Licensed,

October. 11. 1678. Roger L' Estrange.

THE PRINCESS OF CLEVES. The most famed ROMANCE.

Written in French by the greatest Wits of France.

Rendered into English by a Person of Quality, at the Request of some Friends.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1679.

THE PRINCESS OF CLEVE.
GRandeur and Gallantry never appeared in greater splendor in France, than in
the Declension of the Reign of Henry the Second. To the Person and Bravery of
this Prince, Nature had added warm inclinations to maintain the amorous Fire
she had originally kindled in him: That the passion he had for Diana of
Poictiers, Duchess of Valentinois, under which he had labored upwards of
twenty years, was so far from being able to abate of its violence, it rather
seemed to add Fuel to the Flame.

He had the happiness to excel in all those noble Exercises, he judged might
merit a place in his Royal thoughts, amongst the number of which he was
particularly devoted to Hunting, Tennis-Balls, Running at the Ring, and such
other generous Divertisements, as might suit with the Honor of his Presence.

Their Appointments were seldom made, but colourably, to give the King an
opportunity to recruit the passion the Duchesses beauty had so many years since
created in him. She seemed to parallel, if not exceed, the fair Model of Madam
de la March, her Daughter, then unmarried, in those Graces Nature had been
prodigal of to them both. The Queens presence still seemed to authorize hers.

This Princes, though she had out-worn her youthful years, her Face yet seemed
to retain the ruins of a Noble Beauty. She was pleased to set a value on
State, Magnificence, and her pleasures; but to such only she allowed the honor
of her presence, as might not contribute to any diminution of her greatness.
She was married to the King when he was Duke of Orleans: The Dauphin, his elder
Brother, being then living, and who since dyed at Tournon, a Prince whose Birth
and Merit had designed him for the succession of Francis the First, his Royal
Father.

The ambitious humor of the Queen made him keep a straiter Rein upon the
Government. He thought she would not so far express her resentment of his
passion for the Duchess, that the Symptoms of her Jealousy might fall under
his notice. She was so well read in the practice of dissimulation, that it was
impossible to pierce further into the Cabinet of her heart, than she was
pleased to allow the Inquisitor. Policy obliged her to interpose the Person of
this Duchess, that she might the more easily insinuate her self into that of
the King. This Prince was pleased to divert himself in the conversation of
Ladies, and not always of those for whom he had a kindness. He was ever ready
to wait upon the Queen at the usual hour, they took the Tour, which was always
honored with the presence of the greatest and most deserving.

Never was a Court furnished with a fairer stock of either Sex. Nature seemed to
have taken pleasure to be most lavish of her greatest Graces to the greatest
Persons. The Princess Elizabeth, who had the honor to marry with the King of
Spain, was pleased to expose to the admiration of the Court, that incomparable
Beauty, that proved afterward so fatal to her. The Lady Mary Steward, Queen of
Scotland, who being designed to marry the Dauphin, had the honor to wear the
Title of the Dauphin-Queen. Nature had made her fair Model inferior in no part
to that of the Princess; she received her Education in France, and had taken up
an Ambition from her Infancy (that in despite of her green years) she was
resolved, not only to love, but understand all such things as might contribute
to her improvement. The Queen her Mother-in-law, and the Princess the Kings
Sister, were much devoted to Music and Poetry. The Veneration King Francis had
for those Sciences, was not yet extinguished in France: and the King, who
affected all Exercises of the Body, made the Court the Theater he performed
them in. But that which rendered it so splendid, was the presence of so many
great Princes and Persons of Merit. Those I shall presume to name here, were
equally its Ornament, and its Admiration.

The King of Navarre had engrossed the greatest Respect, as pretending to the
greatest Rank, which, joined to the Merit of his Person, justly allowed him the
Honor of it. He was so great a General, that the Duke of Guise had an Ambition
to serve under him in the quality of a private Volunteer. It Is Truth, the Duke
had given so great proofs of his Valor and Conduct, that there was not a
great Captain that could allow his Merit its due Character without Envy. His
Courage was bound up with other great Virtues; he had a Soul as brave as
generous, and a Capacity so great, as if Nature had fitted him Tam Marti, quam
Mercurio, either for War or Counsel. The Cardinal of Lorain, his Brother,
brought into the World so insatiable an Ambition with him, he seemed to have a
Design wholly to ingross her to himself. Nature had added to it, for its
advantage, a Tongue whose Eloquence was made up of Charms. His Studies and
Sedulity had furnished him with a stupendous stock of Learning, which he was
not wanting on all occasions to employ in the defense of the Church. The
Chevalier of Guise, afterward called the Grand Prior, was a Prince, whose
Affability and Sweetness had justly purchased him the respect of all that had
the happiness to know him. The Prince of Conde under the small dimension Nature
had molded him, by which she testified the little regard she had for his
Person, had a Soul as haughty as great; and the briskness of his Wit had amply
supplied Nature's unkind usage; which could not, with all her envy, rob him of
the Honor that was due to his Merit and Quality. The Duke of Nevers, who had
rendered his Age venerable by the Honor of his Actions. These composed the
nobler part of the glorious Train of the Court: He had three Sons as equally as
nobly accomplished, the second was called the Prince of Cleve, a Gentleman that
truly deserved to support the greatness of his Family, he was as good as great;
and he had so large a stock of Prudence and Discretion, such as Nature seldom
lodges in green heads. The viscount of Chartres, descended from the illustrious
Family of Vendome (whose name the Princes of the Blood think no dishonor to
wear) presumed to share in their Gallantry with them: He was inferior, to none
either in his Person or his Courage, or any other rich Endowment, that can
render a Gentleman truly noble. By which he had purchased himself so great an
esteem in the Court, that they thought he might deserve the Honor (if any Man
might presume to it) of having his Merit thrown into the Balance with that of
the Duke of Nemours. This Prince seemed to have been the chief work of Nature;
that which was the least to be admired in him was his Person, than which the
World could not produce a nobler. That which lodged him above the common Sphere
of others, was not only his Courage, which had not it is equal, but the sweet
Harmony that was observed in all his other Virtues: they seemed to have
conspired together to render him the Worlds wonder. The sweetness of his
Converse made him equally the ambition of both Sexes; and he was pleased to
express that Majesty in all his Exercises, that it still purchased him the
admiration of his beholders. The gayety of his Habit had made him the mode of
the Court, though all his followers had the Misfortune to fall short of their
Pattern. In fine there was that Contexture of worth and Honor in the rich
Frame, that wheresoever he came, he had the happiness to ingross to himself the
respect of the whole Company. There was not a Lady in the Court, whose coyness
would not abate upon his approach; neither was there any could boast her heart
proof against his Charms; and as few that could forbear to discover a passion
for him, though he had not the inclination to interchange the flame. He had so
great a passion for Honor, he thought the greatest toils, the noblest steps to
mount up to her. He had his choice of Mistresses, but only a Prophet could
Divine which of them had the happy Fate to entertain his heart. He was often
observed to make his visits to the Dauphin-Queen. The Beauty of this Princess,
the Sweetness of her disposition, and the Industry she seemed to use to keep up
the Honor and Esteem the Court had for her, joined with the respect she was
pleased to show this Prince, gave a suspicion to some, that he might as well
love, as admire so deserving a Lady. The Duke of Guise, whose Niece she was,
had so far advanced the Reputation of his Family by the Honor of this Match,
that his Ambition prompt him to rival it with the Princes of the Blood, and
share in the Power and Authority of the Constable Montmorency. The management
of great Affairs the King left to the conduct of the Constable; and was pleased
to treat the Duke of Guise, and the Marshal of St. Andre, as his Favorites;
but as for that Grace and Favor they were to expect from his Royal Bounty, he
never granted them with that pleasure and content, as when they came
recommended from the Duchess of Valentinois; and notwithstanding age had robbed
her of her youth, which should maintain the Charms that first captivated him,
she yet retained that absolute Empire over his Heart, she might be still said
to be Mistress both of his Royal Person and his Fortune.

The King had so great a kindness for the Constable, that the first moment of
his Reign enlarged him from that Exile, to which Francis the First had
condemned him. The Court was divided between the Duke of Guise and the
Constable, who was supported by the Princes of the Blood: Both Parties made it
their ambition to purchase an Interest in the Duchess of Valentinois. The Duke
of Aumale, Brother to the Duke of Guise, had married one of her Daughters, the
Constable seemed to aspire at the same Alliance. He was not satisfied that his
eldest Son had married Madam Diana, the Kings Daughter by a Lady of Piedmont,
who had no sooner disburthen'd her self of that mutual Pledge, between his
Majesty and her, but was pleased to retire into a Cloister. This Marriage meets
with several difficulties, occasioned by a Promise Monsieur Montmorency had
made to Madam de Piennes, one of her Majesty's Maids of Honor. And
notwithstanding the King was pleased to carry himself with an indifferency
between them, the Constable thought himself not sufficiently propt without the
favor of the Duchess, whereby he might divide the interest the House of Guise
seemed by that Alliance to ingross to its self. Their greatness had already
given some disquiet and uneasiness to her; she endeavored to retard the
Dauphin's Marriage with the Queen of Scotland. The Beauty and discretion of
this young Queen, with the advantage this Match must give the Family of Guise,
she knew not how to relish: She had an inveteracy for the Cardinal of Lorain,
who had taken the liberty to discourse her in a Dialect she could by no means
understand, by which she perceived he had possessed the Queen to her
disadvantage. By this the Constable discovered a disposition in her, which gave
him an opportunity of making an Alliance by a Marriage of Madam la March, her
Daughter, with Monsieur d' Anvile, his second Son, who succeeded him in his
Government under Charles the 9th. The Constable hoped he should not meet the
same Remora in his second he had unhappily found in his eldest: But alas, he
was mistaken: The Duke d' Anvile was passionately in love with the
Dauphin-Queen; but what hopes he might have, that she would vouchsafe to
entertain the Flame, outsoar'd the Constable's apprehension. The Marshal of St.
Andre was the only Person in the Court that seemed to lean to neither side: He
was a Favorite whose interest seldom regarded any thing above his own
advantage. The King loved him from the time he was Dauphin; and since he has
been pleased to make him a Marshal of France, in an Age so raw, it could scarce
entitle another to the meanest Dignity. The Kings favor gave him a great
Luster, which he was not wanting to improve on all occasions, to endear both
his Merit and his Person; which he had the happiness to do, under the
advantages of a splendid Table, to which his Majesty was a constant Guest; the
richness of his Furniture, and gayety of his Equipage, to the splendour whereof
his Majesty's Royal Bounty was ever contributary. This Prince would
passionately espouse the interest of those he loved. And notwithstanding he was
not inrich't with the noblest Qualities, he was not yet barren in them all: As
he was a great lover of Arms, he was no Novice in them; Fortune still waited on
him with success, and barring the battle of St. Quintine, his Reign was no
other than a continued series of Victory. By his Personal Courage he shared in
the Honor of the Battle of Renty, Piedmont submitted to his Arms, to which he
added the greatest luster in chasing the English out of France.

The Emperor Charles the 5 th. found a declension in his Fortune at the Siege
of Metz, before which he brought the strength both of the Empire and Spain: But
the disgrace he received at St. Quintine had put so great a stop to his
glorious Carreer, he was enforced to suffer his Rival to share his Fortune with
him, and treat a Peace.

The Duchess Dowager of Lorain, had made the first Overture at the Dauphins
Marriage, since which there has been held a secret Negotiation. In fine, Cercan
in Artois was the place appointed for the Treaty. The Cardinal of Lorain, the
Constable of Montmorency, and the Marshal of St. Andre, were Plenipotentiaries
for the King; the Duke of Alva, and the Prince of Orange for philip the Second;
the Duke and Duchess of Orleans were the Mediators. The principal Articles
were, the Marriage of the Princess Elizabeth of France with Don Carlos the
Infanta of Spain, and his Majesty's Sister with the Monsieur of Savoy.

The King, during the Treaty, continued upon the Frontiers, where he received
the first news of the Death of Queen Mary of England. His Majesty forthwith
dispatched the Earl of Randan to Queen Elizabeth, to congratulate with her
Majesty her Assumption to the Crown; she received him honorably, her affairs
were in so ill a posture at that time, she was not a little satisfied, that so
great a Prince was pleased to pay his first respects to her. The Court
discoursed she was well read in the interest of the Court of France, and the
merit of those that had the honor to compose it. But for none she seemed to
express so great a value, as the Duke of Nemours; she was pleased to speak with
that Honor of this Prince, that the Ambassador upon his return, took the
Liberty to declare, he thought no Person more valuable in her esteem, than the
Duke. And did not question upon his addresses, the Queen might do him the
Honor to entertain a Passion for him. The King the same Evening communicated
it to the Prince, where he commanded the Count de Randan, to give him the
Relation; to confirm the Duke in the respect the Queen had for him: which he
was pleased to conclude with his advice, not to neglect the favorable
opportunity that seemed to court him to so much happiness. The Duke received it
at first, as a piece of raillery, till his Majesty was pleased to undeceive
him. If, Sir, (says the Duke) in obedience to your Majesty's commands, and for
your service, I shall embark my self upon so extravagant a design, as to
presume a Princess (whom I have never yet had the honor to know) should admit
me to her Royal Bed, I hope your Majesty will be pleased not to divulge the
vanity of the attempt, till the success may justify me to the Public. The
King was pleased to give him his Royal word, that he would depose it in the
knowledge of no other Breast, but the Constable's, concluding with the Duke,
that Secrecy might facilitate the design: The Count advised the Duke to take a
Journey for England, which he refused, and dispatched Monsieur Lignerolle, a
sprightly Gentleman, his Favorite, to sound the Queens inclinations, and to
endeavor to fix some obligation upon her. In the interim he takes a Journey
for Bruxells, to give a visit to the Duke of Savoy, who was there with the King
of Spain. The death of Queen Mary gave several difficulties to the Treaty,
which about the end of November broke up, and his Majesty returned to Paris.

At last there broke forth a Beauty in the Court which drew all its Eyes upon
her, and I cannot without injustice rank her amongst the indifferent, that
could purchase such admiration in a place that was so richly stored. She was of
the Family of the Viscount de Chartres, and one of the greatest Heiresses of
France. She had the misfortune to bury her Father in her infancy, by which
unhappy accident, she was left to the Guardianship of Madam de Chartres, her
Mother. She was a Lady of those great Accomplishments, that Fortune, Virtue,
and Merit seemed to have conspired to complete her fair model. After her
Husbands death, she had for some years made her recess from Court. During her
retirement, she was not wanting to give her Daughter an Education suitable to
her Quality, in which she did not so much labor to improve her Person as her
better part, which she endeavored to embellish with Virtue, which renders a
Lady truly noble. The generality of Mothers imagine it sufficient to forbear to
discourse of the vanity of Love; left their Children should be invited to stray
out of the paths of Virtue. Madam de Chartres was of a contrary opinion. She
was pleased to paint out love to her Daughter in all its shapes, that she might
be the better able to discern that part of her which might be the most
dangerous. She informs her of the little Sincerity and Candor there is in Man.
Their Devices, their Infidelity, and the Domestic Discontents Marriage often
plunges those into, that alter their condition. On the other side she declares
the Happiness and Tranquillity that attends a Virtuous Wife; and what Luster and
Esteem Piety in a person of Birth and Beauty may purchase her. And concludes in
acquainting her with the difficulty to preserve it; which cannot be better
secured than by a diffidence in our selves, and a serious application to those
things that can best contribute to our happiness, which is to love our
Husbands, and to merit a return.

This Lady was at that time one of the greatest Matches of France; and
notwithstanding she was but in her greener years, she wanted not her choice of
Proposals. Madam de Chartres, who was an ambitious Lady, scarce thought the
noblest worthy her consideration. She having now arrived to the sixteenth year
of her Age, she brought her to Court. The first that paid his respects to her,
upon her arrival, was the Viscount, who was not a little surprised, and you
cannot blame him, at the Beauty of the fair Lady. The delicacy of her Mien, (in
which York and Lancaster seemed to have contended which of the two should be
the most prodigal of his Charms) was the Subject of his admiration.

The Day following, the young Lady went to a famous Italian to purchase a Set
of Jewels. This Gentleman came along with the Queen from Florence; and he had
raised himself to that prodigious wealth by his Industry, that his House
appeared rather to be the Palace of a Prince, than the Being of a Merchant.
When she was there, in comes the Prince of Cleve: He was so transported at the
sight of this young Lady, that he could not dissemble his surprise. Madam de
Chartres could not forbear to answer the Princes discomposure with a blush;
after she had a little composed her self, she pays her civility to the Prince,
suitable to the Character she apprehended he might bear. The Prince beheld her
with admiration; but he was not able to judge who this Lady should be, having
never had the honor to see her before. He perceived by her Person, and the
numerous Retinue that waited on her, that she must be of eminent Quality. Her
youth persuaded him she might be a Maid, but seeing no Mother with her, and the
Italian giving her the Title of Madam, he knew not what to think. She seemed to
receive his Addresses with a disorder more than usual with young Ladies, who
take no small vanity in the impression their Beauty may happily make upon a
stranger. The Prince's applications to her, gave her some impatience to retire;
which she suddenly did: Monsieur de Cleve was pleased, notwithstanding her
absence, to solace himself, with the hopes to have the happiness to retrieve
her again, when he should know who she was. But upon the question put to the
Italian, he could receive no satisfaction: He was notwithstanding so strangely
captivated with her Beauty, and that Grace and sweetness that attended it, that
from that moment he entertained a passion for her that was not ordinary. In the
Evening he went to kiss the Hands of his Majesty's Sister.

The Princess was a Lady of great value, for the interest she had in the King,
which was so powerful with him, that his Majesty, upon the Peace, was pleased
to restore Piedmont to the Duke of Savoy for her sake. And notwithstanding she
had a disposition to marry, yet her Ambition would never stoop to any thing
below a Sovereign; which was the reason she refused the King of Navarre, when
he was Duke of Vendome. The Interview, at Nice, between Francis the first, and
Paul the third, gave birth to her inclinations for the Savoyard; she was a
person of great Ingenuity, and a great Judge of the Ingenious; so that her
Apartment was the Theater of the Virtuoso's and the Court was pleased to spend
some hours there for its Divertisement.

The Prince of Cleve was of the number of the Visitants: He was so swelled with
the admiration of young Madam de Chartres, that he could discourse upon no
other Subject. He made a public Narrative of his adventure, and could not
forbear to be lavish of his praises of the Lady (though incognita.) Madam --
was pleased to tell him, that she believed there was no such Creature in being;
for if there were she must needs be known. Madam Dampier, one of the Princesses
Ladies of Honor, and an Intimate of Madam de Chartres, took the liberty to
whisper her Highness in the Ear, that it might be young Madam de Chartres, whom
the Prince had seen: Madam -- turning to the Prince, told him, if he would
afford her his Company the day following, she would endeavor to give him a
sight of the fair Lady he seemed to have so great a passion for. The next day
the young Lady came; she had so obliging a reception from both Queens, that it
sufficiently demonstrated the value they had for her; neither were there
wanting to attend it, both the admiration, and the praise of the whole Court:
She received their Grace and Favor with so sweet a modesty, 'twas hard to
distinguish whether she seemed to take notice of them or value them most. This
young Lady was pleased to put her self amongst Madam's Train. The Princess,
after she had given a fair Character of her person, could not forbear to
acquaint her with the impressions it had made upon the Prince of Cleve; she had
no sooner concluded, but enters the Prince. Come hither (says Madam) behold I
have made good my word to you, and satisfy me, if in presenting Madam de
Chartres to you, I have not given you a sight of the fair Lady you are in quest
of; I expect your thanks for showing you a Lesson by which you may learn the
more to admire it.

The Prince was overjoyed when he found the Lady, for whom he had so great a
passion, was of a Quality adequate with her Person. He made his Addresses to
her, and humbly begged she would vouchsafe to remember he was the first that
laid his Heart at her Feet, and before he had the happiness to be known to her,
he had an honor and respect for her suitable to her merit.

The Chevalier of Guise, and the Prince, two bossome Friends, took their leave
of Madam together. They were no sooner out but they began a fresh to lance
forth into the admiration of this fair Lady. At last, having wasted their stock
of praise, they were forced to take up. The whole day following they gave
themselves the loose Rein again: This fresh beauty continued a long subject for
the Courts discourse. The Queen was pleased to rank her self amongst the
number of her admirers, which she sufficiently evidenced by the kindness she
was pleased to show her.

The Dauphin-Queen made her her Favorite, laying her Commands upon Madam de
Chartres, her Mother, that she should often make her visits to her: And the
Princesses, the Kings Daughters, to declare the Honor they had for her, there
was not any Divertisement they thought worthy their Royal presence, in which
they made her not a sharer. In fine, she had purchased all the Hearts of the
Court, except that of Madam the Valentinois: not that this young Lady gave her
any Jealousy, too long an Experience had confirmed her, that she was not to be
supplanted. She had so great an inveteracy against the Viscount de Chartres,
that she wished she could intail it upon him by a Marriage with one of her
Daughters. She had already possessed the Queen, that she could not look kindly
upon a person that bore his Name, nor any for whom he had a kindness.

The Prince became a passionate admirer of Madam de Chartres, and pursued his
suit with all the Zeal imaginable; but he feared the haughtiness of Madam de
Chartres, her Mother, would never dispense with her Daughters marriage with a
Gentleman that was not the head of his Family. This House was yet so noble,
that the Count d' Eu, who was its Capital, had the honor to marry with a Lady
that was nearly related to the Blood Royal. So that this seemed rather the
timidity of Love, than any just subject for his Jealousy: He had several
Rivals: The Chevalier de Guise, whose Birth, Merit, and the Luster the Royal
Favor gave him, rendered him the most considerable. This Princes heart became
her Prisoner also at the first sight. These two had discovered each others
passion. The distance pretensions of this nature create in Rivals, had
interrupted their usual Conversation: Their friendship began to grow chill, and
they had scarce the power to disguise their several Resentments: The happiness
the Prince of Cleve had to be her first admirer, appeared to be no ill presage;
it seemed to give him some advantage over the rest: The Duke was strongly
leagued with the Duchess of Valentinois; she was a mortla Enemy to the
Viscount, and this was a sufficient reason to divert the Duke of Nevers consent
to the marriage of his Son with a Niece of his.

Madam de Chartres, who had applied her self with so much zeal to infuse Virtue
into her Daughter, was not wanting to contrive it here, where it was so
necessary, and where there were so many dangerous examples. Ambition and
Gallantry were the soul of this Court; they had equally diffused themselves
amongst both Sexes. There were so many several Interests, and different Cabals,
in which the Women bore a part, that Affairs seemed to mix with Love, and Love
with business. No man must be impartial or indifferent: Their thoughts were
either taken up how to rise, to please, to serve, or to offend: They knew not
what it was to be dull or lazy: They were either diverted with Pleasures or
Intrigues: The Ladies studied how they might rivet themselves into the favor
of the Queen, the Dauphin Queen, the Queen of Navarre, Madam the Kings Sister,
or the Duchess of Valentinois; their Inclinations, their Deportment, and their
Humors made their Applications different. Those, who had taken leave of their
youth, to embrace an austerer retirement, made their addresses to her Majesty;
those that had not yet divested themselves of their aerie sprightfulness, to
the Dauphin-Queen. The Queen of Navarre wanted not her Favorites also, she was
young, and had a power over the King her Husband, whose interest was embarked
in the same bottom with the Constables, which gave him a Vogue. The beauty of
Madam, the Kings Sister, was a Loadstone that had not lost its virtue; she
attracted also on her side her number of Admirers. The Duchess of Valentinois
received none both those she thought worthy her regard; few were welcome to
her, and only such, with whom she could converse with freedom and confidence,
and who sympathized with her humor; she took a vanity to see her Court could
in its Luster rival with the Queens: The different Cabals, had their several
emulations and envy; neither were the Ladies that composed them exempted from
their jealousies either for their Love or Favor. The interest of greatness,
and the ambition to rise, sometimes vouchsafed to interfere with concerns of
little importance. There were some motions in this Court without disorder,
which rendered it graceful, though dangerous to youth. Madam de Chartres was
sensible of the peril, and made it her care to find out an expedient to divert
her Daughter from it. She desired her, not as a Mother, but a Friend, that she
would impart to her all the little Gallantries she could meet withal, promising
her in return to afford her her conduct to carry her through all those
difficulties which imbarrass youth.

The Chevalier of Guise had so far divulged his affection for this Lady, that
none could pretend to be ignorant of it; but he finds the way to compass her
was not so even, but there were some Rubs he might unlickily stumble at: He was
sensible that the narrowness of his Fortune, which was not able to support the
honor of his quality, could not render him so agreeable to this Lady, as the
Persons that were considerable; and he was farther conscious to himself, that
his Friends would never consent to this Match, when they considered, that the
marriage of younger Brothers must needs debate great Families. The Cardinal of
Lorain soon took an occasion to undeceive him; he was pleased to express his
resentment, and that with no little heat neither: He would rather have been
consented to any other alliance than that with the Viscount; and he did so far
publish his antipathy against it, that Madam de Chartres was sensibly offended
at it. She made it her care to convince the Cardinal that it was not her
intention. The Viscount followed her example, but seemed more to resent the
Cardinals carriage, being sensible of the cause.

The Prince of Cleve was not backward to make known his passion to the World,
as well as the Chevalier de Guise had done before him. The Duke of Nevers
received the news of this address, not without some tokens that discovered how
unwelcome it was to him. He thought to remind his Son but of his error, would
oblige him to alter his inclination; but he was mistaken, his Son had fixed so
strong a resolution upon this Match, no admonitions could make any impression
on him: He condemns the design, and was so far transported with passion at it,
that his disorder at last reached the knowledge of the Court, and amongst the
rest that of Madam de Chartres; she doubted not but that the Duke of Nevers
would not think this Marriage sufficiently advantageous for his Son; but on the
other side she could not forbear to wonder that the Houses of Cleve and Guise
should rather seem to fear than covet her alliance. The indignation she
conceived at this affront, put her upon a resolution to find out a person that
might exalt her Daughter above those that thought her so much below them. After
she had consulted her thoughts, she fixes upon the Prince Dauphin, Son to the
Duke of Montpensier. This was a Gentleman that held one of the primest Ranks in
the Court. Madam de Chartres was a Lady of parts; she was assisted by the
Viscount, who was a person of great abilities, and her Daughter a Lady
considerable. She managed her design with that dexterity and success, and
Monsieur had so far embraced the motion, she seemed almost to have surmounted
all its difficulties.

The Viscount, knowing the power the Dauphin Queen had over Monsieur de Anvile,
thought it not amiss to employ the interest of that Princess to engage him to
serve Mademoiselle d' Chartres, both with his Majesty and the Prince of
Montpensier, whose intimate friend he was. Madam de Chartres imparts it to her
Majesty; she was pleased to receive it with a great deal of content and
satisfaction, when she understood it would contribute toward the advancement
of a person she had so great a kindness for. She assured the Viscount, that
notwithstanding she was sensible it might disoblige the Cardinal her Uncle, she
was yet resolved to make good her Royal Promise. Upon this just provocation,
that she observed, the Cardinal seemed daily to be more inclinable to the
interest of the Queen than hers.

Persons, that are truly honorable, think themselves happy in any opportunity
that can enable them to serve their Friends. The Viscount had no sooner taken
his leave, but she immediately dispatches Monsieur Castelart, a Favorite of
Monsieur de Anvile, and who was privy to the passion he had for her, to
signify to him, that she expected him that night at Court. Castelart received
her commands with joy and respect. This Gentleman was of a good Family in the
Dauphin; but had a Soul and Spirit too great for his Birth: He was well
received by all the Grandees of the Court; and the intimacy that was between
the Families of Montmorency and de Anvile, had its Birth from him. He was a
person well accomplished, and graceful in his Actions: In Music and Poetry he
did not the least excel: He had a humor so sweet and debonaire, and it had so
far indeared him in the esteem of Monsieur de Anvile, that he made him the
Confident of his Amors, between the Dauphin-Queen and him. This Confidence
recommended him to this Princess; and here it was, by his often visits, that
she took up that unfortunate passion for him, that in the end robbed her both
of her reason and her life.

Monsieur de Anvile failed not to obey her Majesty's Commands; he thought
himself happy that Madam le Dauphin had vouchsafed to impose the thing upon him
he so much coveted. He gave her Majesty his word to serve her in it. Madam de
Valentinois, having discovered the design, was not wanting to throw all the
Rubs imaginable in the way. She had so prepossest the King, that when Monsieur
de Anvile came to speak to him in it, he was pleased to let him understand how
little he approved of it. He commands him to signify as much to the Prince of
Montpensier. You may easily judge how poor Madam de Chartres resented this
sudden Rupture, whose unfortunate success gave so great an advantage to her
Enemies, and so much prejudice to her Daughter.

The Dauphin Queen was pleased to declare to Madam de Chartres the discontent
she had that she could not serve her. You see Madam, (says the Queen) that my
Interest is but small. I stand upon so ill terms with the Queen and Madam
Valentinois, that it is no wonder that either they or their Dependents
endeavor to disappoint all my desires. I have made it my endeavors to please
them: It Is true, they hate me not for my own sake, but my Mothers; she has
formerly given them some jealousy and disquiet: The King had his passions
before he fixed them on the Duchess of Valentinois; and in the first years of
his Marriage, when he had no Issue, and notwithstanding he loved the Duchess,
he was almost resolved to be divorced from the Queen, to make room for the
Queen my Mother. Madam de Valentinois, who was jealous of a Lady whom he had
formerly loved, whose Wit and Beauty were able to lessen her favor, joins her
interest with that of the Constable, who never wished it (as well as she) that
his Majesty should marry with the Sister of the Duke of Guise. They possessed his
Majesty deceased with their Sentiments; and notwithstanding that he mortally
hated the Duchess of Valentinois, and loved the Queen, yet he labored with
them in the prevention of the Divorce. But to divert all his thoughts of my
Mother, they married her into Scotland: They did it as being nearest a
Conclusion; by which means they disappointed the King of England, who the most
coveted it. This precipitation of theirs had like to have made a Rupture
between the two Crowns: Henry the Eighth was unsatisfied that he was
disappointed of the Queen my Mother, or some other French Princess they had
propounded to him: He has been heard to say, that the Worth and Beauty of this
Lady was so firmly riveted in his Royal heart, the fairest of the Sex must
despair ever to remove it thence. It Is true, the Queen my Mother was a great,
but an unfortunate, Beauty; and that which rendered it the more remarkable,
was, That the Widow of the Duke of Longuevile, had been the ambition of three
Crowns; but her unhappy Fate had appointed her the meanest Lot. She had placed
her in a Kingdom where she converst with nothing but misery and trouble: They
are pleased to say that I resemble her, but I fear in nothing but her unhappy
destiny; for what good fortune has prepared for me; I have not faith to believe
I shall enjoy. Mademoiselle de Charters was pleased to reply to the Queen, that
these sad sentiments were ill grounded, that she must not two long dwell upon
them, but that she ought to hope that it would one day answer its appearances.

No man durst farther pursue the thoughts of Madam de Chartres, either fearing
to incur his Majesty's displeasure, or despairing of success in the Affair a
Prince of the Blood has miscarried in. The death of the Duke of Nevers his
Father, which immediately followed, gave him an entire liberty to gratify his
own inclinations; for as soon as he could with modesty dispense with his
appearance in public, he was resolved to resign up all his thoughts toward
the accomplishment of this Marriage. He thought himself happy that he could
make his Proposals, in a season that had given opportunities of
disincouragement to others, and some assurance to himself. But that which
discomposed his Joy, was, that he feared that his Person had not Merit enough
to recommend him to her; and he was resolved to prefer her happiness before his
own.

The Chevalier of Guise had given him some jealousy; but when he considered
that it was rather grounded upon the Merit of that Prince, than any Action of
Mademoiselle de Chartres, he resolved to endeavor to discover, if he were so
happy but to know whether she was pleased to allow the passion he had for her:
He had not the happiness to see her but in the Queens Apartment, or some
public place; so that he found it difficult to have the liberty of a free
conversation. At last he found out the means; he discovered to her his design,
and the passion that obliged him first to take it up. He pressed her to let him
have the happiness to know her Sentiments of him; assuring her, that those he
had for her were of that nature, they would render him eternally miserable, if
she was resolved wholly to resign up her obedience to her Mothers Will.

The young Lady had a generous Soul, she was sensibly touched with the passion
of the Prince of Cleve: This acknowledgment aded so great a sweetness to her
Words and Answers, that it gave him hopes, and he began to flatter himself with
the success he so much wished for.

She gave an account of it to her Mother, Madam de Chartres was pleased to tell
her, that there was that Grandeur and Worth in that Prince, and he demonstrated
that prudence and discretion in all his actions, that in case she had an
inclination for him, she should not want her consent. Mademoiselle de Chartres
answered her Mother, that she was of the number of the admirers of his eminent
qualities, that she could marry him with less reluctance than another, but
confessed the inclination she had for him was not singular.

The day following the Prince signified his intentions to Madam de Chartres,
she was pleased to consent, and told him she did not doubt but that she gave
her Daughter a Husband that would love her when she bestowed her upon him: the
Articles were concluded, the King acquainted, and the Match made public.

The Prince of Cleve thought himself happy, but not content; it troubled him to
see that the sentiments of Mademoiselle de Chartres were no other than the
common returns due to civility and respect: He had not (as it is usual with the
enamoured) the vanity to flatter himself, that she might have reserved the more
obliging for a better season. He only considers the terms upon which he stands
with her, and thinks they may justly dispense with the liberty to discover
them, without prejudice to her modesty. Within few days he finds an opportunity
to acquaint her with his resentment. Is it possible (says the Prince) I may be
once so happy as to be yours; at present I cannot presume to think my self so
fortunate; you are pleased to treat me with a sort of kindness, it neither
gives me satisfaction nor content: I cannot discover those convincing passions
of impatience, disquiet, or disorder, to confirm a Lover's staggering Faith:
You seem to be as insensible of my Love, as you would vouchsafe his, whose
Affection's only grounded upon the advantages of your Fortune, not you Person.
You will think it some injustice (replies Mademoiselle de Chartres) should I
chide you now; I know not what further proofs you can desire to receive, or me
to give, than those I have already done. Methinks you should believe as well as
I, my modesty ought to allow no greater. I own it (says the Prince) that you
are pleased to give me some little Symptoms with which I could rest satisfied,
would greater but ensue: But in lieu of those, you are pleased to interpose a
coyness, which prompts you to this cruelty: I have not the happiness to make
any impression, either upon your Inclination or your Heart; and my Company
seems to be indifferently divided between your trouble and content. You ought
not to question it, (replies Mademoiselle de Chartres) those often blushes I
cannot hide from you, ought to be a sufficient Evidence of the value I have set
upon it. As for your blushes, Madam, (says the Prince) they surprise me not,
they are but modesties bashful discoverers, not the hearts; but I assure you, I
shall presume to take no other advantage by them than what I justly may.

The young Lady was non-plust, she understood not the distinctions the Prince
had made. Monsieur de Cleve, on the otherside, perceived too well how far she
was estranged from any sentiment to his satisfaction. His passion was so
unhappy, it could make no alteration in her.

The Chevalier of Guise returned from a Journey some few days before the
Wedding; he, having been made sensible of those insuperable difficulties that
attended his design upon Mademoiselle de Chartres, resolved to flatter himself
no longer with the vanity of any success in it; yet at the same time he could
not forbear to be sensibly touched to see her in another Arms. His regret was
so far from extinguishing his passion, it rather enflamed it more. Mademoiselle
de Chartres was not ignorant of the respect this Prince had for her; he could
not forbear at his return to let her know she was the unhappy subject of his
torment, though he knew she was a person of that worth and honor, she could
not consent to make him miserable without some pity for him, which he believed
she could scarce avoid, though he was conscious to himself, her compassion
could prompt him no other thoughts, but that he was so. She could not conceal
from Madam de Chartres her Mother, the trouble this Prince's passion gave her:
Madam de Chartres admired (and that justly too) the virtue of her Daughter, for
never Lady had either a greater or a more natural; but her admiration did not
exceed her wonder, that the passion of the Prince of Cleve could make no deeper
an impression in her, than others seemed to do. This made Madam de Chartres the
more zealous to endear her Husband to her, that she might make her sensible
what returns she ought to make the affection he had for her, even when he knew
her not; and to the passion he had since declared, in preferring her before the
whole number of her Sex, and that when no other durst harbor a thought for her.

This Marriage was solemnized at the Louvre; at night his Majesty and the two
Queens, attended with the whole Court, were pleased to take a Treat from Madam
de Chartres. I need not tell you, its splendour and magnificence was
proportioned to the honor of their Royal Guests. The Chevalier of Guise durst
as little venture to distinguish himself from the rest, as not to afford his
assistance at the Ceremony. But, alas, he could so little disguise his trouble
and disorder, it fell under the notice of all the Company.

Monsieur de Cleve discovered, that Mademoiselle de Chartres had not changed
her humor with her name. He was sensible the quality of a Husband had given
him the greater privilege, but not the greater place in his Ladies heart. This
obliged him (though a Husband) to treat her as a Servant, for he still seemed
to wish for something beyond the bare enjoyment of her: And though he seemed to
live perfectly contented, yet he could not think himself entirely happy with
her. The passion he had for her was so violent and troublesome, it disturbed
his joy; though he was yet happy in this, that his jealousy had no share in
his disquiet. Never was Husband so far from taking, nor Wife so far from giving
it. Notwithstanding she visited the Courts of both the Queens, and that of
Madam: where, and at her Brother-in-law's, the Duke of Nevers, whose House was
the general Rendezvous, she was exposed to the admiration of all the brisk and
noble Youth of the Town: She had a Mien that created her so great a respect,
and which seemed so much a stranger to all manner of Courtship, that the
Marshal of St. Andre, who had a passion for her, (notwithstanding he was the
most confident, and indeed the best propt with his Majesty's Grace and Favor)
durst not presume to show it farther than by his services. Many others lay
under the same unhappiness; for Madam de Chartres had added to her Daughters
discretion, so exact a conduct in all her Actions and Deportment, that she
convinced the Court, that that young Lady had a Soul so virtuous, it would
allow of no ill tincture.

The Duchess of Lorain, as she was pleased to employ her interest for the
conclusion of this peace, she was not wanting to contribute her endeavors for
the advantage of her Son. There was a Marriage concluded between him and Madam
Claude, the Kings second Daughter, and the Month of February appointed for the
Nuptials.

In the interim the Duke of Nemours stays at Bruxells, wholly taken up with his
great design for England, Dispatches, and Couriers pass and re-pass daily; his
hopes begin more and more to swell upon him. In fine, Monsieur Lignerolles
advises him, it was now time that his presence should endeavor to accomplish
the thing he had so happily begun: He received the news with all the joy a
young ambitious Soul was capable of, that saw himself so nigh being handed up
into a Throne upon his single Merit. His Heart was so immoveably fixed upon the
Grandeur of this Fortune, that he would not as much as vouchsafe to allow a
thought toward the difficulties that might interpose between it and him.

He sends immediately to Paris his necessary Orders for a splendid Equipage,
that he might appear in the Court of England in luster suitable to the
greatness of his design. Not long after he follows himself, that he might have
the honor to be present at the Wedding of the Duke of Lorain.

He came the day before, and as soon as he arrived, he went to pay his respects
to the King, to give him an account of this Affair, and receive his Majesty's
order and commands how to govern himself in it; he went also to wait upon her
Majesty; Madam Cleve not being there, she had not the happiness either to see
him or to know of his arrival. Report (which had been in every persons mouth,
so lavish of his praises, as of one who was the mirror of the Court, both in
his merit and his person) had amongst the rest reached her Ear. Madam, the
Dauphin, had spoken of him at that rate, and so often to her, she had enflamed
the Princess of Cleve's curiosity, even to a degree of impatience to have the
honor to see him.

She employed the Wedding Day in dressing her self to her advantage, that she
might appear with the greater Luster at the Royal Ball and Banquet that was to
be made that Night at the Louvre: When she came in, the Company paid their
usual admiration to her person and her habit; the Ball began, and as she was
dancing with Monsieur de Guise, there was a noise heard at the Door which
seemed to make room for the entrance of some great person. Madam de Cleve was
just disengaged from the Duke of Guise, and was casting her Eye about the noble
Company, where to single out one to supply his place, when the King was pleased
to oblige her to take him that came in last; she turned upon him, and beheld
his person, which at first sight she knew to be Monsieur de Nemours; he was
forced to walk over some Chairs before he came to her. This Prince was cast in
so fair a Mold, that 'twas impossible not to be surprised with it at the first
sight: The industry he had used to set himself forth, very much contributed to
the gracefulness of his person; and 'twas as hard to look on Madam de Cleve
without an equal admiration.

Monsieur de Nemours was so strangely captivated with her Beauty, that upon his
approaches to her, and the return she paid the respects he gave her, he could
not forbear to show some tokens of his admiration; a soft murmur of praises
stole through the whole Company; the King and the two Queens were all
surprised, and their wonder was not small, to see two persons dance with that
grace and franckness together, and yet were strangers to each other. They had
no sooner done, but they were called; were they were pleased to ask them if
they had not a reciprocal ambition to know each of other. Madam, for may part
(says the Duke of Nemours) I am satisfied; but if Madam de Cleve finds not
these fair Marks about me, as I have discovered in her, to know her by, I be
seech your Majesty to do me the honor to inform her. I believe (says Madam le
Dauphin) you can divine as well as he. I assure you Madam (replies Madam
deCleve) who seemed to be a little di sordered, I am not so good a Prophet as
you are pleased to think me. You guess well (says Madam la Dauphin) you have
certainly some regard more than ordinary for the Prince, that you are not
pleased to acknowledge that you can guess as well at him as he has done at you.
The Queen was pleased to interrupt their disoourse for the advantage of the
Ball; Monsieur de Nemours took out the Dauphin-Queen; this Princess was a
perfect Beauty, and such she did appear in the Prince's Eye before his Journey
into Flanders, yet for all this he could not but allow the whole night to the
admiration of this Lady.

The Chevalier of Guise that did yet adore her, sat at her Feet; there was not
the least thing past there which gave him not some disquiet. He looked upon it
as ominous, that Fortune should destine Monsieur de Nemours to have a passion
for Madam de Cleve, he could scarce disguise his regret from being discovered
in his looks, and was as little able to restrain his jealousy from reflections
upon her Honor. He thought she might be sensibly touched with the merit of this
Prince; and he could not forbear to let her know, that Monsieur de Nemours was
a happy man, that could recommend himself to her knowledge by an adventure,
which, with so much gracefulness and gallantry, had initiated him into her
acquaintance.

Madam de Cleve returns home swelled with the entertainment she had received at
Court; and, notwithstanding 'twas late, she took the liberty to disturb her
Mother, to give her the Relation of it. She was pleased to speak of Monsieur de
Nemours with a Countenance, that gave Madam de Chartres the same jealousy the
Chevalier de Guise had entertained before.

The day following the Ceremony of the Nuptials was performed. There she saw
him with those advantages of Person and Gallantry, that they added to her
former surprise.

The day after she saw him at the Dauphin-Queens, she saw him play a set at
Tennis with the King, she saw him run at the Ring, and she heard him discourse;
but she observed that he so far surpast all the rest, that he ingrost the whole
Company to himself, by the gracefulness of his person and the briskness of his
wit; this in a short time made no small impression in her.

It Is certain that Monsieur Nemours had an inclination for her equally violent
with hers, which gave him that sweetness and delight that inspire desires to
oblige. He endeavored to render himself more lovely and amiable than he was
used to do; insomuch, that by often interviews they did discover something in
each other that was the most accomplished in the Court, so that it was hard if
they should not delight infinitely in each other.

The Duchess of Valentinois was the ambition of all parties; and the King had
as great a care and fondness of her, as in the infancy of his passion: Madam de
Cleve, that was in an Age which thinks Women no longer amiable than under the
years of five and twenty, was not a little surprised at the kindness his
Majesty was still pleased to have for the Duchess, who was a Grandmother, and
now designing the Marriage of her youngest Daughter: Madam de Cleve did often
discourse with her Mother of this Subject. How is it possible, (says she)
Madam, that his Majesty should yet retain a passion for the Duchess; it is
strange that he should fix his Heart upon a Lady superior to him in years, who
has been the Mistress of his Father, and, (if we may presume to credit report)
of others too. It Is true, (replies Madam de Chartres) 'twas neither the Merit,
nor yet the Constancy of Madam de Valentinois, that gave birth to his Majesty's
passion, nor yet conserves it; and it is in this his Majesty is the less
excusable; for had this Lady had Beauty, or Youth, suitable to her Birth, or
had she had so much worth as to have loved no other, or that her love to his
Majesty had kept within the limits of Fidelity, or her Affection had had no
other regard than his Royal Person, abstracted from the interest of Grandeur
and Fortune, and without employing that power but for things that were just and
honorable for the King, it is confessed a person could not (without some
injustice) have blamed the passion of this Prince. If I did believe I should
not lie under the unhappy censure Women of my years undeservedly do, which take
pleasure to relate the passages of the Age they dwell in. I would give you the
Relation of their Amors, and several other intrigues of the Court of the
deceased King, which do not a little sympathize with those practicable at
present. I am far from those reflections (replied Madam de Cleve) that I am
sorry, Madam, that you have not been pleased to instruct me in the present, and
that you have not learnt me the distinct Interests and Cabals of the Court. I
am so ill read in them, that I believed there was not a day wherein the
Constable was not in her Majesty's Favor. Your Opinion is infinitely remote
from the truth of it, (answers Madam de Chartres) the Queen has a perfect
Hatred for the Constable, and if ever she has a power, he will be sure both to
know and feel it. She is sensible that he has often informed the King, that of
all his Children, none resemble him more than his natural ones. I never
suspected a misunderstanding here (replies Madam de Cleve) after I had been an
Eyewitness of the care her Majesty took to solace him in his Confinement; the
joy she was pleased to express at his enlargement; and especially after she had
treated him in the familiar phrase of Gossip with the King. If you shall
measure (says Madam de Chartres) things by their appearances, you will often
lie under a mistake; you must know, that Hearts and Tongues keep here no
correspence together.

Give me leave to assume my story of the Duchess (says Madam de Chartres) and
proceed; You must understand that she is called, The Diana of Poictiers; her
Family is noble; she is descended from the ancient Dukes of Acquitain; her
Grandfather was the Natural Son of Lewis the Eleventh; in fine, her whole
composition is made up of greatness; her Father had unfortunately engaged in
the quarrel of the Constable of Bourbon, of which you have so often heard; he
was condemned to lose his Head, and in order to it was conducted to the
Scaffold; his Daughter, who had a charming Beauty, and which had already
kindled a Flame in the Kings Breast, interposed her interest, and obtained his
pardon. 'Twas brought him in the fatal moment he expected the bloody stroke;
the fear and terror he lay under had so far disordered his thoughts, he was not
sensible of his Majesty's Grace and favor, so that the day following put a
period to his life. His Daughter appeared at Court as the Kings Mistress: the
Expedition for Italy, and the Kings Imprisonment, gave some diversion to this
passion. After his Majesty's return from Spain, and that Madam the Queen Regent
went to meet him at Bayonne, she took all her Daughters with her, amongst which
number was Mademoiselle de Pisseleu, afterward Duchess of d' Estampes. The
King saw her, and became her prize; she was much inferior, both in her
Quality, Wit, and Beauty, to Madam de Valennois, and she had nothing but her
youth to recommend her to his Majesty's favor: I have often heard her say,
that she was born the same Day the Diana of Poictiers was married; but her
malice, not the truth, obliged her to speak it: For, if I am not mistaken, the
Duchess of Valentinois married Monsieur de Breze, Grand-President of Normandy,
at the same time the King had first a passion for Madam d' Estampes. There was
never a greater picque in Nature than between these two Ladies: The Duchess of
Valentinois could not in her heart pardon Madam de Estampes, notwithstanding
she had divested her of the Title of The Kings Mistress, Madam de Estampes had
an inveteracy against the Duchess, because the King still kept her company.
This Prince was not always constant to his Mistresses; there was one, it is
true, which wore the Title and the Honor of it, but the Ladies of the lesser
Faction, as they style them, had the happiness sometimes to take their turns in
his favor. The death of the Dauphin, who dyed at Tournon, and not without a
suspicion of poison, gave him no small Disquiet: He had not that tenderness and
affection for his second Son, our present King: He discovered not in him those
inclinations to vigor and courage: He was pleased to complain to Madam
Valentinois, and told her, he would endeavor to create a passion in him for
her, that she might infuse into him something more noble and generous. It had
the success, you see, it is upwards of twenty years this passion had its Birth,
and yet has stood the shock of all difficulties and alterations.

His deceased Majesty endeavored to oppose it in its in fancy, and
notwithstanding he had a kindness for the Duchess, either prompted by his
jealousy, or Madam de Estampes (who was now upon the point of despair, seeing
her Enemy in the Dauphin's Arms) was pleased to look upon this passion with
some indignation; of which he was not wanting to give his symptoms; his Son
neither regarded his Anger nor his Hatred; nothing could oblige him either to
lessen the value he had for her, nor yet hide it: At last his Majesty was
forced to connive; the Dauphin's stubbornness much abated of his Royal favor,
which he conferred in a greater measure upon the Duke of Orleans, his third
Son: He was a Prince on whom Nature had been lavish of her Grace; but he was
swelled with so much heat and ambition, and of a spirit so fierce, that it
wanted a Curb. He had been a Prince of great worth and honor, had his Age been
so kind as to have ripened his understanding.

The quality the Dauphin held, and the favor the King was pleased to show the
Duke of Orleans, had created so great an envy between them, it almost amounted
to a degree of hatred: It took its being from their infancy, and has continued
to this day. The Emperor, when he came through France, gave the precedence to
the Duke of Orleans, which so much incensed the Dauphin that he would have
obliged the Constable to arrest him without his Majesty's Command. The
Constable durst not obey; the King blamed him that he took not his Sons advice,
and when he bannisht him the Court, his reasons for it wanted not their
different Interpreters.

The difference between these two Brothers gave fresh thoughts to the Duchess
de Estampes, to endeavor to prop her self with the interest of the Duke of
Orleans against the Duchess: It had its success: This Prince, without having
the least passion for her, did as zealously espouse her quarrel, as the Dauphin
had done the Duchess. This created two Cabals in the Court, such as you may
easily imagine. These Intrigues were not limited within the management of the
weaker Sex.

The Emperor who had a great respect for the Duke of Orleans, had often
offered him the Duchy of Millan; and in the Articles of the Peace that was
afterward concluded, he gave him the hopes of the seventeen Provinces, and his
Daughter in marriage with them: The Dauphin neither inclined to the Match nor
it; he employed the Constable, whom he ever loved, to make the King sensible of
what importance it would be, to leave his Successor a Brother so powerful as
the Duke of Orleans must be with the advantage of the Imperial Alliance and
these Countries. The Constable yielded more easily to the Dauphins design, in
that it was opposite to that of Madam d' Estampes, who was his declared Enemy,
and who so passionately desired the Dukes advancement.

The Dauphin at that time commanded his Majesty's Army in Champagne, and had
reduced that of the Empire to those extremities, he had certainly ruined it, if
the Duchess d' Estampes (fearing these great advantages might retard the Peace
and the honor of the Dukes Alliance with the Emperor) had not advised the
Enemy to surprise Espernay, and the Castle of Rierry, which was their Magazine;
they attempted it, and succeeded, by which means they preserved the Army.

This Duchess did not long enjoy the success of her Treason: Immediately after
dyed the Duke of Orleans at Farmoutiers of a contagious disease. He was
enamoured with one of the greatest Beauties of the Court, who was pleased to
entertain the flame. I shall forbear to name her, for she has since lived under
so close a retirement, and has with so much prudence disguised the passion she
had for him, we ought in justice to be tender of her honor. The death of her
Husband and the Duke bore even date together, which gave her the freedom to
show those open marks of her grief and sorrow, which otherwise she had been
enforced to hide.

The King did not long survive the Prince his Son, for he dyed within two years
after. He recommends to the Dauphin the Cardinal of Tournon, and the Admiral d'
Annebault, without the least mention of the Constable, whom he had confined to
Chantilly; notwithstanding his Fathers commands, he calls him home, and makes
him the grand Minister of State.

Madam d' Estampes was discarded, and received all the ill Treatment she could
expect from so powerful and inveterate an Enemy. The Duchess of Valentinois was
not satisfied till she had glutted her self with her revenge upon this Duchess,
and the rest who had fallen under her displeasure. Her interest has been more
absolute over the King since he came to the Crown, than when he was the
Dauphin. These twelve years since he has reigned she has been the
uncontrollable Mistress of all his Actions, she has had the disposal of all
Governments and Affairs, she has obliged him to bannish the Cardinal of
Tournon, the Chancellor, and Villeray; all that have endeavored to eclypse
her power have perished in the attempt. The Count de Taix, Grand Master of the
Artillery, who had no kindness for her, taking the liberty to reflect upon her
Gallants, and particularly the Count de Brissac, of whom the King had a
jealousy, she so subtly played her Cards, that he was in disgrace and
divested of his emply: and what renders the thing more strange, she procured it
for the Count de Brissac, who by her means had the honor to be since created a
Marshal of France. The Kings jealousy began to swell to that degree in him, he
could no longer endure the test of it: but that which in another would have
appeared more sharp and violent, was strangely corrected in him, by the great
respect he had for this Lady; In so much that he durst not (if we may presume
to use this saucy Dialect with a Prince) remove his Rival, but under the
pretense of preferring him to the Government of Piedmont. He has lived there
several years, and only returned this last Winter, under a pretext of
recruiting the Troops under his command; and for other necessary supplies for
the Army. The ambition to see the Duchess of Valentinois, and the fear of being
forgotten, had certainly the greatest share in that Journey. The King was
observed to receive him coldly; the Family of Guise, who loves her not, but yet
dares not declare the cause, employed the Viscount, his mortal Enemy, to
obstruct the Grant of what he designed himself by his Journey. 'Twas no hard
matter to compass it; the King hated him, and his presence gave him no small
disquiet; insomuch that he was forced to return, without having had the
happiness to reap the fruits of his Voyage, which was only to give him an
opportunity to re-kindle the Flame his passion had made in the heart of the
Duchess, which he feared his absence might extinguish: His Majesty wanted no
other subjects of his jealousy, but they not being known gave him no
provocation to complain.

I know not, Daughter, (says Madam de Chartres) if you may not find that I have
instructed you in some things more than you are willing to know. I am so far
from complaining, (replies Madam de Cleve) that did I not fear to be troublesome
to you, I would desire you to enlarge upon several Circumstances which I am
ignorant of.

The passion that Monsieur de Nemours had for Madam de Cleve was so violent in
its Original, that it seemed to have robbed him of all his content, and the
very thoughts of those he had a kindness for; nay, even such with whom he
converst during her absence; 'twas his care to frame excuses to disingage
himself from them; he could not allow himself the patience to give Ear to their
Complaints, nor make returns to their reproaches. Madam la Dauphin, for whom he
had inclinations not ordinarily passionate, yet he was scarce able to confine
them within his Breast; Madam de Cleve had made that impression there. His
impatience for England began to cool, he seemed not to pursue with much Zeal
his necessary dispatches for that Journey.

He often made his visits to the Dauphin-Queen, that he might have the
happiness to pay his respects to Madam de Cleve, who was frequently there;
neither was he concerned at the liberty some took to imagine (what others
thought) of the passion he had for that Princess. Madam de Cleve was of that
value with him, he was resolved rather to hide from her the sentiments of his
heart, than expose her honor to the public. He forbore even to communicate it
to the Viscount de Chartres, who was his Confident, and to whom his Bosom lay
ever open. He used a Conduct so prudent, and which he managed with so much
care, that the Argus's of the Court could not discover the least symptom of
any kindness for this Lady, but in the Chevalier de Guise. Madam de Cleve her
self had continued a stranger to them, had not the inclination she had for that
Prince obliged her to keep a close Watch on all his Actions, which at last
convinced her.

She seemed not to have the same disposition to make an Overture of this
adventure to her Mother, as she had already done by all the rest; she was
resolved to lodge it in no other Breast but her own; but alas, she was
mistaken; Madam de Chartres was as sensible of it as of her love for this
Prince; the knowledge of which gave her no small disquiet. She understood the
danger this poor young Lady was exposed unto, by the affection she had for a
person of this Prince's Merit: Her jealousy was afterward unhappily confirmed
by a passage which suddenly ensued.

The Marshal of St. Andre, who courted all opportunities to make his splendid
Treats, humbly begged of his Majesty, that he would with the two Queens do him
the honor to take a Collation at his house, which was newly finished. 'Twas
thought he did it colourably, that Madam de Cleve might share in the greatness
of this Entertainment, in which no man could possibly be more prodigal or
profuse.

Some few days before that which was appointed for the Supper, the Dauphin
King, who had not his health, was indisposed and admitted of no visits. The
Queen, his Lady, had spent the whole day with him; the Dauphin being better in
the Evening, the persons of quality, who came to wait upon him, were introduced
into his Bedchamber. The Queen was pleased to withdraw into another Chamber,
where she found Madam de Cleve, and some other Ladies, with whom she was most
familiarly pleased to converse.

It being now late, and her Majesty not dressed, she went not to wait upon the
Queen, but obliged them to excuse her; she gives order for her Jewels to be
brought to her, that she might give Madam de Cleve her choice of them to wear
at the Ball the Marshal was to make. In the interim in comes the Prince of
Conde, his quality gave him a free entrance every where. You come (says the
Queen to him) from the King my Husband, pray what news have you there? They are
maintaining, Madam, (replies the Prince) a strong Argument against the Duke of
Nemours, and he defends the Thesis with that heat and obstinaey, as if he
himself were the subject of it. I believe he has a Mistress that may be uneasy
to him at a Ball, that he thinks is so troublesome a thing to find her there.
How, (says the Dauphin Queen) will Monsieur de Nemours be so unkind as to
impose upon his Mistress? This Power me thinks might better suit with the
authority of a Husband, than the obsequionsness of a Servant. Monsieur de
Nemours (answers the Prince) finds by experience, that they are the most
insupportable things in Nature to a poor Lover; for if he be so happy that his
Mistress has a passion for him, he must be sure to stand the Test and Trial of
her frowns for several days together. He says there is not a Lady of them all
but will be so diverted with the vanity of the Habit she must appear in; she
cannot be at leisure as much as to allow a thought toward him: And concludes
the folly epidemical: Nay he does not rest here; he is sensible that when they
are at these Balls, they have no other thoughts but to please in general: and
if once they begin to set a value on their own Beauties, he fears the Servant
has the least share in their admiration of it. He argues yet farther, if it be
a man's unhappiness to be neglected, his torment is the greater in one of these
Assemblies, where his Mistress takes no notice of them; for the more they are
honored in public, the more miserable does a man think himself that is
slighted by them: They are jealous that their Beauty gives Birth to passions to
their prejudice: And affirms there is no greater torment than to see her there.

Madam de Cleve though she had given Ear to what the Prince had said, yet
seemed to take no notice of it. She was sensible what interest she had in the
opinion of Monsieur de Nemours; and above all the uneasieness the presence of
his Mistress would give him there where he could not be; the King was
dispatching him to the Duke of Ferrara.

The Dauphin Queen could not forbear to smile, as well as the Prince who
condemned the Dukes opinion. There is only one occasion (says the Prince) in
which Monsieur de Nemours can dispense with her presence there, and that
neither but when it is given by himself; and he was pleased to tell us, that the
last year he gave one to your Majesty; and says, his Mistress did him the
honor to come, under a pretense to wait on you. It Is an obligation a Mistress
lays upon a Servant, when she is pleased to delight in the Divertiscments he
makes her. And your Majesty must think it not a little pleasing to a Lover,
that his Mistress sees him Master of a Place, the Court is pleased to do him
the honor to compose, and which gives her an opportunity to be an Eyewitness
of the Gallantry with which he acquits himself. Monsieur de Nemours (says the
Dauphin-Queen) had reason to allow it there, where the numbers were so great of
those who wear the Titles of his Mistresses, that had they not been there, the
Ball had been but thin.

The discourse the Prince of Conde used in giving her Majesty the sentiment of
Monsieur de Nemours concerning Balls, diverted Madam de Cleves thoughts from
that intended by the Marshal de St. Andre. She was easily convinced it was
unhandsome to receive a Treat from one that loved her; and was glad of the
opportunity to decline it to oblige the Prince. She accepted notwithstanding of
the favor of the Dauphin-Queen; and in the Evening she showed them to her
Mother; she told her she had no design to use them, and that she was sensible
the Marshal de St. Andre made this splendid Entertainment, to give himself the
occasion to show the honor he has for her, and questioned not but he would
have the vanity to boast his happiness, that he made her a sharer in it; and I
hear (says she) under that unhappy pretext he may involve me in some trouble
and inconvenience.

Madam de Chartes was pleased to oppose her Daughters Opinion, as being
singular; but discovering her obstinacy, she yielded to it; and advised her to
feign her self indisposed, for she believed no other excuse would be allowed
but that, which she was obliged to disguise with privacy and discretion too,
lest it should reach the knowledge of the Company, and expose her to its
censure. Madam de Cleve consents to pass the time away with her Mother, she had
no inclination for the place, she thought not happy without the Princes
presence, who leaves the Court before the day that brought her heart to the
test.

Monsieur de Nemours returns the day after the Ball, and was informed she was
not there; but not knowing whether some might not report to her the discourse
he maintained in the Dauphins Chamber, he began to question if he was so happy
as at first he thought himself.

The day after his arrival he waited upon the Queen, and as he was discoursing
with Madam the Dauphin, came in Madam de Chartres, and Madam de Cleve, her
Daughter, to pay their Respects to their Majesty's. Madam de Cleve was in a
careless dress, that she might the better palliate the indisposition she had
borrowed; but she had this unhappiness, her Face did not correspond with the
Counterfeit. You look so well (says Madam the Dauphin) nothing can convince my
thoughts that you have been otherwise. I fear the Prince of Conde's repetition
of the Argument Monsieur de Nemours held in the Dauphin's Bedchamber in
prejudice of Balls, has had an ill influence upon you; you thought you should
do the Marshal too great an honor in sharing in the noble Treat he gave the
Court, and therefore vouchsafed us not your Company. Madam de Cleve could not
forbear to blush, for she was sensible of what Madam the Dauphin guest so well
at: And the more, because she was pleased to hint it to her in the Princes
presence.

From hence her Mother judged the reason why she declined the Ball; and to
prevent Monsieur de Nemours apprehension of it; was pleased to reply to the
Dauphin-Queen. Madam, (says she) your Majesty does my Daughter a greater honor
than she deserves. She was unfeignedly ill, but I think had I not interposed my
authority, she had exposed her health to wait on your Majesty's, to have had
the pleasure to share in the last Nights Divertisement the Marshal was pleased
to give you. Madam the Dauphin was satisfied with what Madam de Chartres told
her; but Monsieur de Nemours was not a little concerned, that there was a
color for it. Notwithstanding that the blushes of Madam de Cleve deserved to
justify the truth: Madam de Chartres was sensibly offended that she had given
Monsieur de Nemours the vanity to believe he had prevented her appearance
there; and Madam de Cleve on the other side could scarce disguise her
resentment, that any should harbor that opinion of her.

Notwithstanding that the Congress at Cirean was broken up, the Negotiations
for a Peace still continued, things at last were so happily disposed, that
toward the end of February they met again at Catean Cambresis. His Majesty was
pleased to commission the same Plenipotentiaries he had before. The absence of
the Marshal of St. Andre removed a Rival, who was to be feared, not so much for
the impression his Merit could make upon the heart of this Lady, as for the
guard his watchful Eye kept upon all those that made their addresses to her.

Madam de Chartres was not willing her Daughter should understand she had
discovered her passion for the Prince, to prevent her Jealousy of those things
she had an intention to discourse her in, she took an occasion one day to
enlarge (and passionately too) upon his Worth and Merit, but could not forbear
to mix some Venom with his Praise, to make her sick with him. She told her he
had so great a stock of Prudence, it would not allow him the vanity to be
amorous, and that his Conversation with Ladies was only his divertisement. It Is
thought (says she) he has a passion for the Dauphin-Queen, I meet him
oftenthere; and I advise you to decline his company; for the Court, being an
Eyewitness of the kindness her Majesty is pleased to show you, will be apt to
give you the Title of a Confident; and you ought to be sensible what Reputation
that will purchase you. If this Report continue long, my advise is farther,
that you pay not such often visits to that Queen, lest you find your self
embroiled in one of the Gallantries of the Court.

Madam de Cleve (which was a stranger to the Amors of the Dauphin-Queen and
him) was surprised at the knowledge of it; and when she perceived how much she
was abased in her sentiments of this Prince, she could not forbear to discover
it in her Countenance; which she did not well disguise, but her Mother took
notice of it. There came some Ladies to give Madam de Chartres a visit, Which
interrupted the discourse, and Madam de Cleve retired into her Closet.

I am not able to express the sorrow and regret she had at this Relation, and
particularly when it reflects upon the folly that gave birth to her passion for
Monsieur de Nemours. She durst not hitherto discover it to her Mother: She was
sensible the kindness she had for him was the sole ambition of Monsieur de
Cleve; and you cannot blame her, if she could not forbear to quarrel with her
fond inclinations, that she should harbor that love for another, which was
only due to the Merit of her Husband. She was sensibly touched with a Jealousy
that Monsieur de Nemours did only interpose his pretense to her, to facilitate
his addresses to the Dauphin-Queen; the apprehension of it encouraged her to
communicate it to her Mother.

In the morning she enters her Mothers Chamber, to execute the resolutions of
the night before, but finding her indisposed, she deferred it to another
opportunity. Her distemper was so inconsiderable, that it diverted not Madam de
Cleve from waiting upon the Dauphin-Queen in the Afternoon. Her Majesty was
retired into her Closet with two or three Ladies who had the greatest share in
her Bosom. We are, Madam, (says the Queen, discovering Madam de Cleve)
discoursing of Monsieur de Nemours, and equally admire the change we find in
him since his return from Bruxelles. Before his Journey he had an infinity of
Mistresses, and he can only blame himself for it, for he was pleased to divide
himself equally between those of Merit and those of none; but since his return,
there is so great a Metamorphoses, he vouchsafes neither to regard the one nor
other, I my self perceive it in his humor, it has lost its usual gayety.

Madam de Cleve returns no answer: She began to think, and not without some
indignation, that they had taken up this discourse of the alteration in this
Prince, only to discover, if she was not mistaken, some marks of her passion
for him: This began to create in her an antipathy against the Queen, that she
should impose upon her the reasons of a thing which was best known to her self.
She was not able to hide her resentment from her Majesty; the Ladies retiring,
she took the liberty to address her self to the Queen, saying, Madam, are you
pleased to point at me, when you alone are the subject of this change in the
Prince? You are unkind, (replies the Dauphin-Queen) you must be sensible I can
keep nothing from you. I confess the Duke before he went to Bruxelles, might
have some intention to let me know he did not hate me; but since his return, I
believe he has forgotten his resolution. I declare I am impatient to know the
Author of this change. I admire he should hide it from the Viscount de
Chartres, who keeps the Key of his heart. Had he a Passion for a Person I bad a
Power over, I might be so happy as to understand this Alteration. The
Dauphin-Queen delivered it in a Dialect Madam de Cleve could have ill resented,
but that she would not cloud the Debonairness of the humor she first received
it in.

Upon her return home to her Mothers, she found her in a worse condition than
when she went to Court: Her Fever was so violent, that it daily increased upon
her; Insomuch her Physicians judged it would be of some continuance. Madam de
Cleve was so sensibly afflicted, she quitted not her Mothers Chamber. Mounsieur
de Cleve paid his visits daily to Madam de Chartres, not so much for the
interest he had in that Lady, or to divert his Wifes Grief and Sorrow, as to
have the happiness to enjoy her company; for his Passion had abated none of its
primitive Heat and Vigor.

Mounsieur de Nemours, who had a kindness for Mounsieur de Cleve; took all
occasions to demonstrate it to him, since his return from Bruxelles; during the
distemper of Madam de Chartres. The Prince found several opportunities of
seeing Madam de Cleve, under a pretense of her Husbands company to go abroad
with him; he came not thither, but at such hours he knew him not to be there;
and under an excuse of waiting for his return, he spent some hours in the
withdrawing Room, where several Persons of Quality came daily to pay their
Complements of condolence to the Daughter, upon her Mothers indisposition. The
affliction she lay under seemed to Mounsieur de Nemours to have made no
alteration in her Beauty. He endeavored to make her sensible of the interest
he had in her Grief; but in a dialect so passionate, it convin'd her that Madam
la Dauphin, was not the subject of his Change.

She could scarce forbear to discover her indignation in her countenance;
notwithstanding she took pleasure in his company. But when he forbore to visit
her, and that she considered the Charms her Person carried with it, had given
the first Flame to his Passion, she was scarce able to forbear to hate her
self, upon the apprehension of it.

Her Fever got such footing of her daily, that her Physicians began to despair
of her Health, she received the fatal Tidings with a Courage worthy of her
Piety and Virtue. After they had taken their last leaves of her, and the
Chamber was cleared of the Company, she calls her Daughter to her.

We must part Daughter ( says Madam de Chartres) taking her by the hand. The
danger that I leave you in, and the occasion you have for me, add to the regret
I have to leave you. I am sensible you have a Passion for Mounsieur de Nemours,
I ask you not to confirm me in it. I am no longer able to make use of your
sincerity, in your future conduct. I have long since discoursed your
inclination, but I have hitherto forborne to speak to you of it, that I might
give you no jealousy, that I understood it. You must needs be sensible, that
you are upon the point of the Precipice. There ought to be powerful endeavors
used to stop you in your carrear. Reflect upon the Duty you owe your Husband,
and forget not also that that is due to me. Consider you are going about to
Shipwreck the Reputation you have gotten, and which I have so passionately
wished you. Take up strength and courage to quit the Court; Desire your Husband
to take you thence. Fear not to pursue those Paths which at first may seem hard
and uneasy to you. How unpleasant soever they may appear to you in the
beginning, you will find more sweetness in them in the end, than in the
Vanities of the Court.

If any other Motives, than those of Piety and Obedience, could oblige you to
embrace the thing I wish; I would tell you, if any thing can disturb my
happiness in a better World, it will be the consideration of your Fall. But if
this mischief be inevitable, I shall welcome Death with joy, that I am not the
unhappy witness of it.

Madam de Cleve bathed her Mothers hand, which she had enclosed in her own,
with a flood of Tears. Adue (says she) my Child, let us put a Period to the
discourse, that will dissolve us both into Grief and Tears: Forget not (I
beseech you) the last Legacy of your Mother.

Having concluded this short admonition; she turns her self upon her Pillow,
and commanding her Daughter to call in her Women, she would not allow her the
liberty to reply. Madam de Cleve left the Chamber; and you may easily
conjecture in what condition too. Madam de Chartres, gave up all the thoughts
of the little Remnant of her life, toward a preparation for a happier being.
She spun out two days longer, in which time she would not admit her Daughter
into her presence; though she was the only thing of value she left behind her.

Poor Madam de Cleve was dissolved into trouble and tears. Her Husband never
left her, and as soon as her Mothers eyes were closed, he conducts her into the
Country, to remove her from a place which gave her no other objects, but of
grief and sorrow. 'Twas wonderful to observe, that notwithstanding the memory
of her Love and tenderness to her, ought to have had the greatest share in her
discontent; the necessity of her Mothers Conduct, to arm her against this
Prince's Charms, had also its part in it. She begins to see her unhappiness to
be thus forlorn, in an Exigent wherein she was so little Mistress of her
thoughts, and in a season she so much wanted one in whose Breast she might
deposit her complaints. The respect of Monsieur de Cleve's carriage to her,
obliged her to wish more than ever, that she might not be failing in any thing
that might answer her love and duty. She endeavored to repair her former
error, by greater evidences of her kindness to him, than she had shown before.
She could not endure he should part from her, she seemed (as it were) forcibly
to fix her self upon him; that he might shelter her from the troublesome
Addresses of the Duke of Nemours.

The Duke came to give a visit to Mounsieur de Cleve in the Country, with
design to pay another to his Lady; which she refused. And being sensible she
could not avoid his Courtship, she had taken a resolution to prevent the
occasion, and not see him.

Mounsieur de Cleve came to Paris to complete his Train, and promised his Lady
to return the next day; but he disappointed her, for he came not till the day
following. I expected you all yesterday ( says Madam de Cleve) And I ought to
chide you for your breach of Faith. You must believe, if I were capable of any
new affliction in the condition I am in, the Death of Madam de Tournon, which
was brought me this very Morning, had certainly given it me. I had been less
concerned, had I not had the happiness to know her; she is a subject worthy our
Pity, when we consider that a young Lady of her Beauty should dye so sudenly,
as in two days. But it troubles me most, when I reflect upon her as the only
Person in the world, that was dear to me for her merit and discretion.

I am very sorry I have disappointed you, answers Mounsieur de Cleve; My
presence was so necessary to contribute to the consolation of a poor
unfortunate Gentleman, that I could not in honor leave him. As for Madam de
Tournon, be not afflicted at her loss, if you regret it as of a Lady, whose
prudence was deserving your value and esteem. You make me admire you, ( says
Madam de Cleve) for I have often heard you say, that there was not a Lady in
the Court, for whom you had a greater Honor. It Is true, ( replies Mounsieur de
Cleve,) but you women are incomprehensible; and when I have seen them all, I
find my self so happy in you alone, I cannot sufficiently value my own content.
You are pleased to esteem me more than I deserve ( says Madam de Cleve fetching
a sigh,) and if I have not hitherto learnt the method to indear my self, give
me the Lesson Madam de Tournon has taught you. It Is long since that I learnt
it, ( replies Mounsieur de Cleve) and I was sensible she had a passion for the
Count de Sancerre, to whom she gave some hopes. I cannot believe ( says Madam
de Cleve) that Madam de Tournon, after the great antipathy she had expressed for
Marriage, when she was a Widow; and the public declarations she made, never
to have a thought for it, should flattter Mounsieur de Sancerre. Had she been
so just ( replies Mounsieur de Cleve) as to have bounded her folly there, she
had not given the Court the subject of so much discourse to her disadvantage;
but that which surprised it, was, at the same time she gave an equal assurance
to Monsieur Estouteville. And I Will give you the relation of it.

The End of the first Book.
THE PRINCESS OF CLEVE.
BOOK II.
YOU are not a stranger to the Friendship between Sancerre and me. Yet, great
as it was, when about two years since he fell in love with Madam de Tournon, he
made it his business to conceal it as closely from me, as from others; and had
the dexterity to keep it so private, that I never suspected any such thing.
Madam Tournon affected a way of living so extremely retired, and appeared
afflicted to that degree, for the death of her Husband, that it was the general
opinion, there was no comforting of her after a loss she so much lamented. She
scarce admitted a visit from any person, but Sancerre's Sister, nor visited any
other; and at his Sisters Lodging, Sancerre fell in Love with her.

One Evening there was to be a Play at Court; and all things being ready, the
Actors waited the coming of the King and Madam de Valentinois; when News was
brought, she was not well, and the King would not come: Every one guessed her
indisposition was really nothing else but some quarrel with the King: and
though all the Court knew how jealous he had been of the Marshal of Brisac,
while he continued at Court, yet the Marshal being some days before returned
for Piemont, we could not imagine the cause of their falling out: As I was
discoursing of it to Sancerre, Mounsieur d' Anville came into the Hall, and
whispered me in the Ear, that the King was so vexed and so angry it would make
any one pity him: that when the jars he lately had with the Duchess of
Valentinois, about the Marshal Brisac, were composed a few days ago, the King
had given her a Ring, and prayed her to wear it. That as she was a dressing to
come to the Play, the King missed the Ring on her Finger, and asked what was
become of it. She appeared astonished she had it not, and called to her Women
for it; who unluckily, or for want of instruction to the contrary, presently
answered, it was four or five days since they saw it.

It Is precisely so long, continues Mounsieur d' Anville, since the Marshal
Brisac left the Court, and the King makes no doubt, but as she bid him adieu,
she gave him the Ring. The thought of this cut the King to the quick, and
kindled afresh his late jealousy into so sudden and violent a flame, that it
put him in an extraordinary passion, and made him break out into sharp
expressions, and very reproachful Language against her. He is newly gone into
his Lodgings extremely afflicted, but whether more with the thought of the
Duchess having made a sacrifice of his Ring to the Marshal Brisac, or with fear
of having displeased her by his passion, I cannot resolve you.

Mounsieur d' Anville had no sooner made an end of telling me the News, but I
went to Sancerre to acquaint him with it. I told it him as a secret, newly
entrusted with me, and charged him not to speak of it.

The morrow betimes I went to my Sister-in-Law's, and found at her Bedside
Madam de Tournon, who had no great Kindness for Madam de Valentinois, and knew
well enough my Sister-in-Law had small reason to think well of her: Sancerre,
when the Play was done, went to Madam de Tournon's, and gave her an account of
the quarrel between the King and the Duchess, which Madam de Tournon was then
come to relate to my Sister-in-Law, not knowing Sancerre had had it from me.

As Soon as I came up to my Sister-in-Law, she told Madam de Tournon I might be
trusted with the Relation she had newly made, and, without further expecting
permssion from Madam de Tournon, my Sister-in-Law told me word by word, all I
had told Sancerre the night before. This, you may believe, surpised me very
much: I looked upon Madam de Tournon, she appeared disordered: Her disorder
raised a suspicion in me: I had not told any but Sancerre the News: as we were
going from the Play he had quitted me, without telling me the reason: It came
into my mind I had heard him speak much in commendation of Madam de Tournon:
All this together opened my Eyes, and made me easily to discern an intrigue of
Gallantry between Sancerre and her, and that when he left me, he went to see
her.

I was so vexed to find he kept this Adventure from me: I let fall some
expressions that made Madam de Tournon sensible how indiscreet she had been: I
brought her to her Coach, and told her at parting, I envied his happiness who
had given her the News of the quarrel between the King and Madam de Valentinois.

I went presently in search of Sancerre, reproached him with his unkindness,
and (without acquainting him how I made the discovery) I told him, I knew the
passion he had for Madam de Tournon: He was forced to confess it, and then I
told how I came to know it, and he as frankly gave me an exact account of their
Adventure; adding, that though he were a younger Brother, and could not pretend
to so great a Match, yet he had encouragement enough from the Lady to try his
fortune. You cannot imagine the surprise I was in at his discourse: I advised
him to hasten the conclusion of the Marriage, and told him he must provide for
the worst, having to deal with a Woman that did so neatly impose upon the
public, by acting with that artifice a part so different from what he knew she
really was: He answered, the death of her Husband had really troubled her: but
the inclination she had for him dissipated that trouble, and she was unwilling
the world should on the sudden be witness of the Change. He added other reasons
in excuse of her, which gave me light enough to see how deeply he was in Love.
He assured me he would procure her consent, to let me know the passion he had
for her, since she had made the first discovery toward it: nor was he worse
than his word, though she was very loath to give way to an open
acknowledgement: and thenceforward I was their Confident to a very high measure.

Never did I see a Woman carry her self with a Civility so suitable to the
Exigences of her Servants condition, yet I confess I wondered she still
affected to appear troubled for the death of her Husband. Sancerre was so
deeply in Love, and so pleased with her kind usage of him; that he durst not
press the conclusion of the Marriage, for fear of making her suspect he Courted
her more for interest than for Love. Yet he spoke to her of it, and she
appeared willing to be married to him: With that she began to quit her
solitude, and appear abroad to the World: She visited my Sister-in-Law at such
hours she was sure to find some of the Court at her Lodgings. Sancerre came
seldom thither: but those who were at my Sister-in-Laws every Night, and saw
Madam de Tournon frequently there, thought her very amiable.

She had not long quitted her solitude, but Sancerre fancied she coold in her
passion for him. He often told me so; though I made very light of it. At last
when he informed me, that instead of concluding the marriage, she put it off, I
thought he had ground enough for apprehension. I answered, it was no wonder a
passion two years old should be a little abated; and were it still as high as
ever, possibly it was not strong enough to oblige her to marry him; yet he had
not just cause of complaint, being satisfied such a Marriage would (as to the
Public) be much to her prejudice, not only for that he was not a competent
Match for her, but that it would reflect upon her Reputation: that all he could
desire, was, she should not deceive him, by giving him false hopes. I added,
that if she had not the power to marry him, or if she declared she was in Love
with another, he must not be angry nor complain, but continue the esteem, and
persevere to pay her the respect he had for her: I give you, said I, the
Counsel I would take in the like Case; for I am so great a Friend to sincerity,
that I believe should my Mistress or my wife confess to me ingeniously, another
better pleased them than I, it would trouble me without making me angry: I
would lay by the Person of a Lover or a Husband, to be at liberty only to
advise her and to make my Complaint.

Madam de Cleves blushed at these Words, wherein she discerned something so
nearly relateing to her present condition, that very much surpised her, and
put her into a disorder, out of which it was not in her power to recover her
self for some time.

Sancerre, continues Mounsieur de Cleve, acquainted Madam de Tournon with the
advice I had given him. But she took that care to satisfy him, and appeared so
much offended at his suspicions, that she left him fully assured of the
reallity of her kindness for him. However she put off the Marriage till after
his return from a Long Journey he was to take, yet she carried her self so well
till his departure, and appeared so afflicted at it, that I thought as well as
Sancerre she really loved him. He has been gone about three months, and you
have so wholly taken me up ever since, I scarce had the opportunity to see
Madam de Tournon in his absence, and knew only that Sancerre was suddenly
expected.

Two days ago, when I came to Paris, hearing of her death; I sent to Sancerre's
Lodgings, to enquire what News of him: they sent me Word he was arrived the
Night before, being the very same Madam de Tournon dyed on: I went immediately
to see him, doubting very much what condition I should find him in, but the
trouble I saw him under exceeded my imagination.

Never did I see sorrow so deep, and so Tender: As Soon as he saw me, he burst
into Tears, and embracing me. I shall never see her more, says he, I shall
never see her more: she is dead; I was not worthy of her, but I shall quickly
follow her.

Having said this, he held his peace: afterward from time to time, repeating,
she is gone, I shall see her no more: He fell again into Tears and
Lamentations; he was like a Man distracted: He told me he had received but few
Letters from her in his absence, but that he knew her so well he wondered not
at it, being sufficiently assured she was always very shye of sending Letters:
yet he made no doubt but she would have been married to him at his return. He
took her for the most amiable and most faithful Person in the World, and
thought she loved him with a great deal of tenderness, and lost her at the time
he hoped to have made sure of her for his own for ever. These thoughts plunged
him into deep affliction, which, I confess, moved my pity, and made me look
upon him as an object worthy serious Commiseration.

I was forced to leave him to go to the King, but promised to return in a very
short time, and accordingly did so; I was never so surpised, as when at my
return I found him quite another Man: He was in his Chamber with fury in his
face, sometimes going, sometimes standing still, as if he had been mad. Come,
come, says he to me, Come see the most desperate of Men: I am a thousand times
more unfortunate than I was a while ago, and what I have newly heard of Madam
de Tournon is worse than her death.

I looked on this disorder as an effect of his grief, and could not imagine any
thing could be worse than the death of a Mistress one loves, and who loves him
again. I told him, while he kept within bounds, I approved his passion, and
pitied his sorrow, but he was not to expect I should bemoan him any longer, if
he gave himself up to despair, and would run out of his Wits. Happy had it been
for me, cries he, had I long since run out of my Wits, and my life too: Madam de
Tournon was false to me, and I am so unfortunate, as not to have discovered her
infidelity till the morrow after her death, at a time when my heart is at once
full of the most passionate Love Man is capable of, and pierced through and
through with grief, the smartest that ever was felt; I retain at this moment in
my fancy the impression of her Image as the model of perfection, not in my Eyes
only, but in the Judgment of all Mankind, when the same instant I see my self
deceived, and find she deserves not my sorrow. Yet I am as much troubled at her
death as if she had been true to me, and resent her infidelity as if she were
Living: Had I heard of her inconstancy before she had died, anger, jealousy,
and rage would have hardened my heart against a sense of the loss of her, but
the misery of my condition is such, I am incapable of comfort, yet know not how
to hate her.

Judge you whether I was not surpised at Sancerres expressions. I asked him
how he came to know she had been false to him. He answered, I was no sooner
gone out of his Chamber, but Estouteville his intimate friend, but altogethor a
stranger to his Love for Madam de Tournon, came in to see him; that as soon as
he sat down he fell a crying, and begged his pardon for having concealed from
him what he was now come to tell him, that he entreated his pity; that he was
come to open his very heart to him, and that of all the men in the World, he
was the most grieved at the death of Madam de Tournon.

I was so surpised at his nameing her, that though I was just upon answering,
I was more grieved at it than he, yet I had not the power to say so. He went on
with his story, and told me he had been six Months in love with her: that he
was still for making me acquainted with it, but she had expressly forbidden it,
and with so strict a charge he durst not disobey her. That he had had the good
fortune to please her as soon almost as he had fallen in love with her: that
they had concealed their passion from all the World: that he had never been
publicly at her house, that he had the pleasure to see himself effectually
capable of making her lay aside her sorrow for the death of her Husband, and
that just as she died he should have married her, and that their Marriage,
which really was an effect of love, was to have past in the world as a pure
effect of duty and obedience: that in order to this she had prevailed with her
Father to command her to marry him, to prevent the Censures of the World, and
stop the Mouths of those who would have cried out at the great alteration of
her Conduct, which had appeared so averse from the thoughts of a second
Marriage.

While Estouteville was speaking, continues Sancerre, I believed all he said;
his discourse seemed so probable, and the more for that about the time he said
he first fell in Love with her, I first observed a change in her. But the next
moment I thought him a Liar or a Madman. I was going to tell him so, but was
prevailed upon by the desire I had of a fuller discovery, to question him
further, and to throw in objections against what he said. I proceeded so far
toward convincing my self of my misfortune, that he asked me if I knew Madam
de Tournon's handwriting. With that, he threw on my Bed four Letters of hers,
and her Picture. At that very instant my Brother came in. Estouteville was so
blubbered with crying, he was forced to go out to avoid being seen: telling me
he would come again in the Evening, to fetch what he left with me. I sent away
my Brother, pretending my self ill; so impatient was I to read those Letters,
in hopes to find something there, to make me dis-believe what Estouteville had
said. But alas, what found I there? what tenderness, what Oaths, what
assurances of marrying him. Never had she Writ such Letters to me: Thus, adds
he, am I assaulted at once with grief for her death, and vexation for her
falsness: Two evils often compared, but seldom felt by the same person at once.
To my shame be it spoken, the loss of her still troubles me more than her
inconstancy, and I cannot find in my heart to think she deserved death for her
Treachery. Were she living I should take pleasure in reproaching her, and
taking my Revenge of her, by letting her know how unjust she was; But I shall
never see her more, says he again, I shall never see her more. This is the
greatest misfortune: O that I could restore her to life, though with the loss
of my own! yet what do I wish for? were she alive again, she would be
Estouteville's: How happy was I yesterday, cries he, how happy was I when the
most sorrowful of Men: Yet my sorrow appeared reasonable, and it was a pleasure
to think it my duty never to be comforted: To day every thing I do me thinks is
unreasonable: I pay a passion she only feigned for me, that tribute of grief I
thought justly due to a sincere affection. It is not in my power to hate or to
love the memory of her: I am incapable of comfort, yet know not how to grieve
for her. However, says he, turning short toward me, I conjure you, take care
Estouteville come not in sight of me. I abhor the very name of him. I know well
enough I have no cause to complain of -- him, it was my fault not to tell him I
loved Madam de Tournon. Had he known it, perhaps he would never have made an
address to her, nor she have been false to me. He made it his business to find
me out, to communicate his sorrows to me. I cannot but pity him. Ha, cries he,
has he not reason to be sorry, he loved Madam de Tournon, was beloved of her,
and shall never see her more; yet I find by my self I cannot choose but hate
him. However, I conjure you once more, let me not see him.

Sancerre after this fell a crying again, he was sorry for Madam de Tournon, he
spoke to her, and gave her the kindest expressions imaginable: presently he
hates her, he complains of her, he Reproaches and Curses her: When I observed
his Condition I knew I should want some help to quiet him. I sent for his
Brother, whom I had newly left with the King: I gave him the meeting in the
Antichamber, to give him an account of Sancerres condition: We gave order to
prevent his seeing Estouteville, and spent part of the Night in endeavoring to
bring him to himself. This morning I found him more troubled than ever: I left
his Brother with him and came to you.

I am extremely surpised at the News, says Madam de Cleves, I thought Madam de
Tournon incapable either of Love or Deceit. It Is not possible any one, replies
Mounsieur de Cleve, should carry her self with greater dissimulation or
cunning. Observe, that when Sancerre thought her altered as to him, she really
was so; and began to love Estouteville, telling him he was the only Man could
make her forget the death of her Husband, and for whose sake she quitted her
Retirement, when Sancerre thought the while it proceeded from no other Cause
but a Resolution to appear less afflicted than formerly: she made it matter of
favor to Estouteville that she concealed their correspondence, and seemed
obliged by her Father to marry him, which she pretended proceeded purely from
the care of her reputation, when it was in truth a trick to put off Sancerre,
without leaving him just cause of complaint: I must needs return, continues
Mounsieur de Cleve, to see my unfortunate friend, and I think you may do well
to go with me to Paris: It Is high time for you to appear abroad, and Receive
those visits you cannot well dispense with.

Madam de Cleve's agreed to the proposal, and returned on the Morrow: she found
her self more at ease as to Mounsieur de Nemours than she formerly had been:
what Madam de Chartres said on her Deathbed, and sorrow for the loss of her,
had so suspended her thoughts of him, that she thought she should be no more
troubled with them.

The same Evening she arrived, the Queen Dauphin gave her a visit, and having
told her how much she shared in her afflictions, she said, to divert her from
those sad thoughts, she would inform her of all that had past at Court in her
absence, and accordingly gave her an account of several particulars. But that I
have most mind to acquaint you with, adds she, is, that it is most certain
Mounsieur de Nemours is passionately in Love, and that he is so far from making
any the most intimate friend he has his Confident in the case, there is not one
can guess who it is he is in love with: Though he be so deeply in Love it makes
him neglect, if not quit the hopes of a Crown: with that she gave her an
account of what concerned the matter of England: What I have told you, says
she, I had from Mounsieur de Anville, who told me this morning the King had
yesterday, sent for Mounsieur de Nemours, upon Letters received from
Lignerolles, who desires leave to return, as not able any longer to excuse to
the Queen of England the delays of Mounsieur de Nemours, that the Queen begins
to take it ill, and that though she had not made a positive promise, she had
said enough to encourage the hazarding a Voyage. The King read this Letter to
Mounsieur de Nemours, who, instead of speaking seriously, as he had done at
first, fell a laughing and scoffing at Lignerolles hopes; saying, all Europe
would condemn his imprudence, should he undertake a Voyage for England, as
pretending to Marriage with the Queen, without assurance of success.

Besides, adds he, I could not time my business worse, than to take my Journey
at this Iuncture, when the King of Spain makes address to that Queen for
Marriage. In matter of Gallantry, I confess his Catholic Majesty were no very
considerable Rival, but in a Treaty of Marriage I cannot think your Majesty
would advise me to stand in competition with him. I would on this occasion,
replys the King, for I know he is otherwise inclined; and were he not, Queen
Mary took so little pleasure in the Yoke of Spain, I cannot believe her Sister
will undergo it, or suffer her self to be blinded with the Glittering of so
many Crowns on one Head: If she yield not to the splendour of so many Crowns,
says Mounsieur de Nemours, it is probable she will seek her happiness in Love:
She has for some years loved my Lord Courteney: Queen Mary too was in love
with him, and would have married him, and with public consent of her Kingdom,
but that she knew him more taken with the youth and beauty of her Sister
Elizabeth, than ambitious of reigning. Your Majesty knows her Jealousy of them
made her clap them up Prisoners, and afterward banish my Lord Courteney and
prevailed with her at last to resolve to marry with the King of Spain.
Elizabeth, who now possesses the Throne of her Sister, will, I believe, shortly
call home my Lord Courteney, and will rather make choice of him for her
Husband, whom she has loved, and who is really amiable, and has been a great
sufferer for her, than of a Man she has never seen: Were Courteney alive, says
the King, I should be of your mind, but I have been certainly informed some
days since that he is dead at Padua, whither he was banished: But I see, adds
the King as he left Mounsieur de Nemours, your marriage must be made up just as
the Dauphins was, and Ambassadors must be sent to espouse the Queen of England.

Mounsieur d' Anville and the Vidame, who were with the King when he spoke to
Nemours, are clearly of opinion, nothing could divert him from so great a
design, but the passion he is so deeply engaged in. The Vidame, who knows him
best of any man living, has told Madam de Martignes, he finds such a change in
Mounsieur de Nemours, he scarce knows him. And, which he most wonders at, he
cannot observe he has any private Correspondence; nor can he discover any
secret haunts he has, or that he is missing at any time, which makes the
Vidame believe he holds not correspondence with the person he loves: and this
is the reason he thinks himself so much mistaken in Mounsieur de Nemours, to
see him in love with a Woman that does not love him again.

What a poisonous discourse was this for Madam de Cleves! How could she choose
but know her self the Person whose Name was not known? How could she but be
deeply affected with gratitude and tenderness at the News she received, by a
way not at all liable to suspicion, that this Prince she had so great an
inclination for, concealed his passion from all the World, and slighted for
love of her the hopes of a Crown: it is impossible to describe her sentiments
on this occasion, and represent to the life the trouble it raised in her. Had
the Queen-Dauphin eyed her more closely, she would have easily discovered she
was concerned at the discourse: But as she had not the least suspicion of the
truth, she proceeded without taking notice of her; Mounsieur d' Anville, adds
she, who, as I told you, acquainted me with all these particulars, thinks I
know the business better than he, and has so great an opinion of my Charms, he
believes me the sole person capable to cause so extraordinary alterations in
Mounsieur de Nemours.

These last Words raised another kind of trouble in Madam de Cleve's, very
different from that she was formerly in. I am of his mind, (answers she,) and
it is very probable that no less than such a Princess as you could make him
despise the Queen of England. I would confess it, did I know it, replys the
Queen-Dauphin, and I should certainly know it, were it true: Passions of this
Nature seldom escape the discovery of those who occasion them: They are the
first that discern them. Mounsieur de Nemours never expressed for me other than
slight and superficial complaisance: yet I observe so great difference between
his present and former deportment toward me, I dare assure you I am not the
cause of that indifference he shows for the Crown of England: But I am so taken
with your company, I forget my self, and mind not the obligation I am under of
seeing Madam: you know the peace is in a manner concluded, but it is possible it
may be News to you, that the King of Spain refuses to Sign the Articles, but
upon condition he shall marry that Princess, instead of the Prince Don Carlos
his Son. The King was loath to consent to it, but has done it at last, and is
newly gone to carry Madam the News: I believe it will much trouble her: what
pleasure can she expect from Marrying a Man of the age and humor of the King
of Spain; especially she so jovial, so young, and so beautiful a Lady, who
expected to Marry a young Prince, for whom unseen she had a strong inclination.

I question whether the King will meet with the obedience he desires in her. He
has charged me to see her, because he knows she loves me, and that I have some
power over her: I shall from thence make another visit (of a very different
Nature,) to congratulate the Kings Sister for the conclusion of her Marriage
with the Prince of Savoy, who is expected in few days: Never had person of the
age of this Princess so great cause to rejoice at her Marriage. The Court will
be more Numerous and Glorious than ever, and in spite of all your affliction
you must come and help us to let the Strangers see we are furnished with no
mean Beauties.

Having said this, the Queen-Dauphin left Madam de Cleve's, and on the morrow
the Marriage of Madam was in every ones Mouth. The day after the King and
Queens went to see Madam de Cleve: Mounsieur de Nemours who had waited her
return with extreme impatience, and wished passionately he might speak with her
in private, put off going to her, till the time all company broke up, and
probably none would return thither that night. It fell out as he had wished, and
he came in as the last Visiters were taking their leaves.

The Princess was on her Bed, the weather hot, and the sight of Mounsieur de
Nemours put her to a blush, that made her more amiable. He sat over against
her, with a respect and fearfulness incident only to a genuine Passion, he was
speechless for sometime: Madam de Cleve's was as mute as he, so that they were
both silent a pretty while: At last Mounsieur de Nemours complemented her,
condoleing her affliction. Madam de Cleve's very glad of discourse on that
subject, spoke a good while of the loss she had had: and told him at last
though time might abate the violence of her grief, she should still retain so
deep an impression of it, it would alter her humor: It Is true, Madam, replies
M. de Nemours, great troubles and violent passions, occasion great alterations
in our tempers: though I was never actually sensible of it, but since my return
from Flanders: Many have observed in me a very great change, and the
Queen-Dauphin her self spoke to me of it yesterday. She has indeed taken notice
of it, says Madam de Cleve, and I think I have heard her speak of it. I am not
displeased Madam, answers Mounsieur de Nemours, that she has perceived it, but
should be very glad she were not the only Person that did so. There are Persons
in the World to whom we dare give no other evidences of the passion we have for
them, but by things that concern them not; yet when we dare not make it appear
we love them, we are willing at least to let them see we desire not the Love of
any other; we are willing to let them know we look with indifference on all
other Beauties, though in the highest sphere, and that a Crown may be too dear,
if to be purchased with no less a price than absence from her we adore.
Ordinarily, Ladies judge of the passion had for them, by the care their
Servants take to attend and to please them: but be they never so little amiable
those are easy tasks to perform. There is no great difficulty in giving our
selves the pleasure to wait on them: But to avoid their company for fear of
discovering to the World, and almost to themselves, the passion we have for
them, that is a difficult point: the truest evidence of being really in Love, is
when we become quite other men than we were, when we renounce our ambition and
our pleasures, having all our Life pursued the one and the other.

Madam de Cleve's easily understood how far she was concerned in this
discourse, she thought it her duty to cut it off by an answer. Presently her
mind altered, and she was of opinion it was better make as if she understood it
not, and give him no cause to think she took it to her self; she thought she
ought to speak, and thought she ought to be silent; this discourse did in a
manner equally please and displease her. It convinced her of the truth of all
the Queen-Dauphin made her think of him, she could not but look upon it as full
of gallantry and respect, but withal somewhat bold and a little too plain
andintelligible: The inclination she had for that Prince put her into a
disorder it was not in her power to master: the darkest expressions of a Person
we love move more than the clearest declarations of a person we have no
inclination for. She made him no answer. Mounsieur de Nemours took notice of
her silence, and perhaps would have taken it for no ill Omen. But Mounsieur de
Cleve's coming in, put an end to their discourse and his visit.

The Prince of Cleve came in to give his Lady a further account of Sancerre,
but she was not very curious to know the Issue of that Adventure. Her thoughts
were so taken up with what she had newly heard from Mounsieur de Nemours, she
could scarce hide the distraction she was under: As Soon as she was at liberty
to Muse of what was past, she saw clearly how much she had been deceived, when
she thought her self indifferent as to Mounsieur de Nemours; his discourse had
made as deep Impression on her as he could wish, and fully convinced her of the
truth of his passion, his actions agreeing too well with his words to leave her
the least shadow of doubt. She no longer flattered her self with hopes of not
loving him; all her care was not to let him Know it: she knew this would prove
a very hard task, having already had experience of the difficulty of it: she
knew there was no way of doing it, but by avoiding the presence of that Prince:
Her being in Mourning gave her occasion of living more retired than ordinary;
and she took that pretense not to frequent places where she might see him: very
sad and disconsolate she was, but the death of her Mother appeared to be the
cause of it, and no suspicion was had of any other.

Mounsieur de Nemours was almost distracted he could not have a sight of her,
and knowing there was no finding her in Company, and that she appeared not at
any Divertisements at Court, he could not prevail with himself to be there, but
pretended a great love for Hunting, and made Matches for that Sport upon the
days the Ladies and the rest of the Court used to meet at the Queen's Lodgings.
A slight indisposition served him a long time for a pretense to keep home, and
absent himself from those places he knew there were no hopes to see Madam de
Cleve.

Monsieur de Cleve was sick much about the same time. During his illness Madam
de Cleve stirred not out of his Chamber: But when he grew better, and admitted
Visiters, particularly Monsieur de Nemours, who under pretense of being not yet
fully recovered spent there the greatest part of the day; she found it was not
in her power to stay there, yet at his first coming she could not quit the
Room. 'Twas so long since she had seen him, she could not quickly resolve to
see him no more. Monsieur de Nemours had the address by discourses that
appeared altogether general, (but she understood well enough by the relation
they had to what he had privately said to her in her Chamber,) to let her know
he went a Hunting only for more liberty to think of her; and that the reason he
quitted Meetings at Court, was her not being there.

At last, but with very much ado, she put in execution the resolution she had
taken to quit her Husband's Chamber when Monsieur de Nemours was there, who
quickly perceived she shunned him, and was very much troubled at it.

Monsieur de Cleve did not presently take notice of his Lady's conduct in this
particular, but became sensible at length she went out of his Chamber when
company was there. He told her of it: she answered, she thought it not decent
for her to be there every Evening in company with the youngest of the Court,
that she entreated him to allow her to live more retired than she had done
hitherto: that the virtue and presence of her Mother, while she lived, had
given her privilege in some things she thought no longer fit to be made use of
by a Woman of her age.

Monsieur de Cleve, who naturally had a great deal of kindness and complaisance
for his Wife, expressed it not on this occasion, but told her he could by no
means consent she should alter her Conduct. She was upon the point of telling
him, it was the general report Monsieur de Nemours was in Love with her, but
she had not the power to mention his Name; besides she thought it dis-ingenuous
to disguise the truth, and make use of pretenses to a Person who really had a
very good opinion of her.

A few days after, the King was at the Queen's Lodgings about the time of going
to take the Ring; the discourse was of Horoscopes and Predictions: The Company
was divided in opinion what credit to be given them. The Queen maintained, that
after so many things foretold, and afterward come accordingly to pass, it was
not to be doubted but there was some certainty in that Science: others
insisted, that of an infinite number of Predictions so very few proved true,
that the truth of those few must be looked upon as a mere effect of Chance.

I have heretofore, says the King, been very curious and inquisitive of the
future; but they have told me things so false and improbable, that I am
convinced they know nothing certain. Not many years since there came hither a
Man famous for Astrology; every one went to see him, and I among the rest, but
did not let him know who I was: I took with me Monsieur de Guise and Descars,
and made them go in first: Yet the Astrologer addressed himself to me, as if he
had judged me Master to the other two, and perhaps he knew me; but if he did,
he told me a thing no way suitable to me: His Prediction was, I should be
killed in Duel. He told Monsieur de Guise he should die of a Wound given him
behind; and Descars, that he should have his Brains knocked out with the kick of
a Horse. Monsieur de Guise was offended at the Prediction, as if it imported he
would run away: Descars was not well pleased to hear he should end his days by
so unfortunate an Accident. In a word, we went out all three very ill satisfied
with the Astrologer. What may happen to Monsieur de Guise and Descars I know
not, but it is very improbable I shall be killed in Duel: The King of Spain and
I have newly made peace; and had we not done so, I question much if we should
have fought, or I have sent him a Challenge, as the King my Father did to
Charles the Fifth.

When the King had given this account of the misfortune foretold should happen
to him, those who before defended Astrology deserted it, and agreed there was
no credit at all to be given to it. For my part, says Monsieur de Nemours
aloud, I of all Men living have least cause to credit it; and turning himself
toward Madam de Cleve, near whom he stood, It has been told me, says he to her
very softly, I should be happy in the kindness of a Person, for whom I should
have the most violent, and the most respectful Passion imaginable. Judge you,
Madam, if I have cause for any Faith in Predictions.

The Queen-Dauphin having heard what Monsieur de Nemours had said aloud,
thought what he said softly had been some false Prediction told him, and asked
him what it was he had said to Madam de Cleve? Had his Wit been less ready, the
Question might have surprised him, but he answered without any hesitation, it
had been foretold him he should be exalted to a Fortune so high he durst not
pretend to. If this be it has been foretold you, says the Queen-Dauphin,
smiling and thinking of the Affair with England, I would not advise you to run
down Astrology, it is possible you may have reasons to give in defense of it.
Madam de Cleve understood the Queen-Dauphin's meaning, but knew withal that the
Fortune Monsieur de Nemours spoke of, was not that of being King of England.

It was now a long time since the death of her Mother, and Madam de Cleve must
appear abroad, and make her Court as she had used. She had a sight of Monsieur
de Nemours at the Queen-Dauphins, she had a sight of him at Monsieur de
Cleve's, where he frequently came with other Persons of Quality of his age,
that no notice might be taken of it; but wherever she saw him, it gave her
trouble, and put her into some disorder which he easily perceived.

As careful as she was to shun his looks, and speak less to him than any other,
she could not prevent some sudden escapes of her passion, that gave Monsieur de
Nemours cause to believe she had more than indifferent inclination for him. A
Man perhaps less discerning than he could not have perceived it, but he had
been already so often beloved, it was easy for him to know when one loved him.
He knew the Chevalier de Guise was his Rival, and the Chevalier de Guise as
clearly saw Monsieur de Nemours was his. Not one of the whole Court but the
Chevalier de Guise had made the discovery; his interest rendered him more
clear-sighted than the rest: The knowledge they had of one another designs,
made them cross one another in all things, and they could not forbear
expressing their spite on every occasion, though it broke not out into open
enmity. At the Runnings at the Ring, at Combats, at the Barrier, and all
Divertisements the King called them to, they were always of different Parties,
and their emulation was so great it could not be hid.

Madam de Cleve could not forbear thinking frequently of the Affair with
England, she believed Monsieur de Nemours would not resist the King's Advice,
and the Instances of Lignerolles, it troubled her to see Lignerolles was not
yet returned, and she expected him every hour with the greatest impatience: Her
inclinations swayed her strongly to inform her self exactly of the state of
that Affair; but the same thought that raised her Curiosity, immediately
suggested to her she was obliged to conceal it, and she inquired only of the
Beauty, the Wit and Humor of Queen Elizabeth. The King had one of her Pictures
brought him. Madam de Cleve thought it far handsomer than she hoped to have
found it, and she could not forbear saying the Picture-drawer had flattered the
Queen, in drawing her so beautiful. I do not think so, says the Queen-Dauphin,
that Princess is reputed extraordinary handsome, and witty; and I am sure she
has been proposed to me for an Example all my Life: she must be very lovely,
if like Anne Bullen her Mother: Never had a Lady so charming a Person, or so
bewitching a sweetness and lovliness in her humor: I have heard say she had a
singular sprightliness in her Countenance, and not like the common English
Beauties. I think, says Madam Cleve, I have been told she was born in France.
They that fancy so are mistaken, replys the Queen-Dauphin, and I will tell you
the Story of her in a very few words

She was of a good Family in England, Henry the 8th had been in love with her
Mother and Sister; and it was suspected she might be his Daughter. She came
into France with Henry the 7th's Sister, who was married to King Lewis the
12th. This Princess being youthful and gallant, was loath to leave the Court of
France at the death of her Husband: Anne Bullen, whose love for the French
Court was equal to her Mistresses, resolved not to quit it. The late King fell
in love with her, and she was made Maid of Honor to Queen Claudia: This Queen
dying, the Lady Margaret, the King's Sister, Duchess of Alanson, and since
Queen of Navarr, took her into her Service, where she received some Tincture of
the reformed Religion. Afterward she returned into England, and charmed all
that saw her; she sung well, and danced excellently: They made her one of Queen
Katherine's Maids of Honor, and Henry the 8th fell desperately in love with
her.

Cardinal Wolsey, his Favorite and prime Minister, was ill satisfied with the
Emperor, for not having favored his pretensions to the Papacy; and to be
revenged of him, resolved to unite the King his Master to the French. To effect
this, he suggested to Henry the 8th that his Marrriage with the Emperor's Aunt
was Null; and proposed for a Wife to him the Duchess of Alanson, whose Husband
was lately dead. Anne Bullen had Ambition enough to look upon the Divorce of
King Henry from Katherine, as a means to make way for her into the Throne: She
began to give the King some Impressions of the Lutheran Persuasion, and engaged
the late King here, to favor at Rome the Divorce of Henry, in hopes of his
marrying the Duchess of Alanson. Cardinal wolsey, to have opportunity to treat
of this Affair, prevailed with King Henry to send him into France on other
business; but he was so far from giving him power to propose that Marriage,
that he sent him express Order to Calais not to speak of it.

At his return from France, Cardinal Wolsey was received with honors equal to
those they would have done to the King: Never did Favorite carry on Pride and
Vanity to so high a Pitch: He managed an Enterview between the two Kings at
Bulloigne. Francis the 1st would have given the upperhand to Henry the 8th, but
he would not take it: they treated one another by turns with extraordinary
Magnificence, and presented each other with Habits equal to those they had
caused to be made for themselves: I have heard it said, those the late King
sent the King of England were of Crimson-Sattin, beset all over with Pearls and
Diamonds, and a Robe of white Velvet embroidered with Gold. After some days
stay at Bulloigne, they went to Callis; Anne Bullen was Lodged in Henry the
8th's Court, with the Train of a Queen, and Francis the 1st made her the same
Presents, and did her the same Honor, as if she had been actually so. At last,
after a Passion of nine years continuance, Henry the 8th married her, without
staying for the dissolution of his first Marriage, which he had a long time
demanded at Rome. The Pope hastily thundered Excommunications against him,
which provoked the King so highly, that he declared himself Head of the
Religion, and drew England after him into the Change ye now see.

Anne Bullen enjoyed not her Grandeur long; for when she thought it surest by
the death of Queen Katherine, one day as she was seeing, with the whole Court,
a Match made by the Viscount Rochfort her Brother, to run at the Ring; the King
was suddenly struck with so furious a jealousy, that he hastily left the Show,
and went straight to London, having left order for arresting the Queen, the
Viscount Rochfort, and several others whom he thought Lovers or Confidents of
that Princess: though in appearance this jealousy of the Kings seemed to owe
its Birth to that moment, the truth is, it had been inspired into him some time
before by the Viscountess Rochfort, who was not able to bear with patience the
great intimacy between the Queen and her Husband the Vsicount, represented it
to the King as criminal and incestuous: So that he being already in love with
Jane Seymour, thought no more of Anne Bullen, but to get rid of her. In less
than three Weeks he caused the Queen and her Brother to be tried, had them both
beheaded, and married Jane Seymour. He had afterward several other Wives, whom
he put away, or put to death; and among the rest the Lady Katherine Howard,
whose Confident the Countess Rochfort was, and shared in her Fate, having her
Head cut off with her Mistress's: Thus was she punished for falsely accusing
Anne Bullen; and Henry the 8th died, being grown prodigiously big and fat.

All the Ladies present thanked the Queen-Dauphin for the account she had given
them of the Court of England, and among the rest Madam de Cleve, who could not
forbear asking her several Questions about Queen Elizabeth.

The Queen-Dauphin had Pictures in little drawn for her of all the Beauties of
the Court, to be sent to the Queen her Mother. One day as that of Madam de
Cleve's was finishing, the Queen-Dauphin spent the Afternoon with her. Monsieur
de Nemours, who let slip no opportunity of seeing Madam de Cleve, (yet without
letting it appear he sought it,) faild not being there: She was that day so
beautiful, it would have made him in love with her, had he not been so; yet he
durst not fix his Eye upon her as her Picture was a drawing, being fearful
notice might be taken of the pleasure he took to view her now and then as she
sat.

The Queen-Dauphin asked Monsieur de Cleve for a Picture in little he had of
his Wife, to compare it with that which was newly drawn of her: Every one
passed their Judgment of the one and the other, and Madam de Cleve ordered the
Picture-drawer to mend something in the Draught of the Headgeer of that which
Monsieur de Cleve had brought in. The Picture-drawer, to satisfy her, took it
out of the Case; and having mended it, laid it on the Table.

Monsieur de Nemours had long wished for a Picture of Madam de Cleve: when he
saw that of her, which was Monsieur de Cleve's, he could not resist the longing
desire he had to steal it from a Husband he believed she tenderly loved; and
thought among so many Persons in the Room he might be as little suspected to
have done it as another.

The Queen-Dauphin was set on the Bed, and whispered to Madam de Cleve, who
stood before her: Madam de Cleve, through the Curtains which were but half
drawn, spied Monsieur de Nemours with his Back to the Table at the Beds-feet;
and perceived him, without turning his Face, steal something slily that was on
the Table: She quickly guessed it might be her Picture, and was so troubled at
it, that the Queen-Dauphin perceived she heard her not, and asked her aloud
what it was she looked at. At those words Monsieur de Nemours turned about, and
saw Madam de Cleve's Eye still fixed upon him, and thought it not impossible
but she might have seen what he had done.

Madam de Cleve was not a little perplexed: Reason would she should ask for her
Picture, yet to ask for it publicly, was to tell all the World the kindness
that Prince had for her; and to ask for it privately, was to engage him to
declare to her the Passion he had for her: At last she resolved it the best
course to let him carry it away, without taking notice of it, and was glad to
grant him a favor without knowing whether she had done it. Monsieur de Nemours
having observed her disorder, and guessing at the Cause, came up and whispered
to her; If you have seen what I have ventured to do, Madam, be so good to let
me believe you are ignorant of it, which is all I dare beg of you: With that he
withdrew, without expecting her Answer.

The Queen-Dauphin went out a walking, attended with all the Ladies, and
Monsieur de Nemours went home to lock himself in his Closet, to enjoy the
pleasure he took in having a Picture of Madam de Cleve's, which filled him with
joy too great and too delicate to be expressed in public: It gave him a taste
of the highest sweetness Love can afford; he was in love with the most amiable
Person of the Court, and saw she loved him though against her will, and easily
discovered in all her Actions that trouble and disorder which Love produces in
the innocence of Youth.

That Evening great search was made for the Picture: Having found the Case it
was used to be kept in, they never suspected it had been stolen, but thought
it might have been fallen out by chance. Monsieur de Cleve was much troubled at
the loss of it, and when they had long searched, and without finding it, he
told his Wife, (but in such a manner as made it appear he did not think so,)
That she had without doubt some private Lover, to whom she had given that
Picture, or who had stole it; and that any other but one in love would not have
been content with the Picture without the Case.

These words, though spoken in jest, made a deep impression in Madam de Cleve;
they troubled her extremely, and made her reflect with regret on the violence
of her Inclination for Monsieur de Nemours: she found she was no longer
Mistress of her Words, or her Countenance: She thought Lignerolles was
returned, that there was no further fear of the Affair with England, nor any
cause to suspect the Queen-Dauphin; that, in a word, there was not any thing to
help her against the violence of her Passion; and that there was no safety to
be expected, but by absenting her self from Monsieur de Nemours. But leave
being requested to be obtained for her absence from Court, where her Husband
resided, and a pretense wanting, she was in very great extremity, and ready to
fall into that she thought the worst of misfortunes, to let Monsieur de Nemours
see the inclination she had for him. She thought of all Madam de Chartres on
her Deathbed had said to her, and the Advice she had given her, to undergo any
difficulty, rather than engage in an Intrigue of Gallantry. She remembered what
Monsieur de Cleve had said to her of an ingenuous sincerity, when he spoke of
Madam de Tournon; and she thought it her duty to confess to him the inclination
she had for Monsieur de Nemours. These thoughts possessed her a considerable
time, at length she was astonished she could entertain any that appeared so
foolish, and relapsed into her former perplexity; not knowing what course to
take.

The Peace was signed, and the Lady Elizabeth, after much resistance, resolved
to obey the King her Father: The Duke of Alva had been appointed to Marry her
in the Name of His Catholic Majesty, and was shortly expected. They looked
every day for the Duke of Savoy, who had newly married the King's Sister; the
Nuptials being appointed to be kept at the same time the Lady Elizabeth should
be married to the Proxy of Spain. The King's greatest care was to Grace these
Marriages with Sports and Divertisements, wherein he might make appear the
Address and Magnificence of his Court. Great Proposals were made for Balletts
and Comedies, but the King thought those Divertisements too private, and
resolved to have such as should be more Splendid and Noble.

That which he made choice of was, a Solemn Tournament, to which Strangers
might be invited, and the People be Spectators. The Princes and young Lords
approved highly the King's design, especially the Duke of Ferrara, Monsieur de
Guise, and Monsieur de Nemours, who were the most excellent at these sorts of
Exercises; and the King made choice of them to be with him the four Champions
of the Tournament.

Proclamation was made throughout the Kingdom, that the 15th of June, at Paris,
His most Christian Majesty, and the Princes, Alphonso d'Est, Duke of Ferrara,
Francis of Lorrain, Duke of Guise, and James of Savoy Duke of Nemours, would
hold an open Tourney against all comers: The first Combat on Horseback in the
Lists, doubly Armed, to break four Lances, and one for the Ladies: The second
Combat with Swords; one to one, or two to two, as the Masters of the Camp
should order: The third Combat on Foot; three Pushes of Pike, and six Hits with
the Sword: The Champions to furnish Lances, Pikes, and Swords, at the
Assailants choice: Whoever managed not his Horse in the Carreer, to be put out
of the Lists: That there should be four Masters of Camp, to give Orders; the
Assailants who should break most Lances, and perform best, to carry the Prize;
the value whereof to be at the discretion of the Judges: That all the
Assailants, as well French as Strangers, should be obliged openly, to lay Hand
on one, or more, (at their choice) of the Shields that should hang at a Pillar
at the end of the Lists, where an Officer of Arms should be ready to receive
them, and Inroll them according to their Quality, and the Shields they had
handled: That the Assailants should be bound to cause their Shields, and Arms,
to be brought by a Gentleman, and hung up at the Pillar three days before the
beginning of the Tourney, on pain of not being received without the special
leave of the Defendants.

A great List was made, reaching from the Chate aude Tournells, cross S.
Anthony's Street to the King's Stables. There were on both sides Scaffolds, and
Theaters, with covered Galleries very pleasing to the sight, and that would
hold an infinite of People. The Princes and great Lords, made it their business
to provide what might be necessary, to appear there in Splendour, and to have in
their Ciphers and Devises, something of Gallantry relating to the Ladies they
loved.

A few days before the Duke d' Alva arrived, the King made a Match at Tennis
with Monsieur de Nemours, the Chevalier de Guise, and the Vidame de Chartres.
The Queen, attended with the Ladies of the Court, and (among the rest) Madam de
Cleve went to see them play: The Game being ended, as they went out of the
Tennis-Court, Chastelart came up to the Queen-Dauphin, and told her he had by
chance hit upon a Letter of Gallantry fallen out of Monsieur de Nemours's
Pocket. This Queen, who always had a Curiosity for any thing that concerned
Monsieur de Nemours, bid Chastelart give it her: He did so, and she followed
the Queen her Mother-in-Law, who was going with the King to see them work at
the Lists. They had not been long there, but the King sent for some Horses he
had lately caused to be taken in, and though they were not thoroughly managed,
the King would Mount one of them, and ordered his Attendants to Mount the rest:
The fiery'st and highest-mettl'd of them fell to the King's share, and Monsieur
de Nemours's: Their Horses would have presently fallen fowl on one another.
Monsieur de Nemours for fear of hurting the King, recoiled briskly, and ran
back his Horse against a Post, with that violence it made him stagger: The
Company ran in presently to Monsieur de Nemours, thinking him grievously hurt.
Madam de Cleve was more sensible of it than any other, and thought him worse
hurt: She was so much concerned, she never thought of hiding the apprehension
and trouble it put her in; she went to him with the Queens, but with a
Countenance so changed, one less concerned than the Chevalier de Guise might
have easily perceived it. He quickly observed it, and minded more the condition
she was in then, than that of Monsieur de Nemours'S. The violence of the Justle
had so stunned the Prince, he stood a while leaning his Head on those that
supported him: When he held it up, he presently spied Madam de Cleve, and
discovered in her looks the pity she had of him; and looked on her in such a
manner, as made her easily comprehend how sensible he was of it. Afterward he
thanked the Queens for the goodness expressed toward him, and excused the
condition he had been in before them. This done, the King commanded him to go
to rest.

Madam de Cleve being recovered of the fright she had been in, reflected
quickly on the Evidence she had given of it. The Chevalier de Guise presently
put her out of the hopes she had no body had taken notice of it, giving her his
Hand to lead her out of the Lists; I have more cause to complain, says he,
Madam, than Monsieur de Nemours: Pardon me if, for a moment, I forget the
profound respect I have always had for you, to let you see how I grieve at
Heart for what my Eyes have but now discovered: It Is the first time I have
taken the boldness to speak to you, and it shall be the last: Death, or an
everlasting absence, will remove me from a place I can no longer live in;
having now lost the sorry comfort I had, in believing all those who durst look
on you were as unfortunate as I.

Madam de Cleve answered, as if she had not understood him: She would have been
offended another time at any Declaration he should have made of his affection
for her, but that moment her thoughts were wholly drowned in a deep affliction
for the Discovery he had made of her kindness for Monsieur de Nemours. The
Chevalier de Guise was so thoroughly convinced of it, and so heartily troubled
at it, he took a resolution never to think more of obtaining her love. But to
quit an Enterprise that appeared so difficult and glorious, he must pitch on
another great enough to fill the room the former had taken up in his thoughts.
He had formerly entertained some thoughts of the taking of Rhodes; and when
Death took him out of the World in the Flower of his Youth, when he had gained
the Reputation of one of the greatest Princes of his time; the only grief he
expressed for leaving the World, was, he had not been able to put in execution
so noble a Resolution, the success whereof he thought infallible, through the
care he had taken for it.

When Madam de Cleve was gone out of the Lists, she went to the Queen's
Lodgings, full of the thoughts of what had newly happened. Monsieur de Nemours
came in presently after, in a very Magnificent Habit, and like one no way
sensible of the late Accident, but in appearance more gay and jovial than
ordinary: His joy for what he thought he had lately discovered, gave his
Countenance an Air, made him appear handsomer, (if possible,) than formerly.
The Company was surpised at his entrance, every one asked him how he did,
except Madam de Cleve, who staid near the Chimney, as if she had not seen him:
The King coming out of his Closet saw him among the rest, and called him to
have some discourse of his Adventure. Monsieur de Nemours passing by Madam de
Cleve, said to her very low, I have this day received some marks of your pity,
Madam; but they were not such as I am most worthy of. Madam de Cleve doubted
before, that Monsieur de Nemours had observed the concern she was in for him;
and his words sufficiently confirmed the truth of her thoughts. It troubled her
extremely she had been so little Mistress of her Sentiments, as not to have
been able to conceal them from the Chevalier de Guise. It added to her grief
Monsieur de Nemours had discovered them, yet this grief was not so pure, but it
had a mixture of pleasure.

The Queen-Dauphin, impatiently desirous to know the Contents of the Letter
Chastelart had given her, went to Madam de Cleve, Go read this Letter, says
she, it is addressed to Monsieur de Nemours; and in all appearance was sent him
by the Mistress for whom he has quitted all others: If you cannot read it at
present, keep it, and bring it me at Night as I go to Bed, and tell me if you
know the Hand. With that, the Queen-Dauphin left Madam de Cleve, but so
surpised and astonished, she could not a while stir out of her place: It put
her into that impatience and trouble, she was not able to stay at the Queen's
Lodgings; but went home, though long before her usual hour of retirement. Her
Hand trembled as she held the Letter, her thoughts were perplexed, and extremely
disordered; and the trouble she was in no less new than insupportable: As soon
as she got into her Closet, she opened the Letter, and found it to this effect.

The LETTER.
I have loved you too well, to let you believe the change you observe in me is
an effect of Lightness; I am going to tell you, your Infidelity is the cause of
it; you will be surpised I charge you with unfaithfulness: you have kept it
from me so cunningly, and I have been at so much pains to conceal from you my
knowledge of it, you have reason enough to be astonished at the discovery. I
wonder at my self I have been able so long, not to let you know something of
it. Never was affliction equal to mine, I believed you had for me a violent
Passion; I scrupled as little the owning that I had for you. The very time I
made you a full discovery of it, I found my self deceived, that you were in
love with another, and in all appearance made a Sacrifice of me to your new
Mistress: I came to the knowledge of it the day you ran at the Ring, which was
the cause I was not at the Sight: To hide the disorder of my mind, I feigned my
self sick, and quickly became really so; my Body being too weak to support and
endure the violent agitations within me: when I began to recover, I still
pretended my self very ill, to furnish my self with an Excuse for not seeing,
or writing to you. I was willing to have time to resolve how to deal with you;
I took, and I quitted, twenty times the same resolutions: At last I thought you
unworthy to be made acquainted with my grief, and resolved you should not know
it. I was willing to bring down your pride, by letting you see my Passion (of
it self) grow weaker and weaker: I thought it the way to lessen the value of
the Sacrifice you made of me, and was loath you should have the pleasure of
appearing more amiable in the Eyes of another, by showing her how deeply I
loved you: I resolved my Letters to you should be cold and indifferent, that
she you gave them to might perceive (or imagine at least) my Love at an end: I
was unwilling she should have the pleasure to find I knew she triumphed over
me, or the advantage to set off her triumph with my despair, and my reproaches:
To break with you, I thought too small a punishment for you; and that it would
have troubled you but little to find I loved you no longer, when you had first
forsaken me. I knew it necessary you should love me, to feel the smart of not
being loved, which afflicted me so sore. I was of opinion, if any thing could
make you love me as you had done, it must be to let you see my affection was
changed; but so to let you see it as if I would have hid it from you, and had
not the power to own it to you. This resolution I adhered to, I found it
difficult to take, and (when I saw you) I thought it impossible to execute. I
was an hundred times ready to break out into Reproaches and Lamentations: My
indisposition served me for a disguise, to hide from you the affliction and
trouble I was in. By degrees I found pleasure in dissembling with you, as you
did with me: But it went so much against the Grain, to tell you, or write to
you, that I loved you; you quickly perceived I had no mind to let you see my
affection was altered: This touched you, you complained; I endeavored to
confirm you in an opinion of my constancy, but it was in a way so strange, and
so forced, it convinced you the more I had no more love for you. In a word, I
did all I intended to have done: the further I fled from you, the more eagerly
you sought me, so fantastical was your humor; this gave me all the pleasure a
full revenge is capable to bestow: It was clear to me you loved me more than
ever, and I let you see I had no love for you: you gave me cause to believe you
had entirely abandoned her, for whose sake you had forsaken me; and I had some
reason to think you had never spoke to her of me, but your Repentance and
Discretion could not make amends for your Lightness and Inconstancy: your
affection has been divided between me and another, and you have deceived me:
This is enough to take away all the pleasure of being loved by you, as I
thought I deserved, and to make me persist in the Resolution I have taken never
to see you more, which so much surprises you.


Madam de Cleve read the Letter again and again, yet knew not what she read:
she perceived only, Monsieur de Nemours was not so in love with her as she had
thought, but loved others, who were no less deceived in him than she. What a
Discovery was this for a Person of her humor, who had a violent Passion, who
had newly given Evidence of it to a Man she judged unworthy of it; and to
another she used ill for love of him! Never was grief so cutting as hers; she
imputed the sharpness of it to that days adventures, and that if Monsieur de
Nemours had not had occasion to believe she loved him, she would not have cared
for his loving another: Yet she did but deceive her self, the Disease she was
sick of, and thought so intolerable, was Jealousy, with all its horrible
Attendants: This Letter discovered to her a piece of Gallantry Monsieur de
Nemours had long been engaged in. She saw the Lady who had written the Letter,
was a Person of Wit and Merit; she thought her one that deserved his love, and
of more courage than her self; and envied the power she had to conceal her
Passion from Monsieur de Nemours: The close of the Letter gave her cause to
believe that Person thought her self loved; she was presently of opinion the
discretion that Prince had made show of to her, and she had been so taken with,
was perhaps but the effect of his Passion for the other, whom he feared to
displease. In a word, all her thoughts were so many torments, to heighten her
affliction, and occasion despair. What Reflections did she make on her self,
and the Counsels her Mother had given her! How did she repent her not having
persisted in her Resolution of quitting the World, though without the leave of
Monsieur de Cleve; or her not having pursued the intention she had of
confessing to him the inclination she had for Monsieur de Nemours? She thought
she had better have discovered it to a Husband, whose goodness she was assured
of, and who would have been concerned to conceal it; than to have let a Man
know it who was altogether unworthy of it, who deceived her, and perhaps made a
Sacrifice of her; and cared no more for her love, than to have matter thence to
feed his Pride and Vanity. In a word, she thought no greater mischief could
befall her, nor she have done worse, than to have given Monsieur de Nemours
occasion to believe she loved him; and to have since found he was in love with
another. All the comfort she had, was, to believe, that having discovered his
falseness, it would perfectly cure her of the inclination she had for him.

She never thought of the order the Queen-Dauphin had given her, to be with her
at her going to Bed; but went to Bed her self, pretending she was ill: so that
when Monsieur de Cleve came from the King, they told him she was asleep; but
she was far enough from being so well at rest, afflicting her self all Night,
and reading over the Letter she had in her Hand.

Madam de Cleve was not the sole Person this Letter disturbed. The Vidame de
Chartres, who in truth had lost it, was in no small trouble for it: He had
passed that Evening at the Duke of Guise's, who had treated at Supper, his
Brother-in-Law, the Duke of Ferrara, and all the young People of the Court. As
Fortune would have it, they discoursed at Supper of Letters; the Vidame told
them, he had about him the finest that ever was writ: They pressed him to show
it, but he denied. Monsieur de Nemours insisted he had no such Letter, and that
he talked vainly. The Vidame answered, he put him very hard to it, yet he would
not show him the Letter, but would read part of it, which would give them cause
to judge few Men received the like. Having said this, he would have taken out
the Letter, but could not find it: He searched for it, but to no purpose; the
Company jear'd him as if he never had any such; but he was so vexed at the
loss, that they forbore speaking further of it. He retired before the rest of
the Company, and with great impatience went home, to search for the Letter he
missed. As he was in search of it, a Page of the Queens came to tell him that
the Viscountess d' Usez had thought it necessary to give him speedy
intelligence, that at the Queens Lodgings they discoursed of a Letter of
Gallantry dropped out of his Pocket as he was at Tennis: That they had recited
part of what was written in it; that the Queen seemed very desirous to see it;
that she had sent to one of her Gentlemen for it, but he answered he had given
it Chastelart.

The Page added other Particulars which heightened the Vidame's trouble. He
went presently to a Gentleman who was very intimate with Chastelart, and
(though at a very unseasonable hour) made him get up out of Bed, to go ask
Chastelart for the Letter, without letting him know who inquired for it, or had
lost it. Chastelart fully possessed the Letter belonged to Monsieur de Nemours,
and that he was in love with the Queen-Dauphin, made no doubt but he had sent
in search of it, and with a malicious joy answered he had delivered it to the
Queen-Dauphin. The Gentleman brought the Vidame this Answer, which added to his
trouble: After long debate what course to take, he saw Monsieur de Nemours was
the only Person could help him out of the trouble he was in.

He went to his House, and entered his Chamber at peep of Day: The Prince was
fast asleep, the kindness of Madam de Cleve the day before having given him
such pleasing thoughts, that he rested very sweetly that Night. He was
surpised to find himself awakened by the Vidame of Chartres, and asked him if
it was to be revenged of him for what he had said at Supper, that he was come
thus early to break his rest? The Vidame's looks gave him quickly to understand
his business was very serious; I am come, says he, to trust you with the most
important Affair of my Life: I know very well you are not obliged to me for the
confidence, because I do it in a time I stand in need of your help; but I am
satisfied withal I should have lost your esteem, had I acquainted you with what
I am going to tell you, without being forced to it by absolute necessity. I
have dropped the Letter I spoke of yesterday, it concerns me extremely, no one
should know it was addressed to me. Several who were at the Tennis-Court
yesterday, where I dropped it, have seen it. You were there, and I beg the
favor you would own you have lost it. Sure, says Monsieur de Nemours, smiling,
you think I have not such a thing as a Mistress in the World, that you can make
me a Proposal of this Nature, as if there were not a Person living would fall
out with me upon notice of my receiving Letters of that sort. I pray, Sir, says
the Vidame, be serious: If you have a Mistress, (as I question not but you
have, though I know her not,) you will easily justify your self, and I will
put you in an infallible way for it: If you should not justify your self, the
worst you can fear is a short falling out: My case is much worse; by this
unlucky Adventure, I shall dishonor a Person who has passionately loved me,
and is one of the most Enestimable Women of the World; besides, I shall procure
my self her implacable hatred to the certain ruin of my Fortune, and perhaps
something more. I understand you not, answers Monsieur de Nemours; but I begin
methinks to discover the reports we have had of a great Princess being
concerned for you, are not without ground. They are not, replys the Vidame, but
I wish they had been so; I should not have been then in the trouble you see me
in. I will tell you all, to convince you what a condition I am in.

Ever since I came to Court the Queen has been pleased to use me with
particular favor, and has given me cause to believe she has kindness for me:
Yet so, that I never entertained any thought of her but what was full of
respect. I was deeply in love with Madam de Themines; you who have seen her,
may easily judge it was not strange any one should love her, if she loved him
as she did me. Near two years since, the Court being at Fountainbleau, I was
two or three times in discourse with the Queen when there was very little
company: I thought my sense pleased her, and that she approved whatever I
said. One day she fell into a Discourse of Confidence; I told her there was not
a Person in the World I could entirely confide in, that I found many had
repented of having done it, and that I knew several things I had never spoken
of. The Queen told me, she esteemed me the better for it, that she had not found
a Person in France could keep a Secret; and that nothing troubled her more,
because it deprived her of the pleasure of having a Confident; than which
nothing more necessary, especially for those of her Quality: She fell several
times after into the like discourse, and made me acquainted with very
particular Passages: At last I thought she had a mind to learn some Secret of
mine, and to trust me with hers: I was so sensible of this distinguishing
favor, it engaged me strictly to her, and I made my Court to her with more
assiduity than ordinary. One Evening the King, and the Ladies, went on
Horseback into the Forest to take the Air; the Queen went not, being a little
indisposed, I staid to wait on her, she walked down to the Pond side, and to be
at more liberty, would not be handed by the Gentlemen-Ushers: Having taken a
turn or two, she came to me and bid me follow her: I would speak with you, says
she, and by what I shall say to you, you will find I am your Friend. She
stopped there, and looked earnestly on me; You are in love, says she, and
because you have made no one your Confident, you think your love is not known;
but it is, and to Persons who are concerned at it: You are observed, the place
where you see your Mistress is discovered, and there is a design to surprise
you: I know not your Mistress, nor do I ask you who she is; but would arm you
against the Plots that are laid for you. Observe, Sir, what a Snare this was
from a Queen, and how hard to escape: She had a mind to know if I was in love,
and not asking whom I loved, but letting me see her pure intentions of doing me
a kindness, she put it out of my thoughts to suspect her of Curiosity, much
less of Design.

But against all probability, I came to a discovery of the truth, I was in love
with Madam de Themines; but though she loved me, I was not so happy to have
particular places to see her, or to fear a surprise. I easily saw 'twas not she
the Queen spoke of: I knew well enough I had some concern of Gallantry with a
Woman less handsome, and less severe than Madam de Themines, and it was not
impossible the place I used to meet her might have been discovered; but that
was a business I so little cared for, I could easily prevent any danger, by
forbearing to see her: Thus I resolved not to confess any thing to the Queen,
but assured her I had long laid aside the desire of gaining the love of Women,
where I might hope for success, having found them almost all unworthy the
Engagement of an honest Man; and that I was now altogether for something above
them. You do not answer me truly, replys the Queen, I am assured of the
contrary. The manner of my speaking to you, should oblige you to hide nothing
from me. I am willing, adds she, you should be one of my Friends, but not
willing (having taken you into that Number) to be ignorant how you are engaged.
See whether the Place of being my Friend be too dear at the Price of making me
your Confident: I give you two days to think on it, but after that time I expect
your answer; and remember, if I find you deceive me, I shall never pardon you.

Having said this, the Queen left me, without expecting my answer: You may
believe she had said enough to employ my thoughts: I did not think the two days
she had allowed me too long a time to come to Resolution. I saw she was willing
to know if I was in love, and that she did not much desire I should be so. I
considered the Consequences of the Engagement I was entering into. My Vanity was
tickled with the fancy of having a particular Intrigue with a Queen, and a
Queen whose Person is extremely amiable: On the other side, I loved Madam de
Themines, and could not find in my Heart to break with her quite; though I
committed a Petty-Treason against her, by my Engagement with the other I
formerly told you of. I apprehended the danger I should expose my self to, if I
deceived the Queen, and how hard it would be to do it: Yet I could not resolve
to refuse what Fortune offered me, but was willing to run the hazard of any
thing my ill Conduct might bring upon me: I broke with that Woman where I
feared a discovery, and was in hopes to conceal the intelligence I held with
Madam de Themines.

At the two days end I entered the Chamber where the Queen was with all the
Ladies about her; she said aloud, and with a Gravity that surpised me, Have
you thought of the Business I gave you in Charge, and found out the truth of
it? Yes, Madam, answered I, and it is as I told your Majesty. Come in the
Evening when I am a writing, replys she, and you shall have further order.
Having made a profound Reverence, I withdrew without further answer, and failed
not to attend at the hour assigned: I found her in the Gallery, with her
Secretary and one of her Women: As soon as she saw me, she came to me and took
me to the other end of the Gallery: Well, says she, upon second thoughts, have
you nothing to say to me? And my usage of you, does it not deserve you should
deal sincerely with me? My sincerity, Madam, replied I, is the cause I have
nothing to say; and I swear to your Majesty, with all the respect due to your
Majesty, I have no Engagement with any Woman of the Court. I will believe it,
says she, because I wish it so; and I wish it, because I desire to have you
entirely mine, and that it would be impossible I should be satisfied with your
Friendship if you are in love: there is no trusting those that are so, there is
no relying on their secrecy: the Partiality they have for their Mistresses,
who still take up the first room in their thoughts, suits not with the manner I
would have you engaged to me: Remember then that upon your giving me your word
you are not otherwise engaged, I Choose you for my Confident: Remember I would
have you entirely mine, and that you must have no Friend of either Sex, but
such as I please to allow you; and that you are to quit all cares, but that of
pleasing me. You shall not lose your Fortune by it, I shall take more care of
it than you can your self; and whatever I do for you I shall think it well
bestowed, if you answer my expectation of you. I have made choice of you to
make you acquainted with all my Griefs, and to help me out of them. You may
judge they are no mean ones: I endure in appearance, with very little pain, the
King's Engagement with the Duchess of Valentinois, but it is insupportable. She
Governs the King, she deludes him, she cheats him; she slights me, she hates
me, she has debauched my Servants, they are all at her beck: The Queen, my
Daughter-in-Law, is so proud of her Beauty, and the Credit of her Uncles, she
pays me no respect. The Constable Montmorency is Master of the King, and his
Kingdom: He hates me, and has given proofs of his hatred I shall never forget.
The Marshal St. Andre is a fiery young Favorite, who uses me no better than
the rest; you would pity me, should I give you a particular account of my
misfortunes: Till now I never durst trust any Man with them; I trust you, give
me no cause to repent it, and let me have comfort of you. As she said these
words, her Eyes redden'd: I was so sensible of the goodness she had expressed
for me, I was going to throw my self at her Feet. From that day she placed
entire confidence in me, and did nothing without first advising with me; and I
have ever since maintained a Correspondence which holds to this day.

The End of the second Book.
THE PRINCESS OF CLEVE.
BOOK III.
Busy as I was, and full of my new Engagement to the Queen, I held fair and
firm with Madam de Themines, by a natural inclination it was not in my power to
vanquish: Yet methoughts she cooled in her love of me; and where, had I been
wise, I should have made use of the change observed in her for my Cure; it
doubled my love, and I managed it so ill, that the Queen had some knowledge of
it. Jealousy is natural to those of her Nation, and perhaps that Princess had
a greater affection for me than she her self could imagine. At last the report
of my being in love disturbed and troubled her to that height, that I thought
my self an hundred times ruined in my Credit with her: But diligence,
submission, and false Oaths brought me again into favor: Yet it would not have
been in my power to have deceived her long, had not Madam de Themines, sore
against my will, disengaged me from her. She made it appear her love for me was
at an end, and I was so convinced of it, that I was forced to torment her no
further, but let her alone. A short time after she writ me the Letter I have
lost: by it I perceived she knew the Commerce I had with that Woman I told you
of, and that her Change proceeded from thence. Thenceforward the Queen was well
satisfied with me, being no longer divided as formerly: But the Sentiments I
have for her being not of a nature to render me incapable of engaging
elsewhere, and Love being not a thing depends on our Choice, I fell in love
with Madam de Martigues, for whom I had no small inclination, when she was
Villemontar's Maid of Honor to the Queen-Dauphin. I had reason to believe she
did not hate me. The discretion I made show of, (she not knowing all the
Reasons of it,) pleased her very well: The Queen has no suspicion of me on
that side, but has on another account which proves no less troublesome: Madam
de Martigues being every day at the Queen-Dauphin's, I frequent her Lodgings
oftener than ordinary: the Queen fancy's I am in love with that Princess. The
quality of Madam La-Dauphine being equal to the Queens, and her beauty and
youth above hers, have made the Queen jealous even to fury, and filled her with
a hatred she can no longer conceal against her Daughter-in-Law: The Cardinal of
Lorrain, who (I have long thought) aspires the Queen's favor, and sees me
possess a place he would willingly be in, under pretense of reconciling the
Queens, is become concerned in the differences between them. I make no doubt
but he has discovered the true Cause of the Queen's anger, and I believe he
does me all kinds of ill Offices, without letting her see he does it on design:
This is the state of my present condition; judge you what effect the Letter I
have lost may produce, which I unfortunately put into my Pocket to restore it
to Madam de Themines. If the Queen see this Letter, she will know I have
deceived her; and that almost the same time I deceived her by Madam de
Themines, I deceived Madam de Themines by another: Judge you what she will
think of me then, and whether she will ever trust my words more. If she see not
the Letter, what shall I say to her? She knows it has been given the
Queen-Dauphin, she will believe Chastelart knew her Hand, and that the Letter
was hers: she will imagine her self perhaps the Person, she that wrote the
Letter declares her self jealous of. In a word, she has occasion to think any
thing, and there is nothing so bad but I have cause to fear from her thoughts:
besides; I am heartily concerned for Madam de Martigues, the Queen-Dauphin will
certainly show her this Letter, which she will believe lately writ; thus shall
I be embroiled with the Person, whom of all the World I love most, no less than
with the Person, whom of all the World I have most cause to fear. See now
whether I have not reason to conjure you to own the Letter as yours, and to beg
the favor of you to get it out of the Queen-Dauphin's Hands.

I am very well satisfied, answers Monsieur de Nemours, you are sufficiently
perplexed; and it cannot be denied but you very well deserve it. I have been
charged with unfaithfulness in my Amors, and being engaged at the same time in
several Gallantries; but you have so far outdone me, I durst not have imagined
what you have undertaken: Could you pretend to hold fair with Madam de
Themines, and keep her firm to you, being engaged to the Queen? Could you hope
to engage with the Queen, and deceive her? She is an Italian, and a Queen, and
consequently full of suspicions of Jealousy, and of Pride. When your good
Fortune, rather than your good Conduct, had set you at liberty from the
Engagements you were formerly concerned in, you entered into new; and fancied
that in the midst of the Court you could be in love with Madam de Martigues and
the Queen not know it: You could not have been too careful of taking from her
the shame of having made the first motion: she has for you a violent Passion;
you have more discretion than to tell it me, and I, than to ask you of it:
Certain it is she loves you, and intrusts you; and the truth is, you are to be
blamed. Is it your part, Sir, to chide me, says the Vidame, interupting him;
and are not you concerned to be indulgent to faults within your Experience? I
confess I am to blame, but think, I conjure you, how to get me out of this
Abyss: I think you must go see the Queen-Dauphin as soon as she awakes, and ask
her for the Letter as if you had lost it. I have told you already, replys
Monsieur de Nemours, the thing you propose is somewhat extraordinary, and there
are difficulties in it, I am (upon my own account) very loath to engage in. But
if the Letter has been seen to drop out of your Pocket, how shall I persuade
them it dropped out of mine? I thought I had told you, says the Vidame, the
Queen-Dauphin has been informed you had dropped it. How, replys Monsieur de
Nemours, hastily, (apprehending the ill consequence the mistake might be of to
him with Madam de Cleve,) Have they told the Queen-Dauphin I dropped the
Letter? Yes, says the Vidame, they have told her so: And the reason of the
mistake is, there were several of the Queen's Gentlemen in a Chamber belonging
to the Tennis-Court, where our Clothes were put up, and your Servants and mine
went together to fetch them: Then it was the Letter was dropped, those
Gentlemen gathered it up and read it aloud; some thought it was yours, others
thought it mine: Chastelart, who took it, told me just now, as I asked him for
it, that he had given it the Queen-Dauphin as a Letter of yours: And those who
spoke of it to the Queen, have unfortunately said it was mine: You may easily
do what I desire, and get me out of this trouble.

Monsieur de Nemours had ever been a great lover of the Vidame of Chartres, and
his near relation to Madam de Cleve made him love him the more; yet he could
not presently resolve to run the hazard of owning that Letter: He fell into a
deep study, and the Vidame guessing the cause of his meditation, I see well
enough, says he, you are afraid of a Broil with you Mistress, and would make me
believe it is the Queen-Dauphin; but you have so little jealousy of Monsieur
d' Anville, I cannot think it is she. However, it is not reasonable you should
sacrifice your Repose to mine, and I will put you in a way to convince your
Mistress the Letter was directed to me, and not you: See here a Billet from
Madam d' Amboise, who is a Friend of Madam de Themines, and her Confident in
the Amors between me and her: By this Billet Madam d' Amboise desires me to
send her her Friends Letter I have lost; the Billet is addressed to me by Name,
and the Contents of it are an infallible Proof the Letter she desires is the
same they have found. I am content you should take the Billet and show it your
Mistress for your justification. I conjure you not to lose a moments time, but
go presently to the Queen-Dauphin's Lodgings.

Monsieur de Nemours promised to do so, and took the Billet; yet he designed
not to see the Queen-Dauphin, but thought he had business concerned him more:
He made no doubt but she had tole Madam de Cleve of the Letter, and he could
not endure a Person he loved so desperately, should have occasion to believe
him engaged with another.

He went to her as soon as he thought her awake, and sent her word he would not
have desired the honor to see her at so unseasonable an hour, but that he had
extraordinary business. Madam de Cleve was a-Bed, troubled with the sad
thoughts she had had all that Night: she was extremely surpised to hear
Monsieur de Nemours asked for her; that Nights trouble had made her so froward,
she presently answered she was not well, and could not speak with him.

Monsieur de Nemours was not sorry for the Repulse; he thought it no ill Omen
she expressed some coldness at a time she had occasion to be jealous: He went
to the Apartment of Monsieur de Cleve, and told him he came from his Ladys, and
was much troubled he could not speak with her, upon business of consequence
that concerned the Vidame of Chartres. He gave Monsieur de Cleve a short
account of the Affair, and he took him along presently to his Lady's Chamber.
Had she not been in the dark, she could hardly have concealed her trouble and
astonishment, to see Monsieur de Nemours led into her Chamber, by her Husband.
Monsieur de Cleve told her the business was about a Letter, wherein they wanted
her help in behalf of the Vidame, that she was to consider with Monsieur de
Nemours what was to be done, as for him he must go to the King who had newly
sent for him.

Monsieur de Nemours had his hearts desire, to be alone with Madam de Cleve; I
am come to ask you, Madam, says he, if the Queen-Dauphin has not spoken to you
of a Letter Chastelart gave her yesterday. She said something to me of it,
answers Madam de Cleve; but I do not see how my Uncle can be concerned in it,
being not so much as named in it. It Is true, Madam, replys Monsieur de Nemours,
he is not named in it; but it was addressed to him, and it highly concerns him
you should get it out of the Queen-Dauphin's Hands. I cannot conceive, says
Madam de Cleve, how it should concern him to have this Letter seen; and why it
should be asked for as his. If you please to give me the hearing, Madam, replys
Monsieur de Nemours, I will presently make you acquainted with the truth; and
inform you of matters of so great importance to the Vidame, that I would not
have trusted the Prince of Cleve with them, had I not needed his assistance to
have the honor to see you. I suppose what you can say to me will be to small
purpose, says Madam de Cleve, very unconcernedly, you were better find out the
Queen-Dauphin, and without going so far about, tell her the interest you have
in that Letter, for she has been informed it belongs to you.

Monsieur de Nemours was never better pleased, than to observe some peevishness
and frowardness in Madam de Cleve's discourse; it delighted him so, he was not
very hasty to justify himself: I know not, says he, Madam, what the
Queen-Dauphin has been informed, but I am not at all concerned in the Letter,
it was addressed to the Vidame: I believe it, replys Madam de Cleve, but the
Queen-Dauphin has been told otherwise; and it will not appear very probable to
her, a Letter of the Vidame 's should drop out of your Pocket; for that reason
at least you have no cause that I know of to conceal the truth from the
Queen-Dauphin: I advise you to confess it to her. I have nothing to confess to
her, says he, the Letter was not addressed to me; and if there be any one I
desire should believe so, it is not the Queen-Dauphin. But, Madam, since this
business concerns the Vidame as much as his Fortune is worth, be pleased to be
made acquainted with Passages in themselves worthy your Curiosity. Madam de
Cleve by her silence showed her readiness to hear him, and he with all possible
brevity gave her an account of what the Vidame had told him; though the
Passages were astonishing, and such as deserved any ones attention, Madam de
Cleve heard them with that coldness and indifferency as if she had not believed
them, or at least not been any ways concerned for them: she continued in that
temper till Monsieur de Nemours told her of the Billet from Madam d' Amboise to
the Vidame of Chartres, which proved all he said to be true. Madam de Cleve
knew that Lady was Madam de Themines Friend, and thought it probable, by what
Monsieur de Nemours said, the Letter was not addressed to him. That very
thought suddenly, and in spite of her, put her out of that coldness and
indifferency she had till then been in. The Prince having read to her the
Billet to justify himself, presented it to her, telling her she might know the
Character. She could not forbear taking it, and examining the Superscription,
if addressed to the Vidame, and reading it all over, that she might the better
judge whether the Letter that was asked for were the same she had. Monsieur de
Nemours added what he thought proper to convince her, and easily convinced her
(of a truth she was very desirous to find) that he was not concerned in the
Letter.

She began then to discourse with him of the trouble and danger the Vidame was
in, to blame his ill Conduct, and find means to help him. She was astonished at
the Queens proceeding, and confessed to Monsieur de Nemours she had the Letter.
In a word, as soon as she believed him innocent, she spoke with freedom and
quietness, of the things she before scarce vouchsafed to hear; they agreed the
Letter should not be restored to the Queen-Dauphin, for fear she should show it
Madam de Martigues, who knew the Hand of Madam de Themines, and was so
concerned for the Vidame, she would easily guess it was addressed to him.
Besides, they thought it not proper to acquaint the Queen-Dauphin with all that
concerned her Mother-in-Law, the Queen. Madam de Cleve was not a little glad of
the Pretense of her Uncle's concern in the case, to be Monsieur de Nemours's
Confident of the Secrets he imparted to her.

The Prince would not have confined his discourse to the Vidame's concern, but
from the liberty he had to entertain her, would have taken a boldness he never
yet durst, had not a Message been brought her, the Queen-Dauphin had sent for
her: Monsieur de Nemours was forced to retire, and went to tell the Vidame,
that after he had left him he thought it more for the purpose to address
himself to Madam de Cleve his Niece, than go directly to the Queen-Dauphin. He
wanted not Reasons to make him approve of what he had done, and put him in
hopes of success.

Madam de Cleve the mean time dressed her self in all haste to go to the Queen:
she scarce entered the Chamber, but the Queen called her up to her, and
whispered her she had looked for her two long hours, and was never so perplexed
about disguising a truth as she had been that Morning. The Queen, says she,
has heard speak of the Letter I gave you yesterday, and believes it is the
Vidame de Chartres let it fall. You know she may be somewhat concerned on that
account: she has been in search of the Letter, and caused Chastelart to be
asked for it; he told her he had given it me: they asked me for it under
pretense it was a pretty Letter the Queen had a great mind to see. I durst not
tell her you had it, lest she should imagine I had given it you on your Uncle
the Vidame's account; and that there might be a Correspondence between me and
him. I was satisfied it was a trouble to her he saw me so often, so that I said
the Letter was in the Clothes I had on yesterday, and that those who had them
in keeping were gone abroad. Give me the Letter quickly, adds she, that I may
send it her, and read it before I send it, to see if I know the Hand.

Madam de Cleve found her self in a greater perplexity than she could have
expected. I know not what you shall do, Madam, says she; for Monsieur de Cleve,
to whom I gave it to read, has restored it to Monsieur de Nemours, who came
early this Morning to desire you to let him have it: Monsieur de Cleve had so
little wit to tell him he had it, and the weakness to yield to Monsieur de
Nemours's request of having it again. You put me into the greatest trouble I
can be in, answers the Queen-Dauphin, and have done very ill to give Monsieur
de Nemours the Letter you had received of me, and should not have parted with
without my leave: what would you have me say to the Queen, and what can she
imagine? She will believe, and not without reason, the Letter concerns me, and
that there is some great matter between the Vidame and me: she will never be
persuaded the Letter belonged to Monsieur de Nemours. I am very sorry, replys
Madam de Cleve, for the trouble I have caused you, and believe it great as it
is; but it is the fault of Monsieur de Cleve, and not mine. It Is your fault,
says the Queen-Dauphin, in giving him the Letter: No woman but your self makes
her Husband acquainted with all she knows. I believe I did ill, Madam, answers
Madam de Cleve; but let us think of repairing the Fault, not of examining it.
Do not you remember, pretty near, what was in the Letter, says the
Queen-Dauphin? Yes Madam, replys Madam de Cleve, I do, having read it several
times over. If so, says the Queen-Dauphin, we must presently have it written in
a strange Hand, and send it the Queen. She will not show it those who have seen
it; and if she do, I will maintain it the same Chastelart gave me, and he dares
not say otherwise.

Madam de Cleve approved of the Expedient, and the more, because it would give
her occasion of sending for Monsieur de Nemours, to have the Letter again, to
be Copied word for word, and pretty near the Hand it was written in, whereby
she thought the Queen would infallibly be deceived. As soon as she came home,
she told her Husband the trouble the Queen-Dauphin was in, and prayed him to
send for Monsieur de Nemours: He was sent for, and came presently. Madam de
Cleve told him all she had informed her Husband of, and asked him for the
Letter. Monsieur de Nemours answered he had restored it to the Vidame, who was
so glad of it, that he sent it immediately to Madam de Themines's Friend: Madam
de Cleve was now in fresh trouble; having consulted awhile, they resolved to
frame a Letter by memory, they locked themselves up to do it; order was given
at the Gate no person should come in; Monsieur de Nemours Attendants were all
sent home; such an appearance of Confidence was no small Charm to Monsieur de
Nemours, and even to Madam de Cleve: Her Husband's being by, and her Uncle
being so deeply concerned in the matter, satisfied all her scruples: the sight
of Monsieur de Nemours pleased her so well, it gave her a joy so pure and
sincere, she never had the like: This made her so free, and so jovial, Monsieur
de Nemours had never seen her so before, and was more passionately in love with
her than ever: He never had a more pleasant time, which made him more lively
and cheerful; and when Madam de Cleve would begin to think of the Letter and
write, he instead of helping her, in good earnest did but interrupt her, and
speak pleasantly to her: Madam de Cleve was gay as he, so that they were long
locked up together, and two Messengers were come from the Queen-Dauphin to bid
Madam de Cleve hasten, before they had finished the Letter half.

Monsieur de Nemours was so willing to prolong time that pleased him so well,
he forgot his Friends Interest. Madam de Cleve too was so far from being tired
with her Entertainment, she forgot the interest of her Uncle. At last with much
ado the Letter was scarce ready by four a Clock, and so ill done, and the
Character so unlike the Original, that the Queen must have taken small care to
find out the truth of it, if they could have imposed on her so: But as careful
as they were, and earnest to persuade her, the Letter was addressed to Monsieur
de Nemours; she was not deceived, but fully convinced it belonged to the
Vidame: Besides, she believed the Queen-Dauphin concerned in it, and that there
was a Correspondence between them: This heightened her hatred against that
Princess to that degree, that she never pardoned her, or ceased persecuting
her, till she had driven her out of France.

As for the Vidame it utterly ruined him; and whether the Cardinal of Lorrain
had already hit the way to please her, or that the adventure of this Letter,
having made it appear she had been deceived in the Vidame, helped her to find
out other tricks he had played her, certain it is, he never after could recover
her favor; their Correspondence was broke, and at length she lost him in the
Conspiracy of Amboise, wherein he had a hand.

When the Letter was sent to the Queen-Dauphin, Monsieur de Cleve, and Monsieur
de Nemours went their way. Madam de Cleve being alone, and no longer supported
with the joy infused by the presence of one she loved, was like one newly
awaked out of a dream; she was astonished to consider the prodigious difference
between her condition the night before, and that she was now in: she remembered
how sharp and how cold she had appeared to Monsieur de Nemours, while she
thought the Letter from Madam de Themines was addressed to him; and what a calm,
what a pleasure succeeded immediately, as soon as he had persuaded her the
Letter concerned him not: When she reflected how she reproached her self as
Criminal, for having the day before given him only some marks of her pity, and
that by her sharpness this morning she gave him cause to believe her jealous
(the infallible proof of passion) she thought she was not her self: when she
considered further, Monsieur de Nemours easily saw she knew him in love with
her; and that notwithstanding that knowledge, she had been so far from using
him the worse for it, even in her Husbands company, that on the contrary, she
had never looked on him so favorably, which was the reason Monsieur de Cleve
had sent for him to pass the afternoon together in private: she found she had
something in her held intelligence with Monsieur de Nemours, that she deceived
a Husband who of all men least deserved it, and she was ashamed to appear to
him that loved her, so little worthy his Esteem; that which troubled her most,
was the thought of her condition the night past, and what piercing griefs she
was under while she thought Monsieur de Nemours was in love with another; and
that she was deceived in him when she fancied her self the object of his
passion.

Never till then had she been acquainted with the mortal inquietudes of
jealousy and distrust; she had applied all her cares to save her self from
being in love with Monsieur de Nemours, and had not begun to fear his being in
love with another: though the suspicions the Letter gave her were vanished, yet
they left her sensible she might be deceived, and gave her impressions of
jealousy and distrust, she had till then been altogether a stranger to: she
was amazed she had not yet considered how improbable it was a Man so inconstant
toward Women as Monsieur de Nemours had always been, could be capable of a
sincere and durable engagement; she thought it next to impossible she could
ever be satisfied of the truth of his passion, But if I should, says she, what
would I do? would I endure it? would I answer it? would I engage in a piece of
Gallantry? would I be false to Monsieur de Cleve? would I be false to my self?
would I, in a word, expose my self to the deadly sorrows, to the mortifying
penitence Love is attended with? I am vanquished, I am conquered by an
inclination which sways me, which drags me along in spite of my heart; my
resolutions are vain; I thought yesterday all I think now, and act to day quite
contrary to yesterdays resolutions; I must withdraw my self from the presence
of Monsieur de Nemours, I must go into the Country, how extravagant soever my
journey appear; and if Monsieur de Cleve be obstinate to the contrary, or to
know the reason of it, will it be any harm to him or my self to let him know
it. She continued in this resolution, and staid all that Evening at home,
without going to enquire of the Queen-Dauphin, what was become of the false
Letter of the Vidame.

When Monsieur de Cleve returned home, she told him she had a desire to go into
the Country, that she was not very well, and it would do her good to take the
air: Monsieur de Cleve, in whose eyes she appeared so beautiful, that he could
not imagine her indisposition considerable, laughed at the proposal, and
answered, she forgot the Marriage of the Princess, and the Turnament were night
at hand; and that she had not too much time for preparation, to appear there
with magnificence equal to that of other Ladies: Her Husbands reasons altered
not her mind, she entreated he would be pleased, while he went with the King to
Compiegne, she might go to Colonniers, a fair House then a building, within a
days journey of Paris. Monsieur de Cleve gave his consent; she went thither
with design not to return quickly; the King took his Progress for Compiegne,
intending a short stay there.

Monsieur de Nemours was much grieved he had not seen Madam de Cleve since the
Afternoon he had past so pleasantly in her company, to the strengthening of his
hopes; he was under that impatience to see her again, that he could not rest;
so that when the King returned to Paris, he resolved to go to his Sisters the
Duchess of Mercoeur's in Champagne, hard by Colonniers. He asked the Vidame to
go with him; he easily consented: Monsieur de Nemours made the proposal, in
hopes to see Madam de Cleve, by going with the Vidame to her house.

Madam de Mercoeur received them with a great deal of joy, and made it her
business to give them all the pleasures and divertisements of the Country: One
day as they were a Hunting a Buck, Monsieur de Nemours lost himself in the
Forest; and enquiring the way, he was told, he was near Colonniers. At that
word, without further consideration, or knowing on what design, he galloped
away full speed toward Colonniers. As he rode, he came to made. VVays, and
Walks which he thought led him toward the Castle: At the end of those Walks he
found a Pavillion, with a large Bower on either side, one whereof opened
toward a Garden of Flowers, and was separated from the Forest only by Pales,
the other faced a great Walk in the Park. He entered the Pavillion, and would
have spent time in observing the beauty of it, but that he saw in the Walk
Monsieur and Madam de Cleve attended with a numerous Train of their Domestics:
He expected not to have found Monsieur de Cleve there, whom he had left with
the King; this made him think of hiding himself. He entered the Bower opening
to the Flower-Garden, as having the convenience of a door opening to the
Forest, at which, upon occasion, he might get out: But having observed Madam
de Cleve and her Husband set under the Pavillion, and their Domestics staying
behind in the Park, and having no way to come to him, without passing through
the place Monsieur and Madam de Cleve were in, he could not forbear taking the
pleasure of a sight of the Princess, nor resist the Curiosity of hearkening to
her discourse with a Husband who gave him more jealousy than any of his Rivals.

He heard Mounsieur de Cleve say to his Laday, But why will you not return to
Paris? what is it can keep you here in the Country? You have of late an
inclination for solitude that amazes me, and troubles me extremely, because it
occasions our separation: besides I see you are more melancholy than ordinary,
and I am afraid you have some cause of grief. I am not under any trouble, says
she as one very much perplexed; but there is such a bustle at Court, and such a
multitude of people always at your House, it is impossible but it should tire
both Body and Soul, and I cannot but desire a place of retirement and repose.
Repose, answers he, is not proper for a Person of your age; you are both at
home and at Court in a condition that cannot occasion your weariness, I rather
fear you have a desire of living apart from me. You would do me extreme wrong,
should you think so, says she, more and more perplexed; but let me beg of you
leave me here. Could you stay here, and without company, I should be very glad
of it; if you could be content not to have about you that infinite of Visitants
that almost never leave you to your self. Ah! Madam, cries Monsieur de Cleve,
your Countenance and your Expressions tell me plainly, you have reasons to
desire to be alone, which I do not know, but I conjure you to tell me them: He
pressed her long, but could not prevail with her to tell him, having long
denied him in such a manner as still increased his Curiosity: she continued
silent a while, with her Eyes to the Ground; and then suddenly looking upon
him, Force me not, says she, to confess to you a thing I have not the power to
declare, though I have often designed it: Think only it is not prudent a Woman
of my age, and Mistress of her Conduct should remain exposed in the middle of
the Court. What a Prospect have you given me, Madam, cries Monsieur de Cleve, I
do not tell you what it is, for fear of giving you offense? She answered not a
word, and her silence confirming the thoughts of her Husband. You tell me
nothing, says he and that tells me clearly I am not mistaken. Ah! Sir, says
she, falling down on her Knees, I am going to make a Confession no Woman ever
made to her Husband, yet the innocence of my Intentions and Conduct give me
power to do it: It Is true I have reasons to absent from Court, and to avoid the
dangers Persons of my age are in there: I have never been guilty of giving any
Mark of weakness, and I cannot fear I ever shall, if you allow me the liberty
to retire from Court, or if I had still Madam de Chartres to assist me in my
Conduct: As dangerous as is the course I take, I take it with joy to preserve
my self worthy of you: I ask your pardon a thousand times if I have any
Sentiments displease you, assure your self my Actions never shall. Think that
to do as I do requires more kindness and esteem for a Husband than ever Wife
had. Dispose of me, direct me, have pity on me; and if you can, still love me.

Monsieur de Cleve all the while she spoke leaned his Head on his Hand, almost
besides himself, and never thought of making her rise up from the posture she
was in. When she had done speaking, and he fixed his Eyes on her and saw her at
his Feet, her Face no less drowned in tears, than admirable for beauty, he was
ready to dye for grief; and taking her up in his Arms, Have you pity on me,
Madam, says he, for I need and deserve it; and pardon me if in the first
Assault of a grief so violent as mine is, I answer not as I ought such a
proceeding as yours: I think you more worthy esteem and admiration, than any
Woman that ever was; and my self the most unfortunate of Men. I have been
passionately in love with you from the first moment I saw you: Neither your
severity, nor the enjoyment of you, was ever able to abate it in the least; it
continues still at the height: It was never in my power to make you in love
with me, and I see now you fear you have inclination for another: Who, Madam,
is the happy Man that causes your fear? How long has he had the good fortune
to please you; what was it he did to please you; what way did he find to gain
your affection? It was some comfort to me for my misfortune of failing it, to
think it was impossible for any one to obtain. Another the while has done what
I have not been able, and I have at once the jealousy both of a Husband and a
Lover. But it is impossible to retain that of a Husband, after a proceeding like
yours; it is too noble and generous not to give me an entire assurance of your
Virtue, it comforts me as a Lover: The confidence and sincerity you have
expressed for me, are of infinite value: You esteem me sufficiently, to believe
I will not abuse your Confession: You may, Madam, I will not abuse it, nor love
you the less for it. You render me unfortunate, by the clearest Evidence of
Fidelity that ever Woman gave a Husband: But perfect what you begun, Madam, and
let me know who it is you would avoid. I beseech you do not ask me, answers
she, I am resolved not to tell you; and I think it prudent not to give you his
Name. Fear not, Madam, replys Monsieur de Cleve, I am too well versed in the
World, not to know Men may be in love with a Woman though she have a Husband:
We are to hate those that are so, but not to complain of it; and once more I
conjure you to tell me who it is. It Is to no purpose to press me, Sir, says
she, I have the power to be silent where I think it my duty not to speak:
impute not to any weakness the Confession I have made to you. And I had need of
more courage to declare to you that truth, than to have concealed it.

Monsieur de Nemours heard every word of this discourse, and what Madam de
Cleve had said, raised no less his jealousy than her Husband's: He was so
desperately in love with her, he thought all the World was so too: True it is,
he had many Rivals, yet he fancied them more; and he was wild to know who it
was Madam de Cleve meant. He had often thought she had some kindness for him,
but the grounds of his judgment appeared on this occasion so slight and
inconsiderable, that he could not imagine she had so violent a passion for him,
as to need recourse to so extraordinary a Remedy: He was so transported he
scarce knew what he saw, but he could not pardon Monsieur de Cleve for not
having pressed her home to tell him the Name of the Person she concealed from
him.

Yet Monsieur de Cleve used his utmost endeavors to know it, but finding it
vain to urge her further, desisted from troubling her; who presently said;
Methinks you ought to rest satisfied with my sincerity, pray ask me no more,
and give me not cause to repent what I have done: Content your self with the
assurance I give you once more, my Sentiments have never appeared by any Action
of mine, and that no address has been made to me that could give me offense.
Ah, Madam, replys Monsieur de Cleve, on the sudden, I cannot believe it: I
remember the trouble you were in the day your Picture was lost; you have given,
Madam, you have given away that Picture that was so dear to me, and so justly
mine: You have not been able to conceal your affection, you are in love, it is
known, your Virtue has hitherto saved you from the rest. Is it possible, cries
the Princess, you can imagine any diguisement in a Confession as mine is, which
I was no way obliged to. Take my word, Sir, I buy at a dear rate the confidence
I desire of you; I conjure you believe I never gave away my Picture: True it is
I saw it taken, but would not take notice I saw it, for fear of exposing my
self on that occasion to be told what none ever yet durst say to me. How know
you then you are loved, says he, what evidences has he given you of his
passion? Spare me the pains and the trouble, answers she, of telling you
particulars I am ashamed to have observed, being such as have too much
convinced me of my weakness. You have reason, Madam, replys he; I am unjust,
and press you too far; refuse me when ever I ask you such Questions, yet be not
offended with me for asking them.

Just then came several of the Servants, (who had staid in the Walks,) to
acquaint Monsieur de Cleve that a Gentleman was arrived from the King, with
Orders for him to be at Paris that Evening: Monsieur de Cleve was forced to go,
and was not able to say anything to his Wife, but that he desired her to come
to Paris on the Morrow; and conjured her to believe that though he was
troubled, he had for her a tenderness and esteem, with which she had reason to
be abundantly satisfied.

When the Prince was gone, and Madam de Cleve, left alone, considered what she
had done; the thought of it so frighted her, she could scarce believe the truth
of it: She saw she her self had put her self out of the affection and esteem of
her Husband, and plunged her self into a Pit she should never get out of. She
asked her self why she had done so hazardous a thing, and perceived she had
engaged in it, having scarce formed the design. The singularity of her
Confession, which she conceived without President, gave her a full Prospect of
her danger. On the other side, when she considered this Remedy (as violent as
it was) was the sole effectual one she could make use of against Monsieur de
Nemours; she thought she had no cause to repent, or to believe she had ventured
too far. She passed that Night under a very great incertitude, trouble, and
fear: at last her Spirits were calmed; she found pleasure in having given that
Evidence of Fidelity to a Husband who deserved it so well, who had so great an
esteem and kindness for her, and had given fresh proof of both, in the manner
of his receiving the strange Confession she had made him.

Monsieur de Nemours was in the mean time got from the place he had heard the
discourse in, into the middle of the Forest: What Madam de Cleve had said of
her Picture had revived him, by letting him know he was the Person she had
inclination for. The thought of this swelled him with joy, but the joy was
short-lived: for when he reflected that what moved her to declare she had
inclination for him, convinced him the same moment he should never receive any
Evidence of it, he thought it impossible to engage a Person who made recourse
to so extraordinary a Remedy; yet he could not but be very much pleased to have
reduced her to such an extremity: He gloried in himself that he gained the
affection of a Lady so different from the rest of her Sex. In a word, he
thought himself a hundred times happy, and unhappy all together. He was
benighted in the Forest, and was much puzzled to find the way to his Sisters,
the Duchess of Mercoeur: He arrived there about break of day, and was very much
to seek what account to give of his absence: He came off the best he could, and
returned the same day with the Vidame to Paris.

This Prince was so full of his passion, and surpised with what he had heard,
that he fell into the common imprudence of speaking in general terms his
particular Sentiments, and relating his own Adventures under borrowed Names. In
his return he fell into discourse of Love, and the extreme pleasure of being in
Love with a person deserving it. He spoke of the extravagant effects of that
passion; and not able to conceal the astonishment he was in at the action of
Madam de Cleve, he made the Vidame acquainted with it, without naming the
person, or owning himself concerned; but he spoke with that heat and
admiration, the Vidame easily suspected him one of the parties in the case, and
pressed him to confess it: He told him he was well assured he had a violent
passion for a Lady, though he knew not who, and that he had no reason to
distrust him, who had trusted him with his life: But Monsieur de Nemours was
too deeply in love to confess it, and had ever concealed his passion from the
Vidame, though he loved him best of any man at Court: He answered, that a
Friend of his had told him this adventure; and not only made him promise not to
speak of it, but conjured him to secrecy. The Vidame assured him it should go
no further, but Monsieur de Nemours repented he had told him so much.

The mean time Monsieur de Cleve was gone to the King, but with a heart
mortally afflicted: Never had Husband so violent a passion for his Wife, nor so
great an Esteem, which was not diminished in the least by what she had told
him, but changed into a sort different from the esteem he had formerly had of
her: His thoughts were most busied about guessing who it was had the secret to
please her: He thought of Monsieur de Nemours, as the most amiable of the
Court, and the Chevalier de Guise, and the Marshal S. Andre, as persons who had
applied themselves to please her, and still continued their endeavors; so that
he was persuaded it must be one of the three.

He arrived at the Louvre, and the King took him into his Closet, to tell him
he had made choice of him to conduct Madam into Spain, and believed no man
could perform it better, and that no Lady could do France more honor than
Madam de Cleve. Monsieur de Cleve received the honor of the Choice as he
ought, and looked on it as an occasion for his Wives absence from Court,
without giving suspicion of any change of her Conduct; but the trouble he was
in, needed a speedier remedy than that Voyage (to be deferred for some Months)
could afford him: He presently writ Madam de Cleve the news of what the King
had said to him, and added, he expected she would not fail of returning to
Paris. She came thither, according to his order; and when they saw one another,
they were both extraordinary sad.

Monsieur de Cleve spoke to her like a man of the greatest honor in the world,
and best deserving the confidence she had reposed in him: It is not your
Conduct, says he, gives me trouble, you have more strength and more virtue than
you imagine: nor am I troubled with fears of what may happen hereafter; that
which troubles me is, that I see you have that affection for another, it has
not been in my power to raise in you: I know not what to answer you, says she,
I am mortally ashamed when I speak to you; let me conjure you to spare this
cruel discourse, order my Conduct, and let me never see any body: This is all I
desire of you; but take it not ill from me, if I speak no more of a thing which
makes me appear so little worthy of you, and which I think so unbecoming me:
You have reason Madam, replies he, I abuse your goodness and your confidence in
me, yet pity the condition you have brought me to, and think, though you have
told me the substance of the matter, you conceal from me a Name that fills me
with a Curiosity, which, if not satisfied, will bring me to my Grave: however,
I do not desire you to tell it me, but I cannot forbear letting you know, I
believe the Man I am to envy is the Marshal S. Andre, the Duke de Nemours, or
the Chevalier de Guise. I will not answer you, says she, blushing; nor give you
occasion to diminish, or raise your suspicions: But if you should try by
watching and observing me, to discover the truth, you will put me into a
trouble all the World will take notice of. A Gods-name, continues she, give me
leave to pretend some Indisposition, and not to see any one. No, Madam, says
he, it will quickly be discovered to be a feigned business: Besides, I would
not rely on any thing but your self, my Heart gives me that is the best course
I can take; and my Reason tells me, considering the humor you are of, I cannot
put a greater Restraint upon you, than by leaving you to your liberty.

Monsieur de Cleve was not mistaken: The confidence he made appear he had in
his Wife, fortified her the more against Monsieur de Nemours, and made her take
more severe Resolutions than any Restraint would have brought her to: She went
to the Louvre and the Queen-Dauphin's Lodgings as she used to do, but avoided
the presence and sight of Monsieur de Nemours with so much care, that she
robbed him of almost all the joy he had in thinking she loved him, all her
Actions persuading him the contrary: He could not tell but what he had heard
might have been in a dream, so little likelihood was there of the truth of it:
The only thing seemed to assure him he was not mistaken, was the extreme
sadness of Madam de Cleve, appearing in spite of all her care to conceal it:
And peradventure, the sweetest looks, and most obliging expressions, would not
have so much heightened the love of Monsieur de Nemours, as the severity of her
Conduct effectually did.

One Evening, as Monsieur and Madam de Cleve were at the Queens Lodgings, it
was said there was a report the King would name another great Lord at Court to
wait on Madam into Spain. Monsieur de Cleve had his eye fixed on his Wife, when
it was further said, the Chevalier de Guise, or the Marshal de S. Andre was to
be the man: He observed she was not at all moved at either of those names, nor
at the discourse of their going along with her; this made him believe he had no
reason to fear the presence of either of them: To clear his suspicions, he went
into the Queens Closet where the King then was. Having staid there a while, he
returned to his Wife, and whispered her, he had but newly been told Monsieur de
Nemours was the person designed to go along with them into Spain. Madam de
Cleve was so moved at the name of Monsieur de Nemours, and the thought of being
exposed to see him every day, during a very long journey, in the presence of
her Husband, that she could not conceal the trouble she was in; and to cloak it
with other reasons, No choice, says she, could have been made more disagreeable
for you, he will share all your Honors, and methinks you are obliged to
endeavor to procure another choice: Madam, answers he, it is not on any account
of State you are unwilling Monsieur de Nemours should go with me, the trouble
it gives you proceeds from another cause; I learn from that trouble in you,
what I should have discovered in another Woman, by the joy she would have
expressed at the news: but fear not, Madam, what I told you is not true, it was
an invention of mine, to be assured of a thing I strongly believed. Having said
so, he went out, being loath by his presence to increase the trouble he saw his
Wife in.

Monsieur de Nemours came in at that instant, and presently observed the
condition she was in: He went up to her, and told her softly, He had that
respect for her, he durst not ask her, what it was made her more thoughtful and
melancholy than ordinary. The voice of Monsieur de Nemours brought her to her
self again, and looking on him, without having heard what he had just then
said, (so full was she of her own thoughts, and of fear her Husband might see
him with her) For Gods sake, says she, let me alone: Alas, Madam, answers he, I
do it too much; what is it you can complain of? I dare not speak to you, I dare
not so much as look upon you, I tremble when I come near you; wherein have I
deserved you should speak so to me? why do you make it appear thus, I am in
some measure the cause of the trouble I see you in? Madam de Cleve was very
sorry she had given him occasion to declare himself more clearly than he had
done before: she left him without saying a word more, and went home more
troubled than ever: her Husband perceived it, and that she was afraid he should
speak to her of what was past; and following her into her Closet, Do not shun
me, Madam, says he, I will not say any thing shall displease you, I beg your
pardon for the surprise I put you to awhile, I am sufficiently punished by what
I have learnt by it; Monsieur de Nemours was the man I most feared of any: I
see the danger you are in; have power over your self for your own sake, and if
you can for mine; I ask it not as your Husband, but as a man whose happiness
wholly depends on you, and who has for you a passion more violent and more
tender than he whom your inclination prefers before me. Monsieur de Cleve
melted at these words, he could scarce finish them: His Lady was so moved, she
burst into tears, and embraced him with a tenderness and sorrow, that put him
into a condition very different from hers: They continued silent a while, and
parted, without having been able to say a word one to the other.

All things were ready for the Marriage of Madam, the Duke of Alva was arrived
to Espouse her: He was received with all the Ceremony and Magnificence usual on
such occasions: The King sent to meet him by the way, the Prince of Conde, the
Cardinals of Lorrain and Guise, the Dukes of Lorrain, Ferrara, Aumale,
Bouillon, Guise and Nemours: They had a great number of Gentlemen, and many
Pages in Livery: The King in Person, attended with two hundred Gentlemen his
Servants, with the Constable, at the head of them, waited the Duke of Alva's
coming at the first Gate of the Louvre. When the Duke of Alva was come up to
the King, he would have embraced his knees; the King would not suffer it, but
made him walk by his side to the Queens Lodgings, and to Madam's, for whom the
Duke of Alva brought a magnificent Present from his Master. He went thence to
the Lodgings of Madam Margaret the Kings Sister, to Complement her on the part
of Monsieur de Savoy, and assure her he would arrive in few days. There were
great Assemblies at the Louvre, to let the Duke of Alva, and the Prince of
Orange, (who accompanied him,) see the Beauties of the Court.

Madam de Cleve durst not absent her self, for fear of displeasing her Husband,
who commanded her to appear there, though very loath to do it. Yet she was the
rather induced to it by the absence of Monsieur de Nemours: He was gone to meet
Monsieur de Savoy, and after his arrival was obliged to be in a manner always
with him, to assist him in what concerned the Ceremonies of his Marriage. This
prevented her meeting him as often as she used, which gave her some
satisfaction.

The Vidame of Chartres had not forgot the discourse he had had with Monsieur
de Nemours. It ran in his mind that the Adventure the Prince had told him, was
his own; and he watched him so narrowly, it is very probable he would have found
out the truth of it, had not the arrival of the Duke of Alva, and Monsieur de
Savoy filled the Court with so much business, that it took away the
opportunities of a discovery of that Nature: The desire he had to know the
truth of it, or rather the natural disposition we have to make those we love
acquainted with all we know, made him tell Madam de Martigues the extraordinary
Action of that Person, who had confessed to her Husband the passion she had for
another: He assured her Monsieur de Nemours was the Man had inspired so violent
a passion, and conjured her to assist him in observing that Prince. Madam de
Martigues was glad to hear what the Vidame told her, and the Curiosity she had
always observed in the Queen-Dauphin for what concerned Monsieur de Nemours,
made her the more desirous to know the bottom of the Adventure.

A short time before the day fixed for the Ceremony of the Marriage, the
Queen-Dauphin invited the King her Father-in-Law, and the Duchess of
Valentinois to Supper. Madam de Cleve had been so busy a dressing her self, it
was late e're she came to the Louvre: By the way she met a Gentleman, who was
coming in search of her from the Queen-Dauphin. As she entered her Chamber,
that Princess said aloud to her, from on her Bed, where she then was; I have
looked for you with the greatest impatience. I believe it, Madam, answers she,
yet perhaps I am not obliged to you for it, the cause being doubtless something
else, and not your desire to see me. You are right, answers the Queen-Dauphin,
yet you are obliged to me; for I will tell you an Adventure you will be very
glad to know.

Madam de Cleve kneeled at her Bed side, and (very luckily) with her Face from
the light: You know, says the Queen-Dauphin, how desirous we were to find out
who had caused the great change observed in Monsieur de Nemours. I believe I
know the Party; you will be surpised at the Story: He is desperatrly in love
with one of the handsomest Ladys of the Court, and she loves him again. You may
easily imagine what grief Madam de Cleve felt at these words, which she could
not apply to her self, as being of opinion no Person knew of her love for
Monsieur de Nemours. I see nothing in this, Madam, answers she, that should
occasion a surprise, if you consider the age and the handsomness of Monsieur de
Nemours. True, says the Queen-Dauphin, but that which will surprise you, is, to
know that the Lady in love with Monsieur de Nemours has never given him any
Evidence of it; and is so afraid she shall not be able to continue Mistress of
her passion, that she has confessed it to her Husband, that he may take her
from Court; and it is Monsieur de Nemours has related what I say to you.

Madam de Cleve was grieved at the beginning of this discourse, when she
thought her self not concerned in the Adventure, but she was at her wits-end
when she heard the conclusion of it, which too clearly made out, it related to
her: She could not answer a word, but continued leaning her Head on the Bed
while the Queen was speaking; which she did with that earnestness and concern,
she took not any notice of the confusion Madam de Cleve was in. This Story,
answers she, seems very improbable, and I would very fain know who it is has
told it you. It Is Madam Martigues, says the Queen-Dauphin; and she had it from
the Vidame of Chartres. You know he is in love with her, he told it to her as a
Secret, and he was told it by the Duke of Nemours: It Is true the Duke of
Nemours told him not the Name of the Lady, nor would confess himself the other
Party concerned; but the Vidame makes no doubt of it.

As the Queen-Dauphin had done speaking, one came up to the Bed: Madam de Cleve
had so turned her self about she could not see who it was, but was quickly
satisfied of the Person, when she heard the Queen-Dauphin cry out, with no less
joy than surprise, Here he is himself, and I will know of him the truth of it.
Madam de Cleve needed not turn about to know it was Monsieur de Nemours, as
really it was, but went hastily to the Queen-Dauphin, and told her softly, she
must take heed of speaking of this Adventure which Monsieur de Nemours had told
the Vidame as a Secret, and perhaps it might make make them fall out. You are
too wise, says the Queen-Dauphin, laughing, and turned toward Monsieur de
Nemours. He was dressed for the Court-meeting at Night, and with a Grace natural
to him, I believe, Madam, says he, I may venture to think you were speaking of
me as I came in; that you had a desire to ask me something, and that Madam de
Cleve was against it. It Is true, answers the Queen-Dauphin, but I shall not be
so complaisant to her on this occasion, as I am used to be. I would know of
you, whether a Story I have been told be true, and whether you are not the
Person in love with, and beloved by a Lady at Court, who endeavors to conceal
her passion from you, and has confessed it to her Husband.

You cannot imagine the trouble and perplexity Madam de Cleve was in, she would
have thought Death a very good exchange for it. Yet Monsieur de Nemours was in
greater, if possible: The discourse of the Queen (who he had reason to believe
hated him not) in presence of Madam de Cleve, in whom of all the Court she
placed greatest confidence, and had the greatest share of hers in return, put
him into so strange a confusion of extravagant thoughts, it was not in his
power to be Master of his Countenance: The trouble he saw Madam de Cleve in by
his fault, and the thought of his having given her just cause to hate him,
surpised him so that he could not answer a word. Madam La Dauphin observing
him mute, Look upon him, says she to Madam de Cleve; look upon him, and judge
if he be not concerned in this Adventure.

The mean time Monsieur de Nemours having considered how necessary it was to
get out of so dangerous a strait, and recovered his wit and his looks; I
confess, Madam, says he, no surprise or affliction could be greater than mine,
at the infidelity of the Vidame of Chartres, in relating an Adventure I had in
confidence imparted to him, of one of my Friends: I know how to be revenged of
him, continues he, (smiling very calmly, which raised the suspicions the
Queen-Dauphin had entertained of him,) he has made me his Confident in matters
of no small importance: But I am to seek for the Reason, Madam, why you make me
concerned in this Adventure: The Vidame will not say it, for I have told him
the contrary. I may very well be taken to be a Man in love, but I cannot
believe, Madam, you will think me of the number of those who are loved again.
Monsieur de Nemours was glad to say any thing to the Queen-Dauphin, that might
relate to that affection he had declared for her formerly, to divert her
thoughts from the matter in hand. She understood what he said, but instead of
answering, continued reazing him for the change in his looks when she began to
discourse him. I was troubled, Madam, says he, on my Friends account; and to
think how justly he would reproach me for telling a Secret more dear to him
than his Life. Yet he imparted it but half, having kept from me the Name of the
Person he loves: All I know, is, he is the most deply in love of any Man
living, and has the most reason to complain. Think you he has any cause of
complaint, replays the Queen-Dauphin, when his passion is so well answered
again? Can you believe it answered, Madam, says he; or that a Lady having a
true passion could have discovered it to her Husband? Doubtless this Lady is
not acquainted with Love, and has taken small notice of the kindness had for
her. My Friend cannot flatter himself with any hope, yet unfortunate as he is,
he esteems himself happy at least, to make her afraid she should fall in love
with him, and he would not change his condition with that of the happiest Lover
in the World. Your Friend has a passion very easy to be satisfied, says she,
and I begin to think you not concerned in the Story; I am almost of the mind of
Madam de Cleve, who maintains there is no truth in it. I cannot think it true,
says Madam de Cleve, who had been silent all this while; and could it have been
true, how should it have been known? It Is not probable a Woman capable of a
Resolution so extraordinary, should have the weakness to speak of it; and
surely her Husband would not have related it, or must have been very unworthy
to have been so well dealt with, as he had been by his Lady in her
unparalleled Conduct. Monsieur de Nemours perceiving the suspicions Madam de
Cleve seemed to have of her Husband, did all he could to confirm them, knowing
him the most formidable of his Rivals: Jealousy, says he, and the desire of
finding out what a wife has, it may be, not thought fit to discover, are
capable to make a Husband guilty of indiscretion.

Madam de Cleve was at her last shifts, and not able to endure the discourse
any longer; she would have said she was not well, when, by good fortune for
her, the Duchess of Valentinois came in, who told the Queen-Dauphin the King
was just a coming. The Queen-Dauphin went into her Closet to be dressed. Monsieur
de Nemours drew up to Madam de Cleve as she followed her, I would give my Life,
Madam, says he, for a moments discourse with you; yet I have not bing of more
importance to tell you, than that if I have said any thing to the Queen-Dauphin
wherein she may seem concerned, I did it for Reasons that relate not to her.
Madam de Cleve made as if she heard him not, but left him without giving him a
look, and followed the King, who was newly come in. There was a great deal of
company. She trod on her own Coat, and made a false step, which served her for
a pretense to quit a place she had not the power to stay in; and she returned
home.

Monsieur de Cleve came to the Louvre, and was amazed not to find his Wife
there; they told him of the Accident befallen her: He went presently home to
enquire after her, he found her a Bed, and easily knew her hurt was not
considerable. When he had been with her some time, he perceived her so
excessively sad that it surpised him. What ails you, Madam, says he, methinks
you are troubled with other grief than that you complain of. I am the most
afflicted I possibly can be, answers she, for the use you have made of that
extraordinary, or (to name it right) foolish confidence I have had in you. Did
I not deserve secrecy, or had I not, did not your Interest engage you to it?
Must your Curiosity of knowing a Name, (it was my duty not to tell you,) oblige
you to make a Confident to assist you in the discovery? Nothing else could have
made you fall into so horrible an indiscretion, the consequences of which are
as bad as bad may be: This Adventure is known, and I have been just told the
Story of it by them who knew not I was principally concerned in it. What say
you Madam, answers he? you accuse me to have told what passed between you and
me, and that the matter is known. I will not justify my self not to have
spoken of it, you cannot believe I ever did; and doubtless you have applied to
your self what was related of another. Ah, Sir, says she, the World has not an
Adventure like mine; there is not another Woman capable of such a thing. The
Story I have heard could not have been invented by chance, none ever imagined
the like; an Action of this nature never entered any thoughts but mine: The
Queen-dauphin has just told me the Story, she had it from the Vidame of
Chartres, and he from Monsieur de Nemours. Monsieur de Nemours, cries Monsieur
de Cleve, like a Man transported and desperate; Does Monsieur de Nemours know
you love him, and that I know it? You always Harp on that String, and fix on
Monsieur de Nemours before any other, replys she; I have told you I would not
answer your suspicions: I am ignorant whether Monsieur de Nemours knows that I
am concerned in the Adventure, and the Person you told him of; but he told the
Vidame the Story, and said he had it from a Friend of his, who had not named
the Lady: It cannot be but that this Friend must be one of yours, whom you
trusted the Secret with, in order to discovery of what I concealed. Is there a
Friend in the World, says he, to be trusted with a business of this nature? And
would any Man purchase the clearing his suspicions at so dear a rate, as
acquainting another with that which he would have gladly had concealed from
himself? I think rather, Madam, who it is you have spoken to, it is more
probable it came from you than me; the trouble you were in was insupportable to
you, and to ease your self of the Burden you have made use of a Confident who
has betrayed you. Destroy me not quite, says she, and be not so hard hearted
to accuse me of a fault you have committed. Can you suspect me of such a thing,
and because I told it you, could I tell it any other?

The Confession Madam de Cleve had made to her Husband was so clear a proof of
her sincerity, and she denied so flatly she had acquainted any with it but
himself, he knew not what to think. On the other side, he was sure he had never
said a word of it, it was not a matter to be guessed at; yet it was known, and
it must be through one of them two: what troubled him most, was the certainty
one or other was privy to the secret, and in all probability it would be
divulged.

Madam de Cleve's thoughts were much the same with her Husbands; she thought it
impossible her Husband would have spoke of it, and as impossible but it must be
he had spoken it; the intimation Monsieur de Nemours had given what
indiscretion a Husbands curiosity might make him guilty of, appeared to hit
Monsieur de Cleve so pat, she could not believe it a thing said by chance: this
weighed with her so far, she was fully persuaded Monsieur de Cleve had abused
her confidence: Both were so full of their own thoughts, they were silent a
confiderable time; and when they spoke to one another, they did but repeat what
they had formerly said, and continued more altered and estranged in opinion and
affection than ever they had been.

You may easily imagine how they past that night: Monsieur de Cleve's patience
was exhausted, to see a Lady he adored in love with another: he was quite
heartless; he had not the courage to resent a matter wherein his Reputation and
Honor were so deeply concerned: he knew not what to think of his Wife; he was
to seek what Conduct he should prescribe to her, or himself; he could discover
on all hands nothing but Precipices and Abysses. After long irresolution,
considering he was shortly engaged for Spain, he resolved to do nothing to
increase the knowledge or suspicion of his unfortunate Estate: he went to Madam
de Cleve, and told her, their business was not to find out which of them two
had discovered the secret, but to endeavor to make it appear the story was a
Fable, and she no way concerned in it; that it was in her power to persuade
Monsieur de Nemours, and others, to that purpose, by using him with that
severity and coldness she ought to express toward a man pretending to be in
love with her; that such a proceeding would easily alter the opinion he had of
her having inclination for him; that she was not to trouble her self for what
he might have hitherto thought, for that if for the future she avoided
discovering any weakness to him, his former thoughts would vanish, and that
especially she must frequent the Louvre and Courtmeetings as she used to do.

Having said this, he quitted her, without expecting her answer: she thought
him much in the right, and was so angry with Monsieur de Nemours, she believed
it an easy matter to put in execution her Husbands advice: but it seemed a
hard task to appear at the Marriage with that calm and tranquillity, that
freedom and clearness of spirit the occasion required: But having been
preferred before several Princesses (ambitious of the honor) to carry the
Queen-Dauphins Train, she could not put it off without occasioning much noise,
and enquiry what had moved her to it: she resolved to strain her self to
perform it, but spent the rest of the day in preparing for the solemnity, and
thinking her own thoughts: she locked her self up in her Closet: that which
grieved her most was, the cause she had to complain of Monsieur de Nemours,
without an excuse to allege in his favor: she made no doubt but he had told
the Vidame the story, he had confessed as much in her hearing, and spoke in that
manner, she could not question but he knew she was concerned; what excuse for
such an imprudence so very unsuitable to the discretion she admired him for?
while he thought himself unhappy, he continued discreet; he has fancied
himself happy, (though on very uncertain grounds) and has dismissed his
discretion: he could not imagine I loved him, but he must make the World
acquainted with it: he has said all he could; I made no confession he was the
man I loved, but he has believed it, and presently declared his belief, had he
been sure of it, I must have expected he would have taken the same course, and
used me with no more respect than he has now done: How was I mistaken, to
think him capable to conceal any thing that flattered his vanity! Yet this is
the man I thought so different from the rest, that for his sake I, who differed
so much from the rest of my Sex, find my self subject to the weakness of other
Women: I have lost the affection and esteem of a Husband, who should have been
my happiness. All the World will shortly look on me as a Woman under a foolish
and violent passion: he for whom I have it is not ignorant of it. It Is for
avoiding these misfortunes I have hazarded my Repose, and my life. These sad
Reflections ended in a torrent of tears; but as great as her grief was, she
found it supportable, if she could be but satisfied in Monsieur de Nemours.

He was not in a much better condition, he was vexed at the heart for his
indiscretion, in speaking as he had done to the Vidame, and the ill
consequences that attended it; he was confounded to think what trouble,
perplexity, and grief he had seen Madam de Cleve in. He could not excuse
himself for having said to her, about this Adventure, things though innocently
gallant in themselves, yet on this occasion too gross and rude, since they made
her sensible he knew she was the Lady had that violent passion, and he the
Person for whom she had it. All he could have wished for, was to discourse her;
but now he thought himself more obliged to avoid, than desire it. What should I
say to her, cried he? should I convince her more plainly of what I have already
given her too much light? shall I tell her I know she loves me, who never yet
durst tell her I loved her? shall I begin to own my passion to her, that she
may see my hopes have inspired me with boldness? can I entertain a thought of
going near her, and giving her new trouble by enduring a sight of me? How shall
I jusiifie my self? I have no Excuse, I am unworthy she should look on me, and
I cannot hope she will ever do it. I have by my faults furnished her with
better Exceptions against me, than any she could have found: My indiscretion
has lost me the happiness, and the glory of being beloved by the most amiable
and most estimable Person in the world. Yet had I lost it without giving her
trouble, it would have been some comfort. At this very moment I am more
sensible of the harm I have done her, than that I have done my self in
forfeiting her favor.

He continued a long time afflicting himself thus. Still his mind hanker'd to
speak with Madam de Cleve: He studied how to do it, he thought of writing to
her; but considering the fault he had committed, and the humor she was of, he
was of opinion that the best course he could take, was, to express a profound
respect for her, by his affliction and silence: to let her see he durst not
present himself before her, and to wait patiently what time, Chance, and the
Inclination she had for him might produce in his favor. And for fear of
confirming her suspicion, he resolved to forbear reproaching the Vidame for his
unfaithfulness.

The Court was so busied about the Espousals of Madam on the Morrow, and her
Marriage to be the day after, that it was no hard matter for Monsieur and Madam
de Cleve to conceal their sadness from public notice: The Queen-Dauphin spoke
but by the by to Madam de Cleve of the discourse they had had with Monsieur de
Nemours, and Monsieur de Cleve industriously shunned speaking to his Wife of
what was past, so that her trouble proved less than she expected.

The Espousals were solemnized at the Louvre, and after the Treat and the Ball,
the King's Household went to ly at the Bishop's Palace according to Custom. In
the Morning, the Duke d' Alva having till then gone very plain, appeared in a
Habit of Cloth of Gold, mixed with fire-colour, yellow and black, all covered
with Jewels, with a close Crown on his Head. The Prince of Orange richly
Apparelled, with his Livery; and all the Spaniards with theirs, came to attend
the Duke from the Hostel de Villeroy (where he was lodged) and marched four
abreast till they came to the Palace. As soon as he arrived, they went in
order to the Church: The King led Madam, with a close Crown on her Head, and
her Train born up by Madamoiselles de Montpensier and Longueville: The Queen
followed next, but without a Crown: Next came the Queen-Dauphin, Madam the
King's Sister, Madam de Lorrain, and the Queen of Navar, their Trains carried
by Princesses.

The Maids of Honor belonging to the Queens and Princesses, were all richly
dressed in the same Colors the Queens and Princesses had on: so that it was
known by the color of their Habits whose Maids they were. They mounted the
Scaffold prepared in the Church, and there the Ceremony of the Marriage was
performed: They returned to Dinner at the Bishops, and went thence about five a
Clock to the great Palace, where the Feast was, and the Parliament, the
Sovereign Courts, and the Corporation of the City were desired to assist. The
King, the Queens, the Princes and Princesses eat at the Marble Table in the
great Hall of the Palace: The Duke of Alva sat by the new Queen of Spain, below
the steps of the Marble Table: At the King's right hand there was a Table for
Ambassadors, Archbishops, and Knights of the Order; and on the other hand a
Table for those of the Parliament.

The Duke of Guise, in a Robe of Cloth of Gold Freez'd, served the King as Lord
Steward of his Household; the Prince of Conde as Parmetier, and the Duke of
Nemours as Cup Bearer. When the Officers had taken away, the Ball began, and
was interrupted by Ballets, and extraordinary Machines: then they resumed the
Ball, and after Midnight the King and all the Court returned to the Louvre. As
sad as Madam de Cleve was, all that saw her, and particularly Monsieur de
Nemours thought her beauty incomparable: Though the bustle of the Ceremony
offered him several opportunities, he durst not speak to her. But he appeared
so sad, and expressed so much fear to approach her, that Madam de Cleve, looking
on it as proceeding from his respect for her, began to think he was not so much
to be blamed, though he had not said a word to justify himself: His Conduct
was the same the following days, and wrought the same effect on Madam de Cleve.

At last the day of the Tournament came; the Queens stood in the Galleries upon
the Scaffolds prepared for them. The four Champions appeared at the end of the
Lists, with a number of Horses and Liveries, the most magnificent sight ever
seen in France.

The King's Colors were Black and White, which he always wore on the account
of Madam de Valentinois being a Widow. Monsieur de Ferrara and his Retinue had
Red and Yellow; Monsieur de Guise Carnation and White, being the Colors of a
young Lady whom he had loved when a Maid, and loved her still though he durst
not make it appear. Monsieur de Nemours had Black and Yellow; why he wore them
was not known, but it was no hard matter for Madam de Cleve to guess at it: she
remembered she had said before him, she loved Yellow, and was sorry it suited
not with her Natural Complexion; which was the reason he thought he might
appear in that Color without indiscretion, because Madam de Cleve not wearing
it, there could be no suspicion he wore it on her account.

The Champions performed with incomparable address. Though the King was the
best Horseman in his Kingdom, they knew not who had the advantage. Monsieur de
Nemours had a Grace in all his Actions won him the favor of Persons less
interess'd than Madam de Cleve: she no sooner discovered him at the end of the
Lists, but she felt her self under extraordinary Emotions; and every Course he
made, she could scarce hide her joy when he had well finished his Career.

In the Evening when all was almost over, and the Company ready to break up,
the King, (provoked only by the ill Fate of the State), would needs break
another Lance: He commanded the Count de Mantgomery (who was very dextrous at
it) to appear in the Lists; the Count begged his Majesty would excuse him,
alleging all the Reasons he could think of; but the King, half angry, sent him
word he commanded him to do it. The Queen conjured the King not to run any
more, that he had performed so well he ought to rest satisfied, and that she
entreated him to come to her. He answered, it was for love of her he would have
another Course, and entered the Barriere. She sent Monsieur de Savoy to pray
him the second time to come back, but all to no purpose. They ran, the Lances
were broken, and a Splinter of the Count of Montgomery's hit the King in the
Eye, and stuck there. The King fell: His Gentlemen, and Monsieur de
Montmorency, Marshal of the Camp, ran to him. They were astonished to see him
so wounded, but the King was hearty; he said it was a very slight hurt, and
pardoned the Count. You may judge the trouble and affliction so sad an Accident
occasioned, at a time wholly dedicated to Gayety and Mirth. As soon as the King
was laid in Bed, and the Chyrurgeons had searched the Wound, it appeared very
considerable. The Constable presently thought of the Prediction (that the King
should be slain in Duel), and made no doubt but it would be accomplished.

The King of Spain, then at Brussels, having news of the Accident, sent his
Physician, a Man of Great Reputation; but he jug'd the King past hope.

A Court so divided, and full of contrary Interests, could not but be in
extraordinary disorder, and factiously busy, in such a Conjuncture: Yet all
was concealed, and the whole Court seemed employed only about the recovery of
the King; the Queens, Princes, and Princesses scarce stirring out of his
Antichamber.

Madam de Cleve knowing her self obliged to be there, that she should see
Monsieur de Nemours there, and should not be able to conceal from her Husband
the disorder that sight would put her to; and being sensible the very presence
of that Prince would justify and clear him in her thoughts, and destroy the
resolutions she had taken against him, she pretended her self sick. The Court
was too busy to mind what she did, or to enquire whether her indisposition
were real or feigned. Only her Husband knew the truth of it. That troubled her
not: she continued at home, little concerned for the great Change that was
shortly expected, and full of her own thoughts which she had liberty enough to
give her self up to. Every one ran to Court to enquire of the King. Monsieur de
Cleve came at certain hours to bring her news: he observed the same method of
proceeding toward her he used to do, save only when they were alone they were
a little less free, and more cold toward one another than formerly. He said
not a word of what was past, and she had not the power, nor thought it
convenient to resume the discourse of it.

Monsieur de Nemours, who waited an opportunity of speaking to Madam de Cleve,
was surpised and troubled he could not have a sight of her. The King was so
ill, that the seventh day the Physicians gave him up. Her received the news of
the certainty of his Death with extraordinary constancy, which was the more
admirable, in that he lost his Life by so unfortunate an Accident, that he was
to die in the Flower of his Age, happy, adored by his People, and beloved by a
Mistress he was desperately in love with: The day before he died he caused
Madam, his Sister, to be married to Monsieur de Savoy, without Ceremony. You
may guess the condition the Duchess of Valentinois was in: The Queen would not
permit her to see the King, but sent to demand of her the King's Signet, and
the Jewels of the Crown, she had in her Custody. The Duchess inquired if the
King were dead, and being told no; I have no Master yet then, says she, and no
body can oblige me to part with what he trusted in my Hands. As soon as he
expired at the Chasteau de Tournels, the Dukes of Ferrara, Guise, and Nemours,
conducted the Queen Mother, the King and Queen-Consort to the Louvre. Monsieur
de Nemours led the Queen Mother: As they began to walk, she stepped back a
little, and told the Queen, her Daughter-in-Law, it was her place to go first;
but it was easy to see there was more sharpness, than civility in the
Complement.

The End of the third Book.
THE PRINCESS OF CLEVE.
BOOK IV.
THE Queen Mother was now wholly governed by the Cardinal of Lorrain: the
Vidame of Chartres was quite out of favor with her; and the love he had for
Madam Martigues, and for liberty, made him less sensible of her displeasure
than a matter of that consequence might seem to deserve. The Cardinal, the ten
days the King continued ill, had leisure to form his designs, and prevail with
the Queen to take Resolutions suitable to his Projects: so that as soon as the
King was dead, the Queen ordered the Constable to stay at the Tournels with the
Corpse, to perform the usual Ceremonies: This kept him at distance, and out of
the Scene of Action: He dispatched a Courrier to the King of Navarr to hasten
him to Court, to join with him in opposing the Rise of the House of Guise. The
Duke of Guise was made General of the Armies, and the Cardinal of Lorrain
Sur-intendant of the Finances. The Duchess of Valentinois was expelled the
Court. The Cardinal of Tournon the Constable's declared Enemy, and the
Chancellor Olivier declared Enemy to the Duchess of Valentinois, were both
called to Court. In a word, the Court had entirely changed Face: The Duke of
Guise ranked himself with the Princes of the Blood, to carry the King's Cloak
at the Funeral. He and his Brothers were absolute Masters at Court, not only
through the credit the Cardinal had with the Queen, but because she thought it
in her power to remove them if they should give her Umbrage, and that she could
not remove the Constable who was upheld by the Princes of the Blood.

The days of mourning for the deceased King being over, the Constable came to
the Louvre, but had a very cold reception from the King. He would have spoken
with him in private, but the King called for Messieurs de Guise, and before
them told him, he advised him to take his ease; that the Finances and the
Command of the Armies were disposed of, and when he should stand in need of his
Counsels, he would send for him to Court. The Queen Mother received him more
coldly than the King had done, and did not forbear to reproach him, with his
having said to the late King, his Children were not like him. The King of
Navarr arrived, and was no better received. The Prince of Conde, more impatient
than his Brother, complained of it aloud, but all to no purpose. He was removed
from Court, under pretense of being sent into Flanders to sign the Ratification
of the Peace. They showed the King of Navarr a forged Letter from the King of
Spain, wherein he was charged with designs to surprise some strong places
belonging to that King: they told him it was high time to look about him, and
prepare for defense: and, in a word, persuaded him to resolve going for Bearn.
The Queen Mother, to furnish him with a pretense, gave him in Charge the
Conduct of Madam Elizabeth to Savoy, and made him take his Journey before her:
so that there was not a Person left at Court to balance the Power of the House
of Guise.

Though it fell out unluckily for Monsieur de Cleve, he had not the Conducting
Madam Elizabeth; yet the greatness of the Person preferred before him, took
from him all cause of complaint. But the loss of the Employ grieved him not so
much for depriving him of the honor he should have received by it, as for
robbing him of so fair an opportunity to remove his Wife from Court, without
suspicion, or the least appearance of design.

Soon after the decease of the late King, a Resolution was taken the King
should go to Rhemes to be anointed. Madam de Cleve having all this while kept
home, on pretense of being ill, no sooner heard this news, but she prayed her
Husband to dispense with her following the Court, and to give her leave to go
take the Air at Colonniers for her health. He told her he would not enquire
whether she desired it on the account of her health, but he was ready to
consent to what she desired; and it was no hard Task to consent to what he had
already resolved. As good an Opinion as he had of his Wife's Virtue, he thought
it imprudent to expose her longer to the view of a Man she was in love with.

Monsieur de Nemours quickly knew she would not go along with the Court, and
could not find in his heart to be gone without seeing her. The Night before the
Court was to remove he went to her House, as late as in decency he could, that
he might find her alone. Fortune favored his Intention, as he entered the
Court he met Madam Nevers, and Madam Martigues coming out, they told him they
had left her alone. He went up under an agitation and trouble, paralleled only
by that Madam de Cleve was in, when told Monsieur de Nemours was come to see
her: the fear of his speaking to her of his passion, her apprehension she might
give him too favorable an answer, the disturbance this Visit might occasion to
her Husband, the difficulty of giving him an account of it, or concealing it,
presented themselves to her imagination all in a moment, and put her into a
perplexity that made her resolve avoiding the thing, than which peradventure
she desired none more. She sent one of her Women to Monsieur de Nemours, who
was in her Antichamber, to tell him she had lately been very ill, and was
extremely sorry she could not receive the honor he would have done her. What a
grief was this to him, not to see Madam de Cleve; and therefore not to see her,
because she had no mind he should? He was to be gone on the Morrow, he could
not expoct from Fortune a more favorable opportunity. He had not spoken to her
since the discourse at the Queen-Dauphin's, and had reason to believe his
telling the Vidame had destroyed all his hopes. In a word, he went away vexed
to the very Heart.

As soon as Madam de Cleve had recovered her self a little, out of the trouble
she was in at the thoughts of Monsieur de Nemours being come to visit her, she
was so far from approving the reasons that induced her to excuse her self from
seeing him, that she condemned her self for having refused his Visit; and if it
had not been too late, she would have had him called back.

Madam de Nevers, and Madam de Martigues, went directly from Madam de Cleve, to
the Queen-Dauphins; Monsieur de Cleve was there. The Queen-Dauphin asked them
where they had been? they answered they came from Madam de Cleve, where they
had spent part of the Afternoon, with a great deal of company, and left no body
there but Monsieur de Nemours. These words, though harmless and indifferent in
themselves, passed not as such with Monsieur de Cleve: he had reason to imagine
Monsieur de Nemours might have several opportunities of speaking to Madam de
Cleve, but to think he was alone with her at her Lodgings, where he might
declare to her his passion, appeared that moment a thing so strange and
intolerable, he was more jealous than ever. It was not in his power to stay at
the Queen-Dauphin's, he went thence not knowing why, nor whether it were with
design to interrupt Monsieur de Nemours: When he drew near home, he looked
about to see what signs he might discover of that Prince's being still there.
It was some comfort to find he was gone, and it pleased him to find he could
not have been long there. He fancied, peradventure, it was not Monsieur de
Nemours he had reason to be jealous of. And though he could not doubt it, yet
he endeavored to persuade himself he ought to question it. But he had been
already so clearly convinced to the contrary, it was not in his power to
continue long in that uncertainty he so earnestly desired. He went straight
into his Wife's Chamber, and after some general discourse, he could not forbear
asking her what she had done in his absence, and who had been to see her. She
gave him account of both, but finding she mentioned not Monsieur de Nemours, he
asked, trembling, if those were all she had seen, that she might have occasion
to name Monsieur de Nemours, and he have the comfort to find she put no tricks
upon him. She had not seen him, therefore she named him not. Monsieur de Cleve,
with a sorrowful tone, replys, Have you not seen Monsieur de Nemours, or have
you forgot him? I have not seen him indeed, says she; I was ill, and sent one
of my Women to make my Excuse. You were not ill, but for him then, replys he;
you admitted all other Visits, why not his as the rest? What reason have you to
fear a sight of him? Why should he know by you that you are afraid to see him?
Why should you make it appear to him you make use of the Power his Passion
gives you over him? Durst you refuse to see him, but that you know him sensible
it proceeded not from Incivility, but Rigor; And what reason have you to be
rigorous to him? From a Person like you, Madam, any thing but indifference is a
favor. I did not think, says she, you had any such suspicion of Monsieur de
Nemours, that you could have reproached me for not admitting a Visit from him.
Yet I reproach you, Madam, replys he, and have ground enough for it: Why should
you not see him, if he never spoke to you of his love? But he has declared it,
Madam; it is not possible it could have made so deep an impression in you, had
you perceived it only by his silence: It was not in your power to tell me the
whole trugh, you have concealed from me the greater, and more considerable
part; you have repented that little you confessed to me, you were not able to
finish your Confession: I am more unhappy than I thought I was, and the
unhappyest of Men. You are my Wife, I love you as my Mistress, and the same
time see you in love with another; and he the most amiable in the Court: He
sees you every day, and knows you are in love with him. Ha, cries he, I believed
you might overcome the Passion you had for him, but sure I had lost my Reason
to think it. I know not, replys she very sorrowfully, whether you did ill to
judge favorably of a proceeding so extraordinary as mine; nor do I know but I
might be mistaken, when I thought you would do me Justice. Never doubt it,
Madam, says he; you were mistaken, you expected from me things as impossible as
those I expected from you: How could you think I should do you right, or act
according to reason? You had sure forgot I was desperately in love with you,
and that I was your Husband. Either of these were enough to run a Man into
extremities, what cannot both do when thus met in one? Ha, what do they not? My
sentiments, my thoughts are uncertain and violent, I cannot master them. I no
longer think my self worthy of you, nor do I think you are worthy of me. I
adore you, I hate you: I offend you, I beg your pardon: I admire you, I (...) I
do so. In a word, I have lost both (...) and my reason; I wonder I have (...)
since you spoke to me at Colonniers, and the Queen-Dauphin told you the
Adventure was known. I cannot discover how it came abroad, nor what passed
between Monsieur de Nemours and you on that account. You will never acquaint me
with it, nor do I desire you should: I beg only you will remember you have made
me the most unfortunate, the most wretched of Men.

Monsieur de Cleve having said this, left his Wife, and departed on the morrow
without seeing her; but he writ her a Letter full of trouble, civility, and
kindness: she sent him an answer so moving, so full of assurance of her Conduct
past and to come, that being grounded on truth, and lively expressions of the
thoughts of her heart, the Letter made impression on Monsieur de Cleve, and
restored, in some measure, the former tranquillity and calm of his spirits:
Besides, his knowing Monsieur de Nemours was to go to the King, and could not
be with Madam de Cleve, contributed not a little to his repose: whenever this
Lady spoke to her Husband, the love he expressed for her, the handsomness of his
proceeding, the kindness he had for her, and what she owed him as her Husband,
had that strong operation on her, capable, one would think, to deface the
Idea's she had of Monsieur de Nemours; but it was but for a time, and presently
after the same Idea's came fresh into her mind, and made deeper impression than
ever.

The first days after Monsieur de Nemours was gone, she was scarce sensible of
his absence; at length it troubled her sore: from the hour she fell in love
with him, not a day had past but she had feared or hoped to meet him, and it
was no small grief to her to think it was not in the power of Fortune to make
them now meet one another.

She went to Colonniers, and ordered to be carried thither the great Pictures
she had caused to be copied out of the Originals Madam de Valentinois had
bought for her fine House at Amet. All the remarkable actions of the Kings
Reign were represented in those Pieces: amongst the rest, was the Siege of
Metz, and those who had signalized themselves were drawn there much to the
Life; Monsieur de Nemours was of the number, which perhaps made her desirous of
the Pictures.

Madam de Martigues having not been able to go with the Court, promised to
spend some days with Madam de Cleve at Colonniers. Though both shared the
Queens favor, yet it was without envy or strangeness to one another: they
continued good friends, yet neither was the others Confident of the Darling
Thoughts. Madam de Cleve knew Madam de Martigues loved the Vidame, but Madam de
Martigues knew nothing of Madam de Cleve's being in love with Monsieur de
Nemours, nor of his love for her, Madam de Martigues loved her the better, as
being Niece to the Vidame; and Madam de Cleve loved Madam de Martigues, as
being in love as she her self was, and in love with the most intimate Friend of
him who had a passion for her.

Madam de Martigues came to Colonniers as she promised, and found Madam de
Cleve led a very desolate life, she affected solitude, and to pass the Evenings
in the Gardens without the company of her Domestics: she frequented the
Pavillion where Monsieur de Nemours had heard her, she entered the Bour that
opened to the Forest: her Women, and other Servants, staid in the other, or
under the Pavillion, and came not to her unless she called them.

Madam de Martigues having never seen Colonniers before, was surpised at the
beauties of it, particularly at the pleasantness of the Pavillion. Madam de
Cleve and she usually past the Evenings there: Two young Ladies (as they) both
passionately in love, being at liberty, to pass the night in the finest place
in the world, knew not how to make an end of discoursing one another, being
extremely pleased with the Conversation, though neither made the other her
Confident. Madam de Martigues could hardly have left Colonniers, but that she
was to go where the Vidame was: she took her leave, and went for Chambort,
where the Court then was.

The Cardinal of Lorrain had anointed the King at Rhemes, and the design was to
pass the rest of the Summer at the Castle of Chambort, which was newly built.
The Queen expressed great joy to see Madam de Martigues at Court, and after
several Evidences of it, she inquired what news of Madam de Cleve, and what she
did in the Country: Monsieur de Nemours, and Monsieur de Cleve were both with
the Queen that very time. Madam Martigues had been so taken with Colonniers,
she gave the Queen an account of the beauties of it, and enlarged upon the
Description of the Pavillion in the Forest, and the pleasure Madam de Cleve
took to walk alone there some part of the Night. Monsieur de Nemours, who knew
the place well enough to understand Madam Martigues's discourse, thought it not
impossible to have a sight of Madam de Cleve there, without being seen by any
but her self. He asked her some questions for his better direction, and
Monsieur de Cleve, who looked earnestly on Monsieur de Nemours while Madam
Martigues was speaking, fancied he knew what was his design: the questions he
asked confirmed him the more, so that he made no doubt but he intended to go
see his Wife. Nor was he mistaken; for Monsieur de Nemours was so set upon it,
that having spent the Night in considering how to execute his design, he went
betimes on the morrow to ask the King leave to go to Paris, on a pretended
occasion.

Monsieur de Cleve questioned not the occasion of the Journey, but resolved to
satisfy himself of his Wife's Conduct, and continue no longer under an
uncertainty so troublesome: He had a desire to go the same time Monsieur de
Nemours set out, and hide himself where he might discover the success of the
Journey; but fearing dis departure would be thought extraordinary, and Monsieur
de Nemours upon notice might take other measures, he resolved to trust a
Gentleman that belonged to him, whose faithfulness and wit he was fully assured
of: he acquainted him with the trouble he was in, and how virtuous his Wife had
been till then; and ordered him to follow Monsieur de Nemours, watch him
narrowly, and see whether he went to Colonniers, and whether he entered the
Garden by Night.

The Gentleman, very capable of such a Commission, discharged it with a great
deal of exactness: he followed Monsieur de Nemours to a Village within half a
league of Colonniers, where Monsieur de Nemours made a halt; which the
Gentleman easily guessed was for no other end, but to stay there till Night.
But he thought it best for him to pass through the Village, and enter the
Forest the way he thought Monsieur de Nemours must pass. He took his measures
very right, for it was no sooner Night but he heard some walk, and though it
were dark he easily knew Monsieur de Nemours: He saw him go round the Garden to
hearken if he could discover any Person, and spy out a place convenient to pass
over. There were double Pales, and very high, on purpose to prevent entrance,
so that it was hard getting over; yet Monsieur de Nemours made a shift to get
in, and was no sooner entered the Garden, but he quickly knew where Madam de
Cleve was: He saw a great light in the Bower, the Windows all open, and
slipping along by the Pales side got close to the Bower; you may imagine in
what trouble and Emotion he took his station behind a Window which served him
conveniently to see what Madam de Cleve was doing. He saw she was alone, but
thought her beauty so admirable he could scarce master the transport it put him
in. It was hot, and she had nothing on her Head and her Neck, but her Hair
hanging carelessly down. She was on a Bed of Repose, with several Baskets full
of Ribbands before her, out of which she made choice of some; and he observed
she picked out the very Colors he wore at the Tourney. He could see her make
them up into Knots for an Indian Cane, which had once been his, and he had
given it his Sister: Madam de Cleve took it from her, as if she had never known
it had been his: When she had tied on the Knots, with a grace and sweetness
suitable to the delicacy of the Sentiments in her Heart, she took a great Wax
Candle in her Hand, and went to the Table over against the Picture of the Siege
of Metz, wherein was the Pourtraict of Monsieur de Nemours: She sat her down,
and fell a looking on that Pourtraict with that attention and thoughtfulness,
which could proceed only from a passionate love.

It Is impossible to express the Sentiments of Monsieur de Nemours that moment;
to see by Night, in the finest place of the World, a Person he adored; to see
her and she not know it, to see her wholly taken up with things relating to
him, and the passion she hid from him, was a pleasure no other Lover ever
tasted, or imagined.

He was so transported he stood gazing at her, without considering how precious
his time was: having bethought himself a little, he believed it best not to
speak to her till she came into the Garden, where he might do it with more
safety at greater distance from her Women. Yet seeing she continued in the
Bower, he resolved to enter: When about to do it, what trouble was he in? how
fearful to displease her, and make her change her Countenance so full of
sweetness and love, into looks full of anger and severity!

Presently he thought he had done very unwisely (not to come see Madam de
Cleve, but) to think of appearing to her: He looked on it as an extravagant
boldness, to surprise, at midnight, a Person to whom he never durst declare his
passion for her: He could not see how he could pretend to audience from her,
but believed she might justly be offended with him, for the danger he exposed
her to by the Accidents might happen. His courage quite failed him, and he was
several times upon the point of returning without letting her see him: Yet
pushed on with the desire he had to speak to her, and encouraged by the hopes
given him by what he had newly seen, he advanced a few steps, but in such
disorder, that a Scarf he wore caught at the Window and made a noise. Madam de
Cleve turned about, and whether her Fancy was full of him, or that she stood in
a place so directly to the light that she might know him, she thought it was
he; and without the least hesitation, or once looking toward him, went into
the place where her Women were. She was so disordered, that to conceal it from
them, she told them she was ill: Which she did to give them employment about
her, and him an opportunity of escaping unseen. Reflecting on what was past,
she thought her self deceived, and that she did but fancy she had seen him: she
knew he was at Chambort, and could not persuade her self he would have
undertaken so hazardous a Journey. She had a mind several times to return into
the Garden, to see if any one were there; and perhaps she no less desired, than
feared, to find Monsieur de Nemours there: At last reason prevailed, and she
thought it more prudent to continue in doubt, than to run the hazard of
clearing the matter; yet she could not of a long time resolve to quit a place
she thought him so near to, and it was almost day e're she returned to the
Castle.

Monsieur de Nemours staid in the Garden while there was any light, in hopes of
another sight of Madam de Cleve, though he was persuaded she knew him, and was
gone out of purpose to shun him; but hearing the Doors locked, his hopes were
at an end. He went to take Horse near the place where Monsieur de Cleve's
Gentleman was watching him. This Gentleman followed him to the same Village,
where he left him in the Evening. Monsieur de Nemours resolved to spend the
rest of the Day there, and return at Night to Colonniers, to see if Madam de
Cleve would have the cruelty to shun him, or not expose her self to view. He
was very glad to find himself so much in her thoughts, yet it could not but
trouble him to see her so bent to avoid him.

Never was passion so tender and violent as that of this Prince: He went under
the Willows along a little Brook that ran behind the House, where he hid
himself, that no notice might be taken of him. He gave himself up to the
transports of his Love, which were so vehement he let fall some tears; not
those of pure grief, but mingled with the pleasure and charms Love only is
acquainted with.

He was now at leisure to reflect on all the Actions of Madam de Cleve, since
he had been in love with her. What a modest rigor she had always used him
with, though she loved him. For it is certain, says he, she loves me, I cannot
doubt of it; the deepest engagements, the highest favors, are not so
infallible Evidences of it, as those I have seen: yet she uses me as if she
hated me. I hoped time would have produced in her some change in my favor, but
now I must not expect it; I find her still upon her Guard against me, and her
self: If she did not love me I would apply my self to please her; but I please
her, she loves me, and yet hides it from me: What am I to expect? what change
can I hope of my Fate? What, shall I have the love of the most amiable Person
in the World, and be under that excess of passion that proceeds from the
certainty of being loved by her, only to make me more sensible of being ill
used? Let me see you love me, fair Princess, cries he, declare to me your
Sentiments, let me once in my Life be assured of them by you; I am content you
should resume your rigor, and use me ever after with the severity that so
mortifies me: Look on me at least with those Eyes you looked last Night on my
Picture in my sight. Can you look with so much kindness on my Picture, yet shun
me so cruelly? What are you afraid of? You love me, and it is in vain to conceal
it from me; you have, against your will, given me Evidences of it. I know my
good fortune, permit me to enjoy it, and do not make me unhappy. Is It possible
Madam de Cleve should love me, yet I be unhappy? How beautiful she appeared in
the Night? how did I forbear throwing my self at her Feet? Had I done it,
perhaps the respect I expressed for her would have kept her from shunning me:
Yet peradventure she did not know me, I trouble my self more than I need: the
sight of a Man at an hour so extraordinary would have frightened her. These
thoughts took up his time all the Day, he wished impatiently for the Night; and
as soon as it came he went for Colonniers. Monsieur de Cleve 's Gentleman,
being disguised, that he might be less observed, followed him to the place he
had followed him the Night before, and saw him enter the Garden again. Monsieur
de Nemours quickly found Madam de Cleve had not exposed her self to a second
view, the Garden-Doors being all shut, he turned him every way about to
discover light, but saw none.

Madam de Cleve apprehending he might return, kept her Chamber, fearing she
might not still have the power to shun him; and unwilling to expose her self to
the hazard of speaking to him in a manner so unsuitable to her Conduct hitherto.

Monsieur de Nemours, though out of hopes of seeing her, could not resolve to
quit presently a place she frequented. He passed that Night in the Garden, and
had the pleasure of seeing the Objects she beheld every day. It was Sunrising
e're he thought of retiring, which he did at last for fear of being discovered.

He had not the power to go for Court, without having seen Madam de Cleve. He
went to his Sisters, the Duchess of Mercoeur, at her House near Colonniers: She
was extremely surpised at her Brother's arrival, but he invented so probable a
Pretense for his Journey, and ordered his business so handsomely, that she made
the first Proposal of visiting Madam de Cleve. This design was to be executed
that very day, Monsieur de Nemours having told his Sister, he would leave her
at Colonniers, and go directly thence to the King. This he did in hopes she
would take her leave before his departure from Colonniers, and afford him an
infallible opportunity of speaking to Madam de Cleve.

At their arrival she was walking in the Garden: The sight of Monsieur de
Nemours troubled her not a little, and silenced all doubts of her having seen
him the Night before: It angered her to find him guilty of so much boldness,
and impudence. He was heartily troubled to observe in her Countenance an Air of
Coldness toward him. Their discourse was general, yet he had the address to
show so much wit, so much complaisance, and admiration for Madam de Cleve, that
he dissipated in some measure the coldness she had expressed toward him at
first.

His first fear being over, he seemed very curious to see the Pavillion in the
Forest: He spoke of it as the most pleasant place in the World, and described
it so particualrly, that Madam de Mercoeur told him, he must needs have been
often there, to be so well acquainted with all the beauties of it. I do not
think for all that, says Madam de Cleve, Monsieur de Nemours has ever been
there: it has been finished but a while since. It Is not long since I have been
there, says he, looking on her; and I cannot tell whether I have not reason to
be glad you have forgot seeing me there. Madam de Mercoeur was so taken up with
viewing the beauty of the Gardens, she minded not what her Brother said. Madam
de Cleve blushed, and with her Eyes to the Ground, without looking on Monsieur
de Nemours, I do not remember, says she, I ever saw you there; and if you were
ever there, it was without my knowledge. It Is true, Madam, says he, I was there
without order, and passed there the most cruel, as well as the most pleasant
moments of my Life.

Madam de Cleve understood very well what he said, but made him no answer: Her
care was to prevent Madam de Mercoeur's going into the Bower where Monsieur de
Nemours's Picture was, which she had no mind should be seen. She kept her in
discourse, and the time passed away so insensibly, that Madam de Mercoeur began
to talk of going homewards: But when Madam de Cleve saw Monsieur de Nemours and
his Sister were not to go together, she quickly guessed what she might be
exposed to, and was in the same straight she had been in at Paris, and made use
of the same Expedient: The fear she had this Visit might confirm her Husbands
suspicions, contributed much to the resolution she took. That Monsieur de
Nemours might not continue alone with her, she told Madam de Mercoeur she would
bring her as far as the edge of the Forest, and ordered her Coach to be made
ready. Monsieur de Nemours turned pale as Ashes, at the rigor of Madam de
Cleve. Madam de Mercoeur asked him if he were ill. He looked on Madam de Cleve,
(though no body perceived it,) and convinced her by his looks, his illness was
a pure effect of his despair. However, there was no reremedy but he must leave
her in his Sisters company, without daring to follow her; and having told his
Sister he would return to Court directly from Colonniers, there was no going
back with her. He went for Paris, and thence on the morrow for Chambort.

Monsieur de Cleve's Gentleman had observed him all this while. He followd him
to Paris, and when he found Monsieur de Nemours was gone for Chambort, he took
Post to get thither before him, and give account of his Journey. His Master
expected his return with impatience, as if the happiness, or unhappiness of his
Life depended upon it.

As soon as he saw him, he gathered from his Countenance, and his silence, he
had no good news for him: He continued some time astonished, with his Face
dejected, and not able to speak to him; at last he made signs with his hand he
should withdraw. Go, says he, I know what you have to say to me; but I have not
the power to hear it. I cannot inform you any thing, says the Gentleman, on
which to ground a sure Judgment. It Is true, Monsieur de Nemours went two Nights
successively into the Garden in the Forest, and the Day after he was at
Colonniers with the Duchess of Mercoeur. It Is enough, replys Monsieur de Cleve,
it is enough, making signs to him to withdraw; I need no further discovery. The
Gentleman was forced to leave his Master abandoned to his despair, which was
perhaps the most violent of any has been known: few men of his courage, and so
deeply in love as he, having felt the same time the grief caused by the
unfaithfulness of a Mistress, and the same occasioned by being deceived by a
Wife.

His trouble was so great, it presently cast him into a Fever; and with such
ill Symptoms, it was thought very dangerous. Madam de Cleve was informed of it,
and came away in all haste to him. When she arrived he was worse: besides, she
found him in such a strangeness and coldness for her, she was equally surpised
and afflicted at it: She saw it was a pain to him to receive the services she
did him in his sickness, but she imputed it to his Malady.

When she was come to the Court at Blois, Monsieur de Nemours could not forbear
expressing his joy at her being in the same place where he was: He endeavored
to see her, and went every day to Monsieur de Cleve's under pretense of
enquiring after his health, but all to no purpose: she stirred not out of her
Husband's Chamber, and was sorry at the heart for the condition he was in. It
madded Monsieur de Nemours to see her so afflicted, as an Evidence of her
kindness for Monsieur de Cleve, and a dangerous diversion for the affection she
had for Monsieur de Nemours. But Monsieur de Cleve was sick to that extremity,
it gave him new hopes: He saw it very probable Mad. de Cleve should be shortly
at liberty to follow her inclination, and that he might expect some durable
pleasure and happiness for the future. But these thoughts were too full of
trouble and transport to last, and the fear of further misfortune, by being
frustrated of his hopes, put them quite out of his Head.

Monsieur de Cleve the mean time was almost given up by the Physicians. One
Morning (having had a very ill Night) he said he would rest: Madam de Cleve
alone continued with him in the Chamber, and instead of taking any Repose,
thought him very restless. She fell on her Knees by his Bedside, and though
Monsieur de Cleve had set up a resolution never to acquaint her with the
violent displeasure he had conceived against her, yet the care she took of him,
and her great affliction (which he could not but sometimes think real, as at
other times he looked on it as an Evidence of dissimulation and perfideousness)
distracted him so violently with contrary Sentiments, that it was not in his
power not to give them vent.

You shed many tears, Madam, says he, for a Death you are the cause of, and
cannot give you the trouble you pretend to be in. I am no longer in a condition
to reproach you, adds he, with a Voice weakened with sickness and grief; but I
die with the cruel and tormenting displeasure you occasioned me: Was it
necessary an Action so extraordinary as that you told me of at Colonniers
should have Consequences so very unsuitable? Why would you declare to me your
passion for Monsieur de Nemours, if your Virtue could hold out no longer to
resist it? I loved you to that extremity, I would have been glad to have been
deceived, I confess it to my shame: I have lamented my loss of that false
repose you robbed me of; why did you not leave me in that quiet blindness so
many Husbands live in? peradventure I had never known you had been in love with
Monsieur de Nemours: I shall die, says he, but know, you have made Death welcome
and pleasing to me; and having deprived me of the esteem and tenderness I had
for you, you have rendered my life a trouble, I cannot but abhor it: What
should I live for, continues he, to spend my days with a Person I have loved so
extremely, and as cruelly been deceived by, or to live apart from the same
person, and to break out openly into violences so opposite to my humor, and the
love I had for you? a love greater than it appeared to you; Madam, I hid a
great part of it from you, for fear of being troublesome to you and forfeiting
your Esteem by actions and expressions of it not becoming a Husband. In a word,
I deserved your affection more than once; yet I die without regret, since I
could not have it, nor can desire it any longer. Adieu, Madam: you will one day
be sorry for a Man that loved you with a true and honest passion: You will feel
the smart of your Engagements, and know the difference between being loved as I
loved you, and their love, who pretending affection for you, seek only the
honor of seducing you: But my death will set you at liberty, and you may
without a Crime make Monsieur de Nemours happy. What matters it what happens
when I am no more, must I have the weakness to trouble my head with those
things?

Madam de Cleve was so far from imagining her Husband suspected her, she
understood not what he meant, and fancied only he reproached her for the
Inclination she had for Monsieur de Nemours. At last, awaked on the sudden; A
Crime, says she, I am a stranger to the thoughts of it; the severest Virtue
could not have prescribed any Conduct but that I have followed; I never did any
thing but I wished you a Witness of it: Could you have wished me a Witness,
replies he, (looking on her with disdain) the Nights you spent with Monsieur de
Nemours? Ah, Madam, is it you I speak of, when I speak of a Lady that has
spent Nights with a Man not her Husband! No, Sir, says she, I am not the Person
you speak of; I never spent a Night, nor a moment with Monsieur de Nemours; he
never saw me in private, I never endured he should do it, I never gave him the
hearing, I would take all the Oaths -- No more, Madam, I pray, says he, a false
Oath, or a Confession, would perhaps trouble me alike. Madam de Cleve had not
the power to answer, her tears and her grief took away her speech: Striving at
last, Look on me, says she, at least give me the hearing; were it only my
Concern, I would bear your Reproaches, but your Life is in the case: Hear me
for your own sake, I am so Innocent, it is impossible but I shall convince you
of the truth. Would to God you could persuade me to it, cries he, but what is it
you can say? Has not Monsieur de Nemours been at Colonniers with his Sister?
Had he not spent the two Nights before with you in the Forest Garden? If that
be my Crime, replies she, I can easily justify my self: I do not desire you
should take my word; ask all your Domestics, and they will tell you whether I
went into the Garden the Night before Monsieur de Nemours came to Colonniers;
and whether the Night before, that I went not out of the Garden two hours
sooner than ordinary: She told him, she thought she had seen one in the Garden,
and confessed she believed it was Monsieur de Nemours. She spoke with that
confidence, and truth, though improbable, is naturally so persuasive, that
Monsieur de Cleve was almost convinced of her Innocence: I cannot tell, says
he, whether I ought to believe you; but I find my self so near death, I would
not know any thing should make me unwilling to die; you have convinced me too
late, yet it will ever be a comfort to me, to go away with the thought of your
being still worthy the Esteem I have had for you: Let me entreat you I may be
assured of this further comfort, that my Memory shall be dear to you; and that
if it had been in your power, you would have had for me the kindness you have
for another. He would have gone on, but was so weak, his speech failed him.
Madam de Cleve called in the Physicians, who found him at the point of death;
yet he languish'd some days, and died at last with admirable Constancy.

Madam de Cleve was so afflicted, she was almost beside her self. The Queen
came to see her, and took her into a Covent, yet she was not sensible of it:
her Sisters-in-Law brought her back to Paris, when she was not yet in a
condition to give an account of her grief: But when she began to have the power
to consider what a Husband she had lost, that she had been the cause of his
death, and by a passion she had had for another, the horror she had for her
self, and for Monsieur de Nemours, surpasses expression.

Monsieur de Nemours at first durst pay her no other Respects but what decency
required: He knew her too well to think any other would be acceptable, and
found afterward he must observe the same Conduct a very long time.

A Servant of his told him, that Monsieur de Cleve's Gentleman, being his
intimate Friend, and lamenting to him the loss of his Master, said to him, that
Monsieur de Nemour's Journey to Colonniers had caused his death. Monsieur de
Nemours was extermely surpised at the discourse; yet after some reflection, he
could guess partly at the truth of it, and judged presently what Madam de Cleve
would think of him, and what a distance it would occasion between them, if she
once believed her Husbands distemper proceeded from his jealousy of him: He
thought it not best to put her in mind so quickly of his Name, and stuck to
that resolution, though it went against the heart of him.

He took a journey to Paris, and could not forbear calling at her Gate to ask
how she did: He was told she admitted no Visit, and had commanded they should
not trouble her with an account of any that came to see her; an Order given
perhaps on purpose to prvent her hearing of Monsieur de Nemours: but he was too
deeply in love to live absolutely deprived of the sight of her, and resolved to
find means, how difficult soever, to get out of a condition he thought so
intolerable.

Madam de Cleve afflicted her self beyond Reason; the Death of her Husband, and
caused by her, a Huband dying with such tenderness for her, still ran in her
mind, she could not forbear reflecting every moment on the duty she ought him,
and condemning her self she had not had the affection for him he deserved, as
if it had depended on her power: All the comfort she had, was to know she
lamented the loss of him as his Merit required, and was resolved the rest of
her life to do nothing but what, had he lived, he would have been certainly
pleased with.

She had often been thinking how he came to know Monsieur de Nemours had been
at Colonniers: She could not suspect he had told him; yet if he had, she valued
it little, she thought her self so perfectly cured of the passion she had had
for him: but she was grieved at the heart to think him the cause of her
Husbands Death, and was troubled at the thought of the fear Monsieur de Cleve
had expressed at his Death she would marry him: But these griefs were drowned all
together in that of the loss of her Husband, which was so great, she seemed to
have no other.

After several Months the violence of her affliction began to abate, and she
fell into a state of sadness and melancholy, being seized with a pining and
languishing grief: Madam de Martigues made a journey to Paris, and during her
stay there visited her often; she entertained her with discourse of the Court,
and the passages there; and though Madam de Cleve appeared unconcerned, yet
Madam de Martigues continued that discourse, in hopes to divert her.

She told her news of the Vidame, of Monsieur de Guise, and all others any way
remarkable for their Persons or Merit. As for Monsieur de Nemours, says she, I
cannot tell whether business has not dispossessed his heart of the Gallantry he
was so much addicted to: sure I am he is not gay and jovial as he used to be,
and he seems not to affect the company of Ladies; he goes often to Paris, and I
believe is there now. Madam de Cleve was so surpised at the name of Nemours,
that she blushed: But she changed the discourse, and Madam de Martigues
perceived not the concern she was in.

The morrow Madam de Cleve being in search of business suitable to her
condition, went to a Neighbors house, who was famous for having a particular
Excellency in weaving of Silks, and she designed to have some done to her
fancy. Having seen several pieces of his work, she spied a Chamber Door where
she thought there were more Silks, and spoke to them to open it: The Master
answered he had not the Key, and that the Chamber was taken by a man who came
at certain hours of the day to take the Prospect and Platform of the fair
houses and Gardens to be seen from his Windows. He is, adds he, the handsomest
man I ever saw, and looks not like one that works for his living; when ever he
comes, I observe he looks still toward the houses and Gardens, but I can never
see him work.

Madam de Cleve heard this discourse very attentively; what Madam de Martigues
had told her (that Monsieur de Nemours was now and then at Paris) she applied
in her fancy to that handsome man coming so near her Lodging, and grew up into
an Idea of Monsieur de Nemours, laboring for a sight of her, which gave her a
confused trouble which she knew not the cause of: she went toward the Windows
to see where they looked, and found they faced the Garden, and her Apartment.
When she went to her Chamber, she could easily see the Window where she was
told that man used to stand in for taking his Prospect. The thought that it was
Monsieur de Nemours produced a great alteration in her: she presently lost that
melancholy repose she had begun to enjoy, and fell into great disquiet, and
disturbance of spirit: Not able to stay at home, she went to take the air in a
Garden in the Suburbs, where she hoped to be alone: At her arrival she thought
she was not deceived, and walked a pretty while without seeing the appearance
of any one.

Having crossed a little Wilderness, she perceived at the end of a Walk, in the
further part of the Garden, a kind of Bower open on all sides, and made toward
it. When she came near, she saw a man laid on the Bank who seemed sunk into
deep meditation, and upon stricter view appeared to be Monsieur de Nemours: she
stopped immediately, but her people who waited on her made some noise, which
roused Monsieur de Nemours out of the study he was in. He to avoid the Company
he thought was coming toward him, started out of his place, without so much as
looking about who had made the noise, and turned away into an Alley, having
made a low Reverence, which hindered him to see those he saluted.

Had he known whom he avoided, how quickly would he have returned? But he went
on along the Alley, and Madam de Cleve saw him go out at a backdoor, where his
Coach waited for him. What an effect produced this sight in the heart of Madam
de Cleve? What passions did it raise there? what a flame did it kindle out of
the Embers of love? and with what violence it burnt? She went and sat her down
in the place Monsieur de Nemours was newly risen from; her fancy immediately
represented him the most amiable Person in the World, and one who had long
loved her with a passion full of respect and fidelity, slighting all for her,
respectful even to his torment, laboring to see her without a thought of being
seen by her, quitting the Court (whose Darling he was) to come and look on the
Walls where she had enclosed her self, and spend his melancholy hours in
places where he had no hopes to meet her. In a word, a man who deserved love
for the manner of his Engagement, and for whom she had an inclination so
violent, she could not have chosen but have loved him, though he had not loved
her; besides, a man of high Quality, and suitable to hers: All the obstacles
from Duty or Virtue were now removed; and of their former Estate, there
remained now only the passion Monsieur de Nemours had for her, and the passion
she had for Monsieur de Nemours.

These Idea's were all new (her affliction for the death of Monsieur de Cleve
having so taken her up, that she had not of a long time entertained a thought
of Monsieur de Nemours, but) at the sight of him they crowded into her head and
her heart.

But having taken her fill of these thoughts, when she remembered that the man
she looked upon as a fit Husband for her, was the same she had loved in her
late Husbands life, and had been the cause of his death, who as he was dying
expressed a fear she would marry him, it so shocked the severity of her Virtue,
she thought it equally criminal to marry Monsieur de Nemours, now her Husband
was dead, as it was to love him while he lived. She yielded her self up to
these Reflections so pernicious to her happiness, and fortified them with many
Reasons that concerned her repose, and the inconveniences she foresaw would
attend her Marriage with Monsieur de Nemours. At last, after two hours stay in
the place where she was, she returned home, under a persuasion she was to avoid
the sight of him, as a thing absolutely contrary to her duty.

Yet this persuasion being a pure effect of her Reason and Virtue, mastered not
her affection: Her heart was still for Monsieur de Nemours, inclining to him
with that violence, it brought her into a condition to be pitied, having quite
robbed her of her repose; never had she Nights more restless and tormenting. In
the morning, the first step she made, was to see if any one were at the Window
that looked toward her Apartment: she went, she saw Monsieur de Nemours, and
returned with that haste, he had reason to judge she knew him. He had long
wished she might take notice of his being there, since his passion had put him
upon finding that way of seeing her; and when he was out of hopes of that
pleasure, his course was to go muse in the Garden where she found him.

Tired at last with a condition so unhappy and uncertain, he resolved to try
some way of knowing his Fortune: What would I stay for, said he, I have known
long enough she loves me; she is at liberty, and has now no Duty to plead
against me: why should I be reduced to see her, without being seen by her, and
speaking to her? Is it possible Love should so absolutely take away my Reason,
and my Courage, and make me differ so much from what I have been in my other
Amors? 'Twas fit I should have expressed a respect for the grief she was under,
but I express it too long, and give her time to Master the Inclination she had
for me.

After these Reflections, he thought of the means of seeing her; he thought he
had no reason to conceal his passion any longer from the Vidame of Chartres, he
resolved to tell him of it, and the design he had for his Niece.

The Vidame was then at Paris, the Town being very full of company who came to
fit their Equipage to attend the King, who was going to conduct the Queen of
Spain. Monsieur de Nemours went to the Vidame's, and made an Ingenous
Confession of what he had till then concealed from him, except only Madam de
Cleve's inclinations for him, which he would not own he knew.

The Vidame received all he said with a great deal of joy, and assured him,
that before he knew his mind, he had often thought (since Madam de Cleve had
been a Widow) she was the only Lady worthy of him. Monsieur de Nemours prayed
him to help him to the speech of her, and let him know the same time how he
found her disposed.

The Vidame proposed to bring him to her house; Monsieur de Nemours thought it
might offend her, who had not yet admitted any Visit. They agreed the Vidame
should pray her to come to his house, on some pretense or other, and that
Monsieur de Nemours should come to them by a Back-stair, that no notice might
be taken of it. Madam de Cleve came, the Vidame went to receive her, and led
her into a great Closet at the end of his Apartment: A while after Monsieur de
Nemours came in, as by chance: Madam de Cleve was extremely surpised to see
him; she blushed, and endeavored to hide it. The Vidame spoke of other
matters, and went out as if he had been to give order about something. He
prayed Madam de Cleve to use no Ceremony at his house, and told her, he would
return presently.

It is impossible to express the Sentiments of Monsieur de Nemours, and Madam
de Cleve, seeing themselves alone, and in a condition to speak to one another,
as they had never been before. Both continued silent a while: At length, Will
you pardon the Vidame, Madam, says Monsieur de Nemours, that he has given me
an opportunity of speaking to you, which you have always so cruelly denied me?
I ought not to pardon him, replied she, for having forgot the condition I am
in, and how much he exposes my Reputation by this proceeding. Having said so,
she would have gone away; Monsieur de Nemours staid her, and said, Fear
nothing, Madam, there is no danger at all, no Body living but the Vidame knows I
am here. But hear me, Madam, hear, if not out of any kindness you have for me,
yet for your own sake, that you may be rid of the extravagancies I shall
infallibly run into, through a passion I can no longer master.

Madam de Cleve yielded for once to the inclination she had for Monsieur de
Nemours, and looking on him with eyes full of kindness and Charms: But what
is it you hope for, says she, from the Complaisance you desire of me? you will
perhaps repent you have obtained it, and I shall certainly repent I have
granted it: You deserve better fortune than you have hitherto had, or can have
for the future, unless you seek it elsewhere. I seek it elsewhere, Madam, says
he, is there any other happiness to be found but in your love? Though I never
spoke of it before, Madam, yet I could not believe you ignorant of my passion,
nor imagine but you knew it the truest and the most violent that ever was, or
will be: what trials has it been proof against, that you know not of? what
trials have you put it to by your rigor?

You are minded to hear me speak, and I am resolved to do it, answers Madam de
Cleve, and with that sincerity and clearness you shall rarely meet with in
those of my Sex; I will not tell you I have not had that inclination for you,
you have had for me; perhaps, should I say it, you would not believe it: I will
confess to you, I have not only been sensible of yours for me, but as sensible
of it as you could wish: And were you sensible of it, Madam, yet not affected
with it at all? May I presume to ask, whether it made not some impression upon
you? You may judge of that by my Conduct, says she, but I would know what you
thought of it? I must be in a happier condition than I am, says he, before I
dare answer you; all I can tell you is, I heartily wished you had not confessed
to Monsieur de Cleve what you hid from me, and that you would have concealed
from him, what you made appear to me: How came you to know, replies she
blushing, that I confessed any thing to Monsieur de Cleve? I knew it from your
self, Madam, says he: but that you may pardon my boldness in listening to your
discourse: I appeal to your memory, whether I made ill use of what I heard,
whether my hopes were raised by it in the least, or whether I had any greater
boldness to speak to you.

He began to give her an account how he heard he discourse with Monsieur de
Cleve, but she interrupted him, saying, No more of that, I see how you came to
be so well informed: I thought you knew it too well, when the Queen-Dauphin
told me the adventure which she had learnt from those you had made acquainted
with it.

Monsieur de Nemours gave her a particular relation of it: You may spare your
Excuses, says she, you have my pardon long since, though you gave me no reason
for it: but since I have told you what I designed to conceal from you while I
lived, I will confess to you, you have inspired me with Sentiments I was
altogether a stranger to till I saw you; and so far from imagining my self
capable of them, that the surprise heightened the trouble that always attends
them. I am the less ashamed to make you this confession, because it is made at
a time I can do it without Crime, and that you have observed my Conduct was
contrary to my affection.

Can you believe, Madam, says he, throwing himself at her feet, but I shall die
here in a transport of joy? I have told you nothing, says she smiling, but what
you knew too well before: Ah Madam, what a difference there is between learning
it by chance, and knowing it from your self, and seeing withal you are willing
I should know it: It Is true, replies she, I am willing you should know it, and
I find pleasure in telling it you; yet I cannot tell but I may tell it you more
for my own sake, than yours; for when all is done, you are not to expect any
effect suitable to the confession I have made: I am resolved to follow the
severest Rules my duty prescribes: You are at liberty, Madam, says he, and
under no obligation of duty, or if under any (if I may be allowed to say so)
it is in your power to make it your duty to preserve those Sentiments you have
had for me: My duty, replies she, forbids me ever to think of any man, but
particularly of you, for reasons unknown to you: They may be unknown to me,
Madam, says he, but they cannot be good; I believe Monsieur de Cleve thought me
more happy than I was, and that you had approved those extravagancies my
passion put me upon without your consent: Let us talk no more of that
Adventure, answers she, I cannot endure the thoughts of it, I am ashamed of it;
and the consequences have been so fatal, it grieves me at the heart: it is but
too true you were the cause of Monsieur de Cleve's death; the suspicions your
inconsiderate Conduct raised in him, cost him his life, no less than if you had
taken it from him with your own hands: Consider what I ought to have done, had
you two come to the extremity of a Duel, and he had been killed;'it is not the
same thing in the eye of the World, but in mine there is no difference, since I
know it is you have been the cause of his death, and on my account: Ah Madam,
says he, what a shadow of duty do you raise against my happiness? shall a vain
and groundless fancy hinder you to render a man happy, whom you have no
unkindness for? what, have I had some ground to hope I might pass my life with
you? has my fate led me to love the most Estimable Person in the World? have I
observed in her all that can make a Mistress adorable? has she had no
unkindness for me? have I found in her Conduct nothing but what I would desire
in my Wife? (for, Madam, you are perhaps the sole person in whom these two
things have concurred, to the degree they are in you; they that marry
Mistresses who have loved them, cannot but fear they may use the like Conduct
toward others they have done toward them; but in you, Madam, I can fear
nothing, I see nothing in you but matter of admiration) have I had a prospect
of so much felicity for no other end, but to see it obstructed by you? Ah
Madam, you forget you have distinguished me from the rest of men, or rather you
have not distinguished me, you have deceived your self, I have flattered my
self.

You have not flattered your self, says she, the Reasons of my duty would
perhaps not appear so strong to me, had I not made that distinction of which
you seem to doubt; and it is it gives me a Prospect of the unfortunate
Consequences of a nearer Engagement with you. I have nothing to answer, Madam,
replies he, when you tell me you are afraid of unfortunate Consequences; but I
confess, after all you have been pleased to say to me, I did not expect from
you so cruel a Reason. It is so far from being intended any way offensive to
you, answers she, I had much a do to tell it you. Alas, Madam, says he, how can
you imagine me so vain, to flatter my self with any thing you shall say to me,
having heard what you have already told me. I will speak to you again, answer
she, with the same sincerity as before, and without those Reserves and Niceties
I ought to have in my first discourse to you of this kind; but I conjure you
hear me without interruption.

I think my self obliged to give the affection you have for me the poor
recompense of letting you see what my Sentiments are: This probably will be the
only time of my life I shall do it in; yet I cannot without blushing confess to
you, that the certainty of being no more loved by you, as I am, appears to me
so dreadful a misfortune, that had I not invincible Reasons, grounded on my
duty, I doubt very much whether it would be in my power to expose my self to
that unhappiness. I know you are free, and that I am so, and that the condition
of things is such, that the Public perhaps should have no cause to blame you
or me, should we be engaged to one another for ever. But are men used to
continue their affection during those long Engagements? or am I to expect a
Miracle in my favor! And shall I put my self in a condition to see that
passion at an end, in which I place all my felicity? Monsieur de Cleve was
perhaps the only man in the World capable to preserve and maintain a passion
for his Wife; it was my ill fate I was not able to reap the advantage of that
happiness; and perhaps his passion had not lasted, but that he found I had
none, but I should not have the same means to preserve yours: I believe you owe
your constancy to the obstacles you have met with; you saw enough to engage you
to encounter and overcome them, and my actions against my will, or what you
learnt by chance, gave you too great hopes to be discouraged.

Ah Madam, says Monsieur de Nemours, I am not able to keep the silence you
command me; you do me too much injustice, and make it appear too clearly, you
are far from being prepossest in my favor: I confess, says she, my passions
may lead me, but they cannot blind me; nothing can hinder me to know you have a
natural disposition to Gallantry, and all the qualities requisite to give you
success; you have already been in love with several, and you will be so again:
I should be no longer she you placed your happiness in, I should see you as
much for another as you had been for me: this would mortally grieve me, and I
am not sure I could save my self from the torment of Jealousy: I have said
already too much to conceal from you, that you have made me know what Jealousy
is, and that it tormented me so cruelly the night the Queen gave me Madam de
Themines Letter, which it was said was addressed to you, that I have to this
moment an Idea of it, makes me believe it the greatest of evils: There Is not a
woman, but out of vanity or inclination has a mind to engage you; there are
very few but you please; my experience would make me believe there is not any
but it is in your power to please: I should think you always in love, and
beloved, and I should not be often mistaken; yet in this case, what remedy for
me but patience? I question much whether I should dare complain: a Lover may be
reproached, but shall a Husband be so, for no other cause but that he loves one
no longer? Could I use my self to bear a misfortune of this nature, should it
ever be in my power to bear that of imagining I saw Monsieur de Cleve every
hour accuse you of his death, and reproach me I had loved you, I had married
you, and make me sensible of the difference between his kindness and yours?
It Is impossible for me to overcome the strength of these Reasons; I must
continue in the condition I am in, and the resolution I have taken never to
alter it.

Ha, do you think you can do it, Madam, cries Monsieur de Nemours, do you
believe you can hold that resolution against a man that adores you, and has
the happiness to please you? It Is more difficult than you think, Madam, to
resist that which pleases and loves us; you have done it by an unparalleled
severity of virtue, but that virtue no longer opposes your affections, and I
hope you will follow your inclination, though against your will: I know, says
she, there is nothing more difficult than what I undertake, I mistrust my own
strength in the midst of my Reasons; the duty I owe the memory of Monsieur de
Cleve would be too weak, if not supported by Reasons drawn from the concern of
my repose, and the interest of my repose has need of support from Reasons
grounded on my duty to his memory: yet though I distrust my self, I believe I
shall never overcome my scruples, nor have I any hopes to overcome the
inclination I have for you; it will make me unhappy, and I must deny my self
the sight of you, how hard soever I strain for it. I conjure you by all the
power I have over you, never more seek an occasion to see me: I am in a
condition makes that Criminal, which were allowable another time; Decency
forbids me all Commerce with you. Monsieur de Nemours threw himself at her
feet, and by his words, and his tears, expressed the tenderest and liveliest
passion that ever heart was affected with: Madam de Cleve was not insensible,
and with eyes swelled with tears, why must it be, cries she, that I should
charge you with the death of Monsieur de Cleve? why did not my first
acquaintance with you begin since I have been at liberty, or why did I not know
you before I was engaged? why did Fate separate us by such invincible
obstacles? There is no obstacle at all, Madam, replies he, you, and you only
obstruct all my happiness; you impose upon your self a Law which neither Virtue
nor Reason require you to do: It Is true, says she, I sacrifice much to a duty
which subsists only in my imagination; have patience, and expect what time may
produce; Monsieur de Cleve is but newly dead; the sad Object is so near, and so
fresh, it cannot as yet but dazzle my eyesight, I see not things clearly and
distinctly as before; the mean time enjoy the pleasure to know you have gained
the Heart of a Person, who would never have loved any man had she not seen you:
Believe the Sentiments I have for you will last for ever, and whatever becomes
of me, they will still be the same. Farewell, says she, I am ashamed of this
discourse; I am willing you should give the Vidame an account of it, and I pray
you to do it.

It was not in his power to stay her any longer: As she was going out, she
found the Vidame in the next Room; he saw her so troubled he durst not speak to
her, and led her into her Coach without saying a word to her. He came back to
Monsieur de Nemours, who was so full of Joy, of Grief, of Astonishment, of
Admiration, of all those affections that attend a passion full of hope, and of
fear, that he had not the use of his Reason. It was a long time e're the Vidame
could get from him an account of their discourse: He had it at last, and
(setting Love aside) Monsieur de Chartres no less admired the Virtue, the Wit,
and Merit of Madam de Cleve, than Monsieur de Nemours did: They considered what
he was reasonably to hope for; and as fearful as his Love made him, he agreed
with the Vidame it was impossible she should hold long in that resolution; yet
they thought it necessary to obey her Orders, lest if the Public should take
notice of his inclination for her, and she should declare her self, and enter
into Engagements before the World, which she would afterward stick to for fear
it should be thought she loved him in her Husbands lifetime.

Monsieur de Nemours resolved to follow the King, without so much as
endeavoring to have sight of Madam de Cleve, from the usual place, before he
went. He prayed the Vidame to speak to her in his favor: What an infinite
number of Reasons did he furnish him with to persuade her against her scruples?
The Vidame thought he would never make an end, having made it late in the night
before he ended his discourse.

As for Madam de Cleve, it was a matter so new to her, to have been out of the
restraint she had imposed on her self, to have endured the first Declaration of
Love ever made to her, and to have declared her self to be in Love, that she
scarce knew her self: she was amazed at what she had done, she repented it, she
was glad of it, all her thoughts were full of trouble and passion: she examined
again the Reasons of her duty which obstructed her happiness; she was sorry to
find them so strong, and repented she had made them out so clear to Monsieur de
Nemours, though the first moment she saw him in the Garden she presently had a
thought of marrying him; but that thought had not made such impression, as the
discourse had since with him; and sometimes she could not comprehend how she
could be unhappy in marrying him: She could have wished with all her heart she
had had no grounds for her past scruples, nor future: At other times, Reason
and her Duty showed her so many things to the contrary, that carried her
violently into a resolution not to marry again, nor ever to see Monsieur de
Nemours; yet this was a resolution hard to be established in a Heart so moved
as hers, and so newly abandoned to the Charms of Love. At last, to be at some
ease, she thought it was not yet necessary to force her self to take these
violent resolutions: She had in decency a long time to consider of it; yet she
was fully resolved to hold no further Correspondence with Monsieur de Nemours.
The Vidame came to see her, and served Monsieur de Nemours with all the wit and
industry imaginable; but he could not persuade her to alter her Conduct, nor to
revoke her rigorous Orders to Monsieur de Nemours not to see her. She told the
Vidame her design was not to alter her condition; that she knew she should meet
with some difficulty in putting it in Execution, but hoped she should be able
to do it. She made him so sensible how much she was concerned at the opinion of
Monsieur de Nemours having caused the death of her Husband, and how fully she
was convinced it was against her duty to marry him, that the Vidame was afraid
it would be very difficult to take away those impressions. He did not acquaint
Monsieur de Nemours with his Apprehensions, but gave him an account of their
discourse, and all the hopes a man who is beloved can reasonably have. They
went away on the morrow to meet the King. The Vidame writ to Madam de Cleve, at
the request of Monsieur de Nemours, to speak in his behalf: in a second Letter
from the Vidame to her, Monsieur de Nemours writ a line or two with his own
hand; but Madam de Cleve resolved to observe strictly the Rules she had
prescribed her self, and fearing the accidents Letters are subject to, writ to
the Vidame she would not receive any more Letters from him, if he continued to
mention Monsieur de Nemours; and added such Asseverations, that Monsieur de
Nemours made it his request to the Vidame, not to name him any more.

The Court went to conduct the Queen of Spain as far as Poitou; Madam de Cleve
continued at home: the more distant she was from Monsieur de Nemours, and every
thing that might put her in mind of him, the more she remembered Monsieur de
Cleve, whose memory she made it her business to honor. The Reasons for her not
marrying Monsieur de Nemours, appeared very strong on the account of her Duty,
but altogether invincible, when she consulted her Repose: The Opinion she had,
Marriage would put an end to his Love, and the torments of Jealousy be the
infallible Consequent, gave her the prospect of inevitable unhappiness if she
consented to his desires: On the other side, she thought it impossible to
refuse (if he were present) the most amiable Man in the World, who loved her,
and whom she loved, and to refuse him in a thing that shocked neither Virtue
nor Honor; she thought nothing but absence and distance could give her the
power to do it; she found she stood in need of it, not only to maintain her
resolution to be no further engaged, but to keep her from seeing Monsieur de
Nemours: she resolved to take a long Journey to pass away the time she was
obliged in decency to live retired: the large Possessions in Lands she had
toward the Pyrenees, she thought the most proper place she could pick out. She
set out a few days before the Court returned, and writ at parting to the
Vidame, to conjure him not to think of once enquiring after her, nor writing to
her.

Monsieur de Nemours was more troubled at this Journey, than another would have
been at the death of his Mistress: the thought of being deprived a long time of
the sight of Madam de Cleve grieved him extremely, and the more in that it
happened when he had lately enjoyed the pleasure of seeing her, and seeing her
affected with his passion; his affliction increased daily. Madam de Cleve was
no sooner arrived at her house near the Pyrenees, but she fell desperately ill.
The news was brought to Court: Monsieur de Nemours was inconsolable, his grief
proceeded to despair and extravagance: The Vidame had much ado to make him
forbear showing his passion in public, and was scarce able to keep him from
going in Person to enquire how she did. The kindness and near Relation between
her and the Vidame, was a very good pretense to send several Courriers to her.
At last they brought certain news she was out of that extremity of danger she
had been in, but had still a languishing malady that took away the hopes of
life.

This gave her a sight of Death, both near and at distance, and represented to
her the things of this World quite otherwise than they appear to those in
health. The necessity of dying she saw her self so near to, weaned her from the
World; and her malady was so lingering, it accustomed her to it, and made it
habitual; yet when she was a little recovered, she found Monsieur de Nemours
was not quite defaced out of her heart; but to defend her self against him, she
called to her aid all the Reasons she thought she had against marrying again.
After long conflict, she subdued the relics of that passion, which had been
weakened by the Sentiments she had in her sickness; the thoughts of death having
reproached her with the memory of Monsieur de Cleve, and being agreeable to her
duty, made deep impression in her heart. She saw clearly the vanity of the
passions and Engagements of the World, her weakness of Body contributed much to
her Constancy; yet being sensible what power opportunity has over the sagest
resolutions, she was unwilling to hazard the breach of those she had taken, by
returning into any place where she might see him she loved. Under pretense of
changing the Air she retired into a Religious House, without declaring a settled
resolution of quitting the Court.

At the first news of it, Monsieur de Nemours felt the weight of her retreat,
and saw the importance of it. He believed presently his hopes were at end, but
omitted not any thing that might obliege her to return to Court: He prevailed
with the Queen to write; he made the Vidame not only write but go to her, but
all to no purpose: the Vidame saw her, but she told him she had settled her
resolution. Yet he was of opinion she would not return to Court. At last
Monsieur de Nemours went himself to her, under pretense of going to the Waters;
she was extremely surpised and troubled at the news of his coming, she sent
him word by a person of merit, whom she loved, that she desired him not to take
it ill if she did not expose her self to the danger of seeing him, and
destroying by his presence those sentiments she was in duty obliged to
preserve: that she desired he should know she found it both against her duty
and repose, to yield to the inclination she had to be his, and that therefore
all things else in the world were become so indifferent to her, she had
renounced them for ever, and taken her leave of the world; that her thoughts
were wholly employed about the things of another life; but as to this, she
desired nothing else, but to see him so disposed as she was.

Monsieur de Nemours was like to have died in the presence of her who brought
him the news: Madam de Cleves had not only absolutely forbidden her to carry
any message from him, but to give her account of their discourse upon her
delivering him the message from Madam de Cleve: thus was Monsieur de Nemours
forced to part oppressed with the heaviest grief a man is capable of, who has
lost all hopes of ever seeing again a person he loved, not only with the most
violent, but the most natural and best grounded passion that ever was. Yet he
was not so discouraged, but he used all means imaginable to induce her to alter
her design: At last after several years, time and absence abated his grief and
extinguished his flame: Madam de Cleve lived a life that took away all
appearance she would ever return to Court: One part of the year she spent in
the Religious House, and the other part at her own, but retired, and employed
constantly in Exercises more holy than the severest Covents can pretend to: Her
life, though short, having left us a multitude of examples of inimitable
Virtues.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes.
Folio.
LOrd Bacon's Natural History in Ten Centuries: Whereunto is newly added, The
History Natural and Experimental of Life and Death, or of the Prolongation of
Life.

The History of Lapland, wherein is showed the Original, Manners, Habits,
Marriages, Conjurations of that People.

The Triumphs of Cods Revenge against the crying and execrable Sin of wilsul
and premeditated Murder; expressed in Thirty seven Tragical Histories, digested
into Six Books, which contain great variety of mournful and memorable
Accidents, Moral, Amorous, and Divine. The whole Work now complete. By I.
Reynolds.

Nostradamus his Prophesies.

Fodinae Raegalis: or, The History of the Laws and Places of the chief Mines
and Mineral Works in England, wales, and the English Pale in Ireland; as also
of the Mint, and Money: With a Clavis, explaining some difficult Words relating
to Mines.

Quarto.
Burnt Child dreads the Fire: or, An Examination of the Merits of the Papists
relating to England, mostly from their own Pens; in justification of the late
Act of Parlimament for preventing Dangers that may happen by Popish Recusants:
and further showing, That whatsoever their Merits have been, no thanks to their
Religion; and therefore ought not to be gratified in Religion, by Toleration
thereof, unless we intend to inslave our selves and our Posterity.

Romish Doctrines not from the Beginning: or, A Reply to what S. C. or Serenus
Cressy, has objected against Dr. Pierce's Sermon, in vindication of our Church
against the Novelties of Rome. By Dr. whitby.

Falsehood unmasked: or, An answer to Truth unvailed.

An earnest Request to Mr. I. Standish.

Plays in Quarto.
Tartuss: or, The French Puritan. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants. Written in French by the famed Wit of France Monsieur
Moliuer, and made English by Mr. M. Medburne.

Plays written by Madam Bean.
The Forced Marriage: or, The Jealous Bridegroom. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes
Theater.

Abdelazzar: or, The Moor's Revenge. A Tragedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Town Fop: or, Sir Timothy Tawdry. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.

Plays written by Mr. James Howard.
All mistaken: or, The Mad Couple. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants.

The English Monsieur. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants.

Plays written by Mr. Crown.
Calisto: or, The Chaste Nymph. A Masque acted at Court, by the Lady Mary, the
Lady Anne, and many other Persons of the greatest Quality in England.

The Country-Wit. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespatian, in two Parts, acted at the
Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants.

Plays written by Mr. Lee.
The Tragedy of Nero. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants.

Sophonisba: or Hannibal overthrown. A Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants.

The Court of Augustus Caesar, or Gloriana. A Tragedy, acted at the Theater
Royal.

The Rival Queens: or, The Death of Alexander the Great. A Tragedy, acted at
the Theater Royal.

The Plain-Dealer. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants. Written by Mr. Witherly.

The Mistaken Husband. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants. Part of it written by John Dryden Esquire.

Madam Fickle: or, The Witty False one. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.
Written by Mr. Durfey.

The Fond Husband: or, The plotting Sisters. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes
Theater. Written by Mr. Durfey.

Mithridates King of Pontus. A Tragedy.

The Fool turned Critique. A Comedy.

Sertorius. A Tragedy. By Mr. Bancroft.

In Octavo.
Plato's Apology of Socrates.

A Discourse of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome.

The Natural History of the Passions.

Covent Garden Drollery: or a Collection of Poems, etc.

Lipsius of Constancy.

Books of Devotion in Twelves.
Moral Essays: in two Volumes. A Prospect of Humane Misery.

The Vanity of Honor, Wealth and Pleasure, etc.

Bishop Andrew's Devotions.

Dr. Cole's Devotions, or Daily Prayers.

Novels in Twelves.
Zelinda: A Romance. Translated from the famed Monsieur Scudery. By T. D.

The Happy Slave: Complete.

The Unfortunate Hero.

Count Brion: A pleasant Novel. Translated from the French, by a Person of
Quality.

The Obliging Mistress.

The Disorders of Love, in Four Histories; full of many pleasant and true
Adventures.

Heroine Musqueteer: Complete.

Memoires of Madam Colonna.

Almanzor and Almanzaida. A Novel.

The Double Cuckold. A pleasant Novel.

Some French Books.
L'Esprit du Christianisme; ou, Sermon per Dr. Tillotson. Rare-En-tout: A
Comedy. La Bibles. La Psaumes. La Practice de Virtue Chrestien. Galand
Escroke. L' Heureux Esclave; in 3 Parts. Princess Momferrat. Duble Cocu.
Triomph de l' Amor. Le Cercle, ou Conversation. Le Delicios de la France: in 2
Vol. Treat Jelousie.
FINIS.

