view of Valley of Tempe The Valley of Tempe


LONDON Printed for Nath: Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultry 1684.

THE FAMOUS ROMANCE OF Tarsis and Zelie.

Digested into TEN BOOKS.

Written Originally in FRENCH, By the Acute Pen of a Person of HONOR.

Done into ENGLISH By CHARLES WILLIAMS, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultry, 1685.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE, Earl of BERKELEY, Viscount Duresly, Lord
Berkeley, Mowbray, Seagrave, and Bruce, Baron of Berkeley-Castle, Governor of
the Levant Company, etc.
MY LORD,
SInce it is become modish to make Dedications of Books to Persons of Honor and
high Quality, amongst whom your Lordship is worthily ranked one of the greatest
in Eminency, I humbly make bold to Present this to your Patronage, being the
Fruit of some spare Hours of Recreation, spent barely in the Translation out of
the Original from which I have not Deviated; I hope to obtain your Lordships
acceptance, which I shall look on as a Signal Addition to your obliging Favors
to my self, and several of my Worthy Friends both at home and abroad: My Design
being chiefly to testify my Gratitude to your Honor, until I am capable to
make some more effectual Demonstration of Real Services, who am,

Right Honorable, Your Lordships most Humble Servant C W.
London, the 12th. of November, 1684.
TO THE READER
TElamon and Tarsis, two Sons of Alcidias, one of the chiefest of the
Inhabitants of the Valley of Tempe, wherein he had large Revenues, called there
a Shepherd, as were the Prime Nobility of that Region, having sent them to be
Trained up in their Youth in Greece, in the Schools of the most Learned
Philosophers, amongst whom, having gained great Repute by their Proficiency in
Learning, they betook themselves to Foreign Travels, and then to Military
Employments, when they changed their Names to Kion and Leonides, and under
those Appellations signalized themselves in Martial Exploits, and Feats of
Arms, Fighting under the Banners of the Greatest Princes, then waging War
against their Enemies, whom having Conquered, they retired into their own
Country wherein they were Vanquished themselves by two Fair Ladies, Sisters,
with whom they fell in Love, who called themselves Shepherdesses, Daughters of
Leucippe, and the Grave Matron his Wife called Melicerte. Telamon obtaining his
end, Espousing the Eldest Daughter, who was Marvellously Virtuous, Tarsis
endeavoring the same with the Youngest, though with much more difficulty would
have succeeded in his Design, had not unkind Fortune frustrated it, and deprived
him of his Fair and Beloved Zelie, whose Favor and Affection he had gained
with the Approbation of her Parents, whose Filial Obedience and Modesty was as
Wonderful, as her End was supposed Tragical.

These Brothers who Reciprocally Embarked themselves, in the Success and
Calamities of each other, acted a large part, and became the Subject of a
considerable share in the ensuing Discourse, calling themselves Shepherds, were
serviceable to many, once Potent Princes, who by Vicissitudes and Change of
Fortunes, were agitated and tossed, betook themselves to these Brothers for
Shelter, Succor, Advice, and Assistance, and obtained it.

The Variety of the Passages and Actions both by Land and Sea, Discoursed of in
this Treatise, are far too Numerous to be inserted in a Preface, and are as
well pleasant as profitable. What Faults may have Occurred from my Pen or the
Press, the Reader is desired to Correct, and put a favorable Interpretation
upon.

The Author to ZELIE.
I Know not, my Shepherdess, whether you will not accuse me of Infidelity; and
whether it be not Treachery to your Chastity to oblige you to appear in
Public, in a condition where I promised you should only appear amongst your
best Friends. They would not have seen you thus slighted, if you had believed
you had been exposed to the Eyes of Strangers, you would have taken some care
to appear Adorned, or you would have desired me, not to have obliged you to
come out of Tempe, and to have left you in that delightful Desert, there to
Enjoy the Society of your Faithful Shepherd, in the Delight of a Rustic Life,
and in the Delicacies of your perfect Friendship. Will you not even tell me,
that I have Conducted you into a Kingdom, where time out of Mind, the
Shepherdesses were not accustomed to mingle themselves, or to have conversed
with the rest of the World? and if any have appeared there otherwise with a
Glimps, it was that they were come in an Age, where Beauties were very Rare,
and where Princesses and Ladies did no wrong to those of Shepherdesses? In Sum,
with what Splendour can you hope to appear in this Day, in Presence of Cassandra
Cleopatra, and which is more, in those of Mandane, and Clelie; Truly, my
Shepherdess, it appears, that you have had great reason to be a Party in these
Complaints against me: And perhaps I am the less excusable, that if I have in
that done you such an Injury, they may alledg that I have done yet a greater to
my self. For if in short, you should have left that Reputation of being Fair,
which you have so Auspiciously Acquired amongst our Shepherds, at leastwise
they could not deny you those excellent qualifications of Modesty and Virtue:
as for me, whatever Virtue, what Modesty, and what even Beauty you could have
been Garnished withal, I foresaw they would not have left me blameless, to have
fastened my self too much to a Shepherdess, and abandoned the most serious
Employments, for an Occupation which they deemed no otherwise Pardonable, than
have they of the Idleness of those who have no others. But notwithstanding all
that, I cannot Repent of my Resolution; and after all, my Shepherdess, I
suppose you ought not to complain your self, if you should lose the Reputation
of being Fair, you would have lost but that which you have always despised: As
for me, what Imports it to be condemned, since I desire not to be known? it is
not that I am incapable to answer those who blame the Tie that I have had for
you, which has never diverted me, even one small Moment from those Occupations
which they call the most Solid, and which have gratefully diverted me without
any perplexity. But I have kept my self, my Dear Zelie, from any other
thoughts, than those of Loving you, that otherwise were a Crime, that had need
of some Justification; But contrarily, that of our Affection which I will make
my chiefest Honor, as it has hitherto done that of my Joy; And that is to
Immortalize if I could the Remembrance I have for you, and to Proclaim it
throughout the World. I would tell you that it is true, that I take Pleasure to
trace to Posterity, even by the same Means, a Draft or Lineament of the same
Spirit, and of the Qualities of our Incomparable Ergaste, to leave after his
Decease, an Eternal Monument of that Excellent Friendship which united us
during his Life, which serves me as a Ligament, which joins with your Hazards,
and which declares, and speaks forth those of his, and to Publish that
Admirable Talent which Rendered him so Dear to his Friends, and that Divine
Science of Friendship, which he so perfectly possessed: But, my Shepherdess, it
would be out of Season to renew your Tears, by the severe Remembrance, of the
loss which we have sustained; what Grace or Comeliness you had in Tears: the
Regret and Grief is Importunately Public, and its Beauty ought to be
accompanied with Joy and Mirth, as one of the most excellent Ornaments of its
Triumph.

Tarsis and Zelie. The First Book.
THE Sun had disappeared within the famous Valley of Tempe, and the incredible
height of those Mountains, within which it is encompassed, had already
withdrawn into the last Beams of that Planet, when the most Amorous, and the
most Unfortunate of Shepherds which inhabited that Country, sweating and raving
on the brink of the River Pennee which divides it, was recovered from his fond
Imagination, immediately he turned his Eyes from that side, and there appeared
a Boat, wherein he observed one or two Persons; he could neither discern their
Visage, nor yet their Attire, for within that Obscurity they resembled nor
appeared other than Shadows. Nevertheless the Boat still approaching he heard
one of those Persons thus speak:

I bewail thee, my dear Tarsis, and thou shall be surprised, when they shall
bring thee this news; but in sum, neither the one nor the other of Us can be
more unhappy than we are, and it were far better we were lost all at once, than
to have the displeasure to find our selves lost every Moment, as we have done
for so many years.

The Shepherd was too often haunted with that Voice, and had the Idea of the
Person who so spoke, too frequently imprinted in his heart, to be a long time
remembered.

He doubted not, but that she was his Shepherdess, and although he understood
not the meaning of her Words, yet the Loss wherewith she always seemed to
threaten him, did so alarm him with perplexity and impatience, that he could
not have leisure of attending the Period of this deplorable Ridle. Zelie quoth
she; quite the contrary fair Zelie; what say you? with whom are you? or where
go you? He had no sooner spoken, but instead of answering her, what she
attended, he saw the Boat, which before approached toward him, and which yet
was not far off, change its course, and return to the Place, whence it came.

This silence and change of Course, amazed him more yet than all the rest;
however, as People commonly flatter themselves in their Misfortune, he
presently persuaded himself that his Shepherdess had not known his Voice, and
that only having understood of some body, not discerning who it was, she would
remove further off, to avoid discovery; Therefore all resolute, quoth she, fair
Zelie, know you not the Voice of your Shepherd? these Words producing no other
effect than the formers, he at once fell into a hundred times more perplexing
Imaginations: but his principal persuasion was, that she had bin hurried away,
even his fair Zelie; And in this belief, he acted something worthy the excess
of his Love. Hold, quoth he, hold you, who are so cruel as to depriv^ me of my
chiefest Wealth: And at the self same time without any other reflection, he
cast himself into the River to swim after the Boat, Clothes and all, with a
Dart in his hand; for the Shepherds of that Country carry one instead of a
Crook, having retained that Custom from their Original War. He presently
overtook the small Vessel although she was at that distance from him, and
though the Shepherd swam excellently well, he who steered the Boat ceased
rowing. Immediately after this Lover had precipitated himself into the River,
so that not being wafted otherwise than by the Stream, it was not difficult to
to overtake her; As soon as the Shepherd approached, he there fixed one hand,
and with the other stretching forth the Dart to a Man who discovered him, Hold
thou perfidious one, quoth he, and at that Instant touched him with the end of
the Dart, to advertise him that to him he addressed; The Man who before
stooped, and upon knee in that Boat, presently raised himself up, and turning
to him with an Oar in hand, Thou fool hardy, quoth he, withdraw, and beware
that thou oblige and prov^ke me not to take the advantage in the state wherein
I have met thee: Render me then Zelie, replied the Shepherd, out of thy
Generosity. Thou have certainly lost thy Reason, quoth the Person unknown. Who
is this Zelie, see thou not that I am alone in my Boat?

The Shepherd who still held fast with one hand, in effect began to observe,
that the same Man appeared only alone, and was astonished to find himself thus
surprised. He looked on all sides as much as the darkness would permit him, to
see whether he could not discover some other Boat, and seeing none, he was
constrained to land to take Breath, and there to clear his doubts.

But he did no other than increase them, for first as he went to a little House
which was near the brink of the River, to have light and aid, he was met by an
old Man, who in this obscurity took him for another: Is it you Alpide? quoth
he, Whence is it that you come all alone? The Shepherd who had remembered Alpide
to be near allied to Zelie, although had never seen him, believed that this
rencounter might in some measure disintricate the other or himself. Wherefore
going in, asked of the Man, and very diligently enquired or what cause, at such
an hour he waited for Alpide, who dwelt so far off the otherside of the River,
but he could have no other satisfaction, only that Alpide had promised to give
him a visit, so that being only a little dried, he departed, much more
dissatisfyed and perplexed than before.

It seemed, that Fortune took pleasure in sporting with the disquietude of this
poor Shepherd. As he went toward the Door to set out, an ill rub by hap hazard
being before his Feet, constrained him to avo^d falling, to lean against a door
which opened to a Chamber on the same side wherein he was; This Door being ill
shut and opening in the middle gave way, there appeared to him from the light
of a small fire, a young Maid, who had in her hands the Habit of a Man, whom
she measured as if she would have clothed him.

The Light was not clear enough to discern his Visage, and he could not be
assured whether he were a Lodger or a Stranger. Therefore he seemed not to take
notice of him. But being in a condition which rendered him suspect, and that
Suspicion being yet increased by the Surprise, which she testified when the
Door flew open, he designed to forbear going out of the House, and discover
what might pass from abroad till the day appeared.

He needed not so to attend long, he scarce had thought of going out of the
door through which he should have gone, but was attacqued by three Men, which
sprang in with Swords in hand, even into the House, requiring the surrender of
a Maid there concealed. Never was the like Surprise to that of the Shepherd. He
doubted not but the Maid which they sought was Zelie, but knew not whether they
thought to succor, or to take her thence, nor whether he should take them for
Friends or Foes.

He entered with them then for further discovery, and although he could not
without difficulty contain himself, he determined for the future to study how
to comport himself in this Encounter.

Mean time these Men looking evere where, of all sides, and finding none in the
first Chamber, they passed into the second where the Shepherd had seen the
Maid, but there could find none, she whom they sought being escaped through a
false or trap Door, where she had heard them. They discovered her however, by
favor of the Moon which began to rise, all three pursuing her flight with
extreme diligence.

The Shepherd followed with the like incredible speed, and all overtook this
fugitive at her entrance into a Forest. Two of these unknown seized her.

The third turning toward the Shepherd rudely demanded, What he would have of
them, and the reason of his presumption so to follow them; The Shepherd was so
impatient to know, whether this Maid were not Zelie, and so attentive to the
sound of her cries, and the Words she spoke to those who so seized her, that he
appeared only as if they had addressed to him.

He persisted still in following them, when he who spoke to him with his Sword
atilt menaced therewith to pierce him, if he immediately retired not.

The Shepherd by these Words thus advertized, and by the glittering of the
Sword thus brandisht before his eyes, retired one pace, and stretching out the
point of his Dart to this unknown, I will (answering furiously) know, who this
Maid is, whom you thus carry away, if she be not one whom I seek, and what ever
she should be, what right have you to offer this violence unto her? It
concerns not thee truly (replied the other) to propose us these questions,
but should rather ask pardon for thy Insolence; and at the same instant
lifted up his Sword, therewith to smite him.

The Shepherd perceiving this without loss of time, but gliding himself
directly beneath, when he spied his Enemy lifting up his Arm, serving himself
with his Dart instead of a Sword, so forced it into his side, that the one half
was left there broken off, and with this first blow cast him stark dead upon
the earth.

The cries that this Man uttered in falling, made the two others believe that
they were pursued; one came up to succor his Comrade: But the Shepherd, rather
feared that if he joined this second, the third would bear away wherewith he
was seized; so that shunning him amongst the Trees, under favor of the Shrubs
and Boughs, made up his way to the third, and presented himself unawares before
his face. This then believed, that both himself and Comrade were attack't
before and behind, and seeing his Adversary so near him, quitted his prize for
self-defence, and instantly with his Sword in hand set upon the Shepherd. This
Shepherd though unarmed, was no whit moved, his stout Heart more worthy the
name of an Hero than of a Shepherd, no otherwise then animating himself by this
hazard, fended off the blow with the Troncheon or Staff of the Dart that
remained in his hand, desperately joining the Soldier, cast him down, throtled
him with one hand, and breaking his Sword with the other, and with its point
pierced his heart with that which remained in the other hand. In another
Encounter this brave Shepherd contented himself to have felled him down, and
disarmed him; but he had bin here imprudent if under the necessity which he
saw, to bear up under the assault of a third, he had left this in a condition
to raise himself. He advanced also immediately to make up with him, all
together amazed that he had given him that leisure. But when he thought to have
encounterd him, was much surprised, that instead of a Man, he saw only a Maid
coming toward him with a Sword in each hand. Is this one of my violent
Comrades? cried she, as soon as she saw him amongst the Trees, how should I be
so happy thus to meet my brave Redeemer? By these Words he knew that she was
the self same Person whom he had rescued; and indeed it was even the very same.

As soon as she found her self at Liberty, instead of the flight which probably
she might have attempted, she went and took the Sword of the first whom the
Shepherd slew, and with the same, like the heart of a true Amazon, made up to
him whom the Shepherd shunned, she attack't him so courageously, that having
dangerously wounded him in the Arm and Side, which caused his Sword to fall,
she constrained him to flight. She would not loose time to pursue him, but
contenting her self to take up the Sword (for the Trees were not so thick in
that place, that by the Light of the Moon she could not discern him upon the
Earth,) she came to succor her Preserver, as we have said.

It would be hard to express in what amazement the Shepherd was in at this
sight, and a thousand times more difficult to express the anguish in which he
was, when the sound of that Voice had confirmed him, that the Person whom he
had rescued was not Zelie. However he concealed his displeasure, and only
testified his admiration.

Thou valiantly unknown, Replied he, I observe you are in a condition, where
there is not any appearance, that any should have the vanity to say, That any
other should be that of your Deliverer, than only your self It Is clear you have
disarmed your Enemies, since you have their Spoils in your own hands, and all
the honor that I can here pretend, is only to give occasion to yours, and to
have in some small sort seconded your worth.

These Words also instructed the Person to whom they were addressed, to doubt
wherein she had accosted him; and as she knew, that from him she had received
Succor: Ah bravely unknown (replied she) whoever you are, or may be, I must
avow that to you I owe my Liberty and Life, and although the deplorable
Condition of my destiny has nothing but what should render death it self
desirable, I shall nevertheless beseech you instantly to declare the Name of my
Preserver, nor to entreat you only that I may know, to whom my acknowledgments
are due. Mean time, added she (after they both were gone a little further from
the place of Combat to choose out one, wherein to speak with more security) I
apprehend you came from performing an Action not only the bravest, but the most
just which could give satisfaction to a good Soul, and who would one day render
you nothing less than a Kingdom, if it were possible, to point out the
acknowledgments of those Favors you have conferred upon me.

The Shepherd judging by this Discourse, as well as by the Actions of this
unknown Person, that she was without doubt some extraordinary one, and of
eminent Quality, replied with wonderful respect and modesty. Madam, the name of
a simple Shepherd as I am, is no way worthy your Curiosity, and the very small
service I have done you, is over-paid by the honor I have had in being employed
for you. Of a Shepherd, quoth she, you surprise me in saying that Shepherds
have that capacity, courage and civility which appears in you; and if it be so
(which I can hardly believe) the Shepherds of this Country do equal those of
the most honorable, and the most generous, that are to be found in the Courts
of the greatest Princes.

Madam (replied the Shepherd,) you would be very injurious to the Shepherds of
this Country, if you doubted, that there were not here, those who in all
respects, were much more worthy than my self. He stopped there, because he
sought no other occasion, than to finish this Discourse, and to remove, where
he was importuned by perplexity and by his Love. Only he would willingly have
known, in few Words, who this unknown was, to find out whether his Fortune had
not disintricated him, in something with that of Zelie, when she answered him;
I believe all the advantages, that may be produced in a Country whence you
sprung: But you shall never persuade me, but that you are more than a Shepherd,
and you handle the Dart too well then to make me believe, that you were born to
no other than that of a Crook. However it be, refuse me not the satisfaction,
and delay not to tell me who you are.

The Shepherd was not naturally willing to speak of himself, but besides this
natural repugnancy, he was so taken up by his perplexity and grief, that all
other thoughts were as to him infernal. Notwithstanding he was too civil, with
an ill grace to repulse that obliging Curiosity of a Person, who appeared a
Lady of quality, and yet he was altogether as incapable to tell his Name, but
that in hopes thereof he might engage her to declare her own.

That which he then did was solely to abridge the Discourse, and without
entrance into the particularities of her Life, to tell him singly her Name, and
to explicate also that of her Quality.

Madam, says he, since its your command, I will declare unto you, that I am
named Tarsis, and to assure you, that which is most considerable in my Person,
its in telling you, that I am one of the Shepherds of this Valley, I will add
that our Original is French; and that there are Olimpiades, that our Fathers
being sprung from the Gauls, ( as have done for some two or three years, other
Gauls, under the Conduct of the renowned Brennus) and having bin very
serviceable to the Lacedaemonians and also to the Thebans in the Peleponnesian
War, the Greeks asign'd them, by the treaty of Peace, an habitation at the foot
of these Mountains, with the Territories of some Cities that surround them, so
that by this means they were rendered Possessors of this pleasant Valley. Now in
the Division which these Gauls made, The Knights elected this here for their
Habitations and Places of abode. And whereas in other Colonies, the Captains
dispose themselves within the Cities, and give the circumjacent Land to the
meaner and more inferior Soldiers for tillage and to be cultivated: These here
in conformity to the Course and Custom of their Nation, do no more shut up
themselves within the Cities, than do the meanest Soldiers, and choose out for
themselves the Villages and Hamlets of this delightful Valley; As it abounds in
Medows, and has its principal Revenue consisting no otherwise than in breeding
up of Cattle, upon which consideration by succession of time, the Nobility
which seemed to be born only for War, bent themselves soly to Pastures, so that
they changed even the name of Knights to those of Shepherds, so that quite
contrary to what in Ages past happened at Rome, where the simple Shepherds turned
themselves to be great Captains, it appears here that Eminent Captains take
complacency in being Simple Shepherds.

Brave Shepherd, replied the unknown, there needs no further discovery, than
what you have already made of your self, nor to persuade my self better of you
than you have said, or of your worth. But since you have taught me who you are,
it is but just you should know also who I am; and besides, it may not (perhaps)
be out of season, not to return so soon to the House whence we came, I find my
self so much indebted to your Worth, and the Spirit of your Wisdom and
Discretion has so anticipated me, that I shall not dissemble, but confide in
you the Secrets unknown to all the World besides. The condition also wherein
you see me, will perhaps, reduce me to have further need of you, and this
acquaintance will facilitate, the occasion, to continue me in your generous
offices.

On these Words having turned about to see whether any person followed them,
she took him by the hand, and advanced further into the Wood, even into a Place
more obscure and out of the way, where they might remain undiscovered. Tarsis
in going marvelled at the Confidence which appeared in a Virgin so young, that
would engage alone with a Man unknown, in the midst of a Wood, and in the
Dark; and although the state of her present Fortune gave no place to his
present curiosity, yet he impatiently attended the issue of this chance;
because he knew not, as we have said, whether he should there find some
manifestation of hers: When this unknown young Person discovered the amazement
wherein he was, having obliged him to sit by her in the thickest of the
Forest, she spoke unto him in these Terms.

History of Damalecinte.
IS it not true, Tarsis, that you find me a little too bold for a Maid, and
that these Passages must render me ill in your Opinion? But be it known unto
you also, such a one as you conceive, and that this Attire derogates from my
Sex, and covers the body of a most unfortunate Prince, by so tragical an
occasion and necessity, and by the most amazing Encounter, that has happened
within the memory of these Ages.

Tarsis extremely astonished at this Discourse, replied My, Lord, that which
you now discover me, is in effect very surprising; But permit me therefore to
tell you, that I am less astonished, at a young Prince under the Attire of a
young Virgin, than I was before, to see a Virgin as courageous as an Hero. And
as he thus spoke, (out of respect) he would have risen up from the place
whereon they sat, to put himself in a posture, which he thought, due to a
Prince, but the Prince holding him by the hand, and in civil treatment,
continued his discourse, thus;

Have you known nothing of the Disasters, of the unfortunate Nicholas King of
Chipre, the deplorable history of his House is too much proclaimed through all
the World, to be unknown at Tempe. You d^ubtless know, how this poor Prince
seeing all his Kingdom rendered desolate, by Argee King of Crete, his capital
City and Metropolis taken, his two Sons and Brother Prisoners, and then slain
by the Enemy, his Palace invested, and himself in peril, yet living to fall
with all his House into the hands of his barbarous Conqueror; he took this
desperate, or rather this noble and heroic resolution, to pile up within a
Chamber all his most precious Movables, and therein to shut up himself with
his Sisters and Daughters, and then to set fire and burn all together, that
nothing should remain after his death, wherewith his Enemy might triumph

Tarsis having testified him, the knowledge that the Renowned had published far
and near, of this amazing Catastrophe, although with very little diversity; Now
behold, the Prince continued, that which before without doubt you were ignorant
of.

The Queen Axiothee Wife to this unfortunate King then was great with Child,
having gone seven or eight Months: That moved him to compassion, he would
willingly have caused to perish his living Children, yet could not resolve to
destroy one who never had lived, and believed it was not in his power to
dispose of a Life that the Gods had not yet given. It Is very true, that this
Design was founded upon politic reason. He had then no other than Daughters,
all very beautiful and of competent state for Marriage; Their Sex, Beauty
together with their Age, had exposed them to the mercy of a brutish and
insolent Conqueror, which he could not brook: but doubting of the Sex of the
Infant, whereof the Queen was big, he still retained some kind of hope of a
Son, which should revenge his Quarrel; wherefore in conclusion, he persuaded
the Queen to take care of her self, at least until she should see whether an
Infant Male should be born, giving her liberty to use her pleasure, if she
should be delivered of a Female.

After a thousand adieus, or farewels, he caused her to imbark by Night upon a
small Boat, out of a trap-door, which from the Castle opened into the Sea; and
seeing her part, half dead with sorrow, musing in the mean time of making a
furious and bloody Assault upon his Enemies, and afterward proceeded to
execute his tragical Resolution, which reduced the rest of his Royal Family
into Ashes.

The Boat was no sooner gone, but that it fell into the hands of the King of
Crete, who was highly pleased that he should revenge upon the Queen, his
resentment and rage, for the escape of those delicate and precious Spoils,
whereof he was insatiably anaricieux, without a politic consideration, which
he yet retained. He had a Son aged nine years, and considered that if Axiothee
should lie down with a Female, that might occasion the settlement of the Crown
of Chipre on his House, by marriage of his Son to the lawful Heiress of the
Kingdom; he appointed Guards to the Captive Queen, and set her to lie down in
Crete. Gave order, that if a Male were born he should instantly be slain, and
if a Female, she should be preserved. And for better security, appointed that
upon the birth, the Infant should be brought, being willing to confide in no
other testimony then his own Eyes. But what precaution soever is contrived by
Man, can in no wise Impede the Decrees of heaven? A Woman which of a long time
had waited upon the Queen Axiothee, and who they permitted always to be with
her, was also big, even about the same time, who also was delivered with her.

The Queen brought into the World a Boy, the Woman a Maiden, so that there
being in the Chamber, no other then the Persons appointed, they made an
exchange, they brought the Maiden to the Guards that attended at the Gate of
the Pallace-Royal, and these Guards having showed her even to the King himself,
confirmed him in the Opinion, that Queen Axiothee had bin delivered of a
Princess. My life therefore was thus preserved by this innocent Stratagem. For
it is I my self, Oh Tarsis! that was this unfortunate Infant, who durst not be
born but in secret, and to whom Death seemed to be so much the more inevitable,
that as a Boy I was condemned to die by our Enemy, I was there, for so I may
say, abandoned by my Father.

The greatest difficulty was by means of the Nurses, for it is hard to conceal
an important Secret, when it passes through so many hands. For prevention
whereof the Queen my Mother desired the Kings permission, that she might nurse
me her self, which he in no wise opposing, so much overjoyed was he, in
believing that she brought up a Princess for his Son; so the Daughter which had
lent me her name, was surrendered to her Mother. I was also replaced into the
hands of mine, and all by the care, and through the Fidelity of a Governess,
whom she gave me, I was brought up by her as her daughter.

The Queen discovered me this important Secret, ever since I was capable to
apprehend, and conceal it, and to engage me the more thereunto, she manifested
the peril to which it was annexed. And although I was not yet capable of so
great Reason (being but nine years of age) I was not wholly destitute of an
applicatory reply. Thus, what will it import me to be a Boy, if I am brought up
and educated as a Maiden? And what relief can you expect from my effeminate Sex
by the Education bestowed upon me? That you send me not to some King of our
Allies, there to learn such Exercises answerable to my Birth, that I may at
least manage a Sword, wherewith I may one day revenge the quarrel of my Father.
My Son, replied she, I am ravished to see you capable of these Sentiments, and
that under this Attire which you have, you retain a heart worthy of him who you
are. I have heard say, that Achilles having also bin brought up, as you, in his
Youth, under the habit of a Maiden, ceased not afterward to be the most
Valliant and the most Illustrious amongst the Greeks. And I take that which is
said of him, as a good presage also of you; I have no design also to neglect
that which you tell me, if I have not sent you hence until this present time,
it is by reason I have bin so narrowly guarded and watch't, that I believed I
could not attempt it with safety; but I avow you, that which I muse of at
present, that I conceive they do not so observe my actions, as they did the
first years of our Captivity.

The resolution being made, and my Mother having taken these measures for this
Design, she one Evening caused me to habit my self in attire conformable to my
Sex, and caused me to be conducted by a Governor in whom she confided, in a
Merchant Ship which should discharge at Rhodes. The morrow Morning as we were
ready to weigh Anchor, I heard a great noise at the Chamber door, from the Poop
where I was, and presently saw the Guards that would have seized me. I had a
Sword by my side, and I would not that it should be said, that I would be the
first that should at the first time unprofitably wear one. I therefore took it
in hand at Rovers, as if I held my self capable to resist so many Men, and
having testified that I would not permit my self to be taken alive, I wounded
the first Soldiers, which were hardy enough to approach me, afterward seeing
my self ready to be taken, I cast my self through a Window into the Sea, wholly
resolved there to perish, rather then to be retaken, and to fall into the hands
of our Enemy.

But all my precaution proved of no utility, some of the Guards had then seized
my Governor and others of the Captain of the Ship, I well divined that we had
bin betrayed: I knew immediately afterward, that the King having had notice of
my issuing forth, by the perfidy of a Domestic of my Mothers, had sent these
Guards to take me, and ordered the hanging of the Captain of the Ship, and my
Governor by the Yards arm.

As for me they brought me to the Palace Royal, where I only expected Death;
for the means farther to disguise my Sex, which I had betrayed my self by my
Attire and my Courage; in this imagination I supposed all lost; for the King
when I was before him, coming to reproach my disguise, I who believed he would
have spoken of him whom they had made to pass for a Maiden, I was ready to avow
all; and notwithstanding (admire the effect of the prevention) it appeared he
would have spoken of the habit, that I had taken to save my self, and that as
this Domestic had discovered my departure, knew nothing of the rest of our
Secret, the King believed that they had not counterfeited me, in a Boy,
otherwise than to favor my flight after a multitude of Menaces, he in
conclusion caused me to be vested in my first Attire.

That being done, he sent us my Mother and my self into Prison, where we were
straightly shut up, and I can say it, treated as Captives, even to the hardest
durance. But the Prince of Crete having attained the Age of twenty two years,
and my self coming out of my sixteenth year, the King his father believed,
deeming it high time to celebrate our Marriage, he came to see the Queen my
Mother, even in the very Prison, to discourse her. I leave you to judge with
what countenance she could hear this terrible Proposit^on, and what she could
think in an occasion so strange, where she saw her self constrained to marry a
Boy instead of a Girl. I saw constrained, for in the state wherein we were, the
King's Will was it not, as to us, absolute necessity? and was there any other
remedy, then exposing my self to death, to discover that which I was? She
therefore dissembled her grief, and feigning an apparent joy, she only demanded
time to sound me.

Never was the like surprise, as that of mine, when she brought me this piece
of news; I avow that I remained a little confused. For what resolution to take
in so fatal a Conjuncture? To accept the Marriage that seemed not impossible;
to refuse also a Marriage so apparently advantageous for me, and which seemed
the only means to recover our Liberty and Dignity altogether, that could not be
as I have said without giving the King cause of great suspicion.

In all cases it was to irritate him by this rejection, it would be the
prolonging of our Imprisonment, and by consequence plunge us in another
inevitable Peril, to discover my self by time and by age.

We could not therefore do any other, than condole my Mother and my self,
wholly ignorant by whom to determine.

In the interim the King pressed for her Answer, and he pressed her with so
much the more instancy, because those of Chypre were already revolted the
second time against him, and he saw no other than this only way to reduce them.
After we had procrastinated the Affair a whole Month, by continual fits and
turns, and always under different pretexts, after I had essayed a thousand
times new means to avoid my self, in conclusion there fell into my thoughts a
Project, which I discovered to the Queen, very near these terms.

Madam (said I) we afflict our selves, through an occasion which should rather
re^oyce us, and that the Gods had sent us (without doubt) to revenge the death
of my Father and Brothers. Our Tyrant will give me his Son for to espouse;
which is to say, unless he will deliver me another himfelf into ^ands, let us
use our advantagae, since he thereunto does force us. I accept of this fatal
bridal, since he constrains me: but since he deprives me of the means, further
to dissemble that which I am, let him know it, in the dispense of his own
proper blood. I will furnish my self with a Sword or a Dagger, and hide it
under the bolster of my Bed. It Is with that within which I will receive his Son
into my Arms, and it is so that I will revenge my Father, my Brothers, my
Sisters and our selves. Hah my Son (interrupted she all in tears) I will never
permit that you cast your self in so unavoidable a danger: that could not be
that which would revenge me, no otherwise then to loose you, since it is only to
preserve you, that I am reserved to so many evils.

To make short to you, I persuaded the Queen, because she saw no other means
nor day for our deliverance. She rendered the King an answer conformable to his
desire, who set us at apparent Liberty, however still in effect, held us in a
strait captivity, by the Guards that he set over us, under pretense of doing us
honor, and that which is yet more mavelous; the Prince of Crete gave me a
visit, even as to his Mistress.

I must avow to you, although I was well prepared for that sight, she put me in
much perplexity of mind, the habit of a Maiden began to rack me, after I had
known my Sex. I thereupon found my actions all in compulsion, and it seemed to
me, that by their observations, it would be impossible but that they should
divine who I was; but this was another torment, when I saw my self reduced to
personate not only a Maiden, but as they say a Lover in sight of an amorous
young Prince, and to counterfeit friendship and obsequiousness, for a man whose
birth was abominable and hateful unto me, however there was no means of
avoiding it. He saw me, he courted me amorously, and on my part, I sported so
well, or rather so unfortunately my Lot, that I appeared to this young Prince
not only to be a Maiden, but also for a fair one, so that he became
marvellously amorous of me.

So that not only the Father, but also the Son pressed even without measure,
this loathsome and vexatious Marriage. As for me, I used all the delays
possible, for whatever resolution I had taken, I had always some repugnancy, to
come to this extremity against a young Prince, which was not culpable as yet,
of the Cruelties of his Father. I was a thousand times tempted to poniard the
Father, with open force in the midst of his Guards, and should have done it
without hesitation, if my Mother had not by all the cautions imaginable,
impeded the execution of an enterprise, from the danger whereof she well saw it
was impossible I should escape, and see if I spared any thing to dispense me to
come to that cruel Remedy, to which our disgrace had reduced us, and if I
forget any thing of that which would prolong time, in managing some other
occasion to dravv us out of captivity.

I remember that one day the Prince of Crete, found me extraordinary
melancholy, and having entreated me to tell him the cause, I spoke to him in
these terms, according to the Instructions my Mother had given them. My Lord,
shall I freely avow you the subject of my heaviness? Yes, I believe you too
generous to abuse my Confidence, and I believe that when you know my
resentments, you will find no other then so much more worthy of the honor that
you do me. Know then, My Lord, that this long captivity wherein even to this
present, I have led my life, has not caused me to forget the Honor and Dignity
of my Birth, and in the midst of the very Prison, I have conserved a frank
heart, and incapable of delight for the violence and tyranny. In the interim,
my Lord, I dare tell you, that one is, that the King your Father exercises
toward me, when he presses me with so much impatience to espouse you. I know
you are a great Prince, and that you have all the Qualities worthy of your
Birth, and that there are those much more Happy and Fortunate then my self,
hold them honored in seeking or making after you; but the same honor that I
would accept joyfully in Liberty, becomes the subject of my Grief, when I
observe how they prevail upon the Condition wherein I am, to necessitate and
constrain me. Is this a Marriage to which they have destinated me? or is this a
new yoke which they impose upon my servitude? Is this a yoke that must be born,
be not astonished that a free and frank Soul submits not thereunto without
perplexity. But if it is a Marriage they offer me, let them give me time at
least to know, and to love the Spouse to which they design me, and that I might
imagine I had chosen him; for (in brief) my Lord, is it not in the Prison that
they propose this my Marriage? Had I ever almost the honor of your
acquaintance, and is not this the fourth or fifth time at most, that I have had
to discourse you? it is not that in these four or five times, as I have said
already, I have not acknowledged in you all the Qualifications, that may be
desired in an excellent Prince: But, my Lord, friendship has not its birth in
a moment, nor yet esteem, but principally and especially when they seem to make
it to be born by constraint and force. Let them permit me a little to sound and
consult my own heart, in a liberty totally entire; Let them give me leisure to
discern if I accept you through necessity or inclination, and that I may be
able to let you know, that I yield not to my misfortune, but to the sole
consideration of your worth.

This discourse touched the Prince, and instead of answering me, I saw that he
betook himself almost to weep, but the consequence made me observe, that it was
debility of Soul and of Displeasure, and that I seemed willing to withdraw his
joy, and not of tenderness and compassion. For although he promised me a little
afterward, that he would do what possible he could to prevail with his Father
to grant me time I craved, I knew he pressed him privately the accomplishing our
word, and that even he himself would remove all obstacles, upon condition that
we should think to oppose.

All things were then preparing for the solemnization of these happy Nuptials,
and I for my own part provided for that which to me was necessary for the
execution of my Project; howsoever because that tho the necessity to which they
reduced me, would sufficiently justify my Design, I could not therefore resolve
to kill a Man, which had bin without defense, I who esteemed my self a Man as
well as me Enemy, and in spite of the great inequality of our Birth, judged
not my self inferior to him in force and courage; I appointed that they should
bring me two Ponyards instead of one, determining that when the one and the
other of us should be retired into our Chamber, to shut the doors upon us, and
then give him one to choose, and tell him that I was a Man, and to oblige him by
this declaration, to decide amongst our selves, by ways of honor, the ancient
Quarrel of our Houses. This resolution and these preparatives being made, I
remitted the success to the Gods, and intended no other than to appear calm and
gay, as far as was necessary to avoid any suspicion.

Never was festival Day more magnificent, and she in no wise was concerned for
the bad Success that might attend her. The Evening they conducted me to my
Chamber, the Prince rendered himself there, and all the company went to retire;
when that we understood one of the Maidens which served me, to cry out Treason
and Murder, and that we saw her approach to us, a Poniard in one hand and the
other all bloody, they demanded what ayled her, and found that as I had thrust
my Ponyards, with so much precipitancy under the boulster of my bed, that the
bed was in disorder. This Maiden to whom my intention was unknown, went to set
it in order, and unfortunately meeting the point of the one, whereby she was
wounded, as we saw her, immediately behold all the Palace allarmed, the Prince
troubled, the King furious, all the suspected Domestics imprisoned; in fine,
by diligent inquiries made through the Fields, they discovered that a Slave of
the Queens had brought me these Ponyards the self same day. Then behold all the
suspicion fell upon the Queen and my self, they fixed us the same night in two
different Prisons, and examined us separately the next day. Besides that it had
bin difficult to me, to dissemble that which was, I held it unworthy in me to
deny a Design, which I deemed lawful. I avowed all, only the quality of my Sex,
which seemed nothing neither as to my Crime nor to my justification, on which
they interrogated me not. I contrived only how to save the Queen, and with very
much tranquillity and serenity prepared my self to dye. But how much soever my
endeavors were to justify her, to bring the burden upon my self, so much
essayed she to persuade them that she was solely culpable, who forcibly had
inspired me with the design. Briefly, in all she endeavored to save my Life to
the loss of her own. Our cares were reciprocally of no utility, they served
only to render us both convict, and not to perplex us by a piecemeal process,
we were both condemned to death. I confess unto you, Tarsis, that the small
virtue and resolution which I had vanished away, when I knew that Sentence was
pronounced against the Queen. I did not only reflect on that part which was
like to fall upon my own head, I abandoned my self totally out of the
tenderness I had to her, resenting only her own Misfortunes.

I had these regrets, when I heard the doors of my Prison opened, I believed
they came to lead me to Execution, and had some kind of joy, for my Life was a
burden to me, under the Pressures and Anguishes wherein I was surrounded. My
sole desire was, that I might embrace my Mother before my death, and desired it
of him who entered before he told me upon what account he came. But, good Gods,
what reply! Let Us pass I beseech you, O Tarsis, a place so mournful to my
remembrance, I had not yet the courage to speak of so tragical and so
lamentable an Encounter, he declared that he came from the Queens immediate
Execution, and that she dyed as valiantly as an Hero; and as form, the Prince
had out of passionate love so far prevailed for a commutation of the Sentence,
as that I should be transported into an Island in the Egean Sea; and believed
he had done me a singular favor; I cried out, O hopeless I, go, go tell him,
do I continue to address to him who has acted his part? I will court none of
his favors, and if any, it is that I may follow my mother. I would have added,
and prayed the Person that I might have liberty to speak one only word to the
King or Prince, having resolved to declare openly whatever I was, believing
that I had nothing to stand in fear for, than for my self alone. But
interrupting me, would not hear nor understand me, declared he was commanded to
constrain me to depart without delay, the Vessel ready, and that he came to
cause me to imbark, immediately he led me, or, rather to say, compelled me by
force, even to the Port. They by mere compulsion, in spite of all imaginable
resistance forced me to imbarke, and conducted me to the Isle of Naxos, one of
the Territories that belong to the King of Crete, and shut me up within the
Dungeon of an old Castle, who had no other prospect than the Sea and the Rocks.
I will not molest you with the relation of this ghastly captivity, nor with the
Endeavors, that I unprofitably used to procure my Liberty, or deprive me of
Life. I will tell you only, that the Prince of Crete had very lately some
important and private Affair to dispatch Personally at Pidne, and passed
through the Egean Sea, where the sight of the Isle, wherein I was, brought me
into his Mind: and whether his wrath was appeased, or whether he had some
Design which I knew not, it fell out that he landed here, and sent a Vessel to
take me in at Naxos, with Orders that I should be brought to a City, situated
in the entrance into that Valley of the Macedonian side, eighteen or twenty
furlongs from hence, and I seemed to understand it to be called Gonnes. We
arrived here yesterday, and in the Evening I took an occasion, which by chance
happened to me, to steal away unknown to the Guards, who supposed that a young
Maiden would not attempt flight, in an unknown Country so far distant from her
own.

I made up by chance to the house of an old Mariner, with whom you have found
me here, who agreed to bring me to the first Port, where I might conveniently
imbark for Chypre. I provided me Apparel to depart with the most security.

Then when I was surprised by these three Men, whom you have seen, which are of
the Guards, which conducted me to Gonnes, and who without trackt me, and
discovered the Place I retired to. But in fine you have delivered me, most
generous Tarsis, and out of my resentment of so signal a piece of service, I
have taken pleasure to tell you (at least) the name of him, whom you have so
obliged, the justice of the Cause you have supported, and the unfortunate
necessity, which serves to excuse me, neither can I at present, testify my
acknowledgments otherwise than in words; that which I have to desire of you at
present, that you would vouchsafe to instruct me a little, is, with the Card
of the Country, as well as in the State, and interests of the neighboring
Cities, that I may accordingly take measures for my Retreat; for all that I can
draw from this Mariner, does no otherwise inlighten me, than to perplex and
confound me, there being an impossibility to comprehend any thing from his
dictates.

Whilst the Prince thus spoke, Tarsis was strangely impatient, for he had as
we have seen a perplexity of Soul, which rendered him almost incapable of being
sensible of that and of another; wherefore he embarked not, thoroughly to
understand the historical relation of the Prince of Chypre, but in hopes as all
those ordinarily have, which are in trouble to learn on all hands, news of
those whom they are in quest of. So that since the consequence of the discourse
of Amalecinte, that the hazards of this Prince had no connection with those of
his, he had a thousand regrets, when he had lost the opportunity of hearing
them, and left no means unattempted, convenient to reingage himself in his
conversation. Howbeit the quality of the Person with whom he had bin,
permitting him not absolutely to conform to his passion, and the rights of
hospitality suffered him not to refuse so great a Prince the Instruction he
required, in relation to his Country. He strove to give him all requisite
illumination, but it was with all brevity possible, and in these terms. My
Lord, said he (after some testimony of acknowledgments and respects) you know
undoubtedly that the Valley of Tempe is of Thessaly, as well as the major part
of the Cities which are on the Thermaique Gulf, on the south side. Since
Philip King of Macedon and father to Alexander the Great, this Province has
always bin subject to the Kings of Macedonia, but I vow unto you, that I know
not almost at present who are our Masters. For since the death of Alexander the
Great, Macedonia has changed so often and so suddenly so many Kings, that
scarcely have they sometimes given opportunity to their Subjects to learn their
Names. Moreover there are about two or three years, that Brennus to come and
fall upon Macedonia, with that great Army of Gauls, which overwhelmed, as you
know, all Grecia; Demetrius then King of Macedonia to whom our Original,
communicated with that of our new Enemies rendered us suspicious, sent us here
for our Governor, a Lord of Albania named Alcime to impede the Intelligences,
that they feared betwixt us and them, and to impose upon us a new Oath of
Allegiance. He appointed him also his principal Troops, to place them in
Garrisons within our Cities: But by this means he became so Potent, that this
Governor being a little afterward in League with Lysimachus King of Thrace,
and a little after with Ptolomee Ceraune, eldest Son to the King of Egypt, to
drive away his Master from Macedonia; he advanced himself, as a kind of
Sovereign. But Ceraune having in conclusion bin defeated, and Antigonus son of
Demetrius, being by that remounted upon the Throne of his Father; Alcime who
knew that this young Prince prepared himself to come and punish his Treason;
immediately used endeavors to conclude a Peace, at least to put himself under
the protection of some King who might support him; and possibly it might be
that, to transact something on this Subject, that the Prince of Crete should
come to Pidne, where Alcime made his residence. But however it be, my Lord, if
it be permitted me to offer the House of a Shepherd, to so great a Prince, I
dare tell you that my Father, and one of my Brothers, have each of them one in
this Valley, where you may continue as long time as you please unknown, and
where you may at your leisure liberally take such measures as you shall judge
expedient, for the success of your Designs. Amalecinte thanked him very
courteously, and having testified him, what he judged convenient for their
security, they imbarqued the self same night, and together took the way from
the Mariners house, arming themselves for all hazards, each one with a Sword.

They already found all this Family alarmed with the Accident whereof we have
spoken, and it was immediately, that they were transported with such joy, when
they saw the young Prince to return, that he absolutely lost all suspicion,
which he had had that the people had betrayed him. However he was amazed, when
he would have pressed the Mariner to depart, observing the old Dotard to
recoil always with new excuses; so that the young Prince being by little and
little warmed, in conclusion grew impatient, and so taking his Sword in one
hand, and with the other seizing the good Man, compelled him by force to the
bark, and made him enter it, with such precipitancy, that he had even forgotten
to change Apparel, which before he resolved upon.

Tarsis having seen him depart, betook himself to run here and there upon the
Rivers bank, his mind still preoccupied, with the transportation of Zelie, and
so allarmed, that he could not express himself. It was then a Season when the
Nights are shortest, so that the day appeared immediately after, and with the
Day light appeared, also three Shepherds, whom he had known to be, Telamon,
Ergaste and Celemante, Telamon was that Brother, whose House he had offered to
the Prince of Chypre. He was the most sagacious and judicious Shepherd of all
the Country, and was bound to Tarsis in such a perfect bond of friendship, that
it exceeded even their affinity. He had espoused Philiste eldest Sister of
Zelie, and was marvellously prevalent by means of this alliance to savor the
love of his Brother. Inquietude had caused him to go forth very early in the
quest of Tarsis, Telamon very well knew, that at least by some extraordinary
accident, he would not have failed his word.

Ergaste and Telamon, were both neighbors to Telamon, who came from the next
Village or Hamlet, driving together their Flocks to feed by the Rivers side,
and that Telamon had a little before joined them, to inquire of them news of
his Brother. Telamon and Ergaste entertained themselves yet together, when
Tarsis discerned them, Celemante, played upon a Flute a few Paces behind them,
after they had seen Tarsis, Telamon ran to him very joyfully, and although he
had embraced him, he ceased not afterward to reproach him, for the perplexity
wherein he had put him. Ergaste and Celemante approached him immediately
afterward, and Celemante who had checked him, betook himself even to jest with
him, as if he had believed, that Tarsis had bin retained by night, by
deputation of some Shepherd. But they were all much amazed, when he made them
all sad; by recital of his adventure. They could not doubt of the truth of some
part of that which he declared them, because he had led them into the Wood,
where were yet found the bodies of two of the Guards whom he had slain, but
they could not yield, to that which he had related them of Zelie. For said
Telamon, they must either have conveyed her away, or must have caused her to be
conveyed away by force. That she was carried by force there was no manner of
appearance; because that besides the Words that we have recited you, she would
not have failed to answer you, nor yet to have demanded your aid and cried out,
then when you were mentioned to her. To believe also that she caused her self
to be carried away, that supposition is absolutely repugnant to the virtue and
incomparable Wisdom of Zelie.

Dear Tarsis, replied Ergaste, shall I tell you my thoughts. That part of your
adventure, has the very face of a Vision, your imagination is forestalled by
your Love, so that all that you see personates Zelie, all that you hear,
seems to be her voice, and this is not the first illusion, by which an
amorous Person, has bin deceived after this rate. Ha! through favor, do not
jest Ergaste, replied Tarsis, for I am thoroughly disquieted by a thousand
thoughts. I also jest not, replied Ergaste, do you not call to mind that which
you have formerly learnt in the Schools of Divine Plato, that our Memories do
bring to our thoughts, the Ideas of all the things we have seen, and causes so
great an amass or heap of th^se that we have very often seen, and which to him
are so delectable, that in the abundance of that whereof he is glutted (for so
I express it) she represents her self sometimes contrary to our imaginations,
its that which abuses, and makes us believe, we have seen the things that we
have not therefore done? Ergaste added, still laughing Celemante, that which I
have often learnt in the Gardens of the great Epicure; that the Air is full of
certain Images, which every moment comes forth of the body, and representing
themselves to our view, form those Visions, which the Vulgar call Ghosts and
Scarcrows. He still persisted in jesting, if it comes out of all Bodies, it
must also come out of that of Zelie, and as Tarsis has told us, that at the
moment that he believed he had seen him, he was turned to the Rivers side,
toward the hamlet of Calioure where she dwelt, it is no wonder that he saw some
kind of Image come forth which resembled her. You may jest with me as much as
you please said Tarsis, but would to God, that what I have told you, were not a
very great truth. But my Brother, added he, sadly beholding Telamon; is it
possible that Lencippe and Milicerte have not advertised you of this fatal
accident? I came out so early replied Telamon, that I was not able to tell you
the news.

With the like Discourse they approached again to the River, whence casting
their Eyes over to the other side, they perceived a great number of Persons, a
little below Calioure, and they observed even in the crowd, Lencippe and
Melicerte, Father and Mother of Zelie. When Tarsis had even till then doubted
of his Misfortune, that which he saw would have done no other, than to have too
much confirmed him, for it was easy to judge by their Action, that they were in
some trouble, and it could not be doubted, but that it was for their Daughter.
Ha! my Brother cried out immediately this desolate Shepherd, in turning himself
toward Telamon, all is lost, and without further discourse, betook himself
into the first Boat he met withal, and went directly where he saw Lencippe and
Melicerte; they were surprised at his approach, for as much as there was
already some time past, that he had not further visited them for reasons, that
hereafter shall be explicated, and their astonishment principally was
augmented, when he inquired, whether his Misfortune were true, and whether they
sought not for Zelie.

And indeed, as it was that, that they were come, they knew the love the
Shepherd bare toward her, the length of the research which he had made, the
Obstacles that Lencippe there had brought, what resolutions are capable of a
passion so extraordinary as those of Tarsis, and besides all, that a Man whom
they had sent to Telamon, had reported to them, that he went in quest of
Tarsis, who had passed the night without the Hamlet, it was impossible, but
that they should fall into great suspision of this Shepherd. However the
freedom and ingenuity with which he related to them, that which happened the
preceding Evening, the tears which fell in abundance from his Eyes, and above
all the knowledge they had of his virtue, effaced all these Impressions.

Melicette declared to him then, how Zelie had bin conveyed away without their
perception, till the morning, and she related him all the circumstances which
she knew, the tears in his Eyes, with the perplexity that might be imagined, on
this occasion in the Mind of the tenderest Mother throughout the World. While
she spoke, the Shepherd steadfastly fixed his Eyes downwards, and gathering
together all the circumstances that he had learnt on this occasion, he verily
had good ground to believe that Zelie, had caused her self to be conveyed away.
And because so great a love as his, is susceptible of all fear imaginable, a
little jealousy made him apprehend, she had not done it, but that through the
disposition of some new affection, and in effect he could conceive of no other
cause.

O just Heaven, cried he, in that thought, could it be possible that Zelie had
forgotten so much virtue? and that the most retentive and discreetest of all
the Shepherds, was become the most....? The respect stopped him there, and
instead of finishing; No Melicerte, added he, beholding her with tears still in
his Eyes; I rather imagine some other thing, than to permit the least thought,
to wound the virtue of the incomparable Zelie.

In thus discoursing they descended along the River, and Melicerte recounted to
Tarsis, that after some Weeks, that he had withdrawn from Zelie, that
Shepherdess had lived in a retiring and extraordinary solitude, not suffering
the company of any whosoever, except one Nephew of Melicerte, who lately was
returned from a long Voyage, and who was named Alpide. At this word, Tarsis
remembering himself to have heard this name Alpide, by the old Mariner, whom he
had taken the preceding Evening for him, recounted that passage to Melicerte
with some show of suspicion, which he began to conceive of him: and because he
was there amongst those that sought after Zelie, Melicerte immediately asked
him, to see whether he believed that he was the same, whom he had seen the
preceding night in the Boat. Tarsis who knew him not, because that Alpide was
not returned to Calioure, but since the Shepherd went not there, looked for him
a long time, but besides that it had bin difficult for him to know the visage
of a Man, whom he had not seen but during an obscure night, being swimming in a
River, and during the trouble and anguish of Mind, as we have described. Alpide
himself also testified so much of anxiety and grief at the loss of Zelie, and
he manifested so much concerned in her research, that his Action together with
the near Affinity which he had with the Shepherdess, caused them to abandon
also the suspicion that they could have had of him.

Some time afterward, Tarsis and Melicerte still descending, they arrived
almost at the mouth of the River, and when they were over against a Boat which
was there fastened to a Willow, Melicerte casting her Eyes there by chance,
perceived in the bottom a great Roll of Papers, which he seemed often to have
seen with Zelie. Tarsis to whom she showed it, ran readily to gather it up, and
knew that it was a parcel of Letters and Verses, that he had formerly composed,
upon the subject of their Love, whereof this Shepherdess had taken pleasure to
collect together, and often carried with her. The Shepherd having often brought
them to Melicerte, both one and another were so astonished, that they knew not
almost what to say.

After they had descended a little lower they found themselves near a little
House, which reached or stood over the water, where Melicerte inquired for
news, whilst Tarsis stood to question the herdmen, which there kept some
Cattle. She found the door open, and seeing no Person in the first Chamber, she
called aloud to cause some one to come. At the same time came forth an old
Woman out of another Chamber, who made signs with Eyes and Hands, not to make
so much noise, and who approaching to her very softly said, that there was on
the other side one sick who slept, and besought her not to awake her. Melicerte
on these Words conceived some hope, she being much moved demanded who this sick
one was, and declared her the subject of her anxiety, as of her demand. Then
the old one taking her by the hand, led her out of the door, to speak with more
freedom, and afterward declared to her, that the preceding day about Noon, a
Boat who carried four or five Persons, having bin wrackt at the Rivers mouth,
her husband who was a fisherman had saved a young Maid of admirable beauty, who
was named Hipolite, that her Parents, as she had told them, had sent into the
Isle of Daphnides to be there a Nun. She added, that according to their small
apprehension, this Maiden had no great inclination to proceed there, and that
it was true, that the indisposition caused by her accident, had not permitted
her to effect it; that she was at present lulled asleep, not having doubtless
taken rest all the night.

These circumstances being lively and properly declared by this Woman, caused
Melicerte to judge that this unknown was no other than Zelie, however as all
was to her suspect, she had the curiosity to see her. The old one therefore led
her, as soft as possible, into the Chamber, where she reposed, and Melicerte
had no sooner set in her feet, but was well assured she was her Daughter, for
she discerned near the Bed, Attire which had no similitude to those of Zelie.
She observed even what Papers were scattered upon the Table, there to be dried,
and in approaching, knew that they were recommendations for this Maiden whose
name she saw was that of Hipolite. She therefore retired without any further
enquiry and returned, mixing her moans and regrets to those of the disconsolate
Tarsis.

In the interim, this tragical accident having bin divulged of all sides, a
company of Shepherds came to offer themselves to Lencippe, because he was one
of the most considerable of the Country, and a multitude of Shepherds also came
to make their Complements to the wise Milicerte, and to the virtuous Philiste
wife of Telamon, who promptly came to render himself to his Mother, since she
had advertized the accident of her Sister. Tarsis whose anxiety rendered the
company so much the more insupportable, that every one on this accident cast
his Eyes up, in regard there was not any Person to whom his love was unknown:
insensibly stole himself from the press, went and thrust himself into a small
Grove which was hard by, there to bemoan himself with more liberty. He there
sat upon the Grass, his back leaning against a Tree, his Hat fallen over his
Eyes, with his Arms across and in this state, having burst forth a thousand
Sobs, he betook him again to perplex his Spirits with a thousand reflections,
wherein he neither became more knowing nor yet consolate. But contrarily the
torment and toil, which he gave to his Spirits, through so many melancholy
thoughts, a hundred times reverberated, served for no other use, than to
overwhelm him with despair. Now he doubted that Zelie had not bin conveyed away
by force, then that she had not caused her self to be carried off, and
sometimes he fell into conceit that she might be drowned, and in that thought
he was ready to precipitate himself in the same Waves where he believed her
buried. After many confused reasonings and revolvings on all these
Imaginations, he meditated or contemplated this roll of Papers which he had set
upon his knees, and opened them to see whether he should not there meet some
writing or other of Zelies, which might enlighten him in the Design he had
resolved upon. He therefore unknit the string which bound them together, and
unfolding them before him, the first Paper which fell into his hands contained
these lines,

Of a Charm so sensible and so delicious,
And of so many Pleasures the Soul finds it self ravished,
from the first moment that they saw you, adorable Zelie.
That she tastes here below all the Pleasures of Heaven;
But amongst all the transports of an infinite joy,
A poison so subtle and pernicious,
Even from the bottom of the heart,
Trickled down from the Eyes,
That must soon or late cost loss of Life:
So that by two effects in equal Prodigies,
You make so many benefits,
And cause so many Evils;
That remaining confused in the doubt wherein we are,
We cannot judge, if the Gods in displeasure
For our Chastisement gave you amongst Men,
Or if they had pity upon Us.
Ha Tarsis! thereupon cried this poor Shepherd, that this doubt is now
explained, and it is this day easy to judge, that the Gods cause thee not to see
Zelie, but to make thee suffer the most exquisit Torments that the most
culpable are chastized with. After these Words, he remained a small space of
time without speech, his Eyes fixed before him, however unfastned on any
Object; and in such a manner, that it might be well seen, that all his
apprehensions were contracted in him, and that he was solely taken up with his
anguish. He returned in conclusion with a profound sigh, and took the second
Paper which he found under his hands, which he did but run over slightly where
there were these Words,

Since thou will know, why thou see me pale and wan, Melancholy and
languishing.
Learn Telamon that I Love,
And so much the more, because that I am absent.
But alas it is but too little to tell what, or, who I Love.
The Object that I love has so many attractives,
That there was never one of the same,
Nor will they ever see any.
Her Stature, her Visage, and her Eyes full of flame,
Displayeth us a thousand treasures:
And I know not whether her Soul,
Can be more fair than her Body.
A thousand and a thousand Shepherds
adore this fair one.
But they are all fair that adore her,
thousands do sigh after her,
Not one can cause her to sigh.
Nere her alone I have found some favor,
She has some kindness for me:
Or rather it is too much audacity,
She has taken some pity.
They would say; what suffers she her self in her own heart,
The Evil or Sorrow with which mine is overtaken,
And if the Shepherdess love me not,
I believe that she at least condoles me.
Demand not therefore why thou see me languishing,
Melancholy and grown wan;
Since thou Shepherd know that I love thee,
And that that which I Love is absent.
Poor Tarsis, continued he, (for he remembered since he cast his Eyes on those
Lines, of the occasion whereof they were made,) what Complaints ought thou
not now to make, if thou so bemoanest thy Self, in a time wherein thou were
happy? Thou were absent, but it was to see Zelie again very speedily, and thou
perhaps shall never see her again. In thus speaking, he took a third Paper,
wherein was traced what follows.

Tarsis and Zelie.
My amiable Shepherd,
it may be, I have in effect some wrong to afflict my self so much, and that I
should comfort my self in all my Evils, only to think that you loved me.
Therefore then conceive, that this second Voyage of Athens, wherewith they
menace me, is at least a Months absence.

Certainly when I thereof think, I doubt almost, whether I am not to much
solaced, because there are already two days that they discourst me concerning
that Voyage, and yet am still living.

If I must yet abandon Zelie in that deplorable condition wherein you see me, I
must relinquish Life, for of that Malady they never escape twice.

TARSIS.


Ha Fortune! cried Tarsis, in putting up this Paper in some heat, will thou
present me with no other than these things, or who speaks of the beauty of
Zelie, to repeat the displeasure I have at her loss or by the memory of a light
absence, makes me contemplate the difference that there is betwixt my present
Evil, with that which is past, and how more unfortunate I am this day, than I
have bin in all the disgraces I have had in my life? At these Words, he
finished impatiently running over all the rest, and having found nothing there
of what he was in quest, he rebound up the Papers, so having gathered them, he
drew his Hat again over his Eyes, leaning his head upon his two hands, both
Elbows on his two knees; and in this posture, he revolved in his Mind a
thousand mournful Designs, and without doubt would have executed some one of
them in the Field, if one light beam of hope, which yet remained with him,
which at this present juncture saved him from desperation.

The End of the First Book.
Tarsis and Zelie. The Second BOOK.
THE Valley of Tempe which should be the Scene of our History, and the famous
Theater of so many rare and renowned Adventures, has in length about forty
furlongs, that is to say, a little more than two Leagues. It commenceth at the
City of Gonnes, toward the West, and following the course of the River Penee,
which traverseth through the midst, she finisheth with it toward the East in
the same place, where meeting the famous Helicon, they degorge themselves
together within the Thermaique Gulf. The Mount Olimpio boundeth its breadth in
the North, in the South it is with the Mount Ossa: the first is covered with a
Forest of Birch and Laurel Trees, the second with one of Pine Trees, and you
would say that Nature had enclosed this admirable Valley, between these two
Mountains, as between strong and invincible Rails, for facilitating to its
Inhabitants, the conservation of the most rare, and the most accomplished of its
primest and chiefest Works. In effect they may say, that there is nothing
beautifully formed else where, which is not found within this small space.
There may be seen Plains, Valleys, Meadows, quantities of Groves, an infinite
number of small Rivolets and Fountains, the Waters whereof serve as a Sovereign
Remedy against diverse Maladies, and all that is so marvellously diversified and
adorned, with such a number of fair Hamlets and small Villages, that it is
impossible to imagine any thing more delectable. The most considerable of its
Hamlets are Hipique, being the first, they meet on the left hand coming from
Gonnes, descending a long the River to the Sea-ward; Cenome which appears on
the same side, about twenty five or thirty furlongs lower; and Calioure which
is on the other side of the River, more yet toward the Sea, and almost upon
the brink of the Gulf. At Calioure was the habitation of Lencippe and of
Melicerte, Father and Mother of Zelie, at Cenome, that of Telamon and Philiste,
and that of Alcidias Father of Telamon, and of Tarsis was of Hipique. As for
Tarsis, he ordinarily dwelt with his Father, but he omitted not therefore to
lie often at Telamons.

As for this last Night, he had not (as we have seen) layen at Telamons, nor
yet at Alcidias, he is so, that in the Condition wherein we have depainted him,
reflecting upon the Words of Zelie, which he had heard the preceding Evening
(That I bewail thee most dear Tarsis, and that thou shall be touched, when they
shall bring thee this news,) it came in his Mind, that this Shepherdess might
have sent to Cenome, the habitation of Telamon, or to the Hippique at the
dwelling of Alcidias to bring a Ticket, to advertize him of his Design, and
that not being there, they might leave it with some of the Domestiques, to
deliver at his return. In this Imagination, he rudely rose from the place where
he sat, repassed the River, and again took the way of Cenome, and having found
nothing there of what he sought, he afterward took that of Hippique, after he
had discharged himself of the roll of Papers whereof we have spoken, and after
giving directions to leave it with Telamon or Philiste to keep it for him.

He was already on the dependances of the house of Alcidias within a Valley,
where the way on one side's Boards upon a Meddow, and the other upon a Pond,
when he saw a Horse tied to some Branch under a Tree, at the entrance into the
Meddow, and an unknown one sit near the brink of a Fountain which ran amongst
those Willows, and which formed the Pond for the discharge of the Waters. This
unknown was covered with Armor, enamelled with black, raised up on all borders
with a twist of Gold, the headpiece black and welt as the rest of his Armor,
shadowed with some quantity of Feathers of the same color, and his Shield was
upon the Grass near his Dart, had for a Coat or Emblem, a Lance fastened to the
trunk of a Tree, almost ready consumed with fire, the Flame appeared as though
'twere agitated by Winds, and beaten with a furious Rain which seemed to do it
in spite, but unprofitably, although they used all endeavors to quench it,
there were these Words above, It Is too much lighted.

Some Paces behind this unknown was his Squire, his feet also upon the ground,
but standing upright his back leaning on a Willow, the bridle of his Horse
passed within one of his Arms, which he held across, and his Eyes fixed upon
his Master whom he looked upon, uttering from time to time long sighs, whilst
that he, the Viser of whose Casket was advanced, who held in his hand a small
Book, which he read with much attention.

Although the posture wherein he was, permitted not Tarsis well to consider
him, howbeit he saw enough, that his Visage was fair, the Countenance raised,
the Port and Stature high, the Air melancholy, yet noble, and so observing him,
found that in all things he should be an extraordinary Person. However this
Shepherd who was pressed to terminate his Voyage, through impatience that he
left no place to his curiosity, still hastening to pass farther, and was already
one hundred Paces from thence, when he heard a great noise behind him, and
having turned about his head, he discovered four Men on horse back who with
Lance in hand, made up again upon this unknown. The cowardice of these
Assassines who attach't him, being in number so disproportionable, moved Tarsis
to indignation, and as he had the most generous, and the fairest Soul in the
World, he drew the Sword wherewith, as we have lately said, he was armed, and
rashly returned to his Succor, who apparently was weakest. But this courageous
Man, had therefore no need, for before that Tarsis was with him, being already
mounted on horseback, he had with his Dart pierced the foremost of these
Cavaliers, and selled him dead to the ground, he had cut the hand off of the
following Comrade by a back blow with his Sword, and by this fortunate
beginning, he had in conclusion so affrighted the two others, that being
themselves contented Cowards, they threw their Darts to him a far off, and
betook themselves to flight.

The unknown would not continue there, but pursued them, Sword in hand, with
all the speed he could, his Squire doing the same; so that the Shepherd who was
on foot, not being able to follow, he soon lost sight of them.

In the interim he approacht to the wounded Person, and having taken off his
Helmet to know whether he were yet living, he saw him open his eyes weakly, and
heard him speak these Words with many repetitions. O unfortunate Pallante, Is
that the fruit of so many Crimes, if you are just Gods, punish also the Traitor
Menelas. Ah Pyrhus! Antigone! you are avenged. Death cut off his Voice in this
discourse, and the Shepherd saw paleness to scatter all at once upon his face
at that last word.

Tarsis had not always lived such a Shepherd, but that he knew, that the King
who then reigned in Epirus was called Pyrhus, and that that Prince was one of
the Prime, and one of the most valiant Monarchs of the World, so that this
Encounter gave him great subjects of astonishment, but his Surprise was
otherwise, then when he perceived lying at his feet, the same Book which before
was read by the first unknown; and when these Words appeared to him, at the top
of the first Page, where it was by chance opened. They skipt into his sight,
(for so I may say) because they were in a very great Character.

History of Kion and Leonides, written by Straton of Lamsaque, to the Prince
Philadelphe.
IT is not possible to express, what was the amazement of the Shepherd, when he
saw these two Names of Kion and Leonides at the Frontispiece of this Work, he
immediately took it up, to see whether he were not deceived, and having there
yet read over again the same Words, and besides having slightly ran over some
Pages, he found himself so surprised, that he began to doubt, whether this and
the preceding Passages were not a dream.

In sum, it is not possible to delineate or pourtray any thing more surprising
than was that, which he had found written in that Book, as we shall see in its
proper place. However he could not forbear to read it from one end to the
other, and being only content by the beginning and the end, what the rest
contained, he cried: Ah! the news I seek after, is not for Kion and Leonides, I
would know none but that of Zelie. Ah poor Leonides, thy disgraces are pleasant
in comparison of those of the unfortunate Tarsis! O Tarsis, why have thou
survived Leonides.

At these Words, crossing his Arms athwart before him, he remained some space
immovable all in a sweat, that the Book fell out of his hands without his
heed. In conclusion, being a little afterward come out of his sweat, he
departed thence, and went his way toward Hippique.

In the interim, Telamon was on the other side in great trouble about Tarsis,
and sought him every where, being accompanied by Ergaste, Celamante and another
stranger that joined them also, and behold in what manner.

Amongst the crowd of all those, which the accident of Zelie, had drawn
together by the River side. A Man of thirty eight or forty years of age,
addressing himself to Telamon, said. May I know the reason, why so many People
are assembled here together? Telamon having beheld him, believed he had seen
his face else where; and in effect by serious consideration, he knew him to be
an Athenian, with whom he had formerly born Arms in the Service of the
Thebeans. What Agamee, said he unto him (for he remembered that so he was named)
Hah! who has brought you here amongst us? Alas! Telamon, (replied the other,
who likewise knew him,) you ask me a thing which requires a long explication.
All that I can tell you in one word, that is, that I fly my disgrace, and come
to seek your repose. You see, replied Telamon, that you take an ill time: for
besides, that is, there is a long time past, that Tempe is no more (so to speak)
it self; we are so alarmed, by the taking away of one of the most considerable
Shepherdess of the Country, that we were never so much disordered and
afflicted. And as for me, I am concerned more than any other; because that this
Shepherdess is my Sister-in law, and one of my Brothers is so exceedingly
amorous of her, that he is altogether disconsolate. I bewail his displeasure,
more than I do his Fortune, answered Agamee; for I would that he apprehended
only that of mine to consolate him, if he yet is capable of reason. He would
see, that he could not be grateful enough to Fortune, if it could thence
withdraw his disire to be married. But I should be obliged to you, replied
Telamon, if you could assist me, in giving him some comfort: for he so loved
this Shepherdess, and I saw him so anxious, that I believe not, if the Gods
have not pity upon him, but that he will dye.

In speaking so, he sought Tarsis amongst the Crowd, and not finding him, he
called Ergaste, to know, if he saw him not on his side. Celamante who
understood Telamon, spoke to him and said: I also sought him my self, and began
to be in pain, because a Shepherd lately ^nform'd me, that he had seen him to
draw toward the little Grove, that you see on the left hand, and that his
countenance was so sad, that we should do very well not to leave him alone.

This discourse alarmed Telamon, he besought Celamante to aid him in seeking
him out, and demanded pardon of Agamee, if he should quit him; Agamee offered
himself to follow him and Telamon, having received his offer civilly, they went
together toward the little Grove, where was entered Tarsis.

In walking Telamon said to his two friends, which was Agamee, with a summary
Elogy of his Merits. Agamee on the other hand, demanded of Telamon which where
Ergaste and Celamante: and certainly these two Shepherds were not unworthy of
her curiosity.

They were sufficiently well shaped in body, and yet more excellent in Mind.
Both the one and the other were, Good, Free, Generous, and if there were
wherewith to object, in relation to this humor, it is that Ergaste was too
prompt, Celemante a little too voluptuous; and besides many natural
accomplishments, they had acquired a large addition of others in the Sch^ols of
the most Famous Philosophers of Athens, where they had a long time Studied, and
there they were bound in such a degree of friendship, that those who knew them
ordinarily called them the two Cousens, more in respect of the Union of their
Minds, than for their consanguinity which was no other than very far off. In
the mean time, its not possibly to imagine the great contrariety of their
tempers and inclinations. Ergaste was of a nature very fiery, and that appeared
in the singular vivacity of his Eyes all sparkling with flame, and the most
glittering that had been ever seen. His Choler would be moved for the least
thing, and oftentimes without any heed he would be chafed in his own proper
discourse, that when he believed he had spoken very moderately, others would
have supposed, that he had been in very great wrath.

But contrarily Celemante had a spirit sweet and temperate and it must have
been a greater matter to provoke him to anger. Ergaste was melancholy, he took
no pleasure very few things, but his Books or in the Society of his most
intimate friends, and hated above all things new Acquaintance: Celemante in the
reverse, diverted himself equally every where, and took pleasure at all times,
to know all men. The first was exact and circumspect with his friends, and as
he never came short toward them, in the least Obligation of Friendship, so he
could in no wise brook their reciprocal disrespect toward him: the other did
not so narrowly regard it, and as he was of humor in all points indulgent
toward others, he expected the like treatment. In sum they were observed also
to be almost always in dispute one against another, but never in one that was
repugnant to friendship.

That which Ergaste had moreover in particular, is that there was never a man,
that was deceived less than himself in his Judgments, and in nothing less, be
they Persons, be they Books, be it in other things within his verge. He had
found both good and evil, with such exactitude, that the most tedious
Contemplations of others, were incapable to add any thing thereunto. Celemante
yet gave out that praise of Ergaste, that he had never known man which would so
well love him, to whom he pretended love, and moreover said, that if he knew
himself to be a good friend, he had had an Obligation to Ergaste. But that this
had been taught him, as a Master does to little Children, that is to say, in
reproving him, and in grumbling without intermission and almost with the Rod in
hand.

Telamon said not so much to Agamee, he contented himself in letting them
understand they were his Relations and near Friends, knowing that he would soon
be sensible of all the rest.

They were half way from the small Grove, where they went to seek Tarsis, when
some persons informed them, that they had seen him repass the River and take
the way to Cenome. They presently went there, but found him not. They stayed no
longer there than the time of taking a small repast or light meal, because
'twas late, and thence went toward Hipique, following the Road as Tarsis had
signified to them. Telamon and Agamee, walked before, and entered together;
Ergaste went sweating behind them; and Celemente walked by his side. But
because his friend said nothing to him, and his naturally pleasant temper,
could not suffer a moments Melancholy. After he had unprofitably spoken of many
things, endeavoring to fix some conversation with him, he began to sing a Song
which he had formerly composed, and which began after this sort.

Reign solely in my heart with freedom, tranquillity and joy,
Wealth is not wealth without you,
You are of those whom the Heavens have sent,
The most solid and the most pleasantly sweet
And the only one worthy of Us.
Since he betook himself to sing, Ergaste returned to him with a serious
Countenance, and lifting up his Shoulders, twice or thrice shook his head, to
signify to him that he sung much out of Season, and in an occasion so
unpleasing where he saw his best friends afflicted, Moans had been much more
graceful than Songs. Celemante immediately held his peace, and without contest
with his friend excused himself, that he not having entertained him in
discourse, his singing had escaped him unheedily. But a little after Ergaste
being set to raving, Celemante persisted also insensibly to sing without
Dreaming the advertization of Ergaste.

How Love flatters those who are Amorous, with vain hopes of Delights; its most
considerable Contentments are to the wise but places of Execution and Death.
Did ever Lover live without uttering a Multitude of Sighs, without bewailing
Inhumanity? its pleasure is even a pain, and if it were without pain, it would
be without pleasure. Reign solely in my heart, with freedom, tranquillity and
joy: Wealth is not wealth without you. You are of those that the Heavens have
sent us, the most solid and the most amiably sweet, and the only one worthy of
us.

The sweetest passion is always a very great evil, if it be not an affliction,
it is at least an inquietude; the more vexation crosses an Amorous desire, the
more pleasure also abounds, but the greatest pleasure of the World, if it gives
me Anxiety, its no more a pleasure to me.

Reign solely in my Heart, with Freedom, Peace and Joy, Wealth is not wealth
without you. You are of those whom the Heavens have sent us, the most solid and
the deliciously sweet, and the only one worthy of us.

Celemante would have persisted, but Ergaste who had already looked twice or
thrice upon him, to cause him to hold his Peace, without the heed of Celemante,
observing that he continued without intermission, in conclusion he began to
speak to him, saying, Without doubt, Celemente, it must be avowed that thou
have but little judgment. For how indifferent soever thou art for thy friends,
at leastwise thou should use thy endeavors to conceal thy defaults, and to
contain thy self when thou see them in affliction; and 'twere better for thee
not to offer thy self to Telamon, than to come with him only to sing, and let
him see by thy Actions how little regard thou have to his displeasure.
Celemante who (as we have said) without any reflection betook himself to sing,
and by a kind of Habit of diverting himself in one sort or other, had no sooner
perceived his fault, but joining his hands he turned to Ergaste and said. Oh!
my poor Ergaste, I demand thy Pardon, and of Telamon also. I protest unto thee
I remember not hitherto any more of thy reproofs, and I thought no more of thy
singing. Ergaste did not thus believe him, and as the kindness he had for him
joined with a little inclination he had to reprove all that he disliked of,
persuaded him easily to make him out some Lessons on his defaults, and on this
Subject it was sufficiently long. Celemante took it in good part, for though
the Reprehension was perhaps more earnest than he had deserved, he knew too
well, that what Ergaste had done was through excess of friendship, but he would
not therefore acknowledge that he was so much overseen, as he would have
possessed him he had been; and he fixed himself thereon so much the more
willingly, that he might thereby find means to engage him in some discourse. My
Instructor, replied he then laughing, you blame me after all for a thing for
which I think you ought to commend me; if I sing and if you see me joyful in
occasions that are questionable in employing my self for my friends, believe
not that this is a fault to interest my self in that which concerns them; but
contrarily, this which I I do him of good Will, that I concern my self merrily,
when I serve them without regret. Behold, a very fair conceit, said Ergaste: My
Friend, when men take a share at the displeasure of their Friends, they have a
like displeasure, and are sorrowful with them. I agree thereunto (said
Celemante) but when this displeasure or sorrow seems of no use to our friends,
they ought to do all that is possible to chase it away. See thou, dear
Ergaste, friendship goes not to counterfeit the Postures and Faces of our
Friends as do the Apes; to laugh when they laugh, and cry when they cry; it is
solidly and effectually to succor them when there is an occasion, and to do it
handsomely and with a good grace. The greatest number of such as thou see sad,
when they should comfort and serve an afflicted friend, it is not because they
see their friend to be so: but where they counterfeit themselves, or that they
are effectually Melancholy, it is that they should do something which pains
them and rejoice the Personage that displeases them; or in fine, because they
may be sad for Company, and by reason of one only man, vexation is displeasant
and irksome to all the Company. And know, interrupted Ergaste, that this of a
man which sings is yet more to those who are really afflicted. I believe
nothing, answered Celemante, for when I have affliction I am assured that my
friends do me the greatest pleasure in the World, to come and make themselves
merry with me. When I am gay and pleasant I have almost no need of them,
because I sufficiently divert my self all alone, but when I am sad it is then
that I have occasion of my friends to divert me. I see well ( said Ergaste,
persisting) that thou never had any trouble that was really and truly so.
Thou ought to know that to make a man laugh who is desirous to weep, is as
vexatious to him as to make a man weep, who would fain laugh. I believe nothing
yet, added Celemante, and I declare unto thee that if thou ever see me weep,
I shall be much obliged to thee for the pains that thou shall take to make me
laugh. It Is not but that after all, if I knew that my friends were offended to
see me jocund, and that they therefore doubted of my friendship, I would not
have done my utmost to abstain from being so. But as I am persuaded they ought
to be very well pleased, and that my friendship to them is sufficiently known
that exterior demonstrations are needless, I shall do more than endeavor to
serve them, and comfort my self all at once.

Ergaste and Celemante were so bent to this discourse, that they heeded not how
much their Comrades were advanced before them, even so much, that there was a
long time, that they had lost sight of them, then when they discerned them.

And truly Telamon and Ergaste were already in the little Valley, where Tarsis
had met those unknown, whereof we had spoken, that Ergaste and Celemante were
yet very far. Telamon and his friend found the Body of this unfortunate one,
who was there slain, and after they had considered of him, without knowledge of
him, they perceived also that little Book that Tarsis had there likewise met
withal. Telamon was him who first had observed it and taken it up, and it
cannot be imagined how it surprised him, when he knew its Subject.

Agamee observing the astonishment of Telamon, approach't to see the cause also
why it was, and taking the Book out of the hands of the Shepherd, (which he
left him to carry away without speaking any thing, so much was he amazed) he
betook himself to read it there, whilst that Telamon returned to consider once
again the dead Corpse, and attempt to know it. But his endeavors there were all
to no purpose. He would willingly have had Ergaste and Celemante with them, to
see whether they could assist him to replace its Ideas, and seeing these two
Shepherds lingered so long in coming, Telamon returned to press them. In the
Interim Agamee remaining at his Book, read there what follows, without knowing
that which had been necessary for him to learn, to render the Lecture more
acceptable.

History of Kion and Leonides, written by Straton of Lampsaque, to the Prince
Philadelphee.
YOur Curiosity my Lord is worthy of you, and it becomes you well to know, the
most rare Effects of a Virtue, to whom you owe your name. As for me I shall
take great pleasure in tracing you out a Memorial of the friendship of two
Brothers. The single Picture whereof, I learn is so Famous, that it has
ravished you with Admiration; and to enrich Egypt after you, by a second
Example, that all the Ages to come, will envy that of ours.

Heraclee a City situated upon the Pont Euxin in the Kingdom of Pont, had after
the death of the Great Eumene been peaceably governed, by its Senate under the
Jurisdiction of old Antigonus: then when the Slaves rebelled against their
Masters, and having chosen for their Chief, a Person of mean Parentage, named
Clearque, troubled the Tranquillity of that City, and made it the Bloody Theater
of the most horrible inhumanities that Asia had seen for many Ages. This
Clearque was a man bold, violent and cruel in whom all Crimes held place as
virtues, when they served the ends of his Ambition. He soon composed a small
Army of his Slaves, and being by this means rendered Master of the City, he
caused the Senate there to assemble, to deliberate upon some Proposal, that he
would there treat of in order to a Peace. Having by this Artifice assembled all
the Senators into the Townhouse, he caused them all to be Arrested, made some
part of them to be Massacred upon the place, seized upon others whom he
imprisoned, lading them with Chains, and afterward caused them to be inhumanly
put to death.

This was no other then a preludium to the Cruelties of this detestable Tyrant.
He caused to be taken and executed by the like barbarism, all those of the City
that were rich and wealthy, and by this general Massacre, having made Widows of
all the Women of quality in Heraclea, he recompensed his accomplices, and by a
sacrilegious Attempt, and beyond example, he put the Slaves into the possession
of the Wealth, into the Offices, and into the beds of their Masters, the major
part of the virtuous Women, not being able to brook so great Indignities, slew
themselves upon the Corpse of their Husbands, and there were a considerable
number of young Virgins, imitating their courage, sacrificed themselves also,
upon those of their Parents.

Amongst those, there was one named Olympie, who was passionately beloved by a
young Stranger, of whose affection she had received great testimonials, and of
whom she was greatly inamored, but above all things she was exceeding tender of
her Father and Mother, which would not permit her to survive them, nor yet to
let them be unrevenged. She would have a thousand times given her Life to
render them, this sad and deplorable duty, and you may well judge, that there
was not any thing in the World, which she would not willingly have sacrificed
in this design, by the strange and unparalleled Resolution, which her anxious
and perplexed state had made her to undertake. She was tempted a thousand times
to go her self personally to poniard the Tyrant; but after she had seen the
impossibility of this Interprize by a young Maiden, after consideration had of
an Attempt of this nature, without any effect, would serve but as an
advertisement to Clearque, and thereby oblige him to hold himself well guarded,
and precaution him against all hazards and events.

She sent for her Lover, and having showed him the Body of her Mother, stretched
out all bloody upon the floor of her Chamber. Kion said she, melting into
tears, you see the consequences of the Cruelties of Clearque, and to what
Extremities he reduced my Mother, after he had bin the barbarous Executioner of
my Father. That Is to say Kion, that I must dye, for you would not see me
recompensed as a Slave: but also I must tell you, that it behooves you to
revenge me, and thereby give me some illustrious Tokens of that Love you have
so often times sworn unto me, and if my supplication is not yet so effectually
forcible, thereon to resolve you, behold Kion, behold, how I command you. At
these Words having drawn a Poniard, which she had hid under her Attire, and
therewith twice pierced her heart, which he could not in any wise hinder, and
immediately fell down dead upon the Body of her Mother, adding only these few
Words: It Is Clearque who has slain me, O Kion, revenge me of Clearque.

These Words pronounced from the Mouth of a dying Mistress, wrought a strange
effect on this poor Lover, and the consequence made appear that he had too much
love to survive her, if he had not courage enough to revenge her.

This Stranger aged only twenty five or twenty six years, had a younger Brother
than himself named Leonides, with whom he was bound in such a strict degree of
friendship, the like whereof was rarely exemplified amongst men; I have never
bin able to learn their Country, nor yet their Birth; only I learnt since,
that they had both studied in the Schools of Plato, and that there was two
years, that curiosity of Travels, had caused them to roam the World, and that
they were returned from Gaul, whence they declared their Original was. Their
design had bin immediately to pass farther, and after they had seen (as they
had done, the major part of Europe,) to run over all Asia: but the love of Kion
and the delectable fellowship of Leonides, for his dear Brother had stayed them
both at Heraclea.

Kion being then come, as well as he could from the view and sight of that
dismal and bloody Spectacle, ran toward his Brother, his heart pierced with
Love and Grief; declared to him, with a thousand regrets and sighs, the
deplorable piece-meales and passages of this tragical Accident, and in the
transport of his Desperation embraced him, and demanded his Succor to revenge
the death of Olympie.

Neither the friendship nor the great courage of Leonides could not permit him
to refuse any of the Supplications or Desires of Kion: And behold a resolution
truly worthy of the Love of the one, and friendship of the other, and the
courage of both.

The Tyrant never walked but in the middle of two hundred of his Guards. He had
the insolence to call himself the Son of Jupiter, and as a badge or mark of his
Extraction, he caused to be carried before him an Eagle of Gold, and his
Busquins or Boots all embroidered with precious Stones and Jewels. So that this
Slave being apparrelled with the Pomp, State and Authority of a King, made all
Heraclea tremble, by the sole port and equipage of his Person, and of his Train
and Attendants.

All that which there remained amongst the Citizens, were Groans under the
weight of his Tyranny. There passed not a day, that he perpeted and imbrued
himself in some sanguinary Murder, there was neither Wealth nor Liberty, but
only for Slaves, and in the mean time, these poor Citizens had their Souls so
amated and dismayed, and their Hearts so violently quelled and born down, that
they served themselves only with wishing the death of the Tyrant, without the
courage to undertake it, and saw themselves so Massacred one after another, not
one daring to revenge it. But this part seemed not possible to come forth from
any other, than from the hand of some God, and there appeared not a possibility
in Men to give a Deaths wound to another, who never would leave himself to be
approached, but across through two hundred Halberdtiers.

However Kion and Leonides undertook it, and the honor of the deliverance of
Heraclea from the most abominable of all Tyrants, joined to the Transports and
to the excellent Movements, Agility and Disposition of love and friendship
wherewith they were animated, they resolved without difficulty or hesitation,
to expose their own lives, to render themselves Masters of his.

They therefore armed themselves immediately each one with a Poniard, and went
to the Palace, demanding speech with Clearque, under pretense of having some
difference betwixt them, of some great Importance, which they would refer to
the King, and being by this artifice introduced, and way made to the Tyrant,
they took their time so oportunely, that in the very instant that Clearque
list'ned to him who first spoke, the other drew his Poniard, and with the very
first stab, wherewith he was pierced, this infamous Captain of Slaves, fell
stark dead at his feet.

Immediately the Guards ran upon them; but their number dismayed them not, and
resolving to dye, yet to sell very dearly their lives, they set upon the
Soldiers athwart their Pikes and Swords, and ceased not killing, until they
were in, conclusion, borne down with blows, they deferred putting them to
present death, reserving them for a barbarous and cruel Execution; and in that
resolution, they shut them up in the very Chamber where were the Corpse of the
Tyrant, and they placed Guards upon them. In the mean time the rumor and ^ame
of this Action, was spread, immediately throughout all the City of Heraclea. It
awakned the courage of the Inhabitants, who running to their Arms, and
impatient to have at least the Bodies of their Deliverers in the hands of
those, by whom 'twas said, they were slain, came in Troops crowding to the
Palace. And beleaguering it, they at last forced the rest of these unfortunate
Slaves, who kept it to redeem their Lives in the surrendry of Kion and Leonides
into their hands.

It Is in no wise possible to express the joy they conceived, when they found
them living; nor yet to describe what Marks and Tokens, all the Popullacy
sparkled and glittered forth in testimony of their grateful resentments. Some
immediately seized the Corpse of the Tyrant, dragging it through the Streets,
and in the end tearing it in a thousand pieces. Others sounded and echoed out
Elegies and magnificent Triumphs, setting forth Trophies in memory of their
generous and unparrallell'd Deliverer, you had said they had bin taken for
Gods. They fell before them in Troops upon their knees, lifting them upon their
Shouldiers, and so pompously carried them to the public Guild Hall or
townhouse, and through an extreme zeal, which they supposed to be more fatal
to the lives of these two illlustrious Brothers, than the very hands of their
Enemies, they for some time minded not but utterly forgot the dressing and
healing of their own Wounds, by a kind of an indiscreet ardour they had, to
render them the Honor worthy their acknowledgments. In an instant the face of
the whole City was changed, the joy and allacrity pierced the hearts, and was
visibly demonstrated in the Visage of the Citizens, when it had for a long time
bin banished and exiled; there was then seen no more heaviness, but in those of
the Slaves and Kion.

This generous and faithful Lover, could not survive his Mistress, and after he
had executed his Commission, it seemed he would go and render her an account of
it: neither reason nor prayers, could act any thing toward the mitigation of
his Dolor; there remained nothing but Friendship and Amity could oppose the
mournful effects of his Love.

His brother and himself would willingly have bin set in one Chamber; so that
Leonides seeing the resistance that Kion made to all remedies: Brother, said
he, I believe I have sufficiently testified to you, that I feared not to dye
with you, but I must also let you know, that I cannot yet live without you.
Wherefore if you have resolved to dye, tell me frankly and freely, that I may
not give my self the trouble unprofitably to labor the conservation of a Life,
which to me is of no value without yours. Upon these Words, he commanded the
Chyrurgeons to cease, and discharged them from further attendance, in
expectation of his reply. Kion tenderly and gingerly looked upon him, and would
have obliged him to let them persist, endeavoring to persuade him, that he had
neither cause nor reasonable subject to hate his life: but Leonides having
protested to him, that he would not permit any further care to be taken of
himself, then should be seen that his Brother should take care of his own, Kion
was in fine constrained to live, only to preserve the Life of his dear
Leonides. It Is true their care and recovery was very tedious and leisurely,
because their Wounds were great and grievous, and for a considerable time
almost desperate, so that it occasioned the world to believe that they were
dead: but you will soon see, they were reserved for more strange Adventures.

After the example of Heraclea, the major part of the Cities of Pont were also
held by small Tyrants, who from being simple and petty Governors under old
Antigonus, had erected themselves to be so many Sovereigns, shaking off the
yoke of Tyranny and declared for Liberty: but in regard these petty Kings
chased from usurped Thrones, were in League together to re-enter there, with
Satyr brother of Clearque, the Cities likewise united amongst themselves, and
having levied Troops for their universal and common Defense, they elected for
their Chieftain one valiantly unknown named Ariamene, upon whom they conferred
all the Authority of their Arms, under the Title of Defender of the Liberties
of the People.

My Lord, I will not tell you any thing of this Ariamene, a whole volum would
be necessary separately to recount to you the History of his high Feats.

For over and above that, the Renown of them is manifestly famous throughout
the earth, you will without any doubt have known, that he had defeated Satyr
and his Comrades in five different Battles, that in the latter, and that he
himself with his own proper hands had slain three of these petty Tyrants, and
in sum had acquired so considerable a Reputation of Valor, Liberality and
Justice among the People of Pont and Cappadocia, that after having fought
during the term of four years, for their sole Liberty, they had voluntarily
renounced him, to submit it to Ariamene, and that they had crowned him their
King, after they had had him four years for their Captain. But let us return to
the History of our two brave Brothers.

The People of Heraclea being united, and in league with other Cities of Pont,
levied Troops which they sent to join with those of Ariamene, and for a badge
of Cognizance toward Kion and Leonides, they remitted them to their sole
Conduct.

These valiant Brothers, so acquitted themselves of this trust and charge, that
it exceeded the possibility of all Expectations: they declared to me, that the
grand Ariamene had diverse times confess't himself, that he owed a considerable
part of his Victories to their Valor. Satyr and his Allies having bin defeated
the two first Battles, craved assistance of the King of Thrace, and engaged him
in their Succor, through hopes, that they would even make him King of Asia.

This was, my Lord, at the self same time, when the King your Father did me the
honor to send me his Ambassador in Ordinary to Lysimachus: and I learnt by the
way, that the King of Thrace had already passed into Asia with an Army composed
of threescore thousand Men, against the valiant Ariamene. I was then obliged to
find him in Asia, and I arrived at his Camp, only three days before this great
Battle, which was the commencement of his Losses, the Success whereof, I writ
the King your Father.

It Is certain, that when I arrived among the Thracians, the Reputation of
Ariamene, how considerable soever it was, did in no wise obliterate that of
Kion and Leonides. They were not only signalized by a hundred valorous Actions;
their amity and friendship did no less contribute to render them Illustrious.

They made it shine and glitter, even against Envy and Emulation, by a thousand
remarkable passages, nay in their Habiliaments and Array.

In effect they were seen always attyred after the same Mode and Method, and
armed in such sort, as was sufficiently significant.

Their Heads were covered with Caskets or Helmets, adorned with the figure of
two Men aiding each other to sustain and uphold one heart, in the midst whereof
were plumes of Feathers of the color of fire, sorting or issuing it in guise
of Flames, to express the ardour of their friendly Amity. This Motto was
engraven under their Hearts. One alone animates both. For on the Scymeter were
seen the trunk of a Man with two heads, compassed and bound with a Crown of
Laurel, with these Words on the bust, Amity makes but one. On their Bucklers
was depainted each of them peeping into a Looking-Glass, which instead of his
Visage, represented to him that of his Friend.

Although these Portraits were small, yet that did not leave them, otherwise
then to be marvelously resembling each other, and the famous Protogene their
friend, had there so counterfeited the natural, that having even demonstrated
their Amity upon their Faces, he seemed to have found the secret to paint their
hearts. That was the Body of the Devise or Emblem, which they were not so
solicitous to invent according to the Rules, but according to their
Inclinations. For Soul there were these Words, It Is my Self.

But if they signalized their Amity by these petty small exterior Marks, they
rendered them much more illustrious, by the noble Actions which they did in this
Battle.

They there fought always one near the other, or rather to say, they fought one
for another. For 'twas said, that Leonides had his eyes perpetually fixed on
Kion, which made him as a second buckler of his Body, and of his Sword, and
that when he saw any turn against this dear Brother, no Obstacle was
sufficiently able to hinder him to cause the hands to fall which sustained him.

Kion likewise warded off no other blows which were upon young Leonides. And of
these two brave Lovers and Adventurers, there was not so much as one that dealt
or warded the least blow for the defense of his own life. So that to see an
Enemy fall under the Sword of the one, it was not enough to judge, that he had
attempted the life of the other, and at this Encounter they gave such
Testimonials and Tokens of their friendship, ghastly here to behold, by the
number of dead Corpse wherewith they covered the Field of the Battle: But
behold, my Lord, something more worthy your attention.

Lysimachus having lost the day, and totally defeated in Battle, retired
himself into Chalcedone, where Ariamene pursued him with such diligence, that
he there enclosed him, and shut him up before he had dreamed of repassing into
Thrace. Also Lysimachus believed not that they would presume to infest him,
which was not separated, but by a small Ferry or Passage of the Sea, from the
Capital City and Metropolis of his Kingdom. For as you know, Chalcedone is
situated and seated upon the Promontory, at the Entrance and Passage from
Pont-Euxin, and all over against or directly opposite to Bizance. On one side
the Sea washes its Walls, and the profound and deep Trench and Dike which
encompasseth the other part, serves as a Bed to a rapid River, which dividing
themselves into two Arms, encloseth all the rest of its Circuit. This abundance
of water is the cause that all the Neighboring and Circumjacent Fields, are no
other than Marshes, so that when they would make Trenches, they make unwarily
small Rivers.

Those difficulties notwithstanding did not deter, nor yet divert Ariamene from
the Siege. He took Ships in the Neighboring Ports, and filled them with able
men, and upon the Sea stopped up all the Passages to Lysimachus, and as for the
succor which he might possibly receive from Thrace, he caused his Army at the
self same time by Land, giving such necessary orders and directions for the
Siege, and having rendered himself Master of all the Frontiers and Outworks, in
a few days he found means to approach the Walls with Ramms, by the favor of
some Bridges of Boats, wherewith he covered a part of the Moats. I can speak
experimentally of this Siege, in regard I was in the number of the besieged.

The endeavors and devices of the Engines were not without Effect, and their
Battery overthrew one Panel or piece of the Wall.

The two Brothers put themselves in the Front of their Armed Followers, entered
the first breach which was guarded well and defended by an infinite number of
their Enemies, and having forced their way a cross Stones, against Arrows,
Pikes and resolute men, they had in fine the pleasure of fighting within the
City.

There were already of the one Party and the other many fallen, and the Swords
of our young Adventurers had felled down so many men, that the heaps of the
dead Corpse one upon another repaired almost the breach which had been made, and
by an effect of Valor, which was contrary to them, they themselves shut up the
Passage, in such sort that they themselves endeavored to open it; when one of
the Besieged accosted Kion, laid on him so heavy a blow, that he was
constrained to rest his Knee on the Earth. Leonides who had taken no other
care, than according to his Custom, to ward off the blows which were aimed at
his friend, thought to dye because he could not have warded him from the last.
He fell furiously on him who had dealt it, and seeing him retired behind
others, pursued him in spite of all such as opposed his passage. You may very
well believe that Kion, who until then had not also fought but for Leonides,
would not have withdrawn, or abandoned him, in danger where this here had not
engaged himself, but to revenge him. He followed him through a thousand Swords,
and because he whom Leonides pursued, still kept himself alooff, they engaged
so far within the City, that they were found alone to defend themselves. In
sum, the great number that oppressed and over-bore them, and all their worthy
Actions, served to no other use then to render their Surprise more considerable
to Lysimachus. The Besiegers were repulsed, being deprived of succor so
advantageous, and the Thracians saw themselves at liberty to repair the Ruins
of their Walls.

In the mean time these two Valiant Brothers, who were but slightly wounded,
for as much as the seizing them behind, they had in spite of them managed
their lives and way; they were led and placed in two separate Towers, where the
King of Thrace had caused them carefully to be shut up.

You will observe, My Lord, that amongst those who had been slain by Leonides,
was the eldest of the Children of the King of Thrace, and that which had
principally animated Leonides against him, that he had seen his hand lifted up
against Kion.

That Prince was named Diomede, and of all his Brethren there was not one for
whom Lysimachus had so much tenderness as for him. He loved him with so
forcible a passion, that he would have him perpetually as a Companion in all
his Wars, dividing even betwixt them the whole Sovereign Authority; his own
life was not so dear to him as was that of his Prince; and they astonished
themselves how nature was so puissant on him who passed as you know for
unnatural. Also when he knew of his death, he was more afflicted than if he had
learnt the subversion of all his Kingdom. His perplexity appeared visibly in
his Visage and in his Actions, as well as in his discourse: and I can truly
tell you, that his desperation manifested it self even through such and so many
infirmities, as were unworthy a man. He deliberated not long upon the Revenge
he would take: and seeing the Murderer Diomede in his hands, he resolved he
should die. It was in vain for all those that were near him or had any
influence upon him or that were tender of his reputation, to represent to him
the Laws of Honor and of Arms; those of his passion were more forcible, and
even Theodore the Philosopher (the liberty or reputation of whose Sentence
caused him to be Surnamed Athee, and whom the King your Father had sent
Ambassador Extraordinary to him,) having presumed to contradict him thereon,
the King was so moved that he menaced him with death. It was then when this
Philosopher gave him such convincing Answers, as you have known, and all Greece
has so open Published, Thou shall do to him no more than a Cantharide (or
venomous green Fly) can do to thee. Lysimachus more irritated than before,
replied that he would have him hanged* Reserve that Execution for thy Curtisans
which fear it, replied he, as for me it is indifferent to die upon the Land or
in the Air. These words put Lysimachus in such a furious fume against him, that
if the terror of the King your Father had not restrained him, he would without
doubt have executed and effected his Menaces.

It was in vain therefore that they endeavored to oppose his Cruelty; he had
caused magnificent preparations to be made for the Obsequies of Diomede, and
would have his Hearse bedewed with the Blood of his Murderer. But the
resemblance that there was upon the Harness of these brave Brothers, that
having hindered the Soldiers to discern with which hand he had been wounded,
Lysimachus knew not which of the two he should take. They had sufficiently
assured him that the blow was from one of them: but they could not discern from
which. Thus having fruitlessly Essayed to draw some clear Testimony from those
who were there present at his death, and seeing none possibly able to instruct
him but Kion and his Brother, he endeavored to learn it from themselves.

He gave Commission to one of his Captains named Evandre (and who was of his
guards) to inform himself, and this Captain having been instructed in what
Method he should proceed, he went to visit Leonides who had been shut up in a
Prison separate, for they would by no means permit them the favor of being
together.

Evandre feigned that he came for no other intent but to give a Visit: and
after some Civilities had past, he told him, that he was not the person alone,
that so much resented and shared in his misfortune, that all those who had
been Witnesses of his Courage and Valor, could not but be concerned, and
interest themselves on his behalf, and that even the King himself could not but
be an admirer of him, although he had been fatal to him in depriving him of his
Son.

Leonides who would willingly give the honor of the Combat to his Brother,
replied that the similitude of his Armor, had without doubt caused him to take
him for Kion, and that the gallant Exploits he attributed unto him, could not
be separate from that hand.

Evandre imputing this Discourse to his Modesty, pressed him further on the
same Subject: but Leonides comported himself so handsomely, that the other was
altogether persuaded that Diomede had been slain by Kion, and upon that
consideration went to see him for further assurance.

He entertained him after the same Method he had done Leonides: but Kion would
by no means assume a Victory to himself, which he had not won, he who finding
all his honor in that of his Brother, would not be less generous to accept of
his own, in the like Encounter Evandre not being able to discover any thing,
went to find out the King, where learning the ill success of his Commission,
resolved to employ himself in the clear discovery thereof.

The self same Evening he sent for them, and as he had extremely dissembled, he
treated them with many demonstrations of friendship, and testimonies of
goodness, demanding their Pardon for the bad Entertainment they had received.
He protested to them, that it was not by his order that they had been so
straightly shut up, and that for the time to come he would demonstrate, that he
did not consider them as Prisoners, and would let them know he had not sent for
them, but to assure them, so much.

With this discourse he made them insensibly pass with others, who seemed no
less obliging, and told them he believed himself not a little recompensed for
the defeat he had in Battle, by the prize of such two Courageous Men, and
insensibly insinuating himself into the Subject of his Sons death, he addressed
himself particularly to Kion, declaring to him that if any thing were capable
of comforting him, it was only that he had yielded to none but the most Valiant
Man in all the World.

Kion not foreseeing his Artifice ingeniously answered him, that the Action
which he attributed unto him came from the hand of Leonides. Leonides who would
yield the honor to his Brother acted as abovesaid, and both the one and the
other reciprocally yielding the honor of the Exploit as above related,
Lysimachus lost all manner of hopes of being truly informed.

What, said he then, was there so little honor in Vanquishing of Diomede, that
no person will avow his defeat? Leonides willing to purge his Brother from that
reproach, and at once to set an end to their Contest; we have both my Lord,
replied he, overcome him, and we have therein found so much honor and acquired
so much glory, that we both Challenge it.

The impatient Lysimachus was not appeased by or with this obliging Reply, but
contrarily was in such a manner heated, that quitting his Custom, he could not
any more dissemble his Fury and Rage: well, said he, so much the better, I
shall then have Victimes upon whom to wreak my Vengeance, and you shall both
die, since you are both guilty, and immediately Commanded the Soldiers who had
led them there, to return them to Prison.

Leonides presently changed Note and Language upon these words, and seeing of
what Importance the Life of his Brother was, without further dissimulation, Ah!
Lysimachus, cried he, we have both overcome, but it was my self that dealt the
Mortal Blow to thy Son. Thou King of Thrace, replied Kion, my Brother's
innocent, it is my self alone that have deprived thee of Diomede. I leave you,
my Lord, to judge whether or no Lysimachus was surprised, to hear them both at
once change discourse, and that each of them did impute that to himself, the
self same Crime from each which had so carefully and with so much solicitude
freed himself.

That made him believe that he should be sufficiently informed according to his
own desire, and upon that account, he made sign to the Soldiers to let them
further speak.

Leonides having that liberty said to his Brother; What then, after having so
long time disputed the Victory over Diomede, must I yet dispute it against
Kion? But tell me your self, replied this, what have I done to you, my dear
Leonide, who obliges you to be willing to take from me the honor of slaying
Diomede? You have Vanquished so many, generous Brother, replied Leonides, do
not envy me the honor of vanquishing one alone.

Their Contest had lasted longer, unless Lysimachus perplexed with this
discourse, discovered no other thing than their Amity, and therefore
interrupting them, thus spoke unto them.

Hah, hah! Which of both will appear the most Criminal? Ah my Son, I will
avenge thee of both. The most innocent is sufficiently culpable, since he
boasts of thy death.

Upon these Words, he caused them to be returned again without further hearing
them.

They put them again in the same Prison, that they might, as there was manifest
appearance, then being together, might if 'twere possible decide the Contest;
for what ever Lysimachus had said, without doubt it had bin facile, not to
confound the author of the loss with him, that had bin innocent.

I knew from the Captain who had them in Ward, that they recommenced again,
their friendly combat in the Prison, and not being able to vanquish each other,
in this generous dispute, they bethought them of attempting another remedy.
They resolved every one in particular to write a Letter to Lysimachus, and as
the King showed it to me, thinking to justify himself to the King your father,
by this Conduct and management, behold a Copy I have drawn of each of them.

Kion
to King LYSIMACHVS, Health.
My Lord,
I Repeat and reitterate you again, that I my self alone am guilty of the Death
of Diomede.

If my tongue has rendered me suspicious to you, you ought to believe my Hand,
for it is that which perpetrated the Crime. My Brother is innocent, all his
Crime is no other, but that he was willing to share in mine, and when he
accuses himself of Guilt, it is not as the Murderer of Diomede, but as the
Brother of

KION.


LEONIDES to LYSIMACHVS.
SInce Valor passes with thee for a Crime, I vow unto thee, that my Brother is
more criminal than my self. It is not therefore to say that he has slain
Diomede, for it is no great Exployt to have done no other than to have killed
thy Son, for if he had done it, it is true he deserved to have bin punished, and
'twould not have bin a small Crime, to have profaned and polluted his valiant
hands, in the blood of the treacherous and cowardly Lysimachus: but thou
should take it of me alone, for it is I only that have polluted my self.
Revenge therefore thy Son, who had not courage to defend himself. This Action
would be reproachful to others, as well as to the King of Thrace, and it would
be a shame to take so unworthy an advantage of our Misfortune, but they will
pardon thee, who would nor could not have power to reveng, if thou give
us liberty to defend our selves, use therefore without fear thy utmost power
upon the murderer of thy Son. But confound not the Innocent with the Guilt, if
thou will not have all Men and the Gods also even for thy Enemies I reitterate
to thee again, that I alone have killed Diomede; and the Victory had not bin so
difficult, but for the carrying it away, some Succors must have come to

LEONIDES.


You see, my Lord, that the style of these Letters are very different. Kion
thought to obtain what he demanded of Lysimachus by gentleness and mildness,
Leonides dreamed of nothing more than to exasperate him, to draw all his fury
upon himself: but neither the one nor the other had the desired success.

I was present when Lysimachus received these two Letters. He read that of
Kion, which had bin first brought him, not having produced any testimony of its
effect upon his mind: but he often changed his countenance, in seeing that of
Leonides, and after he finished its perusal, he was so transported with rage,
that he could not forbear expressing himself in a furious tone and voice, he
braved me, the small piece of insolence, that he is and would have conceived
himself generous, in outraging a Son, who no more was in a condition to defend
himself: but if Diomede be dead, let him know, that Lysimachus is yet alive. He
shall dye, even that arrogant Leonides, and I design him to such exquisite
torments, that I will make him repent of this Victory, whereof he so proudly
vaunts himself. I will render him the desirable Destiny of Diomede. He shall
dye alone, least he should be consolated by the meeting of such an unfortunate
one as himself, and since he will make himself alone culpable and guilty, he
alone shall suffer the pains of both.

But added he a little afterward, that which he demands is, to dye alone; and
if I give his Brother his life, I should make my self a recompense for his
Crime. No, it is so, that both must dye, only one alone is not able, nor yet
capable to bear all my vengeance, one Life alone would not be sufficiently
durable to commemorate and resent all the Evils and so many Mischiefs. They
shall both dye, and that insolent Leonides shall not have the Honor to have
saved the life of his Brother.

He held a thousand such Discourses as these were, and spent above an hour,
uttering forth nothing else, but menaces alone. In vain had the great Ariamene
sent to him diverse times to treat of their Ransom, we saw the fatal day that
these two illustrious Victims should be sacrificed to Diomede.

The Scaffold designed for their Execution was erected upon the Walls of the
City, in a certain place where they were so high, that they appeared without
the Scalado, and so thick, that the endeavors of the Rams had bin there of no
utility, besides the swiftness and rapidity of the River, being much more deep
and profund there, than any where else, rendered the approach almost impossible.

He purposely chose out that certain place, that all the Camp of Ariamene might
testify his Vengeance, and to distort and extend it, stretched out in some
strange mode and manner even upon all his Enemies, for the sanguinary and
bloody displeasure, that so dismal and deplorable a Spectacle, might be able to
carry them. As if he had even apprehended that their eyes could not have given
nor yielded them a sufficiently great certainty of this loss, he caused it to
be confirmed to them, by some Soldiers to whom he expressly and premeditated
purposely granted free liberty; and having caused a double Guard to be set
through all the Quarters of the City, in conclusion, he commanded to draw forth
these innocent Victims out of Prison, and to lead them where they should be
sacrificed.

They would have bound their Hands, but Leonides not being able to brook such
an Indignity; What says he, Lysimachus fears us yet disarmed, Go, go, says he
to him, who designed it, directing himself to him who approached for that
purpose, cause us not to call to mind the treachery and unwor^hiness of thy
Master, and let us believe, that we go of our selves to dye.

At these Words they went forth, Kion and he, and walked together to the
Scaffold, without any further instance made to bind them, for as much as the
King had not expressly commanded it, and being alone and without Weapons, they
could make no resistance.

They knew by the preparations made for their Death, and by the report of those
who led them there, that whatever Theater Lysimachus had made, he contented
himself that they should lose their heads only; and they knew also at the same
time, that Ariamene advertized of their Misfortune, came to attack the City in
three different places, but using all endeavors imaginable, to render himself
Master thereof, he had bin repuls't with great loss, all that was too true.
This generous King, after having taken a little breath, advanced himself again
even toward Chalcedoine, and recommenced the Assault with new ardour, when the
two Brothers appeared on the Wall.

That sight did in such a sort animate their Troops, that there was not almost
one Soldier, who would not have some share in the honor of their preservation:
but their generous emulation was of no utility, and all that it produced, was
only to give some joy to Kion and Leonides, in letting them see the pains they
had taken for their deliverance. However they prepared their death with so much
speed, that they foresaw that what Success soever the Arms of Ariamene had, the
City could not be so soon taken, that they were not in a condition to receive
Succor.

They stayed to cast their view upon the Camp, not desiring to be employed, but
only to have themselves seen the small time that remained to them to do it. And
Leonides being willing to prevail, and essaying yet once more to make Kion
resolve to save his Life. If you were willing, said he to him, you would have
done, even you only alone, more than the Army of the great Ariamene, for you
should have bin saved your self; but there is yet time enough; disavow a Crime
that you have not committed (since it must be called so) and fight not against
your self, as long as all our Troops fight for you. Ay my Brother (replied
Kion) and I can do much more yet, if you please, since that I can preserve you
your self, even you. Preserve me (replied Leonides) Ah! that is that which we
cannot do both of us, and if I should be so sufficiently treacherous, as not to
dye with you, I should infallibly dye with shame and with regret, to have seen
you dye without me.

He would have continued, when the Executioner interrupting them, advised them
to put themselves in a condition to dye, and first addressed himself to Leonides,
he signified to him, that he had order to begin with him, Leonides appeared
very willing, because he imagined that it would always give more time to
succor his Brother. He then replied, that he was ready to dye, and demanded no
more, than leisure to give him his last embraces. There was not any Person that
opposed, he embraced him yet another time, Adieu, my too generous Brother
Adieu. He would have added something, But Kion interrupting him, replied, Say
not unto me Adieu, I will not quit nor abandon you, my dear Brother, and am far
from our separation, death unites us for ever. Leonides replied not to this
discourse, but by a small endeavor that he made to embrace him, yet more
straightly and closely: afterward unclapsing himself from between his arms. Oh
Lysimachus! cried he, preserve Kion, or else thou go to destroy in one day,
a miracle of friendship and amity, that Nature could not repair in one Age. At
these words he withdrew from him, to place himself at the other end of the
Scaffold, where was raised a little Post or Beam, on which he should have lost
his head.

Kion followed him mournfully, his Eyes fixed, and was seized with so violent a
pain, that there was little appearance, but that he would have prevented the
office of the Executioner. The least noise he heard caused him to return his
head, to see whether it were not some succor come to his Brother; but that
served but to let him see, that he should expect none at all. For if he had
cast his Eyes upon the Camp of Ariamene, he saw, he used but unprofitable
endeavors, if he should fix upon the People, which assisted at that sanguinary
Spectacle, he might see enough that bewailed him, but not one that would
succor him, and if he looked upon Leonides, he saw himself assisting at his own
death.

In effect, he had almost stretched out his Neck to the Executioner, then when
he testified, that he would willingly spoke one word to his Brother. He easily
obtained permission by reason they foresaw not but that might be of the
smallest consequence: however they observed that after he had spoken to him
some words very softly, they ran both together, holding one another by the hand
toward the edge of the Scaffold, which butted toward the City Moat or Ditch,
and there precipitated themselves both together.

This Action strangely surprised all those, who beheld it, for the Exsessive
height of the Walls, and the impetuous rapidity of the River, even very
frightful to behold, would not have permitted them to have foreseen it. Also
they immediately believed, that they have done no other, than changed the kind
and manner of their Execution, and that by reason they would not fall by the
Hand of the Hangman, they had not yet bin able to escape death. But the River
was not so cruel to them, as was Lysimachus, and after that by reason of the
weight of their fall, they had bin sunk down in the Water, it cast them up
again upon the face of the River, not far from the place where they fell.
Leonides was the first that appeared, and supporting himself by the motion of
his hands and feet, he looked on all sides; to see whether he could discover his
brother. It was not long but that he observed him acting and moving, as he had
done himself, but accidentally finding himself nearest the Shore, he would not
in the beginning use any endeavor to advance forwards, until he had seen him
before him.

Kion in like manner would have kept himself behind Leonides, not being able to
resolve to lose the sight of him in the danger, and that he might be ready to
succor him, in case of emergency or necessity. So that as if he would have bin
ashamed to be the first out of danger, they remained some time there in
Emulation, and their friendship seemed to them more mournful in this broad
River, then it had been within the City.

However they gained the Shore in despite of a thousand Arrows, which they had
shot against them from off the Walls, they saw themselves in a condition to
revenge themselves.

The Land afforded them immediately a Party of Forces, which the Water had
debarred them from, and scarce had they recovered strength to walk, but taking
each one a Sword, they ran without any other Weapons, as wet as they were, to
the place where the valiant Ariamene had given the Assault.

Their presence so astonished those who saw them, that some believed they had
been alreay dead, and took them for their Shadows, that came to avenge
themselves. In sum, their presence infused so much courage into those who began
to grow weary, that after some extraordinary endeavors, having made their
Enemies and their Walls to yield and give way, the great Ariamene entered the
City victoriously. The Massacre was great within Chalcedoine, and though
Ariamene did all that might be possible to hinder its pillaging, they revenged
it more than they otherwise would have done, for the indignity they had there
received: The Soldiers in the^r furious rage, made no distinction neither of
Age nor Sex, and he who could not kill a Man, would force himself upon Woman or
Child, whereby to dye his Sword. The slaughter was so prodigious, and the
Streets were so strewed and covered over with so many dead Corpse, that those
last that entered, finding such great heaps to oppose and stop up their Passage,
were more incommoded by the dead, than by the Living.

The day ended before the disorder, and when the Shadows of the Night could
conceal any one from the fury of the Soldiers, they created a new day by the
fire they put into the Houses, and seeking their Enemies, by the assistance of
this dismal and fatal light, they made the City to contribute its aid in the
Massacre of its Inhabitants. However Ariamene who would have preserved it,
dispatched such good Orders and Directions, that the fire was extinguished and
wholly quenched. The Water there served not all alone, but the blood which ran
down the Streets was therein employed; the dead had at least this fruit of
their decease to preserve their Country, and the City by this blow, drew an
advantage from the Massacre of its Inhabitants. As for Lysimachus, as he was
Master of the Sea, it was easy for him to save himself, and I imbarqued my self
to retire to Bisance with him. This ill success obliged and constrained him to
treat of Peace with Ariamene; but, my Lord, I will not entertain you with this
negotiation, for as your design is no other than to learn that which concerns
our two Illustrious Brothers, I ought to insist upon none, but the Subject that
imports them.

Agamee was in that certain part of his Book, and he was thereunto fixed
through such a mavelous attention, when a Shepherd came to interrupt him, and
tell him from Telamon, that he prayed him to excuse him, if he returned not to
find him, and that he did in^ite him to go still to Hippique, where he should
meet him, if he had not rather expect him where he left him; and behold what
obliged Telamon, to send him to make this Complement.

We have seen that Telamon had abandoned Agamee, to return to Ergaste and
Celemante, and to see the cause that retained them so long a time: but he had
scarcely walked two hundred Paces, but he called for Ergaste, so that following
the sound of his voice, he entered into the high way of a Wood, where he found
them in an occupation which surprised him no less than the meeting which he had
had near the Pond. Ergaste and Celemante assisted a Man who had mounted
another, who had bin sore wounded on horseback; and in the same place, he yet
saw a third stretched out upon the ground as dead. Telamon immediately judged
that he whom he and Agamee had met a little beneath in the like condition,
ought to be of the company of these here, and he was not deceiv^d. He whom they
remounted on horseback was the self same Cavalier, who had bin sometime before
attacked by four others, so as we have seen, and who pursuing the fugitives
even within the Wood, there had found four new Enemies in Ambush, who had put
him in that condition: but they were all fled having seen the third to fall who
was of their company, by blows which they also had received.

The Squire of the bravely unknown was without any Wounds, although he had done
all that was possible for the defense of his Master: but it was not at him that
they aimed; and 'twas he who having seen these Assassines turn in flight, and
not able alone to replace his Master on horseback, wounded as he was, had
dissuaded Ergaste and Celemante, whom he had accidentally met in seeking some
one to aid him.

As it was not then time to think of satisfying their Curiosity on this
Subject, but rather to succor that unknown; they dreamed of nothing but of
remounting him on Horseback, and seeing that there was no appearance that with
facility he might go to Gonnes, as he made account, by reason of weakness, and
the loss of a considerable quantity of Blood by his wounds, Telamon offered him
the House of Alcidias his Father, as being the nearest. The unknown was not in
a State of refusing it, and he even besought him that he would take care of
that Cavalier who had been laid along in the same place, that they might see if
he were yet in a condition to be succored.

Ergaste and Celemante did officiously undertake that care; and for Telamon,
having mounted the Squire behind his Master to uphold him, he Conducted both
the one and the other to the House of Alcidias, walking on foot before them; He
returned not through the place where he had left Agamee, because that from the
place where they were, there was another way shorter to go to the House of
Alcidias, and in that condition wherein the unknown was, there was not any time
to be lost.

The Shepherd repeated part of those things to Agamee, with the Compliment that
Telamon had sent him to make, and they may judge of the pleasure and
satisfaction which that Athenian had taken at its reading, since that instead
of being touched, with some curiosity for that new adventure, he chose rather
to send to Telamon, by this Shepherd, that he would expect him in a certain
Alley that he perceived one hundred paces from thence, where he went to
withdraw himself from the Highway, and there continue more reposed, in the
reading his book, whereof he saw the sequel and consequence was such.

The peace of Lysimachus being concluded, and Satyr with his Allies seeing
themselves destitute of his Succors, they were constrained to cast themselves
under the protection of Prytanis, one of the Kings of the Bosphore Cimmerien.

This Prince was then himself waging War against his own Brother, named Eumele,
and the subject of their Discord was the partage or division of the Kingdom.
The Embassy whereon the King, your Father, had honored me with, and this having
given me some reputation amongst the People of the North, I had bin called to
assist in composing that difference; and I should have bin sufficiently happy
to succeed therein, if Prytanis also had bin so religious, as was Eumele, in
the performance of his Word. But this league and confederacy with Satyr,
having made him entertain new hopes, the War recommenced more earnest and
furious than ever before. Prytanis retired himself into Panticapee, the capital
City or Metropolis of the Bosphorus Cimerien.

Eumele laid siege thereunto, and Ariamene having known that Prytanis had taken
part with Satyr, took that of Eumele, and sent him Kion and Leonides with some
part of his Troops.

These two illustrious Brothers, soon made themselves known in the Army of
Eumele, for as much as they were, that is to say, two of the most gallant
Captains that were in all our Troops. They also yet more manifestly made it
known to their Enemies, but the envious fortune of their worthy Actions soon
interrupted the course, by an Adventure the most dismal, and the most tragical
of the World.

After five Months siege, Prytanis finding himself weak, in point of Soldiers
and Victuals, demanded of Eumele a second Conference. This generous Prince
assented thereunto, though he had Subject sufficient to reject it.

For he had discovered two or three Conspiracies contrived to assassinate him,
by the practices of Prytanis, who had caused the Guards of Eumele to be
corrupted for that end; and all these Traitors had afterward took refuge
within the City. However Eumele would not that it should be said, that he had
refused to conceade to a Peace, and these Kings saw one another upon a small
rising, between the Walls of the City, and the Camp of Eumele, both the one and
the other equally distant.

Eumele (near to who I had dwelt after the conclusion of my Embassy) was
willing that I should accompany him thither, and the two Brothers were of those
of whom he desired to be guides. There is a very fair appearance that the
Parley and Conference, was not craved by Prytanis, but to give occasion to his
followers to sound and endeavor yet to corrupt, some of ours.

For while they spoke together, there was one of the Principal Officers of his
Retinue, who addressing himself perticularly to Kion, said, that knowing his
Merit and his Valor, as well as that of his Brother, he was displeased to see
them engaged in so ill a bargain; and above all, that he was fixed to a Prince,
who owing them so many obligations, had not placed them in the principal
Offices of his Army. And if they had done half so much for his Master, in point
of Services and Feats of Arms, he would have laden them with Titles of Honor
as well as Riches, and he persisted in amplyfying the liberality of Prytanis,
and that particular eem that he had both for himself and his Brother. When Kion
had well observed where he was willing to come, and mortally pierced and thrust
through, to see himself believed to be one capable of Treason, interrupted him,
and with an incensed tone, animated with generous fury, said unto him; Your
Master has in so decent an Order, drawn unto him all the treacherous Persons
of our Army, that he shall never for future meet with any one near to Eumele.
But replied the other, They are no Traitors, but whilst they are amongst you;
and since they are belonging to us, they cannot desire any thing more faithful.
I doubt not, coldly replied Kion, but you have more of the recital and simpathy
with such People, than we have with them. The other could not brook such an
unanswering blow without a reply, so that after many stinging Words from one to
another, in the conclusion, this dispute was so forcibly warmed, that the
Cimerian abandoning all mature and sober consideration, and ignorant of any
further Answer, thought it became him to give a reply with his hand, but having
bin frustrated of his design, drew his Sword, and dealt a blow at Kion, who
here having warded it off, stood upon his own defense, and as they knew not the
subject of their quarrel, nor who had wrong, every one immediately taking and
espousing the interest of his Party.

And behold all those who had accompanied the Kings, betook themselves to their
Swords, Prytanis himself not being satisfied with Eumele, began to cry out that
he had broken the Truce, and called to the Gods for Witnesses, and handled his
Sword as the others had done. This Disorder was incontinently observed both
from the Camp, and the City, whence many Troops advanced at the same time, each
one imputing foul play, or injury done or committed by his Enemy. In fine, the
Conflict was so great, and sanguinarily bloody, that above two thousand fell
there, and amongst the others Prytanis.

This Prince having there wounded Kion in the Arm, had soon drawn L^onides upon
him, and as nothing was able to resist the same, when he began to revenge for
his Brother, he compelled Prytanis in spite of all his assistants, to give
back even to the Walls of the City, and there deprived him of life by two blows
with his Sword: but alas! this Victory cost Leonides dear.

His Valor having engaged him too far amidst the Crowd of his Enemies, they by
Troops set upon him, and having seized him, they drew him into the City, where
all retired themselves.

It is very certain that his Surprise, put all the Camp in a general
Consternation, and the affliction appeared equally in the Visages of the chief
Commanders, as well as the Soldiers, because he was universally beloved of
all. But that which is unconceivable, is the dolor of his Brother. He hesitated
not upon what he had to do; the self same night he slipped into the City, and by
all ways imaginable attempted to see Leonides, in a Tower wherein he knew he
had bin shut up.

Eumele on his side hearing the disgrace of these two illustrious Brothers, and
well foreseeing that they would perpetrate some villainous Act upon the Person
of Leonides, by reason of the death of Prytanis, resolved to apply thereunto
all the Remedies imaginable, which might in any wise depend upon him, and to
that end he sent me the second day with a Trumpet, that I might thereby spoke
with the Wife of Prytanis then a Widow, and who commanded the City.

The Gates were opened unto us, and we were introduced into Panticapee. But
scarcely had we past two or three Streets, but we met a great multitude of
People, assembled in a place in the midst whereof, they had raised a Block of
an extraordinary height and breadth, and in form of a square Pyramid. We
incontinently knew that this was to render the last dutiful Offices to the
King, and conformable to the Custom of the Ccuntrey in the like disgraces, he
who had slain him, ought to be burned with him. I leave you to think in what
manner we were surprised at this discourse. We readily inquired if this news
were certain, and seeing it was general, and that there was not any the least
appearance of doubt to be made thereof, we immediately ran to the Palace, to
see if we might learn some better tidings. But alas! our diligence served to no
other purpose, than to confirm rather our Misfortune.

We were not yet above half way, but we saw a great number of armed Men, who
making their way through the Streets to make place, constrained us to put our
selver under a Gate. They were followed by a bout one thousand more, which
walked four and four abreast, at the falling of certain lugubrious and doleful
Instruments, that their voice and tone, was almost as mournful as the Disaster,
which they denounced and proclaimed. These People were half Pike Men, and the
other half Hurlers of Darts or Shooters of Shafts or Arrows. The first carried
their downwards, their points trailing along the earth, the others had each one
a Bow, the Cord or String whereof was broke, and each two Arrows, with their
heads or Irons taken off.

These here contrary to the ordinary Custom, held their Bows with the right
hand, and the Arrows with the left, and altogether they boar their Shields and
Targets of Withy, negligently hanging at their Shoulders. Their Officers
marched also on Foot, and at the head of each Company, whereof there were some
four in front, every one making a File, and their Ensign-bearers carried their
Banners or Colors dragging upon the ground.

After these Troops, marched as many Cavaleers or Horsemen, all armed except
the head, which they had all bare. The points of their Darts and Javelins were
broken, with their Scutcheons in their right hands, upon the flanks of their
Horses. They made a halt from twenty Paces to twenty Paces, and every time that
they began to march, the Trumpets sounded in the Air so mournful a tone and
noise, that in despite of endeavors, drew down tears from all eyes; four
hundred Women, their hair dischevelled and falling loose, appeared following,
who notwithstanding the rigor of the Season, carried in their Arms, Children
all naked, whom they constrained to cry, by blows given them from time to time,
that no Sex nor Age, might be exempt from grief, and that those who by reason
of their puberty and youth, could not weep for the death of their King, should
by other means be compelled to bewail it.

We afterward saw a Chariot hung with mourning, drawn by twenty Men all naked,
only that they had a Callezon or Drawers made of Human leather, made of the
Skins of their Enemies.

In the middle of the Chariot was a Coffin, wherein lay the King's Corpse, and
round about were Priests, which sang Verses, composed purposly in praise of the
deceased. The Officers of the King's Household followed the Corpse, all mounted
on horseback. These were the most desolate of all, as being those, who also
had the greatest subject: for they were not only to bewail the death of their
King, but their own selves properly and personally, the Custom ordaining that
they and their Horses should be strangled about the Block; to accompany their
Master, and serve him in the other World. Those of the Bosphorus had borrowed
that cruel Custom from the Scythians their neighbors, who strangled them even
upon their King's Grave.

These Men therefore had their Visages, with their demenor, gesture and
behavior, very mournful, for they were magnificently decked, adorned and
garnished, and mounted on excellent horses, most sumptuously furnished, as
being those who not having lost any thing since they went to find out their
Prince.

Of all these Spectacles, it was this last that most moved me with pity and
commiseration; but he who appeared last of all, touched me with a much more
violent grief. I saw the poor Leonides (my Lord) coming, his head bare, his
hands bound behind his back, and walking a foot in the midst of a Troop of
Guards. In this dismal and deplorable estate, however I can truly spoke it, he
rather caused admiration than pity. He walked as one in triumph, with a frank
and cheerful Countenance, a Visage and Face modest and composed, and you would
have said that those who follow him, to carry some part of his Chains were
Prisoners, whom he drew after him as an Ornament of his triumph. They could
never observe his heart to utter forth the least sigh unworthy the height of
his Courage; his Visage demonstrated no kind of alteration, nor did his Mouth
form forth the least complaint.

As for me, I was a thousand times more troubled than was he; when I saw him in
this posture, and making my way forceably through the press, I cried out,
demanding them to surcease, and that they would bring me to speak with the
Queen, from the King Eumele: but all that I could do, served me not to any
purpose. I had fairly besought them and menaced them from the Prince who, had
sent me. I had fairly said, that if the Queen had understood me, she would have
revoked this cruel Arrest.

They answered me, the Queen would do nothing thereon, and that she could not
although she would have bin willing, to repeal and abbrogate the Law, that was
more puissant and powerful than her self. I ran to the Palace, and not having
ever been able to spoke to the Queen, in regard they told me, that she would
not permit her self to be seen all that day in her perplexed state; I returned
to the place, and pressing through the Crowd, I endeavored at least to spoke
with this illustriously unfortunate one. It Is true I saw him at this time a
little moved: but that was not occasioned by his death, it was through grief
for his Brother. I found his poor Brother bound to his Neck with tears in his
Eyes, moans and cries in his Mouth, speaking and uttering forth a thousand
things capable of making ones heart cleave with pity. Leonides dreamed of
nothing else but comforting him, and fearing by reason or for this dear friend,
all that might inspire him with desperation, he earnestly besought all who were
there present, to take care of the life of his dear Brother. I observed that he
rejoiced when he saw me, thinking that his Supplications to me, might have a
more prevalent effect, than it might upon others.

He therefore repeated it to me, and when I had told him of the care that
Eumele had for him. The King, replied he, has too much respect for me: but if
I had bin so happy, as to have rendered him some Service, which merrited the
Honor of his remembrance, I would have craved all for my Brother. At these
Words he turned toward the Block, and beheld it with a very steadfast Eye, and
with a Countenance other than that of a Man going to Dye; he inquired whether
all were ready, and knowing there wanted not any thing but him, he returned
toward me, and seeing me all in Tears: Straton, continued he, showing me his
Hands bound, I would have embraced you, if they would have given me liberty. I
recommend unto you my Brother, Adieu, it belongs not to me to undertake to
comfort a Philosopher.

On these Words, he entered courageously in the Block, by an opening that they
had left there, expressly in one of its sides, and stopping it immediately with
much Straw, and presently afterward the rest of the Ceremonies being finished,
and the Officers of the deceased King designed to follow him into the other
World, having bin stranged round about the Block, they there set fire to its
four Corners.

Although the heat of the Flame constrained even them themselves, who were at a
farther distance than my self, to retire further off, I was notwithstanding so
afflicted, and altogether so full of admiration, by reason of the constancy of
such a one dead, that I dreamt not of removing from the place where I had bid
adieu to Leonides: but behold another Adventure which made me return to my
self. Kion did no sooner see the Flames well lighted, but he very
precipitatedly hurled himself therein. I presently flew to his succor, I drew
him thereout forcibly, in spite of his endeavors, with the aid of some that
seconded me, and from the apprehension I had of his desperation, I took from
him his Sword. I would also have brought him with me to the Camp of Eumele, and
resolved thereupon, but he stole himself from me at the corner of a Street by
the favor of the Night, which then began, and through the crowd of People who
returned from the beholding of that dismal Spectacle, and as I could never
learn news of him since, I doubt not but that the amity which had so perfectly
united his Brother and him, during their life, did not also reunite it by their
death.

Behold all that was contained in that Book, and Agamee finished its reading
when he was accosted by Telamon.

The End of the Second Book.
Tarsis and Zelie. The Third BOOK.
TELAMON had, as we have said, conducted the unknown Wounded to the House of
Alcidias. Alcidias was an ancient Man, of a ready Wit, pregnant judgment, and
of a comely Personage, and although a Shepherd, had notwithstanding spent a
considerable part of his Life in great Employments. His reputation had
occasioned his being chosen amongst others, by the deceased King Antipater, to
deal Sovereign Justice within the two greatest and most important Provinces of
Macedonia.

The sweetness and elevation of his Genius, having rendered him well known in
that Employment, he had yet passed on, and made a greater progress, but the
diversity of Factions, which he observed to be framed in that State, made him
think of his retreat. Above all the death of his dear Wife, who during her
whole life, was an illustrious and worthy Example of Honor and Virtue to all
her Sex, having given some distate in relation to the things of the World, he
had banished himself, even as one exiled to his house at Hippique, there to
terminate the last days of his Life, in the innocence of Agriculture or
Tillage, and in a Sage and Serene meditation of death.

He received the unknown, not only as one wounded whereof the disgrace invited
him to give him some succor, but he received him as a Person, who was airy,
whose Countenance, Features, Gesture, Visage and Physiognomy marked and
betokened, I know not what, some thing more than ordinary worth and grandeur,
and having caused him to be commodiously placed in a Chamber, he gave general
Orders and Directions for all things necessary for his Cure. Yea he even caused
a Chariot to be prepared to fetch the Bodies of the two others unknown, whereby
the last devoirs might be rendered them, if they were not in a state to receive
those of others.

Telamon in the interim, having inquired after news of Tarsis at the house of
Alcidias, he knew that scarcely had the Shepherd entered there, but that he went
out again; and that all those who had seen him, were astonished at the trouble,
and almost the wandering and straying port wherein he appeared to them.

This answer redoubled the inquietude of Telamon, he gave order, that they
should tell Ergaste and Celemante, if they should come in quest of him, that he
would take his way toward Gonnes, by reason they had told him, that his
Brother had gone from that side there; and for that cause he returned to take
Agamee to the place where the Shepherd had informed him again that he expected
him. Agamee had then finished the reading of his Book, and the dismal and
tragic end of that History, had moistened both their Eyes with tears, when he
was accosted by the Shepherd. Ah Telamon! said he to him wipeing his eyes when
he saw him, I am not the more astonished, by the surprise you had soon
testified, in reading some pages in that Book; I am amazed that you could have
power to begin it, without finishing it, if it be not that you had already
known from elsewhere or from others, the tragic and mavelous Adventure of
those two young and unfortunate Heroes, whose Lives are here described. Telamon
did not immediately answer, but only with a sigh, afterward taking the little
Book in his hands, and having opened it toward the latter end, to see only how
far the History had continued, he immediately closed it, and said unto him, Oh
Agamee! I can well be taught the disgrace of these two unfortunate young ones,
of whom you have discoursed me, since even I my self have suffered a share, and
do yet know more of news, than the Philosopher Straton himself; since that he
learnt the greatest part, from no other than my Mouth.

Agamee comprehended not presently all the sense of this Discourse, and
believing that Telamon knew not these things, but because he had known Kion and
Leonides more particularly than Straton, in the voyages that he had made: he
said unto him, I esteem you happy, O Shepherd, to have known these two
unfortunate Heroes, if the knowledge you have had, redoubled not without doubt
the regrets that you also have at their loss.

But however it be, pardon me, if I tell you, that I will not leave you
patient, that you taught me not, that which you said that the Philosopher
Straton had omitted, in a History so full of Wonders. For in fine, I avow unto
you, that I am enamoured with the virtue of these two illustrious Brothers, as
much as I am concerned at their Misfortune.

And I love them so much the more, that their union seems unto me, in some
sort, the Image of that excellent amity and friendship, that I see between you
and Tarsis, whereof you willingly would, that I demand of you also the same
time the news. I cannot tell you any thing of Tarsis, replied mournful Telamon,
and I my self would demand of you, why or wherefore has he done nothing more,
than only to have passed by the house of Alcidias: but I will tell you of
Leonides, if you please, in searching out for Tarsis, or rather I will declare
unto both of the one and the other, since it is true that Tarsis is himself
Leonides.

It is not possible to delineate, how much Agamee was surprised, when he
understood that Leonides died upon a Block, in view of so great a part of the
World in Panticapee, and Tarsis is now yet living at Tempe, were not but one
sole, and alone even one single Person.

What Telamon, replied he, joining his hands, and retiring two or three Paces,
by way of recoil? That Leonides whom the Philosopher Straton saw, burnt with
his own proper Eyes in Panticapee, is the same Shepherd whom we seek; Ah! the
testimony of his death is too illustriously manifest, to make us suspect it to
be a fable; and if it could be capable, yet it should not be addressed to make
one to one so great a Prince as Philadelphe.

Favor me therefore, and of courtesy tell me, how you understand it, and unfold
or explicate me a ridle or mystery, which I would give to be done by Oedipe
himself. The explanation shall be therefore, as well short, as facile (replied
Telamon) but let us not lose more time here, let us seek out Tarsis, and I will
unridle you this Mystery in walking.

Then returning fifty or sixty Paces the same way by which they had come, they
met a small Town, where turning to the right hand, they took the way to Gonnes,
and in the mean time Telamon spoke to him thus.

Here continues the History of Kion and Leonides.
NOT only Tarsis is Leonides, O Agamee, but I my self am that unfortunate Kion,
who was the Companion of all his dismal and mournful Disasters.

This discourse having yet redoubled the amazement of Agamee, (although he was
falling something suspicious in his mind, since he had understood that Leonides
was Tarsis) he could not refrain himself from interrupting Telamon. I thought
(said he unto him) not to come to see the People of Tempe, but as illustrious
Shepherds: but by what I see, I find my self (contrary to my expectation)
amongst Heroes. I ought therefore well to foresee, Telamon, that these
illustrious Commencements of apprentiship, that you did so young among the
Th^beans, could have no other than such mavelous consequences: but I am too
impatient to learn that which you promiss me, to interrupt you for a longer
time.

Telamon answered with as much civility, as such obliging Words deserved, and
after he had told him that Straton the Philosopher, having bin his particular
Friend, he had doubtless taken pleasure, to set a much higher value upon his
Actions, than they in themselves were worth, he continued thus.

It Is not convenient Agamee, that this great Amity which you have seen between
Kion and Leonides should surprise you. For not only were we born, my Brother
and my self of the same Father and Mother, but I will yet tell you, that if
Fortune as well as Nature, had taken a task to render all amongst us in common,
we had not even from our infancy, but the self same Nurse, the self same
Sportes, the same Exercises, yea and even the same Masters; and although there
is some difference in our Ages, there has not bin almost any, in all the
courses of our Lives.

At the return from the Voyage of Thebes, which is the only one that ever I
made without him, we went together to Athens to study in the Academie, where
then presided Xenocrate the Philosopher. The esteem that our excellent Master
had for Travelers, and Voyages gave us encouragement. I say, to me and my
Brother, to spend some years in that Place, and the rather and more especially
to see the Gauls, which we held for our Original Country.

I will say nothing to you of the diverse Accidents that happened to us there,
you will know only, that being in the Capital City of the Gauls, we were
challenged by two young Knights, with whom we had had some difference. Fortune
gave us the advantage of that Combat, but the prosecution that was made against
us, by the Relations of these two young Knights after their death, constrained
us to depart from thence, sooner than othewise we had done, and to change even
our Names for our better security. We then took upon us these of Kion and
Leonides which our Grandfathers bore, and our paternals; and we were so well
accustomed to those, that as it is ordinary enough with those who travel, to
change theirs, we took those of others, in all the remainder of our courses.
Behold Agamee, all that I will declare unto you, in relation to our Voyage from
the Gauls, although that at our being there, we met with other considerable
Adventures: but I pretend not as to the present, but to satisfy that of your
impatience, which you had to know, how it is possible that Leonides should be
living here, when as you have seen him, (for so it may be said) to dye at
Panticapee.

For this end, you shall know that the Wife of Prytanis was daughter to
Aristodeme, Prince of the Senate of Heraclea, before the Tyranny of Clearque.
She had known our Names by our Misfortunes, and that strange accident which
happened to us at Chalcedone, was no less come to her cognizance, than the
History of the Deliverance of Heraclea. That which we had done for her Country,
moved her therefore to some compassion for us, and the natural mildness and
tractable curtesy of the asiatick Qualities and Conditions, which she could not
forget, imprinted an aversion in her, against the cruelty and barbarity of a
Superstition, to which she had never been accustomed. She knew that the Crime,
that they imputed to my Brother, was called Valor in Heraclea, and that this
was an effect and product of that same courage wherein her Country had
received such signal and considerable Services. That Lysimachus had drawn upon
himself from all Asia, the reproaches of cruel and barbarous, by a Vengeance
almost in similitude, to what he would have taken for the death of Diomede, and
although this great Queen had all the mournful Regret and Sorrow, whereof a
virtuous Princess was capable in the death of her Husband, she therefore knew
how to distinguish the Crime of Tarsis, from that of his Fortune. So
compensating in some sort, the Services which she had received from him, in the
Persons of her Compatriots, besides the outrage that she had received in that
of Prytanis, and considering that she owed the first to our Affection, and that
she could not impute the Injury but to his Fortune, she was ashamed to
sacrifice a Life, which had bin so profitable to her Country, so that having
but one Son, very young, the Tuition, Wardship and Custody of whom, rendered her
the Regency, and conserved in her the sole and entire Authority, she had in
design to save Tarsis.

I avow that the Enterprise was great, and that the Execution appeared
impossible: for she would also have saved the significant appearances and
seeming signs, and given to the Memory, and to the Obsequies of the dead King,
all the Honor and Solemnity that to him was due. Moreover when she had had in
contemplation and thought to retrench something, that depended not absolutely
nor solely upon her self; because she agitated in a Law and Custom invetterate,
and of very ancient use and long continuance, of a Royal Prerogative, and of
popular Superstition. What remedy then in an occasion of this nature, where it
was in question publicly to burn a Man, in the view of all the People, and yet
therefore not to cause him to dye. What way to save appearances? what means to
offer these Sacrifices, and not to immolate the Victim? Certainly I believe
they were the Gods, who inspired, to him whom you go to understand; be it by
reason they never abandoned virtue, and oppressed innocence; be it because that
there having bin nothing that more pleased them in Princes, than Actions of
Clemency, for as much as it is principally from thence, that they immitate them,
they would not leave the generous Compassion of this great Queen, without the
satisfaction of an happy Success.

The Corpse of the dead King being placed upon the height of the Block, to be
exposed to the view of all the People; my Brother was entered, as you have read,
through an opening place, that they had left on one side, and which they had
immediately stopped up with some quantity of Straw. He found this Block empty and
hollow within, but made no reflections thereon: and being layn flat upon the
ground at his entrance, expecting when they would set fire thereunto, he dreamt
of no other thing but death, with constancy worthy his Life; when he felt some
certain one, who took him by the Arm, drew him, as if he would have made him to
rise, and that having turned his Eyes from that side, he discerned by the
favor of some beam of light, which penetrated through the roof of the Block,
that it was a Man that waited for him there, and whom he had not at first
perceived, by reason of the obscurity of the Place, and that he issued forth at
Noon or light day.

My Brother being raised up again in surprise and that amazement, that you may
readily conceive; this same Man took him by the hand, by one of his own, and
holding a close Lanthorn in the other, caused him to descend, by an opening
newly made under ground, under a Vault, where he immediately felt an
extraordinary freshness, all cool, he understood or heard even the noise of a
soft murmuring very near that Place, and had no sooner made ten or twelve
Paces, but he saw himself, through the favor of the light which his guide
brought, upon the brim of a Pond full of clear and fair Water, which glided
down along the Vault. Tarsis still in an incredible astonishment, thought to
have demanded in the Language of the Country, of which he could speak a
little, a solution of this passage of his Conductor: but that Man answered him
only with Signs; so that my Brother having in conclusion found that he was
dumb, disposed himself only to follow him. After they had walked about one
hundred and fifty Paces, still under the same Vault, they made them pass
through a male Gate, and ascend by steps very obscure into a Tower, where the
dumb one shut him up, making him a sign, that he would soon come to fetch him.
In effect, they came to take him away in the Night, and having caused him to
mount into a Chariot all covered, they lead him into the Palace, and by a
stolen Ladder, they introduced him into the Queens Cabinet. He bowed himself
his face to the ground in his entrance, conforming himself to directions
prescribed him by an old Woman, who received him at the Gate, (for it was not
permitted to look the Queen in the face) and he still remained in that posture,
whilst the Queen so spoke to him in the Greek Tongue.

Young Stranger, I believe that you are not ignorant, but that you should dye
occording to the Custom of this Country, and it is by a very particular Grace
and Favor, that I have conserved you your Life, after I had received from you,
the most sensible Affronts and Outrages. However, I am persuaded, that I may
preserve it you with Justice, since it is not by Treason, but by the Law of Arms
that you have committed the Crime, whereof you are accused, and it is with some
kind of Solace and Consolation that I pay you, in that the Services you have
done to the City of Heraclea. But abuse not that Life, that I so freely and
liberally give you, and do not betake your self to Arms afresh, against us, who
after such an Action, can be no other, than Criminal. As for other Matters,
conceal the theft I have made here against our Laws, for your sake and
conservation, and betray not an Act of Grace and Favor, whereof you reappeal
the Fruit and Benefit, and manage through this Secret my Reputation with care,
as much as I have done your Life, and with these Words she sent him away.

In the mean time, I was in so great grief and dolor, which cannot be
conceived, and the affliction wherein I found my self, in contemplating how I
had seen to perish my dear Brother, and to perish by so tragical an end, gave
me no other hope of Consolation than only in death. Straton had once saved me
from my desperation, but he had not appeased it. I stole my self from him
through favor of the Crowd, in the intricazy of his going out; and I returned
apace, resolved with my blood to water the Ashes of my dear Leonides, and to
appease his Shadow, by a Victim which I believed, could be no other than
pleasing to his Mind. In that design, I would have bought a Sword, because that
Straton had taken away mine, and having chosen one out by the favor or light
of a Lamp in the first shop that I met withal, I threw to the Merchant seller
double of what it might be worth, being not willing to continue there to treat
of the price.

That precipitant profuceness joined to my Language, and the Mode of my Attire,
which made me appear a Stranger, having occasioned some Soldiers, who were in
the Shop, to look upon me very narrowly, who questioned with me, and my Answers
having rendered me suspect, they seized me as a Spy, and brought me to the
Queen. The Queen having known me by the free and frank avow that I had made,
commanded me to be put in Prison, I was there carried immediately by her Order,
and 'twas in the same Tower, where the dumb one had presently set Tarsis. I
entered there even almost at the instant, that he was there also brought, at the
coming forth from the Queens. I will learn you to apprehend, if it be possible,
our joy and reciprocal astonishment, at this unexpected Encounter, but they
left us not then, the time to testify it to each other. For after an Officer
had made us swear Secresy, and that he had received our Oath, no more to bear
Arms against the Queen, yea, and not to return into the Troops of Eumele, nor
of Ariamene, they made us both descend by a small Step from the Tower, under
this same Tower, where Tarsis had bin brought, and which we knew by an
Aqueduct. Afterward the first guide of Tarsis having caused us to walk a
league under ground, he made us at last to go out through a secret Gate, in the
midst of the Fields. Thus in few words Agamee, you have heard the narration of
our deliverance.

There we quitted the Names of Kion and Leonides, and reassumed our own, that
we might fulfill the Commands of the Queen, who had engaged us to secresy, to
conceal our selves, and to the Oaths she had so precisely exacted from us; and
wearyed with so many traverses that we had had in our Courses, we resolved to
return and taste the repose of our Tempe, which seemed more preferable, than all
that we could expect else where by Fortune. However in returning we remained
some Months in the Siege of Mitylene, and rendered our selves a little
afterward here; having bin fully satiated, (by the many and diverse unfortunate
Adventures of our Travels) the curiosity of obliging us to depart hence. I will
only add, that we knew by the way, that Eumele had victoriously entered into
Panticapee a little after our departure, and that believing us to be dead
there, he had avenged us by sacking the City, which he had put to the Sword and
fired.

Telamon pressed himself thus to be cut off short, because that in the Moment
that he had pronounced these Words, they had understood Ag^mee and him, those
of a Man which bewailed himself very sadly very near there.

Alas Erigone, said he, in a languishing tone, you would that I should dye, and
behold you are at the point of being satisfied. I would have chosen a kind of
death more prompt: but the pleasure that you have always taken to see me
suffer, has caused me to believe that my Pains would be yet longer, and you
would be yet more content. Your Husband had not bin sufficiently revenged by a
common death, and it must have had also one stranger than mine, to satisfy so
extraordinary a Malice as was yours.

These Complaints having administered them the curiosity to advance toward the
place, where they had understood it; they perceived a Shepherd layn down all at
length near unto a hedge, having all his Cheeks bedewed with tears, his Arms
joined cross his Stomach, the head and sight turned toward a Shepherdess, who
sat upon the Grass near unto him. The Visage of the Shepherd was pale, lean
and lank, and fallen away, as if he had bin newly recovered from some tedious
Malady or Disease. Nevertheless in this bad plight, he ceast not to have
something very agreeable and delightful, because all the lineaments of his face
were regular, his eyes naturally fiery, yet were sweetened and tempred through a
pining and languishing Affection or Amor, his hairs were clear, and of a
Chestnut color all curled; his Phisiognomy decyphred him to be a Man of
Mettle, marking out something of frankness and generosity, his pitch and
stature as much as one could judge, neither of the tallest nor of the least, but
they were better proportioned, and amongst other things he had (I know not
what) somewhat of naturally passionate in all the air of his Person, which
beseemed properly and very marvellously well sorted to the plight of his
disgrace, and the shallowness and lankness of his Visage.

That of the Shepherdess demonstrated it self a little broken and defaced, and
yet notwithstanding she appeared wonderfully fair and beautiful. One might
discern that she was not unsensible of the ill plight of the Shepherd, whatever
reproach had bin made him; for she also had her Eyes bedewed with tears, and
she beheld him with mavelous significations of compassion. Telamon judged
that there had bin no long time that they were at Tempe, because he remembered
not that he had ever seen them, and because he had no other design to employ
himself upon any other thing, than to seek out Tarsis, he returned to go on his
Journey. When the Shepherdess discerned him, she called him by his Name, and
said unto him, Wise and discreet Telamon behold an Action worthy your
generosity, by favor assist me to heal the languishing Spirit of this poor
sick one, and ratify the opinion that they have given me, that nothing could be
able to resist your Wisdom.

Telamon was so press't with his own displeasure, that heno was not in a proper
plight to interest himself in that of others: however he could not refuse a
word of answer, to the request of the Shepherdess, so that approaching himself,
he testified to her, that though he was not seasoned with so much wisdom to
render even to himself the consolation, that was convenient for him, he would
however, if 'twere possible, do something to serve her. I demand nothing of
you, but for this poor unfortunate one, replied she. He has resolved to suffer
himself to perish and dye with hunger in this certain place, where you now see
him, and behold this is the second day that he is there, without taking any
refection or nourishment.

I know that your reputation has given him a mavelous esteem for you, and
it is for that cause I was imboldned to crave your succor for him, as being the
most capable that I know to give it him. Hah cruel! cried the Stranger in
beholding her. The Gods will doubtless revenge me of your hypocrisy. You feign
and pretend to seek succor for me, and it is you alone that makes me dye.

At this Word raising himself sitting up, and addressing himself to Telamon.
Wise Shepherd, said he unto him, all the consolation that I could wish from you
before my death, is that you would understand the Cruelty and Injustice with
which this Shepherdess has treated me these three years. It seems to me that
I shall finish my Life better content, when I see that you will condemn her,
and that my resolution shall have bin approved of so honest a Man, as you are.

Telamon who had the care of his dear Brother in his mind and heart, thought
good to dispense with himself in listening to this Man; although his strange
resolution touched him with pity, and that at another time he went himself to
seek the consolation, that he could have wished from him.

He prepared himself therefore to speak to him only a few words, and all those
were, what he imagined to be the most useful and capable to withdraw his Mind
from the design he had to leave himself so to dye, when a little Shepherd
accosting him, told him from Tarsis, that the Shepherd that he had perceived
about two hundred Paces from thence. prayed him to attend him some moments, and
that he came to go to find him. This was a very great rejoicing to Telamon, to
learn this piece of news, and so much more, that he hoped that perhaps his
Brother would tell him also something in relation to Zelie. He demanded
therefore of this Boy where Tarsis was, with design to go himself before, and
afterward to return to satisfy the desire of the desolate Stranger, but this
Shepherd answered him, it would be labor lost, and that Tarsis would not be
presently at the same place, in regard that when he had found him this Shepherd
walked very swiftly upon the trace and print of a Chariot, and of some
Cavaliers. So that Telamon judging from thence, that in seeking him, he should
without doubt do no other then lose him, took this occasion to give the unknown
Shepherd the satisfaction he wished.

He therefore sat upon the Grass near him, under the shadow of the same Hedge,
and Agamee did as much, but before he would hear him, he would have engaged him
to take some nourishment and refection. The Shepherd appeared to it, that he
seemed not that they could be able ever there to resolve him: however Telamon
knew him so well as to take him, and so artificially and pathetically did
remonstrate him by candor and sweetness, that in the plight wherein he found
himself, it could not be possible for him to make the discourse he undertook
how short soever it might be. That the Shepherdess having on the other side
deputed Telamon a Judge of their difference, and given her word to yield to all
those things to which he would condemn her, after having heard them both, in
conclusion he inclined, suffering some to go to fetch Wine and Aliment
wherewith to repair a part of his strength. He therefore took some small
pittance, and as he was of a temper sufficiently strong, that which he had
taken having put him in good plight to speak without pain, he began his
Discourse in this manner.

The History of Eleandre, and of Erigone.
I Am very well pleased, Erigone, that you are found present at my Narration.
You may at least interrupt me, if I speak something or any thing which is not
true, and I add any feigning to the reasons I have to complain of your
Cruelties. You shall know then, Sage Shepherd, that there are about three years
and a half, that returning from Thebes, the Place of my Nativity, I was obliged
to lie at Larissa, which is as you know, a City of Thessalie, distant from
hence about one hundred and sixty paces. I prepared my self to depart the
morrow morning and past through the principal Street to go to my Inn, when I
perceived to run toward me a Woman, whom I knew not, but she appeared to be
one of quality, she had tears in her Eyes, Lamentations in her Mouth, her Hair
loosely scattered, and was pursued or followed by a Man, who was likewise unto
me unknown, and who had a naked Sword in his hand. After she saw me, and was
near unto me, My Lord, cried she, stretching me out her Arms, save my Life.
This sight moved me to compassion, and the cowardice and treachery of him who
pursued her, having stirred me up to indignation and horror, I handled my
Sword, and rusht into the middle of the Street to oppose and withstand his
passage, thereby to give this Woman leisure and opportunity to withdraw her
self and retire.

This unhappy one, blind with choler and rage, instead of standing still cast
himself upon me, and would have slain me, but thrust himself upon the point of
my self, which pierced him through, so that he fell down dead upon the pl^ce.
The noise that some People then made who beheld us, made this Woman to turn
about her head, and she no sooner saw the Man fall down, but she burst forth
into a great cry, and fell her self into a swoon. I ran to her, and assisted
her to raise her self up, and come to her self again, and she had gathered up
her Spirits, when casting her Eyes upon me, and known me to be him who
succored her, I found that instead of returning me thanks and gratitude, which
I might have expected, she laid hold of my Arm, wholly transported, and with a
thousand tears, conjured those there present to aid her, in arresting the
Murderer of her Husband. At the same time I was laid in Prison, the next
Morning the Judges were assembled, and I brought before them. Since that my
Accusation and Indictment was formed and preferred, all the People who knew how
the Action had past, began to murmur against the ingratitude of a Woman, who
prosecuted me to death for having saved her Life; and even the Judges
themselves appeared to be moved with indignation. Wherefore she rose up and
drying her Eyes, which she had bedewed with tears, she began afterward to
speak with modesty and an admirable grace.

My Lords, I would have believed that the murmuring which I heard, had not bin
against me, if we were in a Country, where conjugal love should pass for a
Crime, and where it was prohibited a woman to love her Husband above her self:
but since we live under Laws quite contrary, I apprehend not why they should
blame me, if I have nothing in the World more precious, than the memory of
mine, and which I should rather believe, to have owing more hatred to him who
had deprived him of Life, or of acknowledgment and gratitude for the
conservation of mine. The first duty of a Widow, is to revenge the death of her
Husband, it is to be a complice and confederate in his death to spare the
guilty, and it behooves me to have wished that I should believe I owed him some
acknowledgment; I therefore, my Lords, crave your Justice, I will not diminish
you his Crime; you know as well as my self, that he has slain one of your
Citizens, in the midst of your City in the open Street, in view of all the
People, as if he would have erected that as a Trophy of his Crime. He will
perhaps say I demanded his succor, but to crave his succor, is that to crave
the death of my Husband? Can there be no other ways or means found out to
appease domestic Disorders? Cannot Wives be otherwise succored, than by
killing their Husbands? And although I should have bin so absolutely palpably
and abominably wicked, as to have demanded this detestable parricide, should it
have bin Innocence in him to have thereunto with me accorded? What couly he
thence infer, but that I should be one of his accomplices and confederate, and
so we must have bin punished both together? Hah, my Lords, it is left to you to
judge, if Murder is permitted by your Laws; as for me, I know very well that
those of mine, and my duty oblige me to demand from you vengeance, for the
death of my Husband.

There her Tears, Sighs and Sobs interrupted her Voice, and hindered her to
proceed further, and finished her discourse, by a silence, yet more penetrating,
and a thousand fold more eloquent than her Words. The Countenances and Hearts
of the Judges appear^d to be changed, and I do not conceal from you what I
began to fear, in despite of all the confidence and security, that before my
Innocence had given me. However I rose up, when they had made me a Sign, and
made my defense in these terms.

My Lords, I am no more astonished, that this Widow prosecutes me with this
ardour and violence, now that she has rendered you the reason. You have
understood that she affected her Husband with so much passion, that the
resentment of his death, has smothered that of the conservation of her own
Life; and it is no wonder that the same passion blinds her against me, since she
blinds it against her own self. But, my Lords, as you measure not the public
Interest by particular affections; and that on the contrary, you know well,
there is more opposite to Justice, than Passion, I fear not that her grief will
be more prevalent upon you against me, nor that you will judge me more culpable,
by reason her affliction is so excessive. I passed by accident through a
Street, I saw a Man that would have slain a Woman, I knew not that she had bin
his, and if I had known it, I have not heard say, that at Larisse the Husbands
had the power to kill their Wives. That which I only knew, that it is the right
of the People, and the duty of every one, to succor and relieve the oppressed,
to defend the feeble and weak against the violence of the stronger, and he who
being capable and able to prevent a Crime, and yet suffers and permits it, is
no less culpable than he who commits it. I then would have repressed and given
check to the fury of this barbarous one, I opposed his passage, and because he
had a Sword in his hand I drew mine. For had I exposed my self armless to the
fury of one already armed, I had not done it against him, but for my self, and
if I would have done nothing against his life, I ought to be precautioned for
my own. In the interim, he cast himself upon me, and would have slain me, but
my self who dreamed of nothing but to appease him, and believed I should have
served him, to hinder him in his furious wrath to commit so lewd and horrid a
Crime, whereof he would have had cause to be the first action, and by which he
would have bin exposed, nay would have exposed himself to the severities and
pains of the most rigorous and austerely inexorable Laws. All the People can
testify, and are Witnesses of what I have done. He pursued me as a Man who
attacketh, and I resisted but as a Man who defends himself. I was contented to
ward off the blows, I also even recoyled and retired some certain Paces, and
did not kill him in conclusion, but his fury precipitated even him himself upon
my Sword.

Behold, my Lords, the narration of the truth of all the Action, such as it is,
and you see whether I am culpable. What have I in common with a Murderer, as
they call me, I who had no other intention than only to save the Life of one of
your Citizens, and to impede the same Crime, for so I may say, for which they
reproach me? For it is convenient if it please you, my Lords, that you
distinguish, betwixt what is my Fact, from that of his, who is dead. That which
is of mine, is no other than a design to save the Life of one of your Women,
and the honor of one of your Inhabitants; to hinder a Man to assassinate a
Woman, and a Man armed a Woman disarmed. If the succor I willingly intended to
both, has not extended nor bin profitable, but only to one, it is that which is
through the fact of the dead and not through mine: and I have done much less
against him, than it was permitted me; for being attacked for one good action,
had I not reason to defend my self, and to repulse force with force? in the
interim I would have done nothing, and he deprived me of the means of saving
him.

My Lords, believe not more of your doubt hereafter of my innocence, and I am
assured that a longer Discourse would serve, but to delay and retard my
absolution. I have said.

When I had finished my Speech, they returned me to Prison, whilst the Judges
went to deliberate and advise, and learnt that the Affair was strongly weighed
and ponderd upon, because the dead was one of the principal Men of Larissa, and
that he had potent Friends. In conclusion the Justice carried it in favor of,
and upon the credit of the Accusatrix, I was absolved and set (as formerly) at
liberty.

After I was out of Prison, my first care was to inquire for the habitation of
Erigone (it is the Name of my Accusatrix, whom you here see present) and I
endeavored by all ways and means imaginable, to have access to her. For I avow
you, I conceived not only an extraordinary esteem for her; but that which you
will perhaps have hardly imagined, instead of the affection ordinarily born in
the heart of others, which from the delight and complaisance, and amongst the
pleasures and sweetness of joy; I was become amorous of her, through the
obstinacy which she had had in prosecuting and designing my death, and through
the Pains and Inquietudes of the Prison. I had learnt that she had bin married
very young, to him whom I had slain, and although he was known to be
extraordinary quick, ready and prompt to Choler: Wrathful, furious, jealous,
and likewise subject to all violent Passions, however his relations sacrifised
her, by reason he was extremely rich, that there had bin but two years since
their Marriage, that and in that time he had many times ill treated her,
without cause or subject, that every one complained of him through out the
City; that all the World admired the sagacity, moderation and wisdom of her
Conduct, with a Man so devoid of reason, and that his last ill comportment had
not sprung nor bin produced, but that she returned a little longer than pleased
him, from some Company to whom she had not gone, but by his order and
direction. All that gave me cause to admire the virtue of a Woman, who in
despite of so many subjects of Aversion and Hate, still conserved a friendship
and amity so constant and generous for a Husband; and the marks and tokens of
her Spirit and Grace, whereof I had bin an Evidence, joined with the natural
perfections, which brightly shone in all her Person, had given me sentiments of
extraordinary esteem for her, that she could not but be passionately beloved. I
therefore sought all occasions imaginable to see and speak with her, and no
opportunity having bin represented me, I fully took a resolution to make one my
own self.

I therefore put my self in sufficiently good order, and about three days
after my Liberty, I repaired to her Gate in the Evening, and concealing my
Name, demanded to speak with her. She was alone in a Chamber with a Maiden, and
as she had her Eyes bedewed with tears; I believed, as it was true, that she
yet wept and condoled the death of her Husband, she knew me presently, and
appeared extremely surprised at this visit.

As for me I approached her with all the submission and respect that I imagined
might be possible, and said unto her. Madam, I have made my defense against our
Judges, but will not defend it against you, and I now come to offer it you,
that you may dispose of it all wholly as you please. She blushed at this
discourse, and answered me. Eleandre (for our Process had taught her my name)
you came to reproach my Ingratitude, and to insult upon my Misery: but however
it be, I am assured, that I have done my duty; and although the Judges have
determined, it suffiseth me that I am content of my self.

Madam, replied I, if I had any thing to reproach you withal, it would only be
the injurious suspicion you have of me, and if I were capable of accusing you
of ingratitude, it could be no other, but because that while I have all the
esteem imaginable for your virtue, you suspect me guilty of the greatest
treachery in the Word. It seems to me therefore, Madam, that a Man who comes
to you only as a supplicant, has but very little of the countenance of a Man,
who thinks to insult on you, and he who would not but ask pardon, is very far
from thinking to reproach you. See you, Eleandre, replied she, I flatter not my
self, I know you have cause to complain of me, and if you do it not, it is
through dissimulation or generosity: But before you condemn me, you must put
your self in my place, and that you see what an honest Wife could do for the
Murderer of her Husband.

It is not but that I persuade my self, but that your intention was altogether
generous: but, Eleandre, they cannot but very little consider the intention,
when the effects are so dismally deplorable; and a Woman who seeing her husband
to be slain, is capable to reason or question the intention of him who did it,
has reason to desire to find Justice and Consolation in his death. I know
Madam, answered I, that you have done all that a virtuous Woman ought to do,
and when I made my defense before the Judges, you did not see me complain of
you, and all the care, that I owed for my Life, was not capable to infuse into
me one single thought, unworthy of your virtue.

But contrarily I have commended it in secret, even then when it fought against
me; I have admired a Woman that would so revenge a dead Husband, his Sword in
his hand against her. Excellently Eleandre, interrupted she me at that Passage,
reflect not on the memory of my Husband. If I have hated my Life, because that
has served as a pretext for his death, I would also hate my little virtue, if
it would serve as an occasion to do injury to that of his. Lets blame, lets
blame, rather together my debility and ill conduct, to have exposed him to so
great and many Extremities, and thereby punish me for my Faults, if you find me
not yet sufficiently punished. Ah! Madam, cried I, altogether transported with
admiration and Love; Oh the means of finding to repeat in one virtue, so
perfect. But through your favor Madam, what can I do, to repare or make a
compensation for my offense? for in sum, I protest to the Gods, that if my
death could render you, that which it has deprived you of, I would surrender
my Life with joy; and that I even now give you, with pleasure, if it can render
you satisfaction, and that it might serve to make pardon my Crime. You know
well, answered me Eriogene, that you are not Criminal, since the Judges have
absolved you: But I dissemble you not Eleandre how innocent soever you are, you
are always guilty as to me, since it is you who has slain my Husband. It Is not
that hereafter I desire your death; I had not demanded it, but by reason I
believed it due to that of his, and since they have determined the contrary, I
am not yet so unjust, that I would make him a criminal Sacrifice; yea I will
even tell you much more, I am very well pleased, that you were not guilty
against the Law; and that it was not possible for me my self to have an
acknowledgment for you, that would have supplied my default, and defended you
against my duty. But if I cease to wish your death, I do not therefore detest
my Misfortune, nor yet complain of my unhappiness, and I do not dissemble to
you Eleandre, in what manner soever you could receive it; how you are him
whereof she has served her self to be made the instrument of my disgrace, I
cannot refrain to extend my hatred even as far as you, nor can I hinder my self
to look on you with this kind of horror that we naturally conceive, and
sometimes in despite of us, for all things that have bin contributary, how
ever innocently, in causing us some great evil, and have once wounded our
Imagination. Yea I suffer, and more than I can tell you in your view, in the
self same hour when I speak unto you; she re-opens the Wounds all bloody, and
seems to fight me afresh my Husband in my very heart; his Image whom I there
preserve, is the outraged by the presence of his Enemy; and since you seek my
consolation, as you have said, I conjure you Eleandre to bear my debility and
weakness, and to leave weeping in peace an unfortunate one in solitude; and
spare me the displeasure of seeing you here any longer time. And as well it
seems me on the other side, that this same sight accuses me with
ingratitude, without any intermission toward you; that she reproaches me with
the same sentiments that I declare to you, and that my ill Destiny having put
me under a necessity to be guilty toward my Husband or toward you, you render
me altogether Criminal, both to the one and the other. Toward my Husband, in
making me permit his Murderer in my house; toward you, in treating you as I
do. Behold Eleandre, behold I avow it to you, remember well an Action to which
I owe the conservation of my Life: but if these offers and civilities that you
do me, be frankly put out from a heart tru^y generous and sincere as I believe;
you will not only pardon my displeasure, but you will also capacitate me to
know even some good liking and consent of an ingenuous declaration, which
signifies well enough, that which I conceive, that it is not powered out through
a difficiency of a grateful acknowledgment to you, but only from the duty of a
Woman, and the affection which she bears to her Husband.

Whilst she spoke these Words, the tears trickled down her Eyes in so great an
abundance, that I was sensibly touched with a real pain. I could have resolved
to have retired immediately, and I answe^ed her; O Erigone, that you were not
more pleasant when you prosecuted my death, than in this day, leaving me with
life under these cruel conditions you impose on me. What Madam I shall live
without daring to see you with your hatred, and as the object of your horror?
What grace or favor do you to a Man, whom you acknowledge innocent, and how
would you punish me then, if I were truly guilty? Eleandre, replied she, wiping
her Eyes with her handkerchief, I have told you all that I can say hereon, and
as congruity and good manners permits me not to chase you out otherwise from
out of my house, and as my dolor also cannot admit of a longer time of my
conversation with you, pardon me if I quit you, that you may have liberty to
retire your self.

At the same time she withdrew, and past away into a Cabinet or Chamber,
shutting the door after her, and left me in such confusion that I am incapable
to depaint it.

Eleandre remained a little time in that same room to take breath, afterward
continued in this sort, I retired my self also a little after, but yet a
thousand times more in Love, than I was ever before, and with a greater desire
to see her again; although she had told me, that I should not only lose my
Design, but my hope; I took so much care to converse amongst Persons, whose
company she frequented; upon whom I had some considerable influence, I would
not be discouraged. This was not therefore a thing very facile nor easy, for
naturally she did not love Company, and especially since the death of her
Husband, she made no Visits, unless it were to those of her near Relations; I
insinuated my self therefore amongst others into the friendship of a Widow, who
was of her Cousins, and one of her most intimate Friends, named Olonie, who
signified to me the day and hour, she was to come to her Habitation: I arrived
there a little after Erigone was there entered, at the first sight of her in the
Chamber, I pretended I was surprised, and seemed willing to retire. But Olonie
who knew my Design recalled me. Where go you then Elandre? said she. Is there
any one here, of whom you are afraid? Erigone who saw me enter, rose up, and as
she sought a pretext to shun me, she replied with an insolent and disdainful
tone: It must undoubtedly be my self my Cousin, and therefore I go to leave you
together. At the very instant she went forth, although her Relation did what
possible might be imaginable to diswade her, neither the offers I made to
withdraw my self, nor any thing else could prevail with her to remain there. I
did not retire my self nor would be repulsed for that, and being informed
another time that she was to come after dinner to the same Relation, I first
came there, my design succeeded not a whit better, but rather less, by reason
the Domestics of Olonie knowing I was there, she past away saying, she came
only to excuse her self.

I attempted three or four other times to accost her, but she precautioned her
self still with so much dexterity, that she deprived me of all means or rather
shut me up all the ways, but one which she her self did not defy, and which
was procured me, in conclusion by the same Relation. Olonie had a fair
Countrey-house the other side of Larisse, about forty furlongs from the City;
and she engaged Erigone to spend there some certain days with her. We conceived
it expedient, Olonie and my self, that I should go there to find them; but to
avoid all imaginable suspicion, I pretended my self ready to go forth from
Larisse to return to my own home; and as the house was in the way, I feigned to
have bin fled and dismounted in passing by, and that I would demand a retreat
there, until I might be able to return, to make up my equipage at Larisse. That
which we had accorded and conserted to, was put in execution, and two or three
days before the Voyage of Erigone, having demanded a little audience of her to
take my leave, the refusal she made me, prompted me to write her this Letter.

ELEANDRE to ERIGONE.
I Should be very angry that any other than my self should give you the good
news, I have to tell you, I depart at last for Thebes, Madam, and thereby free
you, from the sight of that unfortunate one, whom you so much hate, who
persecuted you every where, and gave you so much and so many troubles to shun
him. A Novelty so pleasing to you, doubtless merits your permission of my
delivering it you vocalls, but you have refused me that happy consolation, by
reason you had little or rather no regard to conserve the life, and therefore
wish no other than the death of

ELEANDRE.


This Letter was given her, but I thereto received no reply. In fine, Erigone
and her Cousin departed, and two days afterward I mounted on horseback and
arrived by night near the House of Olonie, by reason I conceived that certain
time most proper for my design. I sent back my Servants and Horses to Larisse,
with directions to wait upon me there, and as for my self I went on foot (only
with one Slave) to the House of Olonie, and counterfeited the best I could my
Personage, and even pretended that I had bin Wounded, and put my Arm in a
Scarf, so that in effect, Erigone was persuaded that I had bin fled, and that I
had only withdrawn my self to the house of Olonie, through hazard and
necessity, and there to demand a place of retreat. So that I had the time
desired to remain there, for as I had pretended the loss of my Equipage, and
that Olonie had sent back through design her Chariot to Larisse under some
pretext; I might continue there unsuspected, until I had recovered the Horses.
To this feigned design, Olonie who was extremely jocund and merry, betook her
self to with jest me the self same Evening, upon the account of my allighting;
and as she had an excellent Wit, she pronounced a thousand pleasant Passages
thereon, and I rejoined as pertinently as I could: but what ever we could do,
that and the following Night, it was impossible for us to engage Erigone in our
floricks, I would say frolic, and pleasant conversation; but on the contrary,
she appeared to us still to be unconceivably melancholy. So that the third day
she became sick, and from the commencement of her Malady or Disease, the
Physicians conceived, that not only her self would be in great danger, but even
also those that approached her. That caused Olonie to be surprised with fear,
because that at that certain time, there was much discourse of the Plague; she
abandoned her own house, to go into that of one of her friends, and left poor
Erigone desolate to the discretion of her Domestics. And as I foresaw and
observed the small Succor that she could have from those sort of People; I
resolved to remain with her, even though my own life were endangered, I would
not therefore that she should know any thing least it might give her some
disturbance. I contented my self to have an eye to all that was conducing or
might be convenient for her, and gave order that nothing imaginable should be
wanting. My cares were crowned with such happy success, that she recovered, and
testified to me her grateful acceptance, when she had understood it.

Then I found my Fortune a little changed, as in relation to her, but not
according to my wishes, for all the change that there was, that she daign'd or
vouchsafed sometimes to listen to unto me, and in the end she came even to
suffer me, to practice and use my endeavors, to divert her sometimes by sport
and merriment.

We continued there fifteen days after her recovery, and after the return of
Clonie; Erigone being not yet fortified with strength sufficient to travel on
the Road, I and still feigning some pretext, under which to dispense my
departure. I would not slip that opportunity without declaring more clearly and
manifestly the passionate I had for her Love and now behold the manner how.

One day as Olonie was employed in giving some necessary Orders, I found my
self all alone with Erigone, walking upon a platform or great hillock, where
hence one might behold the fairest sight and prospect in the World, and whence
one might view all the beauty of the House. Erigone understanding that I
praised them after at a very high rate, and above all that I could not cease to
hold my peace, with respect to the excellency of the fruit that we had there
eaten, and less yet of the good reception from our Hostess in common. Indeed,
replied she to me smiling, you have a very great deal of confidence, to cause
your self to fly here, and come to help us to eat our fruits, and a flight
which has led you to such a pleasant place, amongst such good Company, and who
has made you such good cheer, it is to me extremely suspicious. I conceal not
from you, replied I, but that I have cause to complain, if I have bin worse
treated here then I expected, for I believed my self abandoned for my furniture
and array, and I see well that 'twill cost me my Heart and my Liberty.

She feigned to believe that this sweetness and pleasance was for Olonie, It Is
to therefore, replied she, if you believe them be lost, I would counsel you to
take your flight; for I would find that you should pay your shot very dear, and
that your Hostess would have worse treated you than she would have done
thieves. But, Madam, shall I reassume then what they have already lost, to what
purpose then would serve the flight, unless it be yet in the loss of the hope
of their recovery in withdrawing at a greater distance from her, who has taken
them from us. In this case, replied she, I have nothing to say to you; you know
in what plight your Affairs stand, and it concerns you to consult your self.
It Is very much rather to you, Madam, replied I, it is much rather to you, from
whom I ought to demand counsel, since that upon you alone depends the state of
this poor heart, and this poor liberty that I have lost. Erigone appeared
astonished, turning her Eyes toward me, and recoyling one or two Faces. What
Eleandre, says she, Is it to me that you direct these words? and remember you
well who I am? I remember it so well, Madam, replied I, that I have your Image
before my Eyes without intermission, so that it is engraven in my heart, and
tells me every hour, and in every place, that you are the fairest, the most
spiritual, the most wise; in a word, the most accomplished Pers^n throughout the
World. You believe it not without doubt Eleandre, replied she coldly and
faintingly, in betaking her self to walk; for if you believed me wise, you
would not thus discourse me. Madam, replied I to her, the love I have for you,
is so respective and pure, that it cannot wound the virtue of the most
scrupulous, nor yet the most austere Wisdom of the World. She paused yet a
little at these Words and spoke. What you continue Eleandre? I should fear lest
some one should hear you, for they would never imagine that you should have the
boldness to treat of Love to the Widow of a Man, whom you have slain, at least
that she would not have any conference with you. Ah Madam! replied I, this
presumption also costs me very dear, for in fine, I must not flatter you it.
There is six Months that I have loved you, there is six Months that I seek
occasion to declare it you, there is six Months that I languish between hope
and fear, and it is not but at the last extremity and upon the point of loss of
life, that I hazard my self, to declare it you. Yea Madam I loved you almost
from the moment that I had seen you; I had not sooner made that innocent, which
renders me so guilty in respect of essay toward you, but that I was punished by
the same Eyes, which were the Evidences of my Crime, in causing me to be
arrested, detained and made Prisoner; you bound me in other bonds much more
strong and ponderous than those of the Justice, and when you demanded my
Sentence of Death from the Judges, you your self prepared me one, whence they
were in no capacity to deliver me. Eleandre, replied me, Erigone, I conceive
that you have without doubt lost your Wits. There is no doubt thereof, Madam
replied I, doubt not thereof; I have too strong a passion for you, to be able
to preserve me my Senses, and I pride my self that I have lost them, since it
depaints and marks out the violence of my Love. Well said Eleandre, replied
she, it is convenient to pity you, and the sole pity that I can altogether
consent to discharge my obligation to you, and to that of my Husband. I will
have you reassume your Wits, and thereby let you see by good reason, how
rediculous and extravigant your Enterprise is, and has bin, and accordingly to
capacitate your self, in making reflections in order to your cure.

Madam, interrupted I, foreseeing where at she drove, I have considered of all
that you would have told me, and possibly something more: but of all that which
is represented me, I can find nothing that can hinder me from loving you,
because nothing can render you otherwise than infinitely amiable to me.

I very well know, that I love a Person, who hates me, who regards me as her
most mortal Enemy, and that I am an object of her Aversion and Horror, and who
possibly would be glad to see my death, which she has already wished and
prosecuted, I know well that besides her aversion, she will oppose me with a
thousand reasons, and those very pertinent and becoming. In a word, I very well
know that I swim against a strong Torrent of Difficulties and Obstacles, and
that I cannot almost expect any reasonable hopes; but I have very fairly had
represented me all these things, I love, and it concerns you may Madam, to tell
me a stronger reason which excuse me, from having bin able to taste any. It Is
not that I imagine that I act with reason, I cannot then hope to convince you.
For give me leave, Madam, to tell you this, wherefore this hatred, and this
capital Aversion against a Man, who never had other than a tender respect for
you? If you have lost your Husband, was not he even himself the primarily
original Cause? What is there that I have contributed, but an innocent Will,
and what but a design to save you. It was a furious Malady that possessed him, to
precipitate himself in despite of me, upon his own ruin. If you hate all that
was any way contributary toward his death, hate him therefore who was the
principal cause, or rather hate the Gods that would have it so, and who by an
extraordinary punishment have visibly chastised his Cruelty and furious rage.
As for me, what have I deserved, but to be condoled? I went to expose my life,
Pardon me, Madam, if I say so, it is not through reproach, for I should hold my
self happy to have lost a thousand Lives in so fair an occasion, it is not but
in my own justification that I speak. I went there to expose my self through a
pure sentiment of compassion, and all my recompense was, that I have bin put in
Prison, convened before the Judges, treated as a Murderer, and as an
Assassinate, exposed to an Infamous Condemnation of Death, and that which I
most resent and am most sensible of, and a thousand times more rigorous than
all the rest, I drew upon my self all your indignation. All the Judges, all the
Relat^ons of the dead, all Larisse concluded me innocent, and you alone have
held me as guilty. Will you be astonished, Madam, if all your reasons have not
bin able to do any thing against my Love, since that all these that have
convinced so many other Persons, have had no power over your hatred.

She listened to me as long as I spoke, and I conceived she had taken pleasure,
to find and feel that her soul was not any whit moved with all that I had bin
able to say. After I had concluded, disdaining almost to answer me. You have
reason, Eleandre, rejoined she, I am a Woman altogether unjust, and I am
astonished that you knowing me to be such, can yet find me lovely as you have
said.

She withdrew from me at these Words, and went to find out Olonie, to persuade
her departure the self same day to return to Larisse, or to give her permission
to go there all alone. As for me I remained so pensive, and sad, so confused,
and with that stung and netled with a violent vexation against Erigone, that I
was amazed how I could continue to love her.

But it is impossible to fly from Destiny: when the Heavens have resolved
something, all that should appear to divert us from its end, leads us
thereunto, and it seems to be pleased in changing, for that the ordinary
effects of all causes, and in very deed this vexation was no other than a fire,
which increased that of my Love, and instead of repelling me, I felt that my
Passion became yet more violent.

We returned to Larisse, where I found my self far more unfortunate than ever,
for Erigone had found in the end, that my pretended flight, had bin no other
than an artifice, consorted and contrived between Olonie and my self, and
therefore conceived such a sensible apprehension against her Relation, that she
brake with her, and ceased any more to visit her. So that I lost opportunities
of seeing her, and with this occasion, I lost almost all the rest of my hopes,
in that state, I would make an effort or essay upon my self, and resolved to
return to Thebes, to deface and raze out there, through better Fortune, and
more desirable Ideas, that which caused me so many troubles and displeasures. I
therefore departed from Larisse, and that which then extremely satisfied me, I
went away omitting to take my leave of Erigone. If the Heavens had permitted, I
had at Thebes wherewithal to forget this ingrate one, and wherewith to make me
put in Oblivion, for my Father who there impatiently expected me, had accorded
and provided for me, without my knowledge, one of the fairest and richest Ladies
of the City, not any wise doubting, but that I would have held my self happy in
the choice he had made for me.

In the interim the sole proposition which he made, constrained me to think I
should dye with grief, and the change of the place carried nothing away toward
my Love, but that its absence augmenting my desires, increased yet my Passion.
My Father being dead at the same time, I found my self the Heir of a
considerable Inheritance, and as I had always more of Erigone in my thoughts, I
had a design to return to Larisse, where I imagined that the change of my
fortune, and two years time expired since my departure, might make me find some
change in her heart I returned there in a sufficiently good Equipage. I saw
her, but found her not a whit changed, and as she had a Spirit naturally loose
from all manner of Interest, and that she despised the major part of that which
flatters all others, the more I supposed she would value the advantage of my
Fortune, the more she demonstrated an indifferency and insensibility.

All these things inflamed me yet the more, instead of calming and cooling me.
For I took them as so many marks of high and exquisite virtues.

I discovered my self to some of her Relations, and discourse with those in
whom she placed most confidence, and made them so well to resent my reasons,
that they were persuaded; so that her nearest Relations, even those of her
deceased Husband, (whom she regarded more than she did those of her own) spoke
to her in my favor. But their counsels could make no impressions, nor have any
influence upon her Spirits, and she even quitted Larisse, without telling them
where she was going, to deliver her self, as she told me, from their
importunities, as well as mine. We were for some time ignorant of the place
where she went; at length I understood, that she was retired into this Valley,
where she has bought a little house, which you see before you.

I repaired there immediately, not being able to live a moment without her; and
finding that she resolved here to lead the life of a Shepherdess, I at the same
time determined to lead the same kind of Life, and signified to her, that I
renounced willingly all the Wealth I had at Thebes, rather than I would ever
abandon her. But neither my pleasant and obsequious deportment, nor a thousand
submissions, that I had newly practiced to bend her, were of any efficacy, nor
served for any other end, than to leave me hopeless and desperate. I knew there
was no other remedy for me, but death.

Behold the cause of my resolution wise Telamon, for in fine, what should we
think of, but only death, when we have no manner of content, nor pleasure in
life? At least that kind of death, which I have chosen, would not it give her
occasion to blame my desperation or precipitation; and I hope that the cruel
one would have had some horror her self, by reason of her obduration, when she
should have had leisure to contemplate the subject that I had unprofitably
given her to repent her self.

The unfortunate Eleandre finished this history in a manner, so pitiful and
sensibly touched and concerned, that Agamee and Telamon, were both melted and
moved to compassion; and so much the more, that at the same time his Forces,
the recital whereof had drained and exhausted them, the sensibility whereof he
had not felt nor was diminished in the height of discourse, nor was he
sustained, but only with pain, he was constrained to lie down all at length,
and covered his very face with his Cloak, as if he said, Adieu in the day
wherein he would wholly have renounced all, if Telamon changed not the face of
his destiny.

Agamee not only beheld Erigone with some kind of anger and indignation, but as
if he had not then too much subject to be satisfied with that fair Sex, he
could not forbear to cry out: O Women, must the Gods have given you an Empire
so absolute over the Spirits of Men, and must these Men ass^st yet their own
blindness, to ma^e you the cruel Mistresses of their rest and of their Lives!
Telamon seemed to have taken no notice of this small transportation of his
friend, but turning himself gently toward Erigone, he signified to her, that
he was ready to hear all that she was desirous to speak in her own defense, in
the difference wherein she should be willing he should be a Judge.

Erigone did accord and consent in the confidence she had of the sincerity of
Eleandre, and of all the recital he had made, but she could not accord with him
in the opinion that he would have given in relation to their Judges, touching
the injustice that she supposed they had made her. But on the contrary, she
failed not to employ this eloquence, which to her was natural, to endeavor to
persuade Telamon, that all the injustice consisted in the obstinacy of
Eleandre, and if the Shepherd was not convinced by her reasons, he could not
defend himself from being shaken. Eleandre answered nothing thereunto, be it by
reason of the weakness wherein he found himself, be it that he believed he had
there given satisfaction enough already. So that being willing to desist from
further speaking, neither to the one nor the other; it remained to Telamon to
pronounce sentence. But this wise Shepherd to whom the cause of Erigone
appeared the least equitable, would not therefore use that authority she gave
him to condemn her. He was willing that she should judge her self, and by that
means convince her by reason; having then discovered that all her repugnancy
proceeded from no other sentiment than honor, which prohibited honest Women,
for any cause whatsoever, to entertain thoughts of espousing the Murderer of
her husband, she knew so artificially to contend the scruples of her Spirits,
by the difference that was made her betwixt the actions, which the intentions
rendered criminal, and those that are justified by their proper cause; she knew
so well to distinguish Eleandre, murderer of her husband, as she conceived him
from Eleandre Deliverer and passionate Lover of Erigone; she knew so well, in
fine, how to show him that it was not Eleandre who had slain her Husband, but
that it was her Husband who would have killed Eleandre and she too, and who had
even killed himself: and if then she changed not absolutely her obstinacy, at
least she disposed of it so, as to give a beginning of some hope to this
Shepherd and poor Lover, that he might take some care of his own life.

After that Telamon had thus labored for the repose of desolate Eleandre, he
reassumed his Inquietude for his dear Tarsis, or however as may be said to
reassume that which he had never quite quitted. For although he had a little
before heard some news, they had not omitted to hold or keep him still in
suspense; and he was then alarmed so much the more, in regard that this
Shepherd delayed his coming to find him, longer than he had expected. He spoke
with Agamee when he saw Celemante and Ergaste to return, whom Telamon had left,
as we have said, to take some care for the transporting of the dead body of
that unknown one, near unto whom he had met them.

He knew from them, that they had bin delivered from that trouble, by some
Cavalliers who having placed the dead Corpse before one of them, was afterward
gone to take the same care of the other dead one, whom Telamon had seen near
the Pond, and was afterward returned toward Gonnes. Telamon inquired of these
two Shepherds whether they had not met Tarsis, and as he spoke unto them, they
saw him arive. Telamon ran immediately toward him, and impatiently demanded of
him whence he came; Tarsis instead of replying him, demanded himself, Whether
he had learned nothing of Zelie, and seeing that he told him nothing of news.
Ah my Brother! cried he, there is neither hope nor consolation for me. Telamon
feared that this Shepherd had learnt, after he had quitted them, some mournful
news of Zelie; he therefore inquired of him yet more amply than he had done at
the first approach, of that which the Shepherd had known, but he found in
conclusion, that the subject of his despair was no other than the unprofitable
success of their inquiry.

Tarsis afterward recounted to his Brother, but with a voice interrupted with
Sighs, that which had detained him that long time. He told him amongst others,
that at his coming out of Hippique, ranging one side and the other,
endeavoring to learn something of Zelie, he had seen some Women pass a far off
in a Chariot, environed with a numerous Company of armed Men, that his love
having then made him doubt, whether Zelie might not be amongst them, he went in
pursuit of the Coach or Chariot; and that as he was following of it, he
perceived Telamon, from a rising ground where he had past, and from whence he
had sent him a Shepherd, that this pursuit had insensibly drawn him even to
Gonnes, where he knew that these Ladies were the Princesses Troyade, Arsinoe
and Antigonee, whom Alcime had detained Prisoners, and whom he had caused to be
conducted from Pidne to Gonnes.

Ergaste and Celemante having joined themselves to them, sadly signified to
them the resentment they had for the inquietude of Tarsis. Agamee wished even
that Telamon would present him to his Brother, because it was almost Night,
this wise Shepherd, who would not quit Tarsis, engaged him to come to lie at
Cenome. They wanted not subject wherewith to entertain themselves by the way.
So many Adventures presented them in so little time, that they seemed, Fortune
had taken delight and pleasure to pile and heap them one upon another,
sufficiently furnishing them, with ample Matter of discourse. Agamee above all,
had perpetually in his Mind, the miracles which he had read in the history of
Kion and Leonides: but Tarsis could not dream of any other than of one only one
of all his Adventures. The loss of Zelie, occupied and took up all his
thoughts. If he made reflection sometimes upon any others that happened to him,
that was but there to search out the clear manifestation of that which caused
the only subject of his thoughts.

His Brother and Friends used all their endeavors to comfort him, and each of
them according to his own Genius, one may say, that they essayed all the
different and various ways imaginable. Telamon who was tender and complaisant,
entered into the sentiments of his dear Brother, and that was no other, but in
dissembling his grief, that he endeavored to mitigate and sweeten it. Ergaste
who had his Wits more prompt and witty, opposed it openly, and would have
convinced him by reason. Celemante having an humor more frolic, was desirous
to make a diversion of his displeasure, and endeavored by little and little to
change their serious discourses and considerations, to more pleasant and jocund
Entertainments. Agamee who was preoccupied and forestalled with his own proper
displeasure, retired always to himself, and consolated him by his own example.

Amongst other things, Telamon said unto him, My dear Brother without doubt you
have cause to be afflicted, but you must not therefore figure and frame things
to the utmost extremity, after the Idea of your own troubled imagination, you
know very well that Zelie is wise, and you also do not in any wise doubt, but
that she loves you, and the very last words that you your self repeated, are a
very authentic and an assured testimony thereof. You ought not therefore to
think that Zelie being prudent, would not do any thing of concernment and
importance, without due and mature consideration, nor that she loving you,
could take any resolution, which might wound the amity and friendship she bears
you. That which I imagine is, that this Shepherdess not being willing to see
you against the Will of her Father, and moreover, not being able to live so
near you without your sight, she is possibly withdrawn to the house of some one
of her Friends, and there to attend the change of Lucippe. However it be said
Ergaste, I find Tarsis, you have no new subject to afflict your self. How long
has it bin, that you told us that you had lost hopes to espouse this
Shepherdess, and that you are reduced even to that necessity to deprive your
self of her sight? In very deed, you ought to esteem your self happy in an
occasion which should finish the dissolution of your Engagements, and thereby
rendered you free and at liberty, without which you had, it may be, bin in some
more than ordinary pains and trouble to have had a recovery. Have you not been
not long since, in the most dismal and deplorable state imaginable? For I avow
to you, for my part that of all the tortures and racking torments of Love, I
find none so unsupportable, as to be near one beloved, and to be obliged to
live, and to live as if they were separated a hundred thousand ^urlongs, and to
be present and absent all at once; that is to say, to feel the movements of
ardour and impatience, which repres^nts the presence of the Mistress, and at
the self same time all the regrets imaginable, all the inquietudes, and in a
word, all the troubles and pains of absence.

It must be avowed, replied frolic Celemante, if we were all very wise, we
should never dream of having to do, either with love or friendship: and I say
it all before thee Ergaste, than me the very first, I was very much a fool,
when I went to engage my self to be thy friend. For tell me a little, if there
be any thing more rediculous than to see a Man, who has still naturally more
pains and trouble, than he can sustain, should he yet go and contrive and
associate himself, and bring upon his own self the troubles of others, and that
by example, that I should go and constrain my self to condole all thy
displeasures and regrets, to be a Co-partner and Comrade in all thy
weaknessess, and to suffer for all thy follyes. But that which is worst of all,
must it not be the loss of ones Wits and Senses to be figured, as I have
formerly bin, as if I could not live without thee, as if I had already lived
there in times past, and as if there were not one hundred thousand others, with
whom I might live without doubt much better? Ergaste answered him not, by
reason he sufficiently divined what was his intention, and that he would leave
him at leisure with Tarsis, to make himself applications upon these reflections.

So Agamee began to speak: O Shepherd! said he, addressing himself to Telamon,
that you have reason to say, if we were very wise, we should never dream of
Love, for can there be put into the Spirit of a Man, any thing more dangerous
than a desire, to overpress and overwhelm our selves with longer pinings and
impatient Consumptions, and which makes our destiny depend upon a feeble Sex,
unconstant, capricious, petulant, and in as great an incapacity to command, as
to obey. I can better speak than any other Person, because I know it by
experience, and that I envy Tarsis, all the subject that he believes he has
to be afflicted. Telamon who sought no other than an occasion to take from
Tarsis the application which had unfortunately seized his Spirits, had bin very
joyful to have taken these pretexts, and engage Agamee to make them a recital
or repetition of his Adventure, imagining that he would not have made any
scruple to tell it, since he made no complaints before them: and he demanded
this repetition so much the more willingly, in regard he remembered, that he had
heard him spoke before, that if Tarsis knew it, he might thereby be able to
meet with reasons to consolate himself. But in regard they found themselves so
near that Hamblet, and that it was likewise very late, and that Agamee had
Affairs, which obliged him to retire to his Hosts house, he besought Telamon,
to remit the party or match to another day, and quitted them with impatience to
rejoyn them, which is not comparable, but to the extraordinary esteem which he
had conceived for these illustrious Shepherds.

The End of the Third Book.
Tarsis and Zelie. The Fourth BOOK.
TARSIS reposed not all night, he wholly spent it in such regrets and alarms
which are not conceiveable; framing in his conceit a thousand dismal
resolutions, the execution whereof was not suspended, but though I know not
some remaining hopes, that he supposed or felt even ready to finish. He repast
and went over again yet a thousand times more, all the circumstances of his
disgrace: but the more reflections he made thereon, the more he found subjects
and grounds of desperation. For though he had bin willing to persuade his
Brother, that assurance that he had to have heard and seen Zelie in the same
boat, which he had over-taken by swimming the preceding Night, and where he
also had not however found her moment afterward; that meeting that he had made
the Morrow of the same Boat, by the brink of the River, according as he
conjectured by the roll of Papers which he there had found; this unprofitable
search, that not only himself, but so many other persons whom he had still
known, had made all the day by the orders of Leucippe and Melicerte, and above
all, that resolution of losing himself once for all, what he had understood
alleged by the Shepherdess, from her own Mouth, a little before he cast
himself into the River. All these things (I say) seemed to ^im convincing
proofs of a disaster, which he could not imagine alone without trembling and
shaking with horror.

After having finished the dissipating of these mournful and violent agitations
of Spirit, the small forces that the wearisom teadiousness of the preceding
night, and those which the day had left; in conclusion, sleep or rather
lassitude and weakness had shut up (in despite of him) his eyes, and he slept
some moments, only at the hour that the day light awakens others. Telamon came
a little afterward to his Chamber, to know how he had passed the Night, but
seeing it fast shut, and having heard no noise, he withdrew himself for fear of
giving trouble to a repose, that he much doubted had neither bin very long nor
very quiet. Then when Tarsis who slept, but as we usually say, dogs-sleep, had
heard him, he lept out of his bed, and inquired whether he had heard nothing of
Zelie. Telamon seeing that he was awake, returned and came into the Chamber and
asked of him how he did. Ah my Brother, answered the Shepherd, make you any
doubt of the estate wherein I am, since you have learnt no news of Zelie? And
being almost already clothed, he besought him to go with him to Callioure to
know that which Leucippe and Melicerte had understood. They had already entered
into a Meddow, which extended it self from the South from Cenome to the River
Penee. When he discerned an old Man on horse back, which came toward them upon
a hand or rather a wild gallop, from the distance that he might spoke unto
them, he demanded of them the way to the house of Alcidias. Telamon and Tarsis
presently believed that the sound of his voice was not unto them unknown, and
they had the same conceptions of his Phisiognomy: but when this Cavalier, who
still approached them, was near enough to give them opportunity and liberty
well to consider him, they believed him to be Straton the Philosopher, the self
same whom they had known at Panticapee, and who had written their History to
the Prince Philadelphe.

Straton was no less surprised than they, when he had confronted them, but the
opinion he had of their death, hindering him their knowledge, he admired only the
similitude and resemblance, which he found of these two Persons, with those two
unfortunate Brothers, whose memory were to him so dear, and this resemblance
renewing in him the regret he had had of their loss, in bringing it to their
remembrance, and he could not avoid speaking with a sigh, and lifting up his
Eyes to heaven. O Kion! O Leonides.

Although he pronounced those words very low, Tarsis and Telamon (who
attentively observed him) well understood them, and these words having finally
decided some remaining staggering and wavering uncertainties, which held them
in suspense, they made no further doubt but that he was the very self same
Philosopher Straton. So that Telamon first of all running to him; O Straton
cried he, is it possible that it is you?

Never was surprise so great, as was that of Straton's, when he had understood
by Telamon and Tarsis, that they were those two whom he had known. He hastily
alighted from his horse to embrace them, and demanded of them a hundred times
one after another, and chiefly of Tarsis, how it was possible that he could be
living. Alas Straton, replied Tarsis, I am more astonished than you, although
for different reasons for you are doubtless astonished, that I have escaped
death, by reason of the condition wherein you saw me at Panticapee, and I am
not astonished, but that I have bin able to conserve my life at Tempe, where
Fortune persecutes me with much more rigor, than ever it did else where. These
words were accompanied with a thousand Tears, which made Straton believe, that
the disgrace of which Tarsis had, was very strange, since it seemed that it
defaulked and abated from that great courage, which so many other perils and
dangers could not be able to move; for which reason he inquired of him the
cause. But Tarsis not judging that time proper nor convenient to entertain him,
prayed him to defer that discourse to another season, and besought him to tell
him how he had bin brought to Tempe, and above all, what had caused him to
inquire for the house of Alcidias his Father.

Straton understanding that Alcidias was father unto Telamon, testified much
joy, and that news brought to mind some marks upon his face, on which he had
not seen, more than signs of some extreme grief, since he had inquired of him
the subject, which had brought him to Tempe.

O great Gods! cried he, lifting up his eyes toward heaven; I doubt not, but
that you have taken a resolution to save my Illustrious Prince, since that in
this disgrace, you have taken the care to fall into the hands of Kion and
Leonides. Then addressing himself to them, I believe not, continued he, but
that the misfortune which constrained me, to seek the dwelling place of
Alcidias, was capable of any consolation, but it must be avowed that the Gods
sent me more than I could be able to hope in so dismal and mournful an
occasion, to cause me to meet you yet living, and in a place where I have such
great need of friends, and where I find you so apt, fit and seasonable to
favor my design, and that I may in consequence receive from you some marks of
your Generosity. For in fine, I will not conceal from you, that Fortune has
since a certain day put (for so I may say) the life of one of the greatest
Princes of the World, into the hands of Alcidias. But are you willing that I
should unridle you this obscure Mystery? continued he, seeing their surprise,
if it be convenient for you and your leisure will permit, conduct me I beseech
you to the house of your Father; for although it was but yesterday in the
Evening that I departed to go to Gonnes, it is in that I went astray in
returning or coming from thence, and I will declare unto you in requital, by
the way, the subject of all our mournful Adventures and Passages. Although
these two Shepherds penetrated not the sense and meaning of this discourse, yet
they judge that this meeting has some dependence upon that of those Cavaliers,
whereof the most apparent had bin transported the preceding day, in so ill a
plight at the house of Alcidias; and the advantageous Opinion, that both the
one and the other had immediately conceived, not having bin able to leave them,
without a very great desire to know him, they were ravished to find so
favorable an occasion, besides that which I invited them to another place.
However as it was not simply to satisfy their curiosity, that Straton had
besought them to go with him, but that he signified to them also, that he had
need of their aid in an important occasion, and that it was neither becoming
them, nor would it suit with their generosity to refuse him, they were then a
little straightened. However Tarsis spoke to him thus freely. Straton if you
absolutely have need of two Brothers, neither the one nor the other will
hesitate nor deliberate in following you: But if one alone can suffice you, in
the service you desire of them, I pray permit that they may be separated for
some time, and that while my Brother goes with you, I go to a place, where most
important Affairs do require us both. Straton understanding that they had
Affairs, made an excuse for his own part, and would not only have declined even
the acceptance of their offer, nor yet permit them neither the one nor the
other to withdraw from their Affair, if it were his own sole and proper
interest and concern that he went upon there; but as he acted on the behalf of
a Person of high Quality, to whom he would give place, and for whom he had the
highest esteem of any Person throughout the World, he did what he might
possible be able to do, to engage Telamon not to refuse him. Telamon had would
not have done it, though his life had bin at Stake to have gone there, If there
had bin no other than his own interest that had called him else where: But as
he acted in the service of his dear Tarsis, and above all, that in the
condition wherein he saw him, he feared the consequence of his displeasure, he
could not well resolve to abandon him. Tarsis did sufficiently remark and
observe him, and doubting the subject and cause of his apprehension: My
Brother, said he, let it not be said, that we have refused Straton the
Philosopher the only service that he ever required, and that in our own
Country. It Is with grief that I see my self deprived by the disgrace you know,
from that satisfaction that I would have had in rendering it him my self.

Supply therefore for me, my dear Brother, besides you know I have not at
present need of you; and I protest unto you my dear Telamon (added he very
softly embracing him) that I will have a care of you for Tarsis as long as you
will have a care, for him to succor our common friend. Telamon could not then
dispense with the leaving him. Tarsis took leave of Straton only as for some
certain hours, and continued his way toward Callioure, whilst the two others
took that of Hippique. Telamon would have obliged Straton to mount on horse
back, and told him for that end, that it was very far from the place where they
then were, to the house of Alcidias: but Straton would by no means do it, but
led his horse by the bridle and walked side by side with Telamon, and so
entertained discourse on the subject of his Journey.

I would not so liberally use your generosity. O Kion, said he unto him (for he
yet knew no otherwise) if I were not assured that you will have the same joy to
be able to contribute to the service of a great Prince, that Fortune has in
some sort committed to your care, and if I could not declare, that you are
there in some respect obliged by an esteem so great and so perfect that he has
of you, and of your Brother, that the memory of Hermodius and of Aristogiton,
is not more venerable to the Athenians than is yours, to the Prince whereof I
speak. For in fine, I know not whether you have understood, that he was
yesterday carried unknown very much wounded to the house of Alcidias your
Father: but however it be, you shall know, that this unknown is the great
Ptolomee Philadelphe King of Egypt. Telamon was not a little surprised with
this news, and although he was ignorant by what odd humorous events Fortune had
taken pleasure to sport it self in the Destiny of the greatest of Men, how is
it that it can be any wise imagined, by what accidents possible could the King
of Egypt come to Tempe, and that he should be there in an Equipage so
different, from what was convenient for the most puissant Monarch of the World.
But as he had learnt for what reason he had bin carried to the house of
Alcidias, since it was he himself that conducted him there; he signified to
Straton, that although in part, by what mournful accident this great Prince had
bin wounded, he could not refrain from returning thanks to the Gods for the
occasion, which procured his Father the honor to have received under his roof
so illustrious a Guest, and made him hope to have the honor of seeing a
Prince, of whom he had heard such magnificent things, and moreover that he
should be able to do him some service. This occasion is yet more mournful than
you conceive, replied Straton, and if the Ages to come will have difficulty to
believe this rare example, that your Family gives all the World, of a perfect
amity and friendship between two Brothers, they will perhaps have more to
conceive the tragic effects of a fraternal difference, that all the Land of
Egypt weep for a long season in the Royal Family. Telamon had sufficiently
understood what had bin spoken of Ptolomee Philadelphe, that he was one of the
greatest Princes of the World, as well by his virtue as by the Potency of his
State: but that which he knew of his life, was not capable but to augment in
him a curiosity to learn that whereof he was ignorant. It Is therefore the
cause, why he made no difficulty to explicate himself to Straton: and this
Philosopher who had no greater satisfaction, than in publishing the glory of
his Master, and principally before Persons so capable of being just Imitators,
was well pleased to satisfy Telamon's desires, and he did it in such a sort,
till continuing and passing on their way. But it was not however but still
after Telamon had satisfied by a few Words, the curiosity of Straton, in
understanding how his Brother and he were yet living, afterward the
Philosopher contented also that of the Shepherd.

The History of Ptolomee Philadelphe.
PTolomee surnamed Lagus King of Egypt, doubtless the greatest, and the most
illustrious Successor of Alexander the Great, espoused two Wives, the first was
Apamee Daughter of the old Artabase, whose eldest even Alexander himself had
married, and the second was Berenice, who was then Widow of Aridee brother of
Alexander the great, Apamee bare to King Ptolomee three Children. She had first
a Daughter who was married to Lysimachus King of Thrace, and afterward she lay
down with two male Children successively.

The love of the Egyptians for this good Prince occasioned him to call his two
Children by the same, (even his own) name, in conformity to a public Decree,
so that all his Successors called themselves Ptolomees, in memory of that
illustrious Founder, or at least the Restorer of the Kingdom. But to
distinguish them, the elder whose inclinations presently showed themselves
impeteous, turbulent, and tending to confusion and disorder, was for that cause
named Ceraune, from the Greek Word, which, as you know, signifies to thunder,
and the youngest was named Philadelphe, which in the same language signifies,
loving his Brother, for the reasons that you will see afterward.

When these two Princes were of age to come from under the hands of their
Governors, the King their Father did me the honor to send and fetch me as far
as from Lampsaque, and signify to me, that he would commit their education and
instruction to my care and tuition; and to that effect desired I would dwell
near him. I was not deceived in my conceptions, nor in the thoughts I had
immediately of the young Prince Philadelphe; never was there a Nature more
pleasantly fair, nor more happy than that of this young Prince. For besides his
beautiful countenance, his Body singularly well shaped, as you will observe, he
had variety of all great and commendable inclinations. He took delight in
exercises of War and Feats of Arms, very much devoted to Literature, even to
take delight therein, as young as he was, he soon addressed himself to take a
pleasure in Libraries; he was Good, Liberal, Generous, Gallant; but that which
was predominant over his Spirits, was an admirable tenderness toward his
Brother. As for him he was of a Nature directly contrary; its true he was not
ill made nor shaped in point of his Personage; but he loved neither the
exercises of the Body, nor yet those of the Mind. All his diversion, was in
being found in the company of young debauched Persons who applauded him. He was
not able to suffer himself to be conversant with Persons that were Ingenious,
and had good Parts; and more particularly, of Women-kind; because he was then
obliged to refrain himself, by the different Port toward that Sex; and above
all, he was monstruously jealous of his Brother.

That which fomented it the more was, that all the honorable and ingenious
Persons, made all their Courtships and Addresses to Philadelphe, (unless it
were five or six debauched Ones,) and no Person could comport or bear with
Ceraune. I did what in me was possible to reform and correct the Nature of this
unhappy One; The King forgot nothing that depended of him, and that which he
took to task above all, was to unite the Hearts of these two Brothers, as very
well knowing that so good and fair an Union, is the strength, force and support
of a Family Royal.

But Destiny had otherwise appointed, and the fairest proof there is in the
World demonstrateth, that there is no resisting of its Decrees, that is, that
all the remedies that we can thereto apply, will prove unprofitable, and so
were they.

If we had any thing grievous, Philadelphe had yet more; he would frequently
complain to me, as of an Evil, whereof he could never be consolated; I should
take up whole days, to recite you the Cares, and the Complaisances with which
he endeavored to gain the good Will and Favor of Ceraune, and even to what
point his tenderness and friendship would extend it self toward him. I call to
mind, that amongst others, that one Night Philadelphe returning from the City
somewhat late, was attacqued and even wounded by a certain Company of young
Ones, whose Counselor his Brother had been. Some of them having been taken,
avowed that the jealous Prince had engaged them to that Assassination: and the
King was so incensed, that he not only resolved to have the Assassines severely
punished; but he even caused Ceraune to be put in Prison, with great menacing
Threats against him. Philadelphe having known it, immediately rose from his Bed
wounded as he was, and went to find the King his Father, and cast himself upon
his Knees, protesting to him, that he would not depart till he had obtained the
Liberty and Favor of his Brother; and after he had gained that, he besought
the same for the Assassines; because he knew the friendship that Ceraune had
for them.

But that which is strange, is, that he caused to be concealed from Ceraune,
his so generous Actions; for he had such a furious bent of Envy, that he would
not only be jealous of these marks of Credit which his Brother had upon the
Spirit of the King, but also of his Virtue and Generosity.

The Gods are my Evidences, I do not here aggravate the faults of the Dead, to
give all the Honor and Glory to the Living; for as dead as he is; I yet love
his Memory as that of the Son of a great Prince my Benefactor; and I do not
declare you this but with Grief, and for as much as it is the Original and
Foundation of this History.

Philadelphe not being able to extinguish the furious Jealousy of his elder
Brother, went to find the King, and besought him to banish himself for some
time from his Brother; hoping that by little and little, he would be appeased
and his Fury mitigated, when he should see him no more. And for as much as
there was then no War in Egypt, where he could be serviceable, he demanded
leave of him to go into Sicily, where Agatocle King of that Island who had
espoused a Sister of Berenice was in Arms against Denocrate. The King gave him
permission, and furnished him with a Ship; the Prince there Embarked, and
Stilpon my Son had the Honor to accompany him in quality of his Esquire. But
alas! the danger wherein this Prince cast himself, was worse by far than that
which he thought to avoid.

The first day of the Imbarkation was happy enough, but the following night,
there arose so furious a Tempest, that after the Ship had bin tossed and battered
two days and nights, she was at length Wrackt and Stranded against Rocks in the
Ionian Sea. Of all those that were in the Ship, there was not one that could
escape, but only the Prince and my Son; who having clasped in their Arms the
Masts of the Ship, were cast fairly on the Land. It seemed to them that they
had soon only changed the kinds of Death; for that certain place whereon they
were cast, was a Desert where nothing presented them, but the sight of Rocks.
In fine, after the Prince had unprofitably spent a part of the day,
endeavoring yet to save some of his People, he was constrained to retire, and
seek where to go himself, and toward the Evening himself and my Son met a Path
a little trodden, all along which they marched a long time, mounting still
between frightful Precipices. After they had walked about a Furlong, they found
themselves almost at the point of the highest Rock that was upon that Coast;
where they met an Adventure or Accident sufficiently surprising.

Toward the Top or Knap of the Mount, there is a hollow place Natural, or by a
kind of a Miracle, there is met a Source or Spring of Water so abundant, that
scarcely such an one can be seen in the freshest Valleys; and this Water
precipitates against the Rocks with a great Noise, to go and loose it self in
the Sea. The Rock bending it self on high, is there formed like a Vault, hung
with Moss naturally, the entrance is shadowed even with some Trees, which take
their nourishment and sustenance from the Veins of the Rock, and which renders
that place one of the pleasantest and most delightful of the World. For from
thence they may at all times in the noise of that natural Cascade, be out of
the piercing of the Sun and falling of the Rain, and even sheltered from all
incommodious Winds, see all that which passes on the Sea, and with pleasure
consider all the neighboring Coasts

It is there in that place, that Fortune conducted Philadelphe, and he was no
sooner at his view thereof, but he there discerned a thing surprising enough.
You know how the Painters draw Minerve, the headpiece or Helmet on the Head,
the Corselet upon the Back, the half Pike in the Hand. The Prince saw at the
entrance into this Vault, a Maiden in that equipage, who was sat upon a seat
of Moss, which Nature seemed to have made on purpose, but a Maiden whose Vi^age
was formed with Drafts so delicate, and so well proportioned, whose Glimpse was
so gl^ttering and admirable, that he was only capable of taking her for a
Divinity. Her Complexion and Hue of an equal whiteness, in similitude equal to
that of a Lilly, she was animated as with Vermilion in the Cheeks, and raised
with a little Mouth like a Carnation, that the most lively Limner or Painter
cannot imitate. A peaceable, quiet and profound Sleep, which the Head ^ull'd
along, had obliged to bend and bow and lean it self on one of her Hands; and
such a quantity of Tresses of fair Hair loose, which hung apart upon her Neck,
that there was nothing but their Beauty which could consolate Philadelphe to
lose that, which they concealed and hid from him, and could not freely see the
little that her attire left uncovered from so fair a Breast. It is very true,
that he yet had wherewith to recompense himself by the view of one of her Arms,
the whitest, fairest and the best framed of the World, by reason the posture
wherein she held them whereby to lean her Head, gave occasion to the Sleeve,
which being broad and large, fell and left it appear naked even to the Elbow;
whilst the other wherein she held the half Pike being carelessly stretched the
length of her Robe, displayed the whiteness, and just proportion of a Hand,
capable to deface the shining whiteness of the Snow it self. But to paint and
better delineate it to you in one word, my Prince often said unto me, that he
was so troubled with this first view, that she was the D^^sse or Goddess
Minerve her self, which was come to repose her self in that Rock; and that he
felt himself by this fair One unknown in so profound a respect of Soul, that he
was almost ready to prostrate himself before her to adore her. In conclusion,
he resolved with himself to approach her a little nearer, whereby to judge
better; but it was with all the circumspection imaginable, for fear of awakning
her. Admire here the prompt, ready and violent effect of this sight in the
heart of Philadelphe; he came from a sad, mournful and cruel Shipwreck, his
Body all wearied with the agitation of a Tempest of two days and nights, his
hair and Attire all moistened and wet of all sides, as you may think of a man
which comes out from the midst of the Water; and although in that state, as
if he had bin smitten with a sudden Blow, he felt nothing but his Love,
springing. He waited to contemplate of this fair unknown One, and instead of
awakning her, to demand where he was, or to go at least to seek out some
certain place, where he might dry his habit and repose himself, he turned
himself to my Son, and striking him gently on the Arm, he said unto him, with a
low voice, Stilpon, do thou see her? Gods! What shall this be anon, if her
Stature and her Eyes carries a resemblance to that which appears? And at the
self same time, he betook himself to consider her, as if he had bin fully
resolved to wait there until she awaked, and as if he had nothing else to do.

My Son, notwithstanding their disgrace, and in despite thereof could not
abstain from Laughing at the Design of the Prince; and as for him, nothing
hindered him, to resent the Incommodity of their Shipwreck. My Lord, said he to
his Master, we will return when it shall please you, to see if the eyes and the
Stature of this fair One is worthy of the rest: But for the present, you will
permit me to tell you, that my advice is, that you think of going to a house,
which I perceive is near this Place, to dry you and repose your self.

This discourse occasioned him in some sort, (I say Philadelphe) to come again
to himself, he himself was astonished at his own Transport, and knowing well
that the thoughts of my Son were then more reasonable, than his own, I see,
well said he to him, laughing, that Stilpon is not so Gallant as Philadelphe,
and that when he is well wet, he would pass never a day to consider of a fair
One. At these words, he endeavored to make himself retire; and parting from
that place there, the softlyest that he was able, for fear of awakening this
unknown One, he descended still following the same Pathway, toward a House,
which my Son showed him in a Plain which is the other side of the same Rock.

All the way they walked, the Prince entertained him almost, with no other
discourse than that of the unknown, and they could not in effect frame to
themselves by any reason, why a Maiden could be in that Place with those kind
of Habiliments and Attire. They arrived a little afterward at that House, and
at the entrance, they met with a Man, of whom they demanded in the Greek
Language, the name of the Country, and some Place where they might Lodge. This
Man, being stricken or Inspired by the amiable Countenance of Philadelphe, and
altogether as much with his disgrace, which appeared sufficiently by his
apparel, answered him; As to the Country, that they were in the Island of
Corcyre, appertaining to the Athenians, and as for Lodging, that there was
neither City nor yet Village, from which they were not distant seven or eight
Furlongs: but if he would be willing to pardon the incommodiousness of his
Habitation, and would be received under his Roof, he offered him his House for
a Retreat. Philadelphe made use of the Civility of this Man, who placed him
with my Son in a Chamber.

As the Island belonged to the Athenians who had not then a good understanding
with the Egyptians, he would not there make himself known, and had he bin in a
Country less suspect, perhaps it would not have bin proper for him to declare
who he was, in so sad an equipage least he should thereby be exposed to all the
Hazards that insulting Fortune might toss him withal.

So that he cautioned my Son, not to declare his Name, and to live with him, as
if they had bin equal and Companions of Fortune. The evening being come, their
Host asked whether they desired that their Supper should be brought into the
Chamber, or if it pleased them better, they should take Commons with the
Family. Philadelphe had rather have been alone, but believed, that he would
have incommoded him less and would treat him more civilly if he did eat with
him. In going into the Chamber where the Supper was prepared, he saluted the
Wife and Daughter of his Host, and was strangely astonished, when he having
considered his Daughter, he knew her to be the self same, whom he had met among
the Rocks, in the state and condition, we have said.

She had not the same Attire, her Apparel was simple, but in this simplicity,
she appeared yet a thousand times more fairer than before, and made it out
clearly to be seen, that without any ornament she had need of none than of her
self. If she seemed so admirable to Philadelphe being a sleep, it was very much
otherwise, when with all that which he had there observed of charming him, he
saw the grace and the freedom of a marvelous pitch and stature, animated with
Actions majestic and modest, and above all, when he found himself solely
dazzled with the glittering beams and vivacity of her incomparable Eyes. O! for
that he felt a great redoubling of ardour at this sight, and which made in his
heart a strange renewing of a Wound which was first given him, which had
rendered the healing thereof very difficult; and he could not then refrain from
giving some evidences thereof, as soon as he knew her, I know not, says he,
addressing himself to his Host and Hostess with a smile. It would surely make
too well for me here in case the Sea had left me any thing to lose; for I do
either deci^ve my self, or else this amiable Maiden, has stolen the Visage of
one Minerva that I have met among the Rocks, and if she can well dare rifle the
Goddesses, I believe she will not spare Men. Stesicrate and Argene which were
the Names of the Master and Mistress of the house, easily apprehended this
obliging jesting and merriment; which was the cause that Argene turning toward
her Daughter with a Countenance, which well witnessed the tenderness and love
which she bear her: It is true Arsinoe, said she unto her, that I think you
were a fool to be running so disguised, and they would have done very well, and
favored you much, if they had taken you for another in that plight. In truth
my dear Mother, replied gracefully Arsinoe with a modest blush, I must also
have divined that he should this day have made shipwreck upon this Coast, to
fear being seen in the Desert where I went to walk. Whereupon Stesicrate
recounted to my Prince, that the same day they had celebrated the Feast of
Minerva throughout the Island, that in that solemnity all the Maidens were
accustomed to be in the Temple in the like Apparel and Equipage, that
Philadelphe had met his Daughter in, that Arsinoe being returned from the
Ceremony something late, she had through laziness or idleness neglected to
divest her self, and so went to walk in the place where she was fallen asleep.

Although the lassitude of two days and nights painfully, as were the
precedent, should have constrained Philadelphe to seek rest as soon as Supper
was done, yet he had a thousand troublesome pains to withdraw; and for a pretext
of continuing a longer space of time with his Hostess, he began to make them a
recital of his shipwreck, after some other Adventures, that he forced to feign
to accommodate them to the Design he had taken to disguise himself: in
conclusion, he withdrew but rested not, the beauty of Arsinoe entertained him
all night; the Idea or Image of her went not out of his thoughts, and she was
represented unto him there so fair, so charming and adorable, that I believe he
would then have preferred the possession of her, before the possession of what
could be found on earth.

He was well content to have made shipwreck, since that he had seen Arsinoe,
and setting aside by way of reserve, the compassion he had for so many People
drowned, I know he would have bin ravished with delight, though some other
tragical Adventure also, had procured him the opportunity of continuing a
longer time, near where she was. But he had no kind of pretext* for the Capital
or Metropolis of the Island being near, and himself in plight to go there,
there was no appearance of an occasion that could constrain him to continue a
longer time, to incommode them.

So that the next morning he arose with an unconceivable sadness, when he
dreamed that it was not but to take leave of Arsinoe. He resolved with himself
notwithstanding not to depart without having at least the satisfaction to
entertain her; and for that end he commanded my Son to counterfeit himself
sick, and to keep himself late in bed, that he might in the mean time, seek an
occasion to discourse her. He could not find one according to his wishes; for
the young Arsinoe was always near to Argene, only he had the satisfaction to
speak in her presence, and to give her to understand from that time, some part
of his Sentiments. It is with great reason, said he, once amongst other times
to Argene, that you have chosen your dwelling near to these Rocks, and that you
have fortifyed your self by these strong rails and ramparts, being to conserve
a treasure so precious, as is that which you have in your house. My Lord,
replied the Woman, smiling and looking upon her Daughter, in such a manner
which might make one see the pleasure she took, in hearing her commended; in
fine, a Child is in effect, always a treasure of the Father and the Mother; and
it is without doubt that only reason, that ma^es you speak so of Arsinoe.
Philadelphe replied, they accuse Mothers of being always blind, through the
good Opinion they have of their Children: but if you speak sincerely your self,
I would accuse you of a contrary blindness; for I protest to you, that in all
that I have seen in the time I have lived, I have not seen any thing ever so
fair, as that which I saw in your house. Argene replied modestly to this
discourse, and as Arsinoe still left Argene to speak for her, my Prince could
not possible be able to cause her to speak, unless 'twere very little, nor yet
to enter into this conversation, but in that little she spoke, he found so much
gracefulness and promptness of wit, that he was much more charmed than
heretofore.

He had, as I have told you, resolved in the Morning to depart after dinner:
but when the time was come, all that resolution was vanished, and he obliged my
Son to continue the same pretext of their sojourning in that house, till the
next day, imagining with himself that as he would have had more time to resolve
to depart, he would find less pains in loosing and disingaging himself. However
on the morrow he felt himself there yet more indisposed than the first day. So
that the curtesy and the generosity of his Hostess, seconding his intentions,
and more yet a very real indisposition which unexpectedly concurred to my Son,
by reason he fo^nd himself more unable to sustain and support himself under the
wearisomness, lassitude and pains of the late shipwreck, which the Prince did
not feel, he continued fifteen days with them, without believing almost, that
he had there spent one entire day. It is not possible to declare how much care
he took in the mean time, to find a favorable and convenient opportunity or
moment of time, where to entertain and discourse the fair Arsinoe alone: but be
it that this virtuous Person defied, be it that it was by a simple scruple of
her modesty, and of her shamfastness, pudicity or chastity; so that so many
times as he sought occasions, so many times she took the trouble to shun and
avoid them. In such sort, that he could never speak unto her, but in the
presence of Argene or Stesicrate.

However in despite of the compulsion, constraint and violence all this
presence gave him, how many new pleasures, delights and subjects of love and
admiration, did he not find in this charming conversation which discovered him
so many rare, bright, fair and shining lights in the delicate Wit and Parts of
Arsinoe, and which demonstrated him in the end, some part of those wonderful
and mavelous Qualities, which adorned and garnished the Soul of this divine
Person? Truly altho^gh that at every instant he essayed to prepare himself for
the mournful time of departure, which he foresaw necessary: The more he
endeavored to dispose himself thereto, the less he found himself capable; so
that although my Son was perfectly healed, if however Philadelphe had not bin a
fraid to render him suspect, by too much importunity, I believe he would never
have bin able to resolve to quit, and to take leave of the house of Stesicrate.

In fine, Stilpon being healed, the Prince took leave of his Host, and he would
in parting have left him some marks of his liberality. drew out for that end
the fairest Diamond in the World, out of a little Casquet, that my Son had by
good fortune saved from shipwreck, and as he believed it too small a thing for
the Father or the Mother, he presented it to the Daughter; Arsinoe refused it,
she blushed even as if ashamed to have bin believed capable to receive it, and
never was it possible for Philadelphe to make her accept of it. His endeavors
were also all in vain to Stesicrate and Argene, whom he unprofitably conjured
to make them constrain their Daughter to take it, and he was forced to content
himself with the acknowledgment of words alone.

I will not exaggerate or yet aggravate you, the new effect that the generosity
of Arsinoe made yet upon the heart of this generous Prince: but, this there
was, that being parted from thence, he declared to my Son, that he was resolved
not to go very far from that house, that he had not yet had the satisfaction to
see again that amiable Person, and to entertain her once at least in
particular, and for that purpose, he told him, that he would lodge in some
neighboring house, whence he might more easily spy an occasion. Stilpon,
Stilpon, said he to my Son, still speaking of her, I avow that this Maiden has
neither the air nor the heart of a country Maiden. My Son who would divert him
from this springing and rising Passion, whereof he fore saw not any good
effect, answered to that which the Prince had told him: I avow it, my Lord, but
she has the birth, and that is enough to make you conceive she is not worthy
of you, and that you ought not to remain here. What say thou my friend, what
say thou, for the Son of a Philosopher? and thereupon he recited him these
Lines out of a Greek Poet.

In what Rank soever one may be born, Love knows how to equal Shepherds and
Kings, and all those who conform to their Laws, are all equally Subjects to the
self same Master. It decides all Debates,
Of all Fortunes and Ranks, among those who assemble and unites them together.
And there sets them equally at one, where be found them not so.
After many Discourses of this nature, they met with the House of a Peasant
very near them, and Philadelphe engaged him by a liberality considerable enough
to lodge them some days without their discovery. There they confirmed him a
thing, which he had already known at the house of Stesicrate; to wit, that
Stesicrate and his Wife were strangers in the Isle, and that they had not bin
there above thirteen or fourteen years, but he could never precisely know
neither their Country nor their Condition, nor yet their Fortune, only they
told him they had lived there always a simple People, yet notwithstanding
sufficiently well with much reputation and honor, and of general integrity and
uprightness. They made him also a thousand Elogies of Virtue, Piety, and an
infinite number of fair and admirable Qualities met in young Arsinoe, whom he
had too well known. They gave him to understand, that as young as she was, she
had notwithstanding already bin sought after and courted by the most
considerable and potent Persons of the Island; but that hitherto neither she
nor her Parents would listen to any, and they even said, that she would not be
married. All this discourse was to no other use, for so we may say, but to cast
Oil into the Fire, they did but inflame the heart of Philadelphe.

They spent that Night incommodiously in that Cottage, but Philadelphe
preferred it to all the Palaces of Egypt, by reason it was neighboring upon
that of Arsinoe. He went out early the next day, although he verily believed
that she would neither be yet abroad nor out of bed, however he conceived some
pleasure in endeavoring at least to review the Place and House where she was;
and lest he might be rendered suspect, he resolved, that if he were there met by
Stesicrate, or any others of the house, to pretend that he had lost his
Diamond, and that he was returned in quest thereof. He designed to practice the
same pretext even toward Arsinoe, persuading himself that when he should meet
her, possibly she might fly from him, and that he could not otherwise do it
without suspicion, and therefore would by that means endeavor to engage her in
some discourse and converse with him. His design succeeded fortunately enough,
he saw her after some time go forth from thence, and followed her undiscovered,
to a little Temple or Oratory desert and half ruined, which was but a furlong
from the dwelling of Stesicrate. He had trouble enough to retain and withhold
himself from interrupting her Devotion: and when she went out of the Temple, he
presented himself unawares to her, pretending himself to be surprised at her
Encounter. He knew also that she was astonished, and even her Modesty and chaste
Pudicity caused her to blush, to be found alone with him. Fair Arsinoe, said he
immediately to detain her, I demand not of you, for what I am in quest of, for
since I am so happy as to have met you, I will not only believe that I have
lost nothing. My Lord, answered she, whatever you have lost, I would I were
able to tell you news of it, and I will cause some to come to assist you in the
finding it out. He thought to tell her, that she would better tell news of it,
than any Person whatsoever, since he had lost but what she had taken her self:
but he conceived, that if he should discover himself so soon, she would not
fail to abandon him.

Wherefore thinking of nothing else than continuing her, he answered her; But
if you go so fast, you may put your foot on it unawares, and as it is but a
Diamond, there needs nothing more to hinder me to find it. These words stopped
Arsinoe a little, who prepared to leave him very rashly, with much
precipitation. She slackned her pace, and choosing the certain Places whereon
she walked, by this means gave my Prince some opportunity to spoke some words
to her.

But fair Arsinoe (continued he, following her, and therefore still pretending
to find his Diamond upon the way) wherefore did you make so much difficulty to
receive it? for I believe for my part, I had not lost it, but as a punishment,
I had not left it with you. Rather say, replied she him, it is for a punishment,
that in giving it me, you would have lost it. Amiable Arsinoe, answer^d he, one
never loses that which is given, unless it be to those who are ungrateful, and
for the contrary reason, I believed that there would be very much gain, but to
give you a very small thing. My Lord, replied she gracefully, there is no
appearance that you had that thought; but however it be, I have also heard say,
that to give, but to gain thereby, merits the loss of what one gives. There is
therefore in my apprehension, replied he, a certain sort of gain that one may
honestly wish to make with his friends. Should I be blameworthy to endeavor to
gain the esteem and favor of Arsinoe, if there were something worth m^rit in
the World? Arsinoe then well perceived where he would come, and because she
desired to break off short thereon; My Lord, said she, without other answer, I
see that I do not any thing, but amuse you or distract you, and therefore it is
convenient I leave you in quest of your Diamond. Then she mended her pace, and
my Prince accordingly followed her; Amiable Arsinoe, cried he, I have already
told you, I had much rather lose the Diamond, than your presence, and I protest
to you I prefer it, to all the riches in the World. What ever he could say,
'twas impossible to detain her, and after some other discourse, he was
constrained to return his own pace.

Although he had no great cause wherewith to be satisfied with this
entertainment, he told me he returned so content, that he could not express in
Words the pleasure and delight he had received. It seemed to him to have had
some new remarks of Ingenuity and Wit in those few words he had from Arsinoe,
that the amiable beauties and lineaments of her Body, as marvelously fair as
they were, yet they far short of those of her Mind, Parts and Wit. But this
satisfaction was not that which filled nor which extinguished the desire, but
on the contrary hers, did not but give him a far greater longing desire yet
again to see Arsin^e, and there was so great an obstinacy in him to persist in
this resolution, that notwithstanding my S^n dissuaded him by all arguments
possible, that sought so carefully the opportunity, that three or four days
from that time, he found one in the end, such as I am going to declare.

The same day therefore, after he had a long time made several turns about the
house of Stesicrate, and even the Sun very ardent, he posted himself upon the
brink of a small River, which ran between two great Medows, fifty or sixty
paces from the house, in a place where he had learnt that Arsinoe had
oftentimes used her self to walk. He saw her come there in the Evening, holding
in one hand a Cane, that is to say, in her right hand, and in the other a Music
book, out of which she sang some Airs. Philadelphe who would not have her
discern him, because he well conceived, that if she saw him at such a distance,
she would quickly have retired, therefore hid himself in a little Grove of
Orange and Citron Trees, whereof there are great quantities in that Isle. And
by good fortune, before the Sun was withdrawn, and not yet gone down, she came
in the shadow to sit under the same Grove, and scarcely was she sat down, but
she sought in her Book a little while and began to sing, but with so sweet and
melodious harmony, and a Voice so pleasant, that it is not possible to express
it.

Come you young Zephirs from your sweet respirations, refr^sh the Bosoms of our
Complaints; where the Sun has ardently reigned all the day, it now retireth
and gives you place, come take your turn and reign, the Night approaches and
chaseth you away. Philadelphe was charmed at the hearing thereof, and had he
not bin pressed through an amorous impatience to speak to her, he could never
have resolved to have interrupted her: but he sought no other than a convenient
and fit opportunity, to take or make use of time and this Prince singing
passing well, resolved to return answer to what Arsinoe had sung.

Come you young Lovers out of the flames of your Fidelity, and warm the bosom
of the fairest, where only cold has predominated, even to this day, let that
withdraw and give place, let it likewise come to reign and take its turn, Love
calls and chaseth it away. You may conceive if she were surprised with this
Echo. She turned her head, rose from the place she sat, and at the same time
discovered my Prince, who soon addressing himself to her with a particular
grace, thus said unto her. Fair Arsinoe, it had bin great pity, that so sweet
and melodious a Voice should want an Echo to second it; in truth, that which
did it, was much inferior to it; but in revenge it will be published else where,
better than by another, that fair Arsinoe is inimitable, and there is nothing,
but desirable in this amiable Person, unless it may be, that she had so much
sweetness in her Soul, as she has in her voice. Arsinoe all in confusion and
disquieted to find her self with a Man all alone, was presently moved with
anger against Philadelphe, verily believing that he came not there without a
Design, and although she wanted not an esteem, nor, it may be, a favorable
respect for him, she could not however refrain from giving him some marks of
dislike: My Lord, said she, when I seek an Echo, I go to the Rocks, which are
here hard by, and for this time I sought no other, than solitude, and as I
likewise believe you sought it for your own part, I withdraw and give you
place, that we may not frustrate the designs each of other. At the pronouncing
of these Words she would have gone, but Philadelphe could not so resolve to
lose so opportune an occasion, without a further explication of his Mind unto
her. Wherefore the Prince fixing himself before her Passage, said. Divine
Arsinoe, it is not solitude, but it is your self I seek, and I pray you do not
fly from me, as you have formerly done, until I have told you the design that
led me here. I demand of you but a small moment of expressing my self unto you,
and if there be a less thing that can cause you to repent your yielding me that
favor, I consent not only that you make me do it during your life, but even to
dye immediately at your Feet. Arsinoe replied him. My Lord, I believe you are
capable of no other than good designs: but how Innocent soever you are, in what
you tell me, or have to say, you know it could not be to listen to it here, and
if you have an inclination to discourse me, ther'es no great distance, betwixt
this Place and my Fathers House; On this expression; she began to advance
further: but the Prince being passionately in Love, stayed her by laying hold
of one part of her Vesture, with that Liberty, that the proportion of their
conditions, and civility seemed to permit him; very well, fair Arsinoe,
continued he, I consent to follow you there fair Arsinoe: but at least let me
know henceforward, if I shall not there be Importunate, in going there to make
you an offer of my Heart, and that with the strongest, the most faithful, and
the most passionate of the World; my Prince pronouncing these words, observed a
sudden Blushing to spread over the Face of Arsinoe, which he Interpreted, not
disadvantageous to himself; and yet he found no great Subject wherewith to be
satisfied in her Answer. I can answer you nothing, replied she, while you
retain me thus like a Prisoner; for what advantage could you have by a word
that you could not have drawn from me, other than by fear and Violence? Ah!
replied the Prince, still holding her, you would err exceedingly if you should
impute violence to me; Alas! Arsinoe, it is I that am your Prisoner, and from
the first moment that I saw you, I found my self fastened to you, by so strong
and powerful Ties and Ligaments, that I am more a Captivated Slave than I
should have bin, in the hands of Pirates, and that which is worse, I am not
only ignorant of means to extricate my self out of these Bonds, but I find no
disposition nor willingness thereunto.

Complain not therefore Arsinoe, if I detain you for a Moment, you who detain
me Captive for so long time, and undoubtedly a Captive during my Life. My Lord
answered Arsinoe, using endeavors to escape; should I retain you, which I will
never believe, it would never be through Violence, since you your self say,
that you will have it so; but can you excuse your self, and must I not impute
you blameable with offering Violence to me, since you arrest me, and detain me,
in despite of what I can do; Truly my Lord. I shall have good cause to
complain, if you shall refuse to dismiss me, after so many Instances and
Supplications wherewith I have besought you? Yea I obey you fair Arsinoe,
replied the Prince, but however at least, favor me therefore before hand with
a Boon, which the most barbarous People do to their Enemies when they have
vanquished them. Avow me for your Prisoner, and if I dare to demand more,
testify to me that you will well use your Victory. I will so well use it,
replied sharply Arsinoe, (yet with wonderful Grace) that I will now freely give
you your Liberty for my own O Arsinoe! replied my Prince, it is difficult for
you to give me the Liberty you speak of; Alas I am bound by Ligaments and Ties,
that neither you, nor perhaps my self, could be able to unloose, were we
willing: but it is not so much my Liberty that I demand of you, but a little of
sweetness and pleasure within my Prison. This fair One answered him not,
because the Prince dreading her displeasure, had let go her Garment; she
presently retired into the House.

He believed that after that time, it would not be facile for him to find her
again, and that she would therefore for future, keep her self upon her Guard;
whererefore he returned very sad to find my Son, whom he had twice commanded to
let go all alone; fearing his presence might have abstructed his design. After
he had declared to him the success of this interview, he signified to him he
was in great Trouble how he should act for time to come, and asked his Counsel
as to that Point. My Son who had already, as I have told you, dissuaded him as
much as in him was possible, to Imbark himself in that Passion replied him,
with the Liberty he permitted him, because they had bin brought up together;
That which I Counsel you, my Lord, is to remember your self of the design for
which you came out of Egypt. Alas to what end or purpose will it be said, that
the Prince Philadelphe shall vaunt and boast himself, of going to make War at
Syracuse, and that all his Courage will determine in coming only to make Love
and Court a Maiden in Corcyre? My Lord, they pardon these amusements for a day
to those who take them, to relinquish and abandon them after the Victory, and
as our Poets say, they excuse Mars to repose himself some moments, between the
Arms of Venus: But that your first Actions and Attempts shall determine in
Attacking and Combating with the Heart of a simple and contemptible Country
Wench of Corcyre, and that so many Gallant Designs with which they have seen
you to divide and share with Alexander, should, as may be said, be here
Shipwrackt with your Vessel; My Lord, pardon me if I dare say, that this is a
Thought unworthy and unbeseeming one of the Sons of great Ptolomee. This
Discourse touched the Heart of the Prince with Grief, and some sort of
confusion; he was not therefore angry with my Son, for amongst the qualities of
this great Prince, there is this very admirable, that ther'es not in the World,
that would receive with a better Grace than him, the Counsel and advice of his
Friends. But after he had heard him; Stilpon, replied he, I well observe there
is much of truth in some part of what you have told me: But there is yet
therefore no long time that I am here, that they should reproach me for
abandoning the Design for which I left Egypt. What? if it be permitted to
relinquish it after a Victory, ought there not therefore a time of repose to be
allowed after a Shipwreck? Go, go Stilpon, when I shall pass more yet eight
days at Corcyre, I shall not have bin a longer time, than there would have bin
necessity to repair our Ship, when we were saved from the Storm; judge and
consider if having bin wholly lost, my retardment was not an excuse lawful
enough? my Lord, my Son asked him, What do you think to do in those eight
days, that you are willing to spend here? I think, replied he, I may in some
respect gain the favor of Arsinoe. And when you have got her favor, replied
my Son, do you make account to abandon her? Ah Stilpon, cry^d he, that, as
Treachery whereof thou ought not to believe me capable of. My Lord, answered
presently my Son, avow therefore that you deceive your self, when you think of
being here but eight days more. But would they not also say, that you think not
to go out of your Way, and Life, and that you set a bound here to all your
Designs and Hopes? Think you only, neither of making up your Equipage and
Furniture, nor of providing you a Ship or Vessel? as for the rest, what hopes
is there for you to succeed, near to Arsinoe? you avow me your self, that she
flies from you; that she, will not listen to you alone, out of the presence of
her Parents; and if you have been many days waiting to speak with, and
discourse her once, when she did defye you, you will be some years without
effecting it, now when she has Ground and Cause, to precaution her self; In
one word, my Lord, you are so hopeless on this point and subject, that you are
reduced even to come to me to ask Counsel and Advice. I avow to thee, that that
gives me trouble; replied the Prince, But wherefore should I not discover it to
Argene nor to St^sicrate? What my Lord, continued my Son, you think to make a
Father and Mother, Confidents of a Gallantry for their Daughters? Why not
Stilpon? added Philadelphe, I have so pure and respectful a Passion for
Arsinoe, that I am assured, that neither Stesicrate nor Argene can never find a
reason wherewithal to oppose or gainsay it. But my Lord, continued my Son, you
pretend therefore to espouse Arsinoe, for in fine, I believe not, that neither
Father nor Mother, as Wise as they, can find Honesty in a Passion, which should
have another reach. Thou pressest me too much, Stilpon, cried here the Prince,
ask me not that which I do not yet apprehend my self. All that I can say unto
thee, that is, thou can if thou will, prepare all things for our departure:
But whatever may or can arrive, or come to pass, I will yet once again speak
with Arsinoe.

My Son would not lose the occasion from the ensuing day, and forward he went
into the Neighboring City to make Sale of some Diamonds of those which he had
saved; and from thence to the next Port where he hired a Bark to transport them
to Sicily, and having made an agreement, he came to render an account to his
Master.

Philadelphe had spent that day in strange disquietments. For on one side, the
sensibility he had for all the things of Honor, caused in him some shame, to
lose time for a Maiden, when for Reputation and Glory sake, it behoved him to
have a care of rendering an account to the King his Father; and on the other
side, his Love dethroning and destroying all the efforts and endeavors of his
reason, caused him to reject and pass by all that Glory and Repute, only for
one fair Chimera, and left him not the Solidity to consider, but only the
pleasures and delights that he could hope for, in the Society of Arsinoe the
fair. But that which Tyranized the most, that he himself did not very well
conceive his Designs. For he well enough saw on one side, that he should not
expect any thing from Arsinoe, that might invalidate her Virtue, and he loved
her with so pure, true and sincere a Tenderness, that he himself durst not
infringe it, nor yet desire it. He judged very well also on the other side,
that he was neither of Age nor in Place, nor yet in a state, to dream of
Marriage, and which is yet more, in despite of all the preventions of his
Love, his reason still reproached him, with I know not what Treachery, or
rather absurdity to be left so absolutely overcome and vanquished at the first
shock or meeting of a simple Maiden, and who had obliterated and forgotten all,
even to the honor and dignity of his Birth. In this Combat of Honor and of
Love, he observed all the reasons on one side, but all his own proper
Inclinations carried him to the other; and there arrived him in this encounter,
that which occurrs to all those, who not daring to take the part between two
puissant adversaries and willing to please and manage them both, render the one
and the others Enemies.

In sum, he resolved to finish his Voyage in Sicily, to go there and spend some
years in seats of Arms, and signalize himself there, by some Exploits worthy
his Name: But before hand to assure himself if it were possible of the Heart of
Arsinoe to discover himself to her, and promise to return to her, when he had
rendered his Birth that which he ought it, and even to do in time all things
that might be conducible to the happy and laudable success of his Love. So he
gave a shock to his Passion, in quitting Arsinoe, he shockt his Honor by the
thoughts of an alliance so unequal, he exposed himself to the reproaches of
Honor and of Love, he rendered them both Enemies, and instead of placing his
Mind in rest and quiet, from one side or the other, he Cumbred and intricately
entangled himself with both. He made these Resolutions, walking about the
dwelling of Arsinoe, when he met a Slave, who approached him with a design to
have gained him, and to engage him to carry some Ticket, but he was much
amazed, when this Slave told him, that Stesicrate and Argene were departed the
self same Morning very early, to make a Voyage some Months, in a place that
this Slave knew not of, and where they had conducted Arsinoe with them.
Philadelphe, presently believed (as it was true, and so much he understood
afterwads) that he had bin the cause of that departure, his Presence having
given them some cause to suspect him, after he had made a discovery of his Love
to Arsinoe; and its impossible to me to delineate or depaint, what the
affliction of this Prince was, at the report and certainty of this piece of
News. He failed not immediately to take a resolution to go in quest of her, for
he verily conceived, that she could not be gone out of the Island, and
doubtless he would have gone, if my S^n had not employed all that might be
thought imaginable, in his Endeavors to divert and dissuade him. In short,
Stilpon acted so well, that he obliged him to imbark, and having made him quit
all his amorous designs, and no more to dream of them till his return, they
fortunately passed over into Sicily.

Agatocle, as I have told you, was then waging War with Dinocrate, and my
Prince went to find him in his Army. He offered himself as a Voluntier without
naming himself, and would not then make himself known, but by his laudable and
honorable Feats and Actions.

I will here pass by the retayling of them, for in so doing his Merits would
give us subject and matter sufficient for a long History: But all that being no
part of (but quite besides) my design, I will content my self to declare to
you, that my Prince did there so signalize himself, by such very extraordinary
Exploits, that Agatocle immediately considered him, above any amongst all his
Troops It cannot be expressed with what Honors he received him, when
Philadelphe made himself understand by that which was, nor by how many Marks he
signified to him his esteem and his acknowledgment. After the War was finished
he would have made him make a solemn and public entry into Syracuse, and
determined a kind of Triumph: but my Prince was unsensible of all these
Honors, and although he had made the War, as if he had had but that in his
mind, he had no other thing there than only Love.

Arsinoe returned without surcease or any intermission into his imaginations,
and that which is unceivable, as if he had had some Joy in those occasions
wherein he signalized himself; it was not but that he dreamed, that he should
be more worthy of Arsinoe. Will you not admire this effect of Love? Philadelphe
as great a Prince as he was, yet notwithstanding conceived himself unworthy of
a simple Maiden, whom he saw in a condition so disproportionable to that of
his; and his Passion made him appear to her a subject of emulation, to make him
to research with pleasure, the most difficult and perilous occasions in
exposing himself. But this is yet much more strange, the War continued two
years, and at the end of those two years his Love, that so many important and
diverse occupations should dissipate, appeared no other than much more forcible
and violent. My Son was extraordinarily surprised, for he believed that that
fantasy had bin absolutely past, because he had seen him so fixed to functions
and feats of Arms, that one would have believed that he had forgotten all other
things: but he soon made it appear, that it was a fire which lay hid under the
ashes, and that it was not shut up, but to gather together all its forces, and
to shine, glitter and beam forth in its time, with much more ardour and violent
heat.

Stilpon then was much astonished, when that some days after the return of
Agatocles unto Syracuse, my Prince said unto him; Well Stilpon, do you now find
that I remember my self of the Design, which made me quit Egypt, and that I
have in some measure filled and satisfied the expectation, that thou did
conceive of a Son of the great Ptolomee? My Son who knew not to what this
Discourse tended, answered him with testimonies of esteem and admiration, that
all the Island of Sicily, had by his great courage, and by his gallant
Exploits, observed his worth. And then the Prince reassumed thus; It Is too much
Stilpon, it suffices me that I have done no more shame to the Name of the
great Ptolomee, that thou reproachest me no more, but that I seek to relinquish
my self before the labor, and that thou believe I have at least desevred
some moments of rest, which I will go to take at Corcyre.

My Son who immediately understood him, and who still apprehended for him that
amusement would answer him; but Philadelphe interrupted him saying: Listen
Stilpon, I have had enough of time to consult of that design, to tell me even
to my self, all the things that thou can represent unto me, and if they were
to vanish, it would have done it after the endeavors, through which I have
fought these two years: but I could never yet be able to take my self from the
thoughts of my imagination, and I can only dream of joy not of rest, but in
thoughts of making another voyage to Corcyre. After all this discourse, he
commanded my Son to prepare all things in readiness for their departure, and
some days afterward, he departed from Sicily and made for Corcyre, leaving
after him an universal regret, not only in the King, but all the Court. I
cannot describe you the joy, nor yet the ravishments that he had, when he
approached Corcyre, for they exceed not only Expression, but Imagination also.
He made us to land at the Port the nearest could be to the house of Stesicrate,
and without delay, he walked there alone with my Son, leaving all the rest of
his Retinue in the Ship. He past first by the house, where they formerly had
both lodged, there to speak, and to inform them of the news of Arsinoe, and was
much surprised to learn, that neither she nor Stesicrate nor Argene had dwelt
in the Island; that astonished him so much more, because he expected there to
find them, upon the report of a Man, whom he had sent there express from Sicily
some days before his departure. Alas, what is become of them? demanded the
Prince all abasht. My Lord, answered they, There are about fifteen days since
they embarked themselves in a strange Vessel, and knew not well whence she was.
But there ran a secret or heedless report, that it was a great King had sent to
fetch Arsinoe. At these words, the love of the Prince failed not to put into
his Mind a thought, whereof all others than a Lover had never bin capable of.
For he believed that this King, had undoubtedly sent for her to espouse her,
and his jealousy immediately possessed him therewith, mixing it with his
imagination. Ah Stilpon! cried he, it is doubtless a Rival has carried her
away; but however it be, he is more worthy of Arsinoe than Philadelphe, because
he has not treacherously hesitated, as he upon an imaginary inequality in
point of Birth. Not so, my Lord, replied he who had spoken to him, for they
said she was his daughter. The Spirit of the Prince was somewhat revived by
this discourse; but I deceive my self, for he passed and went only from one
Passion to another, of Jealousy, and incredible transportations and
astonishments of joy. Arsinoe daughter of a King replied he much moved. I know
not precisely nor exactly if it were a King, answered the other, but they said
at least, that it was some great Prin^e. Philadelphe was sometimes in a sweat,
then presently turning to my Son, Hah Stilpon, continued he, ^id I not still
tell thee that Arsinoe, had neither the Heart nor the Temper nor Spirit of a
Country Maiden, and that her great and marvelous Qualifications, decyphered
the magnificence of her Birth.

He endeavored afterward to learn from that Man, other particulars in
relation to this wonderful Encounter: but not being further able to draw forth
more ample Instructions and Informations, he quitted him, and went directly to
the former dwelling house of Stesicrate, endeavoring to be more thoroughly
enlightened, and further informed by those whom he should there meet withal.

Never did so many different Passions attack a Soul at one time, and agitate in
this Encounter the amorous Spirit of Philadelphe. He had some times an
inexpressible ravishment, dreaming that Arsinoe was the Daughter of a King, and
in a condition, which might reasonably approach them nearer both the one and
the other, and consequently there might be a probability of their Marriage.

Then again grief seized him and assaulted him when he conceived that in this
condition, she should be exposed to other reserches also, and that the conquest
of her would be infinitely more difficulty. Sometimes fear and inquietude
seized him, in the ignorance where the Country and Kingdom was, where this
fair Princess should be gone. He apprehended that it was with some great Prince
at enmity with the King his Father; then supposing it was a friend, he
apprehended he should be prevented by the demand of some other, whilst he was
in quest of the place where he should seek after her.

But that which gave him most trouble and confusion, was the doubt wherein he
sometimes was, that that Royal birth was not a fable, and Chymera that the
Inhabitants of the Island, might preposterously frame or figure it; and in all
that he had heard, there might be nothing of veri^y, but the absence or rather
the loss of Arsinoe. With these thoughts he arrived at the house where formerly
Stesicrate was lodged, he found there a new Host and new Informations, but
still with new causes and grounds of trouble and perplexity. For he who
Inhabited there was a friend of Stesicrate, who confirmed him, that there was
some came to fetch away Arsinoe, with great and magnificent preparations of
Equipage, etc. and although that Stesicrate had not had so great confidence in
him, as to have imparted to him any more than half his Secret, however he had
not left him so ignorant, but that she was the Daughter of a great Prince; that
Argene had with her taken their voyage toward Egypt, and that they might hear
tidings of them at Alexandria.

All that Philadelphe could learn till then, had given him no other than an
imperfect joy, because they had bin always mixed with some considerations that
troubled and perplexed him, but there appeared in this last none, than subjects
and grounds of hope and some joyful ravishments. Arsinoe daughter of a great
Prince, made no great disproportion in their birth; Arsinoe in Egypt and in
Alexandria, left in him no great difficulty, or more doubt of their Marriage.

He returned to his Vessel with a rash and furious pace, with much
precipitancy, altogether transported with excess of joy impatience and love,
and having no more of perplexity, than the thoughts of the great Prince, whose
daughter this Arsinoe could possibly be. There was many in Egypt, because
Ptolomee had three or four Brothers, who had left a great number of Children,
and there were even yet many of the Family of the ancient Kings. So that did
not put him in any great trouble, because that amongst them, if there were any
Daughters, there would not have bin one, but would have thought themselves
happy in being sought unto by Philadelphe. He therefore embarked in his Vessel
and caused them with full Sail to make for Alexandria, and had no more trouble
in his Mind, than only delay, and all Winds seemed him too slow and dull, and
to second his impatience, it must have bin almost necessary, that he were
driven into Egypt by another Tempest.

In fine, after a few days sailing, he arrived in the Evening at the Port of
Alexandria, and the first thing he there made inquiry for, was after the
Princess Arsinoe, and if they knew not whence she was. My Lord, answered one to
whom he spoke, We must surely be very great strangers, if we should not know
whence she was, and you may see her, if you please, even before you enter into
the City; for behold there she walks upon the bank of the River with the King,
the Queen Berenice and the Princess Antigone. In saying this he showed him a
crowd of People by the Sea side, four or five hundred paces from thence, where
Philadelphe ran or rather flew, transported with ravishing joy and content. The
King, Queen and Princess were afoot, having alighted from their Chariots, which
waited upon them hard by, and I had the honor to walk by, and then spoke and
discourse with the King, and therefore I can declare to you the original of all
that past at this Encounter.

As soon as Ptolomee perceived the Prince his Son, he knew him, and was so
fully transported with joy, that he advanced even some paces, toward him to
embrace him. Philadelphe saluted the King, the Queen and Antigone, as a Father,
Mother in Law, and a Sister whom he loved, with a respect and tenderness
unconceivable. They reviewed him as the Person of the World, which above all
was most dear. But Philadelphe principally was attentive in seeking after the
sight of Arsinoe, and 'twas not long before he found her. For besides her
beauty which immediately invited all Eyes to behold her, and those of the
Prince were led and lighted by Love, he had no sooner embraced Berenice and
Antigone; ^ut the Queen her self presented him Arsinoe. Come my Lord, said she
unto him, come also, and embrace this dear Sister, and at the same time turning
her self toward Arsinoe; my Daughter, quoth she, beh^ld this Brother which I
promised you. Love waited not any long time to receive these Words of Berenice,
nor caused them to be remarked by the Prince Philadelphe. They did not in an
instant only penetrate his ears, but his heart, and this fraternity unexpected,
so contrary to the Designs wherewith he flattered himse^f, dissipated in a
moment all the of joy his Spirits, and also defaced and razed all the marks in
his Countenance, and there left but only the Indexes and evident significations
of an incredible and unconceivable amazement and astonishment. He continued for
some time almost confused, amated and immovable, in that respectful Submission
with which he approa^hed to salute her. He had scarce the strength and courage
to rise up, and those who a moment before looked upon his countenance, almost
in a moment afterward, did not know it. On the other side, Arsinoe appeared no
less surprised, when having beheld this new Brother, she knew him to be the
Stranger whom she had seen at Corcyre, who had there began to make her a
declaration of his Love, and for whom she had also already conceived movements
strong enough of high esteem and good liking. But this surprise caused in her
heart an effect far different from that which was produced in that of
Philadelphe. For instead of the grief wherewith he was perplexed, she was
ravished with joy, in contemplating the fortune that was made her now, in
having such a Brother; to resent these first and obscure movements of
friendship and amity, that she had already conceived for Philadelphe unknown,
justified by the duties of those of Nature, and consanguinity, and in one Word,
she appeared a Sister that rebovered a Brother, and he a Lover which had lost a
Mistress.

All the Court observed their Emotion, they presently knew the cause of that of
Arsinoe, but they knew nothing then of that of Philadelphe: and after the
Prince, who never had heard say that Berenice had had any other Daughter than
Antigone, except one who died very young had learnt from the Queen, that she
who was thought to have bin dead, was she who had only bin lost till then, by
these passages she told him; this Prince too much confirmed in his own
Misfortune, found himself obliged to pretend some indisposition, to have
thereby cause given him to go and hide his displeasure, and so all at once to
let his regret have its free course.

From the time he retired to his Chamber, he dismissed all others, except my
Son, and being at liberty to bemoan himself, he cast him desolately upon his
Bed, and with tears in his Eyes he abandoned himself, to a thousand regrets,
and so many marks of afflictions which could never have bin expected from Love,
of which was not yet quite declared.

O Arsinoe! cried he, O Arsinoe! I lose you, and when I thought to have found
you for perpetuity, I see that I have lost you for ever. I had a dread upon me,
that you were in an unknown Country, that you had bin under the power of some
Prince, and an Adversary, where I was not prevented by any, or some Rival. I
rejoiced to see you in Egypt, in the power of my Father, which is as much as to
say, as in my own; in the mean time, I feared nothing that I apprehended, I had
no cause of trembling, but of that which overjoyed me; I had nothing to doubt
of, but my Country, but my Family, but my self. Alas must it be thus, that
when I think I am delivered from all that which could bear away Arsinoe from
me? must it be, alas, that I take her from my own self? must I be my own Rival,
and must I make my own State more dismal and deplorable, than all the Men in
the World could have made it be? my love was not but too forcible to make me
triumph over all the rest; There is neither force nor powers of Princes and
Kings whereof I had not hoped to have succeeded: But what shall I do against
this improvident Obstacle, which I cannot make to cease, unless I cease to be
Philadelphe? O Nature that thou did not content thy self to give me an amity
and friendship for Arsinoe, since that thou have made her to be born my Sister,
or wherefore did thou cause her to be born my Sister, since thou would give
me a Love so opposite to that of a Brother? Why did thou betray me, Nature,
inspiring me a passion, which thou would oppose? and wherefore betrayest thou
thy self, in making me sin against thee? If thou were blind, why have thou not
bin so unto to the end?

He stopped there to give passage to a thousand sighs, and thrust them forward
with such violence, that he seemed they were so many endeavors to make his Soul
go forth. That obliged my Son to approach him, to see if he should be necessary
to him, and after the Prince had discerned him: Ah my friend, said he unto him,
Thou art happy, and I emulate thy Condition and thy Birth. Thou art happy
Stilpon, that thou art not as I, am Brother of Arsinoe.

Some Obstacle that the Gods had put to my Love, at least there would have bin
none invincible; and this inequality of Birth and Fortune, that thou had
formerly so much represented, and not kept me from the distance of that good
Fortune of possessing Arsinoe in comparison of this too great equality, which
is betwixt us. He stopped there yet a while; afterward reassuming a little his
discourse.

But Stilpon, continued he, think thou that Nature opposes my Love, she who
seems in duty bound to fortify yet by this new tie, whereto she fastens me to
Arsinoe, why should it be against Nature, that two Persons formed from the same
blood, should have so much simpathy among themselves, as two strange Persons?
Would not this be to second his intention and inseparably to bind together what
she has already commenced to unite?

Something my Son said unto him, all he was able to frame or figure wherein to
consolate him, but he could never come to an end, and the Prince spent the
Night in so many violent agitations of Spirit, that it is scarce possible to be
imagined.

I went to see him the next day, and found him in his Bed, with a resolution
there to spend the day, for fear of being obliged to receive Visits, or making
of any; and above all, for fear of going to see the same Arsinoe, whose
presence in times past, he longed afterand sighed for; for he found himself in
no capacity to approach her, nor to consider her as his Sister, and he mortally
apprehended a conversation which had not made* but renewed a mortal affliction.
He concealed not his disgrace from me, nor yet his perplexity, and I avow to
you I was sensibly touched; but I would not signify so much to him for his own
sake, and as I knew, how much his Soul was naturally capable, to suffer himself
to be governed by reason, I began to represent him the necessity of overcoming
and vanquishing himself, with the most forcible arguments and terms that my
affections could suggest; and attacking him in that part, through which I knew
he would be most sensible, I represented him these remainders of Love, which he
could not stifle nor suffocate, not only as a weakness, but as a great Crime.
He immediately made me a reply very coldly: but on that which I pressed him with
most ardour and fervency, he answered me.

That great Crime that you blame so much, Straton, has notwithstanding found a
probation amongst the Caldeans, to whom there is great appearance, that the
verity of things present is known, since they penetrate even for and in things
for future. Chrisippe that young Philosopher, for whom I have seen and heard
you testify so much admiration, has he not even pleaded and supported to you
your self, that love among Relations, was more conformable than contrary to
nature? His Master the great Zenon, has he not bin of the same sentiment? So
that if you must find Authorities in entire Nations, Arabia, Ireland, and a
thousand other Countries, have they not practiced, and do they not yet practice
this Custom, to espouse their Sisters, of which Egypt has advised and
considered of only since some Ages to have it in horror? The Carians within
the memory of Arthemise and of Mausole, do they not reverence and adore the
Alliance of a Sister and a Brother? Do we not our selves make so much within
the Feasts and Holy Days of Isis and of Osiris, which we celebrate and
solemnize every year? That love was it not innocent every where, and necessary
even at the birth of the World? And Jupiter, I say, Jupiter the great, has he
not made his Wife of his Sister? Wherefore will they then that this usage be
contrary to Nature? If that were, it would never have bin just, for nature has
bin from all times, and it would be prohibited throughout the World, for Nature
is universal. I left him to say all he could, that so he might listen to me the
more attentively, when he would have any thing more to object unto me; besides
that, I admired his reasonings, and took much pleasure in harkning unto them,
although I signified him nothing. After he had held his peace, I replied to him
in these terms.

Permit me to tell you my Lord, that all that you allege me of authorities and
examples, are not good reasons, and that the sentiments of Zenon of Chrisippe,
nor those of the Chaldeans do not justify yours. They might as well be deceived
as you; and to show you that it is not impossible, but that even entire
Provinces have bin abused, that is that Arabia, Egypt retaining to this day,
two Opinions so contrary, it must necessarily be, that one of the two must be
deceived. However, my Lord, they may say, that they both have good reason; that
there is nothing naturally just nor unjust: but that the Laws alone, with usage
justify and render evil all Actions. So your love is criminal, since that
neither our Manners nor our Laws cannot suffer it, and those of the Arabians
cannot serve you to any purpose, since you live in Egypt. It is not but that
there was some greater appearance, in believing that Nature oppug^s; she has
even given horror to the very Beasts; you may have read in Aristotle, that the
Horses have precipitated themselves to be fallen into the like default, and she
seems to apprehend in such a manner the incestuous union of the Brother and
Sister, that when she ingenders them together, she separates them from one
Membrane, which is not found between two Boys twins, nor between two Maidens. I
did not convince him by these reasons, but in conclusion, I disposed him to
rise, and go see the King, Queen and Princess.

As to that of visiting the King, Queen and Antigone, there was yet no
difficulty in the managing of that, but it is not conceivable with what emotions
of Soul, nor with what troubles of Spirit he entered the Chamber of Arsinoe. He
knew not where to commence his discourse, he knew not almost even how to name
her: for to treat her as a Princess, as a Stranger that seemed him to be too
cold to a Sister: to call her also his Sister, that was too repugnant to his
love; as for Arsinoe, she had not the same perplexity, for as I have said, the
esteem and friendship which she had begun to conceive at Corcyre for
Philadelphe, served but to dispose her to receive a Brother with more joy. Her
heart was not, nor had yet bin preoccupied, as that of the Prince, by the
thoughts of an Alliance, contrary to the proximity of blood, and all that the
change of her condition had bin surprise in her, ended and terminated in a
surprise, pleasingly delightful and advantageous. So that she had in this
Encounter, but a facile and delectable rejoicing in his Personage; and
therefore from the first moment she saw him enter into her Chamber, where she
was yet apparelling her self, she advanced before him with a very joyful Gay
and jocund Countenance, and embraced him with a thousand tender respects, and
with extreme demonstrations of joy. O how had these tender and precious
caresses rendered him happy some days before! but the more he dreamed, that
formerly they had bin sweet and delectable pleasures, the more he then
conceived of Regrets.

It was a long time before that sweet name of Brother, that she had repeated
him so many times, could draw from his Mouth any other then Sighs. The Princess
discerned it, but imputed it to no other than his indisposition, that he had
dissembled or feigned the day preceding, and 'twas therefore that she often
tenderly asked him, what ailed him, and whether he were yet sick and
indisposed. Philadelphe answered hre, No, but in so mournful a manner, that the
Princess was much troubled and disquieted, and as she seared some disgrace had
befallen him, and that the presence of her Ladies of Honor, hindered him to open
his heart in the discovery, she made them signs to withdraw, and afterward
said unto him: What aileth you my dear Brother? for both my duty and
inclination makes me to take so great a part and share in all that concerns
you, that I conceive I should demand why you seem troubled, without
signification of any indiscreet curiosity. By your good favor my dear Brother,
free me from this inquietude and pain, and let me thereby see, that you
consider me as your Sister.

At these words, the Prince uttered a d^ep Sigh, then looking upon her with the
eyes of Love and Grief, who unfolded and displayed themselves together, he
replied: you ask me what ayleth me? Alas Arsinoe? Do you not, even your own
self tell me by the names of Brother and Sister, what you give to both of us? O
Arsinoe! Added he, Arsinoe that you would bewail me, and that you would
bewail your own proper misfortune, if you loved me as I love you.

The Princess who knew not to what excess and extremity the love of Philadelphe
had bin, would produce or extend unto, and knew not yet the effects of a
Passion, that she had not resented, was enough surprised at these Words; and
however as she called to mind, how little the Prince had formerly expressed
himself to her, and that as she had an infinite quick, pregnant, accute and
lively Spirit and Wit, she omitted not to Divine of something; so that she
answered him: O my Brother, What reproaches do you make me? I should have much
more cause to tell you, that you love not your Sister your self, being you will
recover her with so little Joy, or at least, you love her not as you ought. I
kn^w not, replied the Prince, if I love you as I ought: but I know I love you
so well and so much, that I bemoan my self, and you ought to have Compassion
upon me. For in fine Princess, the Prince Philadelphe has the same heart, that
that unknown One had whom you saw at Corcyre, and the Princess of Egypt has
the same Beauty, that this unknown Arsinoe also had. The Princess did apprehend
this discourse with much facility; Wherefore beholding the Prince with some
Sentiments of that Compassion be required from her: My Brother, replied she
unto him; Philadelphe ought not to be here what he was at Corcyre, since that
Arsinoe is no more, what she there thought her self to be, and he ought also to
remember himself that these petty Passions of an unknown One straying out of
his Country, are unworthy to be those of a Son of the great Ptolomee in Egypt.
Alas! replied he, would you that the Prince of Egypt and that unknown one had
not the same Passions since that I told you, that they both have but one, and
the same Heart? O Arsinoe! that its easy to you, to speak of this change, to
you who have not had, but a change of Apparel and Condition! But that it is
there to see my self reduced, me who must (for so I may speak) change Hearts,
and to despoyle my self of a Passion, rooted within my Soul, and which
henceforth would make my Life full of all Hopes and Pleasures.

In uttering these words the Tears trickled down from his Eyes, and though
Arsinoe could not almost but apprehend a thing which could not be conceived,
but by those who had proved it, she omitted not however to give him also some
Marks that she was plyant, soft and gentle. That was some little Consolation to
Philadelphe to see that she took part and share with him in his Grief and
resented it; and after some moments he said unto her; At least my dear Sister,
it is true that you now have some little friendship and kindness for me, and if
I am so unfortunate that I must raze here, and blot out, a part of that
affection, that I had for you, then you will have an affection for me, which
you formerly had not at Corcyre? My Brother, replied the Princess, never doubt
of my Kindness and Friendship, and be assured, that of all the new Duties and
Devoirs, to which the change of my Condition obliges me, its him to whom I will
tie my self the fastest, and from that I will never depart. These words gave
some movements of Joy to Philadelphe, who kissed the Hand of Arsinoe to testify
to her his Obligation and Acknowledgment, and having also on his part assured
her of an inviolable Affection, and which should never terminate but with that
of his Life, he betook himself to entertain her, after the same Rate, in which
he had past all the time which had bin sl^pt since their first interview; and
after his endeavors used to make her conceive to what a high Pitch, the
Passion of Love he had had for her was mounted unto, he insensibly engaged
himself to her in an apologetical Discourse, and after such a manner as will
make me observe, how he was yet preoccupied.

But is it possible said he to her, that nature obliges me to quit so strong a
Passion? as if by reason I have a double Subject to love you, it must therefore
be that you were more indifferent. Ah my Sister, avow with me, that we are very
unhappy to live in a Country where men are mingled to correct Nature, and
where as if they did not yet commit Crimes enough, they have by new Laws, made
us new occasions of Sinning. That the Gods did not cause us to be born amongst
People less blinded. That love wherewith they have made us guilty of a Crime in
Egypt, would be unto us a virtue amongst the Britains, amongst the Indians,
and in a thousand other Countries. But let us go there my Sister, and lets make
it our Country. We cannot have a better than that wherein we shall be
permitted to love one another.

Philadelphe had no sooner pronounced these words, but that he well saw his
Passion had transported him to say something which had not pleased Arsinoe. He
knew it by her Countenance, and as he dreaded nothing more than her
displeasure, he was ready to retract, when she answered him: Brother what is it
you demand, and wherefore think you already ^o put my affection to such strange
Proofs? Let Us live here my dear Brother, the Gods will have it so, because they
appointed us to be born here; and content your self that I am your Sister; for
all your displeasures can never make me to be more unto you.

The Princess embraced him in finishing, without doubt 'twas to repair the ill
he had done by his words; and afterward taking him by the Hand, she would have
had him pass into another Chamber where there was People, to interrupt
afterward that discourse and entertainment, which she would not continue.

But Philadelphe which felt himself, in a condition not very well able to begin
another, took leave of her, and retired into his apartment, altogether as sad
as he came forth of it. He past all the rest of the day in a Mood so mute and
melancholy as is unconceivable, and that which infinitely Rackt and Tortured
him, that he could not dispense with the Visits that were made him, and which
augmented his Pain, by the constraint and trouble they rendered him in this his
affliction. Yea, he found that the sight of Arsinoe did no other than reinvenom
his Wound, and that there was no means of Cure, in presence of her who had
given it.

All that which he imagined might prove a Remedy, was the hopes he had in the
change of his Brothers qualifications, for whom he still conserved that
wonderful Tenderness, he had had from his Infancy. He had not seen him since
his return, by reason there had already bin eight days that Ceraune was gone a
Hunting fifteen or sixteen Miles from Al^xandria. Wherefore he went to find him
there, with design to have spent some time with him in the Country: But he
found little ground or subject of Consolation, scarcely had Ceraune seen him
only arriving; he treated him with such Insolence, Arrogance, Disdain,
Fierceness, Cruelty and Inhumanity, not like an elder Brother, but an Enemy; so
that poor Philad^lphe was constrained to return the same day that he was gone
there. Make you I pray some reflections upon his misfortune, and observe how
much he was persecuted by two opposite Passions. The hatred of his Brother
constrained him to shun and fly him, and he was forced to shun and keep at
distance from his Sister, in regard of his Love.

In this necessity he well saw, that there was no consolation for him in Egypt,
and he dreamed of nothing more than to seek some occasion to quit it a second
time. He had the most honorable that he could desire. For in that time chanced
the famous troubles which confederated and combined all the Successors of
Al^xander the great, against the Kings Antigonus and Demetrius: Ptolomee levied
a considerable Army to send into Sicily, where were to be joined all the Troops
of his Party, and he gave their conduct to Philadelphe. It Is here where I shall
have opportunity, to recount you Things, worthy the memory of all Ages, if the
tediousness of my recital, did not oblige me hereafter to abridge it, and
lightly to pass over that which remains to be declared you, I will observe unto
you only, that amongst all the gallant and worthy Actions that this Prince did
there, there was amongst others, an encounter near unto Gaza, where he defeated
one of the Armies of Antigonus, and there slew fifty thousand Men, and took
eight thousand Prisoners with all the Baggage of the Son of King Demetrius. But
the manner wherewith he used this Victory was unto him much more honorable,
than had bin the Victory it self. For Philadelphe returned to Demetrius his
Baggage again, together with his ^^^ends taken in the Battle, with these
generous Expression. That the Fight betwixt them, was not for all Things: but
only for the Honor and the Victory. This noble and heroic Exploit produced
very different effects. For as it had accumulated Honor, Glory and Renown upon
Philadelphe, it envenomed the heart of Ceraune, with an incredible Jealousy.
Although he knew that Philadelphe had not used it in that sort, but by the
permission of King Ptolomee his Father, to whom he had sent a courier Express:
however, he left it not but pass for an Intelligence with the Enemy, and highly
decry'd it as a piece of Treason. The King would have had him to impose silence
upon himself on this Subject, and therefore did frequently command him to
sucrease, but the more he undertook to defend the innocent, the more he
reported him Guilty, and was jealous he was culpable; and his rage and fury was
come to such a pitch and point, that by a second attempt, he under hand
subborned the Guards of Philadelphe, to Assassinate him in his Army.

The Conspiracy was discovered, the Guards taken, who avowed all; and behold
another admirable generosity worthy of my Prince. He did not make it seem, that
he pardoned the Guilty, as at the other time, but as if he had believed them
only criminal toward his Brother in accusing him unjustly, and not as if they
would have Assassinated him, he sent them to him bound hand and foot to use
them according to his discretion.

After much time spent in diverse Combats they came at last as doubtless you
well know, to a general Battle near to the City of Ipse, where King Ptolomee
would have personally assisted. I will not tell you the success, because it is
known through all the World, no more than that which happened to Philadelphe in
the War, that the King appointed him to make afterward against Seleucius King
of Syria. I will not dwell upon any Subject, but that which has relation to
the love and the misfortune of my Prince; There had bin two years and some
Months, that he had bin absent from the Court, where they spoke of no other
then his high and honorable Feats, when he received order from the King
presently to come and meet him at Alexandria. The Prince immediately departed,
although with altogether as much displeasure as he formerly had of joy to
return there. For very far from feeling his Heart confirmed by a long
resolution of thinking no more upon Arsinoe then as a Sister, he found himself
more feeble and weak upon that point than ever before; absence nor time having
bin able to heal that Wound that I know not what fatality rendered Incurable.

He departed notwithstanding because the Order was precise, and allighting from
his Horse he immediately repaired to the King, who having commanded all people
to withdraw, spoke to him after this manner. My Son, one of the greatest Acts
of Grace, which the Gods confer upon Men, is in my Apprehension this, in
granting them Desire and Leisure before their Death, to dispose of the Affairs
of their Family, in the same manner they wish they may remain after them. I am
in a condition of thinking to prevail with the Gods for this favor; so much
the more, that the comportments of your Brother, reduce me to the necessity of
not committing your Fortune to his discretion, nor yet to that of your Sister.
I do not intend nor pretend to take from him the advantages of his Birth, nor
yet the Rights and Prerogatives of his Eldership, although he has given too great
a cause, and that the Kingdom of Egypt, not being come to me by Inheritance nor
Patrimony, but being the price of my Blood and Labor, it gives me Right and
Privilege to dispose of it to my good liking; nevertheless the right of
Eldership is an error in Law which I respect wherewith I willingly leave it
and do rejoice therein, when the Gods shall have appointed me to give him
place, provided, that he continue not to render himself unworthy. But in
leaving him his Portion, it is just also that I assure you of yours and that I
give you part in an Inheritance which you have so well known and conserve and
extend. My Kingdom can be commodiously divided into two Parts; into Egypt
Inferior and Egypt Superior. I intend to leave him one, and to put you at
present in the possession of another. As to what relates to Antigone your
Sister, you know I am in treaty of her Marriage. Behold my Son the Design for
which I have sent to fetch you, and which I intend to put in execution,
immediately after the next Solemnity of the Feast of Isis. This discourse gave
Philadelphe much and many thoughts for many reasons: but the principal was, to
see that Ptolomee had not spoken of Arsinoe, as if he would have disinherited
her; and this thought troubling all the Sentiments of acknowledgments, that he
felt in his heart for the King his Father, he could not refrain telling him
instead of thanking him; My Lord the Princess Arsinoe.... The King apprehended
his thought at the very first word, and betaking himself to smile; No, my Son,
(said he interrupting him,) I do not give her any Partage, Share or Division,
for I intend the contrary, that she her self shall be a Portion of yours. These
Terms yet more intricated and perplexed Philadelphe. Ptolomee who would not
leave him longer in Pain, expressed him and unfolded him his mind that she
should by him be given him in Marriage. And to let his Joy have its free and
liberal course, (for the King did me the honor to communicate me his Design,
having known from me, the Passion which Philadelphe had) he made him understand
that Arsinoe was not his Sister. But that she was indeed Daughter to Berenice,
the Daughter of this Queen by a former Marriage with Aridee Brother of
Alexander the Great. That the jealousy of the ambitious and cruel Olympias who
was also Wife to Aridee, and the Empire which she had upon her Spirit of their
common Husband, having brought that Prince to suffer Impunity; that Olympias
undertook, and attempted upon the Life of these two Children that he had by his
other Wives, that she might thereby transfer all the Love of the Father upon
hers; Berenice had bin constrained to feign that Arsinoe was dead as soon as
she was born, and that in the Interim she had privately sent her to be
nourished and brought up at Corcyre by Stesicrate and Argene his Wife, both her
Domestics, in whom she had Confidence in expectation that the Death of her
rival would permit her to be made known by Aridee. But Olympias having survived
that Prince, she had never durst made it to be known; and that he had bin a
long time after her second marriage with Ptolomee without making it known to
himself, by an awful Timidity, and scrupulous Bashfulness, as if she had
apprehended, that that was not capable of giving him some Ombrages of her
Virtue. That her maternal Love had in the end forced her to this confidence in
him, and to recommend him her Daughter in a malevolent Disease wherein this
virtuous Queen thought to dye during the absence of Philadelphe, and that for
him who was not ignorant neither of the furious rage of Olympias, nor the
feeble Complaisance by which Aridee had left her to Sacrifice one part of her
Family, and who yet better knew the Wisdom and the incomparable virtue of
Berenice, he had immediately not only sent to fetch away Arsinoe from Corcyre,
but that loving no less the Children of his dear Wife than those who properly
were his own, he would have her also pass for his Daughter, whereby to assure
her a part of his Wealth in recompense of those of her Father. For in the
conclusion, pursued Ptolomee, I avow to you that I love Arsinoe no less than my
own Daughter, and that it is to testify unto her that I have for her the Love
of a Father that I will give her to my own Son. Philadelphe listened to all this
with so much astonishment, so much Joy, and so much Impatience, that he almost
lost the attention, and he cared not how the thing did happen, provided that it
was so.

After having signified and testified as much as was possible his
Acknowledgments and Obligations together with his Joy, to the King his Father,
he quickly and nimbly ran to Arsinoe, and ran there so transported with Love
and ravishing joy, that he did not almost feel himself. I doubt not, but that
you would take great pleasure to understand, after what manner he reviewed this
fair Princess, and how he was received; If I should undertake to make a draft
of the lineaments of this Picture, and to depaint all the most rare, and the
most tender passions the World inspired them in this reunion; so fortunately
happy, and so unexpected and unawares: but for that, it would be needful for me
to have twice as much time, as undoubtedly remains to us to finish our course,
since it seems to me, I discover from hence the house of Alcidias, upon that
adjacent hillock or eminent rising. It suffiseth that you know that Arsinoe,
who had bin prepared by Berenice, for that interview, corresponded with the joy
of the Prince so much, that he could exact and require it from her Modesty and
chaste Pudicity and Purity, and advantageously repared and made up, in these
first Moments, all the displeasures, all the troubles and pains of many years.

Eight days after the return of Philadelphe, they celebrated in Alexandria the
Feast of Isis, pursuant whereunto preparations were to be made for the Marriage
and Coronation of Philadelphe.

The solemnity of this Feast, had something of barbarity, for those who knew
nothing of the Manners and Theology of the Egyptians. For first of all, after a
Sacrifice that the Priests made in the Morning with Cakes, on which there is
the figure of a Seahorse tied; they made a procession, in which four Priests
having their hair and beard shaved, conducted the Ox (or as they say) the God
Apis. Four others afterward led the Dog Anubis with the like Ceremony, and all
the other Priests followed after them, singing of Hymns, and all vested and
arrayed with Robes of Linen.

They walked so in order, to a large and hollow Fountain, which stands without
the City of Alexandria, in which they drowned the Ox, and at the self same time
the Gates of a little Temple, which is very near approaching, opening as of
themselves, they beheld the coming forth of a new Ox and one Heyfer. Every one
of these Animals carried on his Neck a Maiden, which there is seated much in
similitude to those that the Limners represent us in Europe upon a Bull, and
these Maidens are always Princesses, or Persons of the highest Quality, because
they do upon this occasion represent the Goddess Isis, for she that sits upon
the Heyfer, signifies Isis, then when being the Nymph Io, she was changed into
an Heyfer by the Artifices of Jupiter, and she which is upon the Ox there, then
represents that being the Wife of Osiris and Queen of Egypt, she taught these
People to cultivate and sow their Lands. They made them afterward mount twice
upon the Nile in a Vessel, which conducted them to an Isle in the Sea, some
miles from its Mouth, and where there is a Temple of Osiris, on the Altar
whereof is a Chest of Iron, where they said Osiris was shut up and drowned.
They yet make there the sacrifice of an Ox, and afterward all the procession
return by the light of a thousand Torches, and at the sound of Flutes, Pipes or
Tabers of Drums and Trumpets, which makes the Air on all sides to resound, ring
and yield an Echo. At another time, I will explain you the Mysteries of that
Superstition, as to the present it suffiseth; after I have explained you the
order of that Solemnity, to tell you that the Princesses Antigone and Arsinoe
had bin chosen to represent at this time the Goddess Isis. And to speak truth,
they could not better choose, whereby to give a greater Idea to the Goddess,
nor to imprint the respect and the veneration in the Spirits of these People;
for they had both the one and the other such Beauty, as would draw and attrackt
the Eyes and adoration of all the World.

Certainly I can assure you, as having bin the Witness of it, never was any
thing so admirable, as they appeared that day, the one and the other. Antigone
as the youngest represented the Goddess or the Nymph Io. Her Robe was of Cloth
of Silver sown with Pearls, and her Hair was trust and tuckt up under a Crown
of Flowers: her white and fair Arms appeared decked and garnished with rich
Bracelets of Pearls, and they saw on her a kind of half Moon blazoned in
silver upon the forehead, in sign of the change of the Nymph. Arsinoe
represented the Queen Isis, and that therefore was the reason why it was more
magnificent and Royal, being all imbroydered with Gold, and covered with
precious Stones. Her head was covered with a Crown of Gold, in fashion or
similitude of an Ear of Corn, interlaced with a great number of Emeralds,
Rubies and Stones of diverse exquisit colors, to signify the diverse sorts of
Herbs and Flowers, which spring up among the Corn, and instead of a Scepter,
she carried in her hand a Coulter or share of Gold, which they had made very
light, lest they should wrong or over-press her hand with its weight. But
scarce did they only take notice of these exterior Ornaments, as those which of
hers were natural, and drew, enticed and allured the Eyes and Attention of all
which beheld them.

All Egypt which seemed to be gathered together and assembled at Alexandria,
for the solemnity of that Feast, avowed that she had never seen any thing so
worthy the Greatness, Magnificence and Majesty of Isis, and it seemed that
Fortune envying our joy, took pleasure to redouble our acclamations and our
congratulation, to render afterward our Moans and Regrets more sensible.

The Sacrifice being finished in the Isle, all the Court were upon the Port
expecting, by the luster and tansparent clearness of a thousand Links and waxen
Torches lighted, the return of these two fair Princesses. The Prince
Philadelphe alone went before them, in a little magnificent and gallant Boat
made expressly, when a bark returning from the Isle with all diligence of the
Rowers, reported to the King, that Antigone and Arsinoe were carried away by
some People, hid in an unknown Vessel which lay behind the Island, and who had
not appeared, but when they were ready to go to Sea. It is not possible to
express unto you here the Alarm, nor the trouble that in one instant this news
produced. Immediately the King gave order to hasten away after them, and caused
all the Soldiers to be embarked, that could be found upon the first Vessels
that were ready in the Port, or could be met withal: But very strange! of two
hundred Vessels that were there, there was not found one in a readiness, or
which wanted not either Ropes or Sails or Rudders, or other things necessary.

There must something more appear to the King to be known, and that there was
some Treason here under hid and concealed. He caused Pylots and Captains of
Ships to be taken, but 'twas not possible to draw any thing out, unless it were
they themselves were surprised, having believed all things in good condition.
On the other side Philadelphe being, as I have told you, gone before the
Princesses in this little Bark, which he had caused to be built, more for
appearance than service, had no sooner received this fatal news, that he became
like one thunderstruck so unawares.

Never did pain nor grief make so sudden and so violent an effect and change,
as was in him, and I believe that there had bin no need of any but himself for
his Princess which conserved him his life, and rendered him apart of his Forces,
after he had almost lost them all. Ah my Friends! cried he, to them that were
with him, all desolate and hopeless, We must perish or save our dear Princesses.

Grief and pain permitted him not to discourse any more, and in the mean time
without consideration of the little succor that they could receive from him, in
the state wherein he was, he commanded the Mariners who conducted his Bark, to
row with all their strength, although the night deprived them of all knowledge.

But behold another Mischief, scarcely had this poor Prince advanced one Mile,
that some pieces of his Bark being loosned, the one from the other, as if by
set purpose, he found himself down in the Sea.

Happy it was he was not far from the Island, so that he saved himself by
swimming, with all those of his Retinue, one Mariner only excepted, whom they
saw no more. But that which afflicted him a thousand times more than death, was
that he found himself there without any means to pursue the forcible Ravishers
away, and a nin impossibility of succouring his Princess.

To what extremities was he not ready to expose himself in this Encounter? But
above all, imagine you, that which became of him, then when he regained the Port
of Alexandria, in an ill favored Gondoso, which was ^ound by hap-hazard, and
thinking to go upon some good Ship to seek after Arsinoe, he knew the state in
which they were all found. Every one saw the Treason was manifest, but they
could not, and they durst not almost suspect the Traitors, for the love of
Ceraune, who was one of the Robbers, as you will soon observe, had not yet
broken out.

And besides he himself, appeared at Court with the Countenance of a Man, who
took too great a share of the Calamity, to be one of them guilty of the Crime.
But the Crime was too black to remain unpunished, and the Gods ought to indicte
the Author, for their own proper Vengeance, since that havi^g troubled the
Ceremonies of one of their solemn Feasts, they themselves were there in some
sort interested.

You shall know then Kion, who by force and means of searches and
perquisitions, had made serious Inquiry, they learnt in the end, that Ceraune
and Menelas Nephew of Ptolomee, and who had the Office of Admiral, were the
Authors of this violent Robbery: the former being unfortunately fallen in Love
with Arsinoe, and the second with the Princess Antigone. That which much
conduced to their Discovery was their flight, for they disappeared the self
same night. They knew that it was they themselves, who had secreetly caused a
part of those Vessels to descend, for fear they should be sent after those who
had made the Rape; that it was they who had subborned and corrupted with Money,
a Carpenter who had built the Bark of Philadelphe, that it might be made in
that manner, as to fall a sunder, as it had done, in taking away only a Pin of
wood (the which had bin effected by that Mariner, who had disappeared a little
afterward) In a word, they knew that 'twas they who had caused those to
agitate themselves, and to put them all at work, and act in this fatal Tragedy.

The King had till then conserved and reserved some paternal tenderness for
Ceraune, but it was not possible for him, more to resist the justice of his
Wrath, when he saw this last Feat and Perfidy of this graceless and worthy Son;
and his flight with that of his Accomplice and Comrade, having finished their
conviction, the King caused that the Morrow their process should be made.
Amongst other things he declared Ceraune unworthy and incapable of the Crown,
and because they should not take this Vengeance to be a simple Menace he put it
in execution in such manner, that it has without doubt, bin known all the
World over; but I will not omit to repeat it unto you, because you will be well
pleased to be assured to learn by retale, a thing which until this time, never
had an Example, and possibly may never have. He caused to assemble together,
all Orders and Degrees throughout his Kingdom, at least those that were found
in and about Alexandria, and having appointed Philadelphe to follow him to the
public Place, where all the Soldiers were in Arms, and all the People
attentive, and in expectation of what would follow such great preparatives, he
there made a long Oration upon the affections, which he had always had for his
People, and the cares he had taken to educate and bring up his Children, in an
inclination and disposition of Peace, necessary for the better Government of
his Subjects; from thence he fell to discourse of the different Manners and
Qualifications of his two Sons, and putting again into the Mind and Memory of
the Egyptians of the magnificent and famous Feats, and honorable Actions of
Philadelphe, wherewith all his Subjects were very exceedingly satisfied and
well pleased, he there afterward those of miscontent and displeasure, which he
and they had received from Ceraune. After he had aggravated the three
fratercides, wherewith this cruel Prince would have caused his Brother to
perish and to be destroyed, the violent ravishment and carrying away the two
Princesses, his Confederacy and Treaty even with the known Enemies of the
State, (for they knew he made one with Lysimachus, to assure himself a retreat
into his Kingdom, after he had amplified and laid open at large all the
circumstances of his Crimes, he at last publicly declared his Dissheirison,
and thereby declared his Son Philadelphe his sole and only Successor.

And that there might be no shadow, nor ground, nor cause of contest against
his Title, I say to impede or hinder what possibly might be questioned after
his death, and to take and deprive Ceraune from all means of imbarking the
People in Civil-War, and intestine jars and commotions, he added, that it was
his Will and Declaration, his Resolution of putting Philadelphe in present
possession of the Crown, and that he appointed and published him King of Egypt,
resigning into his hands all his Power, Privileges and Prerogatives Royal,
reserving only unto himself the Degree, of his Prime and Principal Subject, and
Captain of his Guards.

At the same Even the self same moment, having caused Philadelphe to approach,
who had not followed him there, but against his Will, because he dreamt of
nothing else but his departure in quest of Arsinoe, and was importunate against
all things that might delay or any wise frustrate his design, the King repeated
to him the precedent declaration, and having constrained and obliged him to sit
down upon a Royal Throne, which he had purposely and expressly commanded to be
prepared, he with his own hands placed the Crown Royal upon his head, the
Scepter in his hand, and then and there swore himself his faithful Subject, and
declared and owned him to be his Master, his Liege Lord and Sovereign King.

If this Oration and memorable Action which immediately followed it caused an
astonishment amongst the Egyptians, it gave them ground, cause and subject of
much more incomparable joy and admiration, for as much hatred and aversion as
they had and conceived against Ceraune, even so much love, and respect had they
for Philadelphe, But Philadelphe for his own self in particular, was so
surprised and so confused, in receiving such marks and signs of deference and
submission from a Father, for whom he had such obsequious and venerable
respect, that he could not possibly resolve to accept these rare and
illustrious Testimonies of a Love so Royal and Paternal. What wonderful Miracle
was that not, that the Land of Egypt beheld not on that day? Certainly future
Ages will scarcely have faith to believe it.

It saw a great King which was the delight of his People, and the terror of his
Enemies, voluntarily descend from the Throne, and there to cause his Son to
ascend it, and I there saw the Son refusing to mount into the Throne, and use
all his utmost endeavors, there to retain and hold his Father. In sum, so it
must be, that Philadelphe yielded and gave place, unto the absolute Will of
Ptolomee, but it was not by a deference; and it may be said, that he consented
not to be King, but to give a pregnant demonstration of obedience, both as a
Son, and as a Subject.

In the interim do not in any wise believe, that this great change and
transmutation of the condition and state of my Prince, made any kind of
alteration in his love nor yet grief and dolor; believe not that he judged the
gift of a Kingdom, was capable to consolate him, to balance the loss of
Arsinoe. Ambition had not power to suspend, remove or discharge him one moment
from the thoughts, nor perplexing inquietudes of his Love, and all that which
Prince Philadelphe had resolved for the recovery of this Princess, Philadelphe
the King would also execute.

He had already sent to all Parts and Coasts to learn news of the two
Princesses: but that was a thing that appeared to him, but little worthy of his
Love, to seek after them by the means of others only, his passion defied him
the cares and diligence of all others. He would therein employ himself, and in
that very resolution and design, he would depart the following Night without
speaking any thing to Ptolomee, knowing he would have opposed it. Only he
resolved to leave a Letter with some of his People, to give unto the King after
his departure, and began one in these terms.

Philadelphe to King Ptolomee, Health.
SIR,
I a thousand times beg pardon of your Majesty, if I dare without his leave
depart from being near her, and if it appears, that I acted the part of an ill
Son, it will soon make an Apology for me to so good a Father. But Sir, one so
good as your Majesty is, merits him the conservation of all his Children, so
that if I remove one from him for some few days, I protest to your Majesty,
it is not but to essay, to return them to you very suddenly altogether.


I entered into his Chamber, when he was there with his Letter, and although he
presently resolved not to discover his design, unless it were to those that to
him were necessary, so it came to pass, that my presence and the kindness he
had for me, tempted or prompted him to make me a participant. I was not
surprised with that resolution, for I know the fervor and greatness of his
Love. But as it seemed to me on this occasion, to be altogether blind, I took
the liberty to tell him my Sentiments. I then represented to him, that
Philadelphe King of Egypt, ought not hence forward to imagine himself yet to be
Prince Philadelphe, that in receiving the Crown, he had well changed conditions
and obligations. Think you my Lord (said I) that you are now to your self, as
you then were, to dispose of according to your passions and willing
inclinations, and to run about the World, as a single and simple Adventurer,
and to expose your self to all the fantastical conceits, humors and capricio's
of Fortune? Know, my Lord, that you now at present are united by very straight
ties and strong ligaments, and by indispensable obligations to your Estate;
that you are accountable for all your cares and steps to your Kingdom; and that
where ever you go, you carry along with you the sole and entire Fortune of the
Land of Egypt, etc. Pardon me, my Lord, if I presume to tell you of it; would
you not be ashamed unfaithfully to abandon your People, in the self same moment
that you have so solemnly engaged your self to them? and think you that the
Prince your Brother, in quitting Egypt, has not left some seeds of Division
there, which will require your presence, and all your cares to smother it? But
when, or if all these Important considerations of Interest and Honor should
cease; after all, what think you to do, to go running at all Adventures, for so
I may say, with your Eyes close shut after People, whose path-wayes nor
retreates you know not, and which it is possible, will be at one end of the
World, when you go to seek after them in the other? for in fine, although they
have told you, that they are gone into the States of Lysimachus, how know you
it is not a false report, by which they think to give you a change? Dream not
to retrieve the Princesses from out of their hands, you possible will go, and
deliver even your self into those of your Enemies? My Lord, it is much more to
the purpose, and for your dignity and love, to send to all parts to seek out
the Criminals, and in the mean time, to prepare Ships and Men to fetch them
away by main force, when you shall have learnt where they are, and if it be
then needful, to chastize them as a King. Philadelphe had much trouble and
pain, and was loath to yield; for he could find and feel that his Princess had
bin carried away, and that it was needful, that he should continue in the mean
time at Alexandria. However I made him at last consider the necessity; so that
he was contented to dispatch Men away to all Parts, to learn news of the
Princesses; and of the Rovers, but it was no of utility, and behold wherefore.

The truth is, that Ceraune had retired himself to the Court of the King of
Thrace, but he had not led there the Princesses, for although the King of
Thrace had espoused the Daughter of the first Wife of Ptolomee, of whom I have
spoken unto you, and who was also called Arsinoe, and that Lysimachus was
consequently brother-in-law to Ceraune. Nevertheless this same here, did not
altogether put confidence in this barbarous Prince, who was naturally cruel and
violent, even to the utmost extremity, as you know by too much experience. So
that before the leading away of the Princesses there, he would make only a turn
to Lysimachus, where was the Court of Thrace, in the mean time leaving Arsinoe
and Antigone unknown in a City of Chersonese, under the tuition and guard of
Menelas, without discovery to any Person whence they were.

But this Voyage was longer than he presently was aware of. While he was in
that Court, he became in love of this other Arsinoe, of whom I have told you,
although she was his Sister by Father and Mother, and Wife of Lysimachus, and that
Queen unworthy of the blood of the great Ptolomee, having correspondence with
this criminal and incestuous love, they fastened together a Commerce which was
plentifully fertile, and abounded in all manner of Crimes. I will not recount
you the havoc and violent Ravage they made the one and the other in the Royal
Family of Lysimachus, by the assassination and poisoning of many Children,
which remained born by diversity of Wives, whom he had espoused. That tragical
history is too well known throughout the earth, to stay me there. I will tell
you alone in few words, that this wicked Woman fearing that Ceraune would not
quit her in the end, to return to his first passion, caused to be robbed by
Night from Menelas the two Princesses whom he kept, caused them to be carried
away from the Chernesesse, where they were in an Isle of Pont Euxin, and there
privately shut them up, without the knowledge of neither of Ceraune nor Menelas.
But she was soon punished by himself, on occasion of him with whom she had
committed so many Crimes. For you know how Lysimachus having bin slain
incontinently afterward by Seleucus, about the Subject of the Kingdom of
Macedonia, whom the first had usurped upon the young Antigonus Son of Demetrius
and Seleucus, having bin slain afterward by Ceraune in an ambush, which he had
laid for him; Arsinoe remitted imprudently, not only a part of her Estates, but
her own proper Person, and that of the two Children, which she had by
Lysimachus into the hands of her incestuous Adulterer.

That by this means Ceraune being made Tutor of these two Children, declared
himself Regent, and in conclusion, crowned King of Macedonia, and that he had
scarce known, that he should have more need of this Queen to reign, but he
despised her, that their detestable union, had this sad and dismal conclusion,
which never is wanting to punish criminal and disorderly Passions. In sum
Ceraune having then discovered the place where she caused these two Princesses
to be kept Captives he resolved with himself to disintangle and rid himself of
her, and sent her to fetch the Prisoners. The jealous Queen had no sooner
advice and Intimation, then she designed to prevent him. She dispatched
Assassines to go and cut the Throats of the two Princesses, and prepared Poison
to defeat Ceraune, but she was prevented by himself, for he was as well skilled
in the Operation and Effect and custom of Poison, as her self.

He therefore Poisoned her, after he had cruelly Massacred between his Arms,
her two young Sons, and on the other side; he dispatched Menelas into
Chersonese, to deliver the Princesses and to bring them to Macedonia. In the
interim Ceraune conducted his Army against that of the Gauls, who then made
desolate the Frontiers of that Kingdom, and there he fought that famous Battle,
where, you know, he was slain. But I pass by all these things slightly, and
cursorily run over them, because that besides those, there arrived in a little
time the great and sudden violent flash, that they have made, nor permits it
any person to be ignorant of them; and because that from elsewhere, as they are
arrived almost at your Gates, you are far better instructed than my self.

I return then to that which passed in Alexandria, and as the short way that we
have yet to walk, obliges me to abridge my repetition, content your self that
I yet cut short off all these things, how important soever they are, and that
in a few words.

It Is impossible for me to delineat or depaint unto you, the Condition and
State my poor Prince was in, Ignorant where he lived, during the time he knew
not what was became of his Princess; nor with how much Grief and Sorrow of Mind
he saw himself confined and fastened in Egypt, by a State and Condition that
impeded him to employ himself in the research of Arsinoe. He learnt News enough
of Ceraune, but those News instead of consolating, did no other than redouble
and reinforce his Anguish. For as he knew in conclusion that he was at Thrace,
and there without the Princesses and then not knowing what was become of them,
he was ready to abandon himself to a furious and violent despair, whereof all
his Sagacity, our Endeavors and all the Tendernesses of the great Ptolomee his
Father with all his Pains and efforts did not warrant him nor could.
Notwithstanding all, that it was an admirable thing to see in what manner this
Illustrious Father, and this yet more Illustrious Son, lived together; it was a
Wonder worthy the curiosity of the People, the Philosophers, the Princes; it
was a Spectacle worthy the Gods themselves. For this Father who of a King had
made himself, as I have already declared you, the simple Captain of the Guards
of his Son, took Pleasure to give the first examples to others of the devoir
and respects that Subjects owe to their Sovereign.

This Son that saw himself against his Will, lifted up above his Father, forced
himself to abase himself below himself, and descend (for so I may properly say)
from his Throne to replace him there; so that they could scarce discern between
them, who was the King and who the Subject. But the Gods soon envyed Egypt the
unconceiveable and inexpressible content when it rejoiced in the veiw of this
rare and incomparable Spectacle. Ptolomee the great died, and the unconceivable
regrets which Philadelphe had, added so sensible an increase of Pain to his
Dolor and Grief, that he found himself incapable to resist his affliction, and
as they had but one and the same Throne, it was almost requisite and needful to
prepare them one Tomb.

In short Philadelphe became extremely Sick, and very hardly the efforts and
endeavors of the most excellent Physicians, and the vows of all the People,
were or could be capable to mitigate or withdraw his Maladies and Grief. But
great Gods what owe we unto you, to have consented in the end to save him in
Egypt, if you did not reserve him to more happy and prosperous Adventures than
those, which are already arrived and happened unto him in Greece.

I have told you that before Ceraune led his Army against that of the Gauls,
he had sent Menelas into Chersonese from Thrace, to deliver the Princesses
Arsinoe and Antigone, Menelas went there, and brought them into Macedonia when
he had heard that the Gauls having defeated and slain Ceraune, and had as you
know, caused his head to be put upon the top of a Pike, and walked in that very
Posture throughout the Camp, and that the Troops of this unhappy Prince were
given to a valiant One unknown, named Sosthene.

Menelas therefore not seeing a secure retreat for himself, at Macedonia, and
not knowing where to rest his head, came into Thessalia to find Alcime, by the
gaballes and intelligences of whom Lysimachus, and after him Ceraune were
themselves seized of Macedonia.

Alcime, who was then in trouble, how to defend even himself against these
Gauls, and who sought some succor favorably received Menelas; not so much
for the succor he expected from him, (for Menelas was not in an Estate to
serve him, otherwise than personally, and of very few People that he had) but
because he would be Master of the two Princesses, by the means of whom, he
hoped in case of necessity to engage the King of Egypt to protect him.

But before he sent into Egypt, he would try if an accommodation and agreement
might be made with Brennus and so much the rather that young Antigonus having
ascended the Throne, he well foresaw that he would have this puissant Enemy
upon his Back. Menelas willing to render himself considerable to Alcime,
undertook the negotiating his accommodation with the Gauls, and to that effect
went to find Brennus, leaving in the interim, the Princesses at Pidne, in the
custody of Alcime. Menelas made their Treaty: But on these Affairs the Gauls
having bin defeated at Delphes by that memorable passage or accident that you
well know, that undid, brake and defeated all the measures which Menelas and
Alcime had taken; and I avow you, that I do not yet well know, those which they
had taken on this new revolution: But however it might be; The Princesses after
they were brought to Pidne where Alcime made his ordinary Residence, they were
there in much more incomparable Liberty, and far less shut up than they had
been during the time that they were Prisoners of the Queen of Thrace. So that
one day they found means to gain one of the Guards who observed them to send
their News into Egypt, and to advertize the King my Master the place of their
Retreat, and some certain part of the Accidents and Adventures that had
befallen them. You may well conceive the ravishing Joy of my Prince at this
piece of News. She healed him all at once almost with this Intimation, and
after he had diligently informed himself of the State of Things, he caused six
Vessels to be armed with all diligence imaginable, and having filled them with
Men fit for the purpose, he undertook to come one night to surprise Pidne,
which you know is seated upon the Sea. But alas he should not have confided in
an Element which had bin to him so contrary. In passing the Cyclades the
Vessels were surprised by a Tempestuous Storm, which caused them to be stranded
for the major part upon the sides of the Island, and all the direction of the
Mariners could not hinder, but that after a stormy day and night she aboard of
whom he was, with my self and my Son was cast upon the Rocks which are upon the
Coast of Thessalia.

Very few saved themselves with us in our Skiff, but this misfortune did in no
wise astonish the great and undaunted heart of Philadelphe. But contrarily
forcing himself to infuse in us all the courage we had lost; The Gods said, he,
gave me the first acquaintance with Arsinoe by a stormy and impetuous Tempest,
and by another Tempest they will put me in possession of her.

So having sent to buy Horses in the next City with the money that we had saved
with us in our Skiff, he enterprized to come unknown to Pidne, to essay and
endeavor a Conference and Parley with the Princesses, and accordingly to take
his measures for their deliverance. At our arrival there we learnt that two
days before that, Alcime for some private reason had caused them to be
conducted the following day to Gonnes, and Philadelphe expected me here hard
by, in the morning during the time I was gone by his order, to spy the time
that they should pass. I have even known that then they entertained themselves
with the History of the wonderful beginnings of your Life, which another time I
digested in Writing by his order, when he was unexpectedly attached by the
People of Menelas.

That perfidious Prince had bin advertized by one of his Gang of the arrival of
Philadelphe, and as he had a double Interest in seeking his death, first and
principally because he was after him to inherit the Kingdom of Egypt, in the
second place, by reason he was wonderfully amorous of Antigone the Princess,
whose deliverance he doubted not but my Master was expressly come to attempt; he
caused him to be sought after yesterday in the Morning by a number of
Assassins, the first of whom Philadelphe, immediately upon his approach cast at
his Feet, and put all the rest to slight. But O Gods that his own courageous
valor was to him very dismal! In the pursuit of the others, he fell into an
Ambuscado where Menelas expected him in person, and where that wicked One put
him in that deplorable State wherein you met him. It Is true that Menelas did
not commit that execrable Parricide and Regicide upon his Liege Lord and
Sovereign Prince with Impunity, for that perfidious Person paid with his Life,
his own proper Treason. In effect I have heard at Gonnes where my Prince sent
me yesterday in the evening to learn News, that Menelas there had bin reported
dead, by some of his: But on the other side, Alcime having understood by this
means that Philadelphe was within his Territories, he sent to seek him out
every where, and I will not conceal from you, what they told, that they were
commanded this Morning to publish in Gonnes a Placaet to all Persons to
discover Philadelphe dead or alive, prohibiting his concealment upon pain of
death. So that you see the need we have of your Father, or rather you your self
whom we now have, for it is by your means that I hope and expect any aid or
assistance from Alcidias.

Telamon answered Straton, that he did great wrong to Alcidias if he made any
doubt that the same Shepherd would not of his proper inclination render all the
services imaginable to the King of Egypt, whereof he were in any wise capable,
and if he thought that the fear of Alcime who had in Thessalia but an usurped
Power, he would not omit to show him and do him all Rights of Hospitality, and
above all toward such a great King as Philadelphe. He afterward asked him if
Alcidias knew the Quality of his Illustrious Host or rather Guest, and Straton
having answered him, that he durst not yet discover any thing to him, Telamon
said that he should be ravished with joy to be able to be the first that might
give his Father the News which would be so Grateful to him; and a little
afterward they came to the Gate of Alcidias. But scarcely were they entered
into the Court, but one of the Domestics of this Shepherd came all alarmed to
tell Telamon, that twenty Knights or Gentlemen, had a little before forcibly
carried away that unknown Person in a close Chariot whom he had brought there
the preceding day, and that they said they would carry him to Gonnes by
command of Alcime, and that Alcidias had followed them, to know the reason of
this violence, and the Order or by what Authority they should or would there
carry him.

What Philosopher then was Straton, his Heart nor Soul was not prepared to hear
such Tidings. He expected to dye through Grief, and carried himself, or rather
lay the Burden and Blame and Guilt of all this disgrace upon himself because he
failed to return time enough. He ceased not therefore to bewail and bemoan
himself, neither yet to examine how Alcime had discovered the place where
Philadelphe was, for as he had bin brought there but the day before even by
day, it was not a very hard matter to discover it, but after having only
embraced Telamon, and again desired Succor for his Master, he rashly mounted
on Horseback and betook himself to gallop away upon the Track of the people of
the Governor.

The End of the Fourth Book.
Tarsis and Zelie. The Fifth BOOK.
TElamon found and felt himself engaged in the interests of the King of Egypt,
by so deep sentiments of respect, and his generous soul had elsewhere so
natural an inclination to take the part of those who were unfortunate, that he
would not omit or abandon so Illustrious a Person, nor yet fail in this
disgrace, to render him all the Services whereof he was capable. Although he
was but a Shepherd, he was not without much credit at Gonnes, the Shepherds of
Tempe being, as we have said, the Nobles of the Country, and that the Gauls
called them Knights, amongst the Gauls in their own Country. His Family which
was the most ancient, the employment which his Father had had, and above all,
his merits, and his own proper and personal virtue, had procured him the most
puissant and considerable Men of the City for his friends, and without the
great number of Men of War or Soldiers that Alcime entertained there, the
Family of Telamon, might there possibly be able to despuite force, strength and
credit with this Governor.

He followed Straton there on foot, because there was no long way from
Hippique, and entering in the City, he met him in the house of a rich Merchant
with Alcidias, and this was near to Alcime, and altogether intimate with
Alcidias.

Telamon had understood there, that Alcime had caused the King of Egypt to be
shut up in the Tower of the Castle with his Squire, whom he had left there to
serve him. Straton would have gone there to be shut up with him, to serve his
Master, but Alcidias made him consider, that being at liberty, he would find
more and better means to serve him, and after they had well deliberated of what
was to be done, in conclusion, they took the best resolutions they could to set
Philadelphe at liberty.

A little afterward Alcidias and Telamon went to see some of their Friends,
for the service of the King, and then in a little time retired, for fear of
being rendered suspect by a longer conference, and they both together took their
way to Hippique. Alcidias by the way asked news of Tarsis from Telamon, who
answering him in what a state he had left him, Alcidias said unto him: I doubt
not Telamon, but you give very good advice to your Brother, but it being so I
am astonished and have good cause to be so, that he so obstinately persists in a
Passion, which will be, as I did foresee, the ruin not only of himself, but
his life. I have approved of him rather than of any other, as long as I
believed that he could have any success; for I avow in the end, I could not
find wherewith to contradict, in the Person on whom he had cast his Eyes, and
that I would not have wished for any other Person, had I bin to have chosen, I
will not say among our Shepherdessess, I will say among all the Maidens of the
World. But we must not therefore be wilfully ohstinate wedded to our own
Humors, conceited of our own Judgment, or frowardly persist in our own Opinion,
in a blind design, where it may be seen, there is a manifest and clear
impossibility to succced, nor have so ill Opinion of him, that they cannot
believe themselves able to make a happy Destiny out of that state, which was
first pitched upon by their fancy. As for me I am weary of speaking to him
unprofitably, and to no purpose: but if you love him, as I believe you do, you
ought to do all that may be possible, to withdraw him from this strong love,
which is only imaginary, and you may tell him, if he will thereunto listen,
that they spoke to me this day concerning him, pointing out for him, one of the
fairest and the richest Maidens of all Thessaly. Telamon listened to the
discourse of Alcidias without any other reply, but that he had the very same
sentiments with his Father, but he believed not that Tarsis was for the
present, in a state to relish any such a proposition, but however he would use
it according to the order and direction which was appointed him. They spoke of
nothing else, almost all along the way, nor yet during the time they dined
together, which his Father obliged him to take then with him, and sometime
afterward he dismissed him, and gave him liberty to return.

The first design that Telamon attempted, was to endeavor to rejoyn Tarsis: but
what ever care he undertook he could not find him till the Evening, when he
perceived him walking by the River side.

This poor Shepherd having unprofitably spent the whole day in the quest of
Zelie, came to contemplate upon, and entertain himself with her loss in that
self same certain place where it was done, and in the incertitude of what was
become of the Shepherdess, he seemed willing to ask a clear demonstration in
the very same place where the Witnesses had bin.

He rested there from time to time, placing the one end of his Dart upon the
ground, and there firmly fixing his Eyes, and at certain times he also uttered
some long sighs, lifting up his Eyes toward Heaven, bewailing his fortune, as
a Man, to whom she had given the greatest subjects of distress and sorrow.

Sometimes he seemed resolved to bring himself to think upon the subjects of
Complaints, he believed he had cause to make of his Shepherdess, and how much
she her self had contributed to her Misfortune: Ah! said he, It Is not by reason
of Fortune, that I have cause to complain, for Fortune would have rendered me
too happy, if Zelie had not bin to me more impitiable, than she forgot, let us
forget this cruel one, who was willing to have ruined me, and for the finishing
that satisfaction of hers, if it be possible, let us lose it till it come to be
remembered. At the same time he began to walk faster, and more deliberate than
before, and cast his Eyes here and there, to seek out objects which presented
themselves to his sight wherewith to combat those, who came to offer
themselves to his imagination. Now he looked upon the prodigious Mountains
Olimpia and Ossa, who hide their Heads above the Clouds, and seem to serve as
pillars of Heaven, and who bear Forest even into a Region, where the lightest
Vapors cannot be lifted up. Then he cast his Eyes among the fertile and
fruitful Medows, which coasts and butts the River on all sides, and there
considered the Shepherds occupying themselves, in retiring their Flocks and
Herds, by reason of the approaching Night, and then casting his Eyes upon the
River it self, there he beheld to float the Pictures and Effigies of the
diversity of Clouds of sundry colors, which the Sun usually marks there, in
its Declension and Setting, by the last trace and progress it makes of its
light. But when we have some strong affliction upon our Spirits, every thing
seems to bespeak our evil, the memory serving to take all occasions to
represent its Misfortunes. For the excessive height of the Mountains compared
to the Place, whence they are considered, demonstrated him in his own fancy and
imagination, the difference of the honorable state, and his elevated past
Fortune, with the profound or bottomless evils, where he found himself now
plunged in and precipitated. Alas! said he, observing the Flocks and Herds,
retiring from the Meddows, etc. all these Creatures go to take their repose,
there is none, but my self, to whom the silent Night gives not a relaxation. The
variety of the painted Clouds, diversifi'd within the River, I did pourtray,
delineate and shape forth unto him, the sundry Events and Changes of his life,
and the floting of its billows and surges which changed themselves every
moment, represented him the Image of that unconstant Fortune, which had never
almost permitted him to see himself two points or moments succeeding each other
in the same situation and form.

He was occupied by sad and mournful imaginations, then when Telamon approached
him, and was there so profoundly buried, that he himself observed not that his
Brother came unto him, until that Shepherd was close by.

Telamon found him so amated and defeated, by the lassitude and displeasure
wherewith he had unprofitably tormented himself all that day, that another
would scarcely have known him. He would not speak to him of the discourse of
Alcidias, because he knew him well enough, judging that in the state and
condition wherein he saw him, he had done no other than have doubled his
affliction, and for that purpose it was necessary to take a more seasonable
opportunity and convenient time. After he had understood by him the ill and
unprofitable excess of his research, he would have entertained him with what he
had learnt on his part, yea and related to him, a part of the Adventures of the
King of Egypt, hoping he might experimentally find from that recital, wherewith
to divert his displeasure: but scarcely could Tarsis yield any attention there,
his own proper disgraces leaving him no liberty to fix himself upon the
concerns of others. In conclusion, Telamon reconducted him to Cenome, where
having spent together, some part of the Night within a Garden in discourse of
Zelie. Tarsis finished the other in his Chamber in thinking of that
Shepherdess, whilst Telamon went to repose himself. Telamon also slept very
little, by reason of the pain and inquietude he had for Tarsis: but although he
was up very early in the Morning, he would not go to his Brothers Chamber, as
he had done the preceding day, lest he should wake him out of his repose; he
therefore continued in his own, in expectation when his Brother would rise and
go forth; and seeing upon his table the role of Papers, that his Brother had
deposited him, one of the precedent days, he began to unloose and read over
some pieces (for he knew that Tarsis would take it well) seeming to treat with
the Author, whilst he was occupied about his work, and finding consolation, in
bringing to memory a more fortunate and happy time, in reviewing the fruits
which it had produced.

As he saw these pieces were mingled pell-mell, and that there was not one
almost in its range and decorum, he undertook to place them, even in the same
order wherein they were composed. That was not a thing difficult unto him, by
reason that there was scarce one that Tarsis who kept not any secret from him,
but showed it him the very same moment that he had done it, and he knew not
only the time and date, but the occasion and subject, having always bin the
faithful confident and the principal mediator of his Love.

Agamee whom desire and impatience had whetted to rejoyn these illustrious
Shepherds, had also awaked since the break of day, fearing lest by his idleness
he should lose the occasion of losing them, as he had done the preceding day,
surprised him in this occupation, and Telamon not having concealed from him,
the subject of these pieces, the Athenian also freely discovered to him the
curiosity he had to see something. Telamon could use the secrets of his
Brother, as his own, and he judged that there was not any thing, but that he
might freely communicate too, and confide in Agamee. Behold therefore the
reason, why the Shepherd having testified him, that he should have the same
pleasure to content him in that point, he took these Papers, and fearing to be
interrupted, brought them into a Cabinet or Closet of his Garden, to read them
with more repose and quiet, expecting the coming of his Brother out of the
Chamber.

As soon as Agamee and Telamon were sat, the Athenian began to spoke, and said
unto him: If you will do me that entire favor, Telamon, it will be in reading
that line or verse, and also unfold to me the occasion for which they were
composed, for undoubtedly that should extremely contribute toward the
inlightning of my understanding: and besides, I have taken so much pleasure in
reading the life of Tarsis the Warrier and Hero, that I have an extraordinary
Passion, that of Tarsis the Lover and Shepherd. I will very readily do it,
replied Telamon, provided we have so much time; for if I undertake it. I shall
be constrained sometimes to make a long discourse, and as they said, the
commentaries are longer than the text, but however it be, I shall not offer to
refuse it you, provided you believe that that may contribute and add to your
satisfaction.

After the unfolding and extending all these papers in order by him, he
reaussmed one and spoke after this manner.

The History of Tarsis and Zelie.
THese Verses that I hold are the first that ever my Brother made for Zelie. It
was but a very little time after our coming from Panticarpee: for almost in
arriving, I accorded with Philiste, although I had never seen her, because that
the Memory that still I retained of the unfortunate Olimpie, had taken me off
from all thoughts of Marriage, and my Relations which managed ours without me,
fortunately spared me the trouble of a Choice, wherein humane Prudence when it
is employed alone, fails not sometimes to be deceived, now that was upon the
occassion of my Marriage, that Tarsis saw Zelie the first time, and at her
first sight he became passionately amorous of her, although she was then but
thirteen years old. I am angry Agamee for the excuse of my Brother, and
altogether for the Honor of our Hamlets, that you have not seen that
Shepherdess, you would assuredly pardon Tarsis to be so soon lest vanquished by
so many Beauties and this day to have so many regrets at her loss, and
undoubtedly you would also take more delight in our Verses, because the
Expressions that you shall see there in some certain places, in relation to a
strong and violent Passion, have a thousand times more Grace, when they know
the Subject of their worth. But to explicate you these here as you desire, it
will be necessary to entertain you which possibly you will find too long; for I
should tell you, that the Solemnities of my Marriage were performed in a time
when they celebrate amongst us, that which is called the bloody Sacrifice.

I will another time entertain you with the Subject of that Sacrifice, which
has something in it very particular, and the Nature thereof is now, the only
use over all Greece; as for the present, before I do it, I will only declare to
you they Solemnize it the two preceding days by Sports in honor of Daphne,
Daughter of the God of our River, in memory of whom they also celebrate the
Sacrifice.

The first day is solemnized by the Maidens who have in this pre-eminence
amongst the Men, because they opperate in the festival of a Goddess, and this
Spectacle which is elsewhere very rare, has something in it which has much of
delight and a sufficiency of contentment.

In the midst of a great Meadow, which is a little below Calioure, on the
Banks of the River Penee they erect a Scaffold where all the young
Shepherdesses who are of the Sports, ascend one after another, and where every
one of them shoot, let fly, or discharge at her turn an Arrow, or Shaft, until
she has shot three, endeavoring to pierce or smite some flying Bird that she
lets go some certain space from thence. This sport is instituted with design to
renew the memory of the exercises wherein is Conformed or disposed Daphne
within our Valley, then when she was a mortal Maiden, for you know she was one
of the Nymphs of Diana.

They celebrate the second day by Verses which are composed and Sung by the
Shepherds, in honor of the Shepherdesses, who have carried off the prize of
the first day, and after they who are established to Judge of the value of the
Compositions (which ought never to exceed six Verses by reason the great number
of pieces would take up too much time to examine them, if they were longer) the
same Shepherdess to the Honor of whom they are made, gives the Prize to him
who has best succeeded.

There was a long time that we had not assisted at these Sports, because we had
always been out of the Country, and my Brother had not even yet then desired
to be found there, because that being always disposed to something more
searious than Poesy, he knew not how to make Verses, and that by reason of a
little natural Pride that Philosophy could not vanquish nor overcome, he would
not go to a Festival where he believed not he should bear off the Prize.
However the occasion of my Bridal and Wedding which was made at the opening of
the Sports, engaged him as I have told you to assist there.

After many of the Sherpherdesses had made their Shots and discharged their
Flights according to the Order and Range which was given them by their
respective Lotts; They also saw young Zelie appear, I know not if I should say,
whether to kill Birds or Men. I yet call to mind, she was attired with a white
Robe, whereof the lower Part and Edges were covered with a Tissue of Flowers,
which seemed an admirable piece of Embroydery, Her Vestment or upper Garment
was trust and tuckt up of the left side, a little below the Knee, which left
appearing visible the Buskins of the same trimming and Livery. Her right Hand
was armed with three Arrows or Shafts, and in her left she carried a Bow of
Ebony, the string whereof was Tissued with Silk of the same Color of her
Attire. Her Head was adorned and decked with a Hat of Flowers whereof the
diversity and variety of Colors mixed, made them infinitely delightful. But
that was but a faint and feeble Ornament in comparison of that which is Imbued
and dyed white, the most delicate and admirable of the World, with many black
Locks, which hung negligently upon her Shoulders, and which formed into many
Rings, seem to enforce themselves to ascend again to their first and fair
Original and Offspring. Be not astonished Agamee to see that I stay rather to
describe you this, than her Pitch, Stature and Countenance; I leave to your
imagina- to make out the Portrait of these Miracles, which cannot be depainted
nor delineated.

As soon as they had let go one of the Birds, she shot the Arrow so directly,
that she smote his Head the very first flight, and made it fall down dead in
the very midst of the Assembly. A thousand outcries of Joy burst out at the
same Instant, and they saw this fair Shepherdess with a Gayety and cheerful
Alacrity which is sufficiently remarkable, how much satisfaction she received
to have had better Success than any of her Companions yet had done. Tarsis
followed her with his eyes the longest he could, and had much regret, when he
had lost her in the middle of a thousand other Shepherdesses, amongst whom she
betook her self.

The State wherein I then saw him, made me immediately presage something of his
misfortune. Although he was naturally cheerful and full of alacrity, yet he was
always sad until he had seen fair Zelie return again, and that by another Shot
having deprived another Bird of its Life by a second Flight made after it,
after she had let it go, she finished the taking away of the Shepherds Liberty.

She appeared the third time with the like success as she had done the two
first, but her Consorts could not perform the same. The major part failed in
their Shots and if I should stop at the Presages, I would tell you, that those
of that day which was that of the Birth of her Love, were so unfortunate, that
one Bird having bin struck and pierced by a shot of an Arrow, ceased not to
fly away to the great amazement of all the Assembly. After the Ceremony, we
went to see the Shepherdesses; and Tarsis having saluted them all, he
approached to Zelie in particular, with whom he had some discourse which
renewed his Wounds and rendered his Malady incurable. In very truth fair
Shepherdess, said he, you have born off much Honor, but however, complaints
are made that you could not kill Birds without wounding of Men.

I did not belive I had bin so out of Decorum, or unseemly; replied she, with
an amiable blush; and I so exactly observed the fall and descent of all the
Arrows I shot, that I am very well assured I gave not any person whatsoever
Ground, Cause or Subject to complain of me. You have not heeded replied Tarsis,
nor known the ill that is done by the Flights and Shots whereof I speak, since
possibly, you know not whom you have pierced. They ought therefore to pardon
me, replied she, since it is without any design, that I have done the evil
whereof I am accused. Also they never will reproach you, fair Shepherdess,
replied Tarsis, and they who do it, do it less to signify their displeasure,
than by boasting themselves to have had the honor of being wounded by you. She
replied him not, and to dispense with her self she took an occasion by the
arrival of some other Shepherdesses.

The rest of the day was spent without any of his further declaring, otherwise
than only the ill she had done him: But see the great Transmutation and change,
that his love produced in him at the same Instant, and so forward since it
carried him away not only to undertake to make Verses or Rimes of the praise of
Zelie, but even to make in public an Essay of a Trade or Calling wherein he
never was concerned nor had intermedled. Behold therefore Agamee what was the
Subject of the first Elogy, that you now go to see, I do not remember my self
that they were those of other Shepherds. I know some compared the direct Shots
out of a Bow made by Zelie to that of Diana. Others, said, she had stolen the
secret from Apollo as well as the glittering and shining cast of her Eyes.
Others in fine said, that 'twas hard to judge to which she would serve best
either the Arrows of Diana, or those of Love, but however it be, behold the
Sizain or Dictates of my Brother.

Madrigal.
It Is not possible to be weary of admiring your direct Aim, nor yet your
incomparable even due Measure and just proportion of levelling Shots and
Flights with which you infalliby Slay, even my self the first, I covet and
desire it and therefore praise you; But Zelie in secret my heart disavows me,
and says you either smite or you see not.
I well see that you desire to know what was the effect of the preceding lines,
you see well he had not the perfection of a Poet, or that should be given to a
good Poet and however it is, or be it how it will be by the favor of the
Judges, be it by the grace in which he sings them, they carry the Prize, and
Tarsis had the satisfaction not only to have most worthily praised Zelie, but
which is more, that of receiving a recompense with his own Hands.

The Prize was a Dart or Javeling whereof the Head or Shaft was guilt, which he
went to receive upon his Knees, from the fair Hands of Zelie, and in its receipt
he said unto her: Ah! Divine Zelie, you gave me Weapons too late, since it was
not done but after I was vanquished and overcome.

The Morrow was the day of the bloody Sacrifice, and as it is the first of the
year, which begins amongst us, its the ancient Custom there to make small
Presents one to the other which we call New Years Gifts, Present, or Handsel.
That was the Subject of the succeeding Lines, which behold have no great need
of a greater explication.

A New Years Gift.
Shepherdess, Custom will have it that every Shepherd is disposed this day to
give if he can, something to his Shepherdess, it is a Law and standing Ordinance
established amongst us and accordingly observed which puts me in extreme Pain,
for what have I which is not yours? you know even your self, that I am yours,
even I my self; but now to determine and put me out of Pain, permit me to give
you a little Love for your New Years Gift, Shepherdess its all my Wealth,
suffer me to bestow it upon you, you have none neither and as for me I have
more than any Person.

After that Telamon had yet read those Lines Agamee would have spoken to
testify him that they were to his good liking, and was astonished they were the
lines of a learner as Telamon said: But the Shepherd who foresaw, that if the
Athenian would also speak and declare his Sentiment of every Piece, he would
advance but very little in much time; moreover he well thought that possibly he
would not often praise them but because they believed that that might do him a
Pleasure, he said unto him: I know well Agamee that your Complaisance and
delight would oblige you to praise themselves, even those whom you possibly
might find worthy; but as that would not make us some interruption in our
design, I will tell you, that your Attention and your Silence would serve me
instead of the greatest Approbation that you can give them. Agamee having
promised him the one and the other; Telamon persisted thus in taking a third
Paper.

You would not understand these here, if you did not unfold and explicate the
subject a little more and longer, than I have done those of the last.

I have told you that Tarsis did passionately love Zelie, ever since he had
seen her, as young, and as I may say, as much a Child as she was: But Zelie did
not in the like manner love Tarsis. but contrarily these lines had for a
foundation a sufficiently pleasant kind of inquietude that she had, for that
after my wedding, and all my Relations being returned to their own homes, she
saw that Leucippe and Melicerte, had retained Tarsis with me, to continue some
days at Calioure. For Tarsis in his new born passion, sought always to be near
her, and to talk to her of some kind of worthy Feats and gallant pranks. Zelie
who had not yet scarcely seen the World, found her self incapable or unable to
answer him: not that she had not already wit enough, as you may very well judge
by her former answers, but she had not that boldness to express her self, which
is not acquired but by the frequenting of company; and that diffidence which
she had of her self, was accompanied with a little pride and loftiness, and
even an esteem for the credit, honor and reputation of Tarsis, which made her
yet fear to be faulty before him, so that as much as Tarsis loved to be near
her, so much did she apprehend it, even her self. She was even ravished to see
the Marriage finished, quite contrary to the ordinary custom of young Maidens
of her age, who love nothing more than these bridal Feasts; and the reason that
gave her this content, was that she hoped that all the Company going away, she
should be delivered and rid of Tarsis. Therefore when she knew that he
continued, she went all mournfully to bemoan her self to Philiste, and said
unto her: O my God, my Sister, what are we going to do, I know not; behold,
Tarsis continues still here, Alas my Sister, answered Philiste, ought you not
to be very well pleased, seeing he is of so amiable and pleasant a dispotion
and humor: amiable? replied Zelie, I never saw one more displeasing, grievous,
troublesome, offensive, loathsome, wearisome and tedious, irksome, distastful
and importunate, and I avow unto you, were I my own Mistress, I would quit and
abandon the house, all the time that he is here, or should continue here. In
truth my Sister, replied Philiste, you alone are of your own and that thought.
Tarsis did no other than laugh, sing, dance, make verses, and a thousand other
pleasant things; is there any thing that can be more contrary to that which can
give vexation and inquietude?

Zelie had some repugnance of declaring the cause for which she was
apprehensive, so that Philiste having asked her, she knew not to render her any
other, unless it was that he talked too much. But, replied Philiste, when he
speaks, is it not to the purpose, pleasantly and wittily? My Sister, my Sister,
replied Zelie, you speak well at your ease and pleasure, you who have no ground
nor find nothing of suffering, if he did not address himself to you, as he does
to me. But Philiste interrupting said, is it not a mark of the esteem he has
for you, and would you take it better, if he left you alone, as a Child? no,
answered she, but I would therefore also, that he would not oblige me to answer
him: for in fine, I so strongly apprehend him, that I tremble when he
approaches me, and I am in such pain, when I shall answer to what he asks me,
that I understand not the moiety of that which he speaks of. We arrived in the
Chamber Tarsis and my self, then when Philiste laughed yet at this reply of
hers. Zelie betook her self to blushing when she discerned him, and she would
immediately have gone forth, after she had softly besought her Sister to tell
us nothing of the subject of their discourse. But Philiste purposely staying
her; in truth my Sister said she unto her, you shall assist me, if you please,
in entertaining Tarsis, for I know well, that he would not continue here, but
for your sake. These words redoubled the blushing of the countenance and visage
of Zelie, and she afterward avowed to us, that she was never passionately
enraged against any person or thing as then, against her Sister. But
principally and especially when Tarsis addressed himself even to her in these
terms. In effect fair Zelie, said he, I protest unto you, I would not contineu
here, but for your self alone, and I am not over joyed with the departure of
the company that have quitted us, but because I hope to be at more freedom and
liberty with you. Judge you, and assure your self, that it was only for that
consideration, that I have taken this course. Judge that it was pertinent there
to make him a reply, also the apprehension that Zeile had of engaging her self
in a new conversation with him, obliging her to seek some shift, excuse or
evasion, answered him; Tarsis you have too much wit and discretion to delight
your self in the company of a Child, but I go to seek Leucippe or Melicerte,
and inform them that you are alone.

At the same time she attempted to go forth, but Tarsis staying her, said unto
her, fair Zelie, if you desire not that I be alone, if you please, there is no
need for you to abandon me, for saw you not that I went away when you departed
hence? and these two married couple, are not good but each for other; very
well, replied she, you will not be alone along time, I have told you that I
went to advertise Melicerte or Leucippe, and I for my part, do assure you,
replied Tarsis, that with Leucippe and Melicerte I should be much more alone
than with you, and that it is not but to be near unto you, that I believe my
self to be in company. Tarsis, replied she excellently, I never better saw that
they would chase me away, than when they sport themselves with me, as you do;
and then she yet made another attempt to withdraw her self and go forth. But
Tarsis opposing himself thereto a second time and taking her by the hand; how
say you, that I will drive you hence, replied he, since that I act even to
incivilities to retain you?

Whilst they discourst thus, Philiste having repeated unto me the inquietude of
her Sister, we laughed together to see her fallen unawares into the gin and
snare, even at the self same time, when she thought to shun it. Zelie doubted,
and did that but in her Sisters despite, and quick enough withdrew her hand
from Tarsis, who had layen hold of it to stay her, when she would have gone,
although her Sister could say unto her, what she did as before. We immediately
recited her apprehension to Tarsis, who upon that subject gave her these lines
or stances.

I bemoan my self, that you thus scorn me;
Seeing you so fair and fiery, and yet cold;
And in the mean time fair Shepherdess,
They tell me that you fear me,
But tell me whence comes this fear,
Is it from my esteem of you, is that the cause of your fright fair Zelie, is
it for me, a subject of Joy and Complaint. Always the fear of what they depaint
to us, accompanies a heart when it loves, alas friendship it self is in the
heart which fears. But who knows not that the timorous Sheep trembles at the
Wolf which follow it; that the Lark fears and flies from the flight, hasty
course and speedy passage of the ravenous and violently impetuous Sparrow-hawk?
That a Shepherdess advizing upon the pace of the Serpent, whose skin is
speckled and spotted, is surprised with a speedy and sudden fear, and yet
loves it not. But should it be so with fair Zelie, whose heart fears even as
it does; fears it, as it fears one whom it hates, fears it, as it fears
one whom it loves.

I will add unto you here, said Telamon, that Tarsis showed me these lines,
before she gave them to Telamon, and I signified unto him, that I found them
passable, but I did not counsel him him to give them unto her. He very
discontentedly asked me the reason, and I answered, I deemed it expedient, for
the success of his Love, immediately to conceal it from Leucippe and Melicerte,
with all the care imaginable, because that whilst they believed him not in
love with their Daughter, they would freely give him the liberty of their
house, as my Brother: but from the first moment they should perceive his
design, they would undoubtedly without fail, cause him to withdraw, as rendering
him suspicious, because I very well knew their thoughts were upon a design of
making a new Alliance.

But my dear Brother, replied me, what will it serve me then to love, if they
do not know nor discern that I am amorous of their Daughter? My dear Brother,
replied I, be you prevalent by the success you have in their house, and with
the reputation that you have acquired, make it there more discernably apparent,
by the sweetness of your Spirit and Wisdom, and your other good Qualities, to
make your self to be beloved there. Gain the heart, without seeming to have a
desire, that is the most effectual means to succeed well there, and better than
to cause a defiance. You know they never surprise a place, when once they
discover their design of attacking it; you have to do with Persons, who know
how to observe and compare the nature of things; endeavor only to make your
self valued and prized by those on whom you set a value, and put your self in a
state and condition, where they may wish that you might be beloved, before its
discovery. Ah dear my Brother, replied he, behold here are excellent counsels
given, but by what means shall they be followed, think you that others have
that opinion of me, that your friendship gives and advizeth, and what have I
that can wake me deserve Zelie, but the pure and perfect love, whereof I make a
Profession? My dear Tarsis, replied I, embracing of him, thou know not thy
own worth; I say unto thee, take courage, and afterward leave it to our cares,
both in point of time, as well as with a due respect to thy good fortune.

I left him therefore resolved, to be a little more reserved, in the
demonstration of his love, and in the sequel made him sufficiently sensible,
that I had given him good counsel; for you shall see, that of Leucippe only had
any doubt of his design, he would immediately have used all his endeavors, to
frustrate his design, and hindered him from seeing or entertaining his Daughter.
The first thing to which Tarsis applied himself, it was to gain the heart of
Melicerte; he did it for two reasons. The first, because that this Shepherdess,
as she was one of the first Persons of the World, who had both wit and virtue,
she was also one of those which made the greatest observation in that of
others, and penetrated into the sublimest of all; and that he had effectively
an esteem and veneration for her, who would have caused a research by all
means imaginable, to have gained her good Will, though there he had had no
other kind of interest. The second reason was, because that although that
Leucippe did not permit her self to be governed by any person, she knew
notwithstanding so completely and dexterously to manage it, that she still
insensibly practiced and contrived it to the end she designed. These Papers
that you see are therefore diverse tickets that Tarsis writ to Melicerte, then
when he was returned to Cen^me, and which without doubt she gave in charge to
Zelie, but I pass by what above, to return to our Lines or Verses.

Behold they were made in an unpleasant and irksome occasion, but were by the
event sufficiently advantageous to my Brother, and which contributed not a
little toward the obtaining the savours of Melicerte, and even those of Zelie.
One Evening they walked in a Plain which you may have seen below Callioure,
toward the Sea side. In the midst there is a small River which glides along,
and disgorgeth it self into the Gulf; it is deeply profound and sometimes
large enough, and she passed sometimes upon two Planks or Bridge. In that walk,
Zelie, marched before, singing and gathering of flowers, and Tarsis led
Melicerte who went more slowly and leisurely behind. Be it that these two
Planks or Bridge was rotten, be it that they were ill placed, so it was, that as
Zelice was upon them, she fell down into the water, and into the River where
the great Raines had swelled it to a most prodigious and horribly monstrous,
dreadful and terrible Torrent, ghastly alone to behold.

I leave you to judge of the horrid fright and amazement, wherewith Melicerte
was surprised, for she tenderly respected and loved her daughter, but you could
not imagine how poor Tarsis was alarmed. He ran out of his wits, and though the
water was so frightful and ghastly as is before recited, he cast himself into
it clothes and all, and acted so as that he rescued Zelie, and brought her up,
and placed her between the Arms of her Mother, and upon the fall that he
uttered these lines.

My Shepherdess walking one Evening over the Water, as she was divinely singing
upon a Bridge or two Planks, they fell under her, and sank down, and the
believing Thetis through respect they gave place and yielded, the way which
leads to his humid and moistened manor house, and out of great respect, the
boisterous Billows abated from their impetuous violence, and made a bed to
receive her with more veneration, round about her the flowing Element moved it
self, and through a just pride they immediately swelled again. Our Shepherds
dazzled and dimmed by the beams and clear shining of her piercing Eyes,
observing her fall down there with so many flaming fires, believed the Sun to
be gone and laid down in the waves, and from the bottom of the flowing waters,
when she made a fortunate return, with much beauty she enlightened the day, and
was taken for Venus, which reigns in the World. These lines were also received
favorably, as they merited the service of Tarsis; and Melicerte her self gave
them to her daughter. We must a little discourse and explain unto you the two
pieces which followed; it is not that she was incapable to understand them of
her own accord, but I assure you, that that which I shall declare unto you,
will make you take so much more pleasure. One day Leucippe being sick, we
gathered together after dinner to divert him in his Chamber. Celemante who was
there with Ergaste and some Shepherdesses, being in her ordinary mirth and
alacrity, proposed us diverse Sports, and Tarsis who yielded but little to the
then mirth of Celemante, betook himself to the propounding of others, so that
we were more in trouble to choose, thyn to find out a sport. In conclusion,
they began to play or sport with one, which they call a sport of Questions that
Celemante had invented. That sport so pleasant and particular, which is
accomodated so well to the humors of those, who sport, if they are serious
Persons, they can then entertain them with a sport very serious, if they are
merry, it shall be matter of nothing, but all mirth, It may be even both
together, by the mixture of the diverse humors of those there divert themselves,
and you will see that although it be most facile for the simplest Shepherds to
sport and play it, it will not therefore be unbecoming even the Philosophers.
Behold how they sport.

Each one at his turn proposes a Question, of such a nature, as himself
pleases, upon that question, he who has proposed it, takes publicly the
sentiment of every one of the company. and afterward declares his own, and if
they meet not, nor concur to that of his good liking and approbation, he
briefly refuses that of others. This will better be understood by the example
that I go to tell you. When it came to the turn of Celemante, to propose the
question: As for me, said he, who dream of nothing, but living happily and
content, I pray the company to tell me their thoughts, what must be done
toward the attaining or procuring of that mirth and content.

It came to my turn first to speak, and behold what I declared to him. Truly
Celemante thou haste made us a very fair Question, I believe thou think thy
self to be yet in the School of thy Epicures. Shall we tell the in sporting,
where were stranded and shipwrackt, the most serious meditations of the
Philosophers? It is true, replied Melicerte pleasantly, that Celemante could
not have made another question to the seven Sages: but in conclusion,
satisfaction must be given to Telamon, and to begin although my turn be not yet
come, I will be the first that will answer him, That to live happily and
comfortably, I believe is to be no other than Celemante, for I see none so
contented as he, and I therefore persist that to be, that which he is not,
that is to say, to be very wise, because the wise are content with all things. I
believe continued Leucippe, who was sick, there needs nothing but health, for
who has that, has all things. And as for me, replied or added rather
Philiste, at or in her turn, I think there is nothing needful, but to fear the
Gods, because those who fear them, receive with pleasure all things at their
hands. Zelie said not a word, when it came to her turn, so that Melicerte
advising her to speak; In very truth my Mother, said this amiable Daughter,
that is beyond my Reach or shallow Capacity. Be courageous my Daughter answered
the Wise Melicerte, we speak where we are so Hood-Winked and Blind-folded, that
thou perhaps wilt better meet with it than either or all of us. And of a thing
added Leucippe that they possess it not but almost at her Age. I believe
therefore persisted Zelie, it is necessary to have all Benefits together, for I
always have heard say, that to him who is destitute of any thing, he is not
Happy; and thou Ergaste, demand^d Celemante, it must be to be not unable to
Love replied Ergaste, for Love and Friendship making Pleasure to be found even
in evil it self, they can find it amongst all and every where; I think said one
of the Neighbors that succeeded, there needs no other than to be a King,
because Kings do all they please. There was another Shepherd there named
Euriloque very amorous of Zelie, who being exceeding Rich was pleased in
passing to give this Shepherdess an advantageous Impression of his Talent; he
then said according to his Opinion, there was nothing needful but to be very
Rich, because added he, he who has Money has all that he lists; when it came
to the turn of Tarsis, who was the last, he began to Cant and Sing what
follows, and that with an Intention to disguise or conceal his Love, as I had
counseled him, and to seem to have no other Design, but to have Freedom and
Content said, Our supreme Felicity depends upon nothing but our selves, each
one holds his Fortune of himself, the Richest nor yet the Wisest, are no more
happy than am I, if I believe my self to be more happy and Fortunate, I am Born
neither King nor Prince, I have neither City nor Province, nor almost any thing
that they have, but possibly enjoy more Content; I am not all that they are,
but I am that which they would willingly be.

In vain without my Philosophy, a man during all the days of his Life will
gather together, and accumulate Wealth upon Wealth, he would have whatsoever
all that any or all could say, not to desire that which they have is to have
all that which they possibly can desire: Every one found those Lines so much
the more Polite and seasonably pleasant that unfolding the sentiment of Tarsis,
they almost all, the rest reassumed the same. Ah wicked one, cried Celemante,
after that Tarsis had finished, you have spoiled and bereaved me of my thought,
but in regard you have said it Poetically, I am now going at least to recite it
in Prose; It Is true then, continued he, that to be happy its necessary only to
believe that one is so, because all happiness consists only in Opinion. And to
demonstrate to you all, continued he, smiling that all that you have said is of
no value nor worth; first Melicerte you have said, that to be happy its needful
to be only what I am, but that is to tell us a thing impossible; for you know
that the Gods have made me to be the only one of my kind. You have answered
Telamon, it is needful to be only what I am not: but all the rest of the World
would therefore be Happy; for all the rest of the World as you know, is that
which I am not; add therefore my Explication said I unto him; that is to say,
that is, there is nothing needful but to be Wise, that which thou art not. Well
therefore then replied he; to answer prudently to your Wisdom, I will yet tell
you, that there is nothing which is more opposite to good Fortune, than to be
Wise, because the Wise know too well the Evils to which Men are Subject, and
its impossible to be happy, he who I say knows himself to be subject to so many
Miseries. For you Leucippe, you believe it is only to be in Health: that is
because you are sick. Philiste believes there is not any thing needful but to
fear the Gods: but she will speak therefore of the fortunate State of the pared
or clipped Fields; for there is nothnig in this Life which so much troubles a poor
Spirit as that fear. As for Zelie who will have all benefits at once, she
demands too much ever to be able to have Content. As for thee Ergaste, its but
ordinary with thee to deceive thy self. Think thou to make me believe that
Love, Amity, and Friendship, make or render Happiness, after I have felt and
suffered the ill of both the one or the other? That other Shepherdess that
desires Royalty has too much Ambition to be happy; and Euriloque with his
Riches will pardon me, if by his Instruction, I send him to the good King Midas.

Every one began to laugh when he finished, so that Euriloque who believed that
it was he that had sent him to Midas (for you know that because of his jesting
and flouting Adventure, that name sounds something ridiculous) he believed
himself obliged to answer thereunto; and he did it the more willingly, that his
jealousy made him seek an occasion to oppose or set himself in Balance with
the Sentiments of Tarsis. He had such a one as he wished for: for as Celemante
saw that Euriloque said that there was a pleasing Happiness that consisted only
in Opinion and Chimera Celemante returned, the Tennis Ball (as they say) to
Tarsis, and said unto him; that since he had the Honor of his Advice, it was
also Just that he should have the trouble of sustaining and upholding it. Yea
in good truth said Celemante, replied Tarsis, I will sustain it willingly, and
I will defend it against thy self, if thou will, to demonstrate to thee, that I
have not stolen it. Euriloque who had a Tooth against Tarsis, from something
else, was ravished to have some Dispute with him upon this Subject. Well said
Tarsis, said he, lets therefore see how thou will sustain and uphold that thy
good fortune, which is but an extravagancy. But thou thy self, replied him,
Tarsis tell us now, how thou pretendest it is one. Because, replied Euriloque,
that one must be a Fool, to be able to be believed happy, if one is not so in
effect. And as for my part replied Tarsis, I hold that it is to be very Wise,
that one accomodates himself to his Fortune, and that is that, that I will say,
when I say that there wants nor needs nothing to make one happy, but to believe
one is so; for to believe to be happy and content with his Fortune, these are
the things which are reciprocal, and I replied Euriloque, I say unto thee, that
if one is not happy before it must be Visionary to believe to be so; for it is
to imagine himself to be what he is not, and for one to imagine himself to be
what he is not, it is a disorder and an irregularity of the imagination which
ought not to represent us Things, but as they in reality are, and which by
consequence is otherwise a Folly; Tarsis seeing that their Contestation took an
air so searious, feared it would be vexatious to the Company, who were there
but on design of Diversion and Mirth, and principally of the Shepherdesses.
It Is therefore that he would interrupt him, and for that effect said to the
other: Euriloque, thou dreamest not it may be, that we are here but to Sport,
and before the Shepherdesses, and that from the Sound that we take, we go to
make a villainous Dispute in the Shool. Euriloque who was heated in good
earnest, and who had undertook to over-bear and outvie Tarsis, would
notwithstanding force the thing more forward, and there to engage the Shepherd:
But also replied he, when we intermeddle with the Reprehension of others, it
must then be with some appearance of reason. But truly Euriloque replied
Melicerte, it seems to me that Tarsis has said enough unto you. What replied
yet Euriloque, he will make you able to conceive that a Wise Man can believe
himself happy, if he be not so in effect; Tarsis seeing that all the Company
and Melicerte amongst others did cast their eyes upon him, as demanding an
Answer, reingaged himself in the Dispute: but with Design to terminate it in
short. Shepherd, said he, to him since that sticks so strongly in the heart, I
pretend not that the Wise imagines himself to be happy, if he be not so in
effect, for it is in effect since he imagines it to be so. Behold a strange and
enigmatical Riddle pursued Euriloque; The Wise One, is he happy before he
imagines himself so? or imagines he it to be so before it is so? for it must
necessarily be that the one or the other precedes; for if he be happy before he
imagines himself to be so, it is not then his imagination that renders him
happy, and so the Happiness consists in another thing than the imagination; if
on the other side, he imagines himself Happy before he really is so, he is no
more a Wise Man, but a Fool; since he imagines that which is not. Well said!
added Tarsis with a Design to finish, it is necessary to unfold to thee this
Riddle. Thou shall know that every one makes himself an Happiness after his
Method and Manner, so thou see that Leucippe has placed it in Health, as
thou have done in Riches, Telamon in Wisdom and others in Diversity of things,
various all from each other; in the Interim, Happiness is not in effect in any
one of all these things, as for example, if it it were effectually in Riches it
would follow that all that were Rich were happy, and every one knows that that
is not. In like manner there are many people in good Health, there are some
that are Wise, and if you ask any of them, none of them will say that he finds
himself happy. But as for that which relates to Wisdom, it is Happiness, that is
for him who being Wise, places his Happiness in his Wisdom, for him whose
Health is his Happiness, for him who being Healthy, places his Happiness in
that Health, in what then consists the Happiness? It is not to be in Health,
to be Rich, nor to be Wise: but in placing the Happiness in that of these
Things which they possess, so that that Happiness precedes not the imagination,
nor the imagination which precedes the Happiness, but the Happiness springing,
rising first, appearing or coming into the World, from the assembling, closing
or joining together, and from the concurrs of the imagination with the thing
which they possess, thou see imagination agitateth when the Happiness rises,
and springs up all at the same moment. Euriloque feeling and finding himself
vanquished and overcome, conceived such a despite and vexation, that not
knowing how better to answer Tarsis, he had an inclination and desire to
quarrel with him. All that thou have said is rediculous, said he unto him
blushing, and an Happiness where there needs so much imagination, can be no
otherwise than folly. Tarsis began to laugh when he saw him grow angry, and he
only answered him; all the difference that there is Euriloque; it is that in
folly, is when the imagination disorders, and irregularly governs the judgment,
and that in the happiness whereof I tell thee, it is the judgment which
regulates and governs the imagination. That was not ill said, as you see, but
Euriloque who began to burst and cleave assunder, through despite and anger
and jealousy, and principally because all the World applauded Tarsis, could not
suffer that which my Brother said. Go, said he, they well see that thy
imagination disorders thee, when thou speak so, and since that every one
should place his happiness in that which he has, I approve the putting thine
in the place of thy folly. You may very well believe, that Tarsis was not to
remain without a forcible reply: but considering that he was in the Chamber of
Leucippe, in the presence of Melicerte and Zelie, and that he had bin to them
very displeasing to see a sport terminate in a quarrel, he resolved to convert
the thing the best he could into a merriment. Wise Shepherdess, said he,
turning himself to Melicerte, let us learn for My honor, to Euriloque, our song
yesterday in the Evening, and at the same time he began to sing the Verse,
which he had made at table the day preceding, and the burden whereof was, To
rejoice in being a fool, is to be wise, but I will not read it unto you,
because I believe it has run through all Greece, and I see not a Person that
knows it not.

Agamee having also signified that he knew them, Telamon continued in searching
for new Papers. This jeasting caused Euriloque to be enraged in such sort, that
step by step he came to the last or highest point of chollar and spleen. Tarsis
never replying a word, but laughing: but yet in a pleasing and bold hardy
manner both together, wherein he demonstrated at the same time, his dispising
and contempt of Euriloque, and respect for them that were present, and wherein
Melicerte and others who knew his courage, admired a thousand and a thousand
times, his discretion. And indeed Euriloque having himself acknowledged his
fault, came to demand his excuse the succeeding day.

Now as I have told you these two occasions, advancing well the affairs of my
Brother, with the hearts and minds of Melicerte and Zelie; for that which he
had done in her fall, extremely touched both the one and the other, in their
sencible acknowledgments toward this Shepherd, and such as merited the service
which he had rendered, and his moderation in this last encounter, caused them in
an infinite esteem of his prudence and discretion. Also he was so well received
at the house that then when he came from Calioure, Leucippe himself retained
him often to lie with him, and as my Brother had there, that advantage which
you see, he was almost more often there than at my Fathers.

He always saw Zelie, as if she had bin his Sister; and Leucippe and Melicerte
did not scarce make any difference between him and their own Children. However
he found himself netled, wrackt and tortured, because he durst not entertain
her with his love openly; and as since the scruple which I had put in his Mind,
he very well knew that 'twas my counsel, that procured him the advantage of
living with Zelie without suspicion, and to be received as the Son of the house
of Leucippe, he rendered himself very exact, not to give him any cause of
diffidence or mistrust. He contented himself in conformity to my advice, to
essay and attempt, to bestow his love without open demonstration, and to cause
their wish, that he loved before he speak it, however he was not able to live
without speaking in some sort to Zelie of his passion, and in that constraint,
he had found a sufficiently pleasing means to entertain her. Zelie had a voice
sweet enough, and Melicerte who very much delighted to hear her sing, testified
her willingness that she should there learn. But there were no Masters at
Calioure; so that my Brother (although he knew not very much of the Art of
Music) said smiling, he would serve for one. He betook himself then pleasantly
to give her some Lessons, and even to call her his Scholar, that he might
always by the more familiarity introduce her by names. Now all that he
instructed her in was songs, it was as many Verses, as he had made on the
subject of his love, and these two great leaves of Paper that you see, are full
of nothing else.

Agamee seeing that Telamon passed them; What said he to him, Is it that you
believe that I know not to make my self read, skilled and acquainted with
songs, that you do not read them unto me? In saying so, he took one of the
leaves out of the hands of the Shepherd, and read that which follows,

In Prose.
Go you Sighs, you light Spirits, that in a moment can carry my heart to Zelie,
since it is my Love which gives you life; Of this same Love be you the
Messengers; they serve to make you be born, serve to let them know it; thou who
counsellest me to love, my heart, how can thou suffer, and yet hold thy
peace, since thou inspirest me with presumption to do it, give me the courage
at least to express it, and if I dare not speak it, let me at least have the
liberty to sigh. Another, cease you diverting singers, and part not my Senses
any more, by the consenting and concording charms of your Melody. The object
which occupies them, has many more repasts, I think of fair Zelie: you birds
cease troubling me.

That pleasing remembrance, which I am entertained with, makes the sweetest
moments that I ever passed in my life. All other pleasures are to me
superfluous, I think of fair Zelie, birds give no trouble. Another, Shepherds I
love in two certain Places, and dye for both the one and the other, at one and
the self same time, but those two adorable places, are your Mouth and Eyes.
They therefore seem enemies, one destroys what the other has promised,
demonstrate less of sweetness by your Eyes, or with your little Mouth give us a
more favorable treatment.

It Is true I have vaunted my self, when I knew not the art of pleasing you, and
that in despite of your fury, your heart, and my Vows, shall not be more
contrary, I will not dedicate my self in opposition to your anger, I have said
else where, and again it again before you, call me proud haughty timerarious,
prepare a hundred torments with which to punish me, I know the art of pleasing
you, you cruel one, for whom I go to dye. You who see deserts as absent from
Zelie, I mournfully spend my life, be you witnesses of my faithfulness and
fidelity. Ah without ceasing I think of her, and possibly the cruel one never
thinks of me. Is it not true Deserts, what of my sad moans, you even the Rocks
have attainted and convicted it, and do bewail my torment, so many Echoes do
they hear, which demonstrates that their hearts are more soft and tender, than
archers to the sighs of her lover.

Agamee would have continued, but Telamon interrupted him; I counsel you, said
he, that we cease these lines, to pass forward to the rest; What, replied
Agamee, is it that you less esteem Verses, to carry the name of Songs? It must
be so possible, replied Telamon, and as there is nothing more difficult in well
doing, there is nothing also more to be esteemed. For there must be very much
sense and passion in a very few words, and you know the most sublime efforts
and endeavors of Spirits, as well as of nature, is to shut up much in a little
space and room. But it is as in beholding a so great Number, I had rather lend
them to you to read them in your particular, because that you easily and
sufficiently understand them alone. I will only add to you, touching these same
Songs, that Zelie mistrusted much that they were made for her, and yet she
counterfeited to seem to believe, that he made them not, but that there she
should set her name instead of some other, because that otherwise she should
believe her self obliged for good behavior and courtesy sake, to learn them as
she did. Tarsis was not angry himself that Leucippe and Melicerte had that
thought, and for that end, often singing them in their presence, he there
placed the name of Delie instead of that of Zelie, that he might still avoid
the suspicion of his love. Sometimes therefore he made them so convenient for
the subject, and looked upon her with so much passion in singing them, that
they saw well, that it was her own proper person that was expressed, as for
example, this here which he composed on that which he showed to this
Shepherdess to sing.

I have no otherwise said than loved, with a dying voice and languishing sound,
with an all resembling Air, and a like Accent, my Shepherdess said the same,
but I alas see well, that we understand it not. In the same words that I sigh,
I see her sigh, just so as I did, I see her repeating all my proper wishes,
that which I have said to her, she says to me, must it be alas, that we
understand not our selves, admire my extreme audacity, I will teach you to
sing, though I know not how to do it my self, but alas wherefore should I be
astonished, you apprehend not how they love, and if you knew it not. All that
which you sing is very just to the very last point, I am charmed at your
understanding, that which I would have you apprehend, therefore you do not
comprehend Gods: the fair port of voices, the sweet flection and bending one,
shall never sing the same, but then when you say I love, better to enter into
passion. The amorous Tarsis flattered a little therefore his evil by this
address, and so much the more sweetly, that she served him the same time, for a
pretext to be every day near Zelie. But he wearied himself therefore, in not
expressing him otherwise than in Mysteries and enigmatical riddles; and I call
to mind, when he would take an occasion to declare himself to her.

One day he stood to behold this Shepherdess, who was attiring her self and
coysing her self, and dressing her head in the Chamber of Melicerte, and was
putting her self in the best posture that possibly she could, to go to a
Feastival that was made in these Hamlets; she asked him if he found her well,
Tarsis answered, that he found her v^ry ill for him. But as she saw that he
said that smiling, she also smiling asked him, what that was which he had to
contradict, and he observing Melicerte attentive about other matters, replied
very softly: Quartian prepare as many flights, darts, arrows to reinforce and
redouble your strooks, This Shepherdess is too cruel: alas make you not so fair
and amiable, have some pity upon us.

What Tarsis, replied she, ought you not rather to know me grateful, and essay,
and attempt to have me fair that I might not be evil in your Eyes? Think you,
replied Tarsis, that there is more danger in wounding the Eyes than the Heart,
I protest unto you fair Zelie, that you have already so wounded mine, a long
time since, that I know not what will become of me in the end, if you have not
some compassion on me. She had no sooner understood this discourse, that as if
she believed not that a Maiden should engage in that discourse, she brake off,
pretending that she had lost something in the chamber, where she would hasten,
seeming to go and fetch it.

Since that in reading you these lines, I am insensibly engaged to make you an
historical narrative or recital of the affections of Tarsis and Zelie, and that
you as well have signified me your desire, and how much inclination you have to
learn it, I will declare to you here in passing some particularities pleasant
enough, which I call to mind, which will cause you to observe, to what a point
and pitch of love, this poor Shepherd was reduced, and how far his strong
passion carried him, both as to respect, fear, timidity and trouble.

At this time my Father sent for him, and commanded him to go to Athens, to
solicit a litigious process and great suit of law, and we came, Philiste and
my self, upon the point of coming to establish our Affairs and settle them at
Cenome and to abandon the House of Leucippe, where we had still lodged ever
since we were Married. Although the distance was not great from the place
whence we intended to remove as you see, yet it was a double affliction to
Tarsis, whose love considered the smallest things as very important; first
because it seemed to him that there was no cause of fear, whilst we were
present, and saw all that past at the house of Leucippe and Melicerte; in the
second place, because we should always serve him for a pretext, to be almost
always at Calioure. But that which disquieted him the most, was the long Voyage
wherein he saw himself obliged to go to Athens. The consolation wherewith he
prepared himself, was that he should not depart at least, until he had clearly
and manifestly demonstrated to Zelie, the assurance and reality of his Love,
nor without sounding her heart to know if she would correspond with his desires
and hopes. For although the services he had done her, were considerable enough
to give him large hopes, however his affection and his modesty caused him to
make very light of these things, that he trembled almost all times when he
dreamed of declaring himself. That which rendered also the execution of the
design difficult, was that he seldom or almost never saw Zelie, but in the
presence of her Mother, before whom he durst not presume to discover it, and
when he found her alone and thought to speak to her of his love, she had always
some means, or found out some way to defeat his design, her virtue not
permitting her to receive this declaration out of the presence of her Mother.

In fine, he hazarded himself one day when Leucippe was gone into the fields,
and it casually happened to be the same that two Shepherds came to visit
Melicerte, to propose unto her another marriage for Zelie. For whilst they
spoke very softly, our Lovers ignorant of their subject, Tarsis who believed
Melicerte very attentive to what they said, finished some Airs which he sang
before with Zelie, and said unto her with a very low and soft voice. My fair
Scholar, tell us also, we pray you, our secrets in particular, since that
others conceal theirs from us, for to tell theirs; also I know one that I am
very impatient to let you learn: Zelie mistrusted in some sort, that which it
was, and as she would not enter into this discourse with him; Tarsis! answered
she very loudly, as I my self imagine that it was some good news, since you
apply your self to declare it to me, I pray you attend a little that my Mother
may have a share thereof. Tarsis was angry in that he having spoken to her in
secret, she had answered him so loudly, but that it was impossible they should
not be understood. What? replied he softlier than before, it seems you conceive
not, that behold other Persons besides Melicerte, will be able also to hear
you. Pardon me, answered Zelie yet aloud, but it is no secret, nor have I any
that I will conceal from any one. Tarsis well believed that what she did, was
to no other end than to scoff or dally: but as he would not remain there; You
will make these Shepherds believe, answered he still very softly, that I
mistrust them. In speaking softly, replied she, in the same tone she had began,
you would make them yet more believe it your self. They may, continued he still
softly, impute it to my discretion, and of the fear I should have to interrupt
them. You had that fear so soon, said Zelie laughing, when we sang louder than
I speak. He was sometime without answering her and in a sweat; afterward he
replied thus, still continuing to speak softly as he began and had done. It is
not a piece of news that I would have you learn, but it is for counsel that I
demand of you. Ah Tarsis! interrupted she, what I have need of for my self, I
ask it of Melicerte. But added he, answer you me, that I may be able to
discover it to Melicerte with security? As I know not your affair, continued
Zelie, I cannot answer you to any thing: but if there were no security in
telling it to Melicerte, there would have bin no more in telling it to my self.

You see well Agamee, continued Telamon, that it is not through aversion that
she keeps her self so at a distance, but altogether on the contrary, she
seems by all this discourse, to encourage him to discover himself to
Melicerte: and in effect it was her design, for as she knew the esteem that
this Shepherdess had for him, she doubted not but that he should be favorably
received; but her scrupulous virtue hindered her to declare it to him more
openly. If Tarsis had therefore thereunto taken good heed, he had seen that she
had given him the best counsel that she could possibly, in making a pretense of
refusing him: but he who took and apprehended it quite otherwise, he had an
extreme despite to see and find that she would not only not understand him,
and more than that, when he discoursed to her so softly, the more she affected
to answer him very loudly.

He accused her in his heart for some kind of ingratitude, believing that she
ill corresponded with his love; but he had yet more displeasure, then when
these two Strangers were both gone forth, Melicerte had made known unto him all
she had understood; for she has the Ear mavelous subtle, and a Spirit and
Wit so quick and lively, that she can when she lifts, be attentive to three
or four things all at one time. What controversy had then Tarsis, therefore so
soon with Zelie? said she unto him laughing; indeed it is an ungrateful
Scholar thus to refuse the counsel of her Master. Tarsis blushed at this
discourse, and found himself so surprised, that in lieu and stead of being
prevailed upon the fair occasion he had to discover himself, he estranged
himself by some defeat, which I know not was what in his imagination, which
suggested or prompted him to in this ill time.

Melicerte who had he Wit too penetrating, not to be already mistrustful and
diffident of the truth, would not dig deep nor dive into its profundity, and
though she was better intentionally to him, than he durst to hope, however as
she took notice how he blushed, she made a scruple to press him. But she
designedly administered him another occasion, yet more favorable than the
former; for altering her discourse all at once, Know you well Tarsis, said she,
that we are going to marry your Scholar, and that these Shepherds come to
speak to Leucippe, but not having him, they have addressed themselves to me.
You may judge, continued she laughing, if I went to i^gage the Scholar, without
demanding advice of her Master. Admire this Agamee! Not only had, Tarsis very
much vivacity, but he was even naturally bold, and hardy: and in the interim he
remained in this encounter inhibited, enjoined to the contrary, and as one
stupid; so much is a great and prodigiously respectful love accompanied with
timidity and bashfulness. He grew pale, he blushed, and apprehended not well
himself; he disintricated, disintangled, unpestered himself of this passage, as
if he would have done from a trap and snare, that is to say, he attempted and
essayed to delude and dally and content himself to know, (without seeming to
make or take thereout a more particular interest) that Melicerte had answered
that Leucippe was not yet resolved nor designed to marry his Daughter. He was
even so blind, that after his being gone forth, he knew not whether he were
willing to be discovered, undoubtedly he said to his own self. Melicerte her
self being mistrustful of my Love, by the discourse which I had held with
Zelie, has not intention, but to sound me, and if I had left my self to have
bin taken or surprised by appearance, I should fall into the inconvenience that
Telamon had foretold me of. But after having had some time these Sentiments, he
passed into others quite contrary. For making reflections upon the discourse of
Zelie, and afterward upon these of Melicerte, and above all upon the goodness,
that this Sage and generous Mother had testified to him day by day; he there
found wherewith to persuade himself very strongly, that it was impossible but
the Mother and Daughter, had some favorable intentions for him, and that they
desired but that he should or had discovered it to Melicerte.

In that Thought he returned to find her; fully resolved to cast himself at her
Feet, and whatsoever could or might arrive, to make her confident of the
passionate Love he had for Zelie. He found Melicerte all alone, who wrote a
Letter, and as the Designs which seem to us to be accompanied with some Perils
and Dangers, are always full of so much Timidity, that there needs but one
nothing to divert them, (and principally in matters of Love, by reason that
Love being but a desire, is naturally mixed with Fear;) Tarsis was no sooner in
the Chamber of this Shepherdess, but behold all his Resolution vanished away.
That was not a Truth without a Pretext, for our debility and weakness still
makes one or other: But see if that which should be capable to stay him, since
that it was no other thing, unless that finding her occupied and taken up in
writing a Letter, he believed there would have bin some incivility in her
Interruption. He did no other then pass through her Chamber, but scarcely was
he gone forth, but he stopped, and making some reflection upon his little
Resolution, he made a confusion within himself. He feared most that this Letter
had some Relation to the Marriage of Zelie, and that it was an Advertizement
that she gave to Leucippe, and that it was that which should encourage him the
more, to make his Declaration, and thereby prevent some other engagement. As he
re-entred by one Gate, I entered there by another; so that Tarsis who was not
prepared to see me there, nor yet to speak before me, made yet a pretense to
his little Hardiness and Resolution. He repassed therefore only through the
Chamber, so little knowing that which he did, that although in passing by him,
I asked him where he went, he made me no answer.

But he was no sooner in his own, then behold the Remorse which again surprised
him. What, said he, I have not been willing to declare my self before Telamon;
Alas is it not all contrary, is it not his presence that should encourage me,
since he was there, to confirm my Request? He returned a third time, being
resolved to make his Declaration before me, but as I had observed Melicerte
taken up and employed in Writing, I did no other than pass into the Garden, so
that Tarsis found me no more there, and he met no Body there but Malicerte
which came from sending her Letter. This will not seem strange unto you, the
reason why Tarsis had bin so soon interrupted in his Design, was because
Melicerte was writing the second Time, that he found me present, At this third
he found me not there at all, and Melicerte wrote not any more and in the mean
time he durst not yet discover himself. But that which is most pleasant is that
his Timidity was pretended upon Reasons all opposite to the formers: He whom my
Presence had astonished began to find himself Weak through my absence, and the
Letter of Melicerte being sent, he thought that since that was done, nothing
did press him more than to discover himself; That which was yet admirable is,
that Melicerte seeing him pass and repass so many times, could not refrain to
ask him in conclusion what he sought for, Tarsis who found himself not in a
condition, to Imbark himself with her in Conversation, answered her to defeat
himself, that he sought Philiste.

Philiste who was then in a Closet very near, approaching, came forth at the
same Instant, and asked him what he would have; whereupon Tarsis who sought her
not effectually was so surprised that he knew not what to say to her. I have
recounted this to you Agamee to cause you to understand how much he loved,
since he feared so much, for it is certain that we form not unto you the great
Peril, that the Proportion of the esteem had, that we made of the benefit of
the privation wherewith it menaced us; in conclusion the day of departure and
ours also came, and behold what was his only Consolation. Zelie and Philiste
loved one another tenderly, and that day they were almost all in Tears, as if
we were to go very far, and as if they were not to see one another for a long
time. A little before we departed, Tarsis having perceived them alone in this
mournful Estate in a Closet or Arbor of the Garden, went unto them, and whilst
Philiste who also saw me arrive after him, came forwards toward me to declare
something unto me, my Brother entered into the Closet, where seeing Zelie
wiping her eyes, he said unto her: I should be happy my fair Shepherdess, if I
could pretend some Share, Part or Portion in these fair Tears, and that I
should find consolation in a departure where death only is able to give it unto
me: If I had more Tears than I have, replied Zelie, I should owe all to the
departure of my dear Sister; But if I had more remaining, and that that could
serve you, I believe I have Obligations enough to you, not to refuse you so
small a thing. Ah fair Zelie, replied Tarsis, if I have bin happy enough in
rendering you some Service, it has not bin but over-payed by the Honor, and
by the contentment, that I have my self received, and you know not the price
and value of your Tears, when you believe them owing to Obligations of this
Nature. But Zelie I have suffered for you, and I very well see, that I shall
suffer all the remainder of my Life in secret Pains, and such as you know not,
which I can tell you; and you effectually owe me some Acknowledgments which are
well worthy of your pity and of your Tears; I have very much Trouble and Pains
to believe it, replied Zelie, that I should be able to owe you something more
important, than the Life that I owe you: But whatsoever it be, you may believe
that since I would not refuse you, that which you wish, that which you call
light Obligations, I shall never be ungrateful to those that are greater. But
replied he, If you had had a design to acknowledge them, you would have desired
to have known them, but in the Interim, you never would permit me to let you
know or learn them. I do not call to mind replied Zelie, the ingratitude
wherewith you reproach me; But I avow you continued she, well mistrusting what
he would speak of, That I shall not be angry to know the Obligations that I
shall have, but when I shall be in a Capacity to acknowledge them. Alas Zelie!
replied he, you are now in an Estate to acknowledge them since I have told you
that for all Acknowledgments, I ask you but for a little Compassion and a few
Tears. You see me already so afflicted pursued Zelie, that there would be
inhumanity in desiring that I were more afflicted. But added Tarsis, raising
his Voice a little, and uttering a long Sigh, I have no part nor portion in the
Subject of that affliction; and that which kills me, that I carry a mortal
regret in quitting or abandoning you, and I see you not at all touched or
concerned. You are very cruel Tarsis, replied she, to take a time when you see
me all in Tears, to come and make me such reproaches. You are much more cruel
your self; replied Tarsis, to see me almost ready to dye with Grief, and to
refuse me one word of Consolation. Alas! demanded she him, What would you have
me say unto you? I am so pressed with Grief, that I am not capable to give any
consolation even to my self.

I would have you tell me (pursuant to his former discourse,) said he, that I
had some part or portion in the Cause and Ground of that Grief, and that after
having given you all the Testimonies that I have been able of the most sincere
passion of the World, you see me not to remove with the same eye which you
would see the departing of an indifferent Person. Tarsis, replied she, I could
not have an indifference for a Brother of Telamon, for whom Leucippe, and
Melicerte, have so much esteem, and to whom I my self have so many and great
Obligations, so that, continued she, it is not but to Telamon, to Leucippe, to
Melicerte, and to a small accident of Fortune to whom I owe this Favor; and
yet all this Favor goes not but to be indifferent with you; But Tarsis, said
Zelie unto him, do I not tell you what you demanded of me? No Zelie, answered
he, to cease to be indifferent unto you for the Reasons which you have told me,
is no other than a mark of the consideration that you have for your Relations,
and out of your generosity, and I demanded for one that came from your
inclination, and a little of your good Will for me. You are very difficult,
added Zelie, but I tell you yet once for all, that you shall never find me
ungrateful, when it shall depend but upon me alone, to testify you my
Acknowledgments. At these words, he cast himself at her Feet, and signified her
his satisfaction and his Love, by inexpressible Transportations. In fine, some
certain hours after that, was made that mournful separation. He was above a
year at Athens, and there was more Consolation than he thought, for he did that
there which he could not do at Calioure; that is to say, that he declared
himself openly and manifestly to Melicerte with the most fortunate and happy
success which he could have hoped, and the Verses which were (behold) the
occasion as you in proceeding will understand.

Remember you well Agamee of that great Eclipse which arrived two years since,
that they said were universal, and which caused so great an astonishment and
amazement throughout the World; we we were gone at that time to spend some
days at Hippique at my Fathers House, two others of my Brothers and my self
and Wife were there also with her Sister, Melicerte having confided in her. One
day which was the Seventh or Eighth before the Eclipse I advised with my self
to write a Letter in Verses to Tarsis. I made him a partaker of our
divertisements, knowing well that that would consolate him at Athens where he
languished very much by the perplexing process and litigious wrangling Suit of
Alcidias, and principally because I would tell him News of Zelie. I made it in
the name of the three Brothers and the two Sisters whom I obliged there to
write some words each one a part, and to sign with me; There was none but Zelie
alone whose scruples I did not overcome, and who would not sign it so that one
of my Brothers signed it for her. But because his Sign Manual was ill
counterfeited, he pleasantly cast a little drop of Ink upon it, so that all the
Signature was almost all covered; one might sufficiently see some letters of
the name of Zelie, but one could not discern whose hand it was. As it was not
advised of, but to give Tarsis the joy, that it was his Mistress which had
signed, he writ in the bottom, Zelie has blotted her Signature. Behold the
answer which he made us, which were in Verses, and I would have not told you
that, but to give you the signification and meaning.

Epistle.
Amiable Tripartite company of Shepherds,
Amiable couple of Shepherdesses;
Amiable Sisters, amiable Brothers, who are shadows of your crocks,
Live exempt from our Miseries, pass away your hours
Lightly and pleasantly, under the shelter of all our dangers:
Live in the famous Golden-Age, where Vices presume
Not to appear, or rather to say, being to be born,
Innocence yet reigns.
Fair Troop, is it possible therefore, that in your champion, Plainy and Fieldy
leisures,
You interrupt the Pleasures which are relished and well tasted, in a peaceable
sojourning.
And dream you sometimes of me, and for you is a Man perplexed with cares.
In a state of Tranquillity, and a quiet Hovil,
There they can think on him without fear.
Behold therefore, continued Telamon, where the beginning and commencement is,
where you see he addresses himself to all the Company in general, and then
afterward answers every one in particular.

But that would be too long, I will only read you what has relation to Zelie.

I come to you young Shepherdess, or rather a fair rising Star, where other
Beauties go obscuring themselves, as the appearing and rising Sun defaceth and
blotteth out all the Luminaries of Heaven, by its bright and radiant light,
when it commenceth its Career, Course and Race.

Tell me wherefore your Hand by the shot of an inhumane Pen, deprives me of
you, of my view thereof? Why set you down, and concealing your self, hide under
this dark and cloudy Epilogue? O Shepherdess do nothing, are you afraid of
being known, then when you do me good? Why therefore this great and black vail,
which hinders me here to see you there? Wherefore in this Assembly, the front
open, why have you not appeared? is it not that you have believed, that a
Virgin in public ought to be hooded and veiled?

But what am I going to imagine! it is easy to divine, what is that here which is
the effect of this Prophecy, wherewith the World has bin menaced.

I see it in fine accomplished; and the Sun is eclipsed,
But wherewith do you menace us?
With a new and fatal Eclipse, the influence is it
Mortal? shall I dye alone? shall we all dye?
Is it toward me alone that it looks forth?
Is it upon me alone that she lanceth her Darts?
The Influences of an evil lot,
Should it be to me so considerable?
Or otherwise should I be so culpably guilty,
That an Eclipse was necessary to foretell my Death?
I was so much hindered, that I could interrupt you, said Agamee: But I would
not, but I pray you now to lend me these lines to read them in particular, for
that which I have heard, prompts me to a desire to read the rest. I have found
them sufficiently excellent and polite, replied Telamon, and therefore I will
carry them with me, in returning my Sister to Calioure, to cause them to be
seen there by Melicerte. And to take an occasion to discover to her the love of
Tarsis, of whom I believed she had reason in all this time, to place some
confidence and of whose real passionate love to her Daughter Zelie, I hoped she
would well be assured, after so many signal testimonies. I took an hour wherein
we were alone, and after I had read them to her; Well Wise and Sage Melicerte,
said I to her, poor Tarsis shall he dye? for I very well know, that it is you
alone that I should consult withal alone for his Destiny. Melicerte at these
Words betook her self to laugh, and answered me, you know the Eclipse has not
done so much evil as they think, and I believe not that Tarsis should only be
more sick than others. I answer you generous Melicerte, replied I, that this
poor Shepherd is in a pitiful state, and he does no other than languish, and
bemoan himself ever since he departed from your house. But I suppose you are
not now to know his disease, and that there was no need of those lines, to make
you know, how amorous he was of my Sister. Melicerte made not use of any kind
of dissimulation with me; she declared to me, she was mistrustful, and to make
it to you short, she testified to me, with all the goodness and generosity
imaginable, that she had as much amity and friendship for me, and as much
esteem for Tarsis, that she would serve him as a Mother, and would contribute
all that might be possibly imaginable in her toward Leucippe, for the good
success of our Interprize. I was not wanting immediately to make my Brother a
participant of our entertainment and discourse, and behold the Letter which he
writ upon this subject to Melicerte. In saying this, Telamon took another Paper
to continue his reading to Agamee, then when Tarsis being come out of his
Chamber came to find them in the Closset where they were. He was in some
confusion, when he understood from them, in what they were taken up and
employed in expecting him, and reproached his Brother for entertaining Agamee
so ill. Almost at the same time also arrived Argaste and Celemante, who were
astonished and amazed to see the change, that the displeasure had already made
upon the countenance of Tarsis, since the little time that there had bin past,
that they had seen him. O! Shepherd, said Celemante unto him seeing him, I
believe also that you are in love with Zelie, for in sum, it is not Tarsis that
we see there, and it is to do you a favor, that we take you for his shadow or
his Ghost.

Tarsis answered him not, but with a profound Sigh, that he made as he joined
his hands, lifting up his shoulders, and casting his Eyes upwards toward
Heaven; as if he would have said, that his disgrace was such, that there were
none but the Gods that could give him some remedy or consolation. After some
other discourse, Telamon who had in his thoughts no other care than to divert
him, or at least to mitigate and assuage the grief of his dear Brother,
proposed them variety of Walks, and engaged them in conclusion, to go to the
Temple of Jupiter Olympia, under pretense of showing that mavelous piece to
Agamee; but it was in effect, because he called to mind that he had heard
Tarsis say the preceding Evening, that he should be very well pleased, to
consult the famous Oracle on the subject of his doubts. The Athenian and the
Shepherds being of accord in that proposition, and concurring (which they could
easily enough execute by reason of the proximity of the Temple) Telamon gave
them a Dinner with him, lest they should lose too much time in assembling
together, and having taken their repast early, to have more leisure in this
pleasant Journey, he made them yet call to mind at rising from Table, the
shortness of the time, so that they walked altogether.

The End of the Fifth and last Book, of the first Part.
Tarsis and Zelie. The Second Part. The First BOOK.
IN the beginning of the way, the loss of Zelie was all the Subject and
Argument of their discourse and entertainment. For the desolate Tarsis returned
without intermission to that discourse, although all others used all their
efforts and endeavors to divert it. However their Conversation by little and
little returned to be more pleasant, because Ergaste and Celemante, were of the
Party, that they could never be a quarter of an hour together without
contesting one against the other, and all their disputes always furnished,
fitted and made ready some kind of Diversion to those who were present
Witnesses. Ergaste for that time affected even to Jest and Flout Celemante, to
change the Discourse and to divert Tarsis from the Application he made to his
displeasure; and seeing that his Friend attempted by very serious Reasons, but
very unprofitable, to bring some Consolation to Tarsis, he interrupting said
unto him: See thou, Celemante, I permit all others to undertake the
consolating of one afflicted; but thou interposest to speak of affliction, and
I declare unto thee, that I cannot suffer nor brook it.

Celemante who neither sought nor endeavored any thing rather than to dispute
against Ergaste, to divert himself the first omitted not so fair an occasion.
He turned himself about toward that Shepherd and stretching forth his hand to
him said: Well! my dear Cosen and Comptroller, What find thou, or wherein
can thou contradict any thing that I have done? Two days since thou did
reprehend me, for that I did not afflict my self with my Friends. Will It thou
not this day reprove and blame me, in that I afflict my self with them? So it
must be, replied Ergaste: but I find reason to oppose in that thou intermedlest
thy self in reasoning upon the Argument and Subject of an Affliction, thou who
never had any, for there must have bin had reason to speak, to be in a
Capacity to consolate those that want it. That Is that in which thou doubly
deceivest thy self, replied Celemante; For first thou should know, that
since I spoke of Affliction, I only have cause for what I speak; and moreover
added he, why should I not be capable to counsel others though I never have had
any? Can one not be a good Physician, without having bin Sick? I do not say so,
answered Ergaste: But it is necessary at least to know what the Disease is, and
thou know not what Affliction is; testify to us what thou have said thy
self, when thou so call a light constraint, which must be made suitable to
thy Humor to speak.

I know not what thou call affliction, replied Celemante: But whatsoever it
be, I declare unto thee, I do not know any person so proper to Counsel others,
than he who never afflicts himself, as I believe none is so good a Physician as
he who is always in Health himself. That is good, added Ergaste, if it be for
the effect of his Art that he is in health: But if it is naturally that he is
not Sick, its not needful for that to be a great Phisician. Ha! what know
thou replied Celemante, if it be naturally, or by address, that I defend my
self from Affliction? Ergaste would have replied then, but Agamee interrupted
him, and addressing himself to Celemante, he said unto him; Ah Shepherd! defend
not your selves neither the one nor the other; for be it by nature, or be it by
the address, you are always too happy if it be true that you never afflict your
self, and I do no less esteem so rare a quality to come to the goodness and
benefit of Nature, then when it is produced by force and strength of Reason. But
continued Ergaste, the evil is, that it is not by force of Reason nor by
goodness of Nature, that Celemante never afflicts himself, and that contrarily
it is by the Vice both of the one and the other. It Is by default of Nature,
because it is by insensibility: That Is through want of Reason, because he
believes, that it is a virtue to be insensible of affliction. Tell me Ergaste
replied Celemante, believe thou that Affliction is a benefit, or believe
thou that it is an evil? The difficulty is great! replied him Ergaste smiling,
so great, replied Celemante, that I will give thee to choose for to disintangle
thy self. For if thou say it is a benefi^, thou will say a ridiculous thing,
if thou say it is an Evil, then Reason, will tell thee, that it will be
necessary to defend it as much as may be possible. My poor Celemante, answered
Ergaste, we are not to know if it be needful to defend our selves from an
Affliction; for who doubts? but we dispute if, as I have heard thee hold one
hundred times, that it is a Virtue to be insensible. Now I till thee that it is a
vice of Nature, and not a Virtue, and that as when they pinch a Man, it is a
very ill Mark or Sign in him to feel nothing, even so when any Adversity
pierces us, it is a very ill Sign to be therein altogether insensible.

I deny not, but that it is needful to resist Affliction, as much as we can,
but I hold unto thee that it is therefore needful to be naturally susceptible,
that is to say, capable; that it must not be received as a Starve or dead
Image, but as a Man: that is to say, that we must if it be possible, feel the
Designs, the Purposes and Intentions of Grief and D^lour, but yet
notwithstanding to oppose and overcome them with Reason. Celemante shaking his
Head began to Smile and looking upon Ergaste, said unto him: But, however
Ergaste, if it is a Virtue concurring with reason to defend our selves from the
feeling and sentiment of our Grief and Pain, as thou have avowed; why will thou
then, that it be not a virtue of Nature to make the same thing? Because replied
Ergaste, that it is the Office of Nature to render and give us the sentiment of
Evil, as it is that of Reason to take it from us. So when Reason chaseth and
hunts away Affliction, it does it is Devoir: But when Nature undertakes it, it
does a thing opposite to it is self, and that is a Mark and Sign that it is
perverted. Poor Man! said Celemante; Wherefore should the Fancy, the Humor or
Will have Nature wait for, and expect Affliction? Is it to have need of Reason
to chase and drive it away? Is is not that as if we would have Evils and
Maladies and Diseases to come and seize us, that we might have need of a
Physician? Believe me Ergaste, there is no such thing as to be so naturally in
Health, but that there will be need of Remedies.

Telamon seeing that Celemante ceased, began to take up and reassumed the
Dispute and said: But Shepherd what say you to those Sages and Wise Men which
went to encounter Affliction and sought after Adversity, (as we may see) that
they might show forth and demonstrate the force and strength of their Reason? I
say (sharply replying) says Celemante, that they did as the Mountebanks and
Quack salvers who make themselves great Wounds, and lay on Emplaisters upon
them, made with their Druggs, and by that means endeavor to gain themselves
Credit and Reputation of the Populacy. Agamee, Ergaste nor Telamon, could not
refrain from Laughing at his Comparison; but Ergaste who delighted himself in
hearing him spoke, readily began to say unto him: And thou Celemante, thou
justly do as those Cowards, who so dread being killed, that they dare not
see the Face of their Enemies. For have I not heard thee say, that the fear of
being afflicted makes thee fly, even from the smallest thought of mournful or
sad Things? My dear Ergaste, answered Celemante, there is frequently more
honor in flying than in fighting; and the Retreat of ten Thousand acquired the
Greeks more Reputation than all the Battles they had fought till that time. In
fine what Hopes can thou look for, or expect in Combating against
Affliction, unless it be to vanquish and overcome it? Now I find it more short
and expedient to shun it. For is not the way to vanquish it, to know how to
shun it? Ergaste would have replied, but Agamee approached Celemante, and then
embracing him said; Ah Shepherd! I not only find you happy, but I admire you,
if you are such as, Ergaste, you reproach him; and I should be more happy my
self, if I were able to learn at your School to shun the Thoughts of my
disgraces, as I have attempted to fly the Cause of them. At these Words, he
uttered some Sighs, and his Discourse having made Telamon call to mind the
promise that that Athenian had made them make the day before, to recount them
his Adventures, gave also subject to the Shepherd to summon and challenge him
of his Word. Agamee signified himself to be very prompt and ready to ratify
it: but his History although short enough, was notwithstanding too long winded
for a Man who walked in very hot Weather, and who being to speak to four
several distinct persons at a time, could not in walking make himself to be
well understood of all, unless he extraordinarily extended his Voice. Behold
therefore as they had elsewhere much more time and leisure, than was needful
for them in so small a Journey, and that as they found themselves near to a
Tuff or Grove of Trees very pleasant, they engaged Tarsis to come and sit down
there, with them under the Shadow; and elamon invited him to attentive to the
repetition of something wherein he hoped to administer him some ground and
Subject of Solace, on that discourse which Agamee had the preceding day
entertained them with.

But at the hour, that they intended to sit down there, they were surprised by
an Adventure of more astonishment and amazements. And accidentally casting
their eyes toward the Gulf, they discovered there from that place which was
very high; two Vessels, who in their Dimensions in point of Bulk and Grandeur
were very unequal, who attacked each other in a furious Fight and Combat; in
fine the smallest fled, and seemed willing to come and save her self in the
Mouth of the River: but the other gave her no opportunity nor Truce, but
grapled her when she was going to enter there; immediately there appeared a
Woman upon the Deck, holding a young Child in her Arms; if these Shepherds had
been nearer, they would have observed that this Woman who appeared to have been
no more than nineteen or twenty years old, was one of the fairest, most
exquisite and excellently amiable and admirablest Beauties of the whole
Universe. It is true her Visage and Countenance was a little wasted and pined:
But that served to no other than giving her a certain kind of languishing
Consumption, so touching, that never was any though in the best and
salubriously, complete state imaginable, but would have bin incapable to act,
with so much force and impression upon the Hearts of any Person whatever. Her
Attire was of a soft, most mean and Simple: but her Physiognomy, her Action and
all her Personage in fine appeared Royal and Majestic.

The Child she held was not above two years of age at most, and seemed by its
Nobility and in it is smiling Visage with which it pleased it self in the Neck
of this Mother, who should not have had any part in the Peril and Danger, nor
have been exposed to that Violence whereof she was therefore the principal
Object. When she saw her Vessel thus grapled withal and Attackt, she advanced
her self and went forward upon the middle of the Deck athwart and over the dead
Corpse wherewith it was covered, and showing this Child to the enemies who were
on Board the other Vessel, and ready to enter hers: Perfidious Lacedaemonians,
said she unto them, you are not contented with the Blood of your Sovereign, but
you are insatiably Thirsty after that of his Wife and Son? Well done ungrateful
and barbarous People; you must be glutted, satiated, cloyed and filled. But the
cruel Amphare shall not have the Contentment to be the Executioner of the Life
of that of my Son nor of mine, as he has bin of that of the great Agis; and I
will save or spare Sparta the Horror yet to see another time her Walls imbrued
and besprinkled with Blood, by one so abominable a Paricide and Regicide. At
these Words lifting up her eyes toward Heaven; Great Gods! cried she, I do
not ask nor demand that you should revenge me; Only act so that our death may
be profitable to Sparta. In saying and uttering these words she ran aboard the
Vessel, whereon she precipitated her self and Son. Two Women who were in the
same Ship, imitated the generous Resolution of this Queen, and two or three of
the small number that remained there, piercing their own Bodies with their
Swords, also cast themselves into the Sea.

At this spectle, the Enemies whom the words of the Queen had arrested and
surprised, uttered into the air such terrible Cries, and so horrible, that the
bruit, sound and noise thereof, pierced the Ears of the Shepherds. Although
they discerned not all these things, but confusedly, and being also ignorant of
that which was there the most astonishing, and most worthy of compassion in
this adventure, not knowing any thing of the condition of the Persons, on whom
Fortune had cast that cruel example of its Inconstancy: however they had seen
enough to be touched with some horror, and there was not one present, who
testified it not by some particular marks, the effect that this sad spectacle
produced in him.

Agamee had that of Pity; Celemante that of Indignation, Telamon that of Grief,
Ergaste that of fierce Rage and Choler; and desolate Tarsis, on whom the Image
of the disgrace of another, yet rendered the remembrance of his own more
sensible, represented forth the emotion of his heart, by the abundance of his
sighs. Telamon who assiduously sought on all occassions, one that might give
some consolation to his Brother, would willing improve this, in some kind or
other, and addressing himself to Agamee, without dissimulation, lying or
deceit, said he unto him, What Injustice soever we have often received by
Fortune, we ought notwithstanding to praise her for one thing, that is,
whatever evil she does us, she almost always shows us Persons whom she has as
evilly treated, as she has done our selves, nay has worse treated them, and
in respect of whom, we cannot refrain from believing our selves happy and
blessed. But our misfortune is, that we are ordinarily more unjust than she,
and as we feel not the evil of others, we always think that ours is the
greatest; because there is none but that alone, which makes us resent it as
indeed it is. Tarsis well observed that Telamon said that for him, although he
had addressed himself to Agamee. Behold therefore the cause why he replied him:
Ah my Brother! And you say well, that we are almost always unjust in the
judgment we make of the evils of others; for we judge but by those appearances
that smite our Eyes, and there is none so great a deceiver. We think that the
Accidents which have in them something more of barbarity, and appear more
extraordinary to our eyes, than others, are more rigorous to them who suffer
them, because they are more astonishing to those who see and observe them. And
in the interim, that which makes us afraid in the mifortunes of others, is
oftentimes that which causes Consolation, and it happens and occurs every day
that we bemoan the unfortunate, because there is something more Sweet, Pleasant
and more Supportable in their misfortune. Not so Telamon, The great and heavy
Strokes of Despair, do not consist in misfortune; that which you take for the
Evil is the Remedy, O! that there are secret and private Regrets and
Misfortunes, in Comparison of whom, the most savagely cruel death has
Sweetness! Telamon would not contradict, for as much as he knew, that there is
nothing that pains and stings an afflicted Person more than to oppose and
combat his Grief with Obstinacy. This wise and judicious Shepherd contented
himself to tell him so from time to time, uttering some words, to make him
capable of reflecting upon the reasons wherewith he might Consolate him; And
after he had yet made some certain Ones with his Company upon the sad
Accidental Adventure, whereof they altogether had bin effectual Witnesses, he
caused them to reassume, and call to mind the curiosity or hearing an History
that that Accident had interrupted, whereof he was in expectation as we above
have said, whereby a little to give some Consolation to Tarsis, on that which
had bin promised by Agamee, ever since the Shepherds had taken places round
about him, The Athenian spoke unto them thus.

The History of Agamee.
I Have been persuaded more than any person of the World that it was possible
to take such firm and assured Measures in the choice of a Mistress, that one
might find an absolute and complete perfection conformable to his Humor, and
after the having met with it, all manner of Felicity capable in this Life,
consisted in seeing themselves united together by Marriage. I was even yet in
the same Error, Telamon, when we left Thebes. This thought was the Cause, that
I returned with precipitation enough to Athens; because I had left there a
young Beauty for whom I had so great a Love, that no Man living can be capable
of more; she wanted not a correspendency for me, and we were mutually engaged
in an extreme affection; and so much the more easily, that we had almost bin
brought up together. At least we had lived these six or seven last Years in one
and the same House (because my Sister had espoused her Brother, and taken him
in Marriage) (and we both lived with them.) So that I believed I knew the
bottom of her Heart, and even the smallest of all her Faults.

For besides that she was exceedingly fair and beautiful, she had an admirable,
infinite and excellently prompt and ready Wit, and that which engaged me the
more, was, I found in her so firm and solid a Wit for a Maiden, so disingaged
and unloosned from all kinds and sorts of preventions, so elevated above all
common and vulgar Opinions, that she seemed to me to have nothing at all
inherent, in point of the debility of her Sex. You may conceive, how much my
passion was augmented the more, by the knowledge I had of her Amity and
Friendship; for nothing in the World does inflame a young Man more than the
thought that he has to be beloved. But there appeared to me a very great
Transmutation, and strange change of Fortune, when I re-visited her, and a^l
that I formerly had of Joy and content was quite turned about and converted
into Grief, Dolor and Bitterness. For when I thought to approach her with
Testimonies and Significations of ravishing Joy where I was to re-visit her,
she comported her self in such a frigid sense, and cold kind of strain like
unto him, whom she would have had, as a Person throughout the whole Universe
most unknown. And she afterward took the self same care to endeavor to shun
me, that we both of us took formerly to be together, for the entertainment of
our reciprocal affection.

This kind of welcome so different from that which I expected, gave me a
displeasure, the like whereof I never had felt in my life. I spent all that
night to make a reflection upon the subject, that I could have given her to
treat me so; and not finding any cause in the review of all my actions, I soon
imputed it to the little Stability and Constancy that is in a Maiden, whom the
absence of two years had undoubtedly soon frozen or cooled, for a new
Affection. The Morrow I went to see my Friends, and diligently and carefully
enquired of them of the names of all those who since my departure had seen
Telesile (that was her name) and, in one Word, of all the things for which
Jealousy which began to torment me gave me that Curiosity. But for as much as
they knew nothing of our Love, which we always concealed, they assured me that
Telesile had the Credit and Reputation of affecting none nor loving any Body;
that during my absence there presented variety of diverse considerable
pretenders of Affection to her, but she had Will to listen to none, nor would
entertain any, and that it was enough to be Evil thought by her, only to make
mention of any thought of approaching her by any kind of declaration of
Passion. That made me resolve to endeavor to be enlightened by her own self
upon the Subject and Ground of her Frigidity and Chilness and as I was very
well pleased that we were at Liberty and in a Place where we were not
interrupted, I prayed her to grant me an hours time to entertain and discourse
her. She answered me with a very indifferent air, that she believed not I had
any thing to declare to her that was of any Importance, and that although there
might be there was no Person there before whom I might not speak what I had to
say. I thus spoke to her at the taking away of the Table, my Brother in Law and
Sister being there present, before whom I would not discover my self, because I
had learnt that both the one and the other had thoughts to marry Telesile
elsewhere, and particularly my Brother in Law who had promised her to a Friend
of his named Aristoxene. So I replied to her with a still Voice, as I had
begun, that the Persons for whom she testified so much Confidence and Trust,
were those whom I had most cause to mistrust. Whatever I said or could say, I
could not obtain what I demanded of her, and she continued even many days to
shun all opportunities with all the Care that she could possibly take, that I
should not discourse her alone or particularly. That which consolated me was,
that I could not see that she had any more Kindness nor sweet Complaisance for
this Aristoxene, for although my Brother-in-Law would have made him pass to be
of the most ancient House, and in Reputation to have very much in point of
Wealth; however the Spirit of Telesile was then so forcibly strong and so well
tempered with Metal, so loosned from either Interest or Ambition, that she
considered him never a whit the more. But contrarily she esteemed him very
little, because he had but little Wit and a shallow Brain, and that was it by
which she took the Measures of her esteem and Valuation. I found no other
Person whatsoever that was better treated than I, nor who could by consequence
give me any Subject of Jealousy, so that I could not think but that the
Treatment that she made me, came from another Cause, that from a scruple that
came to her with her Age, or from that ordinary Error among the fair Ones, who
believe that the most sweet and most amiable Sex of the World are born to be
severe, and that they m^st feign and seem to be cruel when they have no such
thing at all, so that I resolved with my self to Combat with, and oppose that
Scruple and Opinion, and as they say, to recommence by her, upon a new Track or
Method.

We were then in Winter, and my Brother was lodged in a certain Place where
every Night the Neighborhood failed not to assemble themselves to sup
together, sometimes with one and sometimes with another; after Supper they
parted themselves, some sporting one way, some another, some by Hazard, Hap, or
Lot, others diverting themselves in Conversation of Things of Wit. One night
therefore, all the rest of the Company being left to play, we found our selves
no more than four for Conversation, to wit, the Wife of one Areopagite named
Belialte, who was one sufficiently fair, bright, well made and of a comely
Pitch and Presence, and having in her Mind and Spirit a certain medly
Composition gaullimaufrey or mixture of Sweetness and Alacrity mingled with a
kind of Ferocity, Insolency and Arrogance, which in her was not ill becoming
nor yet unseemly. That which some found Cause to Object in her, that she had as
well as her Husband (who was otherwise a very Honest Man, and one of the most
considerable of Areopage) a very great Inclination for the Sport, even to say
oftentimes, that that Person who would not play was good for nothing. That
night she played not at all, because that having been unfortunate all the day,
she would hazard no more till the succeeding day. The second Person of ours,
was Cotys, a very noble Corinthian, aged about thirty five years, although he
was yet a Batchellor, of an ordinary Pitch or Height, but sufficiently well
shaped, having a fair Countenance still smiling. The Dye and Color of a
Maiden, Hair brown, long, and well Combed, his Spirit Gay, Jocond, Free and
Open, but a little quick and prompt, and one that Jeasted, and they flouted
him, to be a very Pratler and Speaker, though he never spoke but much to the
purpose, and that all that he said, was infinitely Spiritual.

Telesile made the third of our Band, and I was the fourth; after some moments
of Conversation, which was pleasant and merry enough, but to which none but
Cotys could always furnish; they proposed some Plays of Wit, and Cotys taught
us one that he called the Sport of Advice. In that Play every one speaking
softly in the ear of that Person near to whom he was, asked him or her an
Advice; the other gave the most convenient that he could to the Person that
demanded it, after that the other demanded one for him or her self, his
Companion in like manner gave him or her the most convenient he could choose,
and so consequently round till the turn was made and finished; Every one
repeated aloud the Advice which to him had bin given, by the means of this
Advice, they often said the very real Truth sporting and laughing, and without
making any semblance of any thing, sometimes they made a profitable
Advertisement of the Sport, but that wherein there was most Pleasure and
Delight, was that in the Repetition aloud of all Advices received, you
ordinarily saw one obliged even himself to publish his own Defaults and
Frailties. As Cotys taught us the Play, it belonged to him to Commence it; and
for that efect he addressed to Belialte, who was at his right Hand; Belialte
said unto him softly (but in such sort therefore that 'twas easy to me to
understand) pay me for the Pains that I took to instruct you, and by your
favor give me some good Advice. Belialte who knew his weakness, and who was
enough his Friend to be capable and able to Jest, answered him, my Advice is
that you will retain this Sport, or let each one speak according to his Turn;
Cotys very well apprehended the Jest, and he failed not to render it her; for
when she interrogated him afterward he made her a reply which I do not
precisely remember, but I know very well that he sufficiently flouted and
scoffed Belialte for her continued Passion and eager Desire for the Sport. It
chanced afterward that Telesile was also to ask for my Advice, and although I
was but a very ill Poet, I spoke to her after this manner. Receive faithful
Advice, it is not sufficient to be only fair and beautiful; for to retain and
uphold a firm and solid Heart, it is most needful to be less Cruel, and not to
have so much Beauty. I afterward demanded hers, and she answered me; I give
you Advice Agamee, that is, before you reprehend others, you examine if there be
not any thing worthy of Reprehension in your self. I did not immediately take
these words in so favorable a sense, nor made that construction of them as I
should have done; and as I knew that I had never come short in the Affection
that I had pretended or promised to Telesile, I thought not, nor did expect
that she would have reproached me, no nor even that she loved me so
sufficiently well, for that purpose, but I knew it by the Consequence, as I am
going to declare it you.

The Play ended, we began another more difficult and more pleasant than the
former. Every one wrote three or four words in a Ticket such as seemed him
best, and pleased his own Fancy; afterward they mingled these Tickets in a
Hat, then having drawn one out accidentally, it belonged to all that were in
Company each one to make a small particular historical Narration or Discourse
upon the Subject of what was written in the Ticket drawn; the Ticket of Cotys
was, I love Liberty; that of Belialte, I Love to play; I put in my Course and
range, I blame unconstancy; and Telesile, I hate Ingratitude. That was hers
which was drawn; so that it behoved every one to make a History upon the
Subject of Ingratitude.

Telesile was to begin, because they had drawn her Ticket: however as she
testified by her Laughing, that she was to seek, and straightned as to the
History which she was obliged to make, Cotys who had a pregnant and lively Wit,
said unto her; Well Telesile, I proceed to make a commencement and beginning
for you, and I am of Advice even for your Troubles sake, that you speak not
till last of all. A little after he continued thus.

There was a Maiden of Quality at Corinthia named Licie, and if I had not seen
Belialte, and Telesile, I would have added that she had bin the fairest that
ever I had seen. She was observed by a young Corinthian of a comely and amiable
Countenance, and of a ready and prompt Wit, if it had not bin spoiled by the
furious and passionate Love he had for her. I say furious, because it cannot
otherwise be expressed, as you will judge by the Sequel and Consequence. One
day as he was by her in her Chamberand discoursing to her of his Love, he
besought her as they frequently and sufficiently do, who are in that strong
Passion to make trial and proof of him: I should ensnare you well enough, and
overtake, entrap and find you Tardy; Talbion, said she, unto him, if I had
taken you at your word. Thereupon the young man who was named as above,
reassumed and protested to her, that it would be the greatest joy in the World
to him, to dye for her if would so appoint it; and then Licie, were it only
that she spoke it to him to laugh and jest were it that she loved him not and
designed and would defeat him. Well, said she, lets see whether or no for love
of me, you will cast your self out of this Window. She had no sooner uttered
the words, that although the Chamber was two Stories high, he cast himself out
at the Window without replying the least syllable. This incredible Action,
which is also very true and therefore undeniable, had not had such unfortunate
success, as it would doubtless have had, if that Window had not jutted out over
the Sea, but he fell but into the Water, and although it was in a place
dangerous enough, he was quitted for designing to drown himself. Now, continued
Cotys, behold and see if there were ever a greater Ingratitude, as the making
so ill an use of the obedience of a poor Lover? Ay Cotys, continued Belialte,
and you will avow, that that which I am going to speak of, is yet far greater.
For I knew afterward that the self same person, being gone to dwell at Argos
and Talbyon having followed her there, that poor Lover continuing to discourse
her of his Passion, and yet beseeching her to make further Trials and of
greater moments; she took a little Pot wherein there was some Paint in which
was some Poison whereof his Sister served her self (for you know that for her
she had no occasion) and showing it him: Talbion, said, he, smiling on him, are
you not yet content with that perilous leap? hold you have but to swallow down
that for my Sake. She had no need of speaking of it to him twice; he
immediately drank it off and was so violently poisoned that all the Remedies
imaginable that were given and administered were impossible to save him.

Belialte having finished, we lla consented that this piece of Ingratitude
infinitely surpast the first, not only because the effect had bin more dismal,
but for as much as Licie had not a greater excuse to have again exposed to so
dangerous a Trial, the obedience of a Man whom she had already proved so
blinded. However I told them afterward that the Ingratitude of Licie might yet
be excusable, in that she knew not there was any Poison therein, and that is
not an Ingratitude, because there might possibly have bin Ignorance; But behold
an example where Ingratitude triumpeth all alone, behold a Crime which can have
no kind of excuse nor Argument nor Pretense nor Color.

A poor Lover, the name of whom I forbear to tell you, passionately loved a
Young Lady; It Is true, he had not signalized his Love by any great Services,
never having had an occasion: but in that respect he was not to be but the more
bewailed, for he would have esteemed himself too happy to have bin able to have
done it, and being displeased that he was deprived of that Honor, he had a
continual Regret, which augmented and increased insupportable Evils to those of
Love. He would have dyed a thousand times as Talbion to have given his Mistress
some signal marks worthy her self, and would have had no cause to make use of
Poison to dye, if she had signified him a doubt his Grief and Dolor had bin
sufficient. But she had made him believe that she was content with all
Testimonies, he had produced, in that she had bin taught it from his Mouth and
by his eyes. She was also willing to flatter him with some Hopes that she loved
him, that she might engage him more and more, and oblige him entirely to
abandon himself to that Passion, leaving him neither Remedy, Refuge^, Recovery
or Succor, in the displeasures and Regrets that she prepared him afterward.
In fine, after she had reduced him to a State where he could not live longer
but for her, and where she knew well that her change would cause him to dye in
the Languishments more cruel than all kinds of Deaths. This ungrateful One,
abandoned him without any ground or cause, without pretense, without any new
Lover, and by a pure effect of Ingratitude, and daily saw him pining away, and
dying without being sensibly touched nor moved with pity and Compassion.

In finishing I turned toward Cotys without any kind of seeming or thinking of
Telesile, because I would not have my Actions bewray others, that which I very
well knew she would sufficiently understand by my Discourse. In sum, neither
Cotys nor yet Belialte apprehended my Intention, and I well observed that they
looked one upon another, smiling, as scoffing me that I would have had them set
a valuation upon an History, which unto them appeared so rude, vulgar and
unpollisht: But Telesile, far better knew and penetrated the bottom of the
Design. I sufficiently observed a blushing which flushed in her Face; however
she immediately revived and as she had an extraordinary Wit, and would not give
others time to pierce or penetrate my Intentions, she also began another
historical Narration, which she acquitted her self of the most gracefully
becomingly and acceptably as could have bin imagined: But I will not give you
the trouble of hearing it is Repetition, by reason it no way suits nor serves my
Intention, and I even fear I have already tired you Patience and displeased you
by those already recited.

In the Interim, I well saw that the Method I had used to Telesile, had
produced a good effect in her Spirits, and that she was very well pleased to
have bin so enlightened by my Sentiments; for from the very self same evening
she began to look upon me with a more gracious and favorable an Aspect, than
she had done since my return; and after the Company were retired, my
Brother-in-Law, having given his hand to my Sister to conduct her into the
Chamber, and having offered my Service to Telesile to lead her and follow them
there: Agamee, said she unto me, very softly as we were walking there, you
would have deceived us this Evening and you declared us a Fable or Fiction for
a real History. Fair Telesile, replied I, I would to the Gods that your cruelty
were no other than a Legend or fable, or that my Love were not as great and
real a Truth! But speak you sincerely Agamee? replied she me; I could not but
shut her Hand close instead or a present Answer, because, that my Brother
having heard us speak, turned himself to behold us, and that being come
presently into the Chamber, I was constrained to take leave of Telesile: But
those few words which she spoke unto me having made me suspect that there was
some other, or that there had bin some other cause of my disgrace, than that
which I had imagined, I took all the care, and used all the Art I could to be
truly informed. In fine, she her self having given me opportunity of seeing her
the succeeding day in her Chamber after many Plaints and great and tedious
Interlocutions and Intercourses from one to another; I knew that during my
absence, my Brother-in-Law and Sister, who partly by family Interest, and
partly for the kindness they had for Aristoxene absolutely opposed our
Marriage, and would have espoused Telesile to my Rival; and not content to have
attempted by rigor and by the Authority they had over her (for my
Brother-in-Law was her Guardian and Tutor and held the place of a Father) to
divert the Affection she had for me, and made her believe by address, that I my
self thought of another. In effect they had expressly writ to me of this new
Mistress and by a strange persidiousness, when my Sister had received my
Answer, she read it aloud to my Brother-in-Law, her Husband in the presence of
Telesile as if it had bin with design; and had read it in other Terms, and in
Terms and style absolutely different to what I had answered, changing all the
Sense and Meaning of my Letter, and having made me joyfully accept that which I
had effectually refused. And she had also used the same mode and method in
diverse other Letters that I had written, making me still say those things of
which I had never so much as thought or dreamed of, and behold that which had
irritated Telesile against me and of the falsness thereof I easily convinced
her and that by clear demonstrations manifest and visible.

This being explained, illustrated and cleared, I received more honorable
Tokens of her Affection, than ever I had done: But notwithstanding all that, I
was not a long time happy; Cleonime (which is the name of my Brother-in-Law)
willing by all means possible to obstruct our Marriage, to conclude that of
Aristoxene, conceived there would be no means to dis-unite our Hearts as long
as we dwelt together: But because he could not put away his Sister from him,
being her Guardian and Tutor, and because he could not in point of Honor chase
me away, he made a show as if he had bin or was a little indisposed and ill,
and feigned and dissembled that his House was unhealthy, and that his
Physicians counseled him to a Change, and in fine, he went and lodged in
another place, wherein there was no more Room than just enough for the Lodging
of him and his Family, that is to say also for his Sister. So that behold I was
fairly reduced to seek a House for my self, and separate from the Habitation of
Telesile. But that which accumulated and augmented my Misfortune, was that the
House where Cleonime went to lodge in, appeartained to or was owned by
Aristoxene, who being yet a Batchellor had not a Train sufficient to occupy it
entirely and contented himself with lodging in some of the fore-parts thereof:
So that behold I was not only deprived of the benefit of being near Telesile,
but my Rival possessed my Place, and I could not dispute more but only with that
of the Heart.

You may very well think that they did not dwell there and that all this
levelled and aimed further of.

Cleonime could not decently nor honorably shut the Doors of the House, but
contrarily he received me better than ever: But every time I went there, they
ordered it so that I could not see Telesile. Always they engaged her upon some
new pretext directly to go forth of the Chamber of my Sister, and if I went to
visit her there in her own, they gave order to declare she was not there or
that she was Sick, or was so employed or taken up that she could not see any
Body. They treated me so for some days, during which time they made her
understand on the other Hand, when she enquired for me, that I had reassumed
Thoughts of another Marriage, and for that cause and to that effect I came
often enough to see Cleonime and his Wife, and that I did not so much as
enquire nor ask for her. She who in effect saw me every day by reason the
Windows of her Chamber looked over the Court by which I passed and over which I
walked, and she having bin elsewhere naturally inclinable to Suspicions, failed
not to conceive something of them who did or would give her some Thoughts
against my Fidelity. I Writ her many Tickets but they were not given her,
Cleonime always hindering any of my People that they could not speak with her,
and by this means causing my Letters to fall into the Hands of Persons who
would always carry them to himself. That which gave more Weight to this
Imposture and Deceit, that was, that all they would insinuate in the Mind of
Telesile to my disadvantage was told her by a Servant Maiden of hers, whom she
had always before even till then seen to be for my interests: But who had been
gained absolutely by Aristoxene and Cleonime, and 'twas she that returned and
diverted all my Tickets. So that what assurance soever Telesile had of my
Fidelity and Kindness: Behold the Suspicion and Jealousy which re awoke in her
Soul, and I will not conceal from you, that I was not exempt on my side.

One Morning not knowing more how to speak with her, I resolved to wait and
attend her upon the Way which leads to the Temple of Diana, where she failed
not to go once every eight days. But behold a strange Perfidy; Cleonime who was
informed by one of my Servants who was also at his Devotion, went also
presently to the House of the Father of that Maiden, whom they would have had
me marry, making Semblance that I would renew with him the Propositions which
had bin made for me; told him, that as I would not desire to be seen at his
House till all things were adjusted, and determined that I would attend him at
a certain Place that he designed which was the same where I expected Telesile,
and that he was come to him, of set purpose to lead him there.

The good Man who by Misfortune had more good me Will for than I would have had
him had, presently bit, as they say, of the Fish-Hook, and they came and found
me both the one and the other where I was, at the time when Telesile passed by
there. On the other side the Wife of Cleonime ayding the Imposture, was gone
the same Morning to find Telesile in her Chamber, and as a piece of News had
said unto her, that my Marriage was made with that Maiden of whom I have spoken
unto you, and that Cleonime was gone with her Father to find me to bring him and
I face to face to confer together vocally, in a certain Place which she seemed
to be ignorant of. My self indeed who in very deed was ignorant of all that was
as you may very well believe, much surprised when I saw Cleonime and this good
Man, accost and draw near unto me. Cleonime advanced him first and before, to
give me to understand that that old Man had prayed that I should come yet again
to reiterate the Proposal of our Marriage, and even to manage a mutual
Interview betwixt him and me; You ought not to know it unwillingly or take it
ill, added ^he, it is a Token of the esteem he has for you, who ingageth you
to nothing, and you ought favorably to receive it, and that with marks and
demonstrations of Acknowledgment. Although I had no Ground nor Cause to confide
in Cleonime, yet I was so far incapacitated to divine the Treason he contrived
and conspired, and I was also so certain of the Affection which the good old
Man had for me, that I found something of appearance of that which he told me,
and that I would have believed to have made my self Brutal, to go and break him
in the Helmet; however it had bin easy for me to have known the Artifice, if
Cleonime had left us to speak one to another at our approach, for it is very
difficult, that two Persons who parley and confer of a Design contrary to that
which has bin given them to understand, that they should not know the
Circumvention, Fallacy and Delusion. But Cleonime who had his Wit very nimble,
so well knew our former Civilities for one, and for another, and so well to
manage the Colligation and Connection and the entrance of our Conversation, that
he made us insensibly to fall into the proposition of my Marriage without our
apprehension, or that we could perceive either of us that it came from either
our own part or from our Motion or his own; I regarded not nor did I heed this
Imposture nor trick of Legerdemain; for I found all the Sentiments of this
pretended Father-in-Law conformable enough to what Cleonime had told me: But I
know not what he believed on his part then, when he saw the coldness with which
I spoke unto him.

Whatever it were, while we were thereupon Telesile came and past by, and I
would not that she should see me there with that good Man, because they had
formerly told her of something in Relation to me and his Daughter. Behold the
reason why I retired my self a little aside to finish our Conference speedily,
and afterward to go to the Temple of Diana, to confer and parley together: But
see a little the fantasticalness, and conceited toy of my Destiny. Telesile who
had discerned me at a distance between him and Cleonime according to the advice
that they had given her, had no sooner observed that I had hid my self from
her, that she doubted no more but that I was there for the Subject they had
told her of; and behold the Jealousy and despite that immediately animated
her against me after a very strange sort.

Aristoxene being informed of all this Mystery, did not fail to come to the
Temple with my Sister, not only as at a favorable time, to improve to himself
by the indignation he would have against me, but further to design the
obstructing me, and incapacitating me to make a clear Apology for my self with
her, which they well conceived I would not have omitted, so that since I had
defeated my self with the old Man, whom Cleonime had pestered me withal, as
long as he could, and that I thought to go to Telesile; I saw her returning
with my Sister, led by Aristoxene who had offered her his hand at coming out of
the Temple. The Impression which she conceived upon this new Perfidy irritated
her to such a degree, that she told me afterward that she could hardly resist
a sudden Qualm of Heart, which took her in the Temple, and notwithstanding as
she was very fierce, she would not seem to be touched. And never had she a
Countenance more cheerful than that which she showed then when I perceived her
with Aristoxene. That joy that she testified with my Rival in a time where the
Affliction in which I was, persuaded me that she had as much cause to be sad,
as my self, also almost finished my assurance of her Unconstancy; chiefly and
principally then when I saw this great Alacrity and Gayetey which appeared
before she had made semblance of seeing me, to vanish all at once from the
moment, which I had joined them, and Telesile to receive me with the last
coldness. I could not dissemble my Grief, and because the Company of Aristoxene
and that of my Sister held me compelled and constrained; I said not a word
almost all the Way. But admire a little my Misfortune! my Melancholy goes yet
to persuade Telesile that it was an effect of the tie that I had at the thought
of that Marriage which she believed I came from the treating of, and not having
bin able all the day, to find a moment of Discourse alone, we both of us
retired much less satisfied the one with the other, than ever.

That which aggravated and exasperated us the more, was that Aristoxene and
Cleonime had directed and appointed a bruit Noise or Report to be published and
proclaimed throughout Athens, that I had espoused that Maiden whereof I spoke,
and that Telesile married her self to Aristoxene, and they made us report this
Noise to one and the other in all Parts. However I had always in my Mind, the
Stratagem which they had another time already abused us withal, and how jealous
soever I was, I yet conserved enough of Reason not to be willing to sparkle or
glittler or make a fair Gloss until such time as I was more clearly enlightened.
To that effect I writ yet again to Telesile, but a long Letter by which I
challenged her amongst others; That I could not believe that she had so soon
forgot the Fidelity she had promised me, while I still conserved for her so
much respect and passion; that there must undoubtedly be our Enemies which she
knew had yet practiced some Impostures and deceitful Tricks of Legerdemain, to
abuse both the one and the other of us, and therefore I besought her that we
might have an Interview and Parley to clarify the matter by a mutual Conference
together.

That Letter was given into her own proper hand by reason I had ordered a Slave
with whom I had given it in charge to attend and wait certainly even a whole
entire day, that he might deliver it himself to her self in particular. What
certainly soever that Telesile could believe to be of my Fidelity because she
had seen it with her own eyes, my Letter began to give her therefore some
diffidence and mistrust of my Enemies, and disposed her Mind to those
Manifestations, illustrating of matters and things as I had desired her. She
therefore said to my Slave that he should attend an answer, and writ me the
most favorable that I could have desired by which she gave me time till the
Morrow.

Would you believe the malice of Cleonime, illustrious Shepherds? Whilst that
Telesile wrote, my Brother-in-Law having understood that my Slave attented in
the next Chamber, sent to fetch him under pretext of being willing to know and
enquire after my Health, and after having directly drawn from him all that he
could wish, he knew to take it in such a manner, at least that he corrupted his
Fidedelity with Money and Promises, and disposed him to bring even to him the
Letter or Ticket that Telesile had given him for me, and came and told me
afterward, that she could not read my Letter by reason of the Company that was
with her: but that she had appointed him to return to carry back the Answer the
ensuing day. I accordingly sent him with an Impatience which made that night
seem to me as half an age; That Slave instead of going to Telesile, who had
given no order (having given him her Answer the preceding Evening) returned to
my Brother-in-Law to take new Instructions to abuse me; and Cleonime having
since the Evening engaged the maiden Servant of Telesile to steal the Letter
that I had written to his Mistress, tare it in a thousand pieces, put it into
the hands of my Slave and sending it to me, with command from Telesile, that
that was the answer that she was not willing to make before the Company the
preceding day.

It Is true, I could hardly contain my self, being so transported with Rage and
Fury by reason of those outrageous Marks and Tokens of her so despising and
undervaluing me, and the thoughts of her scornful Dis-estimation and Contempt
of me. At length I resolved to go there personally and see her the self same
day, and to discourse her vocally, and if I could draw no satisfaction, I
resolved to reproach her a thousand times and never to re-visit her. In entering
into the Court, I perceived her at the Window, whence she briskly retired after
she had seen me, but I omitted not to observe in her a cheerful and jocund
Countenance and Aspect, she placed her self there, but to expect me, believing
that the had delivered me her Letter, all her Joy proceeded from her sight of
me, and when she so briskly retired, 'twas least that Cleonime and Aristoxene,
who were with her and whom she could not be able to prevent nor defeat, that
they should not perceive our Randezvous. In the Interim, when I enquired
whether she were there, they answered me, no; and upon my alleging to them
that I had seen her, they avowed me, that she was there, but was indisposed and
therefore not to be seen by any; I further did reply I saw her very pleasant
with a cheerful Countenance and thereupon, he with whom I spoke, confidently
confessed to me, that she was well and in perfect Health, but the Truth was,
that she had laid a command upon them, to make me this answer, because she was
with Aristoxene and that she had prohibited them to declare it unto me.

And indeed at the self same time, I saw Aristoxene laughing very loud very
near to her Window, who being there with my Brother Cleonime on purpose, with a
design, that I might come and find them there, and so continued and affected to
brave and affront me with his manifestly, open and apparent Favor. There was
then no further means to refrain my Jealousy. I would not however give my
Rival the content of being a Testimony of my discontent, but contrarily retired
wholly silent, affecting I know not what kind of indifferency, that they might
rather occasion him to understand, that I rather came to visit Cleonime than
Telesile; and on the other side likewise, howsoever, to satisfy the extreme
desire of Vengeance, which I had conceived, and having shut up my self at home,
I there wrote two Letters, both befitting the rage and fury wherewith I felt my
self transported. I have almost some repugnance to repeat you what that was I
wrote to Telesile, for you would possibly have difficulty to pardon me my
transport, if you did not conceive that a Man the more he less Loves, is he
capable to preserve reason and respect in his Jealousy, and if you cannot
excuse the Follies of a man infinitely amorous, and who believes himself
exceedingly undervalued. And behold the Terms.

AGAMEE to TELESILE.
THere was nothing more firmly and strongly tied and fastened me unto you, that
would have occasion of so many Artifices to have set my self at so great a
distance, and if you had less dissembled, I would have eased you of much
Trouble; For future, seek none to conceal your self from me, since I promise
you, I will never take any to search after you, the only Passion that remains
with me is the shame of having lost much time to do it, and all that I desire,
is, that you will only not remember me, as I promise to Banish you for ever out
of remembrance.

AGAMEE.


The other was a Letter of defiance after the same style, which I sent to
Aristoxene, where I remarked him, not as a Rival, nor as a Man whose fortune I
would have envied, but I only considered the affected Insultation wherewith he
braved me, and to do it at the House of Telesile, and 'twas simply for that I
pretended that he should do me reason and give me Satisfaction.

They omitted not to deliver my Letter to Telesile, for 'twas too conformable
to the intention that our Enemies had to divide us. I did not then receive any
reply, only I afterward knew, that she fell into a Swoon with Grief in reading
that Letter, and you will see what was the sequel.

As for Aristoxene he fiercely answered me, that he had accepted my Challenge,
but he had promised Telesile not to fight me, till he had first consummated his
Marriage with her; and if I were in his place, I would not violently infringe
so solemn an Oath, and that he promised and protested that he would afterward
give me satisfaction with the self same hand, wherewith he would formerly have
received the Fidelity of Telesile.

That Bravado, and unseasonable swaggering put me out of my self; I resolved to
seek him out by all means imaginable to force him to handle his Sword, and gave
him to understand, that where ever I found him, I would treat him as a Coward
and a Person of no Honor. But be it that he apprehended the encountering of a
desperate and despairing One, be it that he judged the Air of the Country was
or would be necessary to Telesile for the restoring of Telesile to Health and
recovering from that debility wherein she had bin and was: in so much that
Cleonime and his Wife, conducted her the succeeding day to a House in the
Fields which they had some certain furlongs from Athens, where Aristoxene
accompanied them.

He held himself so confident of his Conquest, that he openly and publicly
declared to all his. Friends, that he went there to ^espouse and marry her, and
in truth and effect he carried a considerable quantity of Preparatives there,
as if there he would have celebrated his Marriage.

The Report thereof was already almost certain in Athens, and there were some
who even believed that it was done. When in a Morning being yet in my Bed, they
came and told me a Cook asked to speak with me, who having bin introduced,
rendered me this Letter.

TELESILE to AGAMEE.
THe outrage and injury you have done me, is too great to make me believe you
had done it me with willingness of Heart, and the more I think thereof, the
less could I have imagined that you had writ to me after that method and
manner, if they not made you believe that I had given you Subject or cause it
is true that even in this case, your Credulity could not nor ought not to be
excusable: But in the Conclusion, I had rather Sin through or by too much
indulgence for my Friends than to condemn them, as you have done me without
understanding them. Answer me by this same Man whom I have sent you, and
believe what ever they have bin possibly able to say unto you, there never was
change nor dissimulation in the heart of.

TELESILE.


I can in no wise depaint you, the great but pleasant Surprise wherein I was in
the receiving this Letter, I considered her as a criminal to whom one should
have given Grace and Favor; I kissed it a thousand times, with a thousand
Transports, and having understood by him who gave it me, the fallacious Reports
that ran abroad of the Marriage of Telesile, and how she had counterfeited her
self Sick, to undeceive them all, I took Horse the same Hour, and having
engaged that Man for my Interests, by a Liberality considerable enough, I went
with him to his Cottage, which was in the neighborhood of Cleonime. I had
resolved to have sent him directly to Telesile, to inform her of the place
where I was, and to have demanded a place of mutual Conference where we might
treat together: but my ordinary misfortune would have it, that as I was come
there on a Gallop through the impatiency of my Love, the Peasant who had
overheated himself in following me, fell sick of a Pleurisy which having
given him trouble enough to recover his House, constrained him upon his arrival
to take his Bed. Behold me therefore disappointed; for this Man was so poor
that he had no domestics nor menial Servants, I durst not confide in any
Person within the Neighborhood, the major part of them being Farmers to
Cleonime; and moreover I had bin deceived by so many Persons, that I mistrusted
all the World. I knew not how then to do, I knew not; You will possibly laugh
at the Folly that I am going to tell you of: But conceive for my excuse, that
which Love has caused the Gods frequently to do themselves. Has it not often
times made them change themselves into men? Has it not made Jupiter to take
upon him the ridiculous form of an old Man? Has it not made them even carry
themselves and hide and conceal themselves under forms much more strange? I
will therefore say nothing unto you, I believe that will astonish you, when I
recount you that my design being to Parley with Telesile, without discovery of
that which was, and not being able to do it, but in the House of my Brother,
where my Countenance was unknown to none there. I habited my self with the most
tottering and ragged Aparrel that I could find in the House of the poor
Peasant, afterward I girded thereon a Sword with a very ill gierse or piece of
Leather, and having put a great Emplaister upon one of my eyes, walked as a
maimed Soldier, even to the House of Cleonime. I stayed near enough in a Wood,
which is overright against the principal Gate, and which crosses or thwarteth
a long Alley, where the ordinary walk is; that there was also the place where
the Peasant had told me he ought to give an answer to Telesile. I hid my self
in a certain place, where I could commodiously see all those who came out and
entered, and I had not waited there an hour, but I saw Telesile come forth,
unready or undrest, with a Cane in one hand, on which she leaned as one Sick.
Aristoxene followed her and I observed him frequently offering to present her
his hand to aid her in walking: But I also remarked she still refused it, and
even stayed there a long time without coming forward, as thereby denoting that
she would not depart thence, till he was returned and would re-enter: But
Aristoxene persisting and continuing obstinate also, more and more, in his
Importunate Civility, I waited the event, with a strange palpitation of heart:
for you may sufficiently judge how much more advantageous it had bin for me to
see Telesile come alone, than accompanied with my Rival.

In fine, their Contestation was terminated by the arrival of my Sister, which
obliged Aristoxene to re-enter, on the Supplication that Telesile had made her:
But in recompense she would accompany her, not judging, but in the
indisposition, wherein she had signified her self to be, she should leave her
there to walk all alone. So that behold, my Case grew worse and worse, for if
there were danger in my being known by Aristoxene, there seemed yet more
difficulty, but that I should be known by my own Sister. However I left them to
come forward, and when they were almost over right me, I came out from the
Place wherein I was, and appearing in the middle of the Alley, I also went
forward toward them with Hat in hand, kissing the other and stretching it out,
and in the end, int the posture of one whom we call an idle lazy, and lousie
Vagabond Beggar, who asked an Alms. The sudden Apparition of my underground
and odd lurking Posture, and Form; did so strangely surprise them both, by the
fear wherewith they had bin seized they turned to the one and the other,
although that Telesile who before made a show of not being to uphold her self
but by a Cane remembered her self not of her pretended and feigned Indisposition.

They ran even so unto the very Gate, without so much as daring to look behind
them; and met Cleonime and Aristoxene in the Court, to whom they recounted the
terrible fright wherein they had bin, immediately Cleonime opened the Gate to
see me, and Aristoxene himself came there. They saw me yet in the same Alley,
where I walked slowly, and where, all in Confusion and disquieted, in having
lost that occasion of making my self known to Telesile, by some twinkling of an
Eye or some other Sign as I had expected, I entered into some means of refinding
anew. As soon as I saw Cleonime and Aristoxene look upon me, I feared they
would advance toward me to make me some demand, for which reason I would have
bin well pleased to shun and avoid: but I dreamed that if I testified any kind
of Propensity and Inclination to shun them, that would but have augmented the
suspicion of my Sister and Telesile, and might make them think I was some
Thief: behold wherefore that as far off as I saw them, I put off my Hat, and
went forward even within forty or fifty Paces from them, still stretching out
my Arm, in a supplicating Posture, muttering forth some Words as a Passenger
which demanded or entreated their Charity, Cleonime took me for such a one, and
because my Sister had assured him that I was some Hobgoblin, Ghost or ill
Spirit, he betook him to laugh and jest, whilst he searched his Pocket; he
took out some money which he gave to a Slave to give me. Aristoxene, who would
have appeared liberal before his Mistress fumbled, groped, or dug and
searched his, and sent me a piece of Gold by the same Slave.

Some inquietude or disturbance which Passion caused in me the fantastical and
toyish Humor of that Adventure, which made me have the Alms of my Brother and
Rival, seemed to me to have something of extraordinary and so pleasant, that I
had Pain and Trouble to receive it in a cool sense, however I counterfeited my
Personage the best I could, and having said to the Slave with a Voice and
Countenance the most Counterfeiting that I could possible, that I was obliged
to pray to the Gods for them; I besought him to demand something for me of
those Ladies, and to tell them that it was not simply for my self, but for Poor
Marsias their Neighbor and my Brother, and whom I had found very Sick at my
return from the Army. You will remark that Marsias was the poor Peasant whom
Telesile had sent me; and I said this to give her some Diffidence or Mistrust
of the Truth or at least some curiosity that she might speak with me. That
Slave did them my Message, which failed not to produce in Telesile the effect I
expected, not that she had any kind of Diffidence of what I was, but it seized
on her immediately with an extreme impatience to speak with me to know if
Marcias had not had some Charge of a Letter from me to her. The difficulty was
to be able to do it without giving some Suspicion; and my Sister her self was
an occasion of giving Birth to one in her unawares, for as she was charitable
enough, and knew this poor Man who was accustomed usually to go and ask an Alms
of her, she sent word to me that I should come in the evening, and that they
should give me some remainders of the Supper to bring to him.

As for Telesile, she then sent me nothing, but privately gave order to one of
the Servant Maidens of my Sister, for she began to mistrust her own to spy out
the time when I would return, and to go and inform her. That Maiden who had
received some good by Her means from my Sister, and was very ready to serve
her, held her self so heedy and wary that she discerned me from the very moment
when I first appeared, and as it was early enough, because I had done no other
then to sink or thrust into the Wood without going further, it was found they
had not yet sat at Table to Supper. Telesile having bin informed and willingly
desiring to manage the occasion of speaking with me all alone, prayed the
Company to excuse her sitting at the Table at that time seeming willing to
attempt a little abstinence which she supposed might be a Means to ease her.

She went out even then when she saw them sat down, as fearing to be tempted
to eat in seeing them so to do; and in the mean time having made a Turn in the
Garden, she went out at a Postern and came to find me under some Trees where
she commanded them to speak to me to expect her. The fear she had lest some of
the Domestics should perceive her, hindered her to come directly to me; she
took her Turn by a lower way, then returned within twenty Paces of me, as by
accident, she called me without staying, and almost without beholding me
telling me that she came with me, and went to cause to be given me what she had
promised me. I followed her, I will not tell you, with what palpitation and
emotion of Heart, turbulency or agitation of Spirit, for that cannot possibly
be spoken; and as she asked me still in walking and even without looking behind
her, how Marsias was in point of health, and since when he was Sick? Madam,
replied I very softly, he was not in Bed but this day. But there is another
Person Sick since a longer time, and fell Sick as well as Marsias at your
Service, who has much more need than he of your Care, and for whom I demand of
you, a little Succor and Compassion. These words, and the sound and tone of my
Voice, which I no more disguised nor dissembled, smote the Heart of Telesile;
she turned about to consider me, all surprised, and she saw that I had taken of
the Emplaister which had hid a part of my Face; She very soon knew the
Lineaments and Features when she could not doubt but that it was I, that she
was even at the point of crying out. However she refrained, and turning her
self wholly toward me, she joined her hands together, and in the end began to
smile to see me in this State. Madam, said I unto her, undoubtedly the Equipage
wherein you see me surprizeth you: But it is that of a miserable One, who comes
to do Penance for his Faults casting himself at your Knees to demand your
Pardon, and to be subject to those Pains which your Pleasure shall impose. On
these words, I would have effectually have fallen at her Feet, but Telesile
considering more prudentially that I was not capable to conserve on that
occasion, but that there might pass by some one, by whom I might be seen,
retained me, and still casting her eyes now here, now there, for the fear she
had lest we should be perceived: Agamee, said she unto him, This here is not
the place where we ought to deliberate, return only to finish your motion of a
Beggar, and the night being come, you shall be permitted to reassume that of
Agamee. She added, that I should render my self firmly that very night at the
door of her Chamber, by a small Ladder, or Stairs stolen which descends from
her Chamber into the Garden, and that I should there hear News of her.

I failed not at the time assigned, nor she to retire early under pretext of
her Indisposition. I was introduced into her Chamber at the precise hour by
that self same Servant whom she had already employed to inform her of my
return. Good Gods! what pleasing Transports, and what had I not of ravishing
Joy? expect it not from me that I should by retail recite you, the particulars
of our Conversation, for I had too much emotion and agitation upon my Heart and
in my Breast, to be able my self to heed all that which we mutually said. Only
I know well, that after she had sweetly and softly lifted me up from her feet,
where I left my self to fall at my approaching her, and after she had a
thousand times justly reproached me, but obligingly in point of my furious
Transportation, we at last enlightened our selves interchangeably with the
Cheats and Impostures and Tricks of Legerdemain, by which they had divided us;
and we protested a hundred times, not to suffer nor leave our selves to be any
more surprised with the Artifices of our Enemies: We swear an eternal and
inviolable Friendship, and we tasted in conclusion, whilst two hours lasted,
the entertainments of all the innocent Pleasures of this sweet Peace, which
reconciles two Lovers, after the alarms and transports of Jealousy, and who
after some days of Division, reunites Friendship and Amity, to the degrees of
the greatest Tenderness and Perfection.

But fortune willed not too much nor would suffer, that I had so much
contentment without making me pay dear enough for it. Misfortune would that
Cleonime went very late to walk in the Garden, and seeing light in the Chamber
of Telesile by the Windows that opened over it, he feared lest some ill
Accident might occur unto her unawares, or, that she might find her self more
indisposed than before, by reason that retiring her self so early, she had
pretended it was with a design to go to Bed. He therefore went readily to the
little Ladder or Scales, whereof I have spoken unto you, and finding it open he
ascended and came and knocked softly at that of the Chamber of Telesile. Behold
Telesile well allarmed, and I was little less than she; not for any fear that I
had for my self, but only for the apprehension I had for her, for as much as I
had rather have died than to have bin the cause that her Honor and Reputation
should receive the least Attaint. I counseled her not to answer at all, and
the Counsel succeeded immediately because that, Cleonime not hearing any noise
in the Chamber believed in effect that his Sister slept, but he went into that
of the Maidens by a little Gallery which answers to the same Stairs, to demand
of the Servant of Telesile why they saw a Fire in the Chamber of her Mistress.
That Maiden from whom Telesile had concealed in the just mistrust of what we
have said, answered, that she had there left it because that her Mistress
betaking her self to read, had sent her away, and told her that she would
uncloath and undress her self all alone when she would lie down. Cleonime
fearing thereupon that his Sister sleeping might have forgotten to extinguish
the Light, lest the House might be set on Fire, returned with that same Maiden
to knock at the same door which he had done before, and no Body answering, he
knocked more roundly and called Telesile to awake her. Behold us then in new
Trances and Troubles. I rose up as softly as possibly I could and hid my self
behind the hanging of Tapestry, whilst that Telesile, as if the noise had
awaked Telesile, demanded who was there, Cleonime naming himself, told her the
Subject of his Apprehension, and believing that she was layn down, prayed her
only to quench the Fire, and afterward returned to the place from whence he
came, I returned smiling from the alarm we had had: but Telesile who had no
more rest than she had seen her self out of the danger where she had found her
self, ceased not to press me to be gone and at length dismissed me; I went out
with a thousand Regrets, and having against all hazards replaced my Emplaister,
I descended by the same Stairs by which I mounted; but it happened that Cleonime
who had met or found the Gate which leads to the Garden open, fearing lest the
negligence of those who had the care of fastening it, had made it fly open, he
sent one of his Servants to lock it with the Key, and that Servant arrived
there just at the Instant I was going forth. He had no light with him, but
heard me by the noise, and asked who came there, I would have shunned him by
favor of obscurity without a reply; This Man, who was both bold and powerful,
seeing me betwixt light and darkness, or having had but a Glimpse of me and
seized of my Neck; he repelled and indeavourd to force me back into the
Lodgings, and as you see that I am not of those that are of the highest Pitch
nor Stature, nor yet the strongest, he felled me to the Ground, although with
pain enough even to the nether most Step or lowest; He cried out a Thief, on my
resistance. I smothered as was possible his Voice, in placing my Hand before
his Mouth, I prayed him to understand me and I would make his Fortune. But I
gained nothing upon his inclination, he continued still to cry out, and I
endeavored to hinder the sounding of his Voice, by my hand, wherewith I shut
his Mouth as well as I was able. By good Fortune these Stairs were at the
corner of the Lodgings and answered not but only to the Chamber of Telesile and
to that Gallery at one end whereof was the Chamber of the Maiden Servants; and
for as much as the Gallery was very long that there was two doors locked upon
it, to wit, that of their Chamber and that of the Gallery, and that at the self
same hour so cried out that they also might possibly make some Noise, in so
much that they might hear nothing of ours, and that the voice of that Servant
almost smothered, losing it self on the Stairs, was not heard nor understood
but by Telesile.

Telesile therefore lent her ear there, and mistrusting one part of the Truth,
she cast about her self a night Gown or Chamber Mantle, and descended all
trembling, bringing a light with her. She found us both tumbling upon the
ground, and as I ceased resisting, after I had discerned her, the Servant took
hold of my Collar or Throat and lifting up himself from above me, he told her
that I was a Thief whom he had then surprised and that he must bring me to
Cleonime. Telesile, who then apprehended more than I did, that he might not
bring me there, said unto him, that it was not convenient at such a time as
that was, to give an allarm to her Brother, but that it was only needful to
take from me my Sword, and to shut me up, in some certain place, till the next
day.

What difference soever that Man had with her, he would never thereunto consent
nor accord with her, and he told her he was well assured that Cleonime was not
gone to Bed as yet. As she saw that, she proposed to him to shut me up at least
in some certain place, whilst he should go and inform his Master, remonstrating
to him, that he was not strong enough to hale or draw me there forcibly in
despite or against my Will, and that I might escape him. That advice seemed
very pertinent and rational and very seasonable and good; she caused me her
self to place me in a little Cabinet or Closet which was under her Chamber,
where the Windows were withered or grated, and which she fastened with a Bolt
before him: but while he went to inform Cleonime, she opened the Gate of my
Prison (where I was with enough of inquietude to know by what manner I might be
able to get forth, because that Slave had locked the door of the Garden even
with the Key,) and without giving me time to speak any thing to her, she led me
to a low Window of the Stairs, which she opened unto me, and by which she
appointed me to retire. I easily lept from that Window into the Garden, whence
I went to the House of the good Man Marcias, with Subject enough of laughing at
my Adventure, if the Regret that I had, for Telesile had not taken away all my
Pleasure. The succeeding day I returned to Athens, where I understood the alarm
that had bin all the Night in the House of Cleonime, and that Telesile had
directly cast all the fault of my escaping forth, upon the Slave, as if he had
forgotten well to fasten the Bolt of the Closet, where she had caused me to be
Imprisoned, so that they had not the least suspicion of the Truth.

In the interim, I attended with impatience the return of my Mistress to
Athens, and there had already eight days expired, that I was come there, more
and better assured of her Fidelity and Constancy; when an Uncle of Aristoxene
dying, left him Heir of the Inheritance whom all the World reputed so opulent,
that they believed that he was become one of the wealthiest and richest of all
the Men of Athens. All that alarmed me not, by reason I had known so much
generosity in the Soul of Telesile, that I believed her incapable of being
tempted by the Riches, even of the King of Persia. Also she had assuredly
rejected for my sake, Persons very considerable in her Youth, and undoubtedly
much more considerable than Aristoxene formerly was: But it was as I have have
told you in the time of her Youth, that she had done it, and her Soul had not
as then the leisure to be left to be corrupted by the passions of Ambition and
Avaricious Covetousness: Would you doubt you Illustrious, Generous Shepherds of
this perfide? This generous and constant Maiden, from whom I had so lately
received Testimonies and Assurances, so perfect of an Amity and Friendship so
tender, that I would rather have doubted of my own propper fidelity, than of
hers; No sooner therefore knew she that Aristoxene was elevated to so high a
degree of Fortune; but she all at once changed her Sentiments and Heart.

She no more remembered neither my Love, nor her own Asseverations and Solemn
Oaths; she left her self to be charmed by the hopes of an Imaginary Grandeur or
Greatness: In fine, she quitted and abandoned me altogether, and sold her self
(for so we may say) to Aristoxene. It must be avowed that never a change did so
much surprise me as did that, and that the Marriage being made with much
Precipitancy, and without the giving me leisure to prepare my self thereto; I
knew it for two days without believing it, nor could I give credit thereunto.
However I had more despite than regre^t, as I may so say, for I would not have
had Telesile with all the wealth of Aristoxene, when once I knew her capable of
such a high piece of Perfidy: So that I soon consolated my self, and I even
rejoiced in the end to have been disabused of my error, before I had been
engaged farther with a Woman so Treacherously Disloyal.

And in very deed it is true, that I had yet the pleasure to be soon Revenged:
for it was found that the Uncle of Aristoxene having intermedled himself, and
being crowded and pestered with so great a bulk and quantity of business and
affairs during his Life. All his great wealth consisted, in effect, that he was
only capable to Disintricate and Unpester and Disintangle himself; even in such
sort that one great Merchant, who had been owing him great Immense and vast
Sums, being come to be made a Bankrupt, all the high fortune of Aristoxene was
but a dream of some Months at the end, whereof he was not a whit better
accommodated than he had been before.

But I made an Irreparable fault by not becoming wise by experience; and to
believe yet after that repose or rest, may be fastened to the possession of a
Woman after the having suffered so many pains and evils by a Woman, whom I had
I apprehended so well tried and proved, and whom I believed to be the
perfectest of all. In fine, Shepherds, I resembled those Travelers whom the
rest of some few days makes them lose the memory of a painful and dangerous
Shipwreck, and that without remembering themselves of the peril that they have
gone through; they reimbarque inconsideratly upon the same Sea whereon they
were so ill treated by a Tempestuous Storm. It is true, I resolved never any
more to fasten my self, neither to the Beauty of the Body, nor yet to that of
the mind, wherewith I was charmed by Telesile. I call to mind what I have heard
say was spoken by our wise Men, commonly called Sages; That which is most
desirable and pleasant in a Mistress, is not that which is most to be wished in
a Woman: That the rarest Beauties become ordinary by custom, and that Helena
for to be the Fairest and most Galant of the Greeks omitted not to render
Menelaus the most unfortunate of Husbands.

I therefore fixed my self by the advice of my Friends to a Widow, named
Esinie, the credit and reputation of whose wisdom, piety and Occonomie passed
for an example of Virtue amongst Women. They told me she had lived well with
her Husband, though he was neither well Conditioned, Witty nor Wise, nor whose
humor rendered him any way pleasant nor considerable unto her; And in very
deed, a good part of those things wherewith they vauntingly boasted, was very
true; for it is certain that out of her Menagery and the Temple, she had had no
other tie than for her Husband. All the time I saw her before our Marriage,
there never appeared unto me an humor more sweet, more Complaisant nor more
Commodiously apt and pertinently fit and convenient than that of Esinie. As for
the rest, although she was not Fair, she had nothing Disamiable nor Unpleasant,
and she had Wealth reasonably sufficient for the condition wherein I then
lived. In a word, when I Married her, I thought I could have lived with her in
a profound peace with much Tranquillity, and being loosned and disintangled from
Ambition, as I was, I believed my self to have bin one of the most happy and
Fortunate Men in the whole Universe. In the Interim, (it is here Tarsis that I
demand and require your particular attention, and these three words, that
remain more for me to tell you, should or ought to make your consolation and
all those Unfortunate Lovers) In the mean, I say I Espoused her, and found my
self very far distant from my account. All my happiness consisted in hopes, and
I soon knew the truth of what I had heard spoken to a great Personage, that its
needful to espouse a Woman to know her; and as another Philosopher said, we
must not Judge by the Shoe, because it is handsome and well made, since it is
not but in the wearing of it that we discover whether it hurts us. It sits too
ill upon a Man to discover the secrets of his homely affairs, to entertain you
here by retail, our matters they ought to be mysteries, kept also as secretly
as were those of Ceres: But that which I can tell you, that all Wise, all
Pious, all Fixed to the interest of her Husband and his Affairs. In fine, all
the virtues which seemed to meet in Esinie, she knew how to persecute me by an
Execution and Torment of these fair and Lovely Virtues, in such a manner, that
after six years patience, she rendered my Marriage and my Domestics so sadly
Unsupportable, that I was forcibly constrained to quit and abandon all, and I
resolved to quit her for lost, if I could, even unto a remembrance, and never
more have that object of Anguish and trouble before mine Eyes. In fine,
Illustrious Shepherds, after some other Voyages which I have made, having heard
so often speak of the Sweetness and Pleasure and of the Tranquillity of your
Life, I came there to pass or spend some time amongst you, if you will consent
to receive me there.

When Agamee had spoken and finished his Discourse, Telamon reassumed his
Speech on behalf of all, to signify to him that they would esteem it a great
honor to have such an Host amongst them, for he called to mind that whilst
his discourse lasted to have heard say to some that came from Athens that
Agamee had bin made an Areopagite four or five years since, by the Suffrage of
the Progeny of the Stock-race and Families, and that he was the most
considerable of the Senate. Agamee had not in any thing intermedled with or in
his own History, because he despised all that strange Honor which came from
Dignities and Offices, and that he was too much a Philosopher to make that a
case which was derived from Virtue. Also he did honor to himself in estimating
merit, because he extremely had it: for over and above that he naturally had
very much Wit, had he Cultivated it by the Study of excellent Literature, and
there were very few Sciences whereof both in despite of time and War, love and
his office had taken it from him, he had notwithstanding the first and
Principal Knowledges, Familiarity, Intelligence and Apprehension; His Age was
but forty years, however his Domestic cares had changed the color of his
Hair, which being naturally black, began already to be mixed with white. His
Temperature was Chollerick and Testy and yet Melancholy; his Air fierce and
furious, although his Pitch in point of height and stature was not great, and
yet he was more in Discourse than Countenance. But it was not but with them
whom he knew not, or with the great ones which he apprehended with contempt and
scorn; with his equals and inferiors there was not any more facile nor more
submissive, and as he could not hold any Person whatsoever above him, so he
held none below him. In one word he knew no difference amongst Men, but those
that merited and had Virtues. Also Telamon contented himself, not only to
signify to him the Joy which he should have, to see him amongst them: but he
reiterated him the offer of his House, which he had already made the preceding
days, and prayed him with new Instances to accept it. No, replied Agamee, at
arrival I descended the day before Yesterday at evening at the House of the
knowing Nephelocrate, who has, as all Greece knows, flourished at the Bar of
Athens in the reputation of a knowing Jurisconsult or Lawyer, and whom the
desire of Rest has allured and enticed amongst you for above two years. I
shall offend him if I shall take any other Lodging than his: I will not be
incomodious to any but him alone. As for tor others, I will endeavor to
contribute to their Divertisements for my part, and I am already sorry to be to
you of no Utilities; in causing Tarsis to see by an example so pressing, that
we know not what we wish when we wish for a Woman, and that which we call an
unfortunate success in Love causes very frequently our sovereign Happiness. In
saying this, he arose from amidst the place where he sat, and the Shepherds
did like to advance on their Way.

During all the Discourse of Agamee, Tarsis was always buried in profound and
idle Fancies, and he had almost understood nothing of that History: But he
awaked at the Close, when he heard himself named by Agamee, and he answered him
thus: Pardon me Agamee, if I tell you that a particular example concludes
nothing in things so general, and if we were to Combat and Contest with
examples on the Subject of my Sorrow, I would make you see Women who lived so
well with their Husbands and Marriages, so suited, matched and garnished in so
perfect a mutual Concord, that you your self would avow to me that Persons that
so live, surpass in Felicity all the rest of the Earth, and that he, who loves
a Mistress, capable of giving him these Contentments, loses all that which
there is of the most rare and the most precious in the World. You say very well
Tarsis, replied the Areopagite, that is all that there is of the most rare. For
I pray you, where are those Mistresses, and who is able to be assured of
finding one? you see enough of fair Women, you even see the most sweet and the
most Complaisant for their Husbands: But the fair are Prattling and Proud
Gossips, a fisking or flipperous Minx, the spiritual, Glorious or Fantastical,
the Sweet, and the Complaisant have other faults and defects, which are not
less, and who make their Virtue to be very dear bought.

Never a Husband renders them any thing to their Liking, the Complaisance they
have for him, and as they are ordinarily fixed to their Carriage, they would
also that a Man had there the same Tie as they. It must be so that he renounce
his Friends, his Acquaintance, and as I may say, even him his own self, to
fasten himself entirely to his Wife and her Conduct; where all their sweet
Pleasures and Complaisance converts its self into Acrimony, Exasperation and
Aggravations, and wilful obstinacy. Now Tarsis I know very well, that they
still seem better to be than they usually are, and I my self thought it the
first, and thought it even so as you have bin able to see with enough of
appearance.

In the interim, I have bin deceived as others have also, and I can say that
very many others are, and shall be as I. I would not therefore go far, replied
Tarsis, to seek you out an example of these happy Marriages whereof I speak. I
would not that of Telamon, whom you see with Philiste: and this Marriage,
Agamee, gives me occasion, and ground to pretend a semblable Happiness; for
Zelie is Sister to Philiste, they are of the same Blood, they have had the very
self same Education, and their inclinations, mode and manner, had a Sympathy
yet more than fraternal.

It is true continued, Ergaste, that I never have had a desire to be married
but when I have seen Telamon and Philiste in their Conduct and menagery of
Matters. This pleasant Sweetness, this respectful Familiarity, and this mutual
Complaisance, which they have one for another, has made me to take them a
hundred times for a Model of two happy Persons and I believe if there be any
felicity in the World, it is in a Marriage such as is theirs.

Ergaste! replied Telamon laughing, you remember your self no more of that
which Agamee has lately told you, that it is not necessary to confide in
appearances. Think you that Philiste and my self go to show our ill Humors
before you? seriously added Celemante, I would believe Telamon and Philiste
happy, if they could be so still in the Marriage State. But I am of Agamee's
side; But yet howsoever, not for the same Reasons as he; for I believe not that
it is so very difficult as he makes it, to find wise Women, and good Marriages:
But that which I uphold, that even the Pleasures and sweetest Delights of the
best Marriages, are pains incompatible and disagreeing with Rest and Pleasure.
I speak not that it must be so, that a Man who will live in this State,
renounceth, as he has said, his Friends, his Liberty and himself, to give
himself up wholly and entirely to a Woman, although these be the ordinary
Reasons; for I very well conceive, that when one loves a Woman very well, one
willingly quits all others for her, by reason that with her, he passes easily
by from all the rest. But that which I believe, is that this self same Love and
this same Amity and Friendship which you call the happiness of Marriages, are
even themselves the greatest Misery of the World. See I pray you two Persons
who mutually love one another, as Telamon and Philiste. One of the two, are
either of them Sick, it must be that both suffer, the one through his Malady
the other of that of his Companion; for love and Amity have that of Evil, that
they make you Sick enough of the Malady or Disease of those whom you love: But
if you are sick your self they never make you whole by their Health, much
worse, both the one and the other, are they in Health? You see them always in
he apprehension that one of both falls again or Relapseth. The one is he more
ruddy than ordinary? The other seems unto him to be Paler, Does he sleep? Or
Yawneth or Gapeth he, at an unseasonable time, or out of time? Behold the
Inquietude that he is in who perceives it, and behold both of them sick of
their folly when they are not of another evil. Tarsis it were better for him to
do as I do: To live of himself alone, not only exempted from Love, but even
exempted from all Friendship; if it be not that simple Friendship, which
ordinarily they call good Will, which must be had for Decency, Comeliness,
Congruity and Correspondency, nay even tor civil Society: I speak by
experience, and as Jupiter and Juno had recourse to Tiresias to know which was
most pleasant to be a Man or a Woman, because he had been both; It must also be
so, that they come to me to know which it is to be best; Amorous, a Friend or
Indifferent; for favors to Ergaste and to one of your Fair Ladies of Athens; I
have been all three one after the other, and am returned from Love and
Friendship.

Agamee, Telamon and Ergaste, could not refrain from Laughing, all the
discourse of Celemante, and Ergaste replied thereunto in these terms; Were it
even so, Celemante, That thou never have had neither Love nor Friendship, but
quite on the contrary, all that thou says there, made us see that thou never
had had, neither the one nor the other; if it were not a false and
counterfeit Friendship. For see thou my Friend? It is of Virtue as it is of
Coin; there is of that which is True, there is of that which is False: Both the
one and the other have a Similitude, but there is much difference within, for
as the true and real Coin is of Gold or of Silver within, and the false, is not
but of Iron or of some other ill mottle or matter; so true Love is no other
than joy and pleasure within, I say within even the very Inquietudes which thou
blamest so much. There where, in that which is false, its no other than pains
and tiresome Lassitudes, Weariness, Tediousness, Vexation, Toil. For a man who
intermedleth, in giving me Lessons upon the subject of Love, replied Celemante,
it seems to me, thou know little what it imports or means; since thou
call Love a Virtue, that which is but only a passion: And that is truly,
that in which thou deceivest thy self, replied Ergaste, for Love which is but a
passion, is that very thing which is false and counterfeit; but know thou my
poor Celemante, that there is another Love that is a Virtue, which is between a
Husband and a Wife, and which also may possibly be between a Lover and his
Mistress, when it is founded upon true merit: Now its even this, which not only
is full of Tranquillity, but which knows how even to change pains and vexatious
troubles into rest.

Without lying or dissembling, I find thee admirable, replied Celemante, to be
willing to speak of the Tranquillity of Love; Thou who art always seen at every
moment to be at discord with thy Mistress, and to whom thou pretendest Love, as
others do to make quarrels; In very deed thy Love and Friendship are therefore
very false and counterfeit, since that be it with Arelise, be it with me, they
have always caused thee so much trouble. I avow it thee, replied Ergaste, but I
have this consolation, that it has not been my fault that they were not true:
for thou know that which Love and Friendship says, it is that there is
correspondency between Hearts.

Now I have not found this correspondence in either of the Persons whom I have
Loved, because I have had an unfaithful Friend and an ungrateful Mistress; And
therefore I have bin able to make neither a true Love, nor yet a true
Friendship. Listen, Ergaste, said Celemante, I say in this it is an ill sign to
thee, that it is thou art he alone, who calls us unfaithful and ungrateful, and
therefore both of us are met and assembled here to call thee thy very names.
Celemante, replied Ergaste, The greatest number are not frequently those who
are the wisest.

In saying this they came to the height of a little Hillock, whence they
perceived Philiste, who returned from another way, in the company of two other
Shepherdesses; from that distance that Tarsis had perceived them, he readily
ran toward them, to ask them if they had not had any news of Zelie, because he
knew that they returned from Callioure, where they were gone to see Melicerte
very early, and where they had dined. Agamee and the three Shepherds followed
Tarsis, and in walking, the Areopagite besought Telamon to tell him who were
those three Shepherdesses.

She whom thou saw on the right hand, ( answered Telamon) who has black
Hair and is Hawk-Nosed, of a very lively Hue and Dye, yet the Air a little
melancholy, is named Telagie, and has bin some years a Widow of my eldest
Brother. When you have had a little taste of her Conversation, you will find
that there are not many more pleasant and desirable, for with her melancholy
Air, you will notwithstanding, find her Wit lively pleasant, on all occasions
that may be offered, and yet at the same time the most solid,

She on the other hand is my Wife; and the third whom you see the greatest and
the most beautiful, and in whom you observe the Port and that Air accompanied
with a Majesty, which might possibly rather become a Princess, than a simple
Shepherdess, is named Aresile, and that is the Sister of Celemante, and the
Mistress of Ergaste, whereof they now spoke. She has Spirit and Wit infinitely
sparkling and glittering and her clear shining Lights are more natural than
acquired: There is not a better, more frank and free, more generous, nor more
pleasant than she amongst persons who are correspondent and who please her. But
it is not, but only among her Friends that she lets her self be seen in her
natural Parts and Accomplishments; for with others she is Cold, Serious,
Insolent or disdainful, and one may almost say excellently Glorious, yet
Contemning and Negligent, incapable to use Civility to Persons whom she esteems
not to be of some Quality, or that they may be so. But she has also the same
incapacity of being Treacherous and Deceitful to any Person of what sort soever
he or she be. She is brisk, lively, quick and testy, and sometimes transported
when she is offended or made angry, and is not always of the same Humor. There
passes her some certain inequalities in her Wits of which she her self will be
the first to make pleasant Jests of, and her enemies would have trouble to find
in her more Faults and Defects, than she makes observable her self to her
Friends. This dejected, amated, mellancholly Air which you see on her
Countenance and which discoulereth even this great Beauty, is not natural to
her; its not caused but by some extraordinary Afflictions, wherewith her Life
has always bin oppressed and overwhelmed.

That which were to be wished, would be, that she might be able to cure her
self of the extraordinary bent she has, at the Defiance and the Jealousy
which her Detects alone cause and make, as well as her greatest Misfortunes:
for she will appear more angry than she is or can be made. It is also true,
that in her Intervals she pays them with Usury, the Pains which they have
caused in her; for give her leave to return she is the first that will ask for
Pardon, and also will do them a thousand kindnesses and friendships; and in
fine, there is not a Person whose Affection has more of reality, tenderness
and jolidity than hers upon all occasions. As for the rest, she even her self
very well knows her own Defects, and therein deceives no Person; for when she
makes Friendship with any one, the first thing she does, it is to inform them
of her Humor, that they may not thereby be surprised. That which astonisheth us
is, how Ergaste who is naturally prompt and ready to be exreamly impatient,
should be able to fasten himself into so great and high a degree of Friendship
with her; and one may say that Love is as well able to unite things
Incompatible and disagreeing together, if ever these two should consort and
agree together. Also as you have seen Celemante and him contest one against
another, although that in the bottom and foundation they were the best Friends
in the World; you shall see Aresile and Ergaste almost always in dispute,
although they love each other infinitely, and it would be needful to have a
Person to do almost nothing else than to put them at one, and to accord and
unite them.

As Telamon finished, they were come near to the Shepherdesses, to whom he
presented Agamee. He here was surprised in observing the admirable Beauty of
this Shepherdess Aresile; for all Greece had not yet shown him any that
equalled her; But he was little less ravished in seeing Philiste, the honesty,
the modesty, and the mavelous pleasant Sweetness which appeared in her as
well as in her Countenance and in all the air of her Person, and he well
observed that she was the Wife of Telamon, and yet that Shepherd had told him
nothing of her Beauty. Although there might be more Beautiful and sairer
Persons than she, it had notwithstanding bin difficult to find any more
acceptable, graceful and exceedingly delectable.

After the first Civilities, Philiste informed them that they had bin unable to
learn any thing of her Sister, although Leucippe and Melicerte had carefully
sent to all Parts, and she told it them with many significations and marks of
an extreme Trouble; in sequel whereof, Telamon having declared the
Shepherdesses the design of their Voyage they willingly engaged themselves to
be of their Party. They continued therefore to walk together toward the Mount
Olimpie. Ergaste and Celemante went before with Aresile; Agamee was near to or
fast by Telamon and Philiste; Tarsis followed in a more leisurely Pace with
Telagie, who attempted to consolate him. If Telamon and Philiste had followed
their Passions, they had not spoken, but only of the loss of Zelie, and of the
Dolor of Tarsis, because they had no other thing in their Minds, and were
extremely afflicted: But as they believed that would have been but an ill
entertainment for Agamee, they did all that might be possible to pass into
other Discourse; Ergaste, Arelise and Celemante very much encouraged them in
that Design. After that Ergaste had spoken a few words to Arelise what he knew
of the merit and of the condition and misfortune of the Athenian, Celemante
immediately began to relate to his Sister the dispute which he had had with
Ergaste, and the reproach, the ingratitude and infidelity wherewith they had
upbraided one another, so that they omitted not to set themselves against
Ergaste. They spoke so loud, that all the others could with facility understand
them, and 'twas pleasant to see the wit and the wantonness with which they
waged War; Ergaste pesisted to accuse Clemante of Infidelity; Clemante
contrarily undertook to make out, that he had yet much more reason wherewith to
convince and vanquish Ergaste; and he here reproaching yet the Ingratitude of
Arelise, she also called him ungrateful her self.

But that pleasure had bin much better for Telamon and Philiste, if they could
then have bin capable to take it, than for Agamee, although that they all three
appeared attentive to the Discourse: But as this last was a Stranger, he knew
not the ground or subject of their Affairs or Intricacies or Intreagues: and
all that he could there apprehend was, that Celemante bandied or disputed
against Love and Amity; that Ergaste spoke both against the one and the other;
and that Arelise forming a third Party, praised Friendship, but that she
declamed against Love. Agamee very much wished to engage them to teach him the
cause of this acceptable Difference: I conceive said he unto them, that its
requisite and necessary that you should have a Judge deputed to set you to
rights, or to reconcile you, and if I were not suspected by any person, I would
thereunto offer my self, provided I were instructed of the Subject of your
contest; Aye Agamee, answered Ergaste, turning himself toward him and
stretching him out his Hand; I accept of you with all my Heart for our Judge;
and I also, added incontinently Celemante: But with a proviso, that you will
judge us to the utmost and extremest rigor, and will not reconcile us; for I
will have no Peace with Ergaste, and I denounce War against him during my Life.
As for me said Aresile, smiling, I would have a little time to think thereon;
for as I apprehend you have bin all three this day together, how know I Agamee,
if it be not here some Party made, or consederated against me? or at least if
they would not have pre engaged you in their Favor? Fair Shepherdess, replied
Agamee, I warrant you, that your Brother and Ergaste are not so well concerted,
nor have so great an Understanding together to be in confederacy against you,
and moreover, Ergaste will tell you that there is nothing capable to blind
those lovely and lively eyes of yours. Not so pleasantly replied Arelise, (
remembering her self of that little that Ergaste had related her of the History
of Agamee:) but I divine that you are not at present in too good an
Intelligence with Love, and that is the reason why I hope that you will be of my
Party and I will also (whatever I have said,) take you for my Judge. They then
were very near the Temple, therefore Telamon interrupted them to tell them that
'twere therefore requisite to refer that famous Judgment till their return, and
that also as 'twas needful that each of them should declare his Reasons and
plead their cause, it were also requisite to prepare themselves therefore.

The End of the First Book of the Second Part.
Tarsis and Zelie. The Second Part. The Second Book.
THE Temple of Jupiter Olimpie, is so named because it is Built at the foot of
Mount Olimpie, there is even a part cut in the Rock, its form and Figure is
round, and little enough, its Vault is not made but out of a piece of the Rock,
which naturally is advanced above it, and is wonderfully wrought; but that
which therein is most rare, is that above that Vault glides a small River which
takes its Spring from the Mountain, and which in its descent, surrounds the
Temple with Water: You would say with a Wall of Crystal which Invironeth it.
There is but a very small space of room, that they have left free for entrance,
and yet there are certain Sluices or Floodgates, by means whereof, when one
pleases, they cover it entirely. The inner part of the Temple is very rich;
there are amongst others, round about a rack of Marble Pillars all white, in
which there are hollow Seats, where are Statues and Images of Porphiry, of
Jasper, and even some of Massy Silver and Gold: Upon the rest of these Pillars
are Engraven the Loves and Revenges of Jupiter, by the most Excellent
Sculptures of Greece.

They see in the middle of the Temple a Blossom of Chrstial, Garnished and
Adorned with Gold of the height of a Buttress; and in the middle of the Circuit
or Girdle of this Blossom, is a small, but admirable Form and Image of Jupiter,
armed with his Thunderbolt, and such as was represented him, when he thundered
the Titans. It is made of a precious Stone, placed in Workmanship, by the hands
of the Renowned and Famous Phidias. At the foot of the Base, whereon this small
Statue is placed, is the sacred Hole where the High Priest draws up the
Prophetic Vapors, which form the Oracles. To excite and encourage them it is
requisite, but to cast into this hole a Bowl of Marble, whereon he Carveth or
Graveth the name of him who consults him, and at the same instant these Vapors
agitated and wrought, form under ground Thunders: And they see themselves to be
exhaled by the same Overture or opening Smokes, which the High Priest receives
in opening his Mouth, and so holding it above. Immediately they see him fall
into a Trance, and in one moment afterward, lifting himself up, his Vizage all
inflamed, his Eyes staring and roving about, his Arms and Legs trembling, and
as if transported with rage and fury, he pronounces the Oracle. He had no
sooner pronounced it, than he fell again, even as if in a Lethargy, out of
which he came not but the succeeding day. The many Labors which he suffered
within these occasions, made him apprehend Danger, and fly away with much care;
and undoubtedly, though it was the Brother of Telamon and Tarsis, he had not
received him with so much Grace and Favor, as when he gave the visit to
Agamee, and to his Troop, if he had not Immediately learnt the reason. But this
was not but at the end, that they entertained him, by reason, that after he had
Pronounced the Oracle, he was not capable of any more Conference, or Parley all
the day afterward, as we have said.

Over against the Gate of the Temple, there is another which enters into the
Mount, that is the same which is the most Surprising: For as they enter into
the Rock, they think to find there a Cave or Den, or hollow place very obscure;
In the mean time, they enter into a Court very large, spacious and lightsome,
which Nature it self has formed in the Mountain, leaving yet an opening more
broad by the height, so that the Light entering there with facility, and
gathering it self, or contracting it self beneath, it makes there also almost
as much Light, as in the midst of the open Fields. It is there where the
Priests Apartments are. Their Chambers are all Arched in the Rock, and they
have this advantage, that there must be no going out from their Apartment, to
have a fair Walk; for this same Court is surrounded with a double row of great
Trees, in the midst whereof glides a small Rivolet, which falls from the
Mountain by degrees, with a kind of muttering and pleasant Murmurings of the
World.

Also, Agamee he was surprised with the Beauties of this place, he was yet far
more satisfied with the acquaintance of the High Priest: It was one of the
Brethren of Telamon, and of Tarsis, who was named Timothy. He was Aged but a
little more than forty years, although there had bin already ten that he was
High Priest; Before him they had not received any so young: But they had past
by the ordinary rules in consideration of his merit.

In short, he was amiable in Countenance, well shaped in Body, and his mind was
enlightened with all the requisite Accomplishments, necessary to his Profession.
He was very Profound in the Sciences of the Gods, and none had ever spoke with
so much Knowledge, Eloquence nor Grace as he had done, when any thing was in
question, as to the instruction of the People.

After he had received the Civilities of Agamee, and that he had rendered those
of his, he made him see all the Rarities of the Place, leaving the Women in the
Temple, because it was not permitted them to pass further, and he accompanied
this Divertisement with many curious observations, which he made him
understand, in relating to the History. He showed him amongst others, that
Famous Ladder of Alexander, which is a stair hewed in the Rock, by which they
ascend even to that Altar, which is at the very top of the Mount Olimpie, so
much elevated above the Clouds, that the Sacrifices which they leave there
every year, conserve themselves there from one year to another.

A little after their arrival, Telamon observing some displeasure, that crossed
and troubled the Complaisance of Timothy, he resented it particularly, and as
he knew the Pains of those wearisome and vexatious Intreagues which he suffered
all and every time that he should necessarily pronounce an Oracle, and the
disagreement that was there: My Brother, said he unto him, is it not the
inquietude and the desire of Tarsis which puts you in Pain? and has it not
already entertained you? Timothy answered him, it had not, and asked him, what
then was his desire. At the pronouncing these words Telamon called Tarsis that
he himself in particular should explicate it to Timothy; and thereupon Tarsis
related him with Tears in his eyes the strange Adventure of Zelie, which
Timothy had not known from any other, by reason of the little Commerce he had
with the World. Now, added he, in regard we can have no better recourse than
unto the Gods in matters and things where the debility and weakness of Men,
cannot contribute any thing; I come, O my Brother! to implore your assistance,
or rather that of Jupiter's, and supplicate some inlightning in my Obscurity or
Blindness, and some certainty and clear Resolution, in some abstruse Doubts
which unto me are more cruel than Death it self. Timothy, answered him, Tarsis
the Gods have in effect always a delight that we have a recourse and make our
Application to them, and that by the succors we have from them, upon our
request we render them the Homage of their Omnipotency, and avouch them our own
Debility and Impotency: but if they find good and approve of our Supplications
unto them, they are not willing that even our Interrogatories unto them, should
be so frequent; that we demand not for any thing miraculous or extraordinary,
nor that by an indiscreet and rashly inconsiderate curiosity, we so lightly and
unsteadily tempt their Ability and Omnipotency.

Do you know, Tarsis, what you demand of Jupiter, when you request from him an
Oracle or divine Sentence? will you expect that they should disorder the
ordinary and regular Course of Nature; that they should unridle and reveal to
poor Mortals, that which by the orders of Destiny should be by them concealed
and unknown; that they should give the Spirit of a God unto a mortal Man, or
that they should suffer him or make him penetrate into what shall succeed or
come to pass, by a peculiar privilege that he Jupiter communicates not always
even to the Gods themselves? It is not but that in very important Extremities,
that he permits to wish for Miracles, and that ought not nor should be, but in
actions of great moment, where he agitateth in the lives of Princes, of the
Subversion of a Kingdom, of the mischiefs, adversities or calamities, or
contrarily the felicity, tranquillity and happiness of a people or
Commonwealth. But what? but it seems your are amorous, and in pain two days,
and in Love with a simple Maiden; think you that the Spirit of Jupiter, must
descend and come down to the Earth, as if he had not affairs more Important?
Certainly if it must be so that he come to make Responses to all peculiar and
particular desires, he must then make account no more to inhabit in the Heavens
above; and descend here yet once again and establish himself on the Earth here
beneath. My dear Brother, replied Tarsis, it is not the pain of Jupiter that
disturbs you. You know too well that his Spirit reigns throughout the Universe
all at once, that he is altogether in Heaven and on the Earth likewise, that he
listens, hearkens, and equally answers the desires of particular Persons, and
that the lives of Kings and potent Princes, are no more considerable with him,
than those of Shepherds, because that although they say he imprints, I know not
what Radiant beam of his Divinity on the Forheads of Sovereigns, they cost him
no more the making than the meanest Men. I have learnt all these things of you
your self Timothy, and so I very well see that it is not by any solid reason,
but simple pretenses you take to refuse me. I know the Subject that you have,
the Agitations, the Toil and Vexatious Pains that you must suffer to conceive
and bring forth, for so I may say, the Oracles: But believe not but that it is
with trouble that I there expose you.

You know how long time is past, that I have bin in Love; how many crosses and
thwartings I have suffered in my love; how many years I have languished between
hope and fear, without having made you the Supplication I have done this day.
It is not but upon very great and urgent Extremity I have done it to you, and
there is no middle between consenting to me or giving me my Death. Timothy was
angry to see the obstinacy of Tarsis; and how in effect, his discourse had but
only a pretense, to refuse him the satisfaction of a curiosity which he deemed
light and trivial, and which he could not but yet impute to the Impatiency of a
Lover, he endeavored to dispense with him after another Method.

My dear Tarsis, replied he, to show you the Scruples that I make my self, to
tempt the Oracles of our great God; there is a Month and more past that I have
had disquietness of Spirit, in the most pressing and Important manner, which
possibly can be conceived, and which merits more than any other, the mediation
of a God to draw me out, thereof, however I have not yet my self presumed to
consult him; it is for that reason Telamon, that there is a month past, that
you have not had news from me, it is for that which I have since that time
fasted and prayed; It is for that I have spent days and whole nights to turn
over and peruse our sacred Books; and in fine, it is for that cause, that you
see me thus Melancholy and out of Frame, whereof you have lately enquired of
me the Cause. As he said this, Agamee and Ergaste, who restrained themselves:
and by some steps from thence reproached themselves: But when they observed
that Timothy spoke in particular with his Brothers, they willingly would have
retired themselves, lest they should interrupt their Discourse.

Timothy who observed them, called them, hoping that their presence would
hinder Tarsis to persist any further in his demand. You may be there Agamee,
said he, we have nothing of Secret to hide, neither from you, nor from Ergaste;
and besides the disgrace whereof I spoke, is become so public, that
necessarily all Grecia must be certified and advertized thereof. Agamee and
Ergaste thereupon demanded of him with much urgency, the Subject of that
disgrace; The day of the bloody Sacrifice draws near, replied Timothy, and we
have no Victime nor Sacrificer; Agamee, who was but a Stranger, understood not,
nor was instructed with this Sacrifice and who apprehended not the reason for
which he called that a disgrace, so great and so public, and demanded some
inlightning: and thereupon the high Priest (as he sought not but matter
wherewith to entertain them and to spend away the day, and take away from
Tarsis the means and subject of returning to the Request that he made him)
conducted them into a great Tent or Tabernacle which was erected in the midst
of the Court, and where there was a Chamber excellently hung with rich
Tapestry, and exquisite Pictures and Memorials registered, which he began to
explicate unto them in this method and manner.

The History of the Bloody Sacrifice.
ALl these Pictures Agamee contain the History of the Bloody Sacrifice, wherein
you desire to be instructed, and they have depainted them, all at length in
this Chamber, to serve as a Meditation to the Sacrificer, who usually came
there every Year, waiting and expecting the day of the Sacrifice.

The first Picture.
See you in the midst of this Picture, this Hunter, who is in pursuit of this
fair Nymph? This is Apollo, who having met her in Hunting, became all at once
passionately in Love, and who ran after her to declare her his Love. Take you
not Cognizance of this God, by his fair bushy Hair? by the Beauty of his
Countenance? by the glittering and sparkling Brightness, which reverberates
from all his person, and which seems to illuminate all the rest of this
Picture? and of his Body which here alone is, that which makes no kind of
Shadow? For although the Painters have usually accustomed themselves to shadow
them as others, when they represent them, under the form and Shape of a humane
Body: howsoever for as much as it appears here in an occasion where it will
have its self beloved and make him self known to this fair One for what he is;
and in that state probably did not forget any thing, which might render him
amiable, the Painter has Judiciously given him all the Brightness and Beauty
which he was capable to receive from his Pencil. The Nymph and he have already
crossed and past over their Course, all over this Plain which you see behind
them; and that is easily judged, by the Arrows and Shafts which are fallen from
the Quiver of the fair Daphne, and the agitation of her Course has dispersed
through all the Quarter where she passed, her Bow and even her Quiver she has
cast off to disincumber her self to be more lighter. In the Interim, if you
take exact notice thereof, some impatient desire will appear the God had to
overtake and reach her, he ran not after her with all his might.

As the places by which they passed are rough and craggy, they believed that he
feared to precipitate the course of the Nymph by that of his own; and that in
slackning his Pace, he would give her time to choose out the fairest way. In
sum, is it not true that the Pace of the Gods, are only but a part of the
extended visible Heaven, that the proportion of its Size permits it to give
them? That his Body instead of bending and inclining a little forward to hasten
the Course, seems to bear his Weight behind, to withold and restrain it? That
he Balances not his Arms on both sides, to give aid and assistance to the
moving of his Body, he holds them extended forward, a little lifted up in the
actings of a Man who is under some Fear? But behold his eyes they tell us
naturally and properly that which he fears! Consider how he has fastened and
fixed them to the Pace of the Nymph, more than properly to his own; and as he
opens the Mouth of a fiery Face and Countenance, but Timorous to advertize
her that she have a care of falling. But let us consider her now this fair
Nymph, That is Daphne, Daughter of the River Penee. She has nor can have more
than lassitude, toyling, and fear. The lassitude or rather violent Agitation of
her course has caused all the parts of her Countenance to blush, which was
naturally fair and white. Fear has caused it to grow Pale, all those that
naturally were of a Vermilion and Ruddy Color. Her Forhead is all covered over
with Sweat; her Hair scattered and dischevelled, her Robe in disorder, her
Mouth painfully breathing. Her Body hardly able to uphold it self, all that it
could do was to stretch forth the Arms toward the River Penee which behold
before her. Her eyes, her Countenance, and all her Actions did naturally and
clearly express, declare and pronounce the succor that she demanded of her
Father! There are nothing but her Legs, which have almost any conformity to the
rest of her Body.

See you that the Color is changed; that this white Skin, fair and delicate,
that the opening of her Robe discovered a little above the Knee, is not
beneath, but a simple Blanching or unrined part of a hoarish Green. The Toes of
her Feet, go to loose themselves in the Earth, in the guise, form and manner of
Roots; and behold already some Laurel leaves upon this new Stock or Stem, which
marks out the Tree, wherein she goes to be changed. Astonish not your self that
Apollo testifies not of seeing any thing of this Miracle; it is hidden to him
as you see, by the Skirt of the robe of Daphne, which is ungrappled and loosned
on her Side in the agitation of her Course.

The second Picture.
Behold Agamee a terrible example of the wrath of the Great. When they cannot
revenge themselves upon their Enemies or that they commit some fault themselves
whereof they repent, it is the People who suffer by their Wrath. In effect,
although Daphne had bin changed into a Tree by her Father himself, he ceased
not to become furious by a loss whereof he had bin in some sort an Accomplice,
and in the boiling of his Wrath he overwhelmed with its Waters, all our Medows
and Fields, and the large and spacious Valley of Tempe was converted into a
great Channel. He drowned the Inhabitants with their Lands, and punished Men
for the Faults and Defects of two of their Gods.

The sole Draft and Picture of this Spectacle imprints even yet some Horror.
For would they say that this Plain of Waters which you see in this second
Picture, had bin the delicious and delicate Valley of Tempe? would you not take
it rather for an outrageous and tempestuous Sea? What heaps of dead Bodies or
dying Men and Animals which are tossed and float Pel mel upon its Billows, with
the wracks of Houses, of Hamlets, and even entire Towns and Cities! It seems
therefore, that this Deluge has not yet had enough to satisfy the great
Vengeance of Penee. For cast your view at length by this Perspective between
these Mountains. Behold that the Tritons and the Nayades, who labor to raise
the bounds of their Streams and to open all the Cataracts and violent Falls,
from the high and steep places of their Fountains! Here others make a Dike or
Damm, for the opening of the Sea, there to impede the running and gliding of
all the Waters through their ordinary Course. Are they not already joined
together, both the Mountains of Olympia and Ossa even? those prodigious Mounts
of Hills, appear they any other thing than a Causey or Bank, at both ends?
There others trill and slip to the floor or foundation of a Vessel or Bark,
where a troop of our miserable Inhabitants thought to save themselves, and
there others endeavored with their three forked Instruments, to overturn the
Workmanship or Roof of a Tower, whereon a good number of People, had betook
themselves as to a place of refuge. Behold these Neryedes who went to pump
Water into the Sea, with their Pitchers to carry it yet into the River; and how
there are none but these little Tritons, who by Complaisance for their Masters,
who could not do worse in the debility and weakness of their Age, enforced
themselves to repel in the Water with their Pitch-Forks or Prongs, a poor Man
who endeavored by swimming to Land on the Mount, whose highest and utmost top
was yet uncovered.

As for Penee he set not his Hand to the Work, that not becoming the Majesty of
that God: But behold him who over-looks these Demy-Gods from the top of
Olympia, who appoints what must necessarily be done, and who animates them by
his Voice and by his presence.

The third Picture.
For the understanding of this, here we must tell you, that those who could
escape from this great Shipwreck, went to consult the Oracle of Delphos; and
had recourse to the God himself, who had cast them into this danger. Apollo
appointed them to build up two Temples, one at the foot of the Mount Olympie,
to Jupiter Olympie his Father, and the other to the memory of Daphne, in the
self same place where she had bin changed; to enact and establish a College of
Priests in the one, and a Company of Maidens in the other, to sacrifice every
year a young Boy to the God Penee and to his Daughter, and after they had
pierced him with a Dart or Arrow, to cast him headlong into the River, to
revenge them from the outrage they had received upon the self same Sex that
had done it unto them.

The choice and care of that Victime was committed to the Priests; the right of
that Sacrifice to the Daphnides, that is to say, to the Maidens consecrated to
Daphne. As soon as a young Boy of the Country offered himself to the
Sacrifice, he was Sacrificed and offered up; after all that was done, all the
Waters were retired, and because this young Lad called himself Hercules, its
for that they read in the greek Fables, that this was Hercules who separated
both the Mounts Ossa and Olympia in two, to drain the Marshes which did occupy
all the Valley of Tempe. That is therefore the cause why you see again in this
Picture, the Woods, the Hills and the Plains exposed to the view of the World.
The Waters of the River are re entered within its Bed, and the World seems to
be renewed again in this delectable and pleasant Valley. Every one there
cultivates the Fields, replant there the Vineyards and there rebuild Houses:
but the two Structures which appear above all the others are our Temple, which
you will easily know by its Form and Situation; and that of Daphnides which
behold is in the Isle at the mouth of the River Penee.

You will possibly ask me why it is in an Island, having seen the Nymph
metamorphosed upon the Bank of the River, and on firm Land? But it is that
Penee retains the same place she embraces with her Waves in returning, and
reserves unto her self that space and distance to consecrate it to her
Daughters. Now I pray you let us examine here, the admirable Architecture of
these stately Structures, and how the three orders are there found artificially
intermixed; admire the just and even Degradations of the Plain, in a word, how
all the regular Rules of the Optic Vision are here marvellously exercised and
contrived.

Agamee seeing the high Priest in his Train and Retinue to be long, and
observing the impatience of Tarsis, whereof he knew the design, was not willing
that his peculiar and particular satisfaction should prejudice the Consolation
and Content that the Shepherd expected. Which is the reason why he took
occasion here to interrupt Timothy, and to say unto him, Wise Timothy its to
abuse your Patience to give you the trouble to show me in Picture, the things
that I can see and whereof I have already seen a part originally; and as for
that which is of the overplus, which relates to the Sacrifice, I hope soon to
instruct my self in assisting there, since the day as you say is near
approaching. Alas! replied the high Priest, it is that which I have already
said unto you, which makes me despair, the day is certainly approaching: But we
have not yet a Sacrifice; as it ought to be voluntary, it has bin formerly to
him who first offered himself. The place was no sooner empty and void, but it
was also filled; and I have read this day in our sacred Annals, that since the
Foundation of this Temple, the Chamber where we are, did never want to be
occupied by a new Victime the self same day that it began to be empty. In the
interim, there is near a year past, that we have not wherewithal to Sacrifice;
and if Jupiter has not pity upon me, I am in danger to see arrive, in the
time of my Priesthood, a disgrace that so many ages, have avoided, and the
thought thereof alone is capable to make me yield up the Ghost: But would to
the Gods that there might only my Life expire, and that it might be permitted
the Priests of Jupiter to dissolve and unloose themselves even as well as
others. I should not be in pain for a Sacrifice, and would esteem my self happy
and blessed, to dye for all our people. But Agamee, we cannot dispose of our
selves, since we belong to Jupiter, and this jealous God permits us not to
offer to the Daughter or Maiden of the River, that that appertains to the
Monarch of all the Gods. Agamee and Ergaste, in the Spirit of whom these kind
of honors and worships passed for cruel Superstitions, would have willingly
made him something by way of Replication; But the respect they had for his
Character impeded them. Agamee contented himself only to speak in the ear of
Ergaste, that Jupiter would undoubtedly put the high Priest more yet in trouble
than he was, if he took him at his Word. As for me, added Ergaste, I would as
willingly have the River give it self the trouble to come to drown me in my
Bed, as to give my self that of precipitating my self therein. Tarsis and
Telamon, had listened with more Devotion; also they testified their
participating of his Inquietude. My Brother, said Tarsis, if the God will have
Sacrifices, assure your self that he will have a care to provide himself
wherewith; since he will have none but voluntary ones, and it belongs only to
the Gods to give the will. It suffices that you neglect not to receive them
when they present themselves, and in all cases, if you had occasion to consult
an Oracle in your doubts, it should not be that of Jupiter, but of Delphos,
because it is he who has taken already the care. But as for me, who should I
address my self unto but Jupiter, in the particular Protection of whom we are?
should I go to the strange Gods, as if ours were not good, not sufficient, and
Omnipotent enough? And moreover, added Ergaste smiling, what God could better
counsel us, in the matter of ravishing of Maidens, than he who has ravished so
many? very well Ergaste, said Timothy unto him, let us not turn into jeasting
these sacred things; Remember you, that Jupiter yet less suffers the
Sacriledges than his Son, and can as well crush you to pieces under the Mount
Olympia, as Apollo oppressed not long since the Gauls under the Mount
Pernassus. In fine, Timothy, replied Tarsis, you believe not therefore that my
Life is worth the consulting of Jupiter, and you refuse to a Brother, that
which you consent every day to Strangers? Well then I will die then, since you
will have it, and assure your self that this is the last time that you shall
see me living. At these words he would have retired with all the marks of a
violent Despite and of great Grief. Timothy could not contain for or against
the Compassion which he had, and appointed them all to betake themselves to
Prayers in the Temple. He returned there again himself a little afterward with
all his Priests invested with his Ornaments, and a little Bowl in his Hand
whereon he Engraved the name of Tarsis. He entered into the Ballisters of
Crystal, placed himself on his Knees before the Statue, and cast the Bowl into
the sacred Hole.

In the interim, Tarsis uttered forth this Prayer with a loud Voice. Thou
Sovereign Arbitrator of the Destiny of Men, who in one twinkling of an eye
beholdest all the earth, and who equally know the time past, present and to
come; O Jupiter! if thou yet make some account of the State of a Lover, or of
his name, that thou have not formerly disdained to bear thy self, if thou
remembrest thy self, of the Inquietudes of Love, where thou were when the fair
Io was born away from thee by the artifices of Juno; and if thou can in fine,
take some pity of the Pains that thou thy self have proved; by thy gracious
Favor, tell me what is become of the fair Zelie, in what places I may be able
to meet her, and if after so many years languishing and pining away by
suffering, I may in conclusion find the end of my troubles.

He had not uttered the half of these words, but one might have understood the
confusion of a Voice, an howling, and even as frightful Thunders which coming
out of the Earth made an Echo, and resounded all over the Vault, and filled
the Spirits of all who assisted with a sacred Horror; They prostrated
themselves with their Faces to the Earth, and after some time they heard the
high Priest, who with a Voice so changed, that it appeared not his, pronounced
distinctly these words;

Seek Death and thou shall find it, This Oracle strangly surprised all the
Assistants and they remained all as inhibited or interdicted. The first who
rose up were the Priests, who went to take the high Priest to carry him on his
Bed; Telamon, Agamee and Ergaste rose up afterward, and with them the
Shepherdesses. They knew not how to approach to poor Tarsis, who seemed to
become one of the Statues of the Temple, so unmovable was he. It was not that
he was astonished with the Death to which the Oracle seemed to resolve him: but
he thought that since that Jupiter despaired of finding Zelie, for him
otherwise than by Death, there was no doubt to be made, but that she was dead.
For, said he within himself, it is not within the Arms of the dead, that one
can meet with living Persons; and since I am out of hope of finding Zelie in
this World, it must necessarily be, that she be there no more; Ah! if she be
not there any more, O Jupiter! cried he in his Transport, which caused him this
Thought: If she be there no more, I have no more need of thy Counsels to
resolve me to dye, it would rather necessarily import thee to employ thine
Omnipotency to hinder me. He arose afterward, having yet given some time to the
like reflections; after he had returned to himself, he came also again to join
the Troop, with a more resolute Countenance than ordinary, and even mixed with
Joy, so that they were all astonished. I demand your pardon, said he unto them,
with a Countenance cheerful enough, if I have so many times made you wait; but
I must render thanks to Jupiter for his good Counsel.

Telamon and the others had well had the same thoughts as Tarsis, upon the
interpretation of the Oracle: but not a person would signify it to him. But on
the contrary, Telamon dissembling it; I avow unto you, said he unto him, that I
find so much obscurity in this answer, that I know less of our doubt, than I
knew before. Sometimes, added Agamee, we have seen the hopeless to find their
Salvation in the same occasions where they seek for death.

Telamon feared, lest these Words should push forward the Spirit of Tarsis, to
some tragical Reoslution, which is the cause, why he replied thereunto; There
is little appearance Agamee, that the Gods should Counsel Men to be desperate,
those who would that we should hope in them; and undoubtedly it must
necessarily be, that there is in these Words some other sense than we yet do
comprehend, but will be made more clear in the Sequel. Think you that the Gods
will so soon discover us their Secrets, and that they content themselves that
it costs us the Pains of asking them? No not so, they sometimes take Pleasure
to punish our curiosity, in casting us into new Troubles. They discover us the
Truth, but under Enigmatical Riddles or Mysteries, which we are unable to
unfold, unless it be with much trouble and length of Time; they would even be
angry, that we should believe we could understand them, the first time, as if
it were easy for Men to penetrate into the Secrets of the Gods; and they
divert themselves in observing, that after we have unprofitably labored hard,
a little successful event disintangles and unpesters all, and renders us
astonished and confused with our own Ignorance. While they thus discoursed they
went out of the Temple, and immediately after they had made, to one of the
Priests, their Complements for Timothy, they reassumed their Way to return to
Cenome. The Shepherdesses did also as much as in them was possible, to turn the
Sense of the Oracle, to the Advantage and Consolation of Tarsis; There was none
but Philiste who could say nothing, so much was she afflicted her self, with
the loss of her Sister, and of the little hopes that the Gods seemed to give
her of resinding her. Ergaste also would not say any thing of his thoughts, by
reason of the Priests: But when they had quitted them, Will you, said he, that
I speak freely unto you? behold an Oracle which is as all others, that is to
say, a free gibberish, Fustian Language, or Pedlars French. Ah! let us speak of
sacred things with respect, replied Telagie: but let us speak also without
Prevention, replied Ergaste, if you will, that we hold our Peace, in convenient
time and season: But if you will intermedle with reasoning thereunto, they must
be examined with Reason. Now is there reason to believe, that the Gods so
obscurely give Counsels to Men? Who ever speaks does it to be understood, and
in this case it is Ignorance in him, not to be able to make himself understood:
either he speaks not to be understood; and in that case, it is either Malice or
Folly. Now, Ignorance nor yet Malice nor Folly can be presumed in the Gods.
This which possibly can be, it is two things, the one either that the Priests
abuse us or that the Gods do mock us. Also of all these Oracles, is there not
one alone which cannot square and suit with all sorts of Events? I can tell you
a thousand strange examples, but there needs nothing than this here;

Seek Death and thou shall find it. Behold truly, a very wonderful Prophecy! is
it Death or is it Zelie that one shall find? if it be Death that great Miracle,
that one finds in seeking it? if it is Zelie, it must also necessarily be, that
one must meet her in seeking for Death, because she sooner or later must dye,
and be found in the common Rendevouz of all Men. Ergaste having thus spoken.
Telamon replied him, I avow Ergaste, possibly there may have bin abuse in the
Oracles, but you cannot believe it of all. It is easy for the Priests to
counterfeit themselves Prophets, so that there is but to pummel the eyes into
the Head, to open the mouth more than ordinary, to counterfeit the furious and
mad Man, and to pronounce equivocable false and double Words. But what will you
say of that dreadful, hideous, and terrible Voice, of those underground
Thunders, and even sometimes those Earthquakes which excite a little Stone, a
word, a little Air agitated? assuredly these things pass humane Invention. But
you have very well said, that the Gods can render themselves dark and obscure
to sport themselves with our curiosity; and it is by that Reason, that we must
never be hopeless on the answer of their Oracles, how disadvantageous soever
they appear unto us, because that which appears to us at first sight to be
moreirksome, is oftentimes by the success found to be that which we can desire
to be most favorable. See you Telamon, said Ergaste, if it be not needful to
explicate you subterraneous Thunders, your Flames, and Earthquakes to destroy
your Oracles, they would not be yet so well established, for in how many places
do these very same things arrive naturally? witness one simple hole in Sicilia,
where all that happens by the smallest thing, that at the very first coming is
cast there, without any pretense that the Gods take upon them the trouble of
intermedling themselves. And if you will that I give you the reason, I will
tell you, that the Air agitated by the Motion of the Stone cast in, enters and
issues out by the concavities of diverse Figures, and which forms the different
Sounds and Noises that we hear, as that Air in those places there, is already
disposed to take Fire, it is lighted by the smallest movement, and is that which
causes those Flames and Smoaks, and that being already too close shut up in
these low and profound places, this same agitation rarifies it and extends it
so, that it cannot be more contained in its Prison, this is that which causes
the Earthquakes.

But added Telagie, What will you say of the Oracles of Dodone, where the
Pigeons and Trees speak as Men? what will you say of that of Ephesus, where a
Statue of marble speaks as a Person animated? I will tell you, replied Ergaste,
that Men can hide and conceal them within the Bodies of Trees, and make them
appear animated with their Word. I will say that by the same Artifice they can
make poor prevented Spirits believe that their Voice is that of Pigeons, that
there do nest (if you will not better believe Hetorodoto, who says, that these
Pigeons were no other than Women, which boar the name and which meddled with
Prophecies) I will say that of some subterranean Places, they can by the means
of some Pipe, Quill or Reed, make their words pass by the Mouth of a Statue,
and I will say, in a word, a thousand things more apparent, than to believe
that a Marble, that a Pidgeon, or that a Tree has spoken.

What Ergaste, said Pelagie, you would destroy all the Omnipotency of the Gods?
of the Gods, not so! replied Ergaste, since they have created Man, and by an
alone Breathing, they have animated a little Clay, they can make the same thing
of a Marble. But I set a very great difference between that which the Gods do,
and that which the Gods can. The Gods, Telagie, can do all manner of Miracles:
But they do it not for that, by reason they judge it not to purpose. And in
fine, to tell you my thoughts, I esteem that as it would be to do wrong to a
Prince and accuse him of imprudence, to believe that he were at all times
obliged to change his Laws at the Supplication of the meanest of his Subjects,
and to transgress himself the Laws and Statutes, which he has enacted and
established in his own Kingdom; so it is to do wrong to the Gods, who have
established and appointed a fixed, dormant, unrepealable certain Law in the
World; and to think that they are at all Moments obliged to change it in doiog
Miracles, according to the capriciousness of Men who demand it. For to do a
Miracle, is no other than to stray, and swarve, and wander out of the way, (if
it be permitted so to speak) of the course of the Water.

In truth Ergaste, replied Agamee, it is not necessary to listen to you too
long time, to discredit our Oracles. But I would willingly also that Celemante
would tell us his Sentiment. In saying this, Agamee turned his eyes about to
seek him out, and not observing him; truly continued he, smiling, I am afraid
that Celemante has suffered himself to be drawn by Timothy, and that he be
gone to render himself the Victime or Sacrifice.

Thereupon Ergaste and Arelise began also to perceive, that he was not with
them, and even to remember themselves that they had not seen him since he
entered into the Temple; for until then they had bin so occupied by means of all
that they had seen, that they had made no reflection upon his absence, so that
they were troubled for him, without considering the humor of which they knew
him; they judged well that if he had quitted them, it would have bin but better
to spend his time elsewhere. In effect, behold that which was become of him.
From the moment that Celemante had seen the Shepherds enter into the Temple, he
stole himself from them, without saying a word, to go and see a Shepherdess
whom he loved, although he would not avouch it. It is true, that he quitted
them not but with an intention to return before they went forth of the Temple,
and that he had no design to miss to act his part, as he had done, to evacuate
and determine before Agamee, the contest that he and his Sister had had against
Ergaste, and which he had taken the Areopagite to be Judge of But in that
hepromised himself a thing whereof one may say, that his Humor left him not to
be Master of.

The Shepherdess whom he went to see, was named Corys, and she was a very fair
Person, that is, not that the Lineaments and Features of her Countenance were
the most regular: But she was wonderfully fair, and white, and clear, animated
with the most amiable Carnation of the World, her eyes quick, lively and
sparkling, of little Stature, but very upright, a mavelous complaisance,
cheerful Spirit, full of Alacrity, of a certain kind and manner of living, free
and disingaged from many Scruples, ordinary with Women and Maidens; wherein
howsoever she lived with much Prudence, Wisdom, Retention, and very staid. Her
Humor above all, returned upon Celemante, and also that of hers, pleased
Celemante exceedingly. And therefore if he saw her more frequently than any
other, she would also more willingly permit him than others. Moreover, there
was great Pleasure to see them together, for both the one and the other, had
publicly declared against Marriage and Love; and however, there were certain
times and seasons, that Celemante would very willingly had his liberty for
Corys, and where Corys had quitted all things for Celemante; but neither the
one, nor the other durst declare themselves, by reason that Corys had often
said before Celemante, that she loved her Liberty even to hate the best of her
Friends, if he only had but had the thoughts of espousing her: as Celemante had
also frequently said in her Presence, that to make him hate the most amiable
and fairest Person in the World, it was needful to do no more than to look upon
her as his Wife. And in effect, it was the very thought both of the one and the
other, then when they so said: But Love against which they were so strongly
bent, and had both an Aversion unto, made them very soon repent; for in the
sentiments, wherein they were engaged, they durst not make themselves further
known, those which they had commenced to have as well for the shame, that they
had to retract themselves, as for that there was not either of both, who
believed not but that it had bin to be hated by his or her Companion, than to
testify that he had a love for her: so that in this extremity, and exigency,
where they were reciprocally reduced, neither the one nor the other, daring to
declare their Passion, they made out their love by a Stratagem extraordinary
enough, in pretending and seeming to have none at all, and affecting to speak
against those that had it.

This Shepherdess dwelt not in the Hamlet of Telamon: But at another which was
between that and the Temple. Celemante went this way with much diligence, and
yet notwithstanding, found it too long: so much he began involuntarily to be
disquieted by the motions of an amorous Passion. This Molestation was not
therefore in him, but a certain tickling and flattering, delectable Motion of
heart, which re-animated and revived his Joy, without ever giving him the least
Sadness, and when he entertained himself alone, it was not to afflict himself,
as do the major Part of other Lovers, by the consideration of all that which
may be vexatious in their Fortune: he dreamed but of that which might be
delightful in that of his. Also they never did see alone but that he sang, if
it was not but that he had some pleasant Thought, the entertainment whereof
diverted him; and as (if they take not good heed thereto) the desires which are
not satisfied, have always some thing which stings them, he never dreamed of
those which gave his Love Birth and beginning, who in composing some Verses or
some Songs on this Subject, to make a diversion of the same thing whereof
others create themselves a pain and trouble.

In going therefore to the dwelling of Chorys, he entertained himself no
otherwise, but with the Pleasure which he should have by being with this fair
Shepherdess, instead of bemoaning himself, as others possibly had done, of the
Misfortune he had to Love a Maiden, who would not suffer Love, and in which, he
could not hope to have correspondency, and the way though short beginning to
annoy and trouble him, he began to compose and utter forth these lines.

Stances.
Take thou good heed my Heart, to tell me that I love without hoping to arrive
to the point. Or level my Love extreme, I shall become Sad, and Wan, it may be
I should even dye, and that is that which I will not do. It were better to
think that my Chorys is fair, that I have a hundred Pleasures to see her, that
I am very well received of her, that she is not cruel to me, if always she
will be such, Time will demonstrate it to me, let us rejoice in the mean time,
for present without the fear of any thing that an Evil comes not to pass, that
a sottish Fear goes to fain to us, comes not here to compel us, it will be too
much time to bewail our selves, when this ill shall come to pass: Let Us
remember our selves, in fine, that a Man who knows to live, takes always time
as it comes; of the present Pleasure he inebriates himself, if Evil comes to
pursue him, when he can, he delivers himself, and if he cannot, he sustains and
bears up, under it.


He sang yet when he came into a Field near enough, to the Hamlet of Chorys,
and when he saw this Shepherdess sitting under the Shadow of an Hedge, and
singing near to one of her Companions, who also was sat, whilst their Flocks
fed upon the Grass round about.

From the time that Choris saw Celemante, and that he was near enough to hear
her; she said unto him, you are very welcome, Celemante, but it is upon
Condition that you will draw us from pain, and that you teach us the names of
these two Shepherds. In saying this, she showed him with her Crook, two
Shepherds, who passed by fifty Paces from them, and whose Air as well as
Discourse, appeared very Melancholy. It was not that she heard them, but she
might easily judge it by their slow Pace, their mournful Countenance, by their
Arms the one lifted up to the Heavens, and the other held cross ways before
him, in a word, by all their port and demeanor. Celemante knew them not: but
at the same time they all discerned a third who drove toward them a Flock, and
whom they knew for Philemon, I say, Philemon. Philemon was a Shepherd, aged
about thirty years; his Stature was indifferent, his Visage shaped like an Egg,
Oval, his Hue more white than ordinary amongst Men, his Hair of a clear Chestnut
color, and his eyes inclining to Black, but full of great Vivacity. His
temperature appeared a little Melancholy, his Humor Cold, his Feature and
Physiognomy subtle and Politic, spoke little, but always to purpose, with
much reservation, without Heat, without Obstinacy, never assuring himself any
thing, still listening to the sentiments of others before he would give his own
Advice, and never proposing his own without doubt, by reason he believed there
was nothing assured in this World, and that all our knowledge, was nothing but
uncertainty and error. Also he had trouble to suffer those People who never
doubt of any thing, and who make of all their Opinions so many Maxims. When he
contradicted them therefore, it was without fixing himself to the contrary
Party, it was not but to attempt to loosen and disintangle them from their own,
that he might replace them in that doubt which he held for the first Principle
of Wisdom and Prudence; and that made it to pass for dissimulation amongst
those who knew him not well; for as much as seeing him so retentive in his
Sentiments, or rather so indifferent to all Opinions, they thought that he
would never discover his own.

Although that his Temperature appeared not susceptible, nor capable of great
Passions; and that doubt whereof he made profession, was a great Disposition to
an indifferency: he was very strongly Amorous of Celiane, that is the name of
the Shepherdess who was with Coris. Also that Maiden was also her self
infinitely fair and amiable, not only for her Beauty, but for her sweet Temper
and Discretion. She had even some Conformity with Philemon, in that her Humor
appeared a little Cold, and spoke little as he did.

Celemante doubted not but that Philemon knew these two melancholy Ones,
because he saw him stop some Moments to speak with them: But Philemon soon left
them when he saw Celiane. He came immediately toward her, and that was Celiane
her self which demanded of him the name of these two unknown. Fair Shepherdess,
answered Philemon, I will not only tell you their Names, but if you please,
even their Adventures and Occurrences, and if I make you not a very long
discourse of that, for you will I believe know all that there is considerable,
when I shall have first told you that the first is called Delias, and the
second Pleon, and that they are both of them of Delphos, and that both one and
the other, are both vexed and molested, and excessively afflicted, for two
Reasons very opposite. For Delias married a Woman whom he loved, yea, and loved
Passionately, and found that she loved him not; and Pleon contrarily espoused
another whom he loved not, and who by a Destiny loved him a thousand times more
then he would she should. So Delias is come here, and has led his Wife there,
believing that when she shall be far from Delphos and from her acquaintances,
possibly she will better affect and fix her self to her Husband: and the other
has followed his Friend to deliver himself from the Importunities of her own.

But the one and the other have bin very much deceived in their hopes, for the
first has here made new Friendship, and the second has followed her Husband
here in despite of his Will. They put themselves all a laughing, for the
fantastical and odd Disposition of these four Persons; and particularly Coris
and Celemante, who for to make their Course, failed not both to take this
occasion to speak yet against Love and Marriage. I think, said Celemante
laughing, that this day here is fatal to make me see ill conduct. And when is
that one can see good? added Coris. Thereupon Celemante counted them in three
words, that disgrace of Agamee. I believe not, said Coris, that there is any
more deplorable than these two here, whereof Philemon speaks unto us. For yet
there is some Consolation when the Husband and the Wife love not one another,
because they can abandon one another, and they may be at least at rest when
they mutually see not one another: But when there is always one which loves
and the other which hates, it is never to have Patience, and to be eternally
miserable. But after your advice, Celemante, added she, which of the two, think
you to be most miserable, Delias or Pleon? behold a rare Comparison, said
Celemante; is there any thing here equal to the mischief of this poor Delias,
who so well loves his Wife, and who knows not how to make himself beloved.

Celiane, seeing that Philemon replied nothing thereupon, said unto him
laughing, Hah! would you suffer that Philemon? and that Celemante should have
the boldness to assure a thing so affirmatively before you? Fair Shepherdess,
replied Philemon, you have forced me a long time since to rank my self to that
Party that Celemante has taken; For although there is that whereof I
complained to you, those that love and yet not beloved, be the most miserable
People in the World? Oh how am I pleased! cried Coris, to have seen Philemon
once in his Life consent to a Truth. At least he will avow us for time to come,
that he has no reason to uphold that there is nothing of certainty in the
World. Philemon replied to her; Dear Choris, say not so that there is nothing
of that of certainty; for I know not if in that which I say, I deceive not my
self; for as I have never proved by Celiane, that the mischief of loving
without being loved, I speak not but of that until it pleases Love or my
Shepherdess to make me prove the other* Ah! Truly Philemon, said Celemante unto
him, (who was well pleased to give the Shepherdesses, the diversion of a
Dispute, for he well observed that they wished it) must it not be so, that we
shamefully fall into the same advice, and if you will take mine I will quit it.
And what or whose part will you then take? Philemon asked him. That which you
would not answered the chuffy Celemante. I had said that Delias was more
unfortunate than Pleon: But if you accord thereto, I will uphold that Pleon is
more unfortunate than Delias. Philemon replied nothing to Celemante, but
turning himself toward Coris and Celiane: Well said, fair Shepherdesses, said
he unto them; See you not how there is nothing certain in the World, since,
that in the first party, where I have believed a little of Certitude, I see my
self contradicted by him himself which upheld it before me.

The Shepherdesses betook themselves to laugh at his answer, and Celiane said
unto him: You well see Philemon, that there is none but Celemante changes
party; and that which he does is but to divert himself. Nor Celiane, replied
Celemante smiling, I say over again I begin to find Pleon a thousand times more
unfortunate than Delias, and if I were married, I would incomparably, rather
have a Woman that I did strong affect and from whom I could have no Love nor
was beloved, than to have one who loved me too much, and who I loved not. Thy
reason? Philemon asked him? I have so many that I will over-whelm thee,
answered Celemante; for behold at least thirty which comes to me all at once.
First is, that Love is always of it self a Passion, much more desirable than
hatred, for Love is a desire which has not in it any thing but that which is
fair and pleasant for an Object; whereas that of hatred, is still something of
displeasure and sadness: if then Love is more desirable than Hatred, without
doubt it is still much better to Love than to hate; for it is more amiable to
have a pleasant Passion, than to have a vexatious One.

I arrest thee with thy first Reason, interrupted Philemon; for we doubt not,
but that it is much better to love than hate: But the mischief of Delias is not
to love, it is to be hated of her whom he loved. Now seems it unto you that
there is something or any thing in the World so vexatious and irksome as to be
hated by one whom he has so well loved; Well said, I yield you that there
replied Celemante: But what will you answer to this here? The ill of a Husband
who loves without being loved, passes from himself; for in fine, there is no
Love so strong that disdain and time cannot cure: There where the Aversion
which a Man has from his Wife, makes increase but for a time, and by the
Importunities which she makes him. And as for me, I arrest you at your second
Reason, interrupted Corys, for I have heard say, that there is no Countenance
so deformed and loathsome nor person so imperfect, whom one accustometh not with
time, but one can never accustom himself not to be loved! Celemante yet seeing
himself interrupted there, turned himself toward her and Philemon, and taking
a Countenance more searious; Hah! when think you then that I have finished my
thirty Reasons, asked he them, if you so interrupt me at every one? My poor
Celemante, said she unto him, I counsel you to respit the Remainders for
another time; also Celiane and my self are both of us weary already; and
moreover as we will not be married, neither you nor I, we have no interest in
this Contestation. You have reason fair Coris, replied Celemante: But howsoever
what know we to what Fortune will reserve us, and what if we should become
Fools as others? What should I have of Pleasure said Celiane, if I should ever
see Celemante or Coris, amorous; or rather if I should be able to see them both
such at a time. I answer for Celemante, that shall never be nimbly, repyed
Coris, to see that which he would say. You engage your self to be so when he
becomes so, said Celemante to her, stretching forth his hand to her, yea with
all my Heart replied Coris, setting hers into Celemantes; for I am assured that
will never be. At least fair Coris, answered he, I ought to use my utmost
Ability, that it be not with you: for I know too well, that that would make me
be but hated, and to become one of the most unfortunate Ones, of whom we at
present deplore and bemoan. A little blush sprung up into the Face of Coris at
these words; and Celemante who was persuaded that she would not that one should
love her, imputing it to a Cause altogether contrary to that which produced
this effect; added, believing he should do her a Pleasure: Aye I warrant you it
amiable, Coris, I will do my utmost to impede my loving of you; and if I love
you against my Will, which shall never be if I can, but in a sort not to become
a Fool as I see poor Tarsis of the fair Zelie. Thereupon they began to speak,
of the Love of that Shepherd and bewailed all his Disgrace, in such a manner
which made clearly appear the Friendship and Esteem they had for him.

Now in the Delight that Celemante took in Coris, he forgot the Shepherds that
he had left at the entrance into the Temple, and the Party that he had made,
for their Return and the day passed insensibly away without his regard or heed.
He remembered not himself of that which he had promised, but when he was not
occupied in his Diversion. Then his Memory being refreshed and returned unto
him in the close, he foresaw, that Ergaste would not pardon him and that the
others waged War against him; which is the reason he refused to sup with Coris
and Celiane, and going away, he betook himself to dream of some Evasion or
Shift. As he had his Wit nimble, lively, pleasant and facile, he employed
himself after his return, to write some Conceptions which came into his mind on
that Subject, and there he passed all that Evening.

In the interim, Telam^n and his Company being returned to Cenome and that very
early before the day was spent; Tarsis unto whom the Oracle of Jupiter seemed
to be clear enough on the Counsel which he had to take, sought nothing more
than an occasion of putting it in Execution, and this Shepherd resolved to dye,
and that the Gods had taught him to be the sole means to rejoyn Zelie; he had
no other thoughts in his Heart nor yet any more hopes. It is true, that this
had given him more Consolation than any other; for all other designs do still
hold us in suspense, in inquietude of Soul, by the uncertainty of their
success; but death leaves us nothing more to fear, nor yet to those who are
determined and thereunto resolved. He wished for nothing more than to see
himself alone, to be entirely at Liberty to give satisfaction wholly to the
Command of the Oracle, and to his Dolor, and in the Conceptions he had, that
Zelie was dead, he reproached himself every moment that he survived that
Shepherdess. And for as much as he know with how much exactness his Brother had
not omitted nor failed to observe him, for the little that he defied of his
Intentions, he put all his Cares to deceive him at first, and to persuade him
by a thousand Reasons, that he began himself to conceive some hopes of the
answer of Jupiter. My Brother, said he to him, I call to mind to have seen
enough and frequently compare the Sepulchers in the Deserts, and name Death a
long night. The Gods would they not have me therefore understand, that I shall
refind Zelie, during the Night and in Solitude, as it was in Solitude and in
the Night that I lost her? He counterfeited also a Vision more pleasant than he
had done of a long time, and passed even to make some Jest with Philiste, upon
the perplexity wherein he saw she was disquieted in Mind, by reason of that
Oracle. In fine, he dissembled so well, that he found means by little and
little, to steal himself from the Company that they might not follow him, and
going forth of the Hamblet of the side of Olimpia, he went to pass into that
Wood which reaches the length of the Mountain from Gonnes to the Sea.

It was there that not being more seen by any Person, by whom he might
apprehend himself to be witheld, and feeling himself free, he prepared to
execute upon himself, that tragical Resolution which should put an end to all
his trouble and pains. For that effect after some Reflections which he yet made
to confirm himself in his Design; he looked to see if the point of his Dart or
Javeling was whetted and sharpened, and finding it as he would have it, he there
put the point of it toward his Heart, and lifting up his Arms: O Zelie! cried
he, Divine Zelie! receive the sacrifice that I go to make thee with my Blood,
and know that as I lived but for thee, since I could not live a moment after
the hopes of my being with thee has bin taken away.

He pronounced yet these words when two Women all affrighted passed, running
before his eyes; and that which strangely astonished him, was that the first
appeared to him to be Zelie by her Stature, and more by her Habit, which he
believed to have oftentimes seen. He could not consider the Visage, by reason
that they passed before that he had had leisure. His Surprise was such that he
remained as immovable in the Action wherein he was before. But he soon
retired, by the sight of a Wolf that he perceived: holding between his Teeth a
Sheep which he had carried into the Wood or Forest, and went upon the Track of
the two Women. He well judged that it was undoubtedly that which made them
afraid, and for as much as the Thought he had that one of them was Zelie, he
had in a Moment changed all Resolutions into that of following her; and to
inlighten and satisfy himself in so important a Doubt, he dreamed only of
taking away the cause of their Fear, that he might afterward have more Liberty
and Opportunity to rejoyn them. He advanced therefore toward that furious and
ravenous Beast, who in seeing him, let fall his Prey and grinding his Teeth,
menaced himself. But the Shepherd without fear or astonishment, turning against
him the Weapons that he had formerly designed for himself, so directly pierced
his Javeling or Dart through the Flanks and overthrew him, that he fell down
dead. In the same Instant he ran toward that side where he saw the Women go;
and in following them, he discerned a Vail or Scarf, which hung upon a Bush
that a Thorn had hooked and stayed in passing, and torn away from the Head of
one of those unknown. He diligently took it up, and considering it with
Inquietude of all Hands, he knew and remembered it to be the very same of
Zelie's.

That was not difficult, because it was he himself had bought it by appointment
of Melicerte, and it was all wrought with Figures of Gold, whereof he had
caused it to be enriched, and where the Letters of his name were intermixed
with those of his Shepherdess. Who could delineate the diverse Motions
wherewith his Heart was at that Instant agitated? The Joy, the Impatience, and
the Fear all these Passions seized his Soul all at once: but that of Joy, ruled
and reigned there above all the rest. For in fine, he made no more Doubt but
that one of them was Zelie; and his hope confirmed by the circumstance of the
moment in which it seemed, that the Gods had resent him there to hold
Discourse, and to satisfy the Promise that they had made him to make to the
Oracle, not leaving almost any more doubt nor uncertainty in his Mind. He
kissed therefore a thousand times and with a thousand incredible Transports,
this favorable Pledge of his good Fortune, and advancing himself still forward
upon the way and course, that they seemed likely to have taken; he had no more
of Apprehension, but that the approaching Night would too soon prevent him, and
consequently interrupt the success of that important research.

Whilst he was there employed, Agamee pressed by Impatience to understand the
remainder of the Lines or Verses and the History wherewith Telamon entertained
him in the Morning and that their Voyage was interrupted; could not conceal
from that Shepherd, that it was in part the desire of satisfying that Curiosity
that he had reconducted him to Cenome. He besought him therefore not to delay
any longer, the giving him that Content; and Telamon accorded thereunto, so
much the more willingly that he could not scarcely himself have greater. He
returned to his Chamber to take the Papers that he had locked up there, and
leaving Ergaste in the Garden to entertain the Shepherdesses, they went to seek
Agamee and him, in a certain Place out of the way, to finish altogether their
Lecture.

The Sequel of the History of Tarsis and Zelie.
IT seems to me Agamee, said Telamon unto him, in unfolding of his Role of
Papers, that we were staid upon these Verses that my Brother wrote me from
Athens, for answer to those I had sent him from Hippique. I declare unto you,
that they served me as an occasion to manifest his Love to Melicerte and to
obtain from that generous Shepherdess the contract I wished for so long time.
Now Behold diverse Letters, that he writ to Melicerte by way of Gratitude when
I had signified to him with how much Candor she had listened to me, and the
favorable hopes she had given me: But I stayed not there by reason that all
those transports of Love, of acknowledgment and Joy, have not ordinarily any
thing desirable, but to those who resent them or who cause them. I pass also by
the same reason, all the other Letters that he writ to Melicerte, and to Zelie,
in a second Voyage which he yet since made to Athens.

Agamee observing that he so passed by all the Letters without reading them,
interrupted him to say unto him: Permit me Telamon here to condole my self of a
Robbery that you would have me make. If it be not that in these Letters there
be some Secret that all the World must not know. For in that case I shall say
not any thing more; and it is for that sole reason that I have not presumed to
insist this Morning, when you past over so many others. It is not for that
which I have done it, replied Telamon, for there is nothing wherein I would
willingly confide in your Discretion: But it is that I am persuaded that all
the Letters when they are good, are not but for those to whom they are
addressed; if there be not some moral Letters which contain Instructions for
manners, or those for Persons who have bin in public Negotiations, which
teaches us some important Point of the History. Yet the first are no other
than the form and name of Letters, and they are to take them in the right
sense, rather short Treatises and Treaties. As for all the others, one may
almost generally say, that they are nothing worth, when they are good for
Strangers. For you know that Letters ought not to be but a Picture of a
familiar Entertainment, accommodated only to the Humor of the Person to whom
they are written, to the manner that they have to live with, and sometimes of
little Intreagues, and a thousand light Circumstances which are passed amongst
those which write and make Letters, and those for whom they are framed. Now all
these things, being peculiarly and particularly between them, and unknown to
Strangers, how can they Judge if they are good? is it not as if one pretends
that a Person judges well of the goodness and likeness of a Picture without
seeing the Original? It is not but as in the same Picture and Portrait, a Man
versed in Painting will not omit to know or acknowledge the delicacy of the
Hand of the Limner, and sometimes his Genius and Imagination; in like manner
one cannot judge of the Style and Wit of him who writes by seeing his Letters:
but assuredly a Stranger cannot see all the great Beauties. That which you say
is in such wise true, replied Agamee, that I have seen Persons at Athens, after
having acquired great Reputation by others Works, have wrackt themselves by
Volumns of Letters which they have given to the Public, although that they
were elsewhere People knowing and of great Merit. And that is why I cannot
sufficiently admire the inimitable Genius of this Callias, whose Letters they
have given us after his Death, and of whose Reputation you are not ignorant,
but well know. You there clearly see, that he has not written but for the
Persons to whom they are addressed, and in the Interim there is not any who
ever he be, who takes not an infinite delight in reading them. But that hinders
not I pray you, but let me see those of Tarsis. Well done! choose them therefore
your self, replied Telamon; I should also be very much hindered to show them
unto you in that order wherein they have bin written. It seems to me
therefore, added he. Behold the first that ever he writ to Zelie. It was
afterward that by my instant requests, I had in the end obtained the
permission for him from Melicerte.

TARSIS to ZELIE.
Would you believe, my fair Shepherdess, that after having had so much
pressing to demand the Permission to write to you, I found my self perplexed by
that wherein hey consented to me? It is therefore true, that I know not almost
how to serve my self. I think I have a thousand things to send to you, and yet
I have found no more in my heart but one alone. Yet I know not if you will
permit me to entertain you, nor if you will read that which you never would
understand. You ought therefore desire to know it; and a thing so rare and
perfect that my Love undoubtedly deserves to touch you with some Curiosity.
From elsewhere my fair Scholar you who are so generous; apprehend you not that
you are ungrateful toward your Master? And are you not afraid to love him less
than you ought, by reason you know not how much he loves you? In reality, were
it only for Gratitude alone, you ought to study to Love well, and not neglect a
Science which is so necessary to you for the exercising of one of the principal
Virtues. Also it seems to me that in quitting you, that all things that could
render a Person accomplished, you are most Ignorant of that, and it would be a
great blemish unto you not to be able to learn under a Master so skilled and
knowing in that matter, that which all other Companies do learn without a
Master. I can, if you permit me, give you hence Lessons; I will do no more than
propose you the Love I have for you by example. Without Vanity, I defye the
greatest Masters in giving you a more perfect Model than that there, and judge
of that, which ought to succeed well, for a little Pains that you should take
to imitate it, since I propose it to the most perfect and the most spiritual of
Scholars.


Zelie did not make him any answer, persisted Telamon, but Melicerte had the
goodness to write to him frequently; and behold that which this wise
Shepherdess gave me to enclose in my Packet, I saw that Tarsis gave it likewise
to Zelie afterward, and that she kept it with her Letters. Agamee read there
that which follows.

A Reply from Melicerte to Tarsis:
IT is permitted to the Master to write to the Scholar, but not to give her
Lessons of Love. That Is a Science they wish not she should learn so soon, she
must learn others well before that; and I have heard say that they never know
but in confusion those which are showed before a seasonable Time.

Adieu.


Tarsis to the wise Melicerte, Health.
I Cannot believe, most sapient and prudent Melicerte, that you have permitted
me to write to Zelie, without permitting me to entertain her my Love. When they
give any one a Liberty to speak, it is apparently to leave him to say that
which he thinks, and to explicate it in the Language known. Are you ignorant
that there is a long time expired, that I have no other thought than that of my
Passion, and that I know no other Language than that of Love. If you prohibit
my explication thereof, it were as well to condemn me to remain Dumb or Mute
all my Life. I very well know that this is a Language that fair Zelie is not
versed in, and it would be as well and as soon necessary to speak Arabic to
her. But it is good to inure her thereunto by little and little gradually, as
young as she is I am very well assured that they cannot instruct her therein
too soon. There is no need to press the Spirits to such things wherein they
have naturally a Disposition: But to correct Nature it is almost necessary to
Commence with her. They never tame nor reclaim Bears nor Lions, if it be not
done when they are young. Apprehend you not Melicerte that Zelie learns with
time the Science that I will teach her. I am much more afraid that she knows it
not soon enough; and you will permit me to tell you that that which we have
hitherto seen justifies my apprehension more then yours.


Tarsis to his fair Shepherdess.
It Is a great Consolation to me to write unto you, but it is a little cruelty in
you to make me never an Answer. Think you, fair Zelie, that is goodness to
listen to an unfortunate one without daigning to speak a word to consolate him,
and is it not rather a badge of insensibility than of Compassion? I well
conceive your Scruple; you believe it would reflect upon your modesty to write
to a Shepherd that which possibly you would not refuse to say unto him, and
that Letters are something more then single words: but my Shepherdess, it is
necessary to persuade you, if you please, that words spoken or written are but
the same thing to a Lover who is discreet, and how indiscreet soever he may be,
the sole difference that there is, that one may abuse words said in changing
them, but one cannot change the others, because they always remain for a
Testimony and Evidence of the Truth. However it be, it belongs not to Persons
such as are you, that this difference should give any Scruple. That would be
good for those who are not weaned from the Wisdom nor from the Discretion of
their thoughts: But what have you to fear, my Zelie, you who never have bin but
to be so modest and so virtuous? You should wish your own proper Reputation,
that all the World knows. These shall be so many Lessons of Honor and of
Virtue for all your Sex; and of the Humor whereof I know you, I am assured that
there will never be but ours, which shall not be able to profit.


Tarsis to the amiable Zelie.
ALthough they assure me of your Health, I cannot learn it without fear, but
that you have bin sick; and I am out of my self to think only of the peril and
danger that you have run. They say that there is nothing so courageous as Love,
and that when that animates us, there are no dangers which it makes us not to
despise and scorn. But I know not where they that say so have taken it. As for
me I find nothing so Timorous. How would he give me courage in sight of danger
who makes me tremble at the remembrance thereof? Reassure me by your good
Favor, my Shepherdess, and deliver me from a mortal Fear. The thing shall not
be difficult unto you, there needs but four words from your hand to render me
the most hardy, the most bold, and the most contented of Men.


Behold, interrupted Telamon, a Ticket that Zelie sent him for reply, that is
therefore but a Copy which she kept, as you will see in the foot of the
Letter. Admire the Circumspection of this Shepherdess. She would not hazard a
word written to a Man who loved her, without retaining as much to have always
wherewith to justify her self from all the Steps, Paces and Postures of her
Conduct.

ZELIE to TARSIS.
MElicerte orders me to write you that I am in a better State in point of
Health, and that my indisposition did not deserve the Inquietudes which it gave
you, I would not dare to say more to you: for you have asked from me but four
words, and you already see that I have already passed much beyond the Bounds,
which you have prescribed me.

Adieu.


Tarsis to his adorable Shepherdess.
I Avow my Shepherdess that you have more of generosity than I boldness, I
durst not presume to demand more than four Words and you have written me four
Lines, but you must withal confess also, that you have much less Affection than
I have. I could not write you a word without speaking to you of my Love, and
you write me four Lines and there is not one word of Friendship. You would even
be very angry that I should believe that you writ to me through Affection, you
would have me know that it is not but by order of Melicerte. Well done Zelie!
It is needful to be innured to your Scruples. I will well owe all my good
fortune to Melicerte, but diminish not before your self the Obligation that I
will have to her, and that I owe her much, be not so retentive in rendering me
some Signals of your Friendship and Amity.


The afflicted Tarsis to his Divine Shepherdess.
THey now tell me news that makes me desperate, the Judgment of the affair of
Alcidias is suspended for a Month, and in a State wherein he prohibits me to
abandon it, I avow to you my Shepherdess I believe not but that I shall dye,
all the force of my Soul is worn out and spent by the long time I have wasted
here, and I shall have never enough to make more resistance against my Grief.
It Is true, on the other hand, that the hope of the revisiting the fair Zelie
should reanimate the courage of the most amated.

Ah! If it must be so that yet another time I shall revisit her in these divine
Moments so worthy of my Faith I reply you not any more for my self Great Gods!
through the excess of my Joy, and amongst these Transports so charming and so
sweet, I know not if I shall be able to believe that my Honor is yet less than
your Glory, and that I am in greatness inferior, nor less happy than you.


Agamee yet willing to retake others, Telamon withholding him said smiling, Ah!
in very deed Agamee, he goes there by your Compassion not to retain poor Tarsis
a longer time at Athens by the impatience that you see he has to come out from
thence. Let Us reconduct him I pray you to Tempe; and see only before a few
Lines that his Impatience constrained him to make out.

You know undoubtedly Erasistrate the famous and so much renowned Physician,
not only by the excellent Experiences which he has manifested by his Art, but
by the profound and eloquent Meditations which he has written above all that
there is most concealed in the Nature of Man. Yea assuredly, interrupted
Agamee, and I have admired a Hundred times amongst his Works, his Tract, his
rare Draft of the Passions, where teaching us to know them, he teaches us also
to combat with them, and to cure our selves of those Diseases of the Mind
whilst he prohibits us those of the Body. That is the very same, replied
Telamon, you know the Friendship that the great President of the Areopagites
has for him. My Brother who had need to hasten the Judgment of his process and
litigious Suit; which was the only Obstacle of his return to Zelie, prayed
Erasistrate to speak to him in his Favor, and because he deferred it twice or
thrice he thus pressed him.

I languish for some days of a Disease, which according to appearance, if I
receive not some assistance, must necessarily take a course bad enough. This
Disease is called Impatience which naturally still grows and increases and I
see without speedy Succor, my Cure apparently hopeless. Famous Physician of
Souls and Bodies, I ask not for those noble Efforts and Endeavors which render
you famous from Gange even to the Gades. Only vouchsafe to succor me with two
words, that I be not the first sick one whom you will have left to dye. These
words Telamon pursued, produced two advantageous Effects to Tarsis. The first
that Erasistrate effectually made him have a very speedy Expedition. The second
that this illustrious Personage having tasted and sounded his Wit, would
contract Friendship with him. Now behold another piece which makes me call to
mind an occasion, where this acquaintance was yet of more Utility to the Love
of Tarsis: But although they are both in the same Leaf, by reason they are for
the same Person, behold the cause why others were made between them both; it
will be good therefore that we read them beforehand, these here were made at
another House in the Country that Alcidias has a little off the other side of
Gonnes. Melicerte and Zelie were come there to spend some time, and Tarsis was
there with them. After they were departed and returned to Calioure he sent them
these Lines.

I was seized near to you, O divine Zelie, with a thousand Transports of
ravishing Joy, but for these pleasant Moments, I have sad and mournful days,
and so pass my Life; did I think to recall your amiable Presence, by the
deceitful Charms of a sweet Memory, all speak to me of your absence when I
would think of you; go I to walk in the Wood where Zelie came to take the fresh
Air, and the Shadow, unfortunate one that I am, all that I see there is, that
the fair one is departed. Thou seek her every where, my Eye with Care and
Fidelity following that of my Love, the error which deceives thee; thou ^eest a
hundred places where the fair one was, but there she is not. Thou have but the
Pleasure there yet to see the green Turfe where Zelie leaned, after her Paces,
thou know it by the bait of a hundred Flowers that she made there to
disclose and open. All the Grass has taken a new Life, in those certain places
where the fair One walked, thou see Drought and Yellow with desire, that
which her Foot has not touched. In some places, said they, that she came to
appear, they see that of a fair Green, the Earth is painted, they saw the Trees
through desire grow, the Cherry to ripen was much more prompt, and her Hands
choosing the ripest of its Fruits, made the others to blush with shame, because
they had not bin gathered; they yet saw there things metamorphosed, a thousand
prodigious and surprising Effects, and of the Miracles which she has done,
they yet see a thousand things, but what serves that to the happiness of my
Life, all that is of my Dolor I conceal, and conclude that there I saw Zelie,
but in fine, see her no more, let us now return to our Work. But before it be
read unto you it is requisite to you to observe, that a little after Tarsis was
returned from Athens, Erasistrate being fallen sick, caused himself to be
carried to Tempe, there to take the benefit of our Waters whose Reputation you
know is famous all over Greece. There were then a considerable number of
Persons of Quality that by the self same design had there bin conducted, and
there was not one but would have bin very willing to see and entertain
Erasistrate. As he was indisposed and not in a condition to pester and entangle
his Spirits with the Maladies of others, he had provided for that trouble in
declaring at first, that he would not only not make but would also receive nor
accept of any Visits. Leucippe who was also then sick a Bed, had an
unexpressible Passion to see him: But he could not have that Privilege. Tarsis
alone had Erasistrate who even in his Indisposition could not dwell Idle, wrote
at Tempe a Treatise upon the Nature of the Light; and a little before he had
finished it, he showed it to Tarsis, with whom he took pleasure to communicate
his Works. Tarsis was so charmed, that two hours after he had quitted him, he
sent him these Lines.

Finish the principal of the Work to which none is comparable, make appear the
day in it is Supreme degree; give light even to light it self; and from new
Beams, enlighten the Sun. God drew out of the Chaos, the bright shining Light.
Do with thy Pen what he did with his Voice; and by the Divinity of thy learned
Quill, draw Light out of the confused Chaos, a second time. Until now it is
splendour scarce visible. The day to us is dimmed and dazzled, the more are we
sensible thereof; and from it is proper and from its bright Glimps comes it is
Obscurity. But pursue thy Race, and persist in thine Exercise; and three of thy
days Journeys, goes throughout the whole universe to give more Light, which the
Sun has not done since three thousand years.

Although these Lines speak of the Creation of the Light more according to the
Opinion of Moses whose Books my Brother had read which follows that of the
Greeks, who determine not that it was done with, or by a Voice, nor since what
time the World has bin made: Howsoever Erasistrate unto whom this strange
Doctrine was known, so approved of this Piece, found it so to his good liking,
and so much obliging, that although he was at the even of his Departure he
could not yet leave Tempe without sight of my Brother, and went to seek him
even to Callioure in the House of Leucippe whom Tarsis caused to be seen by
this means. After Erasistrate had examined this Sick one, he found that the
Remedies that they had until then Counseled him were quite contrary, and that
he should loose himself in continuing them. So that Leucippe asking him for
orders, Erasistrate who saw that all the cause of his Malady was occasioned by
nothing but his Melancholy, and who knew the naturally pleasant Humor of my
Brother, said in pointing unto him, that he could not counsel him a better
Remedy than that of Tarsis.

Melicerte, who sought but an occasion to make him to be valued by Leucippe,
omitted not to serve her self of this, and from the self same Evening,
discoursing with him on the Subject of his Indisposition, she said unto him,
that in effect she saw well that all his Malady was only the produce of an
excess of Vexation; that she had diverse times observed, That when my Brother
came to spend some time with them at their House, he was always better in point
of Health; and that that had made her wish to him, that the Marriage of Tarsis
and Zelie might still fix him in their House. Leucippe whom Family Reasons had
made to take other Reasons for the Marriage of Zelie, answered coldly, that he
believed not that Tarsis had that thought, and as she answered him, that she
believed not also that it was very far distant: But your Daughter, said he unto
her; has she not formerly signified to you, that she would it should be to
Daphnide? Melicerte to whom these words seemed to be a good Presage, answered
him, that that was a Fancy of Youth, that had undoubtedly past from her. And I
counsel you, replied he, to let yours pass also. She would not press him more
at that time.

But some Months after, Tarsis so importuned Melicerte to make a second attempt
and essay, that in fine, she resolved thereupon. She generously declared to
Leucippe all that she deemed most capable to induce him to consent to this
Marriage, and amongst others she endeavored to make him sensible, of the
infinite deserts and worths of Tarsis, by reason it was from that solely that
she considered him her self. As she at this openly amplified the advantage to
Leucippe, he also openly explained his Thoughts to her.

But it was very cruelly for poor Tarsis. For Leucippe signified to Melicerte
that it was a thing that she must not dream of, and gave her a thousand
reasons. He added above all the Interest he had in a new League of Friendship
and Confederacy, and told her but with a very severe Tone, that there should
nothing be any more said of the Marriage of Tarsis and Zelie; that the thoughts
thereof displeased him, and that she should not for the future make mention
thereof, and thereupon he quitted her in furious Wrath.

Melicerte who is the most Virtuous of Women, and who mortally feared to anger
him, was so sensibly touched with the method in which he spoke to her, that she
had not the power to answer thereunto, and so retired greatly afflicted into
her Chamber. Tarsis who impatiently expected the success of their Discourse,
was there as soon as she arrived there; and presently seeing her there sat
down in a Chair, the left Elbow leaning upon the Table, her head upon one hand,
and a Handkerchief in the other, her eyes bedewed with Tears, he divined by so
sad a Countenance a part of his Misfortune. Ah Melicerte! said he expecting
that she should speak to him, I ask you not for the answer of Leucippe, I too
well see that he will that I dye, and that you have received some displeasure,
by attempting unprofitably to save the Life of a miserable One. Melicerte
answered him, thus I have yet more Sorrow than I am able to express unto you to
have left you engaged in a design, where I foresaw so little Advantage and
Satisfaction to accrue to you, and gives so much displeasure to Leucippe. And
then she recited him a certain part of their Discourse. After this Repetition,
they both were for some time silent. In fine, Tarsis reassuming the first
Discourse said; I avow unto you, Melicerte, that which you now tell me would be
capable to make me desperate; if I had not wherewith to oppose Leucippe: but
the little Virtue you have painted in me to him, and by which you have
endeavored to Combat with his Aversation I am not astonished that you have not
bin able to vanquish him with so feeble Weapons, and the sole reason that he
would have had to yield himself upon these Considerations, it is that they were
represented him by your Mouth. But it is requisite, generous Melicerte, if you
please to leave all there, that relates to the Virtue of Tarsis alone, and
employ only the Credit you have with, and influence you have upon the Spirit of
Leucippe, the kindness you have for him, and that which he has for you, the
Requests and frequent Instances of a Woman so generous and amiable as you are,
and when this is done, you will see that you shall be Omnipotent with him. Not
so Tarsis, replied Melicerte; let us not flatter our selves. If Leucippe had
yielded in some respect to my Inclinations and Supplications which were
instant, he would have done it this day, for I have therein forgotten nothing.
But Tarsis, will you that I speak to you as a Mother? I know very well that
what I am going to say unto you will presently fell down your Passion: But it is
requisite that you make a generous Effort and Endeavor upon your self, and by
the displeasure of some days you may spare one of many years. There is no
Person or at least very few that hitherto know your Inclination; and as your
diligence and research has bin secret, your Honor, nor your Interest, are not
engaged by a Rupture, as they may possibly be, if your Designs had more of
Persecution. Ah Melicerte! interrupted Tarsis; I see too well where you would
come. You have reason to be repulsed and rejected by so many troubles, and
thereby would deliver your self from the Importunities of a miserable One. But
allege not here mine Honor nor Interest for a pretense; My Honor consists in
nothing but in adoring the fair Zelie, and my Interest is but to dye, if I am
miserable enough to loose her. Melicerte, replied to him thus. Tarsis, You ill
interpret my Thought, and it seems to me, that by the manner that I act, you
have no place to believe, that I repulse my self to serve you. Pardon generous
Shepherdess, replied Tarsis, pardon the Transports of a miserable One; if in
something of his Grief he escapes, who repelleth the acknowledgment he owes to
so much goodness. No Melicerte, be not weary and ensnare not, but rather oblige
this miserable One, and your Generosity is gone even beyond that which it would
have dared to pretend. It Is also in this Generosity, that I place all my Hopes,
and they shall never quit me, as long as you shall not have abandoned me. I
will be to you still what I have bin, continued Melicerte: But what can I do
since Leucippe has prohibited me to speak, and in the manner as you have
understood? Will you have me yield him occasion to believe that your Interest
is more considerable to me than his Rest? God forbid, replied Tarsis, that I
should have so unjust a Thought: But if Leucippe has forbidden you to speak,
he has not prohibited your Wishes, and provided you would wish that which to
me would be happy, it seems to me that I should not know how to fail to be
so. Alas, replied Melicerte, what shall secret and important Vows be able to
do, where neither my Prayers nor Reasons can effect nothing? They will be able
to do this, replied Tarsis, that Leucippe calling to mind in the end, all that
which he ought to do for you, he will have a great deal of Trouble to resist so
long a time, your desires. They will make him, not to take it any more for a
Fantastical transitory Passage, but a fixed Resolution supported by Generosity
and Constancy, and if they produce not that Effect, they will at least wise
cause me to dye less unfortunately, when I shall see that you will not have
abandoned me. He would have cast himself at her Feet in finishing those words:
But Melicerte impeding him, said unto him; Tarsis since you believe it not
requisite that you repulse your self, let us essay what our Patience will be
able to, and let us refer the rest to the Gods. In the Sequel she gave him some
Counsel, after what manner and method he should live with Zelie, not to wound
the Spirit of Leucippe, and above all, she recommended to him to take heed,
that he should not be found with her Daughter.

Whilst Tarsis and Melicerte discoursed after this manner, the young
Shepherdess was in a corner of the same Chamber where she was retired to leave
Tarsis and her Mother the Liberty of a Conversation, the Subject whereof she
was not Ignorant, and where she therefore believed that Decency permitted her
not to be present. Howsoever they spoke so loud, that it had bin very easy to
her to understand them; and as that amiable Daughter had since the avouching of
her Mother followed with willingness enough, the bent of her acknowledgment and
Inclination, which gave her some liking and kindness for Tarsis, it is easy to
Judge that it was not without Grief, that she learnt the resistance of her
Father. Also her eyes were not without some Tears, when this Shepherd
discoursed Melicerte, and although those of her Mother had possibly bin the
Occasion, she had notwithstanding given the major part by a disgrace wherein
she had as well as himself the principal Interest. Tarsis approached to her in
going forth from the presence of Melicerte, and accoasting her with an Action
very Passionate. Amiable Zelie, said he unto her, you see a Man who would be in
the last Desperation, if he had not a Mother and a Mistress so generous, who is
assured, that nothing shall be able to move or shake their Constancy, and will
finish with Courage that which they have began with so much goodness. Tarsis
replied she, if you were not very generous your self, you would not accoast me
but with reproaches, and it is a strange thing, that instead of an
Acknowledgment of the Obligations I have to you, I should be the cause of
giving you so much displeasure, But that you quit not also this unfortunate
One, who seems not but destinated to do you Evil? and that you serve not your
self by the Counsel of Melicerte? What Zelie, cried Tarsis, you also give me
those Counsels? Ah! I did not find them strange from a Mother who believes not
always a duty to enter into the Passion of her Children: But that you your self
should Counsel me to loose you, and to do worse by me than Leucippe can do,
pardon me Zelie, if I say that in that I find you more cruel than he. He will
do me evil: but you without Compassion take from me even Consolation it self,
since I expect it but from you. You Transport your self very easily, replied
him sweetly Zelie. If I give you this Counsel, do I take from you the liberty
of not following it? No replied he; but when one gives such Counsel to another,
that is to say that one is very capable to take them for ones self. If I were
capable to take them for my self, sadly, replied Zelie, I should not have had
to do but to give them to you. For you know Tarsis that although there must be
two Persons to make Friendship, there needs but one to break it. But also,
added Tarsis with a deep Sigh, when one would not violate a Friendship, one
Counsels it not to another; for there must be both the one and the other to
conserve it, as there must be two to make it. Zelie was some moments without
replying him; afterward lifting up her eyes toward him, which she before had
fixed upon the Earth; then when one better loves the rest of his Friends than
his own proper, said she unto him, one looks not upon that which one would one
considers not, but their Advantage. It is true Zelie, replied Tarsis: but
when we well love our Friends, we believe them not to be of greater Advantage
than our Friendship, because we judge of them by our selves. But replied she,
(beholding him always with eyes where the Regret with which she had given him,
this Counsel was well painted) when I see that this Friendship causes you not
but so many Evils, can I figure my self that you may have some advantage
thereby? and is it not my Love to you, much more when that in the expense of my
own proper Affection, I wish you another much more happy? no, answered yet this
Shepherd passionately; Nor that Zelie, one cannot when one well loves his
Friends to wish them a new Friendship, because one believes not, that another
can equal that which we have for them, nor who is worthy of their Amity: But
that which we should, it is to do that on our part, which may prove happy for
them, in despite even of Fortune. For in fine, Zelie Friendship it is not of
those benefits which depends of the hazard of their Success, all it is
Perfection consists but in our Heart alone, when the Heart is faithful and
constant Friendship is perfect, and when it is perfect, it is still very happy.
Alas Tarsis! replied Zelie, in conclusion with a Sigh, wherefore are you then
unhappy? Tarsis well understood what would be said in these few words, and the
Consolation which he had re-inflaming him with a new Ardour; My amiable
Shepherdess, said he to her, I know your Fidelity and Constancy: But tempt no
more also mine, and believe that I prefer my misfortune to all the Felicities
of the World, provided that you would permit me to hope in despite of the
Cruelties that Leucippe has for me.

Aye Tarsis, replied she unto him, I will hope that the Aversion of Leucippe
will change, and I could wish that we would hope it together. What? replied
Tarsis, you replace me therefore yet in the change of Leucippe, and I shall
always be unhappy if he changes not? Tarsis, continued she, if it is requisite
for us, as you said before, to be happy, there needs but Fidelity and
Constancy, you shall so find me as long as I live: But it concerns me not more
to answer you to any thing, if you demand of me that which depends not but upon
Leucippe. As she finished Leucippe entered into the Chamber, and surprising them
both there one near to the other, though in the presence of Melicerte, he could
not refrain to signify Displeasure, and passed into the Garden, not uttering
nor speaking one word to Melicerte. This Wise and Virtuous Woman, as I have
said, dreading nothing more in the whole World than to anger him, went there
all disquieted after him with her Daughter; and I admired a thousand times the
address, the sweetness, the complaisance wherewith she essayed to repair,
restore, and revive his Spirits.

In the mean time Tarsis had in his Soul many more regrets, and anxieties, than
I can depaint, and principally, when he dreamed that his love having sparkled
forth, he would always be rendered suspect to Leucippe, and deprived of that
sweet liberty he had before, to live near to Zelie, in the familiarity of a
Brother, and that consequently he should loose his very principal Consolation.
It Is not that Leucippe did not continue to see him with a very good eye in the
House; for as he knew by means of Melicerte and acknowledged a great Friendship
for Tarsis, he had always for her that Complaisance to receive him civilly into
his House: But he would no more permit him to have any Conversation with Zelie,
imagining it was that which entertained their Affection, and thinking to
repulse them by little and little by this Constraint. A great error, not to
know that Love is a Fire whose Heat is the more redoubled by it is being held
shut up, and it is a Torrent which does no other than swell greater by the
Obstacles that one opposes it; It is true Leucippe knew not that their Love
was yet formed or well knit, and he believed it to be but only Friendship as
yet; In such sort that to hinder them to pass further he observed them with so
much exactness, that Tarsis suffered infinitely: for to please him, he
abstained not only to speak to Zelie, but it must be so that he hindered him to
look upon her, unless it were with a kind of indifferency, and was constrained
that for keeping his Court with Leucippe, he must also almost testify an
Aversion against his Daughter. In such wise, that before Leucippe the two
Persons of the World, which loved most one another to be in a Chamber without
speaking, without approaching, yea even without looking one upon another, if
their Amity did not sometimes steal a look, unprevented by the Father, but I
more bewail Zelie than Tarsis, by reason that in this vexatious Constraint it
was necessary that she should pretend Liberty and Joy, when Tarsis went and
passed a long time, without sight of her. That was the time that she must
manifest more of Merriment, for that was the time when she was most observed,
and the least sadness she had missed not but to be imputed to her Affection. It
is true she had a mavelous command over her Spirit and Wit, and she did so
well counterfeit sometimes her Indifferency that Tarsis himself was sometimes
thereby deceived, and she would make him reproaches. Now I have told you a part
of all this to give you some sight and understanding of this Elegy that Tarsis
made on the Subject of this Constraint.

Bewail a little my Lot, adorable Zelie, give some Sighs to the misfortune of
my Life, and refuse not the dolorous Complaints of a Lover, that which the
least Evils easily obtain, you know the rigours of my sad Fortune, I demand not
but that they may be to you common, can you be happy, and I alone unfortunate?
I will only have all the Ills, but let us both bewail them. The Heavens which
made you to be born in such an adorable State made you not so to be miserable,
you would have had much less Grace, which gives not so much of it to those whom
it loves not, but if it have not made you to be miserable, it was not also to
be unpitiful, if it mixeth Tears in your eyes it has so many inticements; Ah!
it was to weep over the Evils, that they have done, they have done all mine,
beloved Zelie, I should not have had without them such bitterness of Life, they
would see me in Tranquillity and Free even to the last Point, and I should be
happy for I should not love. But what do I say? Ah! Zelie! excuse this
Blasphemy, if there be any one happy, it is he whom you Love; and since your
eyes have deigned to charm me, I should be too happy, if I durst love you; it is
not my Love whereof I have cause or place to complain, I complain much rather
because they would extinguish it, and that an obstinate Father, will not permit
me your heavenly Presence liberally to adore, in all places he spies me, and
without Intermission, he takes notice of me, or if I accoast you, or look upon
you, one cast alone toward you is scarcely permitted me, if it be not one of
those given to an Enemy or Enemies. What Torments, great Gods, what difficult
Constraints, to be seen reduced to these cruel Pretenses, and that uneasily
great Passions can subject themselves to so many Afflictions? Alas! must a
legitimate fervor lie concealed in the same Method that one would conceal a
Crime, must a Man see himself so reduced to betray himself, and to love so
much, and yet pretend to hate? I am not more able to do it, Zelie, and my Soul
is constrained this day to finish this mortal Dissimulation, my Love goes to
appear, and I go to discover it, Zelie, they go to see, and I go to dye.

Tarsis had taken a time when Leucippe was gone to fetch a Walk, to present the
foregoing Lines to Melicerte and Zelie, and the Mother gave them her Daughter
to read when the Rain unawares drove in Leucippe, and he found them in the
Hands of the young Shepherdess. She was presently much surprised, and would
rashly have hid them, but even that put an edge to the desire of Leucippe to
see what it was, and I cannot tell you what complaints he made not to
Melicerte, when he knew it.

Tarsis and Zelie, for a very long time in this mournful manner led their Life:
but in fine the Friendship of Leucippe for Melicerte carried him away by her
Policy, so that by the generosity of this incomparable Mother whom we seconded
Philiste and my self, by all our cares; Tarsis saw himself at the Even of his
good Fortune after which he had sighed after so many years. I will not stay
here to mark you out his Joy, nor his Transports to the change of so desirable
a Fortune; for as you your self have very much loved, you should better be able
to conceive these things. I will only read you these Lines he made in that time
of his Patience to press Leucippe to conclude this Marriage. He made them in
form of a Request, and very much after the method of those that he had seen
when they served the Senate at Athens whilst he was there, soliciting the
litigious Suit of my Father.

A poor and unfortunate Lover, humbly remonstrates and makes request, saying
that the same days Journey that his eldest Son by Hymenee entered your House,
the younger was clapped in Prison. The unfortunate one without Defiance and under
the fidelity of an Alliance came to the Solemnity of a Marriage contracted, and
for this Ceremony, he led the Company, made the Sports, the laughter, the
cheerfulness, the youth, the liberty, the pleasures, and the indifferency, and
amongst the joy and delight, the Imprudent took no heed to the Snares and Ginns
that they prepared for him. When Love learnt the mystery, and Hymen that had
done it without having bin contracted in this Divinity, the whole Destiny
having conducted wholly this sacred Himenee. Then he became furious, Fire
sprang up in his eyes, through despite he poured forth Tears, and arming
himself with all his Weapons, he ran nimbly and lightly, and protested to
avenge himself, and in his irredoubtable Fury without discerning the Guilty,
for a Sacrifice offered up himself. The first he met withal, Alas! I was that
miserable One. Immediately with a thousand or rather a hundred Darts he
overwhelmed me. He emptyed his Quiver, but I therefore resisted him; when I
perceived my self that Zelie was of that Party also and perfidiously sent him
the last Dart that he cast at me. This Arrow done to satisfy him, that which
his own were not able to do, for immediately I was felled down, and even at the
same Instant wholly overcome, and soon without Compassion he loosned the string
from his Bow, and with a thousand inhumane Knots, binding my hands and Feet,
delivered me as a Reward into those of the Shepherdess, who a hundred other
blows gave me, and wickedly imprisoned me, but in a Prison so strong that it is
not possible for me to get out, and that her self could not thence draw me
though she would; for this Tragical Adventure was wholly done by Magic Art,
and you only have a Right to undo the Enchantment.

This therefore, considered my Judge, my Redeemer, Refuge, attended, that being
innocent and for a long time languishing, it is not for your Justice to prolong
my Torment: By your gracious Favor let it be appointed, that rest may
forthwith even immediately be given me, and that for to make recompense and
reparation for my Pain, within three days at most, the inhumane One for a
punishment may be committed to my Discretion, to order a Correction, in
effecting which you will execute Justice.

Telamon having finished the reading of this Paper, the Areopagite took it out
of his Hand, and as it was in some respect one certain piece of his Occupation,
he took Pleasure to read it over again. Leucippe also found it very much to his
satisfaction, Telamon continued the Sequel, and he was pleased to sign it with
his own Name.

So you see that this Marriage was wholly resolved on: But admire the
misfortune of poor Tarsis; for the succeeding day Leucippe fell Sick. I know
not whether it was through a purely natural Indisposition, or by the Vexation
that his litigious Suit had given him, or by the Efforts and Endeavors that he
had made upon his Spirits, to overcome himself on this Marriage: But so it was,
that a high Fever seized him with such Malignity that in less than eight days
he raved, and talked idly. There Desolation came and took place instead of the
Joy, that prepared it self. Behold the prudent Melicerte who passionately loved
him, grieved excessively, and Zelie in an Affliction inconsolable. For besides
the Love she had for her Father, as Melicerte loved her Husband, that is to
say, infinitely. Besides the Obstacle that she saw in the success of her
Affection; that is, that Leucippe perpetuallly named them, she her self and
Tarsis in his raving Fits. That was not strange, by reason that being fallen
Sick, at the time that he had the Marriage in his mind, the fresh Impression
and Smack thereof, might make him naturally speak more of that than of any
other thing; even as those who rave, rage, ordinarily dream of the Thoughts
wherein they were, when they fell asleep. In the interim, Zelie by a scruple of
Friendship and Tenderness for her Father, went and put it into her Mind that
she undoubtedly was the cause of his Disease, and that possibly she should be
the cause of his Death. Behold her therefore in so great grief and trouble of
Mind, that she also fell Sick her self with Affliction, and almost, even to
Extremity, I will not however declare the Complaints and Moans and Alarms of
poor Tarsis, nor yet speak of the care and good Offices that he rendered her
during her Illness.

She was fortunately restored, and revived before Leucippe. But however I know
not if I ought to say Fortunately; for it was not but with a Resolution
undoubtedly worthy of a high Virtue, but which cost poor Tarsis exceeding dear.

Leucippe yet continued Sick, but however a little better when Melicerte, whose
Cares, Toyls, Troubles and Afflictions, that she had had through the
indisposition of her Husband, was reduced to the necessity to think of her
self, she came to walk on the bank of the River to take the benefit of the Air,
and exercise her self a little. I gave her my Hand on one side, she with the
other hold Philiste by the Arm, and my Brother aided the fair Zelie in walking,
holding her by one Arm, and she held in the other Hand her Crook leaning on it,
her weakness by her late Indisposition, constraining her to follow softly after
us, not being able to go faster. During the time of the Walk Tarsis told me
that he found her speak Idly and Fantastically; so that he understood not what
she meant or said; and through the disquietude he had by reason thereof, he
frequently asked her if her Disease reseized her. At length after much
pressing, he saw her betake her self to Weeping. Tarsis yet more alarmed,
impatiently asked her what she ailed, and seeing the first Instances served to
no purpose, he conjured her by her Love, and by all he knew might have most
influence on her, to declare to him the cause of her Trouble.

At length Zelie having discharged her Stomach of the Hickhocks or Yexing which
hindered her Voice, and seeing us so far, as not to to be able to hear her,
resolved to speak to her thus. Alas, Tarsis, you press me to tell you a thing
that I am much more desirous to let you know; But I avow you, I know not how to
undertake it when I conceive that from the Moment that you shall learn it, you
will be angry with me, and possibly will hate me. Tarsis was much surprised at
these words and could not divine what they meant. For me to hate you, replied
he, O Zelie! you must then tell me that you love me no more, and although you
should tell me so much, I should rather dye in the Field, but should never be
able to hate you. I am yet less capable not to love you more, replied Zelie.
There she stopped, and Tarsis seeing that she did not unfold him the rest,
asked her what she had to say unto him. And as she saw her Mouth opened twice
or thrice, ready to speak unto him and as often to shut it again, and to utter
nothing but Sighs, behold him in the greatest trouble of the World. What is it
therefore, fair Zelie? said he unto her. Make me not to languish any longer.
For in fine, whilst I know not what it is, I fear a hundred thousand Evils
which I imagine, and yet others which I imagine not. It is true, replied she,
wiping her eyes, that I am a Fool thus to alarm you, and to believe you, and to
believe you could be angry for a thing that you undoubtedly would find just,
and even for the weal of our Friendship.

At the uttering these words, she said unto him, with the fairest Color that
she could there find, that whatever Effort or Endeavor Leucippe had made upon
her, his Aversation against their Marriage still continued undoubtedly, that it
was assuredly that which had made him Sick, and which held him and entertained
him in such perplexity that his Life was in danger; and that if he should dye,
she should never be exempted from that Conception, but that she had bin the
cause thereof that all the World would have the same thoughts, after they
should hear any mention made of his Disease, and what he had therein sa^d, and
of all that which had passed, she therefore besought him, to abstain a while
from seeing her, for some space of time to observe what would thereby be
produced in relation to his cure and recovery. Whatever proportion she had made
to this discourse, Tarsis was so Surprised, that he remained all in confusion,
and amated. His dart fell out of his hand, and left goal so that of Zelie, and
judging by the cross of all the counterfeiting and dissembling which she had
used, that her resolution was to infringe the course of their friendship and
amity, and to sacrifice it to an imagination, that to him appeared Fantastical
and Frivolous: he crossed his arms athwart his stomach, and held himself a long
time in that posture, not being able to speak, only casting his eyes on her,
where grief said a thousand things, that his Tongue could not express.

In the mean time Zelie, who divined the state of his Soul and mind, not only
by his countenance, but yet much more by the affliction that she felt in her
own heart, was very willing to say something to him to cons^late him for the
evil she had done him, and a hundred times she he sitated and stammered, to
retract the word she had spoken and let go. But on the other side the Image of
sick Leucippe, and sick as she believed by the displeasure that she had caused
him, re-animated her virtue to combat against the tenderness of her affection;
So that after having held for some time her eyes down upon the ground remaining
silent, she thus reassumed her discourse and said. I very well see, Tarsis,
that that which I have said has much afflicted you, and I am not much
astonished at the effect it has had on my self. For in fine its requisite you
should know, that it is through the rude and churlish combat between my duty and
my friendship, that I am reduced to those extremities you have found and seen
me in. But its withal requisite, Tarsis, that you make this reflection with me.
You see the condition, wherein my father is; Will you, that I be, (I tremble to
speak it, and only to think of it, but in fine it is that, which possibly may
arrive) will you, that I be the cause of his death, and that I render my self
the shame, and horror of my family? Ah! Tarsis, you would hate me your self,
if I were capable to suffer it, and if you punish me not by your hatred, the
Gods would punish us both. I very well know that you will make my thought pass
for a vision, and a Chimera: but I have but one world to answer you. Either it
is true that Leucippe will have us married, or it is true that he will not, if
he will he will suddenly recall you, if he will not I ought not to think
thereof any more my self. Have you said enough, cruel Zelie, quoth Tarsis, at
that very passage; where or what more remains for you yet to say, to thrust on
my despair any farther? Is it not yet enough that you have testified to me,
that you would defeat your self of me, without giving so many reasons which
serves no other than to show me the premeditation, with which you make me
despair, and the care you have taken to heap up wherewith to combat my
resistance, and wherewith to ruin me? Are these then the fair meditations of
your Malady, and is this the fruit of the vows that I made for your health? you
come to tell me, and oppose me with the sickness of a father. But is it by his
own order at least that you make me this fair, and Eloquent Oration? No Tarsis,
replied she, but it is by the order of my duty, which is yet more to me than my
father. Therefore cried he out all Transported. You oppose me with an Imaginary
duty, though you have nothing more of a father to oppose me withal, and you
come to make a pretext to betray my love, when Leucippe has approved and
confirmed it! You are born and carried away, Tarsis, replied the shepherdess
with a thousand tears: But I am taken only in my own Mischief, and in a common
disgrace wherein already I am undoubtedly the most unfortunate; I will yet see
my self overwhelmed with all reproaches. O! Cruel one, said she unto her, these
reproaches touch you but little, and you very well prepare your self thereunto,
and are prepared to make me this discourse. But believe not that I make you do
it long, I will put my self very suddenly in a state where I shall never be
able to make you do it. He became silent there, and continued his eyes a long
time fixed upon the ground, sometime lifting them up toward heaven
notwithstanding, where he stretched out his arms also sometimes as demanding
vengeance, for the cruelty of Zelie. On the other side, these last words had
also penetrated the heart of Zelie, the shepherdess, with so vigorous a pain,
and gave her such an apprehension, that carried and bare her away to such a
point of extremity, that she knew not where she was. At length she tare their
silence asunder, and tenderly said unto him with a voice feeble enough: Well
Tarsis, is this what you have promised me, not to hate me for that which I was
going to tell you? At these words Tarsis looking upon her with eyes capable to
cleave any heart with pity, and whence Trickled a Thousand Tears: Ah! Zelie,
said he unto her, I do keep you my word too well, and if I could hate you, you
should not see me in the Transporture, nor the despair wherein I am. Then he
beheld the shepherdess grew pale, and in effect the fatigation, and faintness
with the grief and pain joining themselves together to the great weakness
wherein her disease left her, caused her to fall to the ground; and possibly it
had not been without dangerously hurting her, so did all her strength abandon
her all at once, if the shepherd had not upheld her in her fall, and caused his
feet to lean at the foot of a tree very near them, grief and pain had toyled
him, in such a nature, that he neither dreamed of calling us, nor yet to fetch
water from the River, to cast in her face and cause her to revive, so that poor
Zelie remained there a long time without speech, without strength, sense or
motion, unless some affectionate amorous aspect which she piningly, and
pitifully cast upon Tarsis, who with one knee on ground held one of her fair
hands between his, and endeared them with an infinite number of tears.

Never was Spectacle more touching, and Melicerte, my self, and Philiste were
the mournful Witnesses thereof. For as we took notice that there was some time
past, that we had not heard them behind us, I returned to see what was become
of them, and we discerned them afar off in this lamentable condition. I
advanced forward toward their Succor, and having made Zelie revive, we caused
her to be carried to Callioure by some Shepherds where we followed them all
very sad and mournful.

The Morrow we returned, my Brother and my self, from this Hamlet to Callioure,
to learn some News of the State of Leucippes Health and of hers, when a little
Shepherd gave this Ticket to Tarsis which is doubtless the Original which she
kept. For see how many Lines she has begun and blotted out afterward, before
she would determine with her self in what manner to write to him, see how many
razings out and words changed and replaced, and all that marked out well; the
trouble with which she was agitated! But behold what she writ in Conclusion.

ZELIE to TARSIS.
THis is to reiterate you the Request I made you Yesterday, which I write you
this day. You may judge of the violence I suffered by the State wherein you saw
me, and the excess of my Dolor ought in my Apprension purge me from your
Reproaches, I hope that Leucippe will be touched, and that when his Life is out
of danger, he will have a care of ours: But in waiting I demand and desire of
you but three things; Not to see me till the State of our Affairs are changed
to preserve your self, and not to hate me.

ZELIE.


The same reason which has made me already pass by many other things, yet
impedes me to stop me here, by the Testimonies that Tarsis gave of the grief
that Letter had caused to fall upon him, and to declare unto you how many times
he re-perused it, to see if he were not deceived, and if he could not find
there some favorable word to disabuse himself: for if I should dwell upon
these Particularities, 'twould be to have no end. When he was well confirmed in
the Truth of what he saw, he was born away by a thousand Transports which
cannot possibly be imagined. But in conclusion, he was forced to resolve, and
having his Soul full of anguish, but yet at the self same time full of Love and
Respect for Zelie, he entered into the very next House, where having taken Paper
he wrote the answer that you see, and besought me even my self to give it to
that Shepherdess.

TARSIS to ZELIE.
THere is so long a time past that I have bin unfortunate, that I should
thereunto be accustomed, and possibly also, constant in some Disgrace or other;
but that of this kind is to me a Novelty; the same Hand who was wont to solace
me, in times past, makes me despair this day. I have not, nor do find wherewith
to contradict it, since it depends upon the Health of Leucippe. My Life is in
such a Nature at your beck, that you have a right to redeem his, and not being
capable to loose it at your Service in particular, I shall verily Sacrifice it
for the Health of some of yours.

TARSIS.


You see Agamee that this Letter is in the end of all our Papers, and the last
that Tarsis writ unto her. And there was the State of his Affection and of his
Disgrace, there was not any thing left of change, unless it were that Leucippe
was perfectly recovered afterward, there remained but a little trouble, his
Indisposition seemed to have added to his natural melancholy; when the
conclusion of the Marriage between Tarsis and Zelie had bin obstructed by the
strange Accidents that you have known and understood.

There remains no more to me to add you, but a Circumstance which will
undoubtedly make you bewail him more than any other thing. Besides the accident
which has happened, Leucippe overcome by the virtue and complaisance of Zelie,
declared to me even yesterday that although he had not any way signified to his
Daughter, nor yet to Melicerte, any kind of thing, he was however resolved
immediately upon his recovery, to accomplish the desire of these two
unfortunate Lovers, with the Felicity that my Brother had so much desired.

Telamon having thus finished, Agamee resumed the Discourse, and signified to
this Shepherd the extreme satisfaction he had received in their reading and his
recital. It Is requisite that I avow to you, wise Shepherd, said he to him, that
what admiration soever, I had had for Tarsis, combating and performing so many
rare Exploits and noble Feats with his dear Telamon at Chalcedony, and at
Panticapee, I have had no less an esteem for Tarsis loving at Tempe, and if I
have infinitely bewailed him, in the Prisons of Lysimachus and of the King of
the Bosphorus, he has not made me less compassionate in the Shackles and
Fetters of the Virtuous, but too delicate and too scrupulous Zelie. For in
fine, if at present she were not possibly, rather in a State to be bewailed
than blamed, I could not refrain, to have her taste the ill of this
superstitious Imagination which had caused her to banish Tarsis so unseanably
without doubt, (as you have said) as she has done and and has bin the cause
of all the misfortunes which have happened them afterward. But I am no more
astonished now at the strange Disquietudes of Tarsis to know what possibly may
become of her; for I see not in all that you have taught me, any thing that can
assist me in never so small a manner to divine what could have bin the Subject
or Ground which should cause her to disappear for so long a time. I cannot find
any reason, nor do I imagine why she should flee from her Fathers House, nor be
disposed to fear she should be carried a way by any Rivals; since that by good
Fortune, particular enough in a Man who loves so fair a Person, I apprehend not
therein Tarsis has bin crossed and thwarted. I see well that it is the great
stayedness wherein she has bin brought up and educated, the Prudence of
Melicerte, and the small hope that they also found to walk upon the Track of
Tarsis, which has warranted her from so universal an Evil in Love. But
whatsoever it be, the less I see the cause of the loss of this Shepherdess, and
the more I apprehend some mournful Accident, whereof there is not yet any
discovery made or distrusted. They afterward had some discourse on this
Subject, and as it grew exceeding late, Agamee took leave of Telamon who
promised to go and see him the next day.

The End of the Second Book of the Second Part.
Tarsis and Zelie. The Second Part. The Third BOOK.
THe amorous Tarsis continued in the mean time, searching her out with all the
diligence of a Man, who saw his Salvation and Health fixed, in the discovery of
that whereof he was in pursuit. He had soon crossed over a great part of the
Forest, and judging well, that Women could not walk so many Steps in so short a
time, he returned upon his first Track, and repassed twenty times by the same
places, without meeting that which he hoped and was in quest of. In fine, weary
of so unprofitable a search, and seeing the night began to increase and thicken
it is obscurity, and to take from him the means of discerning the Objects that
presented themselves to his sight and view; he had recourse to the Voice, and
made all the Forest resound and echo of the Name of Zelie. But nothing made
him an answer but the echo of the Mount which he nearly approached unto: so
that after having unprofitably run on all sides, he was in the end constrained,
as well through his Grief as Pain, and by the want of Strength, to betake
himself to the foot of a Tree, where he lay also smitten with displeasure,
whereas he was before animated with Joy, there a thousand mournful Thoughts
came crowding to dissipate those Beams of hope which had some Moments before
bin re-given him in the day, and fear succeeding this same hope, it made in his
Heart a new Combat, between these two Passions in which his reason was a
hundred times ready to leave him. So that he addressed himself to things
insensible, unto whom he spoke as if they had bin able to understand him, and
'twas only occasioned, through the small effect of his Fear.

Sometimes he complained to the Trees, accusing them by their thickness to have
taken away the means of following the sight of his Shepherdess, then he would
address himself to the Sun, to have too soon precipitated and hastened it is
going down, and reproached it to have formerly stopped it is Course for a less
important Occasion; and soon in returning to the Vail or Scarce of Zelie that
he had gathered up, and approached it to his Mouth with Transport, he seemed to
conjure it to tell him if it was not true that his Shepherdess was yet living,
and to demand of it the cause of her absence and the places of her retreat.

A profound Silence had succeeded these Complaints, and his Grief shut up again
in his Heart, was no otherwise expressed than by Sighs which he was forced to
burst forth time after time, when he heard the Noise of some Persons speaking,
and having thereunto lent an ear, he judged they advanced toward him. Their
Voices appeared to him to be those of Women, and with the attention which he
thereunto gave, he understood that one said, I am not come yet out of my right,
but it is time that we retire our selves, to morrow we will come to seek your
Vail.

These words made Tarsis to judge that these were the Women he was in quest of;
and indeed he soon understood the Person to continue after this sort. Without
lying or dissimulation, yours is a sad Destiny, to be reduced to take flight
from your Parents, to hide your self in the Forests, and know not which to
fear, either savage and bruit Beasts or Men. But is it possible that the Son of
Alcidias has not bin advertized, that he has not bin touched, and that you
have no News from him? These words seeming to be marvellously relating to those
of Tarsis and Zelie, strangly alarmed the Heart of the Shepherd. He knew not
whether it were better for him to speak and make himself known, or whether he
should content himself, and softly follow these Persons and attempt to learn
the place whereunto they retired. His Love growing Impatient, pressed him to
name himself, and go to cast himself at the feet of her whom he took to be
Zelie, and to go and make her see the injustice of a doubt, which seemed to him
to be outrageous, but the fear that he saw them in, to be known, gave him
apprehension that it would make them fly in his approaching them; and as one
of the precedent nights, when he named himself to Zelie upon the River, the
design of making himself known, had so ill succeeded, he had a thousand Fears
to be no more happy in a second Attempt and Probation. In this perplexity he
knew not what to determine, yet notwithstanding, he still rose up without making
any noise, when he understood her who had not yet spoken, answer the other thus
after sighing once or twice or thrice. Ah! Cosen, the Son of Alcidias shall
always be the same that he has bin, as my Brother shall never be other than
cruel and without Pity. It Is therefore my Resolution having well thought
thereupon, I believe it is better for me to embrace the Condition which I
refused, and to give my self solely to the Gods, since there is nothing but
Inconstancy and cruelty in Men. These Terms all obscure as they were to Tarsis,
did not but too much enlighten him the entire doubt which held his mind in
suspense. He very perfectly knew by that Voice that the Person who so spoke was
not Zel^e, and that Fortune had taken Pleasure to abuse him by some resemblance
or similitude of Height and Habit, and by an equivocation of words. It is not
possible to express or conceive how much Pain and Grief seized him at the same
Instant; he had before lifted up himself half, he had then but one Knee upon
the ground, and his hand leaning against a Tree, at the foot whereof he was
sat, making the last Effort and Endeavor, to finish the putting him in a
condition either to follow these two unknown, or to go and cast himself at
their Feet according as he should there determine by his last Resolution: but
after he had understood these words, his Strength and his Hope left him all at
once, and he fell again through weakness at the Foot of the same Tree, as at
the felling down of a Man whose sense of feeling had abandoned him. He remained
a long time in that state, and so much out of himself, that these Persons went
away farther off without his speaking to them, nor had he any desire to do it.
However he retook his Spirits, and in some sort came to himself, and Love which
in a moment came to stifle in him all sorts of Curisioty, had no sooner let him
loose the occasion of satisfying it, but it reflamed and rekindled to torment
him afresh, and gave him a more impatient desire than ever before, to know what
these unknown Ones were. The name of the Son of Alcidias that they both had
pronounced made him see enough, if he had not some Interest in this Adventure
himself, undoubtedly some of his Brothers had. But this consideration
contributed nothing to the desire he had to rejoyn them; his Love permitted not
his Heart should possibly be sensible of other Motives but of those that
concerned his Passion.

He was not tormented, but by the Inquietude to know how this vail of Zelie was
fatally fallen between the hands of these Strangers. He railed himself more
unquiet than ever, and impatient to repair the fault which he had committed, in
not enlightening himself, he ran with all his might to the place where he
imagined those Women were gone: but be it that he understood them walking they
hid themselves behind some Bush, be it that he took not the way that they had
held, so that it came to pass, that it was impossible for him to find them
again.

That was then a strange redoubling of his disquiets, although that they were
already such before that time, that it seemed that they could not augment, for
this poor Shepherd sought in his mind, what he would have asked of these
Strangers, and interrogating himself of the manner wherewith these precious
Relics of his Shepherdess could possibly come into the hands of one unknown,
he drew out the most dismal Conjectures, and of all that he had said himself,
he said nothing but what would bring him to despair. It must not be more
doubted, cried he, but that Zelie is dead, and it cannot be but by reason of
her death these spoils could fall into other hands. Ah Fortune! Fortune!
Wherefore delayest thou so long to assure me of the Death of Zelie. Oh Oh
Fortune why do thou take Pleasure to abuse me, and prolong my Life by such
deceivable Hopes? But idle Shepherd! replied he, a little afterward, it is of
thy self that thou should complain much rather than by that of Fortune. Had
she not already sufficiently advertized thee of thy Misfortune? Could thou
doubt of the loss of Zelie after all that had past that deplorable night, where
she made thee understand out of her own mouth, that she had an intent to loose
her self? Was not this enough to infuse Courage in thee to follow her? Was not
that enough to incite thee to seek the Remedy, that the Gods have in the end,
bin obliged to Counsel thee themselves by their Oracles? and when thou had
not bin assured that Zelie was not more in the World, the sole doubt of her
loss should not that have bin more than sufficient to oblige thee a hundred
times to dye? Without doubt this was fortunately that his hand found it self
disarmed in the time, that he abandoned his Soul to the Transports of his
Grief; for if he had had his Dart, yet it could not longer have deferred to
have put an end to a Life that he conserved but by regret, and which he
believed he could not prolong without shame. The precipitation of the Course
wherein he found himself engaged to follow these unknown Ones, had not given
him leisure nor time to retire from the Body of that furious Bruit that he had
slain, and the night permitted him not any longer, to disintagle himself from
the place where he had left it, he was obliged to retire himself without doing
himself at that time any more evil than those mournful and cruel News had given
him. But his despair held not there a long time.

The Morrow Telamon arose very early in the Morning to go to see Agamee, as he
had promised the preceding evening. Philiste who would go to render her Devoirs
to the wise Melicerte, whom she saw every day after the accident of her Sister,
clothed her self to take the Air, and chiefly, to take occasion to walk part
of the way with her Husband, he would not go forth before he had made a turn in
the Chamber of Tarsis, to learn why he retired so late the preceding night;
and also to know if he would not be one of the Party to which he was very
willing to engage him, whereby to have diverted him, he opened the door of his
Chamber, and entering was very much surprised, to see him in all his Clothes
upon his Bed, which appeared not to be unmade; and much more yet when he
observed his head uncovered, his Hat upon the Floor, one of his Arms hanging
over the Bed, with some signs and marks of Blood, and the other folded under
his Body in so odd and constrained a posture, that it could not have bin
possible for him to have had any rest or repose. But it was a much greater
amazement, when he approached him nearer, and saw the Coverlet all be bloudied
and poor Tarsis weltring in his Blood. He made a great cry, called for Succor,
and all in confusion seeking and searching after the Wound of this unfortunate
Lover, he observed that he was layen upon an Arrow, which the weight of his
Body had broken, which yet he held under him with the right hand, the point
whereof was sunk into his Stomach. At the view whereof, Telamon thought of
dying himself with the Wound of his dear Brother, and all his Wisdom could not
defend him from the reach and stroke of the most forcible and violent Pain and
Grief. Ah Philiste! cried he to her, seeing her enter, poor Tarsis is dead; and
behold the Issue of this dismal Oracle, and undoubtedly the cause of this
sudden and unexpected Joy, whereof we were all astonished yesterday at night.
At these words poor Philiste appeared as smitten with a Thunderbolt.

She immediately became pale, silent, and immovable, afterward pouring forth
abundance of Tears all at once from her eyes: O Gods! cried she, what have we
done unto you, to over-whelm us all at once with so many Evils? At the same
time she went to cast her self upon the Body of poor Tarsis which she watered
with a Thousand Tears.

Telamon immediately sent to fetch a Surgeon to see if he had yet some life
remaining, and in the mean while having himself uncovered his Stomach he began
with his handkercheif to wipe off the blood which was round about the wound,
and which was already all curded. However he found yet some heat and warmth in
his body, and which was the first thing that gave him any glimpse of hope, the
Surgeon having considered the wound observed, that the point of the arrow
could not have penetrated very far in, by reason it went sloping, and one might
yet see one part of the Iron head without the Wound. He drew it entirely out by
good Fortune, but the abundance of Blood which issued out or the Wound the same
time, having hindered him to search and found it, he was constrained to content
himself to apply Swathes to stanch it, and to attend a second dressing.

The Consolation which he gave Telamon and Philiste, was to assure them that
Tarsis was not yet quite dead; and immediately afterward he gave them certain
marks thereof, by reason they saw him open his eyes and began to retrieve his
Spirits. Telamon and Philiste were then at the Boulster of his Bed, whence they
were not able to pluck him, and it was Philiste who having first seen him open
his eyes, advizing him to retake a little Courage, in saying to him, how now my
Brother: what do you thus abandon poor Zelie? At this word his eyes appeared
re-animated, and he turned them softly round about on all sides to seek the
Person whose name he had heard: but not finding her, he immediately closed
them again, as if he had had no occasion of Light, since it could not discover
him the Person in whom he took Pleasure and delight.

They immediately unclothed him to put him into his Bed, and Philiste her self
assisted in preparing him, saw the Vail of Zelie which this Shepherd had
casually met the preceding Evening. He had for his Consolation brought it with
him, and he was willing to dye kissing those precious remains of his
Shepherdess. So that they found him again bedewed with his Tears, and in that
certain place where his Mouth before had leaned. Philiste was not long without
remembering and knowing it.

She immediately carried it to her Husband all astonished. Ah Telamon! said
she, what is that which this signifies? Behold the Vail of my poor Sister. See
you these Letters intermingled? This is the very self same, that Tarsis brought
her his last Voyage from Athens. Telamon presently knew it, and was no less
astonished than Philiste.

In the interim, this deplorable Accident having interrupted the Visit of
Telamon, Agamee was weary of attending so long a time at the House, and went
out to go before him. The little space that had passed whilst he was in Tempe,
and the length of the way from Cenome to the House of Nephelocrate which was
very far upon the Sea Shore, permitted him not yet perfectly to know the way.
So as he was elsewhere more occupied in his Thoughts than attentive, or heedy
in observing the places, he dreamed not at the first of the Corner of the
place, but instead of going straight forward as he did, he should have turned
to the left hand, so that he soon found himself out of the way. It is true the
pleasantness of the way did comfort him, for when he was at the height of the
Plain in a certain place whence one might discover all the City of Gonnes, and
whence one might see all the River of Penee turning and winding to and fro in
its large Channel, in the midst of that fair and rich Plain and level Ground,
and receive the Tribute of a hundred little Streams and Currents of Water, who
after having bathed and moistened the Feet of many Hamlets and a hundred
delectable Hills, go to mix their Waters with those of that great River: he
admired a thousand and a thousand times the Beauty of that incomparable
Residence, and sound it more preferrable and highlier to be esteemed, than all
that of Athens, and even all Greece had not a more rare and a more splendidly
sumptuous and stately; and believed it equal to all that that the Poets had
imagined of the Elisian Fields. After he had advanced some paces he found
himself in a way strait enough, covered with Hedges on all sides and which
descended to a bottom. He thence discovered a Meadow crossed through the
midst with four rows of Willows, which form three long Alleys, and which go
to but at a young Wood which is on the other side of the Meadow. These four
rows of Willows are watered by four small Streams which glide and gently flow
at the foot of these Trees, and who reuniting themselves in one single Channel,
at the end of the Alley, return somewhat lower almost to make them circulate
the Meadow, forming a quantity of cranklings and wriglings, and frequently
returning upon themselves, as if they had a regret, and were unwilling to leave
that delicate and acceptable place. Agamee remained some time to consider this
fair Prospect and although he sought as much as in him was possible, the
Company to divert the thought of his disgraces, he could not however refrain to
enter farther into a Solitude so charming. He therefore descended even to these
Alleys of willow Trees, and entering into that of the midst, he remained there
yet a while to behold the same Landscape, which by the difference of that
certain place more elevated whence he saw it before and that wherein then he
was, formed a prospect or perspective all different, and yet more delectable
than the former; for he saw himself surrounded with Hills on all sides, whereof
there was not one single one, but had it is riches, it is diversity and it is
particular Embellishment. The Sun was then already risen upon the Horizon, and
it is Rays and Beams regathered, compacted in the bottom of this Meadow,
commenced to surmount there the coolness and freshness which naturally it
received from the abundance of the Streams and Currents of Water. Behold
wherefore Agamee who had already walked much, seeing that as well the hour that
Telamon had promised to come to him to visit him was passed, and that he should
unprofitably return home, he resolved to go and repose himself in that little
Wood that he saw at the end of those Alleys. In walking he saw a quantity of
Figures, Ciphers and Characters on the Bodies of the Trees with the letters T
and Z intermixed. He also discerned there even some entire words, and because
he had then no other design than to divert his Grief and disappointment, he had
the curiosity to read them. The Character was then already old, and the bark or
rine of the Trees had even covered again some places: Notwithstanding he missed
not, to discern clearly the names of Tarsis and Zelie in many places; there was
one certain one, amongst others where he saw that under the name of Zelie,
there were these two succeeding Lines, Her Name is graven on the Trees,
And her Portrait is graven in the Heart.


It was not difficult for him to divine who was the Author, the Love of Tarsis
being known unto him; and that what Subject soever he had himself to bewail
this Passion, he had his Heart very sensible and naturally feeling; he took
Pleasure to see himself in a place, where a Lover was filled with the marks of
his own. In entering into the Wood he met another small Stream, which followed
the declension, and descending toward the lower part of the Meadow. The Water
was fairer, and the bank or brink garnished and adorned with a most pleasant
green Turfe, able enough even to tempt a melancholy One. He could not refrain
from sitting down in that place, if he had not perceived a little Closet
composed of many young Trees planted round about, whose Branches intermixed
above, framed a kind of Vault so thick that the Sun could hardly be able to
penetrate it. The entrance of this Closet or Arbor served as an Issue to the
Stream or Current which went out by the midst, leaving only on every side the
passage for one person.

Agamee being entered into that place, met there the pleasant Source and Spring
of that Water. That certain place was elevated and raised up higher than the
rest. So that descending a little from on high, it made a little noise which in
despite of Fate, invited one to talk idly and fantastically. Above the Spring
was one Tree bigger than the others, which seemed to embrace the Vein of it is
roots, and whose foot apparelled with green Moss, offered a commodious Seat to
all those who came to the place. Although that Agamee carefully enough shunned
being alone, because there was little but his Memory that revived and recovered
him from the Ideas that he fled, and which gave him not a thousand disgustful
Thoughts; howsoever he could not refrain himself for this once to take pleasure
there, in a place which seemed to be made expressly to talk Idly: and the little
time that he had bin at Tempe had also already caused him sufficiently to see
diversity of things, to give him wherewithal to entertain the Adventures and
Accidents of others without afflicting himself by the remembrance of his own.
He therefore sat at the Foot of this great Tree with a design to meditate
there some moments; But he had not any thing to do to trouble himself, he
should find wherewithal to entertain himself. Fortune there provided him a
sufficiency enough. For first in sitting down he saw that the Stock of this
Tree which was extraordinary big, was all covered over with an Inscription,
fresh, recent, and new enough. It was very small by reason there was very much
thereof: But as it was also fresh and new enough, and the Character very clear,
he with facility could there read these Lines.

The other day in this Solitude, one overwhelmed with Love and Care, bemoaning
himself of his disquietudes, by these Lines the desolate Tarsis which made him
go loose his Life; I dye and I cannot be cured, but I dye for fair Zelie, am I
not too happy to dye, O my eyes pour down no more tears to the rigor of
Destinies which attend me: Death has always too many charms when the Object
that causes it has so many; there was no more than that upon the first Tree;
but there were other two some what less near unto that there, upon every of
which was Engraven, One of these two other fair Streams which my fair
Shepherdess so often warms with her eyes, the Sun sees it, when it enlightens
thee with so much Heat, and so much Light as they.

What have thou done with the portrait of the fair one, which in thy Bosom was
so often graved? Ah! fair Water I am much more faithful, and my Heart has much
better conserved it.

Agamee which loved the Fancy, and who was himself sometime entangled, having
read this, drew his writing Tables out, with design to copy them out, wherein
there was something appeared to him to be tender enough of; and in part also
signified to Tarsis, (he hoped to see very soon, and whom he had not charged to
divine the Accident) the esteem he had made of his Composition. But as he had
finished to set them down, he felt something to pluck the Tables from his Hand.

That which surprised him most, was that he saw no body about him, but the
noise that he had heard, having obliged him to look athwart the Arbor or
Closet, he discerned among the Willows a Man who had a Sword by his side, and
who in flying made great burstings forth of Laughter. This Man lifted up even
from time to time his two hands in the Air, in one whereof he yet held the
Table Book that he had plucked from Agamee; afterward bending all his Body he
leaned upon his two Knees, betaking himself to laugh more and more. Agamee was
extremely astonished at this Eruption. He went forth of the Arbor to follow
him; and because this Man returned from time to time, he had by this means the
opportunity to look him in the Face: However he found not himself better
enlightened, for he knew him not, and believed he had never seen him before. He
therefore doubted that this unknown one had taken him for another, then when he
saw him stop to read that which was in the Table Book; and in the Sequel the
same Man approaching himself to him with a swift pace, drew out of his Pocket a
Paper which he presented him. Read that, said he, in a strange and incompatible
manner and remark it is Style. Agamee having by this means the liberty to
consider him, came a little nearer and found I know not what wandering in his
eyes which was suitable to the extravagancy that he had before demonstrated,
and therefore caused him to doubt if the Man was very wise. And indeed he had
great reason to doubt it; For behold who he was, as he learnt immediately after.

It was a Roman Knight named Marcel whom the desire of Traveling had brought
from Italy into Greece. In passing by Callioure he became amorous of Zelie by
having only once seen her in the Temple, and this Love having made in his Heart
an Impression, worthy of the excess of so great a Beauty, had caused him to
remain one or two years at Tempe.

During that time, he had not only found means to introduce himself into
Leucippe's House, but he had also demanded Zelie in Marriage; and the refusal
that they had made him, had born him away to so great an excess of Trouble,
that he was fallen very dangerously sick, and recovered not his bodily
Indisposition but with a Malady in the Mind much more dangerous; in his Folly
his Vision was that the Gods had destinated him to marry Zelie, so that he
called himself, The predestined Knight. He had even publicly sworn to carry
away that Shepherdess; he had suborned People expressly, and extravagantly said
every where, that if he could not compass his end by force, he knew the means
how to succeed by forcery. Although Leucippe took all that, as from a Fool;
however he was alarmed, and sometimes was unwilling to suffer Zelie to go
forth, lest she should be exposed to some affront.

Melicerte had written a Letter full of Wit and Jestingly to Tarsis, who then
was absent. That Letter amongst others, mentioned that after his departure
Zelie could not go forth any more, that there was come a Knight a Magician, to
Callioure who had held her in an enchanted Prison, and that he had besought him
to consult some Oracle, or some other Magician to know how they might be able
to take off the Enchantment. Tarsis had answered to this jesting by another in
verse that he had addressed to Zelie, and in conclusion it was therein
mentioned that Tarsis was upon the point of his return in effect, and sent her
word he would soon come to deliver her. Melicerte having found these Lines
sufficiently pertinent, had caused them to be seen amongst some of her Friends,
and there had run Copies, one whereof had fallen into the Hands of Marcel.
Zelie having therefore disappeared afterward, as we have said. This Vision,
Fantasy or Apparition put it into his mind, that it was Tarsis who had carried
her away, and it was that wherewith he vaunted and boasted in his Verses. So
that in this ridiculous imagination, he came to seek him to quarrel with him,
when in passing by this Wood he had met Agamee. Immediately Marcel who knew
that this Wood was not far from the dwelling of Telamon, and that Tarsis came
there frequently enough to walk, was not near approached to Agamee, but to see
athwart the Arbor if it was not that Shepherd; and although that being near he
had very well observed it was not he, however finding the Table Book in his
Hand, he omitted not through Extravagancy to snatch it away, and then to fly as
we have said. But afterward having rested and stayed to read that which was
therein, he there saw these Lines of Tarsis, the Copy whereof Agamee had taken,
as we have said before; and having found them so passionate for Zelie, and made
in the name of Tarsis in a place convenient and beseeming the very Solitude
where he met this Athenian, his Folly had in a moment, caused it to come and
mount up in his Brain that Agamee was Tarsis, and was come from composing these
Verses for Zelie: but having perceived him, fear had obliged him to conceal
himself under another Visage, as he had read another time among the Poets that
the same had happened to some certain Ones. Behold therefore the reason why he
was returned so furiously to him, and he had presented him the Paper whereof we
have spoken to let him know the Verses, for it contained nothing but the Reply
of Tarsis to this enchanted Prisoner whereof Melicerte had written to him, and
indeed Agamee having thereon cast his eyes he there read these Words.

A Stanza to Zelie.
I Have bin advertised, fair Shepherdess, that by a casual Lottery, a
predestined Knight keeps you a Prisoner at your home, and that when you
thought to depart, you could not go out but by a strange Adventure; you who
made your self to be feared, you now this day fear your self and that your
Prison avengeth me for that wherein you held me, that a Soul a little
vindicative should receive the Consolation to learn in his true feeling, and
sensible Apprehension, the disgrace which happens unto you; have I not a little
Amity and Friendship, to be able to be without Pity. I would insult over your
Pains, I would laugh at your Bonds and all your inhumane Evils as you have done
at mine.


There were also diverse Lines afterward; but as Agamee saw he understood
nothing, because he was ignorant of the Labyrinth and Intrigue, they did
nothing but consider the extravagancy of this Man, so that being unwilling to
maintain Conversation with an unknown One, whereof he had this Opinion, he
rendered them to him coldly, after having only read these two Lines, and in
rendering them to him he said unto him, very well, and demanded of him his Table
Book. How well? perfidious Tarsis! cried the other. Thou call to me to
deliver Zelie, then chargest me to have carried her away. Render render me
Zelie, and in saying these words he seized him by the arm rudely enough. Agamee
did but smile, and as he knew that it was requisite to treat some sort of
People with gentleness, as he saw in what state he was, he took him only by the
Hand, with the other he had laid hold on him, that he might release his hold in
saying unto him, you take me for Tarsis, nor am I Tarsis, nor do I pretend to
be the deliverer of Zelie, and I have never yet seen her. Thou dissemblest in
vain that which thy Table Book makes me learn, replied Marcel; and thou
unprofitably attemptest, thou cowardly and treacherous Ravisher, to conceal thy
self under a false Visage, and under gray Hairs. As if I had not learnt in a
very good Author that Ulysses had formerly done so much to disguise himself
from his Wife or Son; either thou must presently dye, or thou shall render me
Zelie. In saying this, he would have put his hand to his Sword: But Agamee
leapt upon him to take it away, and endeavoring still to disabuse him; that
wherewith you reproach me, said he unto him, is impossible for a Man. Know you
not since you have read Homer, that it was not Ulysses who had disguised
himself so, and that he was not changed, but by the Power of Minerva? Ah
Traitor Tarsis! cried he, even this furious One again, thou art not unprovided
of the Gods who also take care of thee. Love that thou say in thy Verses, to
be the deliverer of Zelie, has well made other Metamorphoses, and he knows
much more of all that Fact there, than Minerva. Render me Zelie I say unto
thee, or render me my Sword that I may kill thee, Agamee who in the Interim,
had disarmed him reylyed to him, As for Zelie I have already told thee that I
know not where she is, and as for thy Sword, I promise to give it thee at thy
home when thou shall be there retired.

The great Noise they made had drawn to that place some Shepherds, and some
Shepherdesses who kept their Flocks there hard by. The Spiritual Ergaste and
the chuffy Celemante were there amongst others with Arelise. They all three
were much astonished to find two men, laying hold one of another with a drawn
Sword. The two Shepherds approacht to separate them; when Agamee who being
seized with the Sword, and disintangled out of the hands of this furious One,
he knew both the one and the other.

Ergaste and Celemante betook themselves to laugh, at this pleasant difference,
when they saw them conclude without appearance of Evil: and much rather when
they knew how it was caused; but to disingage themselves from Marcel they
assured him that Agamee was not Tarsis; and having appeased him, and well
informing him of the Truth, they sent him away with his Sword. The first thing
that he did was to seek that Tree where Agamee had told him he had taken a
duplicate of the Verses, and having found it he there gave it a hundred strokes
with the edge of his Sword, to break away the Bark and the Writing, afterward
he treated in the same manner all those where he perceived the name of Tarsis.

On the other side Arelise, Ergaste and Celemante having separated themselves
from other Shepherds, discovered the Riddle to Agamee, they told him who Marcel
was, and the History of his Love which was known all over Tempe. It was Ergaste
who made the Relation; and Celemante resuming the discourse, afterward added:
Well, said Agamee, see if one can too much hate Love, which makes Fools so
importunate and foolishly furious; and if I had not yesterday much more reason
to condemn it than had Ergaste to uphold it.

Ergaste say I, whom we shall undoubtedly one day see even as Marcel. Speak no
more Celemante, answered Agamee; you have lost your cause, since you durst not
appear yesterday at the Assignation. Sincere and upright Agamee, replied
Celemante, you are too just and equitable to condemn a Man without hearing him;
and I am assured that you are not accustomed nor used so to do at or in
Areopage. But replied Agamee; How can one understand a Man that flies? It Is
true, that I absented my self yesterday, replied Celemante: But you go to see
that it was not but to think upon my defense. If I had not written this,
turbulent Ergaste would never have given me the Patience to explicate it unto
you. But hold Agamee, see now if my cause be not the best; I had taken with me
the Paper, with a design to carry it to you this day. At these words, he gave
him the same writing which he had done the preceding day.

Agamee saw that there was this Title. A Manifesto of Celemante, against
Ergaste, Ho! Ho! cried Ergaste after he had also read it; I well see that it is
a great War that thou wagest and denouncest against me, because thou must have
Manifesto's and notorious Evidences. Doubt it not, replied Celemante, I pretend
to arm all Greece against thee; and Agamee shall judge if I have not as much
ground and subject as Menelaus formerly had, to lead him to the Siege of Troy,
since thou have robbed me of a Mistress. Ergaste who mistrusted what he would
say, betook himself to smile and replied to him: In truth Celemante, I take
thee even thy self, to be also as very a Fool as Marcel, and I put no
difference thereunto, unless that thou art a pleasant Fool, and he is a
melancholy One. They will not believe you, Ergaste, replied Agamee smiling
also; let us see his Reasons. But it seems to me that it would be proper and
to purpose that we were sat; for the Manifesto is a little long, and the
Affair well merits to be examined leisurely. I would only that Telamon and
Tarsis were here, to declare also their Advice, because they were present at
the breaking out of the difference. Arelise who yet knew not any thing no more
than the others of the tragical Adventures of Tarsis, said it would be worth
the while, and she should be glad to have them called because the Lodging of
Telamon was near, and that the Wood and the Meadow which they saw on the other
side, appertained to him; and Agamee condemned Celemante to take the Pains,
because that to justify him they assembled. In the Interim for reposing
himself they went to sit with Arelise on the other side of the Wood on the edge
of the plain, where their Flocks were, and they showed him the certain place
where they would expect him. Although that Celemante had promised to return
immediately. However after he was departed, impatience took them to see the
Writing that he had given to Agamee, and they were well pleased to read it in
his absence to speak their Sentiments with the more Liberty. They had no sooner
sat down, but they saw Choris pass by who sang, and who sporting with her
Crook went to see Arelise. Arelise who mistrusted it called her, and Agamee was
ravished to know her, having understood that she was the good Friend of
Celemante: they easily engaged to sit down with them, and to hear the reading
of the Paper Celemante had left them. Agamee having opened it read there that
which follows.

The Manifesto of Celemante.
THe bloody War, which Celemante declares and denounces against the
unfaithful Ergaste, desire, that all Posterity which shall understand it, may
also know the causes of their Rupture, and that they remit not to the Judgment
of one single Age, the Decision of a thing so Important.

Celemante studied at Athens in the Gardens of the great Epicurus, and from the
very first year he was rendered more skilful than his Master. For he extremely
loved Pleasure, exceedingly hated Grief and Dolor, sought but to give himself
over to past time, and would consider of things no farther than they could
contribute to his Joy. He lived exempt from all inquietudes and passions, not
establishing sovereign Felicity but in the Health of the Body and Mind, and he
was possessed of both the one and the other, when perfidious Ergaste made a
Conspiracy against his Rest and Repose, that is to say, that he undertook to
make him his Friend.

It is difficult to imagine, for what Reasons; for there was little Sympathy
betwixt them. Celemante was more peaceable and more sweet and gentle than a
sucking Lamb: A great Lion is not more furious nor full of rage and Choler
than Ergaste. However this Ergaste proposed to the other to band Friendship and
Amity together: and Celemante replied to him in this manner. Ergaste, I esteem
thee, I love thee, and I will serve thee with Pleasure sooner than any
whomsoever on all occasions wherein I am capable to do it. If it be that thou
call Friendship, unprofitably thou proposest to me to make any, for that is
already all on my side made, and thou have no other than to use even the self
same on thine, but if it be something more, I counsel thee not to demand or ask
it from me, for I would not answer thee. Have thou no shame, replied Ergaste,
(already almost in a rage) to be ignorant what belongs to Amity and Friendship?
and not to know the first and the most amiable Virtue of Civil Society? I would
through Charity draw thee out of thy Ignorance. Know, Celemante, that
Friendship first and principally, requires that we prefer our Friend to our
selves. Continue and remain there, Ergaste immediately interrupted Celemante,
for I tell thee, that if I would make a Friend, I would make him by reason of
my own self, and not doing it but because of my self, I shall always love my
self more than he; I have a better Opinion of thee than thou have thy self,
said Ergaste; replied Ergaste, and since I have believed thee worthy to make
thee my Friend, I will not that thou deceive me, listen therefore. This
preferrence comprehends four principal things; to give in time of need all his
Wealth for his Friend, to communicate him all his Secrets, to take a share in
all his Afflictions, and even to dye for him upon an occasion.

Celemante believed himself falling from the height of the Clouds, so much was
he astonished, when he understood this new and pernicious Doctrine: But much
more yet when Ergaste continued so. These four things yet comprehend a great
many others, which seeming to be more lighter are therefore yet more essential;
to wit, not to please himself but with his Friend; to be troubled at his
absence; liberally and freely to reprehend his Faults; to be afflicted for his
least Evil. Behold too many, Ergaste! cried Celemante, interrupting him, and I
declare unto thee without going further, that I am very much thy Servant, but I
will not be thy Friend. And as for me, I love and am willing to be thine in
despite of thee, persisted Ergaste, and I tell thee to begin, that thou art
the laziest, the most treacherous, and the last and worst of Men, if thou
correspondest not with my Affection. But my poor Ergaste, replied softly
Celemante, what Chimera of Friendship art thou going to place in thy
imagination, and how call thou virtue which derogates from Civil Society,
and which is indeed capable to destroy all Pleasure? As for me I have always
learnt, that all the end of Civil Society, and the only secret of Life is to
live happily, is there any thing more contrary or opposite to happiness than
that thou have told me? In giving all ones Wealth to another one becomes poor
himself; in discovering all his Secrets to another, one betrays himself; in
sharing in the Grief of another, one afflicts himself; and in dying for
another, one destroys himself.

I know well, Ergaste, that Civil Society, requires not that we should live
but for our selves: But that which I know also, that it is requisite that one
should live first for himself and afterward for others. When I shall have no
need of any thing, Ergaste, all that is not necessary for me is for thee: But
that I shall take it away from my self when I shall have need of it to give it
to thee; Ah! I understand not if thou love me more than thy self that would
be to disoblige thee. When I shall have some secret, I will tell it thee
willingly if that damnifies me not; but if that do me harm to tell it to thee,
thou ought not to wish that I do something prejudicial to thy Friend. When
there shall arrive unto thee some good Fortune, I will take part with all my
heart in thy Joy: But thy Ills I will use as if 'twere my own, that is to say,
I will do all that in me is possible, to consolate thee and consolate my self.
See thou Ergaste; I have always heard say that he who would afflict himself
for the evil that one suffers himself or his Friends, he should never be one
sole moment without Affliction. That which must be done, is to set the Face
toward the Weal, and never the Evil. If thou art Sick I will rejoice that I am
in Health, if it be I that am Sick my self I will endeavor to rejoice that
thou, art not so, if we are so both of us, I will yet rejoice that we have not
yet greater Evils; if one breaks one of my Arms, I will count my self happy
that one remains yet whole, and if they break both, I will attempt to consolate
my self through the soundness of my Legs. It is so that one must use in all the
remainder. For heed there Ergaste in all occasions wherein we are afflicted
there rests some things to us, wherewithal to rejoice; and that being so, we
should be very Fools, if of two parts we did not take the most pleasurable.

Celemante spoke to him therefore in this manner, and behold how he replied to
him. As to what thou say, Celemante, there is something that I condemn. For
if in thy misfortunes thou can find Reason to consolate thy self, it is Wisdom
therewith to serve thy self; and were it false, there would be even in that
case Wit to know ones self to be well deceived. But there is one absurd and
dreadful Senselessness, in the rest of thy Sentiments. Thou fear to dye, to
impoverish thy self, to hurt thy self, to afflict thy se^^ for a Friend: Alas!
know thou not, that Virtue teaches us to do all these things even sometimes
for People most indifferent? In what consists Liberality, unless it be to
Impoverish ones self for others? Freedom, unless it be to open our Hearts?
Compassion, if it be not to afflict our selves for their Evils? Courage, unless
even to dye in an occasion as did the renowned Spartiate for the Thermopiles,
for the safety of so many thousands of Men whom he only knew not? If these
little Virtues whereof thou speak, replied Celemante, teach us all these
things, there is yet another the greatest Mistress of all which instructs us
the contrary. That is Prudence, Ergaste, which informs us that Liberality is
Prodigality; that Frankness and Freedom is Indiscretion; that Compassion is
Debility and Weakness; that Courage in one word is rashness and precipitancy,
and all for once is Imprudence when they prejudice us. We should go too far,
replied Ergaste, if I should be willing to answer thee, to all that I could be
capable to do thereon. For I would convince thee and make thee see, that the
more the Virtue we exercise our selves in prejudiceth our Interest, and the
greater it is; since the despising of Interest is a second Virtue, and I can
say it is almost the foundation of all others. But so it is that thou shall
avouch me, that we ought to do more to Friends than Strangers. If thou then
confessest that we ought to do all these things for Strangers, when they
prejudice us not, what we should then be able to act on behalf of our Friends,
unless to perform it even then when they prejudice us? That which we will do is
this, says Celemante; we will prefer them to Strangers, but not above our
selves, by reason we our selves ought to be our own best Friend. And as I would
confide in a Physician that could not cure himself, I would not put confidence
in a Friend who knew not how to love himself. A very fair Comparison, cried
Ergaste, Friendship and Amity is quite contrary to the Art of Physic,
Celemante the art of Physic consists in the knowledge of curing all People in
the World equally. But Friendship consists in knowing to love unequally and
peculiarly. But I will have but one word more to convince thee of this. Ah! do
not declare it unto me I beseech thee, interrupted Celemante; for I tell thee
in fine, that I will not be convinced; also should we be of one Mind thereon,
we should never be at rest. Thou will that one take no Pleasure but with his
Friend; and I hold that a reasonable Man ought to take it for all in general
and every where thou will that one should disquiet ones self in his absence,
and as for me I make a profession never to disquiet my self, if I can. In one
word thou will render me a Fool, and I will be wise. Ergaste mocked Celemante,
and after having only smiled at his Replication, he said unto him; I avow
Celemante, in effect, I do ill to be willing to teach thee Friendship and
sincere Amity, by reason, it comes not by Wit, it must have it is Original and
Birth in the Heart, and I will not instruct thee but by my own example.

They quitted one another a little afterward, and in the Sequel Ergaste spoke
cruelly of Celemante; for there was no more need to dream of quitting him, to
do any thing that Ergaste knew not, nor which is worse to do never so little to
admit of Contradiction, without being terribly grumbled at. So that in the end
poor Celemante, a little naturally a libertin, saw himself reduced to a strange
Captivity. But much worse yet, for Celemante would always do his best and had
done it, the other was never content Celemante should undoubtedly have taken
all that for his leave: But Ergaste had in such a nature perverted the Sense,
that he was no more capable to serve himself.

At that time there came to Athens a young Maiden, of a competent Beauty: but
had much Wit, and was very Pleasant, she was even skilful, so that her Actions
were clearly demonstrated in open View and Light. The proximity of the
Neighborhood, and the Reputation of her excellent Wit, caused Celemante to
enter her Lodgings, and they so pleased one another at the first encounter,
when they mutually saw one another, that the morrow after the first Visit
Celemante wrote her this Ticket.

CELEMANTE to CELESIE.
YOu appeared to me yesterday so amiable, that I know not what I shall do, if
you permit me not to revisit you this day, I have not bin able to spend away
the night, and I had only the Consolation of dreaming. In the interim I should
shun the sight of you, were I Wise, for I very well resent and feel that there
is no assurance for me, and that I shall be constrained to Love you more than I
would.

CELEMANTE.


Behold the Reply that she made him.

CELESIE to CELEMANTE.
IF you feel your self constrained to will my Wealth, it is a violence that you
do to your self, I have nothing that forces Will, and if you find any thing
amiable in me, it is a pure effect of your Imagination. It abuses you, it
paints me or rather repairs me entirely, it is not my self that makes you love,
it is a Ghost or Apparition, I am not astonished that 'twas represented to you in
your Sleep; for that is the time to make Dreams, nor to give it more of
Credulity, it having chosen a time when the Senses are asleep, by reason they
would not have failed to contradict it: But come at what hour it shall please
you to disabuse your self. For what advantage soever, I can draw from your
Error, I will resolve never to deceive my Friends.

CELESIE.


Celemante was charmed with this Letter, and he was scarce able to refrain
himself from showing it to Ergaste, with whom he was reconciled: however he did
it not then, for as much as he mistrusted always the little Complaisance of
that Friend. In the self same thought he concealed from him, during a certain
space of time, his Passion born for Cilesie, and the Tickets that he received:
But in conclusion they gave him one on a certain day in the presence of
Ergaste, who discovered him their Commerce, and engaged Celemante, confidently
to show him all the others.

Ergaste who was immediately well pleased to see his Friend in Love, because he
was persuaded that this Passion, serves always to bring to Perfection and
completely accomplish a young Heart, when he ^^ capable well to regulate and
govern it; he had no sooner seen all these Letters; but he was netled and stung
with the long dissimulation which Celemante had used with him* and although he
had naturally more respect for Women than any other Person, notwithstanding on
that occasion, as if his Resentment and sensible Apprehension extended it self
even against Cilesile; he pardoned not one of her Tickets, that is to say, there
was not one single one, which he censured not, as well the style as the
thoughts. After he had blamed them all by Retail and Peice-Meal, he betook him
to speak generally against the Women that would pass for skilful and expertly
knowing, and particularly against Cillesie, although he yet knew no other than
her name. It is not, says he, but that it be very commendable that a Maiden or
a Woman cultivate their Wits, and, that they should know something more than
their common and ordinary Sex. But it is requisite that it be for their
particular Satisfaction, and not to make an open profession and a kind of
Commerce with the Public. It Is requisite that they learn to render themselves
capable only to understand, and not to distribute and retail; they should
affect almost to conceal that which they know, which is far distant from
vaunting and boasting themselves, and as it is very commendable in a Man to be
handsome, but immodest to sting and nettle himself to be so, it is well becoming
and seemly in a Woman to know, but infamous, ignominious, and dishonorable, to
Nettle and Spur on her self to be known so. Virtues, added he, are divided
among the Sexes.

There are those that are common both to one and the other, and there are which
are but for one alone. These here are Vices in that for whom they have not bin
made. And as they are almost opposite, who diligently seek after Virtues of or
in a Stranger, ordinarily neglect those of his own. The Gods never bequeath it
all to one alone, it must be either Man or Woman; and it is a Monster to be
both. It appertains not, belongs, nor is it becoming, to enterprise or
undertake to practice in the Mysteries, Occupations or Functions of Men, but to
extraordinary Persons, whom the excellency of their Genius elevates above both
Sexes, as the incomparable Sapho, and to some others which are more rare than
the ages. But that your Cillesie should intermeddle her self; pardon me if I
believe her not of that Temper, Composition, Disposition, Mood or Humor.

Celemante would not stay to contest against him, and contented himself only to
conserve for Cillesie the same which he had conceived. In sum, he continued to
entertain discourse with her, in maintaining the same Commerce both in Letters
and Affection: But with so firm a Tie that Ergaste feared that this Love would
in the end, steal away his whole Friendship.

In this Apprehension, he said to Celemante one day, not any way signifying him
his design, that he desired to be acquainted with Cillesie, and besought him to
introduce him into her Company at her Lodginge; certainly Ergaste had reason,
ground and subject to be the most satisfied of any one in the World; for as she
knew that he was the friend of Celemante, she received him with all the
civilities imaginable. In the Interim, when they were upon the return he began
to make him a thousand Sports and Jests, infinitely Vivacious and Sprightful
even to Truth^ but that which touched more than ordinary Celemante, and he
would never have ceased, if he had not interrupted him, Ergaste, said he unto
him, it seems to me that it becomes not a Man, very well even to Scoff and
^lout at a Woman: But yet much less to a Friend to make him the Mistress of his
Friend, what Celemante, replied Ergaste, making himself astonished, Cillesie is
in very deed your Mistress; Ah! you have done very ill not to have well
informed me of it sooner, for I would have done all that I could to have
attempted to have found her fair, or at least wise to have found her less
mis-hapen, ill-favored, ugly, vile and loathsome, and for that effect I promise
you that after the first time, I would not have looked upon her. Ergaste,
Ergaste, said Celemante unto him, a little more Complaisance for a Friend; Aye
aye by all means, rejoyned Ergaste, I do assure thee that in thy Humor, thou
could not make a better choice. Thou love thy Repose and Rest, thou hate
above all things Disquietude and Jealousy, and I think not that such a
Mistress ought to give thee any. At least, replied Celemante smiling, that if
she gives me any, it will not be you that will contribute thereunto. No I
answer thee, rejoyned Ergaste; in what State soever thou can make it appear
to thy Friends, thou should not fear the Adventure of Candaule. He made him
a thousand more Jests yet after this Nature, which Celemante suffered as from a
Friend. In the Interim, the Passion for Cillesie increasing daily in Celemante,
he in the end became so amorous, that he began to feel for her, all the same
movements which Ergaste had given him, in the Lessons of their Friendship. For
he had no other or greater Pleasure than in seeing Cillesie.

In fine, the care of pleasing her, he made his Study afterward; the
Commencement was reasonable enough, for he was not angry with Celemante but ten
or a dozen times a day: But when he observed that this here concealed himself
from him, and began even to shun him, he could not in the end refrain himself
from signifying to him, that he had conceived some jealousy. Celemante
attempted thus to excuse himself: what wrong can the Love that I have for
Cillesie do to our Friendship? these two are ties so different that there is
nothing of them in common. I love in loving, and I love in a Friend; that is to
say, that she has all the foolish and all the blind Inclinations of my Heart,
and you have all the reasonable ones. Unfaithful Friend, rejoyned Ergaste, have
thou two Hearts? I know well I have but one, replied Celemante, but it is
capable of diverse Functions. If thou have but one, added Ergaste, it must be
that thou take away from me a part of that which I have there, since it is
easy to know thou give all to Cillesie. After some other discourse of this
Nature they separated themselves.

In fine, Ergaste seeing the great Tie, and strict band which Celemante had for
Cillesie, the anxiety, pensiveness, perplexity and anguish of mind which he
signified, with all other the Opinion he had of the Fidelity and Constancy of
this Maiden, the Confidence with which he vaunted to be solely beloved by her,
and the courage and hardiness, that he had in mistrusting her himself to try
her Fidelity; he took a resolution which he called generous and worthy of the
most perfect Friendship, but that Celemante held for Treachery, Absurdity,
Unworthiness, and for the Perfidy, the most notorious and infamous which had
ever been seen, and that which he would leave to the Judgment of all the Earth
from Generation to Generation in all Ages.

Ergaste therefore by a feigned Complaisance for his Friend betook himself all
at once to commend Cillesie, to render her many Visits, and although he had no
kindness for her, he counterfeited however the passionate, as the perfidious
one has always but too much Wit, and when he pleases he Counterfeits the most
amiable person in the World, he had soon made a great progress in the Heart of
Cillesie, and advanced more in a Month than Celemante had done in six. This
here was too amorous not to be perceived, and in perceiving it not to have any
Jealousy. Ergaste pretending to take no heed thereunto, did on one side all he
could to augment it, and whereas before he had exaggerated and aggravated the
Faults and defects of Cillesie, he made her an Empress in her prayers, and to
astonish himself of the ill Impression that he had at first conceived. He began
even to write to Cillesie, as Celemante had done, and also to do the same as
he, that is to say, he concealed himself sometimes. But one day having sent a
Present and a Letter to Cillesie, he gave a charge to him who carried it, to
come to him with an answer in the presence of Celemante, and to tell him
confidently aloud, that it was by the appointment of Cillesie. This order
having bin executed, Ergaste made himself surprised, and replied to the Porter
with an affected disorder, that he had mistaken him, and that he would say
Cilene who was an Athenian of our acquaintance. No not so, replied the other
who was instructed, it is Cillesie, which I have carried so many Letters unto,
from you already and received some for you, and unto whom you have sent that
Present. Ergaste feigning himself then convinced in despite of him, avowed to
Celemante that he had truly out of Gallantry, Bravery and Frankness of Humor
sent some Trifle, Toy or thing of small value to Cillesie, that she had made
him an Answer, and that he himself having written to her diverse times, he had
received many obliging Tickets from her, which he showed him; he demanded
pardon of him, if he had too long delayed in making him his Confident, saying
that he concealed it not but least he should give him to ill purpose, some
distrust, jealousy or umbrage. But thou will therefore have ill done to take
one, added he; for besides that Cillesie is (as thou know) a faithful
Mistress, constant and incapable to Love any other than thy self: thou may
think that for my part it is but a piece of gallantry and friendship, who as
thou very well judge, cannot prejudice that rare and inviolable Friendship
and kind Amity which she has promised thee.

During this discourse, poor Celemante sadly spent his time, for Jealousy
cannot torment a Soul with more alarms and violence than his was agitated with.
Ergaste knowing him could not with all his cruelty hinder himself to be
touched. I know not therefore if it was through Compassion or Bravery, but so
it was that he said unto him, How now, go to Celemante, I have not yet but
kindness for Cillesie, but to tell thee the Truth, I know not what can become
of that: Will thou avow unto me freely, if that be capable to give thee some
disturbance or jealousy, and I will yet break the course whilst I am yet the
Master. I promise thee if thou will, I will never revisit nor see Cillesie,
again. Never was a proposal so pleasing and acceptable to Celemante as was
that; and he opened his Mouth a hundred times to avow his debility and weakness
to Ergaste. He was quite ready to leap upon his neck, and to Embrace him a
hundred times to testify him his acknowledgment: but he was withheld and I
could not tell wherefore. For be it that he was hindered through timerousness,
that this Great Empire that Ergaste had Tyrannically Usurped over him, had laid
an Impression on him; be it that it was by a false complaint for him, be it
that it was through shame, that he had to testify some doubt of Cillesie,
after having so frequently Vaunted and Boasted of her fidelity, be it that it
was by a little Jealousy he would try her himself: so it happened, that instead of
confessing his Debility and Weakness to his friend, he would contrarily
counterfeit the Confident and Dreadless one, and besought him to act in such
sort that they should have but one and the same Mistress. But what effect or
endeavor soever Celemante made and dissembled, I am well assured that he
acquitted himself so ill, that it was easy for Ergaste to know, that he spoke
against the Sentiments of his heart. However Ergaste was so Inhumane as to take
him at his word, and made a new Progress in the heart of Cillesie. This
Barbarous Man not so contented, but willing to conduct his Vengeance by the
same Degrees and Steps by which he believed himself offended, he became so
Assiduous near to this Maiden, that Celemante saw him not almost more then at
her Dwelling, and could not see her but in his presence; he went yet much
farther, and that Cruelty would not fall into the heart of a Scythian. He came
one day to find Celemante, and said unto him, My dear Celemante, I will not
longer conceal from thee a piece of news; that is, that I am desperately in
Love with Cillesie. At this discourse a Blushing covered the face of Celemante,
and he was all confused; but Ergaste not making any semblance or show of
observing him, added, I do not demand thy pardon, for thou have not only
Testified to me that thou would not be angry; but thou have besought me that
we might have, even one and the same Mistress both of us. After all, what part
soever I have in the good favor of Cillesie, thou well know that thou shall
also have the first, and I will have there but that thou would not also; I
pretend not to be happy but by thy means, and as thou art the most Generous
Friend in the World, I come to thee to pray thee to manage for me thy Self,
some place in the Grace and Favor of that Fair one; for if Cillesie had not
more kindness for me then she has had until now, I believe not but that I had
dyed. During this discourse Celemante was agitated with diverse motions, which
combated one with the other that left him not Liberty nor Opportunity to unfold
them. Now despite and rage Animated him against Ergaste, then he reproached
himself with the Imprudence he had Engaged in the Love of Cillesie, and then he
believed that Ergaste came to discourse unto him his Feigned Passion, that by
reducing him to avouch his weakness, to demand his pardon, to try his mercy,
and to request him not any farther to push forward in his Conquest. Celemante
had too much for that, but to the quite contrary he counterfeited the
Confident, and exhorted Ergaste, not to Rejoice, nor be Foiled, nor Rejected;
in one word he promised him all that he believed himself able to obtain for
him; that is to say, not to Endamage his Love. But the Subtilty of Ergaste knew
well enough, that it was not any more in the Power of his Friend to do it, and
that he was not come there, but that he was certain of her Favor.

The same Evening in returning from the dwelling of Cillesie, he met Celemante,
and although he very well knew that this same had not seen her since they both
saw her, and spoke with her, and that Celemante had even promised to serve him:
However he came to him as soon as he perceived him, with a Countenance full of
Joy and Satisfaction, and Accosting him, my dear Celemante, said he unto him; I
should be the most Ungrateful of all Men, if I did not publish every where that
you are the most generous; for in fine you have saved my Life, and I am come
from Resenting, so well the effect of your Recommendation to Cillesie; that
having nothing more to desire, there remains nothing to me but to pay you for
so Sensible a Favor, as the preserving the same Life, which is owing to your
Conservation. The Thunderbolt that fell at the feet of Celemante, would not so
have astonished him, as did these words, he thereunto replied with so much
Disorder and Confusion, that being Ignorant of what he said, he sought an
occasion to quit with the greatest speed he could the Cruel Ergaste; and having
left him, he remained an hour in the street, without doing any other thing but
going to the Gate of Cillesie, and returning to his own, without any
possibility of resolving if he should enter into her House, or should never
revisit her. Now he had a Design to go and reproach her a thousand times; then
would resolve to signify her his Disdain, in Despising her, and leave her
without daigning so much as to speak any more to her: now he doubted whether
what Ergaste had told him were the real truth, and thought it Behoved him to be
Enlightened by her before he were Transported; and as this last part had mixed
some Hope that flattered him yet in his Passion, it was this that he Embraced;
for there was not place to doubt a long Time the Infidelity of Cillesie. For
first he observed, that he grew red and blushed, and appeared abashed, and out
of countenance as soon as he entered, and he was in fine by a Thousand Signs and
Tokens, so well assured of the Perfidy of his Friend and of his Mistress, that
he was resolved to deliver himself for Ever from the Tyranny of both.

Ergaste was yet so Cruel, that he would Insult over this Unfortunate one, and
that some days after, seeing Celemante had altogether a Rupture with Cillesie,
he came to rejoice with him, as if it had been some Great Happiness: he Vaunted
himself to him, that this Breach, was the Production of their Friendship, and
would have made it pass for an Obligation, so sensibly, that Celemante was
therefore Indebted to him. See, said he, see Celemante, to what point I desire
we be Eternally Friends; I never had a passion for Cillesie, and in the mean
time I have been able to constrain my self, even to pretend Love for her, and
yet to subject my self to all those small trifling things, by which one gains
the heart of these sorts of Maidens; for to make thee sensible of thy Error, I
would have thee see the wrong thou do thy self to Abandon a Faithful Friend
for an Unconstant Mistress, and the difference that there is between a Sollid
and Virtuous Friendship, and a Foolish and Unruly Passion. Go Ergaste, Go,
Rejoyned him Celemante Animated with to much Just Anger, you your self are the
most unfaithful of all men; you are not only contented to betray the pleasant
and merry heart of your Friend, but you have done it to betray him, yet for, or
by Cillesie, and not content with your own proper Perfidy you have Inspired it
into his Mistress. You should yet be more excusable if you had been in Love as
you said it, and one could pardon all the Imprudence that I have seen to be
willing to engage you therein, and at the Violence of a Passion, which
primarily Tyrannizeth over us then when it constrains us to do evil to others:
but to be there carried, there well tempered, settled with sober and sollid
Reason by a Premeditated Disign, by pure Malicious Envy to betray me, it is a
Detestable piece of Perfidy, it is an Ambush prepared with a set purpose to
entrap, ensnare, and deceive wittingly, and willingly: it is that which cannot
find pardon among the Gods, nor excuse amongst men. I have two things to reply
unto thee thereon, and to subdivide, rejoyned him Ergaste smiling. First,
Celemante, I avouch unto thee that there are certain sorts of Love, whic hought
to be Inviolable, and as we so say, Sacred between Friends: but thou must not
believe that of all. On the contrary there are others, where not only it is
permitted us, but wherein it is our duty to deceive them. We owe them Fidelity
in all just and honest Love, but in debauched Love know that the Complaisance
of a Friend is Criminal, and his Infidelity is Officious, Dutiful, Serviceable,
Diligent, Courteous, and Friendly. In the second place I ask thee if thou did
not pray me, and engage thy self in despite of me to try and prove the
Fidelity of Cillesie, and if thou did not even as good as compel and force me
thereunto? in fine, if thou have not an Obligation to me to disabuse thee in an
error, that would have made thee Sacrifice all to an unconstant Mistress.

He added a thousand ill reasons more, in similitude like to those there: but
Celemante had too much power to be overcome thereby, and his Liberty Captivated
so long a time, reclaimed too highly against the Tyranny of Love and
Friendship. He protested therefore both to Renounce the one and the other, to
have no more Love then is necessary for the pleasure of life, nor of friendship
but what is requisite for Civil Society.

He denounced and declared a Mortal War against the other Love, and the other
Friendship whereof are made so many Passions, and Tyranies; and above all
against the Perfidious Ergaste, who had given him so much Torment from the one
and the other.

So finished the writing of Celemante; and when they had ended the Lecture,
they testified to have found it altogether Delightful.

Another then cries who had as much right as he to pretend kindness to this
Shepherd, had not possibly bin able to refrain having a little Jealousy of this
first and principal affection, or a few Alarms from the Resolution that she
there had made him take, to have no more; but what disposition soever she had
to receive his friendship, she had none to have any Jealousy, and yet less
cause to be angry if Celemante had not loved her; contrary in that to Arelise,
because Arelise would not that Argaste should have any Love for her; and yet
she was Jealous she had it for others, and would possibly been angry if he had
less Loved; thereon Chorys would willingly in her heart that Celemante might
Love her, but she had seen him indifferent for her without despite, and
Amourous of others without Jealousy.

After they had all testified the pleasure they had received in the reading of
this Lecture, Ergaste amongst others reassumed Speech thus: well said! Agamee
must not there patience be had to listen so peaceably as I have done, a great
Volumne that Celemante has compiled against me? and more must be to show you
that I am not so prompt and ready as he has rendered me; it is true, replied
Agamee, that I would very much commend your Moderation, without being hindered
by any thing. What then? replied Ergaste. Divine, said Agamee unto him. I know
not how to Divine, replied Ergaste, if it be not so that this writing has
persuaded you against me, and that you could not resolve your self to praise a
man, of whom one has told you so much evil. So much it must be, replied
Agamee; it is that I find that Celemante has written for you, and I would
Condemn him upon his own proper Plea, not to have known to Correspond, with a
Friendship so tender and so perfect as yours. And I said Arelise, I condemn
them both; Celemante to be engaged so forward in so foolish a Passion, and
Ergaste to be served of a remedy so dishonest to withdraw him. The one not to
have avowed his weakness to his Friend, the other to have dissembled and
feigned to be of his side, to deceive and cheat his own: the one of having been
so Liberal in his Love, the other to have been too Imperious in his Friendship,
and to have been willing to have exercised a kind of small Tyranny. Ergaste saw
well that Arelise said not this without design, by reason she had frequently
enough made the same Complaint of him. This Shepherd being deeply in Love with
Arelise, and willing with too great Imperiousness, it seemed him would prevail
upon the Friendship which she had for him, to oblige her to correspond with his
Passion. A little even before having met Agamee, they came yet to have another
management on this subject; and Ergaste Prompt, and Ready as he was, went not
out without some sort of anger. So that when he heard Arelise who Condemned
him; he replied her in Smiling, at the truth, but however with some kind of
Despite, Sheepherdess, you are not of my Judges; wherefore find it good, that
I tell you, that I neither will be Absolved, nor Condemned, by your Mouth. How,
what! Said afterward Coris, shall no Person speak here for this Poor
Celemante? truly if I were of his Judges, I know what would be for him; not
that I find he has reason, but it makes me pity him, that he is so Abandoned
of all the World. Arelise who well saw that Ergaste was angry, and to whom that
would cause trouble and pain, through the kindness she had for him; the time
was not long, but she sought to be reconciled to him; and to that effect
Resuming Speech, and Addressing her self to Agamee our Judge; said she unto
him, you shall not be quitted of so good a proceeding: you have Judged but of
half the Difference; and if Ergaste has gained his Process against Celemante,
I pretend that he will loose it against me. I give it you gained already,
replied Ergaste; afterward turning toward Coris, I dream no more to gain
mine, but near by this Amiable Shepherdess. He spoke this very far fom his
thought; but as he was angry with Arelise, because she would not Correspond
with his Love, and that he knew how much, even in her Friendship she was
Naturally Susceptable, Capable, and prone to Jealousy; he was well pleased to
yield to her in making show of being Amorous of Coris, and to punish her there
for the Evil she had done him; or rather he was glad to excite and kindle some
spark in her Heart, well knowing that there is nothing more proper to kindle
Fire, than is Jealousy. It was therefore for that reason, that he would
pretend to Love Coris. This Shepherdess, who knew well the Humor of the one and
the other, immediately apprehended the design of Ergaste, and as she was
naturally merry and given to jesting and would not therefore give occasion of
offense in the Company, she took a delight to endeavor to entangle the
Shepherd, but he had a Vivacity wherein he disintricated himself pleasantly
amongst all.

This Shepherd having therefore said unto her, that he dreamed of nothing more
against her, he replied him; what Ergaste? you would gain a process against me?
Ah! I pretend not that we have it together. You will therefore accord with me
in that which I demand of you, said Ergaste; if it be otherwise I am firmly
resolved to make you one. Ha! what can you demand of me? answered she him. Your
Heart, replied Ergaste, for mine wherewith I will make you a present; for
yours? replied Coris; I would therefore demand of you my self that which you
formerly demanded, Celemante, if you have many Hearts; for you have given him
one, another to Arelise, I must therefore have the third. It is true, added
Ergaste, that I had given it to Celemante: but you have seen that he has
rendered himself Unworthy. Arelise to whom I had made a Present afterward,
has deserved as her Brother to loose it; behold therefore that I can now
dispose thereof. But before it be accepted of, replied Coris, if it be they
that have rendered it to you. For I do not see that Arelise accords, and I would
not have the Wealth of another.

Whatever design Arelise had to reconcile her self to Ergaste, this discourse
changed in a moment the entire situation of his Mind; and this natural
propensity that she had to Jealousy, having produced it is ordinary effect,
they saw in an instant that pleasant and merry Air with which she recommenced
the dispute, turned into a serious Tone, whereupon she replied to Coris, I
declare you I pretend nothing at all to the Heart of Ergaste. Well done Coris,
added readily the Shepherd, glad to see the success of his feigning to second
his Intentions, you see that the one and the other are agreed and of one
accord; for as Arelise declares, that she pretends nothing thereunto, you have
seen also that Celemante has rendered it me too. It Is true, replied Coris: But
will you that I tell you Ergaste? a heart that they so willingly render you,
begins to make me become suspect. And since to tell you the Truth, I am a
little vainglorious, and I will not have what others have rejected. Hah! say
not so, Coris, cried Ergaste, for I go to demonstrate you that if I give you it
at the present, it is a Sign and Token that I esteem of you more than I do them.
I apprehend not how Coris. It is, replied Ergaste, that having bin deceived
twice by them it is requisite I esteem you infinitely, for having confided in
you for a third. But added Agamee laughing, the question is if Arelise has
deceived you. But, continued he afterward more seriously, I think that before
it be decided, it would be good to see if nothing be happened to Celemante; for
it seems to me that he is long in returning, since you said the House of
Telamon is so near. It is true he might have bin gone and returned twice,
persisted Ergaste, who also began to be in trouble for his Friend, and I know
not what could have detained him, if it be not that he has yet again sported
us with a turn as he yesterday did after dinner. In saying this, they perceived
this Shepherd who returned with a Countenance so far from that Jocundity and
Pleasantness, wherewith his had always bin accustomed to be animated, that they
could scarcely believe he was Celemante. However Ergaste not imputing this
seriousness but to some fantastical Humor which occupied him, cried out unto
him at that distance whence he perceived him; Ho! ho! Celemante, dare thou
appear before me, after the outrage thou have committed against me by thy
Writing! Truly I believed that the fear of approaching me had after that
detained thee. But I imagined myself also, continued he, that Repentance has
surprised thee, and it is for that reason so serious and almost afflicted. Ah my
poor Ergaste, replied Celemante, in approaching still toward them; I avow you
I would have bin willing to dispense my return, rather than to bring you such
ill Tidings. Poor Tarsis is much wounded, and I know not whether there may be
any reasonable Hopes of Life. These words, caused an incredible surprise and
displeasure, not only of Ergaste, but also of Agamee and the two Shepherdesses,
who understood them; and as they all had a kindness and an extraordinary esteem
of Tarsis, it cannot be expressed how they appeared allarmed, they approached
to Celemante, asking him mournfully how this distaster happened. Celemante
related it them, with the manner how he had learnt it from the Mouth of
Telamon, and declared to them that was the cause that detained him. After
bewailing this Accident as a Calamity which was common to them all in general,
and the most sensible, they all resolved to go to the dwelling of Telamon;
Ergaste and Agamee to testify him their resentment, and the two Shepherdesses
to consolate Philiste.

Tarsis and Zelie. The Second Part. The Fourth BOOK.
IN The Interim, the news of this sad Accident being spread over all the Valley
of Tempe, every one came from all Coasts to know it by Retail. Leucippe and
Melicerte omitted not to send there. They permitted not any Person to speak to
him, lest that any Emotion might cause a Fever: but he who came from Lucippe
having delivered his message so loud, and so near the Chamber, that Tarsis
understood and knew the Voice, the poor Shepherd was very urgent to have him
enter. My Friend, said he unto him with a feeble Voice, as the condition
wherein I am will undoubtedly please Leucippe, I was willing that thou
should see me, that thou might bear the News thereof, the more assured, but
tell him, however that I dye his Servant; and as for Melicerte, the sole Regret
of whom that I carry with me, Sorrow to dye without Testifying my Willingness
to show my Respects, and demonstrate the Obligations I have to her, which I
would have acknowledged. Telamon besought Tarsis to speak no more, because the
emotion might do him harm. My Brother, replied Tarsis, that which you tell me,
is proper for a man who desires to Live, but not for one who desires to Dye;
and upon these words he would, yet as he had already attempted, many times with
his hands to take hold of the Swathes, and Bands, to tear them off in the
Presence of this Domestic of Leucippe. But Telamon perceiving it with held
him; and Philiste melting into Tears, and closeing in her hands one of his: My
Dear Brother, said she, have Pity and Compassion of the Grief and Dolor of
Telamon, and my self, and preserve your self in the Name of the Gods. They have
appointed me to dye, replied Tarsis. Their Oracle, answered she unto him, speak
not of seeking Death, and you have but too much satisfied therein; leave them
now to finish the rest. He would have replied, but Telamon resuming discourse:
my Dear Tarsis, added he, if the Gods Will that you should dye, they are Potent
enough to bring it to pass, attend therefore Death from their hand, and in the
doubt of their Will, prevent not their Order, and take not from them the Means
to Render you the Amiable Zelie. Tarsis replied not but with a Great and Deep
Sigh; after which, he signified a willingness to resign himself in some sort to
the Decree of the Gods; afterward turning his head to the other side, he put
himself in the posture of one who would Rest.

However a moment afterward, she called Telamon again, this Shepherd omitted
not Immediately to come to him, and asked him what he wished for; he saw that
Tarsis was in trouble to know what should become of the Vail of Zelie. I pray
you, Brother, cause it to be sought out for me, for although Fortune has not
let it fall into my hands, but to give me the last assurances of the Death of
Zelie; however it is a pledge which unto me is very precious, since it has
been hers, and it is almost the only thing which remains with me, that belonged
to that Shepherdess. Telamon had no little Impatience to know how it fell into
his hands, but he durst not ask him, fearing he should make him talk too much.
Howsoever, for as much as he persuaded himself, that possibly Tarsis would draw
it to ill purpose, from such evil conjectures, by the sole propensity which
Naturally the major part of those who are in Love have, to unfold all to the
disadvantage of their Passion; he could not refrain (after he had assured him,
that Philiste had took it up) to say unto him; My Dear Brother, it must be on
the contrary, for you ought to take this as a sure Sign and Token, of the Life
of Zelie; and you ought to believe that the Gods, by these petty Institutions,
begin to prepare you for greater. How know you if it be not she that left it
there unawares, in the place where you found it? Ah! My Brother, replied
Tarsis, I am but too well assured that it is not she. After some endeavors
made by Telamon, he could not hinder him from relating to him, how this Vail
came into his hands, nor tell him the reasons of the Dismal Consequences that
he had drawn.

Telamon made a Judgment wholly different from his Brother; he believed that it
might possibly be, that Zelie was retired into some Cottage thereabouts, with
the two Women, of whom Tarsis had spoken, that she might possibly have lent her
Vail, to her who had lost it; and what ever it was, he will still hope, that at
the least, if they could find again one of those unknown, they would not fail
to draw forth a clear Manifestation. He would not however stay to contradict
Tarsis, and retiring himself from him, he besought him to seek to take some
Rest.

Afterward, having made a sign to Philiste to follow him, they went forth of
the Chamber both together, and passed into their own. They there met Agamee,
Ergaste, Coris, Arelise, and Celemante who waited for News of Tarsis. Telamon
Communicated them, that which he had learnt from him; and Philiste showed them
the Vail, and she had it yet in her hand; they all fell into the thought that
he had had, that these unknown ones might give them News of Zelie, and that
it was requisite to do all that possibly might be to refind them. Coris alone
having mused a little while, and yet considering the Veil that Philiste showed
them, said unto her: There is not any person, Philiste, that can better know it
than my self, for I was with Melicerte then when Tarsis brought it from Athens,
and by her leave he presented it to Zelie; we considered long enough together,
the Stuff, and the Figures, and very much commended the Invention. But,
Philiste, I know not if I ought to tell you the rest, and if the Clear
Manifestation that I can make you, upon the trouble and perplexity wherein I
see you will not rather contribute to augment it, than to put an end thereunto.
Philiste wholly moved, besought her not to conceal any thing of what she knew
thereon. So that Coris continued; It is said she unto her, that yesterday
morning passing by a small House, which is near approaching here to the
declension of the Forest, and returning to our Hamlet, I met twenty or thirty
Paces from thence these same Women undoubtedly of whom Tarsis has spoken to
you. I was deceived as well as he, at the resemblance, the pitch, height, port
and attire of Zelie, and that was the cause that I approached them. The Vail
above all which was on the head of the youngest of the two, in whom I observed
this conformity, aided me yet the more to persuade my self that she was Zelie.
But having known by their Visage that I was abused, I make them an excuse, told
them what had deceived me, and took thence an occasion to entertain them in
discourse to know who they were. The elder answered me, they were of Gonnes,
and that the other was of Thessalonica and her Relation; I might or could well
have seen this Vail, with other persons than these, by reason that her Cousin
held her by mere accident or hazard, having found her on the River side, where
they were on the Grass together, clasped the self same day when they said that
a Shepherdess of the Country was lost. Behold all that I have learnt, and I
would not have said any thing unto you, because I much doubted my self would
not any way assist nor add to your Consolation.

After that Coris had thus spoken, there was not one of the Company that
remained not persuaded, that the Grief of Tarsis was not so blind as they had
believed it, and that he had bin more clear sighted than they to forsee even
immediately all the truth of his Misfortune. Telamon re-heaping together all
the Circumstances of that which had passed in all this Adventure; the Boat that
fatal night, wherein the Shepherdess had disappeared, Tarsis having found none
but one person after he had there seen two. This roll of Papers met the next
day in the bottom of the same Boat, according as they could judge; this vain
and unprofitable search after so many Persons, during so many days, and after
all that this last which he learnt from Choris; Telamon, said I, making a
reflection on all these things, could not disavow, that if it was not certain
that Zelie were drowned, there was at least great cause, ground and subject to
apprehend it. After that he abandoned the design that he had had to cause to be
sought out these two unknown Women; for what could he desire after that Coris
had made him her report? her discourse sufficiently enough unfolded him the
same who was the Son of Alcidias whom Tarsis had heard them name; because that
Telamon had a Brother, who had a long time resided at Thessalonica, whence he
learnt who was one of these unknown ones, and that he could not doubt but that
they would speak with him; as for Philiste she was so troubled by the sole
thought of the evil that she apprehended, that she was no more able to shed
Tears, nor capable to give reasons. Agamee, Arelise nor Ergaste could avoid the
same fears as had Telamon. Celemante alone resisted the reasons they gave to
create troubles to themselves; and finding little to comfort them, he
represented them to that for the little that there was. The least reason to
conserve a good, ought still prevail above all those which would force them
away.

Agamee judging well that a long Visit would serve in such an Encounter or the
like, but to pester and molest Philiste and Telamon, took leave of them soon
afterward, and gave his hand to Arelise who also would retire, and was
followed by Coris, Ergaste and Celemante.

As it was very late, Ergaste whose House was the nearest, invited the
Areopagite to dinner, and would also retain there Celemante and the two
Shepherdesses. Agamee and Celemante thereto consented: but Arelise was too much
animated against Ergaste to do him that Favor, and it, must be very likely
that she had some prejudice against Coris, to have served though innocently,
the occasion of her Jealousy. She found that she did her Injustice in that, by
reason that Coris had bin very far from contributing willingly thereunto: but
her reason could not resist the natural propensity of her Humor, and she must
be constrained necessarily to use some endeavor, to pray that Shepherdess to
go and dine with her.

Ergaste who as we have said was willing to give her cause of Jealousy by
Design and Project, forgot not any thing which was necessary to augment it, and
as if he had not bin willing to fix the faction of the Dinner, but because of
Coris, he used all his Efforts and Endeavors to retain her. But Coris who had
as much kindness for her Friends, as she had Wit and Merriment, knowing well
the trouble that that would give to Arelise, if she staid to dinner with
Ergaste, would never consent thereunto. She therefore replied to Ergaste after
her ordinary, pleasant, merry manner: Ergaste I have already lately told you,
that I would not have the leavings, and offalls, and remains of Arelise; and as
I would not have a Heart that she rendered, and left to you, so I will therefore
not have nor accept of a Dinner, which she has refused. My Mistress, replied
Ergaste, I well observe that you will try and prove me, and I avow, that it is
not just, that I receive Favors from you, from the first day which I could not
deserve nor merit, but by years of Services.

Although that Celemante was not present, nor had bin at the birth of the
Jealousy of Arelise, and that the Accident of Tarsis had occupied them in such
sort, that they had scarcely spoken of any other thing, after they had learnt
it: however he soon knew the Anger and Vexation of his Sister, and the design
of his Friend, by the discourse of the one and the Countenance of the other.
However he did not immediately seem or make any show of perceiving it, and
staying himself only on Ergaste his calling Coris his Mistress, he said unto
him; It is therefore by design, Ergaste, that thou will also carry away from me
all my Mistresses. Mine enemy, replied Ergaste, expectest thou quarter from me,
after the War thou have so openly declared against me? Celemante would have
replied, but Agamee resuming speech added, And moreover Shepherd, is it not you
that would never remember Love more, that would renounce all Mistresses and all
Love? I have truly renounced Love, answered Celemante: but remember your self
Agamee, that is passionate Love, but not that which they call Gallantry and
frankness of Humor, without which one never saw a decent and honest Man; Well
said Celemante, replied Ergaste, it is easy to accommodate us; you shall be
the Gallant, and I the Lover of Coris. Shepherds, said the pleasant merry Coris
unto them, make out always your course, and I will tell you afterward if I
will resolve to enter there; at these words she quitted them to go to dine with
Arelise whom Agamee would bring back to her dwelling.

Ergaste and Celemante ran also after Coris, and presenting the Hand with
desire to conduct and lead her, told her they could not make out their course,
progress, nor Treaty without her. She placed her self between them both, and
giving each of them one hand, Well said, said she, let us see whether we can
agree. First Celemante tell me a little the difference, that you pretend there
is between a Gallant and a Lover; it is so great, replied he, as the day is
different from the night, for a Lover is one that sleeps not, that eats not,
laughs not, who seems nothing but Tears and Sighs, and the sight of a Mistress,
which will enrage him even from morning to night; and a Gallant is a Man who
sleeps, eats, laughs as others, that sees nothing but Joy and Pleasure, and who
seeks not but to divert his Mistress, in diverting himself. They could not
refrain laughing at the Picture that Celemante had drawn for them, and Arelise
who smiled as did the others, and who essayed to dissemble her anger as much as
she could, replied to him; Thou have reason, my Brother, to say that the day is
not more different from the night, as the Pourtraits and Pictures which thou
make us there are one from another. But as the Night and the Day cannot
accord together, how can a Lover and a Gallant accord together? I pretend not
that they accord, replied Celemante, but on the contray I pretend that the
Gallant chaseth away the Lover, as the Day does the night. That would not be
just, said Agamee, but as the night succeeds the day, the Gallant and the Lover
may have their turn one after another; to tell you the Truth, said Coris, I
know not well yet if I shall be able to accommodate my self with either of
both: But if I were a Shepherd I know well which I would be; Ah! my Mistress
said Ergaste, I know well you would be the Lover, and in despite of the false
Picture which Celemante has drawn us, you would never intermeddle with loving
that you would not do it in it is perfection, and that a Lover will say. Well
Ergaste, replied Celemante, hold, not to that: it will not be difficult to
accommodate us. Amiable Shepherdess, when you shall be a Shepherd, you will
rather be a Lover, as Ergaste; But you will prefer your Gallant, as long as you
shall be the fair Coris. With the like discourse they arrived at the House of
Arelise, where the Shepherdesses being entered, Agamee and the two Shepherds
took leave of them and returned to dine together at the Habitation of Ergaste.

At going from the Table they returned to Arelise's House, where they learnt,
that the two Shepherdesses were already gone forth. They followed the same way
they heard they had taken, and repassed by the House of Telamon, where they
asked again about the State of the Wounded Celemante, perceiving the Shepherd
Philemon, who came out addressed himself to him. Although these two Shepherds
had much Friendship, and moreover the last esteem they had one for another,
they notwithstanding always waged War, by reason of the Opposition that there
was between the two Sects of Philosophy, whereof they made a Profession; For
Epicurus, who had been Master of Celemante, preferred pleasure to all things;
and the Philosopher Pyrrhon, in the opinion of whom Philemon was Naturally met;
however without understanding it, and almost without any other guide than his
Natural Sight, doubted whether Pleasure was preferrable to Pain and Grief. He
held all things so uncertainly, that he, not only sported at the Error and
Vanity of Sciences, but he would not that one should Confide, even in his own
proper Sense. Epicurus on the contrary, said, that we ought not to doubt of any
thing, when our Senses had assured it us: and he held the Mistrust, and
Diffidence of Pyrrhon for a childish, Trivial, and Ridiculous Scruple. There
was probability in the one, and in the other, and it may be, that one doubted
too much, and the other doubted not enough: but whatsoever it were, they both
were the Sects, which then were the most of the mode, and, Celemante, and
Philemon took pleasure to uphold, even to Desire, and Emulation, each one, his
own; and made a perpetual matter of Sporting one at the other.

Celemante had there in some respect more Advantage, because he had much more
Studied then Philemon had; who for the little reputation that he added to the
Sciences, had almost wholly Despised, and Rejected them; but Philemon omitted
not also, to take great advantage upon Celemante, who in Certain Encounters, he
made him see, that by the Purest Natural Lights, he was capable to Destroy the
certitude of the Rarest Experiences, and Skill which this had acquired with
much Time and Explication.

Celemante having therefore perceived him ran unto him, and though he
effectually took as great a share as he could, in the Misfortune of Tarsis;
however, as he sought not but to divert an unprofitable Sorrow, for the healing
of the wounded, he said to Philemon; I am Ravished that I have found you,
Philemon! I pray do not refuse me some of your Lessons, and I pray also that
you would teach me to doubt. Philemon having asked him wherefore? It is,
replied Celemante, that all the world assures me here, that this poor Tarsis is
much wounded; and as he is one of my Friends, I should be very glad to doubt it
for my Consolation. My Friend, replied Philemon, with his cold Sense, when I
shall have showed thee to doubt, thou will not thereby gain as much as thou
think; for I could not refrain my self from teaching thee, at the self same
time to afflict thy self, more than to doubt, only if thy Friends are in
danger, thou know it not, although thou hold thy self assured. It
Imports, nor matters not, replied Celemante, if thou will teach me these two
things, it will depend upon me alone to retain, only that which I would, and I
have a faculty clear enough to discern to choose the Good, and leave the Evil;
and I, replied Coris, I, replied Philemon, I declare thee that I will not have
a Scholar, who shall not Confide in his Master. But persisted Ergaste, if it be
needful to doubt of all, must there not also doubt be made of that which you
shall tell me?

Agamee, and Ergaste Interrupted the Sequel of this Discourse, because the last
had said to the other who was Philemon, he had a desire to approach and know
him: they went all out of the Hamlet together, and entered into the Plain on
the East side. After having Advanced there about Fifty Paces, they there
perceived Coris, who walked with Arelise, whom she held under her Arm, and they
saw a little nearer two other Shepherdesses, who walked also, and whom also
they Incontinently knew, the one for the Discreet Celiane Mistress of Philemon,
and the other for Al^e Friend to Celiane. What Resolution soever had made
Ergaste to continue the Feigning, by which he had resolved to possess Arelise
with Jealousy: it was not possible for him to dissemble it any longer time, it
is too difficult to make a long violence to Powerful Inclinations; and of the
manner wherein he loved Arelise, he could not do it with so little pain, but he
made it a thousand times more unto himself. Therefore he could not longer delay
to make his Peace, and for that end and effect, leaving his company, he
Advanced himself toward Arelise, and presenting her his hand, said unto her:
Fair Arelise, there no means to constrain my self any longer, and it is an
Enterprise more difficult then I thought of, to dissemble a Love so strong as
mine. Arelise did not make any show of understanding him, and having contented
her self to cast a look upon him, with some sort of Disdain, she returned
toward Coris, and said unto her; let us go my Comrade, let us go, to give the
good night to these two Fair Shepherdesses. Immediately she would Advance
toward Celiane and Alice, from whom they were not very far. But Ergaste
putting himself before her, said unto her Amourously: Dear Arelise, I request
you be not angry with me, if I have failed this Morning, am not I punished
enough to have lost ever since that time the pleasure of speaking to you of my
Love? Ergaste, replied she, very coldly, those faults put you in very little
Pain, but I am very glad to let you know, thai I also very much scorn, and
despise your Repentance; and I, replied Ergaste, with an Air much more
passionate than before, I protest to you, that there is not any thing in the
World, that I apprehend or dread so much as your Displeasure, and if I were so
wise as I would be, I would never give you any Ground, Subject or Gause? but
what will you Arelise? think you to find Lovers Wise, and would you reform the
World? no, replied she fiercely, and it is for that also that I will have none.
Well Arelise! continued he, receive me not as your Lover, but pardon me as your
Friend. At the time that he said this, they were very near to Celiane and her
Company; to whom also were joined, Agamee and the other two Shepherds. The
Athenian who had not yet seen Celiane saluted her, and afterward rendered the
same civility to Alce, Alce was a Shepherdess who was not very fair, but had
wit, and whom a certain Air of Freeness, and Frankness made her beloved of
those who knew her, and above all to Celiane. The Sun was then upon its
Setting, it seemed to have no more Beams but what was requisite to enlighten
Delectably the Company, and areigning Zaphir, or Planet throughout all the
Plain, rendered this hour the Pleasantest, and most Commodious for walking;
after some other discourse they continued the walk, in taking the way of Ceris,
and Celiane to reconduct them: and every one without choice, having offered his
hand to the Shepherdess, nearest to whom he found himself met, Ergaste amongst
others met with Arelise, and Celemante with Celiane, Ergaste soon recommended
his first converse with Arelise, who could not so soon return from her
Displeasure, continued still to refuse him her hand, and even to endeavor to
withdraw farther at a distance from him, not willing to listen to his Excuse.
The Shepherd who could no longer support himself, nor bear her fury and rage,
seeing all his Words and Speeches too feeble to Mollify, and Sweeten her, at
last casting himself at her knees and tenderly embracing them, Fair Arelise!
said he to her, must you also yet be more Inexorable than the Gods, who in
spite of the Offenses, that we commit against them every day, are always ready
to pardon us, from the Moment that we crave Mercy at their hands; you see that
I make you all the submissions, that I could be able to render to themselves, I
confess my Fault, I demand your Pardon, I put my self upon my knees before you,
I embrace yours; and that there may be nothing wanting to the Satisfaction I ow
you, Impose upon me what pain you please for my Default, and I promise you, and
protest you, I willingly will submit thereunto, provided it be not that of
seeing you a longer time angry with me: Arelise not any way heeding this
discourse, but disintangling her self out of the hands of the Shepherd, she
returned to join Coris, to whom Agamee gave his hand. Celiane who knew nothing
of their affairs, and intricacies, and on the contrary, understood the great
kindness that was betwixt them, was astonished to see the coldness of Arelise,
and demanded the cause of Celemante. Amiable Celiane, answered he her, when you
shall see Ergaste and Arelise, without being angry together, demand of me then
the Subject and Cause, for then there must be something very extraordinary: but
what can I say unto you, when they do but what is usually done every day, and
what reason to render you of a thing, which is not but Natural to them?
Celemante made her this Reply so loud, that Ergaste heard it: and for as much,
that he saw well, that the hour of his Reconciling himself with Arelise, was
not yet come, that the Humor which he knew her to be of, he should lose his
Labor, and thereby make her more obstinate then at that time, and therefore
must leave her to come to her self; he used his Endeavors to conceal his
Vexation, and dreamed only of fencing himself from the Jests of Celemante; he
therefore, to that effect came up from the place where he had been on his
knees. However at the time, when he thought to speak, he was interrupted by
Celiane who answered Telamon: Shepherd, you are Malicious, for I know that
there were never two Persons, that loved one another better then did Ergaste
and Arelise. I say, not the contrary, replied Celemante, but you must know Fair
Celiane, that it is their particular manner of Loving. Some do believe, that to
live together in Unity, and Peace one by another is Love; and they hold that it
cannot be done, but only in War, and Contention. See, you Shepherdess, that
Love is an Ape, which always counterfeits the Natural Qualification of all
those he meets. It is peaceable in a Sweet Temper; a Quarelour with one
Naturally Prompt and Hasty, Merry and Pleasant with those Persons who are given
to Sports and Rejoicing.

Ergaste, who still Intended to speak, when Celemante had finished, seeing that
he prepared himself to continue longer yet in discourse, Interrupted him at
last, and addressing himself to Celiane, said; Amiable Celiane, if Celemante
knew the Nature of Love, he would give you a better then that, to what you have
required of him. Love, Fair Celiane, is a kind of War, where every one seeks
nothing else, but to Conquer his Adversary; That is, who shall surprise him,
shall wound him, shall surmount one another; and it being so, should you be
astonished, always to see both Parties in Strife, and Division? Ah! I accord
with thee, cried Celemante: undoubtedly, Ergaste, Love, as thou managest it, is
a War; and I should so be persuaded, if I were Arelise, I would not approach
thee, without putting on my Head-Peice, and array me with my Armor, Helmet,
etc. Cap-a-Pe, from head to foot at all hazards. Ergaste who apprehended what
he would say, rejoined him smiling: Celemante, it is a War where no blows are
dealt, but what are received, and felt with pleasure, and provided the
Adversary pleases, there is nothing but pleasure in being wounded; that is the
reason why thou see, that they will give to truth, the offensive Arms to the
God of Love, as well as to that of War, and that they paint him with a Bow and
Arrows, as they do Mars, with a Sword: but thou see also, that they give him
not therefore any Defensive Arms, as to the other, and that on the contrary,
they paint him all naked, as if he were afraid, not to receive all the Shots
that they had Aimed, and Levelled, and made against him; and least he should
lose one in his Attire. Celemante had replied, but seeing that Celiane would
speak, he yielded her Place, and Precedence, by Civility; so that the
Shepherdess replied thus. That which you speak, Ergaste, is Gallant and Comely:
but however, I do not well understand, how you compare Love with War, since
that contrarily, Love in my apprehension tends not but to Peace, and Union of
hearts. And War, Amiable Celiane, replied Ergaste, tends it to any other thing
than Peace? Celiane not answering any thing, Celemante took up the Cudgels for
her, and said; no Ergaste, not so; Wars arise from the Disunion of Heart, and
thou will avow me, that Love Arises and Springs from Union, and
Correspondency. That is that in which thou deceivest, and cheatest thy self,
replied Ergaste. Love, as well as War, Springs yet from Disunion of Minds, and
Spirits, and Tempers. At this Discourse, Celemante betook himself to laugh, and
turning himself to look after Philemon, said, Philemon, behold here is news for
you; for what shall we be assured of in the world hereafter, if Ergaste goes to
make proof unto us, as he says, that Love Springs from Divsunion of Hearts,
and Minds? that is not very difficult, replied Ergaste. Is it not true, that
Love is no other then a desire? now all Desire, comes from the absence of a
good we wish, and as we may say, from its Disunion with us; for if we were
United in the thing we Desire, we should surcease, wishing for it, being
impossible to Desire that which we are in possession of already, and with which
we are United, therefore thou must necessarily Avow me that Love, being a
Desire, and Desire Springing from Disunion, Love Springs likewise from the
same. Celemante would have replied, but Agamee Interrupted him thus; I believe
Ergaste that you would say as our Poets, that the Man and the Woman, were not
formerly, but one and the same person, which were Disunited, and Separated in
two halves: and to hold upon this Foundation, that since that time, one half
dreams of nothing else, nor seeks to Unite themselves as do the Parts of a
Serpent cut in two prices, so that when a Man loves a Woman, or that a Woman
loves a Man, it is that they have both refound the half, whereof from they had
been Disunited. Celemante having commended the thoughts of Agamee replied him:
if that which you say should be true, Agamee, it would still be true, that Love
did Spring from Union, and not from Disunion, as Ergaste said. For this
Inclination of two halves to resemble themselves would not come to pass, but
from that which other whiles, they would have been United. But also it is
certain that Ergaste Dreams not, nor Conceives, nor Apprehends what he says,
and that if the Spirits should not Unite, before they Loved one another, they
should never be capable of Affection. Have thou sometimes taken Notice,
Ergaste, of this Fatal Moment which gives Birth to Love? have thou observed
that which passes in this first Interview of a Shepherd well shaped, who meets
with a Fair and Amiable Shepherdess? I know well, that they frequently long,
will look upon one another, before they will join in Love, and that other
times, they will never Love, and that even many times, they will conceive an
Aversion one for another: but also you will sometimes see, that their Eyes are
no sooner met, then they feel themselves Inseparately tied one to another, and
so Love one another. That is certain, said Erg^ste: but what conclusion do
thou draw, or infer from thence? that Love, replied Celemante, never Springs,
but from Union of hearts. My Poor Friend, replied Ergaste, I see not but that
returns too much to that which thou will show us, more then thou believe,
said Celemante. For these different effects from the first interview, come from
this, that Certain Spirits, which commonly go out of us, as the Beams go out of
the Sun, mingle themselves in a Moment one with another; almost after the same
manner as thou see the Atoms, and Motes fly from the Air. And as thou see
yet these same Motes to meet one another, to knock one another, to recoil
sometimes one upon another, sometimes to pass beyond, and not to touch one
another, and sometimes to grasp one another together; it arrives in the self
same manner, in the Medly, and Mixture of Spirits, sometimes they are long
before they fix together, and Unite together. Whence it comes that it is a long
time before they love one another: other times in meeting, they knock and
justle, one another; and thence comes the Aversion: sometimes, they pass
further without touching one another, and from thence Springs the Indifferency.
But also sometimes they do no sooner touch, they graple one another, as one may
say, and they Unite together; and it is thence that this sudden Love arises,
which takes Birth at the very first Interview. So thou see that Union is
always the Sole, and True Cause of Love. O Celemante, cried Coris, all that is
unknown to us! think you, that we know what is of the Spirits, and what they
are, and that we can Imagine, how it is possible that the Spirits Unite, and as
you say, graple one another. Dear Coris, replied he, concieve you how that
happens in the Body? undoubtedly, replied Coris; and I think that there needs
not much skill to apprehend, how a thing which is grapled and clasped, is fixed
to another thing, in the like manner how a clasp or hasp holds to a Buckle? how
a Stone remains, in the Iron Head of my Crook which is hollow? nor how, in
fine, how a Body which has a Figure, is fixed to another which likewise has a
Figure and Frame, which is proper to it? But how will you that I comprehend
that of Spirits, who have neither Body, Frame, nor Figure? Amiable Coris, said
Celemante unto her, behold you are therefore more Skilful, and Expert then I
am, since you conceive that in the Body; for, in fine, the Bodies, and the
Spirits are but one and the same thing, the sole difference is but only in the
Name. They call those Bodies that are Gross, Ponderous, Visible, and Composed
of many others. They call Spirits, Small Subtle Bodies that are Simple, Light,
Imperceptible, and whereof others are Composed. But in Truth, they are equally
of the Body, and the smallest of all have their Frames and Figures, even as
others. Truly Celemante, replied Ergaste, it Admirably becomes thee, to speak
here of these Small Bodies, and so to Act the Doctor amongst Women! Friend,
replied Celmante, that here is but a Doctrine of Love, and I believe that he is
not a Gentleman, but would very readily Learn, or Teach, how it is to Love
such Fair, and Amiable Shepherdesses.

Agamee who was ravished with joy to hear him, said unto him; They would pardon
you, Celemante, if you did not also leave us in the same doubt where we were,
concerning that which has given place to your Contest. For we have told you
enough how two Persons Love, how they are indifferent, and even how they hate,
but you teach us not how two Persons who Love one another, are angry together,
and do sometimes the same thing as if they hated one another, and in the mean
time it is that which has caused your dispute to arise. It is true that I have
not told you, replied Celemante, but what need is there that I explain that
unto you Agamee? See you not that Ergaste and Arelise, who do all they are able
to teach you? The Science is of much utility and unprofitable, where experience
is so common. They all began to laugh at the Reply of Celemante.

Philemon himself had taken great Pleasure to listen to them, and although the
variety of their Opinions and of their Reasonings, served not but to make him
admire more the uncertainty of all things, and to confirm him in the Opinion
that he had, that all the Science of the Philosophers was nothing but Vanity
and Error, (however he would not have spoken until then, lest he should
interrupt them.) But when he saw they did nothing but laugh he begin to speak
thus, Well Celemante, you think you have acted Wonders that it is not true
which you think, that there is less assurance in the Oracles of Jupiter than in
the Science of your Moats and Atoms? not so, replied Celemante: but I think
that there is always as much as in the doubts that thou make; O poor Boy!
replied Philemon; if thou have no other than that to answer me, thou must
necessarily be a very Fool, to have lost thy time in a Science whence all the
assurance terminates in saying that thou know as much as I, who make a
Profession of knowing nothing.

Celemante would have replied, when from the foot of a small hill, where they
then were, they heard a great noise as if People had cried. Almost at the self
same moment at the top of that rising a Shepherd with a Dart in his Hand haling
with the other hand a young Maiden whom he held by the arm, and they also
perceived an old Woman who striking him with an Hook or Crook, endeavored to
force and constrain him to quit the same young Maiden. Agamee advanced to know
what it was, and the rest of the Company did the same. Ergaste knew this Man to
be a Shepherd, who was lately come to inhabit amongst them: But as he knew not
the ground nor cause, that he had so ill to treat a Maiden, who although she
was simply habited, appeared admirably fair and beautiful, he asked him the
cause. The other, replied him, that she was his Slave, that fled away from his
dwelling. Thy Slave, replied the old Woman, thou wicked Person. Say say, that is
a free Maiden whom thou forcibly have ravished away, and by the Laws of
Justice, thou ought to be condemned thy self and made a Slave to her. Agamee
seeing that they mutually complained one of another would needs know who had
most cause. He softly took the young Maiden by the arm, and taking her out of
his hands, whom they had accused to be her ravisher away, he demanded to be
clearly and duly informed, and what she or he said. This Man who was tall and
shaped well enough, but whose Physiognomy marked him out to be very violent,
and naturally ill tempered, churlish and malignant, looked fiercely upon
Agamee, and presently scorned to give him a reply, seemed to consult if he
should attempt to compel him by force to execute his enterpize. In fine, the
number of those who were present amazed him, so that he began in part, to
satisfy the demand of Agamee. All that I have to say unto you, replied he, is
that that Maiden was a Slave, I have bought her to be mine. This Woman whom you
see, did conceal her in her house, I retook her there hence, and remanded her
to my dwelling. Ah, generous Shepherds, replied the old Woman, (for she also
took Agamee to be a Shepherd,) be you I pray you, a Judge of this difference;
and you will see and find that this wicked one, would ravish from me my Neice
by the blackest and most abominable Treachery. What wicked Woman! replied the
other, would thou deny that I bought this Slave? I deny it not truly,
replied she, but it is by the crime by which she is become so? Whilst they so
contested the young Maiden fixed her eyes upon the ground, and a thousand Tears
trickled down her fair Cheeks. She durst not almost through confusion and fear
look upwards, nor speak one word nor pronounce a syllable. The Shepherdesses
looked upon her with an extreme Compassion, and admired her dismal State, the
excellent Features of her Face and the whiteness of her Hue, and the others
those of her Teeth, and the form of her delicate Mouth, her sweetness, port,
modesty, and comely pitch, and gesture. The Shepherds also said one to another,
that she appeared to be born rather to make Slaves, than to be one her self,
and that assuredly Nature had not formed such delicate arms to carry Chains.
They were on this discourse, when they saw come toward them, a Man, who ran
with all his might, having a Javelin in his hand. His pitch in point of height
was but ordinary: but considerable for its excellent Proportion. He had his hue
and die brown, as was his Hair, his Eyes black, his Nose like an Eagles bill,
usually called a hawked Nose, much sweetness and majesty in the Face, mixed
with some kind of Fury. The old Woman no sooner had seen him, but turning her
self to the other: Tremble, tremble, perfidious One, said she to him, behold
him who will punish thy Crimes.

These words caused the young Maiden to lift up her eyes, and from the time of
the coming of him whom she knew one might observe to dart and beam from her
Face a sudden Joy, which gave her a thousand new Transports and auspicious
Delights. The first of these unknown appeared much moved in seeing him, and his
Hue and Color which naturally was red and high, was yet kindled with a new
flaming Fire. However his Emotion seemed not to be mixed with Fear, and he
attended with great Resolution. In the mean time the other approaching him, and
judging by that which he saw the Obligation which he had to the Company of
these Shepherds, he saluted them all civilly, and afterward looking upon his
enemy with an eye full of indignation, he said unto him? It Is against me, thou
Traitor, thou treacherous One and Coward, that thou must dispute the Possession
of Eliante, and not shamefully to carry away a Woman. It becomes thee well,
replied the other, to combat with me by force of arms, and thereby I will
render thee thy Desert, for flying away with my Wealth. But I will not omit to
accept thy challenge, nor to dispute my Slave against thee, but to punish thee
to have durst undertaken to debauch her. At these words lifting up his hands he
would have made up to his enemy, to smite him with his Dart, and this prepared
himself, with an excellent Grace to receive it, when Agamee and the Shepherds
put themselves betwixt them, and so hindered a disorder which the Women were
already all alarmed at. Agamee having a little remitted them, demanded of them
if there were no means to know their difference, and the first having told him
by way of answer that he had already unfolded it to him, the other replied,
that if they would have the Patience, he would relate them the Justice of his
Complaints, adding that he would that his enemy would refer it to their
Judgments. This after he had considered and mused some time, said he would
willingly do it, provided they would listen to them the one after the other; so
there being a content on all hands, they descended to the foot of the Hill,
where there was a kind of Bank, and there they sat down. The two Adversaries
chose a certain place opposite to speak in the hearing of their Judges Orally.
And for as much as he who first spoke had already alleged his Pretense, the
other replied in these Terms.

The History of Alceste and Eliante.
I Should be happy, generous Shepherds, and wise Shepherdesses, if the Gods had
always made my Destiny to depend upon the Justice of Laws; and that they had
given me Judges, such as you are from my Infancy, to punish the first outrages
which have bin done me, as they seem this day to have miraculously sent you
here to do me reason, for the last that I have suffered before your eyes. You
will be astonished with the variety of events, and diversity of the
Circumstances which I have to relate you, but if you have Astonishment, I am
assured that you will yet have more Compassion for us, and yet more Indignation
against our enemy, when you shall know our misfortunes and how they are happened
to us, and above all when you shall see that the sole right, wherewith my Rival
pretends to serve himself against me, is not sounded but on the Crimes of his
Family.

We are all time originally descended from this Valley, I will tell you, the
young Eliante that you see, Perinte that is our Enemy, and I my self: but there
is so long a time past that our Forefathers are gone out and expired, that it
is difficult their Memory should be traced down to you. It was from the time
that Alexander the great passed into Asia. They enrolled themselves all three
in his Army, and being in all the Battails that he fought against Darius, they
there acquired such Reputation, and so enriched themselves with the Spoils of
the Persians, that the Fortune that they made in a strange Country, made them
despise their own where they had one more competent.

After the death of Alexander the great, they married themselves in Babylon:
but after some years my Mother and that of Eliante, being dead almost at one
and the same time, our Fathers who loved them with an unparalelled Tenderness,
conceived so much Grief that they could not longer dwell in Babylon, nor suffer
the sight of those places which at all times would renew the memory of their
Loss; as they we trained up in arms, they resolved there to finish their days,
and for as much more they sought not but honorable Occasions to loose a Life
that their regret had rendered unsupportable, but because each of them had a
Child of their Marriage, and that my self who was eldest of the two, had not
attained above twelve years of age, and Eliante but six. They made a Will and
Testament before their departure, by which they named and appointed the Father
of Perinte our Guardian, and Tutor, and besought him to bring up Eliante and my
self in a Friendship and amity one for another, which represented that of our
Father, and to marry us together when we came of age and for as much as the
Father of Perinte had also a Son and a Daughter, and that these Friends over
credulous, would leave them marks and tokens of their Friendship, they added in
their Will and Testament, that if it happened I should dye, they desired that all
my Wealth should appertain to Eliante, on condition and always, provided that
she would marry the Son of our Guardian and Tutor. If I should survive Eliante,
that I should have all her Wealth, provided I would marry his Daughter, and if
we refused these Conditions, he would give him the Liberty to dispose of all
their Inheritance.

The Father of Perinte, therefore received the Will and Testament and Pledge of
these two Friends: But I pray you to see in what manner he executed their Wills
and Testaments. He no sooner saw their Children and Wealth in his hands, but he
designed both the one and the other for his own Family. Instead of educating
Eliante and my self in a kindness which might dispose us for Marriage, for
which our Fathers had both a willingness to unite us, or rather by which they
were willing to unite themselves in the Persons of their Children: he employed
all his care and thoughts on one side to divide our minds, endeavoring to
animate us one against the other by small Jealousies to nourish amongst us by
these questions, which one sucks often as one may say Enmity even as milk, and
on the other side to insinuate into me for his Daughter, all the affection I
owed to Eliante, and to imprint in the Heart of Eliante for his Son all the
good will which I had right to hope for by the last Will of her Father.

But be it that Love irritates it self against all the designs, which opposes
it self to her Liberty, be it that the Gods take pleasure to overthrow
enterprises, so treacherous and so full of Perfidy: so it is that they found it
always, that all that this perfidious one practiced to endeavor to make me
have a kindness for his Daughter, that it always made me have an Aversion, that
Eliante had the same Sentiments for Perinte, and to the contrary there sprang
up among us both, I know not what desire of loving one another, by the
constraint that they would have imposed upon us to hate one another. The Father
of Perinte caused his Son, to learn all that could be Imagined, to perfect him
in all exercises, which might Capacitate him, to be rendered Amiable, and
Delightful to Eliante. He caused his Daughter to be Educated and brought up,
with a Care all alike, that I might the rather leave my self to be Dazzled, and
a Mist cast over my Eyes; and as for Eliante and my self they abandoned us
both, the one, and the other, her to her good Nature, and my self to all the
Defaults of mine. But all the art in the World could not put in the Sister of
Perinte, the least part of those Natural Graces wherewith Eliante Shone, and
Sparkled in mine eyes; and my good Fortune would have it, that she had an
Higher Esteem of me, than of Perinte with all that he had acquired.

A Success so contrary to the Designs of this Wicked Tutor, and Guardian,
S^angely Irritated against us. We perceived even Eliante and my self as young
as we were, that they conceived a Displeasure, when she and I were together,
that they testified nothing but joy, when they saw us make any Love or Caresses
to their Children, and that they punished us, but for the Faults that I
committed against his Daughter, and the Divisions which sprang betwixt Eliante
and his Son. If we would obtain any thing of him, we must feign to quarrel
Eliante and my self, and it came even to such an excess of Jealousy, betwixt us
two, that we durst not speak together, unless we were resolved to draw upon our
selves, some ill Treatment from him. On the other side we could not Live,
neither Eliante, nor my self, without testifying our Affection, and when it was
needful to wipe away a thousand Dolors, Infinitely beyond those which were
Invented against us by our Persecutor, I would have Despised and Rejected them,
to have only the Pleasure to tell Eliante how much I Loved her. But because in
giving us this satisfaction, we exposed our selves, Mutually to these hard
Persecutions, we obliged our selves to Manage it for the Love of one another,
if we would not do it for our selves. Love is a Great Master, and Infancy the
most Simple, and the most Ingenious one, becomes Expert and Skilful, when it
comes to Instruct, not daring to speak together, we advised one another to
write all that, which we would have made known to one another. The Negligence
that they had affected to make us Instructed, was cause that we Immediately
drew to our selves Evil enough: But Love soon taught us that, which the Masters
had not done. They observed us so strictly, that we could scarcely make, or
hold our Tickets. now we would give them one to the other in passing, then we
would slip them in our Clothes; now we served our selves of Certain Lurking
Holes, which were convenient for us, where I put my Letters, and where I went
to fetch her Answers; we oftentimes changed the places, lest they should
mistrust us, in seeing us go there too often. We passed some years sweet
enough; and although it were to us a great Evil, as that we durst not always
speak; I found it on the the side by the kindness that Eliante had for me, and
this kindness was to me so great a Treasure, that I thought to have had yet
more subject to praise my self, than to complain of my Destiny. But Fortune in
the end betrayed all our Precautions, and Perinte having casually found one of
my Letters in the cleft of a wall, where I had put it, and where Eliante should
have taken it, his Father thereby discovered our Commerce. Unfortunately for us
this Letter was the most tender, and the most forcible, that ever I wrote to
Eliante, for after having reiterated her all the assurances possible of my
Love, I there bewailed the Perfidy of our Guardian. I there spoke of the
aversion I had against his daughter, I declared her that I impatiently expected
the age wherein the Laws would leave us to our own conduct, to press her to
execute the Will and Testament of our Father. In conclusion I there Discovered,
all that the Interest of our Love Obliged me most to hold our Peace to our
Cruel Enemy. I cannot nor could not better Delineate you, how much he was
Incensed, then by the Strange and Cruel Resolution that he took. He spoke to
Merchants who went to Traffic toward the Pillars of Hercules; made an
agreement and bargain with them to carry me so far, that I should never return;
and afterward made me depart, not Advertising me two hours before, and made me
believe that he would send me to spend away a Year in Greece, there to learn my
Exercise.

I do not tell you of my Surprise, nor my Grief at the Order of this Terrible
Departure. A Clap of Thunder had not Rendered me so Confused as I was, and I
believe I had learnt news of my Death with more Constancy and Resolution. For
in fine, although Eliante was then but thirteen years of age, we were however
yet she and my self depending on his Condition, and all my resistance served
not, but only to render us both more Unfortunate. But conjecture you what was
also the astonishment of Generous Eliante, when I went to bid her adieu, she
had yet known nothing of this sad news, and I also found her thereunto very
little prepared; but what shall I say, what other preparation must there be on
the like occasions, then the Testimony of the last Grief; is there any thing
that better cuts asunder, then that of the seizing of hearts, the disorder of
the Spirit, and the abundance of Tears? it is that which I observed in this
fatal moment, in the Fair Eliante, if otherwise, or notwithstanding, I dare say
I was my self in a condition to remark something. In fine, I parted, and we
came and Imbarqued upon the Mediterranean Sea. In the sixth day after our
Sailing, our Ship having been a long time battered with a Tempestuous Storm,
they perceived they had sprung a leak, or cloven asunder, and not being in a
Condition to bear so great a weight any longer, they must Necessarily per^sh,
or discharge the Men, and Merchandise without Diligence. Compassion is a Virtue
unknown to Mariners. They have no Laws but for Interest, nor yet any Maxims
but those which inspires into them their Avarice. They hoped for a profit for
their Merchandise, they waited upon none of the Traveller; so they resolved to
put off the men, and to preserve the Merchandise. In this Design they chose
people unprofitable to themselves, I was of the Number, and designed to be cut
off. By Casualty we had been cast near to an Island which is but a days journey
from Crete, alias Candia, but very far from the ordinary passage of Ships. It
is an Island Desert, to which I think there is not so much as a name given, and
where there are but Birds and Serpents for their hoasts, nor for retreat but
only Woods and Rocks. But yet it was a Good Fortune, in an extremity of this
Nature, it was a Port of Safety for the Unfortunate, who without that had been
cast into the Sea. The Captain of the Ship made us there to go and land, and by
much Favor, gave us only a little Bread, with Bows, and Arrows, and Darts for
Hunting, that we might thereby be able at least to Subsist for some time,
waiting till he might, return to retake us in as he Promised us, or that we
should have some succor by some Vessels passing. But we well knew, that he
promised us the one but to deceive us, and that we durst not attend the other
but by Fortune: we were thirty that Disimbarked there. They say, that the
Miserable Consolate themselves together, but I experimented wholly the contrary
on this occasion. I was a thousand times more afflicted by the Complaints, by
the Cries, and by Despair of my Comrades, then I was by the apprehension of
Death; it is true I Imputed not to my Courage the Disdain I made, the absence
of Eliante had put me in an Estate to wish Death, rather then to fear it. Also
of all that was Affrightful, and Terrible in this Island, nothing did so much
Terrify me as that I should never see her again; we had soon ran over all the
Island its Circuit, not being at the utmost but sixty, or eighty Furlongs.
There were some Birds, and a great number or Serpents, we slew the one to eat
the other for our own Defense. We Roasted our Viands by the Sun Beams, and when
it was Cloudy Weather, we were obliged to eat it all Raw; we spent the day
close to the Sea side to see if we could see any Ships: the night we retired
our selves into the Hollows of Trees, or Caves of the Earth; that which was
Incommodious, was the want of Water, we had none sweet, and if there were any
that were not altogether salt, they had so ill a taste that they excited us to
Vomitings. The Bread which they had given us, could not long suffice so many
Mouths, we were forced to have Recourse to Roots, and to supply the defect of
Fountains by great Pits which we made in the lowest places, there to gather
together the Water of the Rain. There was no means to subsist any long time in
this Dismal kind of Life. Some Dyed with Hunger, by and near our Viands, others
with Thirst near to the Fountains; there were some Poisoned sleeping, by the
biting of the venomous Serpents, and there was not one, only one in the end,
but fell sick by ill Nourishment or Pain. It was there that I learnt the
condition of the Treatment that the Father of Perinte had made with these
Merchants, to leave me in a place whence I should never return, and I knew it
from one of my unfortunate Comrades, who had heard it also spoken to the Pilot;
but it is time that you should know that which passed in Babylon, whilst I
languished in this deplorable Desert, and for as much as I have not been
instructed but from the mouth of Eliante, and that I might possibly omit
something I pray you that you will permit her to relate it her self.

Alceste (for that unfortunate Lover was so named) ceased then to speak; and
immediately all the Company cast their eyes upon the fair Eliante, and expected
from her the recital of what followed. She would gladly have bin excused,
because her modesty rendered her Timorous, and her pain and grief had also
taken almost her Speech from her, and the discourse of Alceste renewing the
Memory and Remembrance of so many Disgraces, had also renewed her Tears, that
she could not stay them. But as she saw her self, in fine, pressed by the
silence of her Lover, and by the impatient desire that she saw upon the Faces
of those round about her, she betook her self to speak, addressing to the
Shepherdesses, who had made her to sit down in the midst of them.

I know not, fair and wise Shepherdesses, why Alceste would that I should
recite you my self, the State wherein he left me after his departure from
Bayblon. It is all that which has bin hitherunto the most difficult to depaint
you in this historical Narration, and it is that which I am almost least
acquainted with. For in fine, when I saw the manner wherein they made him
depart, without any Speech thereof ever in my hearing before, without
advertizing him thereof, and under a pretext, the feigning and dissimulation
appearing very gross, (for what appearance of care should they take, to choose
him Masters in Greece when they would give him none in Babylon?) When I
considered, I say, all these things, I divined immediately that it was an
Artifice to separate Alceste from me to force me in his absence to espouse
Perinte, and I fell into a condition that I knew not well what would become of
me. I was obliged by the last Will of my Father to consider and love Alceste as
a Spouse, which he had designed me by his own Choice, and I will not dissemble
to tell you in his presence, that his Virtue and Merit, had made a desirable
necessity in me, to perform my duty. My Regrets also tormented me, with so much
the more Empire, that they were authorized by the order of my Father, and I
permitted so much more willingly Pain and Grief to seize upon my Soul, that no
scruples should combat my Heart, and that it was my duty as well as my
inclination.

My Guardian (but can I give this name to my mortal Enemy?) This cruel one,
said I, used all Artifices imaginable to dissemble his barbarous design. He
published amongst his Friends that he had sent Alceste to the School of Athens,
as he had made himself believe, and he whom he could not suffer before, he
dissembled, notwithstanding his absence gave him trouble and regret. He even
affected to testify it before me, be it to gain me by this Complaisance, be it
to take from me ground and cause to mistrust his Treachery. He treated me with
much more kindness than he was accustomed, and of his Persecutions I had not
any greater sufferings then the Pressures of his Son.

In fine, one day I saw him come into my Chamber with a Countenance more sad
than ordinary. He said nothing unto me, but appointed his Son, who there was to
follow me, and when they were upon the Stairs, he said unto him as in secret,
yet loud enough, that I could understand him, that Alceste was dead, that he
had received the news thereof, and notice was given him that the Ship whereon
he embarked suffered Shipwreck, and however he must not advertize me thereof.
He said this unto him, without thinking to approach so near as he did to the
Truth, for he had not since heard any thing from the Merchants, with whom he
had agreed, and knew not the extremity of Alceste: but he would by the design
which you see, falsely persuade me of his Death, thinking to disabuse me by the
extremities of the World, whereto he had exposed him. I who effectively
believed that Alceste was dead, beheld me alarmed as you well may imagine.
Grief so seized on me at once, that Perinte returning to my Chamber, found me
there swooned. I will not urge you to believe the Complaints I made when they
made me return to my Sentiments; I will tell you only that I immediately
doubted that the death of Alceste, was a premeditated Design of the cruelty of
our Enemy, and I saw well that it was to oblige me to marry his Son, or in case
I refused to seize on our Wealth; and indeed there passed not a Month but he
made me this Proposition of this fair Marriage, for although he believed that
Alceste would never return from the place he had sent him, however he would
make precautions against all hazards, there was nothing more assured then the
attempting quickly to conclude our Marriage.

This was then, when I no more made any more doubt of the Perfidy of the
Design, whereof I had only a mistrust. Until then I had but a simple Aversion
against Perinte, as we naturally have of all things where we see they force us:
but when the Grief which I had for the Death of Alceste was joined with this
Aversion, when I saw that they would have me become the price of his Blood, and
the recompense as I may say, of his Murderers, then I had neither Father nor
Son but horror and abomination, and to say all at once, I considered him as the
cause of the death of Alceste, and the other for his execrable murderer and
parricide. In vain did they think to gain me by the consideration of Wealth.
Let him take, said I, let him take my Wealth provided he gives me my Liberty.
Poverty shall be much sweeter to me alone, than all the Riches of the World
with his Son. Let him seize on the inheritance of our Fathers without scruple;
it is far less Crime to take away Wealth then Life, and flight cannot cause
Horror in a Murderer.

It was not in secret that I made these manner of Complaints, I freely
discovered it to all Persons whom I saw, because that after the loss of
Alceste, I believed I should have no more cause to fear my Enemy. And in
reality, I would willingly have relinquished the Inheritance of my Father which
Joy, provided he had left me at liberty to fly where I might never more hear of
him nor his Son. There was in Babylon a young Persian of quality, with whom
Alceste had contracted a most perfect Friendsh^p. He was named Oxiarte, and was
near about the same Age As he dwelt in the Neighborhood, one might say that
they had almost bin brought up together, for a long time he conceived a great
affection for me: But for as much as he knew that of Alceste, he had so much
consideration for his Friend that whilst he believed him living, he would never
speak of his Passion. He thought he could discover it me when he believed him
dead, and that without being his Rival, he could demand of me a place that the
other was not capable to occupy. If I had bin in a state to listen to a new
Friendship, I had possibly bin unjust to resist his, for there was never one
accompanied with more generosity nor sincerity, nor yet discretion. But Alceste
had carried away all my Affections with him; and of all Passions, I was not
capable of any thing but hatred and aversion, that I had for those who I
believed occasioned his Death. I would not however reject him. But on the
contrary, endeavoring to engage him to serve me, in the design I had to draw
my self out of the hands of my Persecutor. Oxtarte, said I unto him, I am in a
trouble where my Soul is not capable to dream of new Engagements, and also in
the hands of a Man from whom you ought not hope to draw a consent, contrary to
the design which he has to Sacrifice me to his Avarice. That which I can say
to you notwithstanding, that I have so much horror for that cruel Enemy, and
the Marriage he designs me, that there is nothing honorable that a Man can
hope from me, who shall have the courage to draw me out of his hands, and set
meat Liberty but I will testify my acknowledgment unto him.

There was no more need of disposing Oxiarte to undertake all, he would but
know in what place I had fixed my Eyes for a Retreat, I told him I had always
heard say, that my Father was of Tempe, and that he had yet a Sister, and some
Relations whose Names I knew not, but I hoped to discover them there, when I
should be there personally present, and I signified to him in fine, that I had
designed that place for my Sanctuary, and place of Refuge. Oxiarte did not
ponder upon my Proposition, and too well content with the only shadow of the
hope I gave him, he made all our necessary preparatives ready, the most
diligently and the most secretly that in him was possible. He had a great
Patrimony, and Inheritance which he enjoyed, having neither Father nor Mother.
He sold it all, and having by this means made a very considerable fond of
money, and capable to repair the loss which he had Abandoned, he so very well
disposed all that which was necessary for our departure, that we, in conclusion
went out of Babylon by night, and having in few days gained the City of Tire,
by the means of Chariots appointed by turns on purpose, we prosperously
Embarked our selves on the Sea, before they had leisure to overtake us. It is
true that I Imagined not that this good Guardian would make any great Diligence
to Arrest us. For I had with me but one Maiden, at my wealth remained in his
hands, and that was the sole aim of his wishes, I believed no otherwise,
although he would also afterward tell me that he was not soon consolated, for
what affection can I ever Imagine tn a man, who treats me as a Slave? and has
done me the Outrages which you have seen.

As Eliante was there, Perinte who had scarce the Patience to refrain himself
to Interrupt her diverse times, willing to say something, but the Shepherds
having interrupted him, and having signified him, they would hear him at his
turn, as much, and as long as he pleased; he left the Fair Eliante the liberty
to continue after this sort.

We Rowed most Prosperously the first day, after our Imbarkation, Oxiarte
without ceasing or Intermission being always by me, and although he had in his
heart for me a passion such as you will see by the sequel, nevertheless as he
saw my Grief all fresh, and how many regrets I had for the Grief of Alceste,
and the Affection that I Conserved for his Memory, rendered me the thoughts of a
new Friendship unsupportable; he had the Discretion to withold himself, and
to hold his Peace, as much he was able to refrain his Passion to flatter and
dissemble that of mine. About the fifth day at the last watch of the night, we
heard a great noise upon the Deck, and that having obliged us to rise up, we
found all the Mariners there occupied, in considering with much astonishment, a
great fire which appeared very far, the cause whereof they could not
Conjecture, the major part verily believed, that it was some Ship burning; and
our Pilot who was more humane then ordinarily are all those sort of People,
caused them to steer toward it, notwithstanding not too much to go out of our
course, to see if there were not some Miserable People who wanted succor.

In Advancing forward, they knew that this Fire was much farther and greater
then at first was apprehended; you would have thought it had been the total
burning of an Entire City, but it was in a place where they knew there was none
at all. So this Spectacle increased their astonishment, augmented their
curiosity, yea even gave them fear. We omitted not to approach. In fine, being
much nearer they began to discern it was a small Island in the Sea wherein
there was a Forest burning, and by and by, we observed even some Men on the
Sea, who stretched their hands toward us, and by a supplicating posture,
seemed to call us to their relief and succor. Generous Oxiarte was the first
to press the Mariners to go to them, and he was Forward, Zealous, and Ardent in
all acts of Humanity, he was of those who leaped into the Boat to fetch those
unknown ones ashore. They there found only three Men, lean, lank, scraggy,
looking like Ghosts, that had nothing but Skin, and Bones left on them, having
their Faces as it were dressed, or tanned, their Eyes sunk in their heads, Men
rather like Hobgoblins, and Ghosts then Men. He made them enter into the Skiff,
and turning to one of them to enquire of him the cause of that great burning
fire that they saw in the Isle, he astonished himself, that the same Person
casting himself about his neck, and Embracing him very straightly, and closely,
said unto him: O! My Dear Oxiarte, is it possible that it should be you? can
you bring me no news of poor Eliante? these words and the sound of that Voice,
soon instructed Oxiarte who it was that spoke thus. He however looked upon him
again, to see if he decieved not himself, and having at last known him to be
Alceste, he let himself fall upon his neck quite confused, without being able
to say, or speak one single word to him. Alceste redoubling his embraces, and
impatient to hear some tidings of me, he asked again if there had a long time
past, since he came from Babylon, and in what condition he left me there: But
Oxiarte Transported with Sentiments, which I cannot very well express unto you,
never answered him but by Sighs. At this silence Alceste persuaded himself, all
that his fear could suggest unto him, the most dismal, that he could imagine.
He believed that his Friend would not declare any thing unto him, because he
supposed he had none to tell him, but what was Mournful; and in that belief,
transported by an excess of Grief; Ah! cried he, I see too too well how matters
are. Eliante is Dead or Married to Perinte, and you will not declare it to me,
because you well know, that will give me a Mortal Wound. O Gods! did you not
conserve me from so many evils, but to reserve me for this here, the greatest,
and the most terrible of all those, to which you have exposed me, and the only
one where I cannot any more expect a remedy? But Eliante! it shall not be said,
that I survive the news of your Marriage or Death, nor that I conserve a Life
which possibly serves no more but to separate my self from you.

At these words he turned to the edge of the Skiff, to precipitate himself
headlong into the Sea: but Oxiarte returning to himself withheld him, and
straightly clasping his hand into his own, and crushing it said, unto him; No
Alceste, Eliante is not Dead, and you are going to see her even in our Ship. He
would have added something: but from the first Syllable, a blushing came up
over all his face, and Alceste observed him to shut his mouth again, and look
downwards with his Eyes, with some Signs, and Tokens of Confusion. All that
gave him Incredible Alarms, and as he knew the kindness that Oxiarte had for
him, it was impossible for him to Divine, that which could so moderate the
contentment, that the like encounter, should in truth semblably bring to this
Dear Friend, nor that which held him so in suspense between Joy, and Grief. He
therefore pressed him the third time to declare to him in what condition I was,
conceiving at least that I was undoubtedly seized with some dangerous Sickness.
In fine Oxiarte said unto him: Reassure your self too happy Alceste, there is
no cause of fear neither for you, nor for Eliante, there is no cause of fear,
but for Oxiarte. Ah Oxiarte! replied Alceste, there can be no peril to you,
unless there be peril to me also. On these words he began again to press him
anew, and instantly prayed him, that he would no longer leave him disquieted.

Whilst all this passed, the Skiff reapproached our Ship, and I was not a
little astonished to observe from the Deck, all these Embraces, and all these
Demonstrations of Friendship, and Familiarity, which had appeared between
Oxiarte, and one of those Men. I will not however conceal from you that a
certain palpitation of heart, seemed to advertise me that I had concernment,
and some part in that encounter: but the Death of Alceste, whereof I was
persuaded, and which I had always before my eyes, too much preoccupied my mind,
to leave me some disposition to divine such an event. I looked in the mean time
from the Deck of the Ship, with unparalled attention, upon all that which is
passed between them. I attempted afar off to observe the Face, and the
Lineaments, and Features of the Countenance of that unknown one; but the nearer
he approached, the more his great change made me farther distant from the
knowledge of the Truth. I observed only when they were near, that Oxiarte had
his cheeks covered with Tears, and after having Embraced him to whom he spoke,
in showing him the Ladder that they had cast out unto them to ascend; Go to, O
Happy Alceste! Go and take a place which the Gods have Reserved you; whilst
that I as for my part will return to take that which they have prepared for my
Misfortune.

It is a thousand times easier for you to imagine the effect that these words
produced in me, than for me to express them unto you. For this great disguise
which hindered me before to know Alceste, disappeared in a moment in mine eyes,
and my Imagination giving him me again, in the same instant all the former
Features in which he had formerly appeared to me so amiable, I felt my self
wholly seized with an astonishment of all the joy that could transport an Heart
in encounters so delectable, auspicious and casual.

I knew Alceste, in a word, and cried as if I had bin out of my Wits, Ah
Alceste! is it possible that it should be you? I could not speak more, for Joy
so dissipated all my Spirits that there remained not force enough to sustain
and uphold my self, and I was constrained to suffer my self to fall into the
Arms of a Maiden, which was near unto me.

On the other side, Alceste had no sooner perceived me from the Skiff wherein
he was, that yet far more transported than I was, he ascended or rather flew
into our Ship, without any more heeding what Oxiarte said unto him, and came to
cast himself at my Feet. But, amiable Shepherdesses, I insensibly engaged my
self in declaring unto you, more then you have demanded of me. Behold all which
passed in the absence of Alceste, it concerns him now to finish the rest, for
he was there present with me, and he can acquit himself much better than I
shall be able to do.

In saying this, she modestly and gracefully cast her eyes upon Alceste to
signify him that she yielded him precedence and place of Speech: but Alceste
having replied her, that she must necessarily know more then he did, and
knowing the recital that she made to him was very acceptable, and pleasant from
her mouth, and all the company, having also signyfied her the pleasure
wherewith they heard her, she was obliged to continue, which she did in these
words.

Whilst Alceste and my self were in the Transports of our Joy, they informed us
that Oxiarte who remained in the Skiff, refused to ascend into the Ship, and
that by a Despair, the reason whereof was unknown, he would have them row him
to the Island again, and that they left him there whence Alceste came; this
news strangely surprised us both: As for me I was not long in Divineing the
reason; and I thought, Wise Shepherdesses, that I have sufficiently testyfied
you the Love he had for me, to let you conceive this design was in effect of
the Grief, and Despair in observing that the return of Alceste ruined all the
pretensions of his Love. But Alceste to whom this passion was unknown, could
not Imagine the cause of this strange resolution, he inquired me thereof all
amazed, and having apprehended it, by three or tour words I had let fall, I saw
in an instant a fire breaking out in his face, and a paleness succeeding that
ruddiness soon after, even in an instant, and I observed in his eyes all the
signs and tokens of the last pain and grief. O Gods! Cried he, so many pains,
and crosses, deserve they not very well, at least a moment of consolation
without bitterness? at these words, he desired my permission, to quit me for an
instant, and running to his Friend he forced him by his Embraces, and request,
to abandon his wild, and blind design, and to return with him to our Ship, the
Pilot presently steered again our former Course, and Alceste and my self with
the Mournful Oxiarte, retired our selves into a certain part of the Ship;
whilst all the others interrogated the two others, whom they had delivered with
Alceste, on the subject of their Adventure, and of the burning that still
continued upon the Island, they in like manner declared us the cause thereof,
and after having told us how he had been put ashore, and left in that Island
(after the same manner as he has already declared you) the sad, and deplorable
life, that they had led therewith his Comrades, the Persecution that they had
suffered by Serpents and by hunger, the Miserable Kind of Death, who of thirty
persons that were there, had reduced them to the only number of three: he
added, that in fine, having devoured all the roots, and green things capable to
nourish them, not seeing any to pass by, Vessels either great or small, and not
knowing how to have any farther succor; they advised amongst themselve to set
the Forest on fire, hoping the flame thereof by being seen at a Distance,
might draw and allure the Curiosity of some Sailing on the Sea, to come to, and
succor them. He told us that to that end they gathered all the leaves they
could find amongst the Rocks, that were exposed to the heat of the Sun, and
having made them very dry, they brought them into the Forest, and taking some
Flint Stones, they had beaten and knocked them against one another, out of whom
came sparks of fire, which kindled these leaves, whereon they cast branches of
Trees, which they had made exceeding dry on purpose, and by this means set them
on fire in the thickest part Of the Forest which they had so burnt.

After he had declared us this, he would for the satisfaction of his curiosity
have us tell him wherefore, and how we were gone out of Babylon, and I cannot
possibly declare you how he was concerned and sensible of the generosity of
Oxiarte when I had declared him how he had abandoned his Country, quitted his
familiar intimate Friends, sold all his Inheritance to succor me, and follow
me, wheresoever I would go. Although he very well and sufficiently saw, that he
ought not impute this generous Resolution, but to a passion Enemy of his own,
yet he a thousand times embraced him not as his Rival, but always as a generous
Friend, with an ardent and sincere Affection, and with all the Expressions that
he deemed capable, to administer him any little Consolation. Oxiarte on his
part did what in him was possible to answer the Caresses and Love of his
Friend, and one might very well see that his Soul did within it, use all it is
Endeavors to overcome a certain heaviness and burden, wherewith he felt
himself oppressed, and to conceal at least his Sadness. But one might also see
that his Sorrow was still more and more, and that the Combat that was in his
Heart between his Passion and his Friendship; Oxiarte alone remained overcome.
If there appeared any Joy in his Countenance, it was but an imperfect Joy, and
in Similitude like to the weak Beams that the Sun casts forth, sometimes out
through the dark Clouds, who no sooner appear than they are dissipated. If he
thought to open his Mouth to speak a word, he would immediately shut it again
and utter forth nothing but Sighs, and we knew not what he would say, but by
the Pains and Repugnancy which he felt in declaring it us. In fine, he brake
this long Silence, and after he had a little disburdened and discharged his
Heart, of the Vexing and Hickhocks which suffocated it, he took the hand of
Alceste, which he tenderly crushed in his own, and looking upon me the same
time with some sort of confusion, he said unto me: What will you think of me,
Madam, to see me in the Grief and Despair, where I am at the time I recover the
best Friend I have in the World? and what will you say of a Man, who sees not
his Friends revive, but with the Affliction which others have in seeing them
dye? That I would apprehend that you would not believe me guilty toward you,
if you knew less the value and the worth of that, you return to carry away from
me. I love you, my dear Alceste, and I take and call Eliante to witness that
the Sentiments that I have conserved for her, have never violated the Duty of
my Affection, and if ever I declared my self her Lover as much as I could
believe my self to be so, without becoming your Rival, I will tell you very
much more; for in fine, I affirm and attest to the Gods, that at the same hour
that I speak to you, I have yet for you all the kindness and friendship that I
owe you, and that I have so many times sworn to you. But Alceste! The greatest
Kindness and Friendship finds it self feeble, when it comes to oppose it self
in a Love founded upon such legitimate Hopes, when it must tear it self, for so
I may say, or violently root up its Heart to make it a Sacrifice to a Rival,
and that such a one, who would loose his Life for his Friend with Joy, finds it
self frozen when he must loose him for a Mistress. Whilst he spoke, the Tears
trickled from his eyes. I believe there was nothing but his Vexing and
Hickhocks, hindered him to proceed further. Alceste could hardly withold his,
and I very well saw that it was not without making within himself a very great
endeavor that he rendered himself, capable to say unto him. I have not
withheld my self from complaining to you, generous Oxiarte, I know that it
would be to give you occasion to reproach me, that at the time you came to save
my Life, and to preserve me and my Mistress I come ungratefully to interrupt
and trouble your Rest and Peace, if you were not just enough to impute to your
Friend the Capricio or possibly the Injustice of Fortune. But in this
unhappiness where I cannot bewail you, permit Oxiarte that I bewail this
Fortune, who having so cruelly lost a Friend and a Mistress, does not return
them unto me both but by a fatal Accident, who obliges me to be unfaithful to
my Love or ungrateful toward my Friend. Ah Oxiarte! that all your Sentiments
are highly justified by those of mine; and that I am persuaded, that the loss
of a Life is a small thing in comparison to that of a Mistress. They spoke a
thousand things like these, and so tenderly that they drew Tears from mine
eyes, and they were yet in the like Discourses when a new noise Sprung up upon
the Deck advertizing us, that there appeared a Vessel or Ship that our Pilot
judged to be that famous Corsario or Pyrat called Pantauque, who ordinarily
coursed and ranged upon that Sea. They caused all the People of our Ship to arm
themselves immediately, and prepared for a vigorous defense.

As for me all affrighted, I prepared my self only to second the courage of
Alceste and Oxiarte by my vows and prayers, that was the sole arms that I could
employ for them. But alas! they were ill heard. The Enemies Ship approached us
and attached ours, the Combat began, our Ships grapled one another and boarded.
I heard Pantauque himself say over and over, that Alceste and Oxiarte, did
there act so gallantly, as was almost incredible, and if there had been two
such others in our Ship, we should have remained Victorious; but they were not
seconded; we were overcome, Alceste overpowered by a great number before and
behind, was seized and made Prisoner, and that which was most dismal in our
defeat, we there lost the generous Oxiarte. He could have saved himself if he
would, for our Enemies having forced him to one certain place in the Ship,
cried out a long time to him to render and submit himself, and would themselves
have spared him: but he sought nothing but to dye or Conquer. And indeed and in
lieu of defending himself, he cast himself amidst the thickest of them, and
having given them opportunity of attacking him on all sides, he fell down with
a hundred wounds, and in pronouncing the names of Alceste and Eliante, yielded
up his Life and breathed his last. The Fair Eliante could not pass from this
relation, without sheding some tears at the remembrance of that unfortunate
Lover, however she remained not long there, but resumed her discourse thus.
Behold us then Alceste, and my self in the hands of a Pyrat, who caused us to
be laden with chains, and going out of one danger, to fall into another, mere
Ghastly and Horrible. For although, that until then we had conserved our
Liberty: but what Destiny can one Imagine more terrible, then to see ones self
a Slave to a Barbarian, and an Impitiable Corsario and Pyrat? the loss of our
Liberty was not however that which seemed to us the most rude, the regrets
which were caused us by the Death of the Brave and Generous Oxiarte, did yet
more sensibly touch us; and more then that, the Inquietude that I was in for
Alceste, tormented me with a thousand cruel Pains, as also his, for my
Condition rendered it most dismal to me. Although we were in the same Ship (the
Corsarios having according to their custom sunk our Ship, after they had taken
out of her all they found necessary to preserve and put into their own,) yet
they separated us one from another. They had put him amongst the Men, and as
for me they shut me up with some Women that by a misfortune like ours, had
fallen into their Hands, and not having seen one another since the Combat, each
knew not whether the other were alive or dead. We passed a long time in that
condition, without having News one of another. You expect not I know, wise
Shepherdesses, that I depaint you the trouble we were in. Alceste has told me
that all he had formerly had not yet equalled that which he resented then,
because he had not bin apprehensive but for himself, but now he was concerned
and terrified for me. As for me I will avow you, that I was in a State where I
emulated the Destiny of Oxiarte, and esteemed him much more happy than were we,
although I omitted not to bemoan him.

In fine, I learnt that Alceste was living, by a Soldier who I supposed
pitied my Condition, and by his means twice or thrice we knew how it fared
with each other. There had passed many days that I had heard nothing, when one
morning they drew me out of my Prison, with some other of the Women who were
also Captives; and having made us enter into the Shallop, they carried us to a
City who appeared on one side, near to which the Ship whereout we went was
after some time in the Road. I heard them name the City Paphos and the Island
the Country of Cyprus. As soon as we were on shore we saw diverse sorts of
Persons as well Men as Women to come to us; and there was one amongst many, who
remained a long time to consider me; after she had very attentively looked upon
me, I understood that she demanded of them who conducted us there, if they
would sell me, and after having treated and agreed upon the price they
appointed they should lead me to her House, they also yet sold some of my
miserable Comrades, and brought back the others into the Ship. I felt then more
than ever the mischief of my Captivity, for I knew that I was altogether a
Slave, and that as such a one I had bin sold to a Mistress whose conditions,
humors, manners and humanity, I was ignorant of. However that was yet but the
least of my Pains; the inquietude I had for Alceste, was augmented from one
moment to another. There was above eight days that I had no news of him, all my
hopes was, that after they had sold the Women our Pyrat would also expose the
Men to Sale: but even in this Hope, I was afflicted by another fear; for I
dreamed that possibly he would fall into the hands of some cruel and inhumane
Person, and I suffered already in my heart all the ill Treatments that I could
for him.

The House where they had led me was upon the Port, as the Mistress unto whom I
had bin sold, having some visits to make, was not so soon returned to her
House, she had appointed that in expectation of her, they should shut me up in
a Chamber. The Windows opened toward the Sea, and I could thence discover not
only all that passed upon the Port, but also who came from and went to our
Ship. I was then attentive, to see if they did not disimbark some Prisoners and
was very much surprised that after they had returned the Women aboard, whom
they had sold on the Shore, I saw the Mariners weigh the Anchor, haul Sails and
went out into the open Sea. It was at this time I thought I should never see
Alceste again.

Whence could I ever expect hereafter this good Fortune arrive unto me? I knew
he was a Slave in the hands of these Corsarios, the Vessel where he had bin
made Prisoner was gone, and I could not doubt but they would sell him in some
other part. I re-commenced or re-began to weep more than ever, to utter forth a
thousand cries, in a word; to be wholly desperate. I was in this condition when
I understood that the Mistress of the House was returned, and commanded one to
fetch me and bring me to her Chamber. As soon as I heard the door open, and
looking upon him who entered, I knew the Person who came to me to be Alceste.

If ever there was an accident so surprising, I believe you will Judge that
this was it. I came from beholding the Ship, whereon I supposed he had been
departed in her, with all the reasons Imaginable. I thought him to be in the
open Sea, I would consider him, for so I may say already in some Barbarous
Country at a great distance, and at the same time, when I was aifflcted with
these Imaginations, I saw him in the same City, in the same House, and in the
self-same Chamber. As for him he appeared not much surprised, and his Joy
seemed not to me, to be mixed with Astonishment. That made me believe that he
had already been advertised that I was there, and I deceived not my self. After
having made one another the Honest, and Honorable Caresses, that the time
permitted us, he told me that as there was many days already that the Vessel of
our Corsario, was in the Road of the Island, there had been eight wherein he
had been brought to land, with many other Prisoners, and that he had been sold
to an old man, in whose house we were: that he had been happy enough in
obtaining his good favor, that the Master had a daughter a Widow who nourished
him, that this daughter having need of a Slave, he had told her there were many
aboard our Vessel, and that amongst others, there was one whereof he had heard
a thousand Commendations. That he had already notwithstanding spoke of her as
one unknown unto him, for fear of being rendered suspect that, that had given
her occasion to buy me, and we contrived to avoid all suspicion, that we would
not make any show of knowing one another. All this was expressed me in fewer
words than I deliver them to you, for the least delaying or lingering, would
have given cause of mistrust, and it was our great interest to shun it. To make
short, I was brought before my Mistress, her Father was then with her, they saw
me and considered me, and I was Interrogated by both of them, and I was happy
enough not to displease the daughter: but unhappy enough also in pleasing more
then I was willing, the fancy of the Father, although he was approaching so
great an Age, where they say, that men are Virtuous through a kind of
necessity, and where it is believed, that Vice quitteth those who have not had
the Courrage to abandon it: however he had an extraordinary inclination to
Women, and one might say that he had yet all the foolish passions of youth. It
was not long but I perceived his inclination, and from the very first time I
omitted not to advertise his daughter thereof. She prised the method I had used
to preserve my self, and appointed me to tell her of all that passed and was
said. From the moment she knew it, she aided me to cut off all occasions of
discourse with me, and above all to be found alone with me. She was very exact
in having me with her where ever she went: the passions of this good man were
increased by the obstacles that were applied, and the more he found of
difficulties, there the more obstinate he grew to make his Attempts Succesful.
He would not however have his daughter take cognizance thereof, and also, knew
not any thing of my having made her acquainted therewith. Behold wherefore he
sought a Mediator, and that which was also sufficiently pleasant in our
misfortune, he made Alceste his Confident. That was a conjuncture to us
favorable enough, for heretofore we durst not speak almost together, he nor my
self, and when we designed it we were forced to conceal it from the old man and
his daughter: but the one having of his own accord furnished a pretext to see
us, and to entertain our selves frequently in discourse, we had but to steal
our selves from the sight of one single person. We passed so many Months,
during which Alceste to prolong his confidence, and that little Liberty that we
had, was obliged to entertain his Master with a little hopes, Dissembling from
time to time, that he hoped he might make some Impression upon my Spirits,
taking such measures as he Judged needful. But in fine, he could not still
abuse him, and he did it not also, but with some kind of regret, and by a
necessity to which our Misfortune, and Unhappyness reduced us; because of a
certain scruple of freedom and Ingenuity with which he was born, gave him an
Aversion to the most Innocent Deceits. In fine, he said to his Master, that
there was nothing would prevail with me, nor could he make any Impression upon
me. This would not make him recoil, for still he pressed him to be Instant with
me, and urgent upon me, even to come so far as to make her a promise that he
would marry me; Alceste did all that to him was possible on this occasion, and
what was his duty to do, and represented him the wrong he would do his Family,
and undervalue himself to Marry his Slave, and essayed as much as could be to
divert him from that design. His Master hated him not, but contrarily, as
Alceste spoke to him with much sincerity, and he saw well that all his
Remonstrances were very reasonable, he received his advice as so many Marks,
and Tokens of his Fidelity. It is true he also received them without any
Benefit, or Utility, he praised his Councels, and yet notwithstanding did quite
the contrary. He contented not himself to make him speak to me, he pressed and
solicited me himself. We spent a whole year in this new Persecution; in fine, I
conceived my self obliged to advertize his daughter thereof, I told her
Ingeniously all that which had passed, and the Proposals of Marriage, which her
Father had diverse times, and often solicited me Personally to conclude upon. She
was amazed and promised me that she would apply thereunto a remedy, and truly
she also was as good as her word, but it was very sad, and injurious unto me.
There was made a great Traffic of Women, and Maidens for Slaves, and as the
Isle, and all the City of Paphos is Consecrated to Venus, they make by this
kind of commerce a kind of Religion. They come therefore from all parts there
to buy Maidens, and there are certain Feast Days Destinated thereunto, where
there is an Incredible number of persons, and my Mistress omitted not to expose
me to sale to the first that presented. We then expected nothing less, for as
much as she had not spoken any thing to any person, for fear, lest her Father
advertised should thereunto oppose himself: it would be infinite here to stop,
here to tell you of the Grief of Alceste, and of my own, I knew not of his till
afterward, for he had not so much as the opportunity to say adieu. Mine was
such as can scarce possibly be believed, and undoubtedly worthy of our
affection, but it passed almost into despair when I knew into what hands
Fortune made me fall. You shall know, Wise Shepherdesses, that during all these
changes, and varieties of our Fortune, there was also arrived others at Babylon
in the Family of Perinte. His Father seeing himself delivered from Alceste and
my self, and having all our wealth in his hands, he had no other apprehension,
but that in returning we would some day, come and oblige him to render us what
was our own. The return of the Merchants to whom he had consigned Alceste, had
sufficiently assured him that he was in a certain place whence in all
appearance he could never come out. As for me he was ignorant of the place of
my flight: but in fine, he knew it was impossible for us to return, nor yet
that we could find one another, Alceste and my self, and that in Marrying one
another, we had no right to demand the Inheritance of our Fathers; to prevent
that he took a resolution to retire himself out of Babylon, and to transport
his Wealth, and his Family to the Country where he was born, that is to say at
Tempe where he thought not we would come to seek him. He disposed of all his
affairs for the execution of this Design, and put himself in the way with his
Son for his Wife was dead a considerable time since, and his daughter deceased
after my departure, he came the ordinary Road, and Embarked in one of the Ports
of Syria, came near to the Isle of Cyprus. In his Voyage upon the Sea, he was
arrested by a disease which Augmented from day to day, and reduced him to such
extremity, that when he was near to Cyprus, when they believed there was no
other remedy than to disimbark him, he went on shore at Paphos, but very
unprofitable for him, in that he dyed there a few days afterward. That
happened at the time of one of their Feasts of Venus, whereof I have spoken
unto you, and just then when my Mistress would resel me: Perinte who had
performed his last duty in the Funeral Obsequies of his Father, and who was
upon the point of his departure, had the curiosity to see this Market: he met
me there, if he was surprised I Marvel not at it, if he had any compassion, it
is that he would fain have you believe it, but I believe he could never
persuade you to it. He bought me; were it to make me free? how can he be able
to say so, since he pretends that I am at this present his Slave? he went upon
the Sea, caused me to Imbark with him, we arrived at Tempe.

On^ the other side the master of Alceste, having understood that I had been
re-sold, readily sent to inquire to whom, and gave him charge to redeem me, at
what price soever it was; Judge you a little with what Joy he accepted this
Commision, but they had given him notice too late, we were already departed:
all that he could learn of those who accustom themselves to expose Slaves to
Sale, was, that I had been sold to a young stranger, who had lodged in an Inn
they directed him to. He ran there, the Host told him that he had heard that
man named Perinte, and that he understood him say, that his Father who died
there in the Island came from Babylon, and returned to Greece the Country of
his Birth. If this News gave some enlightening to Alceste, you may Judge also
how many Alarms it might cause in him. He returned, carried it to his Master,
who learning my departure, and the cheat his daughter had put upon him,
conceived such anger and fury against her, as he was Naturally Furious and
Violent, and likewise Old and Decayed, he fell into a disease, whereof he dyed
eight days after. And dying left all these signs and tokens of his Indignation
against his daughter, as on the contrary he left Alceste, all those that can be
imagined of his affection; he disinherited his daughter, gave liberty to
Alceste, and made him the Heir of all his wealth: but for all that Alceste
esteemed not any thing but Liberty, which left him the means of seeking me out.
He believed it not just to reap profit by the Indignation of a Father against
his daughter, who had not offended him but upon a Principle of Honor, he
remitted into her hands her Fathers estate, and of a Considerable Inheritance,
he only took what was necessary to depart, and to come after me.

There is but eight days that he h^^ ^^en arrived here, and there is already
more than a month, that w^ ^ave been. I will not conceal from you any thing
that Perinte^ himself can tell you for his advantage. I avow you, that during
the Voyage, he has not made me any ill treatment, and that since he arrived
here he has diverse times proposed me Marriage, and offered me Liberty on that
condition. But was I obliged to pay so dearly for a Liberty, which is due to
me, and that I had not lost but by the crime of his Father? if he has redeemed
me, is it not at the expense of our wealth which he has seized upon? I avow
you then, that since I have been here, I have used all means possible to get
out of his hands, and could not have been able to do it, but by the diligence
of Alceste. He learnt in arriving here that Perinte lodged at Gonnes. The
exactitude wherewith I was observed, not yielding him any Liberty of
approaching me, he found means to convey me a Ticket, by which he advised me of
his arrival, and besought me to give him opportunity to discourse me. I was so
shut up that I could not give him any. But forasmuch as I knew that my Father
had left here a Sister, I prayed him to answer me by informing himself, hoping
that by her means we might see and speak together. Alceste has lost no time,
and by his diligence has discovered that she is yet living, and lives within
the same City. In effect; this is my Aunt whom you now see.

He instructed himself presently, by the particularities of our Fortune, and
having convinced him by all the Circumstances, that she reported him, it would
be convenient, they seemed that she must Commence my Deliverance, out of the
hands of Perinte, and seek me a retreat in waiting, that we might dispose of
all that was necessary; for the proof of the Truth, and to make my self,
declared free in Justice, and oblige him to tender us the Wealth of our
Fathers. My Aunt hired for my Sanctuary, a little Cottage, which is some
Furlongs from hence toward the Sea, amongst the Rocks of Mount Olimpie, she
hoped I would be hidden more there, than with her at Gonnes, and that I should
dwell there more in security, against the Violence of our Enemy. Alceste being
assured of this house, would at the same time by Violence out of the house of
Perinte have carried me, and my Aunt had a thousand fears opposing her self
against this counsel, which his courage and affection prompted him to. But in
Conclusion, he constrained him to consider, that the way of procedure would
make too great a noise, and might prove of ill consequence, and that in an
Encounter where there was need of secrecy, it was far better I should take my
flight out of the house of Perinte by night, and that I should retire to my
Sanctuary that my Aunt had found me, that has been accomplished this morning
before daylight. I had continued there ever since without going abroad, and
there I was yet soon with her, whilst Alceste was gone there hard by to put some
things in order, which he found requisite for the further execution of our
design, when Perinte who caused me to be sought out in all places, having
himself discovered me, did me that Violence which these Generous Shepherds
opposed. Behold, Wise Shepherdesses, the Historical Narration of our
Misfortunes; there was scarce ever a Life more thwarted then that of ours, b^
those two particulars, and I believe that you will Judge, tha^ (...) was never
a more unjust Violence offered to any one the^^ has been done to me by
Perinte, and would yet do.

Eliante having held her peace, all the company admired not less the Variety of
so many rare Events, Adventures, and Hazards, then that they were Charmed with
the Grace, wherewith the Fair Persian had repeated them, and bewailed, and
bemoaned the disgrace of these two Unfortunate Lovers. Above all E^gaste as the
most Ardent, and the most Faithful Friend in the world, made also most account
of these Generous Friends, could not sufficiently condole the death of Poor and
Gallant Oxiarte, nor withold himself, his temper being Furious, and Fiery,
already to condemn highly, and with Indignation, the Treachery, and Perfidy of
the Father of Perinte, who had given occasion, and been cause of so many
mischiefs, and the Violence of the Son who would Authorize, Ratify, and Confirm
them. Celemante declared himself also openly for the liberty of the Fair
Eliante, and for the Repose, and Contentment of Faithful Alceste. Even Agamee
himself, although more accustomed then the two Shepherds, to the form of
Judgments pronounced already in his heart, the Condemnation of Perinte, and had
pains in an occasion, where the crime of this accused appeared so visible,
remembered himself that the first Principle of Justice, is never to Condemn any
Person without hearing him. In fine, every one murmured against this Stranger,
there was but only Philemon, who always Suspended his Judgment, by the
profession which he made to find doubts, and uncertainties, in things that
appeared most clearly and manifestly.

He alone considered this man of a Countenance cold and equal without inclining
to one side, or another, when Perinte spoke unto them thus.

Upright, Equitable, Just, and Sincere Shepherds, If that which Alceste; and
Eliante have declared you were true, there might possibly be Justice in their
complaints, and wholly innocent as I am by their own proper confession, of the
evils they have alleged to have suffered, I should howsoever have an ill
grace, to seek to profit my self by the Mischievous, Pernicious, Depraved, and
Corrupted Faith of my Father. But of this fair and tedious discourse, that they
have made you, all that which is true, it is that I am Originally of this
Country, born in Persia, but in coming here, and returning, and passing by the
Island of Cyprus, I found this Maiden a Slave at Paphos, she pleased me, that I
bought her at my own proper cost; and that this unknown who gives himself the
name of Alceste, and whom I had never seen but these last days, is a man who
has debauched her from me, by conspiring with this old Woman: all the rest
that they have told you is a sable without foundation, and without proof, and
they have concerted together. Also see you, that Alceste remembers not himself
any more, and he has been constrained to leave the finishing of the recital to
this Maiden; who by good right, as you see it, has possibly a greater part in
acting this Invention than he has. What appearance is there, that my Father
would seize upon the Wealth of two young children, entrusted with him, and left
to his good Conduct, and Faith by his two best Friends? If he would have done
it would he have been contented, to send this young boy into a strange Country,
as if it had not been easy for him to return? above all, would he have attended
until he were come to an age where he were never in a possibility more to take
from him the knowledge of that which he was? would he not rather have chosen a
time nearer to his infancy? but what being their Tutor and Guardian, was he not
in some sort master of their Lives? Men are wicked by halves, and whoever has
not horror for Flight-Robbery, or Treason, commonly makes no great conscience
of a Murder. Crimes cannot be assured, but by Crimes. When Polimnestor King of
Thrace, would have had the Wealth of young Polydore, who also had by him been
deposed, he contented not himself to send him (as they have told you of this)
toward the Pillars of Hercules, whence he could have returned by Land and Sea,
he sent him into a Country whence they never return. And indeed where is the
true Semblance of the Fabulous Adventures of this far Voyage? A Ship should
spring a leak or plank open at Sea, an Island should be found there express to
receive this unknown one; that of Delos was not more born to purpose nor more
Wonderfully for the Goddess Latone. It is as he says a Desert Island, where
there is neither Food, nor Subsistence, nor Habitation, and in the mean time
dwelt there, and nourished himself there a very long time. All his Comrades
dead, there is but him alone living, in the conservation of whom you would say,
that all the Gods were occupied, and employed: he dwelt in the midst of
Serpents, as if he had Charmed them with Medee; he set a Forest on fire, in a
place where was no fire; would you not take him for a new Vulcan, at the
subtilty with whom he invented it? at the self same hour a Ship passed by
there, as if there was a Randevous; that is yet nothing: it is justly his
Friend, and his Mistress, which met him there in this Ship, and thence
conducted him away. But how this day, this Friend appears not, and how you
could be able to demand of them what is then become of him? they have not
failed to cause a Corsario, or Pyrot Ship to be found there expressly to defeat
and take them. It would be very much too tedious for me to stay here to examine
all these Ridiculous Adventures: the rest is not of the same stamp and style?
they were sold at different times, bought by different persons, and
notwithstanding they Miraculously met Slaves in the same house, and of the same
Masters. An old decrepit man in an instant Amourous, and in Love with this
Maiden, who made his Slave his Confident, disinherited his own Daughter, and
made his Rival his Heir. What Fable? this generous Rival quits a considerable
Inheritance, of importance in Cyprus; all the Wealth touches him not, it is
above all his Interests; and in the mean time, it is to have my Wealth that
this disinterested Man comes as they say, to commence a process and litigious
Suit against me. But how dares he accuse me, after that which this Maiden has
told you her self? she is my Slave, and in the mean time, have I treated her as
a Slave ever since she came into my hands? have I not considered her as free,
as my Sister? has she not told you that I had the goodness to make her my
Wife? Is there any thing that can rationally be expected from a Man? Is there
any thing which is convenient for the good manners of a Man, whom they would
fain have pass to be a violent one, to seize upon the Wealth of others, to
treat free Women as Slaves? In very deed and truth Shepherds, it is to have a
strange Opinion of your Minds to pretend to abuse you by the like Suppositions.
For yet if they did bring you some proofs? if they show you the Will and
Testament of their Fathers or this Testament of their Master? but they have but
their bare word for all their Evidence; if it be not that you accounted for a
great proof, the opinion of this old Woman, whom they have first deceived and
who even she her self knows them not. In fine* Shepherds you cannot doubt but
that this Man is an Impostor, this Maiden a fugitive Slave, and since they with
one accord confess that it is I that have bought her, you cannot refuse me her
as her Master.

This discourse accompanied with the assurance and with the urgency and fervor
with which this Man pronounced it, did not make a small Impression and effect,
in the minds of all those who understood and listened to it. They looked one
upon another with astonishment, as avowing that they were a little precipitant
in their first Judgment and determination, and that the Face of this Affair was
very much changed. Above all, this old Woman who was so easily persuaded that
she had been Aunt to Eliante began to blame her self of over much credulity;
and looking upon Eliante and then upon Alceste, she seemed to demand of them
successively one after another, a proof of that which they had told her.
Eliante all ashamed and confounded, to see her self accused of Imposture,
appeared to avow by her modest Silence, that she had no other proof of all that
which she had declared, than her own self, nor for evidence but her Conscience;
and Alceste who expected nothing less than a disclaim, that Perinte had done
all that he knew as well as themselves, lifted up his eyes and hands to Heaven,
and besought of the Gods, a punishment whereof the conviction appeared not in
his power. However afterward having paused thereon, he desired yet a little
attention from the Shepherds, and said unto them. I avow you wise Shepherds,
that I have bin surprised with the answer of Perinte, and that whatever ill
opinion I should have of him, I believed not that he had or could have, so much
impudence in the Crime and artifice in his Imposture. He has had reason to
tell you that one is not scarce wicked by halves, and that one cannot assure
Crimes but by Crimes: But that which he has told you for his justification,
discovers you the reason of his boldness and impudence, and causes you to
see that he disavows not the Truth of our misfortunes, but because it would
otherwise be impossible for him to excuse himself, and that he well perceives
that his violence cannot be covered but by his lies. Our condition is very
deplorable I confess it. We are unknown, and Strangers in our own Country; We
are deprived of Relations, of Friends, and of Wealth, and the only Evidence
that Fortune has left us of our condition, and of our Estate, is he himself
that contests it against us. He demands of us the Will and Testament of our
Fathers, and it is he alone which can have it and who retains it, as the Son and
Heir of our Guardian. He opposes us with the multitude and the cruelty of our
disgraces, which puts them almost above their true Semblance and Apparency, and
it is his Father and himself that have caused them. So that he makes his defense
by his Crime, and accuses us by that which ought to make his own Condemnation.
But I draw notwithstanding a great advantage from his own proper Reasonings. If
our disgraces are so difficult to be imagined, how could they be of our own
Invention. Eliante is not with her Aunt but since this Morning; I have been
absent from her almost all the day, before that I was not able to accost her,
nor so much as to discourse her since my Arrival.

In what place, in what time then could have conserted together so many fair
Imaginations? The more they appeared extraordinary and beneficial, the more
time they would and must have required, to have invented them. But let us say
the more they seem incredible* the least they ought to be suspected. There is
nothing which affects so much the true appearance and resemblance as the Lie.
It endeavors to have the least appearance for him, by reason she has
against him the real Truth. He knows he cannot deceive but in being imitated,
and as he strives but to have belief surprised, he never seeks any thing but
what is credible. But it is quite and altogether contrary in Fortune; it sports
it self in the humor and fantasticalness of Events; Chances and Hazards; as it
does all without reason, it regards not to appear in what it does: It laughs
and makes sport of true Resemblances by reason it establishes it self enough
by Authority, and because it is Empire is Tyrannical, and that in like manner as
Tyrants it seeks, not but to administer Terror and astonishment to be rendered
terrible and to make it self feared, it affects nothing but cruelty, and to
be wondered at. And indeed, what need had we to invent so many subtle Evasion,
and cunning Shifts to defend the Liberty of Eliante? Was it to give more
Credibility and Reputation to our Recital? but Perinte you say that it is that
which renders it incredible. Would we have taken so much pains in imagining in
our selves, that which could not serve, but hinder us to be believed, had we
not a defense already and much more easy! We had not but to maintain that
Eliante is free. You say that I have no proofs; I also need none. We naturally
are free born, and presumption is always for our natural free Estate. It
imports and behooves you, to bring clear proofs and evident Testimonies of her
Slavery, you who pretend to reduce her to a servitude which is contrary to the
ordinary right of our Birth. In the mean time where are the evidences you
bring? you have bought her say you, where is the contract? where are the
witnesses, will you say she avows it? but if you would serve your self of her
Confession, you cannot change her. She has said the truth that you have
redeemed her, but it is by, and with her wealth whereof you are seized, but
from a Slavery, where she is fallen into by the crime of your Father. Either
leave there her Confession, or take her in her entire, for, in fine, she cannot
be divided. After all; can we not better oppose you, your Confession, by your
self? you have said you have not considered her here but as free, but as your
sister: you have not then held her your self, as for your Slave. So it lies,
and depends on you to bring Proofs, and Evidences of your pretention; you who
find her in the possession of her Liberty, you who violently ravish her out of
the hands of an Aunt, you who would, in fine, reduce her into a condition
wholly contrary to that in your self which you have acknowledged. For us yet
once again, we want no evidence of her Liberty, it is enough that you only
would have destroyed it, and we need no other Title for our Liberty, but that
of our Birth.

Alceste held his peace on these words, in expectation of the Judgment and
Determination of the Shepherds; Perinte would have made some reply: but the
reasons of his Adversary, and likewise the Testimony of his own Conscience,
pressing and urging him; he pestered and perplexed himself, he grew pale, and
annihilated by his own contradictions, a part of all that he had said before.
His Confusion and Disorder did not a little assist the Shepherd, to determine a
contest, which from him did appear difficult enough. It is true the Freedom,
and Ingenuity which appeared in the Countenance of Alceste, the sweetness, and
modesty which was seen in that of Eliante, and withal, that the Favor of her
Liberty, Finished the Determination in their Judgment. Agamee was he who
pronounced it in the Name of all. He therefore declared Eliante Free and at
Liberty, and remitted her into the hands of her Aunt and Alceste. They
determined nothing concerning the Restitution of their Wealth, because it was
not sufficiently cleared, and they had not been declared Judges of that
difference. Perinte having heard the Judgment, returned toward Gonres all in
Fury; Alceste and Eliante, on the contrary retired themselves, with all the
Testimonies imaginable of their satisfaction, and with all the acknowledgments
whereof they could be capable in the condition of their Fortune, and left very
much esteem and friendship for them, in the minds of all their Judges, whom the
night separated also a little afterward.

The following day after that Tarsis was awaked, they made Provision for the
searching his wound. The Surgeon assured them that it was less dangerous
then they had believed, and if there happened not some unexpected accident, he
promised in a very little time an entire and perfect cure, provided that Tarsis
would aid himself. In sum, he past all that day without any Fever, and that
which infinitely consolated Telamon, that it retook him not also the third day.
The House of Telamon was at all times full of Shepherds, who came to inquire of
the Health of Tarsis. Ergaste above all, was there at all hours, and it must
even be so, although one may well say that he entered always into the chamber of
the wounded. For his Nature Fervent, Ardent, and Unquiet, for his Friends
permitted him not to content himself with the news he had learnt from the
report of others, Celemante was not less careful to come to know, but as for
him he was not angry, that they refused him the gate: and Judging well that in
the state, wherein the wounded was, his pretense would be to him more
Incommodious then any way of Utility, he was himself very well pleased to be
dispensed with the Grief which renews always the sight of a sick Friend. For,
in fine, he lived upon that Principle, that all the Wisdom in the World
consists but in shunning the unprofitable evils, and to maintain his mind in
a sweet and pleasant Tranquillity. Agamee, and Philemon came there, and Timothy
sent there also every day. The Fair Arelise seeing to what point Philiste was
touched, did scarcely quit her at all, no more than did Celiane, Coris and many
others, to whom her affection was so sensible, that her Virtue was to them in
Veneration. Eliandre came there also sometimes, and although he knew not
Tarsis, but by his reputation, however that knowledge joined to the Obligation
he had to his Brother, the favorable hopes, by which Erigone had even as
regiven him a Life, interested him so in the cure of the Shepherd, who had been
there as appeared no less but much more disquieted then he. It was not but that
this Fair Widow, had yet altogether yielded, her Virtue still entertained some
remaining scruples, and there continued yet enough, to protract the good
Fortune of Eliandre, but not enough to destroy the hopes which made him Live.
In fine, there was not any considerable persons in Tempe, who made not
demonstrations by some marks and tokens, the esteem they had conceived for
Tarsis. Also the Gods took a particular care of a Life, to which it seemed that
that of so many persons was fixed and tied, and there passed but very few days,
but that they saw a great amendment in him.

After that Telamon saw his Brother in a better condition, he thought that it
would not always be becoming still to receive the Courtesies, and Civilities of
Agamee, without yet making him a visit: Behold wherefore he departed, one
morning very early to go to see this Areopagite, and to prevent him before he
was yet gone forth, His Way was to pass by the Rivers side, or rather the Sea
bank, and he scarcely arrived there, but lifting up his eyes toward, or on the
Gulf, he was so Drawn, Dimmed, and Dazzled by something so Glittering, and
Sparkling, that it was a long time to Divine what it was. In fine, he observed
in approaching toward that side, that it was a very little Ship, but who in
its smalness appeared something much more considerable then in the greatest.
All the wood was painted, and garnished with a very great number of threads, and
Broydered Works of Gold, that the Glittering of the Metal was to be discerned
but in some few certain places. The Masts were all Gilded, the Sails of Fine
Linen dyed in Purple, and all the Cordage tissued, wound and interlaced with
Gold, and Silk of the same color of the Sails, at the top of the Mainmast
there was a Pavilion, or Standord of Stuff, woven with White Silk, hemmed
round, and welted with Gold Fring? in the midst whereof these words appeared,
Written in the Phrygian Language* and in Characters Guilt with Gold.

Love is my Pilot; Obey Neptune. It well appeared notwithstanding that the Sea
had not had any great respect for the Ship. Some of the Sails were rent and
split, as well as some part of the Cordage, and it was almost laid down on one
side. But that which principally detained the sight of Telamon, was a young
unknown one, who appeared upon the Deck, and who stretching forth his arms
toward another great Ship, who was farther distant in the Road, and forced
himself by his cries to draw some one to his succor. He there did unprofitably
endeavor it, for this great Vessel was at so wide a distance, and likewise the
Waves of the Sea which were agitated ran high, and were so much swollen, and
made so great a Noise, that the others could not hear. By good Fortune this
unknown one, was not so far distant from the Sea Bank, that the Shepherd could
not but hear it, and knew not even that he was all armed of all pieces, but
arms so fair and so rich, that it seemed rather, that it was for the
preparation of a Festival, than for necessary Defense. In fine, all his Armor
was Silver, Guilt with Gold, whereon were an infinite number of Precious, and
Costly Stones of Various Colors, display^d, and excellently exposed to open
view, even beyond desire, the advantage which they had above the most precious
of Metals. The Helmer, or Head Piece of the same Metal, were also garnished,
and decked with Rich Precious Stones, and shaddowed, with a quantity of
Feathers, the Color of the Fire. The small part of the Cassock, or long Coat,
which appeared under the Arms, as that which passed the edges of the Armor,
for Back and Breast was so covered with Embroydered Gold, whereof even a part
was hid under Pearls, and Precious Stones of great value, which was difficult
to find in the Stuff. The Guard and Hilt of the Sword was of Gold, the Pommel
of a Great Ruby, and hung in a Rich Scarf Belt, Embroydered with Gold, Sowed or
Powdered with Pearls and Rich Stones. Telamon could not in reality presently
descern all these things: but he could sufficiently see that he was, and might
be Judged to be a person of very high quality, and his natural compassion
joining it self to this Consideration, he readily leapt into the first Bark,
which he perceived, and conducted him to the succor of this unknown one. He
was much more surprised at his sight, than he had been at his equipage, for he
found him so fair and glittering, that in effect, even Love could not Figure,
nor Frame a Form more Delectable, and Pleasant. His Stature was small, but
straight, all the Features and Leneaments of his Countenance, were formed in a
most Admirable Proportion.

Although the toilsomness of the Sea, had a little diminished the brightness of
his hue, he had however all that whiteness, and all that delicacy, whereof the
Poets and Painters have formed the Visage of Venus, his eyes black, well
proportioned, and full of sweetness, and his hair of the same color, which
fell, and hung in great curled locks upon his shoulders accompanied so well
this Fair Head, that one could not Judge if they received more ornament from his
face, then they brought to it themselves.

Telamon having joined the small Ship, the young unknown leapt into the Bark,
followed by one man, who remained, and with him gave thanks to the Shepherd for
the succor he had brought them; and certainly it could not be more to purpose,
for they were not yet distant, above half a Furlong from the little Ship, but a
Billow or Wave finished the overwhelming it, and it entirely disappeared. They
gained the Land with all diligence. Scarce were they there, but the unknown
demanded of Telamon the name of the Country where he was, but gave him not
scarce leisure to reply thereunto; for at the same time having seemed unto him
to know the countenance of the Shepherd: either I deceive my self, said he unto
him, or else I have seen you somewhere. My Lord, replied him Telamon, I had not
yet durst to discover you my thought: but either I deceive my self, or you are
the King of Lesbos. And where think you to have seen me? rejoined he. My Lord,
replied Telamon again, I believe I have had the Honor to serve under the
deceased King your Father, and to have born Arms with you in the Siege of
Mitriene. The Prince then looking upon him more narrowly: O Gods! cried he!
should you not be one of the brave Shepherds of Tempe, who signalized
themselves so gallantly at that Siege, who first ascended into the breach, and
were the cruse that we retook the City? That action my Lord (modestly replied
Telamon) deserves not that so great a King should conserve it so long in
memory, and we received honors from the mouth of the deceased King, much above
all that which we should have, or did expect. The King then casting his arms
about his neck continued thus: O Telamon (for never shall that name go out of
my memory) I see well that the Gods have not yet altogether abandoned me, since
they have taken the care to let me fall into your hands. But what is become of
your brave Brother; Alas my Lord! replied Telamon, he is in a deplorable
estate, he related him in few words his Adventure, which the Prince extremely
Condoled. But my Lord, continued the Shepherd, should I dare to demand of you
my self a thing much more important, and by what misfortune, or rather by what
good Fortune for me, the Gods should favor me with this happy encounter?
notwithstanding, my Lord, it is more seasonable to think of your rest, than any
other thing, and I beseech you, above all the rest, not to refuse the offer
that I take the Liberty to make you of my house. The King accepted it, as well
for the Friendship which he had for Telamon; as for the necessity which reduced
him to the present state of his disgrace, and leaning on the arm of that
Shepherd, and walked with him toward his Hamlet, therefore Telamon was thus
obliged to return by the way, and finished not his Visit that he intended to
Agamee.

Telamon (said the Prince to him as they were walking) you see a poor King
hunted out of his Dominion by his Subjects, battered by the Sea, and persecuted
by Fortune to such a Degree, that the Earth and Waters have scarcely furnished
him this day with a place of security. I will not conceal from you the
particulars of my Misfortunes, and if you would I will Voluntarily cause you to
understand it more at large. But above all things I have to declare to you,
that since you behold me here at Tempe, I am by consequence upon the
Territories which depend upon the Government of Alcime, one of my greatest
Enemies; and that if I had not the last Confidence in your Discretion and
Curiosity, I would not repute nor account my self, safe in your own House.
Telamon having assured him of all the Fidelity, that he could wish or desire,
in the most obedient of all his Subjects, they continued to walk toward the
House of this Shepherd, followed by that Man who accompanied the Prince.

They had not gone above a hundred Paces, but they entered into a corner of
that Forest which from the top of Mount Olimpie, covers it almost wholly and
entirely, and which extends it felf from one side even to Gonnes, and on the
other side to the Sea Bank; scarcely had they entered therein, but they were
stayed by a lamentable Voice, which they heard near enough to them. That having
occasioned them to walk thitherwards, they perceived a young Female unknown,
sitting at the Foot of a Tree who held her left hand against her Stomach to
stanch the Blood, which gushed out in great Bubbles out of a Wound which she
had there received. There were eight Men that lay there dead before her, and it
manifestly appeared that they had bin all slain by her hands, because she yet
held in her right hand a Sword all bloody. The King and the Shepherd were as
much more concerned at this sight as that this young person appeared one of
high quality, was exceeding fair and amiable, and marvellously well shaped.
That which amazed them the more, that she had a belt girt and the Headpiece or
Helmet on her head, and this Attire suited, and became her so exceeding well,
in despite of the deplorable State wherein she was, that she seemed to be a
young Amazon. A noble arrogance, disdain* and fierceness appeared in her eyes,
and her Pain hindered her not to have something so Majestic in her Countenance,
as might administer as much admiration, as her Misfortune appeared worthy of
Pity. The young King of Lesbos above all, by I know not what Instinct, was
extraordinarily moved with this sight, and his own proper disgrace hindered him
not extremely to interest himself for this Stranger. They approached and asked
her who those were that brought her into that State and Condition, and what she
would say of those lamentable remains of that little Combat. But they saw her
Strength to fail before she could give them an answer; so that all that Telamon
could do, was to go even by appointment of the Prince to bring succor from a
House, that was there approaching, and charitably to cause her to be brought to
his home. His House composed of two rows of Lodgings, was so great and
spacious, that he there assigned a Chamber very commodious for the King, and
there was yet another convenient to lodge the Young and fair wonded one. The
Prince was so toyled and wearied with the Sea, that he had more need of rest
than discourse, and the wounded one was in no condition but to endure the
labor of a Surgeon.

After that Telamon, had therefore sent to fetch one, and that he had taken
charge of this Stranger, with all the care that his generosity inspired him
with, and that he had also besought the King of Lesbos to command his house
with an absolute Authority; he retired himself into the Chamber of Tarsis, to
know of him how he did and to make him a participant in these two encounters.
This poor Shepherd that they had forcibly plucked as one may say, out of the
Jaws of Death, had such an indifferency for all the things in the World, that
nothing was almost able to touch him. He was so perplexed in his Mind for the
Death of Zelie, or rather to say he so feared it, that he could not disbelieve
it. And to tell truth, all the appearances did not but too much authorize his
Fear and Persuasion. In this Estate, he framed nothing but Vows of Death; and
though the Reasons or rather the Prayers of all his Family had taken from him
the resolution of giving it himself, they could not take from him the desire of
receiving it.

Telamon entering into the Chamber of this Shepherd Philiste, who was there
also, made figns to him to walk softly because she believed he slept. However
having immediately heard him condole himself, they thought he was awake, and
they both approached his bed. This was without noise howsoever, and Telamon
only opened his Curtain to demand of him in what State he was: But he knew that
he yet slept by his eyes, which were shut and by his breathing; which was
stronger than of a person awake, and he also observed that he had even all his
Face covered with Tears, who although his eyes were close, found a passage
through the eyelids. He also caused it to be observed by Philiste, and that
having made them judge that he bemoaned not himself, but in raving or talking
idly, they were exceedingly concerned to see how much, even in his very Sleep,
he was tormented by his Grief. They held themselves both for some time there to
look upon him, with an Air so full of Compassion and Tenderness, that they also
made themselves to be almost as much pitied as the Sick One. In retiring
themselves, afterward they yet heard this poor Shepherd pronounce some words,
and having thereunto attentively listened, they heard that he said: Ah cruel
Zelie! that this Virtue has cost both of us very dear! he held his peace
there, and afterward they heard him reassuming Speech a moment after, he
cried, Zelie, Zelie, Zelie, and in saying this, he moved in his Bed, as having
his Spirts very much tormented. That constrained Telamon to run to him and even
to awake him, to interrupt the mournful Ideas of a Dream which disquieted him,
and drew him out of a Sleep which did nothing but disturb him. The Shepherd
appeared much amazed, and in confusion at his first waking, as if he had
returned out of another World, and uttered many Sighs, to discharge his
Stomach, which were yet all oppressed with the Vapors of the Grief, that these
vexatious Imaginations had excited. My dear Brother, said Telamon, I demand
your Pardon, if I have disturbed your Sleep: But I had seen you so disquieted
with your Dreams, that I believed it would be better to awake you than to leave
your mind disturbed and agitated as it appeared. Ah my Brother! replied him
Tarsis, in mournfully turning his head and eyes toward him; I know not almost
hereafter, that which is best for me to sleep or to be awake, nor that which
should more afflict me either the Truth or Dreams. Telamon would not demand nor
ask him, what had so obliged him to bemoan himself, for that would have bin but
to renew his Grief. But contrarily as he sought but an occasion to tell him
some news to divert him from his thoughts, he omitted not finding him without a
Fever, to give him a Narrative of the two Encounters of the King of Lesbos,
and the unknown one.

The one and the other of these two Adventures, deserved undoubtedly the
curiosity of these Illustrious Shepherds, and were worthy to exercise their
reasonings, and to cause them to make their reflections thereon. For this
Magnificent Ship, and that rich and Pompous Attire wherein Telamon had met the
King of Lesbos, was no way suitable to the deplorable state of a King, Chased as
he had told him out of his Kingdom, unless it be those Kings in Play Houses,
Theaters, and public Games, where they are arrayed in Sumptuous Attire for
outward appearance and show. It was not less difficult to divine who this
unknown one should be, found in an equipage also as surprising as the other,
surrounded with an heap of dead men, and as Triumphant in the midst of them,
although she had not apparently a Destiny little more happy. Also Telamon was
long enough discoursing thereupon with Tarsis: but this here had very different
thoughts in his heart. For as Persons truly afflicted, will not think but on
the subject of their Affliction, he supported even with Vexation all that which
could direct his, and found himself Stung by all that which they thought to be
a means to divert him. So that instead of fixing himself to the Reasonings, and
Discourses which Telamon made him to endeavor to penetrate into the secret of
these Adventures, he wholly thought of no other than his Misfortunes, or if he
made some reflection on that which his Brother had said unto him, it was not
but to admire how many extraordinary things had happened at Tempe, since the
loss of his Shepherdess, and to think that the Gods, as they are accustomed to
do in great changings, had affected to mark out this Dismal Time by Events
which adhere to the Nature of Prodigies.

In these interchanges they came to tell Telamon, that some Strangers sought to
speak with him. In order thereunto he descended, after he came into the Court
he saw three men arrayed like Soldiers one of whom was about threescore years
of age, of a Countenance comely enough, who undertook to speak for all, and told
him after great signs, and tokens of Grief, that they had understood that he
had had the Charity to cause a wounded person to be brought into his house, and
besought him to tell them in what condition she was, and to give them leave to
speak with her, by reason they belonged to her. Telamon who knew them not,
asked them such questions as Prudence prompted him to do, before he would
confide in them, or discover unto them where she was, and he even endeavored
to know of them her Name and Quality: but these men having answered, They could
not declare her Name without her leave, and that all that they could say unto
him, that she arrived there the preceding night, in a Vessel which was there in
the Road, toward the Mouth of the River; and Telamon Judging it to be that
other great Ship, which he had there seen, he sent to the Chamber of the young
unknown one, to know her will. Although there past not a long time, that she
was returned out of her swooning, she Commanded that it was her Pleasure they
should speak with her, and having given them some orders with as much Vivacity
of Wit and Presence, as if she had not been wounded, she caused two to return
to the Ship, and retained the third to serve her. Telamon Judging she was a
person of quality, by the care and respect they had for her, had more and more
curiosity to know who she was: but although the retreat he so Generously gave
her in his house, put him into some right to satisfy himself on that subject,
he would not however testify any urgency, he contented himself to learn of one
of her Soldiers, that she was a strange Lady of Quality who had been forced
into the Gulf by Tempest, and being come to Land to refresh her self, had been
attacked by some Thieves, who had put her into that condition where he had met
her.

The end of the Fourth Book of the Second Part.
Tarsis and Zelie. The Second Part. The Fifth BOOK.
ALthough Telamon had as much as wherewith to occupy himself at his own home,
he omitted not to extend his care at places, very much farther distant: and it
seemed that the Gods had committed to his Prudence and Generosity, the
preservation of the greatest Kings of the Earth as well as he, the most
Illustrious of Shepherds. There scarcely passed a day, but he would send to
Gonnes to hear news of Philadelphe. He expected even that very self same day,
the return of a Shepherd to whom he had given charge to go and find Straton as
from him, and to bring him an account of the Prince and what condition he was
in; Then when they told him that the wise Philosopher was arrived at his Gate,
and asked for him, Telamon readily went to meet and receive him. Well Straton,
said he unto him; Will you tell me better news of the King your Master, than
are those that I have to tell you of poor Tarsis? That which I have to tell you
of the King my Master, replied Straton, it is that he is not only better
recovered of his Wounds, but it is that which possibly surprise you more, that
he is almost* at Liberty. That I very lately went out from him, and in the
Knowledge he has of yout affection whereof I have rendered him a good and
authentiek Evidence, and in the extraordinary esteems that he has both for you
and your Brother, he has given me Commission to come to know the news of your
wounded one, the misfortune of whom he heard not of till last night.

Then he recited to him, that the next day that Alcine had caused Philadelphe
to be imprisoned, he had caused him to be taken out of the Tower and fixed him
in the fairest apartment of his Palace; that there he came to demand pardon of
him, for the Violence which he seemed to have done him, and there would have
made him pass by an Artifice gross enough, for an order that he had given to
his Men to come and take him at the house of Alcidias, and transport him into
the City, only to the end that he might be better attended and waited upon, and
dressed there. That by this dissimulation, he would have made him believe that
it was unawares unto him that he had bin put into the Tower. That since that
time he had tendered and rendered him all his Cares and all Civilities
imaginable, permitting him to speak with all those he pleased, so that the
preceding evening Alcidias himself had seen him, that it was by him that
Philadelphe had learnt the misfortune of Tarsis, and that this Prince having at
the self same time known from Straton, that Tarsis was that brave Leonides, the
feigned Death of whom he had so much bemoaned, and whose Life he so much the
more admired, he had charged him to go and visit him as from him, and likewise
also to tell him and signify him as to Telamon, how much he interested and
concerned himself, in their Grief and Misfortune.

Telamon having replied to the discourse of Straton, as well for his Brother as
for himself, with all the marks, signs and tokens of Respect, and of the
acknowledgment he owed for the Honor that had bin done them by so great a
King, signified to Straton, that he had heard with extreme Joy the advantageous
change of his Master, and which those whom he had sent every day to Gonnes, had
indeed already made him a report of something, but it was so imperfect that he
durst not assure himself thereof. He informed himself afterward more
particularly, if Philadelphe had seen the Princess Arsinoe and Antigone, and
whence he thought that sudden change from Alcine could come; seeing it clearly
and manifestly enough appeared that his first intention had not bin to make any
good Treatment to the King of Egypt. Straton answered him that Philadelphe had
seen the Princess Arsinoe and Antigone: And as I will not undertake, added he,
to depaint unto you with what Transports he had seen them, I will no more
declare you the astonishment, the Joy, and the diverse and variety of Sentiments
that they had in seeing him, and to see him in the hands of Alcime; for all
that would merit and require more time, than we undoubtedly have both one and
the other for that Repetition. I will only add unto you to answer you, as to
what you demand me upon the Subject of the sudden change of Alcime; that I
have known that some news which he has received, put him in terrible
apprehensions from the side of Antigonus, and it is apparently for that that he
attempteth now to insinuate himself into the favor of Philadelphe, and to
treat with him to make him in case of need a Protector against the King of
Macedonia. As for the rest, he has not bin displeased at the Death of Menelas
(as you possibly will have thought by reason of the colligation band, knot,
obligation and connection of Interest, which seems to be between those two
Princes) but on the contrary, some Union that appeared between them, however as
the wicked have never any true Friendship, I have known and understood, that
they have bin extremely mistrustful one of the other since the death of
Menelas. I know not yet by what Intreagues, for I have not yet bin able to
unpester, and disintangle, and disintricate the Secret. They have told me
notwithwithstanding, that some one had made Menelas believe in his Life time,
that Alcime had had the thought to seize him, and send him bound hand and foot
into Egypt, thereby to engage Philadelphe, whom he there then believed him to
be, to take his protection against Antigonus.

On the other side, they said that Alcime had bin very well advertised that
Menelas had secretly sent toward the King of Macedonia, to treat with him;
that he had offered to seize Alcime, and to replace him in his hands, that
Menelas before his death for that purpose, had caused secret Practices in
Gonnes, and that he had even already some intelligences in the City of Pidne,
that it was to dissipate these Factions by his presence that Alcime returned
some days since to Gonnes; because he found himself in no security at Pidne.
Behold that which I have confidently learnt and known, from one of the
principal Officers of Alcime.

They were there when they came to advertise Telamon that Ario^arzane, came to
give him a Visit. At this word of Ariobarsane, Straton asked Telamon, if it was
that Ariobarsane so renowned all over Greece by his excellent moral Works, and
so formerly known in the Court of old Antigonus and of Demetrius, under the
Title of Father of the great Ariarte? Telamon replied that it was that
Ariobarsane himself. So that Straton who passionately wished to see him of a
long time, served himself of this occasion to know so rare a Person.

He therefore saluted him civilly, testifying unto him the esteem that he had
conceived for him, upon his Reputation alone; and Ariobarsane having known the
name of Straton, signified him likewise in the most cruel Terms, and the most
obliging that he could choose, the joy he had to see a Man, who passed for one
of the wisest in all his Age. In the Interim, whilst Ariobarsane spoke, Straton
considered and listened to him with much attention, and observed in his
Physiognomy all the Features which bespake him, and presumed him to be a Man of
admirable Wit and great Wisdom and profound Reason. Although that Ariobarsane
was in an age, which had much changed his Visage and Size; one might there
observe notwithstanding, all that could be judged to be done in his Youth, and
had bin past, he had bin very well shaped. But Straton did not concern nor stay
himself so much upon the exterior, but only what might possibly serve him to
know his inside and excellent Parts. He took Pleasure yet to observe in his
eyes where age had not extinguished any thing, the vivacity of his Wit, and to
read the Tranquillity of his Soul, in that which appeared in his Countenance. It
is not howsoever, that Ariobarsane was naturally so moderate, but on the
contrary, he was of a Temper very Testy and Choleric, and as Socrates
ingeniously vowed to his Friends, that he was naturally ill inclined, if he had
not corrected it by the Study of Wisdom. Also Ariobarsane ingeniously confessed
that he was naturally Choleric and Testy, and agitated by violent Passions;
but that he had rendered himself Master by his Study and by his Philosophy.
There appeared yet something in the sound of his Voice, and something in his
Action: however that served but the more to make known his Wisdom and render it
more apparent. And the same that the impetuousness and turbulency of a Horse,
serves not but to make one admire the Skill and Dexterity of him who retains
and tames him: So the impetuosity and passion, for so may be said of his
nature, serves not but to make admired the Empire, that his reason had taken
upon him.

Ariobarsane neither could not be weary, neither looking upon and considering
Straton the Philosopher; although that this here held that other quality of
Socrates, that he had not all the advantages of a Physiognomy which
corresponded with his high Reputation. But be it that Straton made h^msel^ (as
so I may say) a new nature by his assiduity and labor, though that nature it
self had been willing to show by that example that it subjects not it self to
any rules: in so much that Greece as Flourishing as it generally did then, and
as Famous as it was, had not produced men which did more honor than he to his
Country, not in his Age. At the self same moment that they were together in the
house of Telamon, there arrived there a third who was very well worthy of the
esteem and knowledge of both. It was the Shepherd, or rather the Philosopher
Nephelocrate, the most of Agamee, and one of the most skilful, knowing, and
experienced Men of all Greece. He had particularly applied himself to the study
of the Laws, wherein he had been one of the most Principal Luminaries, of the
Bar of Athens: but this Science had not set bounds to the vast extent of his
knowledge; there was not scarce a point, but he possessed, not by memory singly;
as the major part of others, but by his first principles. And the Philosopher
Metrodore, to whom they had through his excellency given the name of knowing,
ordinarily said, that he never had a Master so certain as that there. And that
he had never consulted Nephelocrate upon one matter or thing, without being
fully, completely, and entirely Instructed.

Telamon whom this Shepherd came to see, was ravished in being capable, and
able to assemble in his house three Persons so extraordinary; and for as much
Straton, and Nephelocrote had never came to an interview, he named them both,
the one and the other, and was the band of their knowledge. Ergaste, and
Celemante arrived there also, soon after coming after their ordinary manner to
learn news of Tarsis, and they joined themselves to the Company.

After the first Civilities they entered all together into the Garden with
Telamon; and after three or four turns made in walking; Nephelocrate;
Ariobarsane, and Straton began a Conversation very serious, and worthy the
Wisdom of those three Great Philosophers. They fell casually on the subject of
the retreat of Ariobarsane. Straton asked him amongst others how he could quit
the Court, where he had remained so long time with so much esteem, and
reputation to retire into the Country. Ariobarsane who would not engage himself
by a long recital of diverse reasons which had obliged him thereunto, and yet
less to that of the Occupations wherein he was employed since his retreat,
replied him merely thus: It had been rather necessary to ask me how I quitted
the Country to go to Court, I who have from my beginning of my Infancy
renounced Loftiness, Arrogance, and Ambition. It is true, replied Sraton, that
the Court of Princes, is seldom the Dwelling Places of Philosophers, and that
there are very few that can accommodate, and suit themselves as well as did
Artistippe. And the reason is, that ordinarily there they are very ill welcome,
and that they hate them there, as Public Comptrollers, or Masters of
Discipline, or Punishers of Disorders, as Public Reforms of Dissimulation,
Flattery, and all other Vices that Reign more than the Kings themselves. But
this reason is not for you Ariobarsane, for I know that all the World Loved
you. There Straton interrupted Ariobarsane, I have not been there beloved more
than another; but I have not there had envy, by reason I have neither made, nor
sought after a Fortune which should serve to draw Envy upon me. That is in
what, replied Nephelocrate, I am astonished so much the more that you have
quitted a Life that you had so well known accommodated to the Tranquillity, and
Wisdom of Philosophy. For although they tell us of Aristippe, and what manner
soever they represent at the Court of Dennis in Syracuse, I have never found
him Happy, nor yet Philosophical. First of all, how could he be happy to study
himself, to make the Court of a Tyrant, and to be exposed to his Insolency,
even until he saw they spitt him in the Face? for the reply he made to him, who
bemoaned him in Rejoining him, that if the Fishers suffer to be wetted with the
Sea to take a little Fish, he could well suffer to be moistened with spittle to
overtake a Whale; shows* that if he suffers all that, it was not by this Spirit
of Constancy, which makes the Wise to find Felicity in the disdain of Injuries,
but that this was not but for a pure Motive of Interest, and Avarice. For
Philosophy he was yet much less. For there was never Man more subject to foul
and nasty Sensualities, voluptuous and vile Passions, and who there left
himself to go with so many Prostitutions, and Proscriptions? and never man did
more injury to the Philosophy of his Master, who as Grateful as he was before,
rendered him shamefully Mercenary. So that I consider not Aristippe as a
Philosopher, who had known how to accommodate himself to the Court: but as a
Courtisan who would counterfeit the Philosopher. And I find that when he
reproached Diogenes who being a Philosopher, he knew not to live as he with the
Princes. Diogenes had had much more reason to scoff formerly, than since that
Aristippe boasted himself to be a Philosopher, he lived so well with the
Princes. In the interim, replied Straton; Aristippe has made many more
Philosophers than Diogenes, Diogenes has decryed his profession in living
poor, Aristippe has there given Sway and Authority in heaping to the Court by
his means great and abundant Riches. See you, Nephelocrate the sole example,
that they call good at Court, it is that of a man who made Fortune. Every one
endeavors to imitate him, every one proposes him as a Model and Pattern,
and every one studies him with more exactness, adssiduity, and care then they
have ever studied Diogenes, or Socrates himself. In sum, continued Ariobarsane,
the Prince that is educated, and brought up by a Virtuous Man, that is the most
effectual means to make all his Court resemble him. When you see that Piety,
Religion, or some other Virtue Reigns there more than ordinary, believe not
that it is because there is less Corruption in the Court, than there was
formerly: but hold only for a certainty this, that some one is become greater
by this means. The Prince deceives himself if he believes, that this is enough
to give good example to those of his own, as to live Wisely, and Virtuously on
his part, he must also do good to the Wise and Virtuous, for none proposes to
himself to imitate the Virtues of the Prince, by reason that in imitating them,
none can hope to become so Virtuous: but one studies the Virtues of him whom he
Loves, and to whom he has done, and does do good, because one hopes to receive
benefit by the same in following him. I avow you, that it is a thing that makes
me compassionate, said Nephelocrate, to see that not only at the Court, but
also throughout all the World almost, every one is fixed to that which they
call a making of Fortune, and scarcely do they see a man tempted by that Rest,
and that inward Tranquillity wherein consists notwithstanding all the
Happiness, and Felicity of Life. Every one despises it, by reason every one
can give it himself; and all the World is so blind, that he loves rather to be
made happy by others, than by it self. In the Interim you know how every one is
therein deceived, when we desire others to make us happy, we desire that which
is not in the Power of Kings and Princes to perform, and we refuse that benefit
from him who alone can give it, when we neither ask nor Desire it of our own
selves.

From this discourse, they passed to examine all the Principles of the
Cirenaicque Sect, whereof Aristipe had been the Author and Founder, and in
fine, so far engaged themselves in that discourse, that they insensibly spent
there near two houers. Telamon listened to them with so much satisfaction, that
he durst not almost to speak, for fear of interrupting them, and he found all
their Sentiments so worthy of their high Reputation, that he Judged it yet
beneath one of so great Merit and Desert. It was not but that if this Wise
Shepherd would, he might have caused himself to be listened unto them by them,
with a very Reciprocal Admiration. For besides the application that he had at
other times given, and that he every day gave to the Study of Wisdom, one might
truly say that he naturally possessed all the Principles: and whereas the major
part of Men are obliged to appear Philosophers, to regulate their Sentiments,
by what they have learnt of their Masters; as for him, he had not any occasion,
but only to follow his own temper and Genius, which always naturally led him to
the same end, where Study and Labor had led all others. But he held his peace
here out of respect to these Illustrious three Aged Men; and because he also
esteemed, that what advantage soever one had to speak, there was still much
more in hearing those from whom one might learn. Ergaste was in like manner
charmed by their discourse, and above all he was Ravished to know their
Sentiments on the Subject of Aristippe, that a Famous Author who would have
passed as the perfect model and pattern of a Wise man, in a book that he had
entitled by the name of that Philosopher, and which he had given to the
public already some years past. But as for Celemante, if he spoke not a word,
it was only for fear of protracting a discourse whereof he began to be weary
and toiled; if notwithstanding his temper rendered him capable to be. But for as
much as his free humors wanton and frolic, and enemy to all constraint, made
him impatiently desire the end of a conversation so serious, he was willing the
company should even be separated. It was not but that he had all the esteem
imaginable for Ariobarsane, Nephelocrate, and Straton, not that the Solidity of
his Spirit, was not capable of all their reasonings: but the respect that young
people owe to old age, gave I know not what Torment to his natural Temper, and
Liberality, and he so shunned sadness and pensiveness, that he hated them even
unto things that were too serious, because, said he, that there is a great
similitude in things that are serious, and things that are sad. He could not
withhold himself from dancing once or twice whilst they discoursed, nor nor
softly to ask Ergaste if he intended to continue long to listen to them, and if
he would yet again take a turn, and treat of Philosophy.

Wherefore, when the company separated, he and his friend being gone from the
house of Telamon, and walking together out of the Hamlet, Ergaste said unto
him: Have thou no shame, Celemante, not to be capable of a moment of serious
conversation, and presently to fall a dancing when there is no discourse of
trifles? my dear Ergaste, replied Celemante laughing, I am very sorry that that
displeases thee: but thou should know, that there is nothing so natural as
to dance when one is sad. But, replied Ergaste, ought thou to be grieved to
listen to three of the Wisest, and most experienced Men in the World? why not?
replied Celemante. See thou, Ergaste! Wisdom is good in our actions, and
Sciences in the Schools: but in Conversation I make a greater account of a
grain of Folly, which makes me laugh, than of all the Sciences and Wisdom of
the Philosophers. My child, seriously replied Ergaste, with these Sentiments
thou will never pass but as a Fool. If thou would not love the serious ones,
it would be requisite to seem to love them, and to remember thy self, that in
that consists this day all the Wisdom of the World. How many Fools think
thou that pass for Wise, only because they know how to conceal their Folly
under a serious countenance? but what ever it be, it is necessary to be so
among persons that are so. All the Science of Living consists not almost but
in Complaisance, and to know how to accommodate our selves to the humor of
others; in a word, the Abridgment of Wisdom, is to know how to constrain our
selves. And as for me, replied Celemante still laughing, there are none but
Fools obliged to constrain themselves. For to speak to thee also seriously
Ergaste, I know but two sorts of persons in the World, one sort are subject to
Vicious Passions, there are others that have none but Innocent. I call the
first Fools, for there is not a greater Folly than the unruliness and
irregularity which carrys men away to commit Crimes, and it is therefore why
that it is requisite that they constrain themselves, if they will pass for Wise:
but as for those who have all their inclinations Innocent, as they are
naturally Wise, they would become Fools to constrain themselves.

Very well reasoned, said Ergaste. My Friend, there are things that are not
criminal, that are not to be done for all that. And without going any farther,
although it is not a Crime to dance, nor to testify to some one, that which he
says grieves us; thou must avow me that that is therefore prohibited by the
laws of good manners and civil society. I will not avow it thee, replied
Celemante; and I will hold against thee to the contrary, that it is a very
great Treason in Civil Society, to seem to take pleasure in hearing something,
and to be grieved and vexed in ones heart. Why will thou that I commit such a
piece of Treachery to make a man believe that I am ravished to listen unto him,
when I would with all my heart that he were at a further distance? Ergaste!
there is nothing so faithful as not to Dissemble. Thou find wherewith to
contradict that one signifies that he is vexed, and I would that one should
even speak it Ingeniously one to another, when one disdains or despises, when
one is angry and furious, and when one hates. I would desire the truth that one
constrains himself to endeavor not to hate, nor to despise any person: but if
one cannot refrain, I would that one should freely and frankly discover it.
After thy Sentiment, demanded Ergaste, can thou bear good Will to a man that
should come and tell thee he hates and despises thee? A thousand times more,
replied Celemante, than to hate me, and say nothing. For in fine, when a man
has those, and the like Sentiments for me, if he conceals them from me, it is
not but for his proper Interest, for fear I should bear him ill will, or
possibly the better to surprise me: but if he declares it me ingeniously, I
should at least hold my self or keep me upon my guard, at least even in his
hatred would he do toward me a Friendly Action to declare me my Enemies. And
how many think thou after all, are there of hatreds, and enmities which
continue not in our hearts, but least we should dare to discover them, and
which they would discharge themselves of, in expressing them, as they do for
the most part of all other Passions? Ergaste replied, behold very fair
imaginations, Celemante, but they are such as are not customary, nor used in
this age of ours. To whom should they then be held, interrupted the other?
Friend let us begin to practice them, and we should introduce them into a mode.
It is true that that is justly thy action, continued Ergaste smiling, for I
have always heard say, that they are Fools that invent them. Ay, ay, replied
Celemante: but as they say that the Wise follow them, I hope I shall be a Fool
followed by the Wise, and if thou do not as do I, then thou shall be a Wise
one, who shall not be followed but by Fools. And to demonstrate thee, that from
the present time I will Live with this Freedom, it is I declare thee that I
begin to be very weary of thee, and go to seek to divert my self elsewhere. At
this saying he took leave of Ergaste, and went forward singing, toward the
middle of the Plain, where he saw a considerable number of Shepherds, and
Shepherdesses assembled together.

Ergaste looked upon him sometimes walking, smiling, and admiring in himself the
humor of this Shepherd: afterward as the Extreme Love which he had for
Arelise, conjoined to his temper, which was as Melancholy as that of the others
was airy and merry, made him rather to seek Solitude to meditate, then Company
where he might divert himself, and instead of following Celemante, and going to
the Assembly which he saw, he turned on the other side to go out of the way of
that Company.

In the mean time Celemante went still forward, observed that that Assembly
were intent in looking upon Shepherds, which exercised themselves in a Race,
and he saw two who disputed Emulously, from whom the first carried a Dart which
was fixed in the Earth, near three hundred paces from the place whence they
began to run. The Shepherdesses were sat upon the Grass, eight or ten paces
aside from the Dart, and one of them with a smiling Countenance held in her
hands, a branch of a wild Olive Tree which she plaited in form of a Crown, to
place it upon the head of the Victor. Celemante immediately knew that
Shepherdess to be Coris, and that was enough to make him double his pace,
although he walked already with speed enough. He arrived by or near her, just
at the same time when the two Shepherds had finished their Race, and that the
Victor who was named Olcite demanded the Prize. Celemante opposed himself
thereunto, and told him after his ordinary frolicksome joaking; I yield thee
all that there is of Olive Trees in Tempe, but take it for good, that for the
Honor of Coris, I only Dispute thee that little branch which she has in her
hand. Olcite would answer, when Coris also still frolic and jocund, replied:
wherefore say you, Shepherd, that it is for my Honor, that you would Dispute
the Prize with Olcite? ought you not to do it only for your self, since it is
indifferent to me, as in relation to my self, to whom I give it? Fair
Shepherdess, replied Celemante, I said it because that it being for time to
come, more for you than for me, you have more interest in my Honor than my
self, and since when are you mine; then replied pleasantly Coris. It is
requisite that I be very Rich, to have one in similitude to him there, and yet
am not perceived. But rather Fair Shepherdess, replied he, it seems you make a
very small account, not to remember your self as yet that I gave all these past
days to you, to be your Gallant. Coris being soon put in mind of the Discourse
which they had had on that Subject, the day that Ergaste feigned to be her
Lover, rejoined him thus: Ah I remember once, Celemante. It is true, that you
offered your self to be my Gallant; but Shepherd, I also remember me that I
would not receive you. Amiable Shepherdess, replied he, it is true that I was
not altogether received, but yet I was not wholly rejected, and a Gallant who
is not rejected, has right to believe that he is received. Let us not
dessemble, Celemante, replied Coris, I think that you will never give your self
to any person, and each of us find our selves so well to be each one for him or
her self, that there never will be any more seeking for another Master. I find
my self so in very deed; continued Celemante, and that is that wherein you have
a greater obligation unto me, that I do not as do the Slaves, who will change a
Master because they have a bad one, but that I quit one who to me was one of
the best in the World, wholly and purposely because I would give my self unto
you. I have great fear, replied Coris, that it was rather through unconstancy,
and as those servants who change when they are too well, because they cannot
continue at their ease. Will you that I freely declare unto you the truth?
replied Celemante. I quit a good Master, because I believe you will not be yet
a better Mistress. And I, replied Coris, I declare unto you I will not have a
Servant so Licentious, and such a Libertine; for he would without doubt even
quit me, if he should think of finding or having a better. But, replied
Celemante, be so good unto me, that it be altogether impossible to find a
better. Coris would reply, when Olcite who grew impatient, having had great
pains to let them speak so long a time, interrupted them in the close, and as
he was Rude, Clownish, Blunt, and Brutish: it is well worth the question, what
all these Complements signify, said he. Celemante! declare without making me
to give any longer attendance if thou will run with me, that if thou will do
nothing, this Shepherdess may give me the Prize that I have gained. All the
Company betook themselves to laughing at the rus^^city and incivility of
Olcite, who seeing that, thought to mount up in Wrath. Celemante said to
appease him, I desire thy excuse, my poor Olcite, but I thought to do thee a
pleasure, to take time to fetch Breath. Immediately Olcite having answered him,
that he had took too much, replaced his Dart in the ground, to place himself
with Celemante at that certain part, where they should begin their Race.

They parted both of them at the signal given them by the Shepherds there
present; Olcite, who was more high and vigorous than Celemante, doubted not but
that he should bear away the prize from this Shepherd. He was careless at the
beginning until that seeing himself to be exceeded and out-stripped by
Celemante, he well judged that he should have need to gather up all his Forces
to overtake him, but Celemante outstript him still in Agility and Celerity; the
other had such a despite and made such great Efforts and Endeavors to rejoyn
him, that he ran all out of Breath at the end of the List or Tilt-Yard.
Immediately Celemante who had born away the Dart, went gallantly and cast
himself upon his Knees before Coris, and showing her with his hand Olcite who
lay stretched out with his Belly upon the Ground, panting as a Man who could do
no more: my fair Shepherdess, said he, I know not if it be permitted me to come
to demand of you the prize of the Race; for as they say the Cocks who dye
fighting are the most generous, will you not find here that all the Glory is
due to this poor Olcite who is almost dead hereby by his violent running?

During their Race, Arelise and Ergaste were arrived at the same place. Ergaste
thinking to go aside to meditate solitarily, as we have said, having seen this
fair Shepherdess* who coming out of the Hamlet, walked toward the place, where
she saw Coris her good Friend and many others of her Comrades. Ergaste who
notwithstanding all their petty differences, loved her with a most fervent
Passion, had immedidiately quitted all other designs, for that of going to
rejoyn her, or rather he had changed that of going solitarily to contemplate of
her, for that of going to entertain a discourse with her; and as they were then
reconciled Arelise engaged her self easily to follow him. They arrived
immediately time enough, to see poor Olcite fall and to listen to the Jests
that Celemante had made. Arelise had some Compassion to see this poor
unfortunate One insulted over; and to consolate him she took pleasure to
extenuate and diminish a little the savage, arrogant and insolent
Frolicksomness and Jocundity of her Brother. Howsoever she said nothing unto
him: But as she knew that Ergaste was more proper for that than any Man in the
World, she made a sign to him to deal with him; and as for her she sat (not
seeming to be concerned for any thing) near to Coris, after she had saluted her
and her Company. Ergaste failed not of rendering obedience. After he had also
very civilly saluted all these Shepherdesses, he sat a little behind Arelise;
and having understood, that Olcite had run another Race before that with
Celemante, he said unto his Friend: behold a great exploit, Celemante, that he
has surpassed Olcite, who had ran two or three Races, and that a fresh Man
has overcome one already wearied. Ho, ho, Ergaste! replied him Celemante, is
it for that end that thou art returned back here to control me? Come run with
me, if thou art so bold and hardy as to dispute with me the Victory: or hold
thy peace, if thou dare not to dispute it with me. Think thou, replied
Ergaste, that I would run against thee that art already wearied and toiled? I
who blame thee to have so acted against Olcite, and who I deem not capable to
cope with me, although thou had still thy utmost Strength and Ability. Ah!
replied he in raising himself up from before Coris, where he was upon his
Knees; Victory never wearieth a courageous Man, and that which would have
wearied thee has done no other than given me Breath.

Although that Ergaste as well as Celemante, was of a size which gave him much
advantage in these exercises; however as he was of a melancholy and serious
Temper, this mistrust and diffidence had not engaged him, if he had not in the
Countenance of Arelise observed something wherein she seemed to desire he
should run against her Brother. He thereupon resolved more by Complaisance for
her, than through any emulation; and rising from the place where he was, he
deposited his Dart into her hands, and besought her to keep it while he ran.

How melancholy soever he was, he did all things notwithstanding very
gallantly, and said unto her when he presented it to her: fair Arelise, will
you willingly be halfs with me together, and that I give you the care of
keeping my Weapon, whilst I go to gain a Crown which I will come to lay down at
your Feet? And immediately turning to Celemante who pierced the point of his
into the Ground to serve as a Mark or But, he added smiling: Shepherd Coris
has a Crown for the vanquisher; but I have given my Dart to Arelise, to punish
the vanquished One. Celemante returning himself about at his Voice, replied
him, I unerstand thee Ergaste! That is to say, that thou have a desire to dye
by the hand of Arelise.

At these words, they went to place themselves side by side at that certain
place where they should begin; the Signal being given, they parted both of them
with wonderful Fleetness and Celerity, and having come up to the middle of the
Race, that one could not observe any inequality between them: but a little
afterward Celemante having met with a little Stone, which made him stumble,
Ergaste presently got before him, and still conserved his advantage, until that
being come up within three paces of the Dart, which they should bear away, a
little Wind which arose, casually blew off the Hood of Arelise from off her
head, and cast it almost at the feet of Ergaste. That Shepherd soon left the
Dart and ran to take up the Hood of the Shepherdess. But as he could not do it
without turning himself out of his way. Celemante by this means boar away the
Dart; immediately he turned toward his Friend, and showing it him with a
Countenance full of Joy; Ergaste, said he to him, thou shall have content, and
if casually the Dart, which thou have given to Arelise was born away, behold I
will lend thee one in case of need, and at the same time being cast down upon
his Knees before Coris; My Shepherdess, continued he, it is now if you please,
that you crown me without dispute, whilst Arelise punishes this indiscreet and
rash Ergaste. In saying that he presented her his head bare; to receive the
Crown which she still held in her Hands: but Ergaste who was also near to the
Shepherdesses; to go to present to Arelise her Hood which he had took up,
pushed very gently, Celemante addressing himself to all, and said unto them;
Fair Shepherdesses, you see that it is I have overcome in two respects, and for
to have been more ready to run, as having advanced before Celemante and having
been also most prompt and ready to serve fair Arelise; at this word he placed
himself upon his Knees also by the side of Celemante, and likewise presented
his bare head before Coris. Celemante seeming surprised at the Discourse of
Ergaste, and looking upon him with a serious Countenance; What, said he unto
him, thou pretendest yet to dispute with me the prize? But thy self, replied
Ergaste, have the impudence to demand it; Celemante replied him, nothing but
addressing himself to Coris, fair Shepherdess, said he, as Ergaste sees well,
that he ought to dye by that peculiar Law which he himself has imposed upon
the vanquished, I think that the fear of Death has already troubled him, and
that is it which has thus made his Mind and Spirit to rove and go astray.
Brother, replied Arelise unto him, know thou that these Shepherdesses nor my
self find not that Ergaste has so little reason as thou believe, and that we
do doubt all of us, but that is he who has gained the Prize? What Arelise,
said he unto her, the slight. piece of Service that Ergaste has done you, has
already so forcibly gained you, that you would also doubt that I have not born
away the Dart. Thou have indeed born it away, said Arelise: but that is by
reason he rejected it to take up my Hood, and to do that which thou should
have done thy self if thou had bin before him: Ah Shepherdess, replied
Celemante, we ran not for your Hood, we ran who should bear off the Dart. It is
true, replied Ergaste, that that was the first that we proposed: but Fortune
having offered us a more honorable One, in casting down before us the Hood or
Vail of Arelise, we should have left off the first and not have taken any more
care of the second; Thou mockest thy self, said Celemante. Say that Fortune
made me meet a Stone in the midst of our Race, was then willing to give thee
an advantage, and cast the Vail of Arelise before thee, as another Stone as one
may so say, cast at thy Feet, thereby to render me that which she well saw it
had unjustly taken from me. Wherefore think thou that they ought rather
impute unto me, that to have been stayed by a Stone, than for thee to have been
stayed by a Vail? is it because I stumbled not but against my will, and thou
did it by a voluntary delay? altogether contrarily, one ought not to reproach
me with a Mischief that happened me against my will: but thy delay proceeded from
thy own default, because it was voluntary. Thou will perhaps tell me, that good
manners obliged thee to do as thou have done, but we were not to dispute good
manners, congruity and correspondency, we were to dispute who should overcome
in the Race, it was requisite first and primarily, to attempt the gaining of
the Dart, and afterward to take up the Vail of Arelise, the Service had been
much more considerable, to have been done by a victorious Person. But however
it be, it is a mischief for thee, if thou have thereby bin obliged to stay thy
self, as it was for me to have stumbled. Casualties make a great part of the
Sport and Victory. Do thou not call to mind, that in the Races that Achilles
caused to be run in the Funerals of Patrocle, although the Gallant Son of Admet
ran best, he notwithstnding lost the first Prize because his Chariot brake in
the midst of the Race? it was a misfortune to him, as one of his Comrades told
him. Thou should have besought the Gods, that they would not send thee this
Misfortune. Art thou yet ignorant of what happened in the Famous Courses of
Atalante? she had surpassed Hippomene: but she lost the Victory, because she
stayed to gather up Apples that they cast in her way, it is here even the same
Ergaste.

Take the meeting of the Veil of Arelise, for a Fortune, or for an
Unhappyness, and if thou will not, that a stone has cast Fortune upon thee,
Imagine that it was an Apple of Gold, wherewith the World have tempted thee:
but since it is a hazard, or casualty that has stayed thee, that I have
carried off the Dart, see that by consequence therefrom I have Vanquished thee.

After that Celemante had finished, Ergaste replied him, having always a knee on
the ground before the Shepherdess, as had also Celemante, I cannot be
sufficiently amazed at thy impudence, Celemante, to presume to dispute me the
Prize of a Victory that I have gained from thee, in the clear view of so many
Just, and Equitable Shepherdesses. If the advantage of a Race, depends upon the
Agility and Celerity of those who have Ran, as thou can not deny, have I not
surpassed thee in Agility? I who advanced many paces before thee? To what
design had they fixed the Dart, unless it were to assist them to Judge who Ran
best. If I have* then demonstrated that it is my self, and have had more
Advantages, Signs, Marks, and Evident Tokens, what had I to do with that there?
It is a Misfortune for me say thou, that this Veil has stayed me. God
forbid that I should take for a Misfortune, which occasioned my serving the
Fair Arelise, nor that I bewail me of performing a more acceptible Office,
which could be rendered me by Fortune. But suppose they call it a Misfortune,
that Misfortune should it take from me an advantage, which my Agility (if may
dare say so) has acquired me? do thou not call into Memory, that in the
Courses of Achilles, whereof thou spakest unto me, although the Son of Admet
arrived not but at the last, at the end of the Race, or Tilt-Yard, he omitted
not however to carry off the Prize from all them, even them that Advanced
before him, because he had an advantage over them, when his Misfortune stayed
him? well said Ergaste, interrupted Celemante, there needs no more. I yield
thee also the second Prize, and demand of Coris but the first, and whence would
you then that I took, or should take the second? seasonably and handsomely
demanded him that second. Amiable Coris, replied Celemante, if there be but
that, it will not be difficult to reconcile us. Place upon my head the Crown
that you have, and Arelise shall Coyf Ergaste with her Vail, since he has
found so much Honor in taking it up, he will undoubtedly find more to wear it.

They could not all refrain from laughing at the pleasant imagination of
Celemante. Ergaste smiled himself and rejoined him: Shepherd? neither thou nor
my self, are worthy to wear that which has been upon the head of Arelise^, but
if I deceive that Honor, doubt not, not only that I should esteem to have
gained the first Prize, but that I should make even a greater account thereof,
than of all the Crowns in the World; during their contest all the Shepherds
which were present at the Race were come to hear them, and took so much
pleasure in their dispute, that they apprehended not any thing, but that it
would too soon be decided. Arelise and Coris were very well pleased to let it
continue, and that is the cause why the Shepherds prayed them immediately to
judge them; they refused a long time to give, or to declare their advice.
Arelise excused her self, because the difference had not sprung but on the
subject of the Service, that had been rendered her by Ergaste, she well saw that
she was in some sort suspected by Celemante. Coris defended her self handsomely
on what she alleged, that agitating her in so Importunate a matter as a Crown,
was of too great weight to be left to the judgment of one Shepherdess; all the
rest of the Company dispensed themselves, also in referring the, Honor to the
judgment of Coris, because she had chosen upon her to give the Prize. However
they agreed all together at last to give their Sentiments, and after Celemante
and Ergaste, had yet added some reasons on their own parts respectively, Coris
having taken advice of the Company, they judged that Celemante had gained the
Prize of the Race, but that it was not therefore Just, but that Ergaste should
have a recompense, and Arelise because she had a Branch of Myrtle in her hands
they appointed that she should therewith make a Crown to put it upon his head,
whilst Coris placed that of hers on the head of Celemante.

Whilst this Fair Assembly spent the day in these Diversions Telamon and
Philiste Generously employed all theirs to succor their Unfortunate, and
Illustrious Guests, from time to time he went to know if the King of Lesbos
wanted any thing, they sent likewise to inform themselves, of the state of that
Fair Unknown one, whom he had met in an equipage so astonishing and deplorable
in the corner of the Forest: he stirred not the rest of the time to be near
Tarsis, and went out yet one of the next succeeding days toward the evening,
when that self same man, whom the unknown one had retained by her, came to
inform him, that his Mistress desired to speak with him, and besought him to
asc^nd into her chamber. He immediately repaired thither, and she saw him no
sooner enter but she drew one of her Arms out of the Bed, and stretching forth
her hand, said unto him: I well see, Telamon, that your Family is in possession
of me, and in preserving my Life, and I begin to hope well, since I have known
I am fallen into your hands; Telamon was much astonished at this discourse,
answered he; I have reputed it a great Honor for me to have occasion to render
service to a person, the sole view of whom has made me conceive so great an
opinion, and if this same Honor, had formerly happened unto me, or to some one
of mine, the which I knew not, I would have esteemed my self much more happy.

Then the unknown one made a sign to the servant maid, to retire out of her
chamber, who was there to serve her, and having also appointed the man, whom
she had sent to fetch Telamon, to leave them alone, she spoke to the Shepherd
in these terms. If they have not deceived me in the Particularities, that they
have taught me from your Family, you are the Brother of the Shepherd Tarsis,
and he might possibly have declared you the obligation that Amelicente had to
him. Telamon who had understood from his Brother the Adventure of Amalecinte,
not having doubted by these words, but that it was he who spoke so to him;
admired how Nature had given such a Beauty to the Countenance of that Young
Prince, as if it had made him expressly for that Personage, whom Fortune alone
made to sport and jest withal; and as he was but eighteen years of Age, he
found in his youth so great a delicacy, a hue, and dye so little beseeming, or
becoming a man, that he scarcely believed him to be he whom he was, if what his
Brother had not formerly spoke of him, had not prepared him to that credulity.
He then spoke unto him, with much astonishment and respect: What, my Lord, is
it possible that you are the Prince Amelecinte, and that your Imbarking has
also had so mournful an Issue? Ah it is indeed, it is true that I should esteem
my self happy, to receive into my house a Prince for whom I have conceived such
a Veneration and respect without knowing him; if the estate and condition
wherein I see you, my Lord, did not almost dissipate all my Joy.

Amalecinte replied obligingly to this Civility, and Testified him that he
would Inlighten him in this last Adventure, but beforehand, added he, I will
demand from you, news of your Brother. Telamon told him the accident in few
words, and this Prince who had already known something from those who served
him (for it was by that which he heard of the name of Telamon, and of the
accident of Tarsis that he had Judged with whom he was) signified unto him that
he had received a very sensible displeasure.

The Shepherd would have retired himself after that for fear of giving him to
long occasion to speak, and some curiosity that he had to learn by what Course,
and Sequel of Adventures, was found at Tempe with a Ship so soon after he had
been parted a Fugitive, and without a thought of returning there: however he
did all that he could to oblige him to conserve his rest, representing to him
the evil that the Emotion could cause him in the state wherein he was. But
Amalecinte to whom they had made or put the third preparation, and who felt
himself very much better, replied him, That it was of importance to him to take
Counsel of him, upon the consideration of some affairs wherein he had need of
his succor, and it was for that which he sent to fetch him. And as he was a
young Prince, of an active and lively Spirit, and who tormented himself for the
rest, when it was necessary for him to defer the execution of things that he
had projected, all that the Shepherd could do, it was to obtain of him only
that he would attend till the morrow, when having sent again to fetch him he
spoke unto him after this sort.

The Sequel of the History of Amalecinte.
YOu have understood by your Brother, after what manner I Embarked upon your
River* and by what necessity I undertook to cross the Gulf, and even the Sea
with one Boat-man alone, in a single Bark, and a simple one too. The weather
was favorable to my Design, the Waves quiet and calm, and we rowed in the
Gulf with all manner of good Fortune, but we had no sooner doubled the Cape,
which is at the entrance, but we saw our selves chased by a Corsario who held
himself sheltred under one side, and we were taken. I will leave you to Judge of
my Grief to see my self fallen into that Captivity, then when I thought to shun
another.

This here seemed to me notwithstanding less dangerous than the first, and that
which I did regret the more, was an occasion that I had lost by my
precipitation, to change the habit of a Woman who disguised me, and who could
assist to make me known, and to replace me in the hands of the King of Crete,
or of his Son.

I bewailed my self with so much the more displeasure, that I imputed the fault
to my self, without thinking, that all this made it self by a peculiar order
from the Gods, who take pleasure to confound Human Prudence. I was tormenting
my self thereupon when I saw the Captain of the Ship enter into a wicked
abridgment where they had put me, and approached me with all the Marks and
Tokens of a deep Respect.

Madam, said he, I a thousand times praise the Gods, who of a Corsario as I was
have possibly made me the restorer of Cyprus, and the deliverer of my Princess.
Truly, the life that I led deserved rather their punishment, than a favor of
that Nature. But undoubtedly, they considered that I have not chosen this kind
of Life, by a free election, but by pure necessity, and I hope they will make
all the pains to fall on the King of Crete, who thereunto constrained me. In
the mean time, Madam, begin here if you please to Reign over your Subjects, and
be persuaded that I will be the first, that will in all things obey you. I was
so surprised with this complement, that I knew not almost whether I should
believe my own eyes or ears, when he taught me more at length that he was of
Cyprus, and that he named himself Pantacule.

At this name this Shepherd who understood the History of Alceste and Eliante,
by reason Ergaste had recited it unto him, called to mind that he here so named
the Corsario, who had also taken them, and doubted not but this here was the
same: but as that was not a subject to interrupt the Prince, he only made a
reflection in himself, and left Amalecinte to continue who was thus persisted.
This Corsario said unto me, that he had for a long time served under the
deceased King my Father, in the command and charge of a Captain of a Ship. That
it was he who had been one of the Authors of the two Revolts, which had happened
in the Island after our Captivity, and that the King of Creete having
proscribed his Head, for that Reason he had bin reduced to the necessity of
making himself a Corsario. He added that for him, he would not have presently
known me, not having ever more than once seen me at Creete in a Voyage, that he
had made there unknown: But that there was in his Ship two or three Native
Inhabitants of Crete who had told him my Quality, and principally, added he,
That Cypriot who is fallen into my hands since some time. In saying that, he
presented me a Man, whom I knew to have bin the first Squire of the deceased
Queen my Mother, who returning to Cyprus after her death had bin taken by these
Corsarios.

The sight of that faithful Servant, whom the Queen had always loved made me
shed Tears from my eyes, in renewing in me the sad and cruel remembrance of her
Death: but between these Tears of Grief I cannot deny there were mixed some of
Joy, when of a Captive and of a Slave as I thought I had bin, I saw my self
Master, or to say better, a King of that little Kingdom floating, for you shall
observe that there were a hundred and fifty Men in that Ship, all expert, Three
Natives and Inhabitants of Cyprus whom the like necessity as that of their
Captain had reduced to the like kind of Life. All these People having heard
that I was the Princess of Cyprus were run together with great Vehemence, and
smothered themselves as one may say in the Press one amongst another to see me
and testify their Joy, in such a manner that 'twas requisite, I should go upon
the Deck to give them that Satisfaction. As for me I can scarce do any other
thing than admire the Providence of the Gods, who seemed to lead me even as by
the Hand to my Liberty, amongst Rocks, Shoals and Precipices. In fine, after I
had told them all in general and particular, some obliging things to testify
then my Friendship and Acknowledgment, and principally to their Captain; I
retired my self into his Chamber or Cabin which he had readily prepared for me,
and made variety of Reflections on what I had to do in this Encounter.

All knew my Birth, but not one my Sex, I doubted if I should not discover it
unto them, not having more, as seemed me to fear of Inconvenience, and dreaming
on the contrary that if they knew I was Prince, my Sex would yet give me more
Authority, and them more Courage and Affection to serve me. Notwithstanding, I
thought on the other side, that I was in the hands of people whom I yet knew
not, and who knew me not themselves, but upon the Faith of a Prisoner, and of
two or three proscribed Persons, who had not seen me but very few times, that
in the prevention wherein they all were that there remained but one Daughter of
our House, I should infallibly by some doubt refreeze them coming to discover
my self for a Man; or at least Wise, I should make some scruple to spring up in
their minds that it was all that could make the People well confirmed, than to
know the Miracle or believe the Wonder, for so I may say, of my disguise, and
that not having any present necessity of disabusing them, it were much better
to enjoy in peace, the occasion that the Gods had offered me, than to hazard a
Loss in being to undertake too much, and all at a time. So I resolved to pass
always in their minds, as the Princess of Cyprus, until I saw a greater
necessity and security to discover my self. Before night, the Captain came to
demand me, where I would desire to be conducted, and I was thereupon a little
discouraged. He made me understand, that he had bin caused not long since to
revolt a third time in Cyprus: But I was not assured of the State of things,
nor if they were not appeased, briefly if there would be imprudence, to expose
my self there with the few Forces I had, I therefore said that they should only
plye in the open Sea, and that I would determine the next day with his Counsel,
but Fortune took care to determine me it self.

At the break of day, the Mariners discovered a Ship who had a Standard, and
who was the Prince of Crete, and for as much as we had then fixed the Standard
of Cyprus (for the Corsarios have all the Kingdoms to serve themselves with,
according to their need) he caused a Skiff to be manned in the Sea, and sent to
know who we were. That Prince as one of his Dependants gave me to understand
afterward, had finished his Negotiation at Pidne, with the Governor of that
Province, and had concluded a Treaty with him, by which he was obliged to
furnish him in a little time, with four thousand Men to make War against the
King of Macedonia. That Negotiation had bin so quick, that I had bin happy to
escape from his Guards that Evening when your generous Brother succored me,
for that next day he was come to Gonnes to take me there, and to bring me back
with him to Crete; they told me that he had not heard of my escape but with
great Fury, and that the third of his Guards, whom I had wounded and put to
flight, having told him of the Death of his two Comrades, he had drawn his
Sword to kill him, in that he had not dyed with him rather than to let me
escape. In fine, that Prince having understood of my imbarking, he quickly put
himself under Sail in quest of me; I know not well, if it was his Passion for
me that made him use such diligence, or if it was not the fear he had, that my
going to Cyprus would there second the Revolt: But so it was that having seen
our Ship, and then and there also the Standard of Cyprus, he had sent to know
who was on board, and make us strike the Flag.

I would not have had them dissemble, and knowing well that it was difficult
for him to have as good men as were ours, instructed by length of time and
experience in Sea Combats, I showed my self to the Enemy upon the Deck, and
answered that they might make a report to their Master that I was the Princess
of Cyprus, who expected him. Undoubtedly I committed a rash and indiscreet
Action, for he had two great Ships and we had but one; and immediately I very
well saw that the Captain was not too well content. But I could not resolve my
self to fly from my Enemy, and i^agined with my self that the Gods who had so
manifestly protected me, would not send me but to deliver them into my Hands. I
then betook my self to my Bow and Arrows, I girt on my Sword, put on my
Headpiece, after the Greek mode, and in that Equipage I made a small Oration
to our Men to encourage them. My brave Soldiers, said I unto them; behold the
fairest Opportunity that ever you had to signalize your Courage. There is a
long time that you have lived wandering and roving as Fugitives upon the Sea,
and that you daily expose your Lives to Combats, and the Mercy of the Waves,
without any other hope but to get some small pillage, and to subsist in a Life
always accompanied with fear and toil. This now is another different Fortune
that calls you: you agitate not now upon, or with petty Merchantship for booty,
but now you are upon the Spoils of a Prince, who holds your Country in Irons,
and to make himself a Slave, and set his Kingdom at Ransom to Redeem him. He
agitateth to Revenge the Death of your King, the Matricide of a Great Queen,
the Massacre of all the Family Royal, he agitateth to revenge you himself. You
go to see, and have your Queen, to go to witness your actions, and not only to
witness, but to go and be of your Company, astonish not your selves therefore
that you have a Maiden to command you, the Gods have given her the Courage of a
Man, and I demand of you alone nothing, unless you are ashamed not to be able
to do as well as she. I so animated them by this small discourse, that they
breathed out nothing but longings for Fight: to make it short unto you, after a
shower of Arrows shot on both sides, our Ships Grapled, and there was a horrible
slaughter upon the Deck of that of the Prince, where I had commanded our men to
fasten themselves; I was the first that leapt on board, and sought him to fall
upon him. And on the other side he leaped aboard ours to find me, and seize me.
Now there happened an other Adventure rare enough. For whilst he was in our
Ship, his two which grapled ours, sunk her down, who finding himself sunk in
the Sea, and drowned by his own men, who were the best of those that had
followed him, few of ours were lost in the Shipwreck, because they had leapt
with me into the Enemies Ship, and that we there became the strongest. Some of
ours would cry that the Prince of Crete was dead, and that he had been sunk
down. That was out of design to Alarm the other Ship, and Terrify them: but I
hindered it, not only because it was out of design to advertise them to
endeavor to save the Prince, whom yet I saw laboring in the Sea, but
principally, because something fell into my thought, to whom the error of the
Enemies served me extremely, I commanded ours to seize upon the Rudder of the
Ship, where we were, and to get off at a distance, as much as might be with all
speed from the other Ship of our Enemies, that having separated them one from
the other, that we might finish, and absolutely become Masters of one of them,
to return afterward, to charge furiously upon the other. On the other side I
caused them to hoise the Skiff into the Sea, to go to save as many of our men
as they could who swam. Also those on the other Ship, believing that all this
was done by order of the Prince of Crete their Master, and seeing that it was
their Skiff who Rowed in the Sea, persued us not, nor shot against those who
went to succor our men, thinking that it was their own. In such a manner that
we finished in a moment, to render our selves entirely Masters of the Ship, and
saved the major part of our men, only ten, amongst whom was the poor Boatman
who conducted me. Immediately I made them return to charge upon the Enemy, and
I leave you to Judge of their astonishment, when they dreamed of nothing else,
but to come to congratulate the good Success and Victory of their Prince, they
were taught that they were overcome, that their Prince was dead, and that we
prepared to charge them. This news astonished them in such a Nature; that they
had not so much as the Courage to oppose us, and betook themselves to flight. I
gave them chase two days, and so many nights, and undoubtedly they had not
escaped me, but by means of a Violent Stormy Tempest, which after a long time
tossed, and agitated us, cast me again into the Gulf, and obliged me to come
to refresh our selves in your Road. Whilst they repaired our Vessel which
sprang a Leak, by means of our Furious Fight, and the late Tempest, I would
come to set foot on shore, and walked without dreaming of the advice that had
been given me by one of our Prisoners, whom the Prince of Crete had yet left
there amongst others to seek me out there, in case that the advice of my
Imbarkment was not true. I went accompanied only with two of my men, through
this Wood where you met me, when I was attacked by eight Soldiers, who
immediately fell upon me. I put my Sword in hand, which I still have carried
since the day of our Naval Combat, and seconded by the two men that accompanied
me, I so well defended my self, that we put our Assassines to Flight, and six
others out of a Condition to attack me. But this could not be, without feeing
before my Face to dye my two Seconds, nor without falling my self into a
condition where you have so Generously Succored me.

So Telamon, if Cyprus has some interest in my conservation, I can safely say
that it ought to look upon you, your Brother, and your Self as has its two
Titulary Originals, and I protest unto you also, that if I have ever there any
power, the names of Telamon and Tarsis shall be there also known, as those of
Aristogiton, and Harmodisis, are both in Athens. In the mean while as it is
apparent, these People who attacked me were not alone, and that I am from
elsewhere in the Government of Alcime, an ally of mine Enemy, you see how it
imports me not to be known here, but you judge also well, Telamon, that I ought
to sleep there, whilst that the Death of the Prince of Crete will apparently
prove true, and made great changes in Cyprus, and in the States of the King his
Father.

Which is the cause wherefore I will send with the first opportunity some of my
People to Cyprus, there to confirm the Truth of his Death, and to dispose the
People there to receive me. I will even depart with the soonest to be there,
ready to profit by this occasion. And there to second by my Presence, and by my
Courage, that which shall be found of good disposition in their minds. But as
there is not a moment of time, to be lost here, that my Ship where I make
account to Imbark, cannot be repaid but in some days, and that in the mean
time, it is of importance, that those whom I send to prepare their minds should
depart before me, I have for that end present need of another Ship. I had since
yesterday sent to Gonnes to contract for a Ship in that Port, but I have
understood that since Alcime is returned, there is prohibition made to let none
depart without his express order signed with his hand, and that there is a
thousand difficulties to obtain Pass-Ports, at least to be known. Now you see
the interest that I have, ought not to be made known to a man in Alliance, and
Confederacy with my Enemy. So I have need of your Credit and Generosity,
Telamon to endeavor to obtain one with the soonest, and that is the request
that I will make you.

Whilst he thus spoke, Telamon on one side admired the Courage wherewith this
young Prince framed his designs, for the Conquest of a Kingdom, in a condition
wherein he had not only the strength to rise from his bed, and on the other, he
had not the Ability of Apprehension, that the agitation wherewith he had
spoken, might enkindle some Fever within his Body, which naturally appeared to
be in a temper all of fire. He therefore besought him not to give himself any
further trouble, in any thing that he had commanded him, and promised him that
he would go there the same hour, to give order. Immediately he took leave of
him, but at the instant he thought to go out, Amalecinte recalled him, and said
unto him: Generous Telamon, the care of my affairs has made me forget a thing
which possibly may regard yours, and which have made me call to mind the name
of that Shepherdess, of whom you have lately told me, that her loss has
reduced Tarsis into that condition you have related me. It Is from the first day
that I embarked here, as I would have demanded of my Boat-man why he had so
much desired to recoil in parting, until he had even constrained him thereunto
by force; he told me for a reason, that he expected a Shepherdess, whom he
named as seemed to me, Zelie, as you have done the Mistress of your Brother, he
added that he should by the same occasion conduct her I know not where, and
that it was to do service to a Shepherd named Alpide, who I should also have
come with her. Ah my Lord! cried he Immediately, I mean Telamon, it is the same
Shepherdess whom we seek; and thereupon as he saw that the Prince could not
instruct him further, he retired to make some reflection on this last news,
which more occupied his mind than all the rest.

In sum, that which his Brother had related him the day following, of the loss
of Zelie, of that Mariner whom he had taken in the night for Alpide, and the
Great Assiduity, that the same Alpide had signified to her, after that Tarsis
had no more seen her, had already given them much cause to suspect him: however
he could not make any certain Judgment thereupon, because that Alpide had not
disappeared with Zelie, but otherwise was her Cosen German, and moreover, for
that he was more concerned, pressed for her more than any other, and did much
regret this Shepherdess. But after he had learnt that from the Prince of
Cyprus, there was no place left for him to doubt, but that Alpide was the
Author or at least an Accomplice in this misfortune, as so many others have
followed.

It was almost night when Telamon went out from Amalecinte, that Shepherd not
being there gone, but very late after dinner (by the counsel of the Surgeon)
to leave always so much time with the Prince, as to repose himself, before
engaging him in a discourse, which he well Judged would be of some time. In
going out from thence, he deliberated whether he should direct this piece of
news to Tarsis. He was presently tempted thereunto because he thought that it
would still be some Joy to that unfortunate Lover, to know at least a way by
which he might be assured to be able to learn, what should become of Zelie. But
he immediately also well Judged afterward, that in thinking to regive him
thence some hope, he should not fail to renew his Inquietudes, and to cause in
him strange Alarms, that it would be to hold him all the night in impatience,
which would be a means to hinder his rest, and might possibly cause some seaver
to seize upon him by so great a Commotion, or Violent Inclination of the Mind.
So that after having been only to see him, to give him in secret the
contentment, with which he well knew that this Shepherd would learn news of the
return of Amalecinte, he retired into his Chamber, where he writ to Gonnes to
have a Passport for the Prince of Cyprus, and having given his Letter to a
Shepherd with order to carry it the next day to his Friend, to whom it was
addressed, he went to bed that he might rise at break of day to go to Alpide,
and endeavor to surprise her at his house.

On the other hand whilst Amalecinte made his recital to Telamon, the King of
Lesbos informed Philiste Accidents, and Adventures which were much more
surprising.

That Prince had always appeared so Melancholy since his arrival at Tempe, that
he would scarce see any but that Wise Shepherdess. He was charmed with her
Sweetness, Modesty, and Conversation, and found in all her discourse a certain
clear singularity, and simplicity, and Spiritual Goodness, which he preferred
before all the utmost Gallantry that he had seen in his Court. The Shepherdess
was all in Confusion for the urgency which he still signified to see her, and
her scrupulous Virtue not permitting her to go into the Chamber of the King all
alone, she came to pray her Husband to go for her, to go and keep Company with
that Prince, either willing to excuse her self under some kind of pretense, or
at least to come there with her. Telamon who rather doubted of his own proper
Virtue, than that of his Wives, took pleasure to Jest with her, and besought
her himself not to refuse that Consolation to the disgrace of that unfortunate
Prince. Notwithstanding all that, she shunned all opportunities and occasions
of seeing him, as much as the King sought it, insomuch that the Prince having
also perceived it himself, he resolved to take from her that Scruple. And to
that end, from the very first Moment that he could find himself alone with her,
having under some pretext, sent those who served him out of his Chamber, he
said unto her; Virtuous Philiste, I well see that the King of Lesbos is
suspected by you. He paused there some minutes to attend the reply she would
make him; and seeing she answered him not but by a silent Modesty, accompanied
with Blushing, which commenced to spring up into her Countenance, he continued
thus to speak to her. But, wise Shepherdess, tell me by your good Favor, may
the Queen of Lesbos hope to have a little more Interest in your Friendship and
Kindness? At these words an admirable and gracious Shamefacedness, Chastity and
Pudicity, finished the springing up of an amiable Blushing, in the Countenance
of this incomparable Shepherdess, for yet she saw not to what this discourse
ultimately tended, and forasmuch as she believed that the Prince would speak
either of his Mother or his Wife, not knowing if he were married, she replied
him; My Lord, the Queen of Lesbos would not daign to cast her eyes, upon such a
simple Shepherdess as I am, and I would esteem it too great an Honor, that she
would accept of my Respects and humble Services. The King of Lesbos, replied
her, Amiable Shepherdess, it is howsoever the Queen of Lesbos desires to know
it. Philiste taking these words for a continuation of Jesting, replied not
thereto but with a modest Smile, so that the King persisted thus: You believe
that I Jest, Philiste, but it is a certain Truth that I am therefore going to
declare you, which will surprise you much more. It is I that am the unfortunate
Queen of Lesbos. Philiste was so astonished with this discourse, and knew not
how to take it, when she had a Confirmation thus; Aye, Philiste, I even I, am
the unfortunate Queen of Lesbos, and Judge of the Opinion I have of your
Virtue, because I will place my Confidence in your Secrecy, which I will
conceal from all the rest of the World. But that you may not doubt of what I
declare you, come and receive the Confirmation between my Arms.

At the same Moment opening unto her half her Neck with a virtuous Modesty,
because the necessity of her Condition forced her self that Violence; she
stretced forth her Arms to Philiste, and gave her Liberty to see the fairest
Bosom, and most clear white snowy Pair of Breasts that ever Nature had formed
in a Maiden.

After that Philiste had signified her great surprise and admiration, and then
how much she felt her self obliged by the Confidence wherewith she had honored
her; the Queen of Lesbos (for we will for the Future give her that name more
convenient for the Truth of her Sex) would testify a Confidence wholly and
entirely in that Shepherdess. It is true that which principally obliged her
thereunto, was that finding her self in the House of Philiste and Telamon her
Husband, destitute of People and Counsel, and in a Condition where we shall see
her hereafter; she judged she might dispense with the discovery of her self
unto them, at least than to renounce to all, the Services whereof she had
occasion, and in whom she might be forced to employ them. Thus that Queen
having caused Philiste to sit down by her, spoke unto her in manner following.

The History of Philetere Queen of Lesbos.
YOu are happy, O Philiste, to be born in the Condition of a Shepherdess! That
the Liberty and Repose of your Life is preferrable to the Arrogance and Vanity
of those of the greatest Queens; and that we are unfortunate, we unto whom it
is not only permitted to live as we list, but to whom it is frequently
prohibited to be that which we are. No, Philiste, we dare not sometimes come
into the World, such as the Gods have formed us, and when Fortune pleases not
to avow our selves that for which Nature has framed us, it is absolutely
requisite that we disguise our selves unto it, that they tranform us, for so it
may be said, and to be what she would almost have us cease to be our selves.

Behold, wise Shepherdess, what is the Image of my Destiny, and of my
Misfortunes in an Abridgment, but to let you understand them by Retail or
Piecemeal, you shall know that there are some Olympiades since which Eriane
Queen of Lesbos being dead at Mitilene, the Metropolis of the Island, the
People were so ill satisfied with her Government, that they made a Decree after
her Death, in hatred of her Memory, by which they appointed that the Kingdom
should not any more fall into a Distaff, or into the Feminine Line
hereditarily, and that Women should be absolutely excluded from the Royal
Supremacy, and Sovereign Dignity and Authority.

It is true, that this Decree was not accompanied with all that which would
have been desired to render it entirely Solemn; for the two nearest Heirs of
the Crown, would not thereunto give their Voices, neither the one nor the
other, having then in all but two Children, each one a Maiden. My Father was
the eldest of two; and this Prince the most penetrating and the most politic
that ever was, having had in his Life time even from the Queen some advice of
what was projected after his Death, was advised at my Birth to make me pass for
a Boy, which unto him was then easy, the one and the other Sex being yet
equally capable to succeed in the Kingdom. For that end he even gave me the
Name of a Man, and made me be called Philitere, as was he; it is not but that
he pretended still to dissemble that which I was. He only thought that in the
design that he had to oppose himself to that Decree, his Opposition would be so
much the more considerable, then having apparently a Son, he would appear
disinterested, and he dreamed that in all cases, if he could not hinder it in
the first Movements of the general Aversion, that the People had against the
Government of Ariane, he could at least whilst he should have the Helm in hand,
find a day to cause it to be revoked.

His Stratagem had not neither the one nor the other, the success which he
imagined, for he could neither hinder the decree, nor being become King cause
it to be broken. It was then requisite to continue by necessity the disguising
which had bin begun by Artifice, and the better to succeed therein, from the
time I had a little Strength the King my Father caused me to learn all the
exercises convenient for a Prince. But as he judged well that the difference
that Age has accustomed to put between the Countenances of Boys and those of
Maidens would not fail one day or other to betray his Intention, and that the
People would be astonished at the conclusion, not to see born on my Cheeks, the
ordinary Marks which serve to discern betwixt both Sexes; he feigned I know not
what Accident by which he caused deafly and dumbly to sow a noise, that they
had bin obliged to abandon me to the hands of Chyrurgions, and to reduce me to
the condition of those People, to whom the Persians do commit the Guard of
their Wives and their Treasure. The fair Queen could not speak this without
using some violence to her Modesty and Pudicity; and the redness which appeared
in her Face, finished the explaining to Philiste that which she would have her
understood. After that that Blushing had vanished away, she thus continued her
Discourse.

The King, as I have told you, did not however sow this Noise, but confusedly
and with some kind of uncertainty, to sound and fathom only their Minds and
Dispositions, and to dispose them one day or other to receive it and believe
it, when it was needful; for he was not ignorant that the major part of the
Greeks, have as much Misprision for or of these sort of People, which I have
spoken to you of, as the Persians have them in Veneration. They will have
Kings, which can be able to give them Successors, and are ashamed to obey
Persons whom they put in the rank of Monsters, rather than among the number of
Men, so he would not hazard this noise with so much certainty, but that he was
still the Master to revoke or confirm it at his own Leisure. Whatever it was,
the King my Father reigned peaceably enough, during the first years, and during
the minority of a natural Son that a Brother of the deceased Queen had left,
but when the Son was grown greater, some discontents were buzzed in his ears,
that the Kingdom appertained to him being Nephew of the Queen, and my Father
being but a Relation distant enough, and as there was not a precise Law in the
State by which Bastards were excluded from Succession, he did so well that the
Estates were convoked or assembled together, to judge of this great difference.

The King my Father carried it, but not by all Voices. The Bastard Prince did
not render himself to the Judgment of the States, he would decide the question
by force of Arms, and as he had a very strong Party we saw our Army less than
nothing, at the Gates of Mitilene. What say I, he was Master almost as soon as
he appeared there, by the means of intelligences which he there practiced, and
my Father who was not then mistrusted was reduced to fly from his Capital City.
It is true, that it was not but to re-enter therein with more Honor
afterward, for when he had had Leisure to Levy his Army, he reconducted it
before Mitilene in Person, he there gave Battle to the Enemy, and having
vanquished them in the Combat, he besieged him and took him in the same City.
After this manner, all the War was ended in a very little time. I pass over all
these things lightly, O Philiste, not only by reason that that is nothing but
Wars, which are not convenient for our Sex, and where you could not take
pleasure, but also forasmuch as you undoubtedly know all that which passed
there most memorable, since that they were Telamon your Husband and Tarsis your
Brother-in-Law which did them. Philiste having replied, that she had heard them
sometimes speak thereof, but after a different manner; I doubt not, interrupted
the Queen, that their Modesty has supplanted their Honor: But it is however
true, wise Shepherdess, that these two Brothers who traveled, then being happy
for us met in our Island, and having offered their Service to the King; bore up
alone on a small Bridge the effort of a Battalion, who had put a part of our
Men in disorder, and routed them, and having given them time to rally
themselves, they were the cause of gaining the Battle. This is not all, in the
Siege they were the first that ascended scaling, and having cast themselves
alone into the City, as they say that Alexander the great formerly did at Tire,
they foiled the Troops destinated to the guarding and keeping of the Wall, gave
opportunity to ours to follow them, and caused the taking of Mitilene. Also
there were not Honors enough by which the King attempted not to acknowledge
due to their Valor, and I remember (for this Prince would that even at the
Army, I was always near him) I remember I say to have heard him say, that to
pay well for such a signal Piece of Service, it was requisite to offer them a
part of his Kingdom. He did all he could to oblige them to continue by him, by
the offer of the first dignities; but all our Court had nothing capable to
tempt them, and I am not astonished, for assuredly Telamon would have found
nothing there, in comparison with Philiste. The Shepherdess not having replied
to this obliging Discourse, than by a respectful Inclination of the head and by
a modest Silence, the Queen persisted thus; the taking of Mitelene was soon
followed by a ^reaty of Peace. But alas! the King did not long enjoy it, for he
dyed soon afterward, and left me in an Age young enough, over burdened and
oppressed by the weight of all the Kingdom. I was Crowned King of Lesbos
without any contradiction: Because the Fidelity of those whereof the Ministry
had bin employed to conceal the secret of my Sex had bin so great, that until
then no Person whatsoever, had so much as a mistrust or diffidence of what I
was. It is not but that Demotime, that is the name of the Bastard Prince, had
not been well pleased to hurry, confound, and disorder. But my Father in his
Life time, had given him some employment by which he had, as I may so say,
honorably banished him out of Lesbos. For in that time Lysimachus King of
Thrace having had Phrygia for his part and share from the Spoils of old
Antigonus; This Prince, to whom my Father had rendered the Signal Offices in
this War, would testify unto him his acknowledgment, and by a Confidence
extraordinary enough, but which merited undoubtedly the quality of those
Services which he had received of us, he sent him the Provisions in Blank, from
the Vice-King of Phrygia (an important Province, and which is not separated
from Lesbos, but by a very little Ferry over the Sea) to fill them with the
Name of him, whom my Father would have gratified. The King my Father to oblige
Lysimachus by a Signification of the esteeem which he made by this Present,
filled them with my Name.

Howsoever reserving the Title to me, he gave the employ to Demotime whom he
sent to command for Lysimachus, in that great and important Province; so then
Demotime being occupied elsewhere, did not then thwart nor cross my
establishment in the Throne. But behold the Commencement of my Misfortune.

My Governor had a Son, whom my Father had made my great Chamberlain, he might
then have been about twenty two years old, and one could say that he was almost
one of the best shaped Men in the World. His Countenance amongst others was so
very fair, that all the Ladies of Lesbos, envyed some his eyes, another his
mouth and teeth, and all the clearness and purity of his Hue. As for his Wit he
had it vivacious and full, but his Soul was without Religion and Fidelity. He
was ambitious, arrogant, insolent, vain and presumptuous, to the last point, so
full of a good Opinion of himself, that he imagined not but that the most
virtuous Women, nor yet the wisest could resist his amiable Countenance, and he
believed not any thing could (in a word) be above him.

That which increased his audacity, was that although he was of Nobility, fresh
and hew enough by his Fathers side, he notwithstanding vaunted himself, by
reason of some distant Alliance on the Woman's side, descended from the ancient
Kings of Lesbos. My Father having known his Wit very much repented himself, and
that many times, that he had put him in an Office which so nearly approached my
Person, the exercise whereof obliged me in some sort to confide in him. But his
Father by an abuse, which is too common in the Courts of Princes, had obtained
this Office for him from his Youth, and before one might know what he would be,
and since there was no other means to dispossess him by the apprehension that
we had of hurrying, or giving a check to my Governor, on whom we had made in
some sort a participant of the knowledge of our secret. I had shunned all manner
of confidence in this young man, as much as to me could be possible, and for
that end I would not that he should lie in my chamber, as those are accustomed
to do, who possess the like Offices in the Courts of Princes; I would neither
lie down, nor rise up before him, and I attired my self always particularly:
but as he saw the affectation which I had to deprive him of the best, and most
Beneficial Dues of his Office, he could not refrain from speaking to his
Father, to learn the reason. It is true, I ought here to complain of my self,
as well as of my Governor, for he came to propose it to me, before he would
discover it to his Son, but he made me find so great a necessity in Confiding
in him, and as a Father is almost always Blind for his Children, he answered me
so absolutely, assuring me of his Fidelity, that I gave my hands to what he
would. In the Interim, see, Philiste, the strange success of his Counsel.

Olearque (this Chamberlain was so named) being a participant of my secret, it
was necessarily requisite that I should show him a good Face, and Pleasant
Countenance, and that by some particular marks of Esteem, and Friendship, I
engaged him to Silence, and to the Fidelity whereof I had need. His Natural
Vanity failed not immediately to play his Game: he put himself in his own head
that, I loved him, and that the Testimonies of Goodness, which I gave the sole
Services of his Father, and the necessity of my Destiny, were so many effects
of my Springing Passion. I entered then into my Fourteenth Year. It must
necessarily be altogether deformed, misshapen not to have in that Age
acceptableness, and good liking, and principally when one is Queen, and when
one appears in the eyes of one Ambitious. My Youth, his Ambition, and his
Vanity therefore enflamed him, or rather made him to lose his Judgment.

I so little mistrusted, or was diffident of his Audacity, that I was a long
time without perceiving my self, I did not impute his Assiduity, his Cares, nor
his continual Looks and Regards, but to the Address of a Courtesan, who will
comply with the Queen: I attributed not his Sighs, which he reiterated
frequently enough, but to some vexation or to some strange Love, and was so
Innocent, that when they Jested him to be in Love with some Fair One of
Mitelene, I Jested also as did the others.

As for him, who in his Vanity believed me pre-occupied, he thought that I
understood him very well, that the manner wherewith I treated him, was a tacit
Approbation of his Love, and all that lost in him his Wit more and more. In
fine, I began to perceive him my self at a Tournament that I made at Mitelene
(for I affected those Divertisements of Men, to entertain the Popular Error)
the Spectacle lasted three days, and at every time, those that were of the
Tourney were obliged to appear with Liveries, and of different devices. As for
him at three times he put an Eagle in his Shield or Target, with this Diversity
only, that it was an Eagle Flying near the Sun, and a number of other Birds
under a Cloud, which hid them from the Light; for the Soul, there was round
about, as one worthy to see him without Clouds and Shadows, at the second day,
it was yet an Eagle which steadfastly looked upon the Sun, with these words.

My Eyes would Disdain a lesser Light, And in the third, there was yet an Eagle
carrying in his Beak, a Thunderbolt with these words,

This is my Art. Or this is the Art of mine. The morrow of the Turnament, every
one being placed before me to discover the Devices that they had seen, and to
Explicate them, all consented that they had not well apprehended those of
Olearque, and it was of him they would demand the Signification, or declare it;
I will never tell it but to the King alone, replied he, and yet that shall not
be, but in case his Majesty Commands me to do it, upon Pain of his Disfavour.
That which he said, gave me yet more Curiosity to know the Explication, for I
was so Estranged, and so far at a Distance, as I have told you, to think of the
Folly that he had put in his Mind, that I should never have been diffident of
it. I passed then laughing into my Closet, and there I asked him the
Explication in particular, and in way of Merriment, and Sport only. But I was
much surprised. when in explicating it, he gave me to understand, that in the
first device, those Clouds which hide the Sun from other Birds, was my disguise
which stole the knowledge of that which I was from all my Subjects, and that it
was he, that would willingly Figure himself to be that Eagle, who alone had the
clear View, that by a part of these same things, he would mark; in the second
that he would only believe me worthy to stay his Eyes; and that in the third,
by that Eagle which carried the Thunderbolt, he would have me understand that
being, as he Vaunted, Descended from the Ancient Kings of Lesbos, the Scepter
was not above his Legitimate Pretensions.

It is impossible for me to express you the Amazement, and the Indignation I
was in, and principally when I saw the Audacity, and the Insolence wherewith he
durst so to discover himself unto me, as if he had esteemed, and accounted,
that I should not, or ought not to have found it strange. If I had believed my
Fury, I think I should have sent him Prisoner from the same place, but in the
State and Condition wherein I was, a Maiden, in my Minority, and in my Kingdom,
where I had not mine Authority founded but on a Fable, I depended in some
respect on him, and on his Father; it was then requisite for me to serve my
self, of all that Power that I had over me, to use Dissimulation, and I
contented my self, to answer him with a Sound, where-he might however mark, and
take notice of my intention, and vexatious despite: You have done well,
Oliarque, to say nothing of all this before the World; for you would have made
your self Laughed at, Mocked, and Scorned, and there is none but my self can,
or could excuse such an Extravagance. Immediately I passed into my Chamber, but
with so much Confusion, that he could not possibly avoid the observing it. In
the mean time he recoiled not, nor would be repulsed for that, and although he
saw that after that time, I spoke to him less then ordinary, and that I never
did it, but with even a Serious, and severe Countenance, he gave not over
hoping but that he should succeed in his Designs. He redoubled his Cares and
Assiduities, and his respects, and I would have had too much Subject of being
Contented, if I had not known the cause. All that not giving me again
Encouragement to be with him, nor that Familiarity which I hod done, he
counterfeited to be Sad, Penitent, and even to be Sick; in fine, I thought he
had in his heart, that which he testified without, and I believed he would
become, or had been more Wise, but I was very soon disabused.

One day he engaged me to go to Supper to one of his Houses in the Country,
where he caused to be prepared, a Sumptuous Feast under an Arbor of Trees, in
the Branches of which hung an infinite number of Lamps, of Crystal, which
seemed to brave the number of the Clear Shining and Glittering, and Sparkling
of the Stars. Under the space or distance of the Trees, he had caused to be
Enchased, great Tables, or Pictures which served as Walls, ramed after the
manner of a great Hall, or put us under, and Veiled from the Winds.

After the Supper, he made us take three different Divertisements. The first,
was of a Dance, where they represented the Loves of the Moon, and of Endymion.
The second a Comedy of Loves of Venus, and of Adonis, and the third, the
explication of those Pictures, which three or four Actors came to interpret the
Subject, in Verses, in Form of a Dialogue, and it was found they were the
Amors, or Loves of Cephale and Aurore. That Affectation in all these three
Subjects, which represented the unequal Alliance of three Goddesses with men,
made me well Judge that that was not but with some Design, and principally
because in the Verses, be they of Balls or Dances, be they of Comedies, be they
of the Explication of the Pictures, there had been the greatest part in
Praises, and Commendations of the Generous Passion, and Disinterest of the
Goddesses, and the Fidelity that they had found in Men more then the Gods. But
possibly he believed, that I yet apprehended not the end sufficiently, since
that, the next day all the World having very much commended the Order, and
Economy of the Feast or Banquet, and all that which had followed, and seeing I
said nothing, he asked me if it could be possible, that he could be so
Unfortunate, that I should find nothing there that pleased me. I answered him
coldly enough, that his Feast was not too orderly, and that I was angry he had
been at that great expense. My Lord, said he unto me, I have not hoped for your
approbation of the Feast, and it suffices me if your Majesty refused it not at
the Action of the three Great Goddesses, who have had the Honor to direct you.
He said that unto me aloud, but with the Equivocation that you see; that those
before whom he spoke unto me, might believe that he understood the speaking of
the representation of their Loves, and he well Judged, that never any one of
those who were present did not comprehend him after another manner. But as for
me I had already the knowledge of his intention; I well saw that he otherwise
understood it, and I knew it better, by the manner of his expectation of an
answer, looking steadfastly upon me with a suspended Action, as I may say,
betwixt Joy and Fear, and with eyes who sufficiently enough declared his
thoughts. I did not at all seem to comprehend him, because I should have bin
obliged to testify him in the Country my resentment and my Anger, I answered
him only that the Dancers, and the Actors had very well done. He who would not
leave me in doubt, replied unto me; Your Majesty at least, approves of the
Goddesses as well as the Actors. I could not hinder my self from blushing at
his Impudence, although I very well knew, that no Person but my self could
understand his true meaning, and unless I had explicated it to others, I had
then testified him all my Indignation, But I contented my self to reply him
with a cold and severe Countenance; Olearque, it becomes not men to Judge of
the Actions of the Gods; but I believe Women of Heart would never do that which
they impute them. At the Instant lest he should continue that discourse I
reassumed another.

The occasion which he had to be all the day near me and speak to me made me
well believe that to take one away from him, I was not precautioned against
another, for time to come. That was because I would break the Course of all the
designs he could have to seek any, I was resolved to advertize his Father.

I took him then one day particularly, and after I had made him remember the
Protestations with which he had answered me, in relation to his Son, complained
to him of his Audacity, and conjured him to employ himself in making him more
wise, with all the reasons that I could possibly call to mind. The Father was
astonished at the folly of his Son; he protested me he knew nothing of it until
then; and after he had asked my Pardon a thousand times, he returned to his own
house where he read a Lecture to this young Man, both as a Father and as a
Master, that is to say, with a Lenity mixed notwithstanding, with very severe
Threats, if he profited not himself by this first remonstrance. But that which
should have rendered him wise, cast him into the last excess. For in fine, he
conceived so strange a despite, and of the complaints that I had made him,
that by a kind of Desparation, he went to find the Prince Demotime in Phrygia,
and after he had prepared his Mind for the Design he would inspire into him, he
discovered him what I was, and declared him that acknowledging him to be his
only and Legitimate King, he could not resolve with himself to contribute a
longer time in this kind of Treason.

Demotime who conserved always in his Heart, all the Sentiments of that
Ambition which had formerly obliged him, to take up Arms against the deceased
King. My Father, received this News with the same Joy as if they had already
set the Crown upon his Head; He embraced a thousand times the young Olearque,
and excited him by the hopes of the most high and vast Recompenses, if he could
in any kind convince him by reason, or demonstration, or action, make him
believe that that was really true that he had declared. There was no need to
use Arguments or make so much difficulties, to carry Olearque from any or all
undertaking, and would make good his Declaration. The despite in his Heart was
so joined with Love and Ambition, that in that condition there was not any
thing, whereof he felt not himself capable. What shall I say unto you more? He
engaged Demotime to make a Voyage to Mitilene, under pretext of coming to give
me an account of his Employment, and there to make his Court: he promised him
that he would give him an opportunity of seeing me in the Bath; and in effect,
having corrupted with much Money, those which were necessary to his design, he
caused Demotime to conceal himself in a Corner of my Chamber where I bathed my
self, and (I am in confusion only in calling to mind his Insolence,) this
Perfidy betrayed my Secret, and my Chastity, and acquitted himself of his word
to Demotime. This same here cleared from his Doubts, dreamed a long time in
what manner he should make known to the Public what I was. He well believed
that it would be a difficult thing, if he did not comport himself therein
handsomely, because there was so little appearance of the Truth thereof, that
the very small Semblance thereof would only render the Proposition ridiculous,
and might take away all credulity from his words. Behold his first thought was
to put it in the Peoples minds that it was requisite to press me to marry, to
assure Successors to the State, dreaming of the refusal that I would make,
would be the beginning of a Conviction against me. My Father had thereunto in
some Respect made Provision by the noise that I have told you that he had
dumbly and deafly caused to be spread abroad, and which might serve me for some
kind of excuse: But howsoever that noise had bin so uncertain that they knew
not certainly whether it were a Fable or a Truth. Demotime himself well judged
that if this excuse should be ill received of any to whom the sole Doubt, that
they had had might have given an occasion of making Insolent Jests enough, so
that he thought that that would be to him, but a small advantage, if he obliged
me to have public recourse to an apparition or dumb show, which would cause my
Person to be despised, and would alienate in some sort the minds of my
Subjects, from the respect, affection, and allegiance, which they ought me.

So although I was yet very young, it might be insinuated into their minds,
that it was therefore requisite to press me to choose a Wife, to produce an Heir
to the Kingdom, and as his Interest therein would appear contrary, in the
pretention that he could be to succeed therein, that would make it be thought,
that he spoke not but for the good of the Kingdom, and that which he said,
would make much more Impression. And in truth he in fine, persuaded the
necessity of this Marriage to so many Persons, that I understood not of any
other thing spoken than of these Propositions.

He himself was always urging me thereunto, yea he so persisted in it until my
Subjects expressly deputed some to invite me thereunto, poposing me a Princess
named Aremise who being fair, of my Blood, and of my Age, seemed not to leave
me any pretext to refuse her. I have told you that the two Princes, who opposed
themselves against the establishment of the Decree, who declared the Daughters
incapable to succeed to the Crown, had each of them a Daughter.

I was the Issue of the eldest; Artemise of the second. The People very much
affected this Princess, because her Father during his Life had been extreme
Popular, and she was very much her self. She had moreover a thousand very
amiable Qualities, a penetrating Wit, agitating to the very utmost point. But
even all these advantages which rendered her so commendable and praiseworthy,
made an unfortunate effect against me, by reason the more amiable she was, the
more they would astonish themselves if I made any difficulty to espouse her. I
notwithstanding dallied some time with the artifice of Demotime, in temporising
and excusing my self with the youth fullness of my Age; without my belief that
his urgency was an Artifice. For as I knew not that he had any knowledge of my
Sex, I thought not also that all this was done by an evil intention. Only I
astonished my self that Demotime who was married, and who had Children, was so
affectionate for my Successors that he would forget his own. In fine, the
success of his Stratagem seeming to him too slow, he believed it would be
necessary to advance it, by stronger and more violent Remedies.

At that time Lysimachus King of Thrace having at the solicitation of Arsinoe
caused the last of fifteen Children, which he had by another Wife to be
poisoned, and who all were perished by some kind of Tragic Death; That
Parricide rendered him so odious to all his People, that there was not any of
his Provinces, where he had not caused some rising; I hindered it as much as I
could in Phrygia in his Life time, but immediately after that Lysimachus having
bin killed himself, and not having left any Legitimate Heirs, I believed that I
ought not to let pass that Inheritance to Strangers, nor loose the opportunity
of uniting that great Province to my own Kingdom; that was the cause wherefore
in the Confidence I had yet in Demotime, I not only pressed him to return there
to put things in order, but I gave him four thousand Men which I drew out of
Lesbos, to aid him to preserve Phrygia under my Obedience. Demotime omitted not
to do all things necessary for that effect: But the Sequel made me well know,
that it was for his Interest that he had there so carefully labored. For after
all things were there pacified under my name, after the having established
strong Garrisons in all the Cities, he confederated with the great Ones, the
Men of War and the People, he corrupted all the Governors of Places, even with
the Money that I furnished him to render them affectionate unto me. He caused
them to swear in his name, and having by his Emissaries combined by secret
Practices even in the principal Places, and with the principal Officers of
Lesbos, he reimbarked himself one night with the same Troops which I had given
him to go to Phrygia, and appeared the next day at the head of four thousand
Men, at the Gates of Mitilene. Immediately he caused himself to be proclaimed
King by his Army, sent his Emissaries into the City, who cried to the People in
the Streets; Long live Demotime. They noised every where that I was but a
Maiden, and that it was not but for that, that I would not espouse the Princess
Artimese. You may Imagine in what alarms I found my self; for although I had had
in the end, some advice of these Confederacies, and that I minded to put some
order thereunto convenient, I did not notwithstanding believe them so ready to
burst forth. I caused the Guards to be doubled in Mitilene, and sent to all
parts to inform my self of the Countenance of the People. I assembled my
Council, one whereof was the Father of Olearque, whilst that his Son was at the
Head of the Troops of Demotime, and was a long time irresolute what design I
should take.

In sum, imagine with your self, what I could determine upon. It was not that
four thousand Men, were capable to force me in Mitilene: But besides that I
could not confide in my principal Officers, after the Treason of young
Olearque, and that I knew not if there would be not many in my Council of the
same Party. The Citizens moved by the noise they sowed of my Sex, began to
assemble together by Bands, and although they declared not themselves yet for
the Rebels, howsoever I could not also assure my self that they were for me.
Those whom I had sent to inform themselves in the certain Quarters, reported to
me from other Places, that the minds of the People were very much troubled.
They told me that every one in reality was ready to dye for my defense, if I
was their legitimate Prince, but all ready also to shed even to the last drop
of their Blood, to uphold the Laws of the State; howsoever they reported me
yet, that some of the most affectionate of my Party being willing to say I was
not a Maiden, and excuse the refuse which it seemed that I had done to marry
Artemise on the other Apparition and dissimulation whereof I have lately spoken
unto you; many were yet carried away, even to say that it were yet better, that
I was a Maiden than not to be of neither Sex. So that there was little
certainty in an occasion, where the minds of People were already all moved, to
go to hazard a Declaration that they saw so ill received. In these
perplexities, I took a resolution bold enough without doubt, for a Maiden, and
that which will astonish you, that was which I took on the Advice of the Father
of Olearque, although that in reason he ought to be also rendered suspect, as
you may very well Judge. But that good Man appeared unto me so afflicted, and so
Unworthy of the Perfidy of his Son, he demanded and cordially begged my pardon,
and in effect was so faithful to me, that seeing from elsewhere the way which
he had Counseled me to be, the only one capable to appease the Tumult, and the
minds of the People, I made no difficulty to follow it. I mounted therefore on
Horseback, I went through the Streets, and made my self seen of all the
People; I remonstrated to them, that the Noise by which they was abused were an
Artifice of Demotime to uphold his new Resolution; I made them remember from
the first, to Demonstate how much they ought to believe him capable to do it a
second time. I exhorted them to conceive, if there were only an appearance of
the false Noise which he had caused to be sown, and boldly added to them in
fine, that if they doubted, I was now quite ready resolved to show the falsity
thereof, by espousing the Princess Artemise; I knew well besides, that that
discourse was able of it self to take from them the Impression which did
damnifie me, the affection which they had for that Princess, would not fail to
give great weight to my words.

I was not deceived, the People by this discourse of mine, showed themselves
very ready to obey me. They sent to Demotime, and commanded him to lay down his
Arms, or that they would run upon, and oppose his Troops. Demotime replied
them, they were abused; that the proposition of Marriage wherewith they were
flattered, was a Stratagem only to make him lay down his Arms, and mock him
after that they should see him disarmed, that that which he knew was not upon
the Faith of others, but of his own proper knowledge, which he openly declared.
That to demonstrate the Veracity of all that which he published, they had but
to require the accomplishment of my Promise, and if I durst perform my Word, he
solemnly protested, not only to obey me, but he would be ready to come, and
place his head between my hands, to do with it according to my pleasure; after
my Marriage, the Deputies of the People returned, almost persuaded themselves
by the answer of Demotime. Immediately the Tumultuous Populacy, who desired but
trouble and disorder, and to whom nothing is so sweet, as to give Laws to their
Sovereign, cried, that if I were their King I ought not to refuse immediately to
give them a Queen.

I avow you that I saw my self then in an ill case, and strangely perplexed,
for the thought of old Olearque had been even as mine, that the proposition of
my Marriage, having appeased the Tumult, and forced Demotime to Disarm, I could
then afterward take my measures to Chastize the Seditious, and his Son himself
(against whom he was more Irritated than any other) assure my self of Demotime,
and should, in fine, be able to hinder new disorders. But the urgency of the
People prevented us, and I confess unto you, that I was in Fears, and in
Unconceiveable Terror, by reason we could not apply any Remedy thereto;
howsoever after having composed my Countenance the best I could, I showed my
self again, from a Balcony or Terrace before that Populacy who assembled, by,
or at the Palace, and with a Tone the most Severe, and most Fiery which my
Fury could Inspire into me, I answered them, That I well saw, that it was not
so much of Demotime as of themselves that I had to complain, that it was their
Insolence, and Infidelity, which rendered them Bold, Arrogant, and Proud, and
that it was not for my Marriage they asked, but my Crown, and my Life. That
they might very well Judge, this disorder was not the preparation, nor a
dressing for a Marriage, that it was unheard of that the People should force
their King to Marry himself at the head of an Army of Rebels, and that it was
an Indignity, and a Shame which I would never suffer. That it was a wicked
pretense for them to apprehend, that I would not keep my word, as if the sole
doubt which they made, had not been another Crime, that in all cases it were
requisite then to wait and bemoan themselves, that I had refused the Execution,
and not to come Seditiously, to Beseige their King upon a Chimera, and
Diffidence, inspired by a Revolted Subject. In a word, I declared them so many
things, that in the end as they were to me at other times sufficiently
affectionate, by reason of the Mildness, and Lenity wherewith I had always
treated them,) they sent again to that Prince, protesting that they would with
Weapons in Hand, fall foul of their Troops if they would not presently Disarm.

Demotime seeing himself so pressed, was obliged to Capitulate, he testified he
was ready to retire from Mitilene, but that he could not yet disarm so soon
after that which had past; that they ought not to wish it themselves, since
that being hereafter the sole Descendant of the Kings of Lesbos, it was also he
alone was interested in the execution of their Decree. That they would see that
Decree Repealed, and Abolished in spite of themselves, when there remained no
more a Prince to uphold them. That they might take me at a time, wherein I
could perform my Word, and Solemnize my Marriage, and if I did it at that time,
then and there, he promised to Disarm; that if I would yet defer it, they would
well see themselves, that they were deceived. That as to the rest, his Arming
ought not to be to them suspected, since that they very well knew, that with so
small a Force as he had, he could not do any thing without them, and that they
ought not to be any more mine, since that I should still be Omnipotent, if I
should still have the People on my side; that after all, his Army was not his
own, but theirs solely and properly, since that he protested, that he would not
serve himself therewith, but to uphold their Decrees.

But to be short, I will tell you that four or five days passed in this
Negotiation, and that I saw my self, in fine, reduced to Capitulate with
Demotime. The Capitulation was, that I promised to Espouse the Princess
Artemise in a Month, that in the mean time Demotime should incessantly make his
Troops to withdraw off from the City, under the Conduct of Young Olearque; that
the Prince should have Liberty to come there during that time, and for his
security the People should take him into Protection. You would have reason,
Philiste, to be Astonished, that I would suffer the strange Capitulation, if I
had been in a condition to do better: But I had not in Mitelene all the Militia
in Warlike Discipline, but the Regiment of my Guards, whereof Olearque had even
Debauched or Corrupted a part, and Mitilene being a City very great and well
Peopled, the Burgesses or Citizens there, were absolutely the Masters. During
all these things, Artemise would not forget any thing to testify to me, that
she had not there any part, and in truth, I am assured that she did not at all
contribute thereunto, although there in some appearance, that her interest
hindered her to be very angry.

As for me I dissembled the best I could, and as if I had been effectually
resolved to espouse her, I visited her and even counterfeited to be in Love
with her. But in the mean time Attale and Tumne, who were two of my Brothers
Maternally of my Mothers side (my Mother having already been Married once
before she had espoused my Father) took care so as the Father of Olearque, to
treat with the Governors of Phrygia, to cause some Troops to come to me from
the Frontiers, and to make them secretly draw out toward Mitelene, their
advice was not but to amuse the People. I made a show of espousing the
Princess, and even caused to be made Preparatives; and that in the mean time I
might amuse Demotime by some particular accommodation, (which was so much the
more easy to me, as that this Prince had of himself made me a Proposition to
repudiate his Wife, if I would espouse him) and when my Troops should be come,
that I should cause in one Night the Soldiers to enter into the City, cut the
Throats of the most Seditious of the Citizens, and that I should sieze into my
hands Demotime.

I had presently set my hand to that Counsel: But our Sex, Philiste, is not
proper for violent Enterprises, and whatsoever Courage or Boldness we have at
the present Resolution, our Valor fails us at the Execution. I had horror and
terror at the Cruelty of this Remedy, and I could not determine to shed the
Blood of a People who are not in effect deficient, but in being willing to
follow the Laws of the State. With much Endeavor to practice Artemise, I knew
that as generous and altogether disinterested as she was, she was not therefore
without Ambition; and that Knowledge persuaded me, that with the Greatness of
her Courage, the Strength of her Wit, and the Affection she testified to me,
she might be capable of another Design which fell into my Thoughts. I resolved
therefore to discover my self unto her, and after having prepared her to the
opening of it, which I went to do to her by all the Reasons and Demonstrations
of Friendship that I deemed capable to dispose her thereto; I freely declared
unto her my Sex, and proposed her to share and part the Royal Authority
together under the appearance of a seigned Marriage. Artemise appeared to me
extremely astonished, not only upon the Acknowledgment that I made her; but of
the Proposition of a Design so great. I will not tell you what was the Retail
of all our Discourse. But for as much as her mind, who seemed to recoyl at
first, being accustomed thereunto by little and little, and that we fell, in
fine, to an Agreement, as well as the Accomplishment, and Execution of it.

I well see, Philiste, that you your self are astonished at the Novelty of this
Project, but you should be yet much more by the Sequel: for, in fine, the
Solemnities of the Marriage, or Wedding were prepared, and this Rare and
Marvelous Marriage, was made as we had agreed. I leave you to think what was
then the astonishment of the Prince Demotime, when he saw me (a Maiden as I
was) Espouse another Maiden, with so much resolution. He still expected that I
would refuse to come there, and that when the time would be expired, I would
either feign some pressing Occasion, or some Sickness, or in fine some other
pretense to differ. He had prepared all their Minds thereunto, in assuring
them, that I would never come there, and the Vigil, the Evening of the same
Wedding. Day, as he saw his Friends begin to doubt of the Truth, of that which
he had so much assured them in relation to my Sex, he yet told them, that they
should not put themselves in pain, and upon the Peril of his head, he promised
them I would make to spring some Obstacle before the Morrow was past. Judge
then, what strange Surprise, and what Confusion he was in, when he saw not only
all our Wedding spent in Joy, and Solemnity, where they have accustomed
themselves to spend, and pass away such Festivals, but then that the Morrow,
and the following Days he saw us united: Artemise and my self, by the most
absolute Friendship, which possible could be between a Wife and her Husband.

After diverse reflections, he well Judged in fine that which was, but he saw no
more means to persuade him. That which they had seen of our Marriage, had made
him lose Credulity, Belief, Faith, and Trust in the Minds of People; there was
no other remedy for him, but to obey by Favor, or to retire himself into
Phrygia. But he well thought that I would not fail to pursue him there, if he
retired there Armed with Weapons, and his Affairs there were not yet well
enough fortified, and consolidated to hold up his head long against me. He
therefore took other measures. He knew well that our Sex is more easy to be
surprised by Submissions, and Protractions, then by Resistance and Obstinacy,
and as he knew my goodness elsewhere, and my Natural Facility, or rather to say
my Credulity, and my little and small Experience, he took a way wholly contrary
to that which he had formerly held, and employed not almost any thing more than
an obedience, and Complaysance to betray me. He interposed his Friends to treat
a Peace, he made me a thousand requests for Pardon, and having in the end
obtained security to come to see me Personally, he gave me a thousand feigned
significations of Grief, Sorrow, and Repentance. I well believed that it might
possibly be some new Artifice to deceive me: But I was very well pleased to
retain him at Lesbos, and hinder him to return into Phrygia, as well because it
was more easy for me to be assured of his Person at Mitelene, but that those
whom I had secretly sent into Phrygia, might, during his absence re-establish
my Authority in that Province, which alone is much bigger, and more Important
than all the Kingdom of Lesbos.

It was therefore requisite for me, for that to feign and dissemble on my side,
I did it the best I could, and not being able to oblige him assuredly to disarm
by force, I endeavored to reduce him thereunto, in taking from him all
occasions of diffidence.

But if I mistrusted, or was diffident of Demotime, he was yet more diffident
of me, moreover that he could not be vanquished, but that I was a Prince, the
contrary being to him so well known; that is, that Ambition is not taken away,
or quitted in laying down Arms, and that they never lose the thought, nor the
desire of Reigning, when they are once flattered, he made a show, and seemed to
dismiss and discharge a part of his Troops, and to return the rest into
Phrygia, whence he had drawn them, but in effect he gave Order to the Soldiers
in Disbanding themselves to glide or slide insensibly into Mitelene, where all
sorts of People were drawn by the Spectacle of the Jousts and Tournaments, and
the Divertisements which were made there for the solemnity of our Wedding, and
which should continue a Month yet after our Espousals. In the mean time to take
from me more and more all diffidence and mistrust, he dissembled and feigned to
me all the respect and obedience of a Subject, however he conspired, and
confederated underhand, and not only at Lesbos and Phrygia, but he sought to
make me Enemies even Strangers; he sent into Crete, he sent into Macedonia, he
sent even here, to treat with Alcime, resolved to push things to the utmost
extremity, and to perish, or else to compass his Designs. I espied his Actions,
I had advise of his Intreagues, and conferred with Artemise, and with some of
my Counsel. We all Judged, that as long as he was at liberty, he would never
cease to move and stir, and that we ought to assure our selves of his Person.
His Party seemed not too great, to undertake to destroy an open Force, or
rather, I was too timorous. I would after the ordinary manner of our Sex use
Artifices, and as it had been perilous to miss the blow, which we were
resolved to attempt, I would not hazard it but with great precautions and
forecast.

There is a little Island near to Lesbos, about four Furlongs into the Sea,
where the Famous Pisistrate Ancient King of Lesbos, formerly caused to be built
a Castle so strong and so fair, that it could serve him altogether for
security, and for his delight, and Recreation.

It was there where we determined to arrest Demotime; for we were too well
advertised of the succors that he had in Mitilene, to believe that we should
be able to execute there the Enterprise with Success. Among the Spectacles, by
which the Solemnity of our Nuptials should be finished, there was a Combat upon
the Sea, where all the Court, divided into two parts, should Form a Naval
Combat, in small Ships, that every one caused to be built expressly and of
purpose, with Characters and Devices in the Standards and Flags, with all the
Magnificence that could be possible. Artemise there should give the Prize to
the Vanquishing Party, who were Victorious; and as the place of this Combat
should be between the Island, and Mitilene, I caused a Magnificent Banquet to
be prepared, and a great number of Tables in the Island, there to treat all the
Combatants. On one side I caused a great number of Soldiers secretly to be
concealed in the Towers of the Castle to serve me in case of need, and for the
same design, I caused others to be placed upon the edges of the Island, under a
pretense of hindering by that means the People should not come there in too
great Crowds, and thereby make some disorder. I thought the having drawn
Demotime there, who should be one of the principal of the Combat (for I had
done it the better for reconciliation) to arrest him in the little Island at
the Banquet, and the apparent confidence, by which he had abused me on his part
persuaded me, that I should so come to an end, and that he would not any way
mistrust me. But, Philiste, I soon knew the irreparable Fault which I
committed. Demotime, informed of the great number of Soldiers, that I had
caused to pass into the Island, doubted not but that it was for some Design
which I had framed against him. However he seemed not to take any notice
thereof. But contrarily, instead of being troubled, he testified more and more
confidence in me, and found means of benefiting himself.

He well observed, that in Fortifying the Island with Armed Men. I should
Imprudently Disgarison the City, and to oblige me to enfeeble my self more, he
proposed himself to make new Companies, to pass there, as if he had believed,
there would not have been enough to hinder the confusion. For my part, I
mistrusted not his thought, because I believed not that he had any suspicion of
mine, and for as much as I esteemed I could not have too many Forces in the
place where I projected the execution of my enterprise, I voluntarily took the
occasion, that himself gave me to transport there two or three companies more
yet of my Guard. The hour of parting came, I conducted Artemise into the Ship
which was prepared for her, and afterward went my self into another small
Ship, which I caused to be painted, and guilt and fitted for our Combat, and
which was garnisht, and adorned with some devices on the Subject of my Love to
the Queen, to which I seemed to be entirely occupied. Demotime who should have
chief of the opposite party ascended also into his, and our little Ships to the
number of one hundred, and more being ranked on both sides in Form of a Battle,
the Trumpets sounded the Signal, and we began to engage Pell Mell. But behold,
Philiste, an accident very strange, instead of preparing our selves for an
imaginary. Combat, we found our selves insensibly engaged in an effectual
Fight; for you shall observe, that Demotime having caused Arms to be concealed
in the Ships of the major part of his which he had gained, and even those of
some of my Troop, whom he had also drawn into his confederacy, he had made them
engage from the beginning of the Skirmage, so that those of our side being not
prepared for this Attack, we were obliged immediately to dissipate our selves,
and think of making a Retreat.

That is not all, while we were in that disorder upon the Sea, he made a far
greater one in Mitilene. The Soldiers whom Demotime had caused to enter there
suddenly, seeing themselves the most Puissant by reason of those whom I had
removed, began to range themselves in sundry places by Companies, and to chase
away, and kill those remaining which I had left there, and, in fine, rendered
themselves absolute Masters of the City. I learnt this accident by one of mine,
who came to join me with a Bark at the time when I thought to retire there; but
this is nothing as yet: Behold a third accident, which finished the sum total
of my Misfortunes.

Demotime had assured himself of three of the best Ships that were in the Port,
and had filled them with armed Men at his Devotion; with these Ships he cut off
my way from the little Island where I might have refuge yet for my self. This
was that which I thought to do in my little Ship, where I was with fifteen or
sixteen Men at most, when I perceived these three great Ships before me. What
Equipage was mine, or in what Posture was I to resist them? there remained in
me nothing but hope to save my felf, and to make my escape in the Crowd. I
mixed my self amongst all others, who were dispersed, and seeing my self still
persued, at length I caused them to shape their Course off into the open Sea.
The Enemy who were nearest us shot at us, we returned them also some Arrows,
even some of those they had discharged at us, and which we gathered up upon the
Deck, for those we had not, having been prepared but for the feigned Combat,
had all the heads blunted. For the last Misfortune, they killed twelve of my
Men, and the Pilot who conducted me. In fine, it was impossible for me to shun
them, if the Night favorably approaching had not stole me away in the sight of
my Enemies: but what did it import me to shun Enemies, since that in the
condition wherein I was, I saw not any hopes of safety upon the Sea? There I
rowed all Night, at the sole devotion of the Wind, without knowing from what
side they pushed at me. Imagine you, Philiste, in what Alarms, for it is
impossible for me to express them unto you; neither can I conceive them my own
self. What Refuge? what Succor? what Hopes for a young Maiden fugitive? almost
alone, at the Mercy of Fortune, and of the Sea, without Counsel, without a
Guide or Conduct, ignorant almost what to desire; I then wished to fall into the
hands of Demotime, because I feared him less then the Waves whereunto I saw my
self so exposed. In the mean time to finish my despair, there immediately arose
such a furious Tempest, that I thought all the Winds were unchained, and I
expected not any thing less than to see my self at once swallowed up in the
middle of the Sea.

O Gods! What shall become of me? then certainly I cannot tell you; for I know
it not my self. I fell in a Swoon in the Vessel without feeling motion or
knowledge, and I doubt not but the Gods would not permit so to conserve me my
Life, but that the fear and despair had undoubtedly taken it from me. For, in
fine, Judge what should have been the Violence and Furious Rage of that Stormy
Tempest, since that almost in one only Night I saw my self cast from Lesbos,
into this Gulf where I found my self in returning from a sleep, that toil and
my extreme weakness, had made to succeed my Trance and Convulsion; it is true
that the Winds had no great Labor to thrust forward so little a Vessel as was
mine: I am astonished, only that it could be able to hold up, and resist the
Violence of the Waves in the open Sea. The tempest having cast it on a bank on
that side, we found our selves there in a new danger: not only because the
Vessel remained there almost over set, but also forasmuch as we had not there
any Skiff to carry us to the Land. Two of my Men having been willing to attempt
it by swimming, perished there one after another, by the following and rolling
of the Billows, which were not yet appeased. So that one man alone being left
with me, and not seeing from whom possibly I might have succor or recourse,
but that a great Ship which the Tempest had cast upon that self-same Coast, but
who was too far distant, to permit those who were therein to hear my cries. I
almost dispaired of my safety, when the Gods took care to send me to be
succored by Generous Telamon.

The Fair Princess having surceased speaking, Philiste reassumed discourse, to
signify unto her all the respect, the inequality of their condition, and
qualities obliged her unto, how much she had been concerned, and touched with
Admiration and Grief by the recital of these Misfortunes, and in telling her
modestly, that she knew well that it was not for a Shepherdess, to undertake to
consolate a Great Queen; she omitted not however, handsomely and becomingly to
tell her things on the Subject of her disgrace whence she received all the
consolation she was capable of in the mournful conjuncture of her Fortune.

It was so late when the Queen of Lesbos permitted Philiste to retire, that
there was some time that Telamon was layen down and gone to bed with a Design
which he had the next day to surprise Alpide at his own house before day, and
that this Shepherdess being entered into her Chamber found that he was already
fallen asleep.

The fear she had to awake or disturb him, obliged her to slide into the Bed as
softly as he could, but forasmuch as her Imagination was still full of those
Wonderful Accidents and Events which she had heard repeated, she could not
hinder her self from employing a part of the Night to pass them in her Memory,
and could not almost fall asleep, but that it was near break of day. She had
not but began to take her rest, when Telamon finished his, and that he awoke
through the extreme impatience he had to seek Alpide; that design appeared to
him of such importance for the enlightening him in the Adventure of Zelie, and
the rest of his dear Brother, that he thought he could never execute it soon
enough; and although Alpide concealed not himself, his affection made him take
the same precautions to find him, which he would have had need of, if the other
had sought to shun it, and that he had held himself upon his Guard. He had the
same circumspection for Philiste, as she had for him the preceding Night, he
arose without making any noise, and went out of his Chamber, and even out of
his House, before any Person was there awakned. Aurora had not yet appeared,
but that he was already far off distant from his Hamlet, and the first Rays of
the Morning began not to appear and peep clear, but that he arrived at the
River. He walked some paces along the River side going toward Gonnes, until he
had found a Boat, wherein he entered to pass to the other side; for the House of
Alpide was far before, on the other side, and almost at the foot of Mount Ossa.
After he had crossed the River, he fastened his Boat to the Branches of one of the
Trees which were by the water side, that he might come there again and take to
it, and afterward continued his way toward Ossa. Fifty Paces from the House
of Alpide, he found a Domestic of that Shepherds, of whom he enquired News.
That Shepherd answered him, that his Master was not at home, but that he was
the precedent evening gone and departed to Gonnes, whence he was not yet
returned, Telamon fearing that this Slave had not told him the truth, went even
to the House, pretending to have some business with him, which did oblige him
to stay and expect him there. But as he met no Person there, he returned to
find this Shepherd, endeavoring to make him speak, and to draw some
demonstration from him. He had soon known, almost more than he would, since
that he had learnt things, which had been advantageous to him, to be ignorant
of still. In effect, Telamon after some other discourse, having pertinently
asked him diverse questions concerning the Places, and Persons that frequented
his Master, after the time that Zelie disappeared, that Man replied: I cannot
resolve you, nor yet declare where he goes, nor whom he sees, for I concern
my self only with the care of his Flock, and do other things which he appoints
me, without enforming my self of things that import me not.

It is not but that I begin to be in pain, for that which is happened unto him.
For there is very near fifteen days, that he prepared all things to make a
great Journey, I know not where, and I believed him departed one evening by
reason he gave me diverse Orders for the conduct of his House, and management of
his Affairs during his absence; when I saw him returning the same Night, but so
sad, and besides himself that I could hardly know him.

Since that time his affection has only increased, he neither eats, nor does
he almost take any Rest, and spends entire Days, and Nights in walking, and
bemoaning himself amongst the Rocks of Mount Ossa. I was wholly astonished,
there is not two or three days past, but at the time that I kept toward these
places, there in a certain place, where he believed me not to be, I heard him
in the Wood which is near where he bemoaned himself, saying: Ah! Miserable One
that I am, must it be so, that my returning to Tempe, but that it is to be the
cause of this Misfortune: my Amiable Maiden, cried he afterward, must the pain
of the Crime fall upon thee? and that the Innocent suffers the torment and
execution of the Guilty I soon believed that there was some Maiden with him to
whom he spoke, and that was the cause, that I had the curiosity to advance me
forward very softly to see who he was: but I saw him layen along upon the
Ground, and as he had his Face turned toward the other side, and that he saw
me not, that made me to continue a time long enough to contemplate, and
ruminate upon him. I observed that from time to time he wiped his Eyes, as if
he had wept, and I heard what he yet said: but I am in the wrong, Great Gods,
to accuse your Justice in the punishment of a Criminal. No, no, You are not
therein despised.

And you, Divine Zelie, you are not to complain, since that you have not
without doubt lost this Miserable Life, but to reassume another much more
happy. But what Torments are equal to the Anguishes which devour me? the Gods,
can they deliver me, or can they deliver me to Executioners? more cruel than my
Pain and Grief? and if thy Fair Soul can be beaten and made flat, by the
sweetness of the Vengeance, should it not be too fully satisfied? he
accompanied these words with a thousand Hick-hoxes, and as since, about twelve
or fifseen days that he has been in his affliction, his Visage is so changed,
that he could not be known, I am still in pain lest he should fall into some
furious Malady or Disease, and I would that some one, had the goodness to give
him a little Consolation. He departed yesterday in the evening with one of his
Friends, who led him to Gonnes to divert him, as I believe, from his Grief, and
I know not when he will Return.

Whilst that that Shepherd so spoke, Telamon applying all the Circumstances of
what he had recited him to those which he already knew of the Accident, or
Adventure of Zelie, received (as one may so say) so many Mortal Wounds in his
Heart, as he heard words, there not being one which confirmed not in him more
and more the death of a Person, who to him was so dear for her own self, and
for the interest of his Dear Tarsis.

What Obscurity soever could remain in the manner wherein this dismal accident
happened, he found but too great a Demonstration of the certainty of this Loss.
He knew not if it was the effect of the Crime of Alpide, or that of a simple
accident casually. He saw well by the discourse of the Shepherd, that his
Master was not Innocent, since that he had accused himself. But the means of
thinking that Alpide, who was a near Relation to Zelie, would have attempted at
the Life of that Illustrious Shepherdess; by what Interest, by what Passion
would he have suspected to have undertaken that Dreadful and Heinous Murder?
sometimes thinking of the extreme Beauty of Zelie, and of the great and
extroardinay Passions, that she was capable to inspire, he doubted, whether
Alpide were not become in Love, and if he should not be carried away to those
cruel extremities by some Transport of Jealousy: Notwithstanding, besides the
Proximity of the Relation that was between him and this Shepherdess, Defaced,
Rased, and Abolished all the appearances of that Love, whence Alpide could be
able to take any Foundation of Jealousy? possibly that some days before Tarsis
had been able to give him some, but then Tarsis was Banished, she had not seen
him since the Return of Alpide. Telamon therefore saw from thence that it was
impossible, that this Shepherd was the cause of the Death of Zelie, if it were
not by some casual accident, and he Judged in gathering together all the
Circumstances of this Adventure, that this accident could be no other, unless
that this Shepherdess being with Alpide in the Boat where Tarsis had heard it,
the Night that she had disappeared she was unfortunatly fallen into the River,
whilst he attempted by Swimming to approach, and to come to her. Three things
clearly demonstrated that she was fallen into the River, viz. The certainty
that Tarsis had, to have seen two Persons presently in the Boat where he had
heard her, and there to have found but one alone, although that Boat had not
approached, nor arrived at any Place; this Role of Paper, that they had met
there the next Day, and her Vail found taken hold of by some Reeds of the
River, and taken up by one of these unknown ones. And it appeared yet rather,
that it was Alpide who was then with her by that which Amalecinte had repeated
to him of the old Mariner who attended at that time there Alpide and Zelie, by
the neglect with which that same Mariner taking Tarsis for Alpide had asked
him, why she then did come alone: In a Word, by all that the Shepherd had
recited him, of the Preparatives that Alpide had made the preceding day for a
Voyage, his unexpected return that self same Night, his sadness, the Regrets
that he had made for the Death of Zelie, and the blaming himself for her loss.
It was not but that he had yet something that he could not spread a broad, and
explain, and which left him some Ray, or Beam of Hope.

He asked amongst others of himself, how it was possible that she was drowned,
that they had not found her Body upon the Bank, or in the River, or in the
Gulf wherein so many People had been Employed in her search, during so many
days, and where the Water never fails to cast forth and expel, all and every
Person that there is Lost; then that a second Shepherd chanced to come in, drew
Alpide a little aside and asked him, Know thou not how that Maiden is
called, which about twelve days past, thy Master found her dead Body upon the
Bank of the Gulf, and whom I assisted to bring hither?

Although that that Man appeared to have an intention to say this to the other
in particular, notwithstanding he spoke not so low, but that Telamon heard
these words very distinctly.

They smote him all at once, both in Ear and Heart, and as he gave attention to
what followed; he heard that the Shepherd of Alpide having demanded of the
other, of what Body, and of what Maiden he would speak, the same here replied
him: What then, is it that thy Master has told thee nothing? at these words
drawing him a little more out of the way or aside, he continued to speak unto
him, but so low that Telamon could not hear nor understand. One could not
depaint, nor express the trouble of Mind, wherein this poor Shepherd was, nor
the impatience which he had in his Grief, to hear the Sequel of the discourse,
the beginning whereof had so strangely alarmed him. He was ready two or three
times, to interrupt them for his own enlightening: nevertheless he dreamed, that
since they did it in secret they would make some difficulty to explain it unto
him one before another, and that he should be better pleased to draw out what
he would in particular.

And for as much as he, thought that the Shepherd of Alpide would possibly be
more reserved by reason of the interest of his Master, he retired himself in a
place whence he could see when they departed themselves to go to rejoyn the
other at his Passage. He waited not long, before he saw the second Slave
reassume the way by which he was come. Telamon accosted him so directly, that
joining some Liberality to the Pertinency of his words, he obliged him to
discover himself openly. My Lord, said that Man, I do belong to the Shepherd
Nephelocrate, and I ordinarily dwell at a certain place, or piece of Land which
he has out of this Valley, and which I make of value to him. There may have
been fifteen Days that I came to render him an Account of some disorder which
happened there, I parted hence at Midnight to return, because that in the time
wherein we in the Nights, as you know, find more convenience to walk in than
the day time. In passing toward the Mouth of the River, I heard a Man who wept
and despaired upon the Bank, and being approached, I saw that he essayed to
lade upon his Shoulders a Dead Corpse, which I knew to be of a Woman. He
besought me to assist him to carry this Corpse to his own House, and told me it
was a Daughter of one of his Relations. We carried it therefore, even near to
that House, the Master whereof I have known since calls himself Alpide. He went
there to fetch some Clothes, wherein he wrapped the Dead Corpse, which was already
stiff, and having told me that his People were comeing to help him, he
dismissed me after he had given me cloths, which I sold in the day time in my
way to Persons unknown. Yesterday being returned to see my Master, I knew that
one of the principal Shepherds of Callioure was in great trouble for his
Daughter who was drowned, and that he had promised a considerable Sum to them
who should carry him News of her.

The Hour and the Place where they said she was lost, and even the relation
that they showed me she had to Alpide, have made me very well observe, that she
was the very self same that I had aided him to bring hither, and I came to
assure it, with this Shepherd whom I know long since to give advice thereof to
this Poor Father, to whom I well see that Alpide has not said any thing: I see
that he has not spoken to this Shepherd. However, he said he well remembered
that his Master being returned there very late, went forth again immediately
afterward, and was a long time without returning, and that in effect having
since understood him to condole the Death of that Shepherdess, he heard that
they Named her Zelie, which is the Name of the Daughter of that Shepherd of
Callioure.

Whilst that Man made this recital, a Rivolet of Tears trickled down the Cheeks
of Telamon, and his Heart was pressed with so much Grief, that he could scarce
fetch Breath. He then Judged that he had yet till then flattered himself with
some remaining hopes, that he needed no more ask this unknown one, with whom
they had seen the Vail of Zelie had also apparel like to hers, and that the
Death of that Incomparable Shepherdess, was, in fine, a thing but too true and
assured.

The tenderness which he had for this Shepherdess, was considerable, and touched
him with the last Grief and greatest Pain, but that which afflicted him so much
the more, was to think of the Despair, or that Death would bring to poor
Tarsis. For, in fine, he knew well that whatsoever belief this Shepherd had
before, he had not notwithstanding extinguished that last hope, which with so
much pains he had kept up the unfortunate One.

But at this encounter he saw nothing of mitigation nor of recovery. He
remained some time in these Mortal Reflections, Sad, Mournful, Unmovable. His
Eyes and Arms lift up toward Heaven without ability to express his Affliction,
but by Tears and vexing. Afterward smiting his Stomach with his two Hands: Ah!
Poor Tarsis, cried he, what Account am I come to render thee here, and declare
these dismal and dreadful Tidings? afterward he passed with his Hands before
his Eyes, two or three times to wipe off the Tears which gushed out and blinded
him, and having afterward asked this Shepherd some questions with incredible
Trouble and disorder, he quitted him with a Spirit so strangely oppressed and
overwhelmed, that he scarcely knew himself, neither what he should say, nor
what he should do, nor whither he should go.

The End of the Fifth and Last Book of the Second Part.
FINIS.

