A JUSTIFICATION OF Set FORMS of PRAYER, And in Special of the LITURGY Of the
Church of England; In Answer to, And Confutation of Vavasor Powel's Fourteen
Considerations, against all Composed and Imposed Forms of Prayer.

By Richard Lewthwat, M.A. and Rector of Wethersdale in Suffolk.

LONDON: Printed by A. Godbid and J. Playford, for Robert Clavel, at the
Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard. 16^9.

To the Right Honorable, Henry Earl of Arundel, Lord Mowbray, etc. and his
Virtuous and Religious Countess.
Great Sir,
BEing put upon the Vindication of Set-Forms of Prayer, and especially of the
Liturgy of our Church, and hearing of your Honor's resolution, and beginning
(according thereto) of becoming one in Religion, Worship, and Service of God in
the way of the Church of England, with your Illustrious and Devout Consort, as
ye are become one by Wedlock, I thought it my bounden Duty, upon the first
Opportunity, to make known to your Lordship, and your religious Lady, the great
joy there is among us Protestants at your coming in, as also to throw in my
Mite and small help to settle and continue your Lordship in the Religion you
profess with us, which I can do no way better than by commending to you, with
our God and Savior, the daily reading and searching of the Holy Scriptures.
And as to perusing of Books upon them, of which I may say with the Preacher in
his prediction, namely, Ecclesiastes, 12.12.
there is no end: I shall presume to recommend the same Method my Tutor at the
University gave me, to settle me firm in our Protestant Religion, which was to
be conversant in the Homilies of our Church, and in the 39 Articles, and Rogers
upon them. And withal, I beg your Lordship's favor, to do what I intended with
all holiness and meekness of Spirit, to have desired of your Honorable Father,
the Duke of Norfolk, (had he not gone beyond Sea) namely, to vouchsafe the
reading of this short Tractate, made public at the request of diverse persons,
by him who officiated sometimes as Chaplain to your Honorable Family, and who
is and shall be a truly devoted and well-wishing Servant to your Lordship, and
your religious Consort, and to both your renouned Relations, whilst he shall be

Richard Lewthwat.

To my Reverend and Worthy Friend, Dr. Laurence Womock, Professor of Divinity,
and Archdeacon of Suffolk.
Reverend and Learned Sir,
ACcording to my bounden Duty, and the earnest Desire was in my heart to reduce
as many as I could of that great number of Scismaticks and Separatists that are
about us, to the Unity and Communion of our Church, among other things, in
order thereto, having received the worthy Tractate of Mr. Robert Conold, most
fit to help on that my Design, I commended the perusal thereof to the chief
head of the Independent Faction, and most inflexible heart to Reformation about
us (so I take him to be:) for he told me then, it would be to no purpose, he
being (as in his own expression) an old grown Oak in the Principles he was in.
But through much importunity, I got promise of him to read it over, and give me
his Judgment of it, both he granted, upon condition that I should answer to
things against the late Common Prayer Book of our Church, that were in Print,
that he would send me. Whereupon I promised to give my Answer to the chief
Objections; whereby I became engaged to return an Answer to him of the things
of greatest concern therein; which promise of mine will be made good, and he
obliged to return something about that Tractate of Schism, if there be
delivered to him what I have drawn up to Mr. Powel's Fourteen Considerations,
in the beginning of his Book; of which promise, if he fail, I hope there will
be conviction of him, and of his constant hearers, and thereupon conversion of
them to another Judgment and Practice. Now having made known to several persons
the said Considerations, and my Answers thereto, as I have at times drawn them
up, and my purpose of delivering them to the party in Writing: Diverse p^r^^ns
have advised, and desired me to endeavor the publishing of them by the Press,
alleging withal several Reasons to persuade me thereto. As first, because the
Factions, spreading them by Copies, may willingly adulterate the Original, and
so disable it, as to the conviction of them they communicate it to. Secondly,
because if not Printed, it will not be so commonly had for the benefit of the
Multitude of their weak Proselytes, who are captivated, and held in the sad
bondage of the following, and like erroneous Rudiments and Traditions of the
Jesuitical Heads of the several Factions in the Kingdom. And thirdly, because
they hearing of my Promise made long since, and not yet performed, he and
others give out, that the Allegations in that Pamplet against Set-Forms of
Prayer, cannot be answered by my self, or any of my Judgment. Upon
consideration whereof, it is presumed, that if my Promise be not performed and
published, it may occasion the more secure Settlement of them in those
dangerous Errors; as also make a greater seduction of others to them, than
otherwise would have been.

For which reasons I have pitched upon the latter way of publication hereof (if
Authority shall permit.) Now if your self shall, upon perusal, approve the
Answer as Orthodoxal, and that it may be helpful to the bringing back but of
the simple (yet as I presume conscientious) Multitude, ledd away through good
Words and fair Speeches (as the Apostle speaks) of those who have caused
Divisions and Offenses, contrary to sound Doctrine. Then I most humbly beg,
that your self would Patronize this small Work, being Dedicated to your
Protection. To which request, if you shall condescend, it is very probable,
those Adversaries of our Church will not dare to rally Forces again about the
present concerns, or to give me another challenge, fearing that if so, you may
become Second upon the next Quarrel, whose success in conflicts of this kind,
they know to have been such, that they will not venture upon any further
Undertakings about this matter.

But, Reverend Sir, whilst I am arguing against these and other Errors near of
kin to one another, and reading these Answers to Mr. Powel's Errors (to some
loath to come out of them) they tell me, I am not of the same Opinion as
formerly; they say I was against Infant Baptism, and the Book of Common Prayer,
I now write for.

Sir, to say a little to these Charges. It Is well known to your self, by my
Letters, word of Mouth, and Practice (but best known to my self) that I can
easily take upon me, by acknowledgment of my Errors and Mistakes (for God's
glory, my own and others Eternal Safety) all the shame, and Temporal Evils
incident thereupon, which is much evident, when through your discovering to me
the Error I was in, your self knew I came as willingly, as through your help,
safely down from that high and dangerous Precipice I had climbed up to, of
absolute and irrespective as well Reprobation as Election, by giving too much
credit to diverse Authors of those Opinions, and by not well comparing
Scriptures with Scripture touching those Points. And could I think that my
Grant of what they cast upon me wrongfully, would any thing further their
return to us herein, (I speak it, God bearing me witness) I would take it all
upon me, per modum altissimi silentii.

But, Sir, I have found upon Inquisition, that both those Reports have been
raised and spread abroad by one not of their Judgment. The falseness of that
Report, that I was against Infant Baptism, will be apparent in that I have
Testimony under his hand that raised it, and maliciously spread it abroad, that
at least a year and a half before November the 19th, 1660. I did in my Sermon,
from several places of Scripture, maintain the Lawfulness of Infant Baptism.
Oportet mendacem esse memorem. And I have to the same Testimonial the
Subscriptions of the three chiefest men in Hardwick, and Pulsham St. Mary the
Virgin (besides my Accuser.) Which Notes then delivered in Hardwick Pulpit,
were drawn up by me in 1656. after my Living of Wighton in Norfolk was taken
from me, and conferred upon Mr. Robert Hocknell. And those Notes were drawn up
by me at the request of diverse (going for Anabaptism) to know my Judgment about
that Point, which Notes sent them altered their thoughts, and strayed their
further progress therein.

And whereas many say from the aforesaid Mouth, that I was against the
Common Prayer Book I now write for;

I confess, that for some short time after his Majesty's Restoration, I
omitted Officiating by the Common Prayer Book, but did begin with the
Confession, Absolution, and Lord's Prayer therein, and after the Lessons,
repeated the Apostles Creed, and after the Prayer for his Majesty, and other
Prayers and Collects I could repeat memoriter, until I might (as I expected)
hear from Authority the re-injoyning the Observation thereof punctually. With
which Service so performed the Loyal Party for a while rested contented, but
soon after the death of Thomas Glean, Esquire (a man of known Loyalty to the Crown,
and Conformity to the Church of England) the Major, now Sir Peter Glean, his
Son, was offended, left the Parish Church, in his own person went to Shelton,
and told me so he would do, till I observed the Book of Common Prayer, as I
ought to do. Whereupon considering with my self, that I was for set Forms, and
had no Exceptions against our Liturgy, and that the major part of the Parish
was for that way, I told Sir Peter, I was resolved if the Parish procured the
Book, punctually to use it. I remember Sir Peter's Expression presently was
this: Cousin, I am as glad of your Resolution, as of an Hundred Pounds given me.
And the next Sunday after, according to mutual agreement, he delivered to me in
presence of the Congregation, before any thing said by me, the Book of
Common Prayer, and desired my Observation of it, which was performed by me
accordingly.

But, Sir, were all truth that is suggested against me, I know not why the
remembrancing me thereof should allay my Proceedings herein, according to my
Promise (though so ^st alleged by them, as I judge for that end) considering
the Charge given to St. Peter, Luke 22. v. 32. When thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren. And truly had I been against set Forms of Prayer, and
our Liturgy, (as this Author was at the drawing up of these Considerations) and
afterward should have been convinced of the Greatness of the Error, and the
Damage to the Church of Christ, through perseverance therein (as my Conscience
tells me they all are guilty of, who stand off from joining with us herein) the
first thing I should have undertaken, should have been to imitate St. Paul,
converted to the Faith by the heavenly Vision, who forthwith Preached that
Faith he once destroyed, Gal. 1. v. 23. I should soon have endeavored
thereupon by this way I now am in, to have brought men to unite in this way of
Devotion with our holy Mother, the Church of England. Thus praying God to bless
you with Health, all happiness, and length of days, I rest very much devoted to
serve and honor you, whilst

Richard Lewthwat.

Norf. WE whose Names are here underwritten, do Certify whom it may concern,
That Richard Lewthwat, Rector of Hardwick, in our said County, has, to our
Personal Knowledge, for the space of two Years, last past, been of a Peaceable,
Sober, and good Conversation, has by his Doctrine been Instrumental, under
God, for the increase of our Knowledge, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
profitable to the Instruction of our Youth. And that in our hearing, at least
(as we compute) a year and half since, did in his Sermon, from several places
of Scripture, maintain the Lawfulness of Infant Baptism; Witness our Hands,
etc. And he does Affirm to us, That it is yet his Judgment and Opinion.

This I Affirm from the bottom of my Heart; Witness my Hand; Rich. Lewthwat.
Tho. Gleane. Peter Gleane. Tho. Sayer. Joh. Ebbettes.

Subscribed this 19th day of November, 1660.
THE PREFACE
TO the Readers, but especially to them of the same Judgment and Practice with
him that occasioned the ensuing Discourse, is composed chiefly to remembrance
them with the great concern and necessity of the being of Uniformity in
Doctrine and Discipline among them (that in the Apostle's sense) name the Name
of Christ, or that do take upon them the profession of Christianity. And for
the evidence of the necessity hereof among us, I shall mind them first with
that of our Savior, in his Prayer a little before his Passion, John 17. verse.
11. Holy Father (said he) keep through thy Name those whom thou have given me,
that they may be one, as we are. Judas having received the sop, as in the 13
Chapter of this Gospel, verse. 39. and was gone from Christ and the other
Disciples to betray him, then Christ in his Prayer, desires the Father to keep
his Disciples in his absence, through his Almighty Power, in an holy Unity of
Faith, Spirit and Worship, which is the sum of these words, namely, that they
may be one, as we are. For in these words Christ did not respect the substance
of the Father, and himself, in which respect indeed they both were one; but the
consent and agreement betwixt them (as doing, or having of things done) which
was ever one and the same, as is evident from that of the Apostle to the
Hebrews, quoted out of the Psalms, Hebr. 10. verse. 7. When the Father's will is
for the Son to come, the Son is as ready to come, be it from whatsoever
happiness, to whatsoever misery it shall be. When the Father will be pleased
with no typical Sacrifices longer, but will have the substance, the Son to take
a body of our nature, fitted for a Peace Offering to be sacrificed for the
expiation of our sins, then the Son's will is one with his, Then said he, lo I
come to do thy will, O God, that they may be one, as we are; One in will and
consent. And so the sum of Christ's Prayer there was, That the Father would
keep the Disciples to be one in Faith, in Spirit, in Mind, in Judgment, in
Worship and Service of God, that they may be one, as we are.

And Christ did not see a necessity of this Unity to be in his Disciples only,
but saw it necessary also to be among all men that should believe on him, or
profess Salvation by him, as in John 17. verse. 20, 21. Neither pray I for these
alone, but for them also that shall believe on me through their word, that they
all may be one, etc.

Brentius upon these words says, that what Christ before had prayed for his
Disciples, now prays for all, that should believe on him, and profess Salvation
by him; namely, that there might be Unity among them all, in Spirit, in Mind,
in Worship and Service of God.

And now to clear up further the necessity of Unity and Uniformity among
Believers and Professors of Christianity, especially of them living near
together: I will mind the Readers of some places in St. Paul's Works, sometimes
praying for us, and pressing upon us the same things which Christ prayed the
Father to keep us in.

In order hereunto, I first urge that place of St. Paul to the Romans, chap.
15. verse. 5, 6. God grant ye to be like minded, etc. I shall give but little of
my own Meditations upon the words (the Modern Divines having spoken so fully of
them, as to the present concern.) The words are the Apostles conclusion, as to
what he had spoken from the beginning of the 14th Chapter, to the Quotation,
and it consists of Prayer and Exhortation, each whereof do invite to the
nourishing of Unity and Concord in matters of Religion among Christian
Brethren, both strong and weak, upon the Apostles supplication there, God grant
ye to be like minded, etc.

Marlorat says, That one of the Modern Expositors upon the words says to this
purpose, That the Apostle there contends both with God and the Church, withal
professing Christianity to be of one and the same judgment, and mind (as to the
way of God's Worship) which, says the Author there, is the very esse and being
of Christian Charity, and where that effect is not, it is impossible there
should be true Christians, or any Salvation: for that all true Faith is there
extinct, and the fear of God is not among them.

The later words of the Author are understood of Dissenters from the true
Churches of Christ, which be where the Separatists live: namely such Churches
as ours of England is; which is invincible by any authentic Arguments of
Romish, Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptistical Factions, or of any other
whatever; our Church being like that in Sion, spoken of in Psalm the 48th,
verse. 12, 13. fortified with all the Impregnable Towers and Bulwarks of the
Doctrines, Seals and Discipline of the Gospel of Peace and Salvation.

Which Church of ours was by many of the late Presbyterian and Independent
Separations acknowledged to be Orthodoxal, and that they had no such Exceptions
against the Common Prayer Book, but that they could join with us in Worshipping
of God, as well as others of their judgment formerly, now did, and a long time
before had done: and this was (to my knowledge) the loud, frequent, and public
Expression of many of them, long before the last Sea-Engagement with the Dutch;
but yet many of them thus owning conviction, said, They thought it not fit to
own so much by conforming at that present juncture of time, upon this
insufficient reason alleged by them; Because, that if they did as then
conform, they should lie under the scandal of conforming, out of fear,
considering the smart and severe Execution of the Penal Statutes in many parts
of the Kingdom, upon the Direction and Charges of the Judges in their Circuits.
Which acknowledged Conviction of many of them, and reason of Nonconforming
alleged for that present, is thought by loyal and and charitable Hearts,
sounded in his Majesty's Ears, and was the main end of his suspension of the
Penal Statutes for a while, by grant of the Tolleration; namely, that they
might thereupon take the opportunity to conform without the forementioned
Scandal. For his Majesty there said, That seeing the forementioned harsher
Means would not prevail, he would try what that gentle way of Tolleration for
the present might do for their return to us: I am sure his Majesty's words were
to this purpose. Of which opportunity some made present use, to my knowledge;
for the Sunday after the Tolleration came down to Norwich, some came then to
both Common Prayer and Sermon, and not before, (I Preaching then at St.
Stevens) and so have continued since, as I have had information upon inquiry.
C. G. C. Which Practice of some was the hope or desire of his Majesty for all,
which is evident from the other reason alleged by his Majesty, for granting
the Tolleration, which was, That whilst he had Wars abroad, he might have Peace
at home; whereupon loyal and charitable hearts cannot but judge, that
notwithstanding the Tolleration, his Majesty therein did publish his dislike of
the Separations, and openly check Nonconformity: and possibly might insinuate a
jealousy of the Dissenters from the Established Church of England, that it
might be in their hearts (if they had but Opportunity, Power and Advantages, as
formerly) to Rebel forthwith against his Majesty, and to Involve again this
Church and State in blood and confusion.

And now I beg pardon for this short Digression from the last quoted Text,
(because not passing by without throwing in a Mite into the Treasury erected
for the relief of Uniformity in Religion, which stands now in as much need in
this Kingdom for help, as ever) I come with one Gloss more upon the Apostle's
forementioned words, which I hope shall be prevalent with Dissenters from us,
for their return of some to us, and for the unity of others with us, it being
as apt and genuine an Exposition of Mr. Calvin (a man ever of great Esteem with
them) as ever he gave of any Scripture, speaking of those words of the Apostle;
namely, That with one mind and one mouth ye may glorify God, etc. And upon the
words immediately going before, he says, Ac quo magis commendabilem, etc. that
the Apostle might render their Agreement and Unity the more commendable, the
Apostle teaches how necessary Unity in Worship is, seeing God is not truly
worshipped of us, unless all our minds and tongues agree together in praising
and glorifying of him. The sum of his Inference thereupon is, Non est ergo quod
jactet quisquam, etc. Let no man therefore boast or think he has well
worshipped or served God, doing it his own way; That is, separating in Worship
from, and not joining therein with the true Church of Christ, by him at the
times appointed for Public Worand Devotion. Tantum enim Deo, etc. For so
pleasing to God is the Unity of his Servants therein, that he will not have his
Glory sounded forth in groundless and injustifiable Debates and Discords about
the manner of his Worship and Service. In Congregations and Churches with them
and by them, where he is called upon and served, according to, or not against
his Rule in his Word; as our Church of England in all things punctually
observes. For which additional Gloss of mine upon Mr. Calvin's last words I
have the Apostle backing of me, Romans 16. verse. 17. Mark them that cause
divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them, for they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ. And the
aforesaid Author makes so good an use and application of the Apostle's
supplication there, that were it generally practiced by the Factions among us,
the glory of God would be so magnified, the Church of Christ here in England so
comforted and augmented, the State and Kingdom so settled and united, and
thereupon so strengthened, that then England would be in the eyes of Christ her
husband, as his Espouse was in the Canticles, chap. 6. v. 4. namely, Beautiful
as Tirzah, and comely as Jerusalem; and would be to Rome, and all other her
deadly Enemies, terrible as an Army with Banners. His useful Inference follows
in these words: Hac una cogitatio, etc. The thought whereof alone may be
sufficient to restrain that mad and outrageous behavior of contending and
scoulding (without offense given (he means) about matters of Religion) which as
yet does possess too much the heads of multitudes. I translate it scoulding,
it is so like the debates of froward Women, being commonly carried on
ignorantly, by mere passion and spiritual pride; not by Scripture, Reason,
Authentic or Church Precedents. For as to the later, St. Paul says, 1 Corinthians. 11. verse. 16. If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
Custom, nor the Churches of God.

And to help all men among us, to be as careful and studious, to be quiet, and
to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace hereafter, as it has b^^n
their labor and glory to be disquiet, and to break it, I Will remembrance ye
with one thing more recorded of Mr. Calvan. When Dr. Cranmer, Archbishop of
Canterbury, Rogers upon the ^0 Articles, in his Presa^^.
in the Infancy of the Reformed Churches (being in the Reign of King Edward the
Sixth) was taking care for that one mainly necessary thing of Uniformity in
Doctrine and Discipline among the said Churches: To effect that blessed Work,
he imparted his thoughts to several persons of rarest note throughout
Christendom. Mr. Calvin understanding the Archbishop's intent, addressed his
Letters to him, and offered his service thereto, saying, That might his Labors
stand the Church in stead, Ne december quidem maria, etc. It would not grieve him
to Sail over ten Seas, to give his help to such a blessed Undertaking. The
which if he had done, and had given assent and consent to the Labors of the
Reverend, Learned, and Modest Divines of our Church, it might happily have
prevented his dangerous and doubtful Determinations about Election and
Reprobation, deposited in his Institutions; or if they had been published
before, might perhaps have been retracted by him, to the laying aside the long
and fruitless disturbance of the Churches of Christ thereupon. And now drawing
toward an end, I shall mind ye with the Argument our Savior uses in his
Prayer, to keep all Believers in the beforementioned Unity; He prays the
Father, they may be all one, etc. That the World may believe that thou have
sent me. Here our Savior mentions the great help of Unity and Concord among
men professing Christianity, to bring the World, that is (as I may rightlier
gloss upon the word World there, than they that tie it up to a peculiar number
of the Elect) multitudes of people to the Faith of Christ. For indeed Unity
among Christians will do by the World, sometimes doubting of the Christ, or
Messiah, as Christ's Miracles did for John Baptist, it will settle them so far
in the Faith, as to own, That this is he that should come, and that they will
not look for another. So our Savior Christ expressly speaking of Unity, under
the Notion of Mutual Love among his Disciples, or of both together, John 13.
verse. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love
one to another.

And now see the fruit or benefit of Unity and Uniformity in a Church of
Christ, and among men professing Christianity; it is the great means, under God,
to add to the Church of Christ daily such as may or would be saved, and to
bring the World to know and believe, that Christ is the stone set at naught by
the Jewish builders, and is become the head of the corner; and that there is no
Salvation in any other, and that there is no other name under heaven given,
whereby men must be saved, Acts 4.11, 12.

And as Unity in the Church is thus helpful to bring in them that are without
and Unbelievers, to the saving Faith of Christ, so Difference and Divisions
there do keep men without from coming in, that were entering, which is evident
from the rule of contrary causes, which is to produce contrary effects, which I
could evidence from Examples, if it were not for fear of being too tedious in
so apparent truth. And upon this consideration to bring back again, and to
reunite to us them that are separated and gone out from us, I desire them to
consult and mind the sad state and condition Christ and his Spirit say they are
in. In the life to come, instead of their seat they might had with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, it must be with Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites. See Matt.
23.13. and Antichrist, 1 John 2. verse. 18.

I shall now hint to you in a Breviate what might be showed further to awaken
ye to a return, and come into the Society and Fellowship of our holy Church.

First, God is not with ye, for God is the God of Love, Peace and Unity, where
he is truly and rightly worshipped, (as he is in our Church of England) and
therefore you separating from it, in such groundless, heady, fierce, and fiery
storms, as ye have done, God is no more in you, nor with you, nor them, than he
was in the strong winds, Earthquake, and are, that made such noise and havoc
upon the Mount Horch, 1 Kings 19. verse. 11. where it is said, God was in none of
them.

In the second place, God by his word has silenced ye and suspended ye from
your usurped Office, for that in the 50 Psalm, verse. 16. is against ye, Why
do thou preach my Laws, and take my Covenant into thy mouth, whereas thou
hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee. For verse. 20. Thou
sattest and spakest against thy brother, and have standred thine own mother's
son.

In the third place, God's Spirit denis ye to be Churches of Christ, or else at
least he charges ye with such evil Customs as none of them have, or at least as
they ought not to have; for those words of the Apostle, 1 Corin. 11. v. 16.
belong to you, and to such as you are. If any man seem to be contentious, we
have no such custom, neither the Churches of God. The Factions do not only
seem contentious, they have too deeply engaged themselves therein, for either
their own or others spiritual good.

In the last place, Ye are by the Apostle delivered, with the incestuous
person, up to Satan. As I may say, he has excommunicated you, Romans 16. v.
17. Mark them that cause divisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine ye
have learned, and avoid them. If ye will be holding forth the Word, as ye call
it, the Apostle would have ye have no other Auditors than the Walls and Stools
are with ye; he orders all to avoid ye, none to hear ye, or associate with ye,
unless for your conversion.

And now, from my Heart, for your conversion to us, in the Apostle's words to
the Corinthians, the 1st Epistle, chap. 1. verse. 10. I do exhort ye, and
beseech ye, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, That ye all speak the same
thing: that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined
together with us, in the same mind, and in the same judgment. And to prevail
with ye all to join with us speedily in Worshipping the God of Peace and Unity,
I convince ye in the words of the Apostle, Philippians 2. verse. 1, 2, 3. If
there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye
be like minded, have the same love, being of one accord, of one mind with us.
Let nothing henceforth be done through strife, or vainglory, but in lowliness
of mind, let each esteem other, better than themselves. So bids farewell to
ye all,

Richard Lewthwat.

February 26. 1677.
Mr. Lewthwat,
I Have heard, read, and considered of your Treatise, Entitled, A
Justification of set Forms of Prayer, and in especial of the Liturgy of the
Church of England, in Answer to, and Confutation of Vavasor Powel's Fourteen
Considerations against Composed, and Imposed Forms, etc. And upon the whole
matter I conceive it may be very Useful and Profitable, especially to the
vulgar sort of seduced Dissenters, to withdraw them from their former Errors,
and procure their Return to the Way of Divine Worship prescribed in the Church
of England, if you will be persuaded to permit it to be made Public by the
Press.

Hen. Nerford, B. D. Rector of Attleburgh, Norf.
I Edward Atkinson, Rector of Bunwell, Norf. desire the same thing.

To the Composers, Imposers, Readers, and Hearers of COMMON PRAYER, to the
Disputers and Writers for COMMON PRAYER.
I Would desire ye all in the Name and Fear of the All-seeing Almighty, and All
judging God, to set these following and the like Considerations to your Hearts,
and your Hearts to them.

First, How jealous the Lord of Heaven and Earth is, of his own Worship and of
all the Parts and Circumstances thereto belonging. Deuteronomy. 5.9. Hos. 5.11. Matthew.
15.3. Col. 2.21. Rev. 22.14.20.

2. How abominable and unacceptable, to this holy just God, have been, and is,
all Idolatrous Superstitious and False Services, and all that do serve him, in
any way or thing, which he has not himself commanded and appointed. Deuteronomy.
7.25, 26. Isa. 30.22. and the 66.3, 4. Jerem. 9.13, 14. Ezr. 20.4.

3. How sorely and severely has he punished those Kings, Priests, Prophets,
and people, that have been false Worshippers, and swerved from his holy
Commandments. 1 Kings 11.6. Numb. 11.34.

4. Consider whether God does call upon any of you all, to offer him any such
Service as this is, and whether he may not say to you, as he did once to Judah;
Who has required this at your hand? Isai. 1.12.

5. How inconsistant with the day and light of the Gospel, is this Service, God
having sent his Word more fully and plainly to direct his Ministers and People,
and given his Spirit in a more abundant measure, to help and enable them to
call upon him.

6. How little good (if any at all) has been done by the long use of the
Service Book, though men have prayed long by it, that the rest of their lives
might be holy and righteous, and yet they still continue profane and
unrighteous.

7. How much hurt it has done, in sholdering and thrusting out many godly,
painful, soul-saving Preachers, and in bringing in and maintaining so many
ignorant, scandalous, lazy, and formal Priests and Curats, to the deceiving and
utter undoing of precious souls.

8. Whether the imposing of the Scottish Liturgy (which in some things was
better, though in some others was worse than the English) was not the
beginning, and the first cause of the late grievous Wars, and if so, whether
men should not be more cautious to do the like for the future.

9. Whether if the truth were thoroughly and truly weighed and examined, the
first end of Composing the Common Prayer Book (which does so much symbolize
with the Mass) was not to bring Papists to Church, but it effected so little
therein (not because they so much disliked it, as because it was not in Latin,
and commanded by the Pope) that it rather confirmed them in their Mass-service.

10. Whether some may not intend by the reestablishing this Book, to oppose and
put down that excellent and gracions Spirit of Prayer and Preaching, which God
has poured out upon his Ministers, and to make this a snare and net against
all Preachers and people that out of Conscience cannot conform thereto.

11. Whether any persons can produce any such Liturgy or Form of Prayer from
the beginning of the World, either among the Jews or Geztiles, till above three
hundred years after Christ, when Antichrist began to exercise Papal Power.

12. Whether if there were no other reason, but that this Book has been so
much Idolized by the generality of men, and offensive to so many Christians, it
should not be done with as the Brazen Serpent was by Hezekiah. 1 Kings.

13. Whether one end of Christ's coming into, and one part of his work in the
World, was not to redeem men from the Rudiments and Traditions of men, of which
this is one; And whether it be not a sin against the Blood, and Spirit, and
Gospel of Christ, to impose, maintain, and continue still the use of the same.
1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Heb. 9.10, 11.

14. Whether at the great and terrible day of Judgment any Magistrates, and
Ministers, or People can justify before Christ the making, imposing, reading,
or hearing of this or the like Service? And whether good men, as far as they
build with this Material, will not suffer loss? And whether those can stand
then in the Judgment without fear, shame, and sorrow, that have cast out,
persecuted, imprisoned, or otherwise afflicted the true Preachers, and Servants
of God, who did choose to obey God rather than men; And to observe his Divine
Will, rather than the Traditions of men? Consider what I say, and the Lord give
thee (you) understanding in all things. 2 Timothy 2.7. I esteem all thy precepts
concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way. Psalm 119.128.

With these fourteen Considerations Vavasor Powel begins his Invectives against
Liturgies, set-Forms of Prayer, and Common Prayer Books, etc. which was Printed
at London, for Livewell Chapman, Anno 1661, and was delivered to me, to peruse,
and to give my judgment thereof, the forementioned part whereof, I have
considered, and according to promise do return some of my thoughts upon these
considerations, in the following words;

To the Opposers, Contemners, and Neglecters of Common Prayer, and to the
Disputers and Writers against Common Prayer.
I Would desire you all in the Name and Fear of the All-seeing, All-mighty, and
All-judging God, to set these following Propositions, Conclusions, etc. to your
Hearts, and your Hearts to them, being evidently enough, though secretly closed
and couched in the wombs of the forementioned Considerations.

But before I come to open the Contents of the Considerations (which I presume
are framed especially for a Scarecrow to the Worshippers and Servers of God,
in the Way of our Church of England by the Book of Common Prayer, and by a
Composed Form, or Forms of Prayer, by the Ministers before their Sermons) I
desire all that admire the reasons laid down against this kind of Worship, to
consider, that the Author does not intend only the Condemnation of our
Common Prayers, but of any Common Prayer whatever has been Composed, or shall
be; for he writes to the Disputers, and Writers for Common Prayer; and to the
Composers, Imposers, etc. of Common-Praver, which terms are indefinite, and are
equipollent in Logic to Universality, so that the Author is against all
Common Prayer, whatever have been, or shall be Composed, or Imposed, etc. so
that you may see by the Immediate succeeding discourse, there is no less then a
condemnation, by the Author, of David, of St. Paul, of all the ancient and
modern Churches, and Divines, yea and of Jesus Christ himself, that came into
the World to seek and to save that was lost.

And now to show ye the blindness of this Guide, Disputing and Writing against
Common Prayer, and the danger of them that follow him, and such as are of his
erroneous Judgment:

First. I desire ye to search the Scriptures, as concerning this matter, where
we find Records, that Common Prayers, and set-Forms have been Composed,
Imposed, and Used by them that were sanctified, yea, by them that had Authority
from Heaven, to instruct and guide men in the Worship and Service of God. In
the 1 Chronicles. 16. verse. 7. Then on that day David delivered first this Psalm, to
thank the Lord, into the hand of Asaph, and his brethren; if ye look upon what
follows, ye have the form of the Thanksgiving: If ye look before that 7th
Verse, ye shall see the occasion thereof; and the Quire appointed to sing it
unto the Lord in the Ears of the Congregation.

But come we to look into the Gospel; and that in the 11th of St. Luke, at
Verse the first, our Savior's Disciples desired him to teach them to pray, as
John also taught his Disciples; hereupon Christ composed a Prayer, the Form
being, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. yea, and imposed it upon them, to
be used by them: when ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Now
this Prayer was, and is Common Prayer; it is a Prayer belongs to every one of
Christ's Disciples, because it suits all their occasions, and it is commanded,
That they use it as often as they pray; When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. but
yet not so injoined that they should use no other when they pray; but that as
good Expositors give the meaning (as is the practice of the best Reformed
Churches) and men of the soundest judgments, they should either at the
beginning or ending, or in some part of their Devotions, send up the desires of
their hearts to God in that form of Prayer; And if upon these Considerations,
that Prayer be not Common, or a set-Form of Prayer, I know not what is meant by
the notions of Common or set-Form of Prayer. King Charles the First, of most
blessed memory, in his Contemplations upon the Ordinance against the
Common Prayer Book, says of this our Lord's Prayer, that it is the warrant,
and original pattern of set-Liturgies in the Christian Church.

Further, considering Christ's Disciples request there, it is more then
probable, that John the Baptist, had Composed a set-Form of Prayer to be used
by his Disciples in their Devotions and Service of God.

One Precedent more I shall mind ye of, for justification, for Composing and
Using set-Forms of Prayer in the Churches of Christ, which I bring from the
practice of St. Paul, in the beginning of his Epistles, to the several Churches
of Christ. St. Paul knowing, as he says, in the 1 Corinthians. Chap. 3. Verse 6,
7. That it is not of his planting, nor of Apollo's watering by the word alone,
that Grace is begotten, or increased in men, but that it is by God's blessing
the word thereto: doubtless hereupon it was that he ever began his Epistles,
with prayer to God, for spiritual blessings to be to them, through the word he
sent them.

And if ye peruse the beginning of his Epistles, he being to bring down the
same blessings upon the several Churches from God by his Epistles and Prayer to
God, he uses ever the same set-Form of Pra^er, Romans 1. Verse. 7. and Ephesians. 1.
Verse. 2. his Prayer for them is in the same form of words, Grace be to you, and
peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. See St. Paul having the
same mercies of Grace and Peace, to seek at God's hand, to be power'd down upon
those Churches, by his Epistles to them, his heart ascends up in desire to God,
for their spiritual benefit thereby in the same words.

Nay, and it is not a Common Prayer, or Liturgy for himself only to pray by, but
for others also, for himself, and Sosthenes, 1 Corinthians. Verse. 2. for himself
and Timothy, 2 Corin. Chap. 1. Verse. 2. and Philip. Chap. 1. Verse. 1, 2. and
Colos. Chap. 1. Verse. 1, 2.

Yea, it is a set-Form for himself, Silvanus, and Timotheus, Epist. 1. Thessal.
1. Verse 1, and 2. Thessal. Chap. 1. Verse. 1, 2. Yea further, It Is a set-Form
for himself, and the Brethren with him at Rome, praying to God through the
means of that Epistle for the re-establishing the Galatians in the Gospel from
which they were fallen, it is the Prayer for them all, Grace be to ye, and peace
from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. Galat. Chap. 1. Verse. 1,
2, 3.

So that the sum of this alleged out of St. Paul's practice to justify
set-Forms of Prayer (whose Desire and Prayer to God for Israel was, That they
might be saved, as Romans the 10th. Verse. 1.) amounts to this, That St. Paul,
Sosthenes, Silvanus, Timotheus, and the brethren with Paul at Rome did put up
their Prayers to God, for his bestowing spiritual blessings upon the several
Churches of Christ, through the word of ^^ace, did put them up. I say, in a
Common Prayer, in a set-composed (or, as the Separatists call it) stinted Form
of Prayer; And considering that the aforementioned Christians and Saints
continued so long in a Common set-Form of Prayer for those Churches, I cannot
think but the pride, ignorance, heady, and high-minded Spirits of these men
(had they lived in days together) would have charged St. Paul, and the rest
that joined with him in Devotion for the Churches with what they cast upon the
painful, orthodoxal, conformable Clergy of our Church in the seventh
Consideration, where they call them Ignorant, Scandalous, Lazy, and Formal
Priests, and Ministers, to the deceiving and utter undoing of precious souls,
and should they have had but such Revenues, Salaries, Tithes, and Gleabs gone
along with their Labors, as our reverend Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and some
of our Clergy had with theirs, their Conformity, and Uniformity in Prayer,
especially it being so short (how holy soever their lives had been) was crime
enough for their Houses to have been Plundered, their Estates Sequestered, and
their Persons Imprisoned.

And now to leave off the further confirmation of this unjustly condemned
Practice of Devotion, by the use of set-Forms of Prayer in the times of the Old
and New Testaments, and in the times of the Ancient Churches before Popery, and
in the days of the Reformed Churches, fallen from the Pope, I shall only
commend to your consideration, the Prayer of St. Chrysostom, wherewith we even
close our daily Devotions, as in all probability he, and the people he was
over, did conclude their Worship of God, in their set-Forms of Prayer.

Almighty God who have given us Grace at this time with one accord, etc.

I confess it is not the Forms of Prayer, be they never so Admirable, as to
Expressions, without the fervent desires of the Heart, be the man never so
righteous that utters them, that do avail ought with God; but when a man from
the ground of the heart ascends up to God in Forms, be they never so ancient,
short, or Common, (provided they be lawful as to the Matter, and laudable as to
the manner of the Expression) supplicating, praying, interceding, and giving of
thanks; then they become at the Throne of Grace, such as St. John in the 5th of
the Revelations, Verse. 8. saw in Heaven, when the 24 Elders fell down before
the Lamb, namely, barps, and golden vials full of odours, even the prayer, of
Saints.

And hereupon was the exellency of David's Prayer, of which he speaks, Psalm
11^. Verse. 58. I made my petition with my whole heart. There are recorded in
the Scripture diverse Forms of Prayers and Thanksgivings, Composed by David, and
other devout Worshippers of God; questionless for the use of themselves and
others: in the frequent Commemorations of God's Mercies to them, and for their
Supplications to be made unto God, their wants being again the same or alike as
formerly. But now that which made these Forms of Prayer effectual, David
mentions in the same place, where he says he did it with his whole heart. All
the powers and faculties of his Soul were now acting in their several places,
so as he might prevail with God to supply his wants. And a devout soul, setting
dilligently to this, as St. Peter and the rest of the Twelve resolved to do.
Acts the 6th, Verse. 4. namely, give themselves much to prayer, as David did,
namely petition the Lord with his whole heart, let it be in a set-Form, that
that praying soul goes to God, that soul cannot want success long. For if the
Spirit it self, as St. Paul speaks, Romans the 8th, Verse. 26. be not yet
helping his Infirmities; it will not be long before he be with him, making
Intercessions for him: i. e. working in him gronings that cannot be uttered,
nor long unanswered by his God, if the things petitioned may be consistant with
God's glory, and the petitioners true good; and what hinders that this soul
praying to, or praising God in a Form as before limited, may not be accepted of
God, seeing God has his whole demand of him in a way not inhibited by him, as
is evident, Prove. 23. Verse. 26. My son give me thy heart. So that what St.
James said of faith without works, and of faith with works, may be said of
Common, or set-Forms of Prayer without the heart going up to God with them, and
with the heart going up to God in or by them. In the 17 Verse of the second
Chapter, he says, that faith if it has not works, is dead being alone; and in
Verse the 26th, as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works
is dead also; faith with out works, is like the body without the spirit; it
acts nothing to the good thereof. Even so the best Forms of Common Prayer, if
there be wanting in the man that utters or uses them, a spirit or heart of
supplication, they prevail nothing with God for him; they may be Vials, but
they are without Odours or Incense, and so no sweet savor to God. But then in
the 22 Verse. the Apostle, that faith by works was made perfect: and in the 23
Verse. that by virtue thereof faith was imputed to Abraham for righteousness,
and he was called the friend of God. Even so Common Forms for Prayer by fervent
earnest supplicating hearts, going to God in them, the Common Prayers, but as
dead in themselves, are thereby made perfect, yea lively; and the praying man
thereby is owned of God, and dealt by as his friend.

I shall now end my reasoning for the lawful and justifiable use of Common
Forms of Prayer, that suit our wants, our hearts being in a praying condition,
with the practice of our Savior in his bitter Agonies; Matthew. 26. Verse. 39,
and 42. there is mention of Christ's praying to the father, for the Cup to pass
from him; and having no grant, and resolving to seek God further for it, in the
44 Verse. it is said, he went away again, and prayed the third time, saving the
same words.

And lastly, To prevail with ye, to come off from the dangerous Frrour ye are
in, as concerning the present, I shall mind ye with the Reasons King Charles
the First, of most blessed memory, has laid down for the present purpose, in
his Observations upon the Ordinance against the Book of Common Prayer.

I will write down some Paragraphs in that Tractate, that they that have not
his Book, may read the Judgment of that blessed Martyr, concerning the matter
now in hand.

In the sixth Paragraph his Words are these: For the manner of using set and
prescribed Forms, there is no doubt, that wholesome words, being known and
fitted to men's understandings, are soonest received into their hearts, and
aptest to excite, and carry along with them judicious and fervent affections.

In the eighth Paragraph thus he writes: I could never fee any reason, why any
Christian should abhor or be forbidden to use the same Forms of Prayer, since
he prays to the same God, believes in the same Savior, professes the same
Truth, reads the same Scriptures, has the same Duties upon him, and feels the
same daily wants for the most part both inward and outward, which are common to
the whole Church.

In the ninth Paragraph he goes on thus; Sure we may as well before hand know
what we pray, as to whom we pray, and in what words, as to what sense; when we
desire the same things, what hinders we may not use the same words? our
appetite and digestion too may be good when we use, as we pray for, our daily
bread.

I will write down here the thirteenth Paragraph, which though it justifies
Common Forms of Prayer, yet condemns not, but rather approves what our
Adversary so magnifies (as to down with set-Forms of Prayer) provided it be
done with a religious and prudential care.

His words follow:

Though I am not against modest, discreet, and humble use of Ministers Gifts in
public, the better to fit and excite their own and the peoples affections to
the present occasions; yet I know no necessity, why private and single
abilities should quite justle out, and deprive the Church of the joint
Abilities, and concurrent Gifts of many learned and godly men, such as the
Composers of the Service Book were, who may in all reason be thought to have
more Gifts and Graces, inabling them to Compose with serious deliberations and
concurrent advice such Forms of Prayers as may best fit the Churches common
wants, inform the hearers understandings, and stir up that fiduciary and
fervent application of their Spirits (wherein consists the very life and soul
of Prayer) then any private man by his solitary abilities can be presumed to
have with what they are many times (even there, where they make a great noise
and show) the affectations, emptiness, impertinencies, rudeness, confusions,
flatness, obscurity, vain and ridiculous repetitions, the senseless, and
oft-times blasphemous Expressions, all these burdened with a most tedious and
intolerable length, do sufficiently convince all men, but those who glory in
that pharisaick way.

And the said King Charles, having in the 15th Paragraph showed the necessity
of the use of Forms, of public Composure in the performance of Sacramental
Administrations, and the like in the 16th Paragraph; his words are as follow:

A serious sense of which Inconvenience in the Church inavoidably following
every man's several manner of Officiating, no doubt, first occasioned the Wisdom
and Piety of the Ancient Churches, to remedy those Mischiefs, by the use of
constant Liturgies of Common Composure.

And now for a close (at present) as to my Meditations upon the present subject
of Common Prayer, what can solidly or commendably be said against the Use of
Set and Composed Forms of Prayer, to put up to God the servent desires of our
hearts by. If the said Forms be lawful, laudable, and convenient as to the
Matter and Expressions, suiting together with our wants: seeing we have such a
cloud of Authentic Authors for it, as David, Jesus Christ our Savior, St.
Paul, John the Baptist, besides the Fathers, the Ancient Churches, the devout
and pious Modern Divines, yea, and I might have recounted even all late
Reformed Churches, till these late upstart, Antichristian, heady, high-minded,
late Factions arose, disturbing the Unity and blessed Peace of our, and other
true Churches of Christ, denying the Lord that bought them, and without
Repentance; bringing upon themselves and their Proselytes swift destruction.

And now I shall end my Meditations, as to what preceded the Author's proposed
fourteen, Considerations, (following now to be considered of) in the very Words
of the before quoted King Charles of Blessed Memory, with which he ends his
Observations upon the said Ordinance against the Book of Common Prayer.

I wish (says he) their Repentance may be their only Punishment; that seeing
the mischief the disuse of public Liturgies has already produced, they may
restore that Credit, Use and Reverence to them, which by the Ancient Churches,
were given to Set Forms of sound and wholesome Words.

And now having showed the groundless Oppositions of the Author, to Common and
Set Forms of Prayer (given me to peruse) and to give my opinion concerning the
aforesaid subject; and having also, from the Sacred Scriptures, and otherwise,
justified the Use, and manifested the Aptness of Common Prayers, for our
Devotions, Worship and Service, to be put up and performed to God. I now come
to speak to the Fourteen Considerations, which the Author proposes to the
World as unanswerable Evidences (in his judgment) to make the aforesaid kind
of Worship and Service, (though never so Conscientiously, Sincerely, and
Heartity performed) to be damnable, because abominable to God, and not required
of us by him, as is to be collected out of his four first Considerations.

I shall therefore now spend a little time about the said Considerations, and
look into the Bowels of them, (they being in the whole, like the great Horse
framed at the Seige of Troy) in the Body whereof, were enclosed men enough to
deliver up the City to Destruction.

For in this Fabric and Womb of these Considerations, are enclosed conclusions
and opinions enough to deliver up treacherously, the City of God, the Souls
Redeemed by Christ's Blood, to Hell, and its Assistants, the Beseigers thereof,
to Eternal Destruction, (if impenitently followed, and persevered therein.)

I will therefore open the Door of this Monster (composed by deceitful Workers)
having transformed themselves in the Apostle's sense, into the Ministers of
Christ: And letting out the deadly Enemies therein, the false conclusions,
shall slay them with the two edged Sword of God's Word and known Truth; That
they make no further devastation hereabout, upon them for whom Christ dyed.

In he Considerations, the Author falls from the way he beg^n in, as to the
quantity of a proposition, namely, the universality of his condemnation of
Common Prayer, in his Indefinite term; for now he endeavors, especially to
keep the Common Prayer Book of our Church of England, from a glorious
Resurrection; which had been Crucified, Dead and Buried so long time by the
long Parliament and their Armies. For all his Magazine is spent in killing
again, what they thought they had killed before for ever, namely the
Common Prayer Book.

In the four first Considerations are contained four positive Conclusions,
which the Author endeavors to make good by Scripture, and thereby to overthrow
the Common Prayer Book of our Church; for which purpose, even the whole part of
the following Pamphlet is spent.

Look upon the first Consideration beginning thus; How Jealous the Lord of
Heaven and Earth is of his own Worship, and of all the parts and circumstances
thereto belonging: Deuteronomy. 5. verse. 9. etc. and withal look upon the latter part
of the second Consideration, at these words, All that do serve him in any way
or thing, which he has not himself commanded or appointed. Deuteronomy. 7. verse. 25,
26, etc. And ye shall see thus much to be implied and inserred. The Proposition.

The Lord, in the Scriptures has set forth his own Worship and Service for us
to perform and observe, as to all the parts, circumstances, way and things
thereto belonging.

Parts, Circumstances, any way, and things, are his own words, as ye may read
in the first and second Considerations, and are secretly affirmed there by the
Author, of the Worship and Service of God, to the same purpose I have
predicated them in the Proposition.

To which I thus Answer;

As to the essential and absolutely necessary parts of our Worshipping and
Serving God, or as to what is to be believed and morally done by us to be
saved; I do grant, they are contained and set forth; first fully in the Old
Testament, and that by Moses, from the Mouth of God; though not so clearly as
since, because of the Vail that was over; so that then they could not
steadfastly see to the end of them, as St. Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 3. verse. 13.

And they are again fully set forth in the New Testament, and that by Jesus
Christ, from the Father. John 12. verse. 50. Whatsoever I speak therefore, even
as the father said unto me, so I speak. Whereupon Christ is called the Word;
John 1. verse. 1. that is, the Word of the Father; because, as the Father taught
him so he spoke. John 8. verse. 28. Therefore in respect to the setting forth
fully the Worship and Service of God, and way to Salvation, as to the essential
parts thereof; both Christ and Moses have approbation, by the Author to the
Hebrews, cap. 3. verse. 1, 2. Consider the Apostle and high Priest of our
profession, Christ Jesus, (...) faithful to him that appointed him, as also
Moses was faithful in all his house

But to grant that the Worship and Service of God, set forth so sufficiently by
Moses, or Christ, as before granted, was directed and ordered, as to all the
circumstances, words, ways and things by them, or any under them, is to grant
more than can be proved by the Scriptures.

For to instance in one particular, essential part or duty of Worship or
Service, we see, that when God by Moses, or his Son, or by any under them, have
commanded men to call upon God, by Prayer, in time of need; or to praise him
for his goodness to them; all the Circumstances of this Duty, as to words, or
forms, or places, or number of times of Praying to God, or Praising of him, are
not fully set forth by them, neither by Precept, nor Example; for we see the
Examples herein dissering: Psalm. 119. verse. 164. the Psalmist is at his
Devotion seven times a day; and Daniel is but three times; Daniel 6. verse. 10.
And so as to the Posture or Gesture in performance of the Duty, have not been
the same; Daniel's posture was kneeling, in the place aforesaid. Luke 18. verse.
13. the Publican's was standing. Deuteronomy. 9. verse. 18. Moses's posture was
sometimes falling down upon his Face at his Prayers; And as much may be showed,
as to other Duties. So that from this has been said, it is evident, the
circumstances, ways, and things, (as the Author calls them) as to the Worship
and Service of God, were not all commanded and appointed by God, in the
Author's sense.

Wherefore I cannot see, but that our Church Liturgies are more justifiable
than either the set Forms of the factious Persons, (which some of them desire
should not seem to be set Forms, by reason of their disuse of them, for some
considerable time) yea, and more justifiable than their Extemporary Prayers,
(which they falsely and blasphemously call, Praying by the Spirit:)
Considering, that both in their Composed Forms, and Extemporary Prayers, for
the most part (if not always) they consent not to wholesome Words, even the
Words of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor to the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness, to use the Apostle's Phrase, in the first to Timothy, cap. 6. verse.
3. with neither of which can they charge our former, or present Common Prayer
Book.

Look upon the former part of the second Consideration, which begins thus; How
abominable and unacceptable to this holy, just God, have been all Idolatrous,
superstitious and false Services.

The Proposition is this, as the Author's opinion.

All Idolatrous, Superstitious, and false Services are abominable, and
unacceptable to God.

Answer. This Proposition, I grant to be a Truth; for God wills us to own him
to be God, yea and him alone, 2 Kings, cap. 19. verse. 15. and Exodus 20. verse.
2, 3. I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land, etc. Thou
shall have no other gods, but me. As to godship, lordship, and absolute
Supremacy, God will endure no Corival in the heart of Man. And whosoever
ascribes to any Creature, what the Scriptures have peculiarly attributed to
God, is guilty of Idolatry and Superstition also.

All therefore that is to be faulted in this consideration, is the Author's
misapplication of the Proposition; for he applies it to them that worship God
devoutly, and call upon him fervently, in a justifiable Form of Prayer. And I
see not, but the Author, in so applying the forementioned Proposition (issuing
out of that consideration) how he can be guilty of less than Blasphemy, in
terming that Service of ours Idolatrous, seeing we worship the true God rightly.

Where is our Idolatry, or false Service, in that Worship and Invocation? Is it
in our going to God by Prayer in time of need, through the only Mediator
betwixt God and Man, Christ Jesus, our Savior? As we do, confessing with our
Mouths, because, believing with our hearts, that God is both able and willing
to supply our wants, as is necessary to be in devout souls, in order to obtain
at God's hands: Hebrews 11. verse. 6. In all this, I hope, we are neither
Idolatrous, nor false in our Service. The Author might rightly have applied to
himself and his Proselytes the Doctrine or Proposition, considering his words in
the seventh Consideration, where he terms their own Speakers, Soul-saving
Teachers; for in so saying, he is both Idolatrous and Superstitious, in
ascribing that to themselves, which is the peculiar of the infinite Wise God.
Isaiah 43. ver. 11. I, even I, am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior.
Is he not therein Idolatrous and Superstitious, in ascribing to their own
Teachers, to be both the Fountain and Cunduit-pipe of Salvation, or saving
Grace, as there he does? If not so, I am sure he falls thereupon, under St.
Paul's reprehension of the carnal and ignorant Factions, in the 1 Corimh. cap.
3. ver. 6. For indeed it will be evident, when I come to speak of the aforesaid
consideration; that that have been and are but such as our Savior said, the
Scribe^, Pharisees, and Hypocrites were: Mat. 23 ver. 13. where he said, they
did Shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, did neither go in themselves,
nor suffer them that were entering to go in.

But before I pass from the Consideration and Proposition, I must touch a
little upon the latter part thereof, which is also by the Author, misapplied to
our Liturgy, and them that use it.

He looks upon our Worshipping of God in that form, to be a false Service; and
the chief places he brings to discover what a false Service is, are Isaiah 66.
ver. 3, 4. and Jerem. cap. 9. ver. 13, 14. where the Prophets give the reasons
why God had no respect to Isreal's offerings, and why he gave up the Land to
perish, and to be burnt; and it was, they say, because the People had forsaken
God's Laws, and followed their own ways, and their own abominations. Now all
this makes nothing against our Liturgy, or the Worshippers of God by it; for
our Service Book has nothing in it against the Will of God, or his Worship,
set forth in the Scriptures.

I conclude therefore, that had the Author applied the false Service he there
spoke of, and the recited places, out of Isaiah and Jeremiah, to himself and
the rest of the Factious, as to their Worship and Service, he had done rightly,
for I am sure that their Service, both as to Prayer and Instruction, in most
things, was truly what they falsely charge upon us, namely, a false Service.

As to their Prayers, King Charles the First, of most Blessed memory, has
evidenced the falseness of their Service, seeing God by St. Paul to Timothy, 1
Epist. cap. 2. ver. 1, 2. exhorts, That Prayers and Supplications should be
made for Kings, and all in Authority. For in the last Paragraph but one, in his
Observations upon the Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book: His words
follow thus:

One of the greatest faults some men found with the Common Prayer Book, I
believe was this, that it taught them to pray so often for me; to which
Petitions, they had not Loyalty enough to say, Amen: Nor, yet Charity enough to
forbear reproaches, and even Cursings of me in their own Forms, instead of
Praying for me.

Look upon the third Consideration, beginning thus,

How sorely and severely has he punished those Kings, Priests, Prophets, and
People, that have been false Worshippers, and swerved from his holy
Commandments, 1 Kings 11.6. Number. 11.34.

The Author's Proposition, in this Consideration, is as follows:

God has sorely and severely punished those Kings, Priests, Prophets, and
People, that have been false Worshippers, and swerved from his holy
Commandments. His Proofs as before.

Answ. The Proposition is true, but nothing concerns them that worship God by
the Common Prayer Book, nor are the places he quotes for Proof, against them
that serve God that way: for that the Prayers of our Church are put up to the
true God; we are not gone to the Abominations of this Amorites, nor to the
Abominations of this Author, nor of his Followers; the Lord keep us in the
Worship we are in, and of his Mercy bring them back to us.

To the fourth Consideration, I shall say no more, nor otherwise than the
Author has there said to us; mutatis mutandis; Let them consider whether God
does call upon any of them to offer him any such Service as theirs is, and has
been? And whether he may not say to them for their so doing, as they have done,
as he did once to Judah? Who has required this at your hands? Isa. 1.12.

Look into the fifth Consideration, being this:

How inconsistent with the Day and Light of the Gospel is this Service, God
having sent his Word more fully and plainly to direct his Ministers and People,
and given his Spirit in a more abundant measure, to help and enable them to
call upon him.

This Consideration, in the beginning of it (considering what in the beginning
of the Treatise the Author writes to the Composers, Imposers, etc. of
Common Prayer) contains manifestly in the Author's opinion this following
Proposition as a truth.

To make use of set Forms of Prayer in the time of the Day and Light of the
Gospel, to put up the desires of our Hearts to God by, is no way justificable.
It Is plainly his opinion, for he says, that this kind of Service is
inconsistent with the Day and Light of the Gospel. And the following part of
his Consideration is in manner of a reason to confirm it; for he says, that in
the Day and Light of the Gospel, God has sent his Word more fully and plainly
to direct his Ministers and People, and given his Spirit in a more abundant
measure, to help and enable them to call upon him, than by that way of Common,
or Set Forms of Prayer.

In the beginning of my Confutation of this Author, in my justifying set Forms
of Prayer, (as there limited) and that from the practice of our Savior in his
drawing up, and commanding the use of his set Form. As also from the practice
of David, of St. Paul, Timothy, and others, I have sufficiently overthrown this
Proposition, and his Argument and Reason also brought for confirmation of it,
considering that it was the time and day of the fullest Light and Promulgation
of the Gospel, and of God's enabling Men by his Spirit to call upon him, that
ever was since; in which was the justification of set Forms of Prayer, after,
by the forementioned Examples and Precedents.

Well, but yet for further Answer, let enquiry be made, what time the Author
here means by the Day and Light of the Gospel, in which he says, the Spirit was
given in a more abundant measure to help, etc. For satisfaction herein; It was
not meant of the time of Moses, David, Christ, John Baptist, or the Apostles;
for, as has been showed, set Forms were consistent with those Days of Light,
and help of the Spirit to call upon God.

It Is certain therefore, that by these words in his consideration, namely, the
Day and Light of the Gospel, the Author means the times of the late Wars, and
horrid Rebellion, the times he wrote and inveighed against the best set Form
for public Worship and Service of God, that ever was extant before it, namely
the Common Prayer Book, before this.

And now as for a fuller Answer, I grant, that with those their Days of Light,
(which was as great a darkness as ever was since Christ, as to Spiritual
things) the Glorious Liturgy of our Church was inconsistent, being a Worship
and Service according to God's and Christ's Rule and Doctrine; for that the
practice of the Opposers of the Common Prayer Book was diametrically opposite
to the Day and Light of the Gospel of Christ and his Apostles, and therefore
could have no more Concord together, than St. Paul said, 2 Cor. 6.17.
Christ and Belial could have, which was none at all; therefore it was notable
policy (though nothing of true Religion) of the Counsil of Belial, (to use His
Majesty's expression) to Crucify the Common Prayer Book by an Ordinance; for
had the Liturgy of our Church and their Belial, their Army, stood together, it
would have been, soon as it was with Dagon, when the Ark of God and it stood
together, which soon fell down and brake in pieces; their Army would soon have
moulter'd to nothing; what a confusion and consternation would have been among
them, and upon them; had that Book or the substance of it either been in use by
their Ministers, as by the express word of God is commanded should have been? 1 Timothy 2. verse. 1, 2, 3. What thoughts of heart would have been in those
rebellious spirits, when being sent up to fight against his Majesty, and his
Forces, before they had gone to Battle, they must have prayed to God to be the
preserver of him and them they were going to destroy; for so it is in the
Litany, according to the Command of God, that it may please thee to be the
King's defender, and keeper, and to give him victory over all his Enemies; and
in the Prayer for him, it is, strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome
all his enemies. So that had they continued our Liturgy as was their duty to
have done or had their Prayers been according to God's direction in his Word,
they must (as much as in them lay) have been by Prayer blessing and
strengthening his Majesty, and cursing and weakening themselves in their
Enterprises, by preceding Supplications for both.

To end therefore my Answer as to this in general; I confess indeed the former
Common Prayer Book, and almost all Prayers, according to God's revealed will in
his Word, yea and all found Scripture Doctrine, were inconsistent with the
times of the day and light of the Gospel by the Author's calculation: but in
the light of the Gospel in the times of Christ, and his Apostles, they were
consistent and justifiable; for they had then no contradiction nor
discouragement by God in the Old Testament, nor by Christ and his Apostles in
the New, as is sufficiently proved at the beginning of my Tractate. This may be
sufficient to that fifth Consideration, if not, go on as follows.

But to give the Adversary the fairest play that may be, and to save him and
his assistants the labor of replication, perhaps they will plead their more
abundant help of the Spirit, to call upon God than formerly, from their mode,
or manner of praying; and that in three respects. First in respect to the
length of their Prayers: or Secondly in respect to their Extemporary, and
Unpremeditated way of praying. Or Thirdly in respect to their more powerful,
and argumentative way they use in their Prayers, to prevail with God for the
things they ask.

I will briefly consider what may be said for them, and what against them, as
to the beforementioned respects.

First, They will say it is evident they are much more enabled by the Spirit to
call upon God than formerly, considering the length of their Prayers.

To which I answer.

This is of no moment to them that will be guided by the Precedents and
Precepts in Scriptures, as to this mode of praying: For, first, the practice of
the Saints and holy men of God have in the weightiest matters and concerns been
short in their Prayers put up to God; Abraham's Intercession for Sodom and
Gomorrah, designed for destruction, was but short. Genesis 28. verse. 23, 24, etc.
Jacob in his great fear, that Esau should destroy him and his, going to God by
prayer for safety, his Prayer is past over in four short Verses, with all the
Arguments he used to prevail with God. Genesis 32. ver. 9, 10, etc. Nay Christ
himself, seeking by prayer for the Cup of Death to pass from him, his Prayer
was short every time in his Address to the Father. Matt. 26. verse. 39, 42.
Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I
will, but as thou will: his Prayer was as short the second time; and the third
time it was no longer than at first, for it was the same.

The Precepts of God and his Spirit are against this mode of long Prayers, and
therefore no argument from the length of their Prayers, that they are more
enabled by his Spirit to call upon God. See for this, 1 Ecclus. 5.1, 2. as
concerning hearing, when men come at the House of God, he would have them very
attentive: as to the length of their Prayers, he orders them to be short, God
is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words be few.

And our Savior in his Sermon upon the Mount, directing how to Pray
effectually, orders as well concerning the length of Prayer, as to the matter
thereof. Matt. 6. verse. 7. When ye pray, use not vain repetitions as the
heathen do; the Original is, (...): which is translated, ne inania loquaemtra,
which our Church renders very well, use not vain repetitions; where our Savior
forbids tautological words, variety of Expressions to one and the same purpose.
Learned Sharp^^s in his Symphonia Propheta^um and Apostolorum, says, That the
word there used by our Savior, is taken from one Battus, a soolish Poet in
those days, whose Verses were tedious, to a loathing, by means of many diverse
and vain words to the same signification. So that there our Savior admonished
his Disciples and all men, that their Prayers be not nauscous, through
tediousness, or multiplicity of words, which is abliorred of God and devout
souls. Vos. 9. praedicti Capitis; after this manner pray ye: that is in a
concise and short manner.

Further, If in respect to the length of their Prayers, they or their hearers
will conclude their more abundant help of the Spirit to call upon God, they do
deny the Nature and being of God and Christ, as described in the Scriptures;
for James 1. verse. 1^. With God is no variablerese, nor shadow of change. And
Hebr. 13. verse. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Now
if it be through the help and direction of the Spirit, that their Prayers are
so constantly long, over they were, by the direction of God and Christ, and by
the practice of Abraham, the Prophets, and others, enabled formerly by the
Spirit, to call upon God; then it must follow, that with God is variableness,
and shadows of change; and Christ is not now the same by his Spirit he was
formerly; for if they have now help to pray, as they do, by the Spirit of
Christ, then it follows, he is now for long Prayers; and whilst upon Earth, by
himself, and by his Spirit in the days of the Apostles and Prophets, he was
altogether for short Supplications. All therefore that can be granted the
Adversary, as to the usual mode of long Prayers, is this, That they are carried
and helped thereto, either by an heathenish ignorance, or by that which is far
worse, namely, by a Spirit of Vainglory, or of Covetousness, even by the same
Spirit or ends, our Savior said was in the Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites,
whose Prayers were lengthned for a show, or for pretenses. Luke 20.47. and
Matt. 23. verse. 14.

But let us see what can be said for their pretended more abundant help of the
Spirit, in respect to their Extemporary and Unpremeditated mode of Praying.

To this I answer; If any will go thus to God in Prayer in private, but
especially in public, that is, without a due premeditation and consultation
with himself of the mercies received, he and the people are to be thankful for,
or of the things they stand in need of, and are to beg of God: it is no less
than unwarranted singularity, and rash presumption, in respect to authentic
and Scripture Precedents and Instructions; and to term it praying by the help
of God's Spirit, it is no less than Blasphemy in the highest nature. Let Us look
into the Scriptures for the truth hereof. Genesis 24. verse. 63. And Isaac went out
to meditate in the field: Another Translation renders it, he went out to pray.
And the reason of these differing Translations, Vatablus affirms to be, because
the word in the original, which is Suach, signifies both to Meditate, and to
Pray; so that it might have been rendered, Isaac went out to Meditate and to
Pray: And then it commends thus much to our Practice, and the present purpose.
First, we must meditate of God's goodness to us, and our wants; and that done,
then put up our Praises and Prayers to God; being by that premeditation better
enabled to perform that Duty than without it. A Marginal Note upon this place
says, That this was the Exercise of the godly Fathers in those times, to
meditate of God's merciful Pronuses, and then to pray for the accomplishing of
them.

And this was the practice of David, Psalm. 63 verse. 5, 6, 7. My mouth shall
praise thee with joyfullips; look on, and you shall see David will not enter
upon this Duty rashly, without meditation of God's help and goodness what it
was; this he said he would do, when he had remembered him upon his bed, and
meditated on him in the night watches, because he had been his help.

The resolution of the Twelve, Acts the 6th, verse. 4. will join in condemnation
of this their mode of praying without premeditation at least; there the Twelve
said, we will give our selves unto prayer continually, and to the ministry of
the word. I presume that by their resolution of giving themselves much to
prayer, they neither meant a constant heathenish, nor pharisaical length of
prayer, nor at all the late (...) kind of unpremeditated supplication (both
which modes have been, and yet are too much in use.) No, the Twelve by giving
themselves to prayer, considering the practice of (...) in the Scriptures,
(...) by the same Spirit with the Twelve; it was ^e^t of Composing Forms of
Prayer for themselves and others, to put up their Prayers by; or at least of
searching to know by meditation their own and others (...) they were to take
care of, and then to seek up with M^s^s, David, and others, enabled by the same
Spirit of Prayer, such arguments and reasons, from consideration of God's
promises, and properties, and of Christ's undertakings, and from considerations
of men's wants, and necessities, that thereby they might put up to God^
effectual and servent Prayers for themselves, and those they were setover by
Christ.

Which gloss may very well be admitted, as the meaning of the twelve Apostles
there, considering St. Paul's direction, concerning Prayer, who was of the same
dedication with the twelve, both as to Prayer, and the Ministry of the Word.

1 Timothy 2. verse. 1, 2, 3. the Apostle there, directing Timothy, and all other
Ministers of Christ after him, as to the manner of praying to God. He does not
there exhort to the performing of that duty in such way as that praying in this
or the fore mentioned mode or manner, it should be done according to God's
will. His Exhortation is not, that men pray for Kings and all in Authority. The
Original is, (...) I exhort that Prayers be made, which word bears, to be
composed, prepared, or made ready, as in a form up to God, to put the desires
of their hearts for all men, for Kings and all in Authority, that we may lead a
peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty. It Is confessed, that in
the Apostles times, among other miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost, some had
their Extemporary Effusions. 1 Cor. 11.14, 15. and with the 2^th, Every one of
you has a Psalm, etc. but the Apostle observing that this beg^t so much
Emulation, Faction, and confusion among them, he restrained the use of those
Gifts, and enjoined, that all things should be done decently, and to that
effect that they should be done (...), according to rule, appointment, and
order, verse. 23. and the 40th.

Or again, the former gloss upon the resolution of the twelve Apostles, of
giving themselves much to Prayer, may be admitted as their meaning there,
considering what it was for them to give themselves to the Ministry of the
Word; for what is meant of giving themselves to the word, is meant of giving
themselves to Prayer. Now the Apostles by giving themselves to the Ministry of
the Word, was meant their searching into the will of God, their studying, and
meditating of the mind of Christ, by comparing, as St. Paul speaks, spiritual
things with spiritual, Scripture with Scripture, and by consulting one with
another of the sure way of salvation; as we see was their practice when the
difference arose about Circumcision, Acts 15. from verse. 1. to the 30th. Which
thing is also evident from the practice of the Apostle St. Paul, whose giving
himself to the Ministry of the Word, was doing what he commended in others, 1 Timothy 5. verse. 17. namely, laboring in the Word and Doctrine, by study and
meditation of the word of God, joined to the assistance of God's spirit, that
was helping of him. So that I see not, but that that place where the twelve
Apostles resolved to give themselves much to Prayer, rightly expounded, gives a
suffrage with the practice of Isaac, David, and others, in condemning this mode
of unpremeditated praying to God; And so I shall end my declamation against it,
with part of the second Verse of the fifth Chapter of Ecclesiastes; (the end
whereof before, with other places of Scripture, gave sentence against the
heathenish and pharisaical mode of Prayer) Be not rash with your mouths, and
let not your hearts be hasty, henceforth, to utter any thing before God, for
God is in heaven, and you upon earth.

But though I have said thus much against the two former modes of Prayer, as
they be used by the factious, against both Scripture Precedents, and Rules for
Devotion; yet I would have the Adversaries know, that I am not so against
sudden and unpremeditated Prayers, or long Prayers, either as that God's people
should never use them; there is sometimes occasion for both, and a time when
neither is to be neglected; for a sudden Prayer we have warrant for, and
encouragement to, from the practice and prevalency of the Disciples. Matt.
8.25. When upon a sudden storm the ship was ready to sink, and they to perish,
they run to Christ with, Lord save us, we perish. And there is occasion
sometimes for long Prayers, as there was in the time of God's provocation, by
the sins of Israel and Aaron, when it was the Lord's resolution to have
destroi'd them; Deuteronomy. 9. verse. 18, 19. then Moses is at Prayer forty days and
forty nights. Which is also upon extraordinary occasions, the practice of our
Church; for in the times of God's heavy Judgments upon the Land, or upon some
particular place theref, the sure Evidences of God's displeasure because of our
sins, then our Church appoints days of Humiliation, and the Prayers to God upon
those days are lengthned then, as well as fitted to the present occasions.
Which is also ordinarily the practice of our Church; it being our duty from St.
Paul's churge, sometimes to remember in our Prayers all Men, Kings, and all in
Authority: Here^^on our Church lengthens our Prayers at times by the Litany,
and so, that it is hard to find where the concern of any one man is neglected;
yea, and so well it is composed also as to brevity, fullness, and (...), to the
dispatch of the Duty enjoined, that I heard our late Bishop Reynolds (where
judgment was of high esteem with them of the Author's faction, if they did not
dissemble (...) give it this E^comium: That it was the most excellent composed
Prayer that ever was used in the Worship of God, since the times of Christ and
his Apostles, and said, He was of opinion, that is ^ll the Divines then living
should join (...) in making another, they couldl not parallel it.

But let us look now upon the third respect, their lat City of refuge, as to the
present concern, which is their more spiritual, powerful, and a^^ mentative way
to be used in Prayer, to prevail with God. In which respect, I pre^^^e they
challenge to themselves a more abundant help of the Spirit, as to Prayer, than
others, yea than those that composed this Form of Common Prayer for the Church
and themselves to seek God by.

Well, now as to the trval hereof, we must to the Orale, or Word of God, and
consider of the Precedents and Directions therein, as to the way of
powerfulness and prevalency with God by Prayer, and see whose Pravers, the
Churches or theirs, be best sitted to help the souls of people to a fiduciary,
servent, and effectual way of praying to God, or which be most suitable to
Scripture Directions herein.

And as to lead to this, we need go no further than to our blessed Savior,
helping his Church in their Devotions and Pravers. mait. 6. verse. 9. After this
manner therefore pray ye; Our Father which art in heaven, etc. Heb. 11. verse.
6. The spirit of Christ tells us, that without Faith it is impossible to please
God in the performance of any Duty, and there concludes, that he that goes to
God by Prayer effectually, he must believe that God is both able and willing to
relieve them that diligently seek him, that is the sum of that place.

Now Christ, as helping devont souls to obtain at God's hands the things they
stood in need of by Prayer; directs them in the beginning, to the minding of
that may raise and continue in the praying foul, a faith or belief in God, in
order to a diligent seeking of God, so as he may obtain. Our Father which art
in heaven, for there he remembers them, with the power of God to help, in that
he tells them God is in heaven, to whom they pray, and therefore above the
reach of earthly things to hinder his will: he also there minds them, that he
is as willing to relieve, as able, in remembrancing them he is their Father.
And in the close of his Direction, he teaches them to argue even undeniably
with God, to grant their requests.

For, says he, thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory; here are strong
Arguments to incline a God of power, of truth, of justice, of mercy, and of
greatness as God is, to vouchsafe the things he directed his Church to ask, and
whereof they stand in need. For there he teaches his Church to remembrance
God, that he does no wrong to any in granting their desired necessities, they
mind him he has right to dispose of where he please the things they begged.
Secondly, they mind him, it is in his power to grant their desires.

And lastly, in the close of all, they mind God of his own advantage upon the
grant of their requests, yea and enter into a Covenant also, to be for ever
thankful to God upon his granting their requests: all these are couched
together in that close, commonly called by Divines the Doxology, of that
Prayer, for thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and over.
Amen.

And now having briefly considered of the direction of our Savior, as to the
most powerful and effectual way of Prayer, let us peruse some of the Prayers of
our Church Liturgy, and some of the Prayers of them who have so undervalued and
neglected the same, and let the World and themselves judge, who come nearest
the Directory and Liturgy of our Savior, and the practice of God's Saints in
the Scriptures herein.

And I Will begin with the beginning of our Liturgy, that pithy and effectual
(though short) Form of Confession and Supplication, in order to forgiveness of
sins past, and of amendment of life for the future.

As the due and fullest confession of sins is an infallible way, so also it is
an only way to obtain forgiveness of sins upon supplication thereof through
Christ. Which we see in the Prodigal (being come to himself) and after that to
his Father in the same way: Luke 15. verse. 17, 21, 22. Now that devout souls
might come up to a due performance of both, our Church follows our Savior's
forementioned Directions.

It begins with Almighty and most merciful Father. A Procemium fitted to help
every sinful confitent and petitioner to faith, to continuance and increase in
faith, so as they may return with the Prodigal's hope, and desire, to God their
heavenly Father, Almighty God; and with as happy a success as he did to his.
For here is means fit to help sinners to go to God in (...) faithful hope of
forgiveness, and consequently to seek it of him diligently. For here they are
briefly instructed, they are going to him for forgiveness, and for their wants,
who is the most merciful Father in the World; nay to him whose compassion and
inclination to forgiveness is as far beyond an earthly Father's, as the Heavens
are higher than the Earth: Isa. 55. verse. 9. which thing is argued by our
Savior in Luke 11. verse. 11, 12, 13. to make men importunate and diligent
seekers of God in Prayer. If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a
father, will be give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will be give him a
serpent? or if he ask him an egg, will be give him a scorpion. No the sum is
this, an earthly Father will give a Child upon request the things he has need
of: Ay but what follows, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy
Ghost to them that ask him?

But if there be never so much willingness to help, yet if there be not ability
to relieve, there will be but a slack and faint address made, though there be
never so much want.

But now ye may see our Church here, after the Practice of our Savior, has
made provision for the latter as well as for the former, for it ascribes to him
power to forgive all sins, and to amend all sinfulness of life in man, in
attributing to him almightiness, as well as it preached before his willingness,
in those words placed before the Confession and Supplication, Almighty and most
merciful Father. See Exodus 32. Verse. 31.
And in the close of this Confession and Prayer the Church follows Christ
there, and the Saints of God close.

There our Church helps a devout soul to plead strongly with God for
forgiveness, and assisting grace, by way of an humble remembrancing of God, of
his PRomise made to Mankind, thereupon in Christ Jesus. And citer that pleads
with God for his help to amend their lives, that they might be instruments for
his glory thereby.

And indeed it ye look upon the Absolution, upon the second Collect at Morning
Prayer, which is for Peace, upon the third, which is for Grace, upon the
second, at Evening-Prayer, which is for peace of Conscience, peace with God;
upon the Prayers for his Majesty the King, for the Queen, the Duke of York, and
the Royal Family; for the Ministers of the Word, and all Congregations
committed to their charge, and upon most of the Pravers, to be used with the
forementioned Prayers in our daily Devotions, they are fitted to awaken and
help our Faith, and ^^erchy to strengthen our wrestling souls with God by
Prayer, that we might overcome him, as Jacob did at Peniel, and the Lord not
able to deny us blessings meet for us and his own glory.

And now look upon some of the Prayers and Thanksgivings of them that have so
despised the former, and are so much more enabled by the Spirit to those Duties
by their own Pretensions, and see which have come nearest the help of our
Savior, and the powerful, and argumentative way of the canonized Saints in the
Calendar of the Spirit of God.

At a Market Town in Norfolk, there being a Meeting, in order to setting up the
Presbyterian Government, the Minister in his Sermon, (instructing the
Lay Elders as to the due execution of their places) told them, they must be as
exquisite Surgeons, who have Hauks eyes, Ladies hands, and Lions hearts.

But one of that Faction, taking on him to pray a Blessing upon the work of the
day, among other things, he desired God he would give the Lay Elders, Hauks
eyes, Ladies hands, and Lions paws.

That I shall not omit of one in his Prayer before his Sermon, in his
Thanksgivings, blessed God for the twelve Bishops being sent to the Tower, in
the long and mad Parliament, because that thereupon God had set Christ Jesus
twelve steps higher in his Throne than ever he was before.

Another Minister, being to Preach a Funeral Sermon at another Minister's
Parish, he that officiated before the Sermon, read the 8th of Ecclesiastes,
where, in the 4th Verse, it is said, Where the word of a King is, there is
power, and who can say to him, what do thou? The Minister that was to Preach
(being for the present Rebellion) fearing the people (in all probability) might
have been brought to, or continued in Loyalty, upon the remembrance of
Solomen's Doctrine, used this poisonous Antidote, in his Prayer before the
Sermon. O Lord, though Solomon has said, that Kings cannot be controuled, yet
we thy people know by the Spirit, that Kings may be questioned and called to
account.

I will insert but one more Expression in Prayer, which was lately told me, by
one that heard it, being present himself at a Church in Suffolk: in the Prayer
of a Minister in great esteem, in those days. After some Groanings and small
coughing Respits, these words came forth: Lord go on with thy Reformation,
while it is time: (and after some more coughing Respits, he went on thus) For
if thou do not, thou will not know what to do.

And that these and such like ridiculous and profane Expressions, and dead
argumentative helps were too frequently used in the Prayers of those so boldly
assuming to themselves a superlative, or extraordinary help of the Spirit to
call upon God, are in common charity and probability to be received as truth,
(even by those that have not heard them, or the like to them) considering the
report, as to such like particulars, left to be published by King Charles the
First of most blessed memory, being then in his own thoughts, but a few steps
from the grave. For in his Observations upon the Ordinance against the Book of
Common Prayer, in the twelfth Paragraph there, having stigmatized many of their
Prayers with statness, rudeness, confusion, ridiculous repetitions, yea with
senseless and oft-times blasphemous Expressions, etc. In the thirteenth
Paragraph, he concludes to my present purpose, in these following words;
Wherein they must be stra^^^ly impudent, and flatterers of themselves, not to
have an infinite shame of what they so do, and say, in things of so sacred a
nature, before God and the Church, after so ridiculous, and indeed profane a
manner. But notwithstanding what has been last s^^d, I cannot but grant, that
some of them, infatuated with the same spiritual pride, and self conceitedness,
have been more prudent, and careful than others, in composing and wording their
Public Prayers; but yet if they be weighed in the S^des, and with the Weights
of the Sanctuary, with the Collects and Prayers of our Liturgy, so despised by
them, their best Prayers will be found lighter than the other, in the judgment
of meek, humble, and devout souls, knowing how to pray as they ought, through
the help of the Spirit of God.

Look upon the sixth Consideration, which begins thus:

How little good (if any at all) has been done by the long use of the
Service Book, though men have prayed long by it, that the rest of their lives
might be holy and righteous, yet they still continue profane and unrighteous.

The Author's opinion there is thus:

Those men that have made never so long use of the Service Book, and have
prayed never so long by it to God for a sanctified and righteous life, have
never attained to any part thereof. It appears plainly to be his opinion; for
positively and indefinitely he says, though men have prayed long by it, that
the rest of their lives might be holy and righteous, yet they still continue
profane and unrighteous.

To which I answer, This being the judgment and sentence of the Author, or of
any that read his Pamphlet, let them return speedily with a penitent heart for
and from these thoughts. For I see not but they may be ranked with the man of
sin St. Paul speaks of, in the 2d Epistle to the Thessalonians, chap. 2. verse.
4. who, as God, sits in the Temple of God, showing and professing himself
that he is God. For in the Is It of the Corinthians, chap. 3. verse. 17. A Church
of God, a Congregation of believers, are there called the Temple of God.

Now this man, or any following this his opinion, living with or among a Church
of God, a company of true Worshippers of God, he or they holding and professing
the aforesaid opinion, are got into the Temple of God, hereby professing
themselves that they are God, in judging and condemning a great part of God's
Church, before Christ (to whom is committed all Judgment) be come in the
clouds, to justify some, and condemn others.

Or if they may not be ranked there, I am sure they may with them St Paul, in
the 2 Epistle to Timothy, chap. the 3d, at the first verse. and so on, said
should come in the last and perilous times, namely blasphemers, and despisers
of those that are good; which evidently belongs to them, if ye do but consider
the conversations, and spiritual comforts of the late reverend Bishops, Deans,
Prebends, and of others, outed, sequestered, persecuted, imprisoned, and
murdered, both of Clergy and Laity, that were constant Worshippers of God, in
that Form of the Service Book in public whilst it could be so used, and in
private afterward.

Seeing that these through the grace and help of God (serving God that way)
might, and I believe did, in and from their hearts say in St. Paul's hope, as
well as words. 2 Epist. to Tim. chap. 4. verse. 7. namely, that they had fought
a good fight, and kept the faith, and that there was laid up for them a crown
of righteousness. Nay their blasphemy and unparallelable despications upon this
their condemnation are yet more evident, and rise yet higher in their not
excepting our late King Charles, the blessed Martyr. It cannot be denied, but
that he was a constant Worshipper of God in Public, by the Service Book; And
prayed even to the last unto God by it. Now I do positively say (and who shall
contradict it) that there was much sanctifying grace to him from God upon his
Devotion, and Worshipping God thereby; which will be evident, if his Book
Composed by him were but perused.

Where ye may see a testimony of his Spiritual Comforts, and of Sanctifying
Righteousness, vouchsafed him of God, yea and of his possession of Christ's and
Steven's Spirit at his approaching death, in both freely forgiving, and
fervently praying for his cruel Enemies. Nor can it be thought, but that God,
through the use of that Service Book, did vouchsafe him help cheerfully to
drink off that Cup of Death so embittered by his Enemies; especially
considering the true report goes of his Morning-Worship the day before he
suffered.

His Majesty being to receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper the Morning
before his Passion, being the 30th of January; The Service was to be performed
by the Book of Common Prayer, which Bishop Juxen (then officiating) observed
punctually, and coming to the second Lesson to be read, named it the 27 chap.
of St. Matthew. At the Bishop's naming the Lesson, being the History of our
Savior's Passion, His Majesty (in all probability not eying the Calender, as
then it concerned him not to do) steps to the Bishop, and in meekness asked,
Why he did apply that Chapter to the present occasion? The Bishop replied to
this purpose, and said, It was the portion of Scripture that by providence was
appointed for the second Lesson by the Common Prayer Book for the
Morning-Service.

Then said his Majesty, Go on.

So that at the dreadful hour of his death, being then at greatest need of help
to suffer (as Christ Jesus was, in his bloody Agonies, at the approaching of
the hour of his Passion) God by this his appointed Lesson for his Majesty's
Passion, made the Common Prayer Book do, for this blessed Martyr at that time,
what the Angel did for Christ, when appearing to him in his Agomes from Heaven,
strengthening him; for thereby questionless God helped his Majesty to pass
toward the gate of death, calmly, undauntedly, and cheerfully, as he did (as
thousands can yet testify) nor can I see how it should be less, or otherwise,
seeing that God thereby gave an unexpected, and extraordinary Testimony to him
that that day he was to suffer with him, even as he did, one for many, and
consequently to reign with him, and that he should, this life ended, be with
him in Paradise, sitting with the noble Army of Martyrs, praising and
magnifying the God of his salvation.

And last of all, to conclude against this most false and damnable
determination of the Author, let it be considered of, that God has often given
testimony of his acceptance of that Form of Prayer, and of the Worshippers of
him thereby, seeing that when God at any time has showed his Indignation
against the sinful people of this Land, by his sore Judgments upon some places
thereof; why the repenting Inhabitants, humbling themselves before this God,
and seeking his atonement and reconciliation in this Form of Worship and
Service, together with some few set Prayers and Portions of holy Scripture,
fitted to the present occasions: why, I say, this Common Prayer Book (with
those few apt alterations) have oft-times done for England what David's rearing
an Altar at the Word of God, and offering burnt-offerings, and peace offerings
thereon, did for Israel, 2 Samuel chap. 24. ver. 25. it has not been long before
the Lord has been entreated, and the Judgments stayed.

To the 7th Consideration;

How much hurt it has done in shouldering and thrusting out many godly,
painful, soul-saving Preachers, etc.

I presume that in this Consideration, the Author has respect to the times
before the beginning of the long Parliament, and the Wars they raised against
his late Majesty of blessed memory, when according to the Law of the Land, (as
now it is the same) the Ministers that would not conform to the Book of
Common Prayer, could neither hold their Livings, nor Preach.

In this respect he means the Service Book shouldered and thrust out many
godly, painful, soul-saving Preachers, this being the sense of the Author in
this former part of the Consideration (as I verily believe it is) it contains
this following Proposition:

Those Ministers that would not conform to the Book of Common Prayer, were
godly, painful, soul-saving Preachers.

Answer.

To make which Proposition true, the Author must have recourse to some of their
new light, for I am sure that the old light, the Old and New Testament, neither
by Precedents, nor Precepts therein, can they prove themselves to be either in
a godly or soul-saving way of themselves, or of them that did adhere to their
Doctrines.

For so soon as his Majesty's Grant was ratified for the two Houses of
Parliament to sit during their pleasure, there was soon a foundation for a
Rebellion laid, by them and the Synod of Divines sitting with them. Which was
no sooner done, but those Dissenters from the Common Prayer Book (some having
gone beyond Sea, and others retiring into secret places at home for a while)
soon joined all their Forces, to carry on the late most damnable Rebellion and
Disobedience. So that instead of being owned godly and soul-saving Preachers,
they may justly be termed what the Pharisees were of John the Baptist, namely
an offspring of Vipers.

For as it is the property of the offspring of Vipers, to destroy their Dams
that gave them their being, so did these forsaker, of the Service Book soon
help to destroy our most gracious Sovereign, that, under God, gave them their
safe being and preservation, as Englishmen, and for a long while destroyed
their Mother, the true Protestant Church of England, which gave them their
spiritual, saving, and Christian light and grace, if ever they had any. So that
for the just condemnation of the former part of the Author's 7th Consideration,
what God said against Judah and Hicrusalem, by Isaiah, chap. 1. verse. 2. may
justly be applied to these opposers of the King, State, and Church of England;
Hear O Heaven, and give car O Earth, for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished
and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me.

Now something would be said to the latter part of this 7th Consideration,
where the Service Book lies under a great condemnation, in respect to bringing
in, and maintaining many ignonorant, scandalous, lazy, and formal Priests and
Curats, to the deceiving and utter undoing of many precious souls.

In which latter Paragraph, I presume the Author had respect to the Times
before the long Parliament, and the late unhappy Wars, and do mean thereby,
that the Ministers in the foregoing times, which would subscribe and conform to
the Book of Common Prayer (though but of mean parts) were admitted to Livings,
and suffered to serve their Cures, in which respect, I presume the Author means
the Service Book brought in, and maintained many ignorant, etc. as above said.

To which Accusation, I make this ensuing Apologetical Answer.

I remember that in those times many of the Clergy brought into the Ministry in
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory, as also for some while after,
by reason of a scarcity of Learned Men, occasioned by the sharp Persecution of
such Divines in Queen Mary's days, and in another respect, alleged by a Bishop
at the Conference at Hampton Court. I say, I remember many of those Ministers
of very mean ability were then alive, and remained in their Livings. And indeed
I confess, that in that respect, it may be said, that the Service Book brought
in, and maintained some Ministers of but mean Abilities; but yet were nothing
so impudently and wickedly ignorant, as Butchers, and other Mechanic Teachers,
put into public places, after the said Service Book was crucified; for though
these former Ministers knew not much, yet what they knew, they knew rightly;
but these latter, thinking they knew any thing, as St. Paul, 1 Corinthians. chap.
8. verse. 2. they knew nothing as they ought to know.

In the next place the Author says, this Service Book did bring in, and
maintain scandalous and lazy Priests and Curats: that is, first men of an open
wicked Coversation. To which I Answer:

It Is a charge as nonsensical as false, and as false as any thing can be. Let
him show where the Rubric, or any part of the Book, yea, or any Canons, or
Constitutions of our Church, give Toleration, or countenance of any such
Minister in that Office. If there be any such scandalous Minister in the
Church, the fault lies in the Officers, in not presenting of them, not in the
Service Book, nor in them in Ecclesiastical Authority. For as our Bishop, when
Archdeacon, hearing, by flying reports, of some scandalous Ministers to be in
his Jurisdiction, and meeting with no Informations thereof at his general
Visitation, he told the Officers of the reports: but withal told them, there
could not be a debauched Clergy in England, unless there were a perjured Laity.

And whereas the Author says they were lazy, that probably might be spoken
(how diligent soever) because they prated not nonsensically twice or thrice a
week in the Pulpits, as some of their gang did use to do. But if the Works and
Sermons of most of the Clergy Printed, and weekly Preached, were duly
considered of, both in these times, and in the days he complains of, in this
Consideration, they would be found generally a Clergy so laboring in the Word
and Doctrine, as they might be thought justly worthy of double honor; and in
that respect free, with St. Paul, from the blood of all men, neither deceiving,
nor undoing any soul, as the Author uncharitably and blasphemously charges here
upon many Ministers.

To the 8th Consideration:

Whether the imposing of the Scottish Liturgy (which in some things was better,
though in some others worse than the English) was not the beginning and the
first cause of the late grievous Wars; and if so, whether men should not be
more cautious to do the like for the future.

I presume that upon this Consideration, the Author would have this believed
and granted, that the Imposing of the Scottish Liturgy, to be used in their
Public Worship and Service of God, was the beginning and the first just cause
of the late grievous Wars.

Or thus:

That the Scots, and late long Parliament in England, were justifiable in
Levying Wars against his Majesty, King Charles the First, and his Loyal
Subjects, upon sending, or commanding, or commending to them the aforesaid
Liturgy to be used in their Public Worship and Service of God.

One of these Propositions or Assertions containing the meaning of the Author;
in this Consideration, in the close thereof he makes use and application in
these following words:

And if so, whether men should not be more cantions, etc. The Proposition being
granted to be truth, whereof he would have no man doubt. He makes the
Application by way of an inferential Caveat, or Advice: And that is, that no
Men, Kings or Church, should afterward commend, or tender the like, that is,
any Liturgy or set Form of Prayer to the people (especially of Scotland) to be
used in the Public Worship of God for the future (considering that Wars have
been raised before in Scotland and England thereupon.)

To which I Answer:

Considering the Scots received Knox his Form of Prayer, and England ever had
one, I shall not conclude with the Author, that the Imposition of that Liturgy
was the first cause or beginning of the late grievious Wars, Which I heard Mr.
Peter's boast of in St. Laurence Pulpit, the peculiar Thanksgiving day for the
Defeat at Worcester.
in the intention of the Contrivers, and Managers thereof, (though it might be
made use of, by way of occasion to hasten to the Execution of their long before
contrived rebellious Design, and wished desire.)

Nor shall I here enumerate or debate their pretended just grounds for their
War. Nor shall I argue to evidence the unlawfulness of those Insurrections,
otherwise then by remembrancing men of the displeasure of God with them for
those their Enterprises, manifested sufficiently in the succeeding events and
issues thereof. For we see the Presbytery in Scotland, and their Confederates
in England (the Presbyterian Covenanters here) the beginners of that horrid
Rebellion, soundly basted, wholly subdued (baffled, and made the laughing stock
of the World) by the Sword of their own Party.

What became of the Hothams, that so hindered and disabled his Majesty of most
blessed memory, to defend himself against these and other enemies, in seizing
his Garrison, and Magazine at Hull.

And as to this Topic, I shall desire at present nothing more to be had in
memory, but the end of that heavy scourge and rod of God's Protestant Church,
and his beloved Kingdom of England, I mean the Independent and Cromwellian
Army, and the imparallelable High-Court of Injustice, the chief whereof (though
the generality had mercy) died not the common death of English offenders, but
that death (by the providence and justice of God) appointed by the Law of the
Land for the worst of Malefactors; and so let all the implacable Enemies of our
Church and gracious Sovereign perish.

And now I Will have done speaking to this 8th Consideration, in the same manner
the Author ended it, even by way of Application.

Seeing that God brought upon that party that raised Wars upon the imposing
justifiable and pious Liturgies (as I presume the Scottish was, and am sure the
English formerly was, and this now is) such a miserable and wretched end (as
the just wages of that rebellion) as he did upon the chief heads thereof. Let
all men henceforth be so cautious, as not to dare to think in the least of
Disobedience, or Levying Wars upon the same, or such like grounds, as the
former Rebels did, against this Church, and in the close, our dread Sovereign,
or Crown of England.

To the 9th Consideration:

Whether if the truth were thoroughly and truly weighed and examined, the first
end of Composing the Common Prayer Book (which does symbolize with the Mass)
etc.

In this Consideration are couched diverse Propositions of the Author,
concerning the Common Prayer Book.

One may be this:

The first (that is, as I presume, the chiefest) end of the Author's Composing
the Common Prayer Book, was to bring Papists to Church.

Answer.

This is the first charitable Expression that I have hitherto observed Mr.
Powel to have given them that were the Authors of this kind of Worship, but had
he made known in plain and full terms the other gracious designs of those men
thereby, as namely, to help good meaning hearts to God, by the only Mediator in
Heaven, Christ Jesus, (and not by Saints and Angels;) as also secondly, as St.
Paul directs, 1 Corinthians. chap. 14. verse. 15. to help those had in them a spirit
or heart to pray, that they might perform it with understanding, and be able to
say Amen, effectually and servently.

I say, had Mr. Powel mentioned these and other the gracious ends of the
Composers of the Service Book (God's mercies and way of salvation being then
veiled to the generality of men, being set forth only in an unknown Tongue.) I
say, he and others thereupon might have owned them to have had to the people of
England the like Employment the Angels had to the Shepherds and the World at
the Birth of Christ, when veiled to many, by the meanness of his coming in the
flesh; namely this, to set forth by that Service Book, the glory of God, in his
peace on earth, and good will toward men, that so England might be in a right
way to believe in Christ, and so to call upon him, that they might not perish,
but have everlasting life.

And to be short, as to speaking to this ninth Consideration; what though it be
granted, that it symbolize with the Mass book, or that many things be in it
that are in that, seeing there is nothing in our Liturgy but what is good,
lawful, or useful to Edification (as will be evident to men doubtful thereof,
if they will but peruse diligently Mr. Thomas Comber's Companion to the Temple;
or otherwise termed, A help to Devotion, in the daily use of the Common Prayer:
In two Parts.

To the 10th Consideration.

Whether some may not intend by the reestablishing of this Book, to oppose and
pull down that excellent and gracious Spirit of Prayer.

As to their excellent Gifts, or helps by the Spirit, as to Prayer. And as to
their godly, painful, soul-saving Preachers, both which they have assumed to
themselves in the First and Seventh Considerations, and have reassumed in this
Tenth Consideration, under the notion of an excellent and gracious Spirit of
Prayer and Preaching. As to their mistake in presuming to such Gifts and
Abilities, I refer the Reader hereof to what I have before written, concerning
their Praying and Preaching, upon those Fifth and Seventh Considerations. And
to make a short business as to speak to this Tenth Consideration, I Will give
them my thoughts of the ends of re-establishing the former Book with some few
Alterations, and diverse Additions of several Prayers and Services, fitted to
several accidental occasions: The first whereof might be, to answer such
moderate Dissenters (I call them so in comparison of them of these latter days)
as was Doctor Reynolds, Mr. Chadderton, and the others with them at the
Conference at Hempton-Court, on the behalf of other Ministers and themselves,
whose desires (as to the Book of Common Prayer) then were, that it might be
fitted to more increase of Piety, as our Common Prayer Book now is.

Another end might be, to oppose and pull down (as it was high time to do) the
long, tautological, heathenish, pharisaical, extemporary, nonsensical,
erroneous, damning kinds of Praying and Preaching were then, and had been too
long in use in England.

A third end of confirming this Book, might be, to revive and re-establish this
most blessed and excellent help for Devotion, and Worship of God, that ever was
heretofore in the Church of Christ, and to countenance Orthodoxal Preachers,
and so to maintain sound Doctrine, which had for a long time been shut out of
public places for Worship and Instruction, by an usurped Authority over this
Church and State.

And whereas he concludes it made as a snare and net against such, as out of
Conscience could not Conform thereto; I am sure no man can have any ground now
for such accusation, or uncharitableness, if they do but consider the religious
care taken by his Majesty soon after his Restoration, to answer the Doubts and
Objections of such Pretensions, in appointing a Committee of Bishops for that
purpose, where and when Bishop Reynolds had the Chair. So that indeed all that
can be said, as to the Book (in the intention of any of the Composers thereof)
as concerning net or snare, in respect to the Penalties made thereby to be
inflicted upon the Nonconformists to it, they were only made against perverse,
obstinate, and wilful opposers of the same, and so are to be cleared from the
charge of any evil intention against tender Consciences.

To the 11th Consideration.

Whether any person can produce any such Liturgy, or Form of Prayer, from the
beginning of the World, either among Jews or Gentiles, etc.

As to the justification of Liturgies, and set Forms of Prayer, I have spoken
at large in the beginning of this Fractate, and shall therefore answer the
Author's Question in this Consideration no otherwise than as our Savior
answered the Question put to him in the Temple, Mark 11. verse. 29, 30. And that
is by giving a Question to him and his followers to answer, and it is this:

Whether any persons can produce any such long tautological, extempory,
nonsensical Prayers? or any such soul-destroying, damning Doctrins, or Sermons,
since the beginning of the World, either among the Jews or Gentiles, or any
Churches of Christ, till this Rebellion in Scotland and England, as theirs
were? Let any of them answer me this Question, and I will answer further to
this 11th Consideration.

To the 12th Consideration.

Whether, if there were no other reason, but that this Book has been so much
idolize^ by the generality of men, and offensive t^ so many Christians, it
should not be done with as the brazen Serpent was by Hezekiah 2 Kings 18. verse.
4.

The opinion of the Author may be set forth in this Proposition.

The generality of men have much Idolized the Book of Common Prayer; and it is a
just offense to many Christians also.

Here the Author charge first a great evil to have been committed by most men
in praying unto God, and in worshipping of him in tha^ Form of the
Common Prayer Book: And that is that they have Idolized it.

Now to Idolize a Creature or Thing, is taken several ways out of mentioning
two of them is first to esteem it as their God or Savior. In this respect it
may be the Author means the generality of men Idolized the Service Book.

To which I answer.

I am confident there is not a man will set hi^ heart to that part of the
Consideration; for who can think men so ignorant, as to esteem that their God
or Christ to save them, which is that Form whereby they go to God and Christ
their Redeemer and Mediator for forgiveness of sins and salvation.

But then secondly, To idolize any thing, is inordinately to set the heart upon
it, trusting in it more than in God, and above him, in this respect
Covetousness is called Idolatry. Colos. 3. verse. 5. Thus Mr. Wilson in his
Christian Dictionary.

But thirdly, We commonly say, men idolize a thing, when they have a greater
respect to, and esteem of a thing than it deserves. In this respect I presume
the Author means most men did idolize the Service Book, which he thinks
sufficiently manifested by their so constant and frequent Worshipping and
Invocating of God thereby.

To which I answer. Considering the Counsel, or rather the Command of God, as
to the frequent performance of this Duty of Prayer, and Thanksgiving, by St.
Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5. ver. 17, 18. where he bids us Pray without ceasing, and in
every thing give thanks, because it is the will of God in Christ Jesus.
Considering that, I say King Charles the first, of most blessed memory, in his
Observations upon the Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book, does fully make
void the Author's forementioned Charge and Reason alleged for defense of it,
in the Eighth and Ninth Paragraphs.

The King's words:

I could never see any reason, why any Christian should abhor, or be forbidden
to use the same Form of Prayer, since he prays to the same God, believes in the
same Savior, professes the same truths, reads the same Scriptures, has the
same Duties upon him, and feels the same daily wants for the most part both
inward and outward, which are common to the whole Church.

Sure we may as well before hand know wh^^ we pray, as to whom we pray, and in
what words, as to what sense; when we desire the same things, what hinders we
may not use the same words? our appetite and digestion too may be good, when we
use, as we pray for, our daily bread.

Now, considering all this, where is any cause for taking away this Book of
Common Prayer from the people, as the brazen Serpent from them of Israel and
Judah.

But it is no marvel that the Author and his Followers charge men with Idolizing
this Book, in offering in Public unto God their Prayers and Thanksgivings
thereby, according to the Order and Authority of the Church, when I have heard
them charge men with idolizing the Lord's Prayer, using it but according to the
Command of Jesus Christ himself; that is, in the several Services and Prayers
of the Church, fitted and appointed to be used upon several occasions before
Mattens or Even song be over, whereof by especial command of Christ, the Lord's
Prayer is to be part. Luke 11. verse 2.

When I consider the impudent Charge, I my self heard from one of the Author's
chief fellow Chaplains against some of the Petitions of the Lord's Prayer, in
condemning one of them in the Pulpit unlawful, as to the matter, and another
not fit to be used by most; Hugh Peter's, at Norwich, said of that Petition, thy
will be done, etc. What, said he, pray for an impossible thing; and condemning
another Petition, said, See what the Petitions are of that you call the Lord's
Prayer.
as also when I consider the total neglect of our Lord's Prayer in these men's
Devotions, drawn up by Christ for a Form of Prayer, as well as for an help to
compose our own Prayers by. I say, when I consider these things, then what
David said (seeing the transgressions of the wicked) of his heart, I say of
mine, namely thus, I have said in my heart, that they say in their hearts,
(though not in right down words) that Christ in Composing, and Commanding that
Prayer to be said as often as men pray, is accessory to a very great and general
guiltiness of Idolatry in this last respect at least.

Or if they should not own this, yet I am sure the total neglect of using it in
their Devotions, prove plainly, they look upon it as a Prayer unworthy to be
used, which is no less than in their hearts to blaspheme the Savior of the
World.

But then further, he says the Book was offensive to many Christians.

He does not say, it was offensive to the Brethren, or the weak Brethren (as is
usually the Phrase in the Scriptures, in such cases as this here of the Author)
And that perhaps because he would not have the Church of England, nor the
Worshippers of God by the said Book, to have the honor, to be thought to share
with them in the happy events of their ways.

Verily I think none shall need to be offended at their secluding them from
their Fellowship or Fraternity therein; for both Presbyterian and Independent,
in most of their undertakings, were but like Simeon and Levi, brethren in
Iniquity, and at the last day, without repentance, must have the same doom they
had from their father Jacob, Genesis 49 verse. ^. Cursed be their anger, for it was
fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel.

Well, but to take it in his own terms, that it was offensive to many
Christians. This term of Christian was the ancient, and best name was given to
true believers in Christ after his Assension: this name is, in the opinion of
Divines, that St. James spoke of, in 2d chap. verse. 7. which he says was the
worthy name whereby believers were called. And Divines describe a Christian as
follows; namely, to be one that is endowed through Grace with Faith and the
holy Ghost, serving God in righteousness and true holiness all his days, as a
person dedicated to Christ.

Now if the Author should produce any Christian according to this description
(which I am confident he cannot do) or according to any description hereof,
congruous to the Scripture sense, that ever was offended at the worshipping of
God in this Form of Prayer; yet there is but little said to the Author's
forementioned purpose, namely, of that Book being an offense to many
Christians; it being but an offense taken, where none is justly given.

I can easily grant, that the Book of Common Prayer was offensive to such
Christians as this Author means, and as himself was; and so was many parts of
the whole Bible. In the 1st Book of the Kings, chap. 22. verse. 8. Ahab loved
not to enquire of the Lord by Micaiah, because he prophesied no good concerning
him, but evil. And if the Author and others offended at the Book, would publish
the reason thereof, from their hearts, it is probable, it is because there is
nothing of good for them there, but evil, being in those perverse ways. For, as
I said before, should they have used that Liturgy in the time of the Wars,
using the Forms of Prayer, they must as much as in them lay have been blessing
them they were fighting against, and cursing themselves, and their cursed
undertakings.

And truly from those Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels culled out of the
Scriptures, and injoined by the Liturgy to be read in our daily Service. The
whole Book is but a Micaiah to them, prophesying no good to them, but evil, for
therein they must have found themselves an Army fighting against the Almighty
God, to their sudden both present and eternal overthrow and confusion without
repentance.

Now, to have done speaking to the groundless exceptions against the
Common Prayer Book in this 12th Consideration, I have this following Opinion,
That if the Author and his Party could upon the two former reasons have
procured our Church, and the Civil State of the Kingdom, to have serpentized
the Book of Common Prayer, as Hezekiah did the Nehushtan; they would be soon
Scribbling and Printing, either to have the Scriptures (the full, set, and
stinted Rule for Faith and Obedience to be taken away and destroyed) they
having the Spirit in a more abundant measure than formerly (as to help to call
upon God, as in Consideration the Fifth.) So also to set up upon their
Assertions another fuller and righter Rule for Faith and Obedience, leading to
salvation; or else at least to have the Romish Privilege of an Expurging
Index, to have the Texts in the Scriptures expunged and left out in the Printed
Bibles, that make for Obedience and Subjection to the higher Powers, either in
Church or State; And also all places that command or commend Unity, Order,
Peace or Conformity in or to the Churches of Christ, and whatsoever in the
Bible make against their Opinions and Practices.

Which Opinion of mine may be looked upon as charitable, or true, considering,
among other things of that kind (I could instance and prove) was acted at
Much-H^^^um Church in Hartford-shire, by Mr. Hardwick Chaplain to the Earl of
Warwick) usurping the Cure, after Doctor Pask, Master of Clare-Hall, was outed
and sequestered; for the said Hardwick, reading in the Church, for part of his
own, or the Morning-Service, before Sermon, the 1^2 Psalm, having read to the
last Verse, which contained God's Promise of clothing the Enemies of his
anointed with shame, etc. he passed by the Verse, and then went on.

Which Mr. Hern there present observing, went out of the Church immediately;
and according to his resolution, upon Hardwick's not owning one place of
Scripture, as well as another, heard him no more, the time he lived in Town.

And thus the Dissenters from the Church of England, that have lived, and do
live among us, through pretense of their New Light (which is the blackness of
darkness here) their contrary Revelations to those in the time of the Gospel,
and before, and through their false and groundless Expositions of holy
Scripture, they have darkened the Heavens of God, and the light of his Grace so
in this life, that they have done in this our Age, as our Savior said, the
Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites had done then, Matt. 23. verse. 13. namely,
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven before men, neither going in themselves, nor
suffering many that would enter, to go in.

Blessed Lord, in whose hands are the heads and hearts of all men, lighten the
darkness of all their understandings, change and soften all their hearts, that
they may recover their strength, and strengthen all them they have seduced,
before they go hence, and be not seen.

To the 13th Consideration, which is this:

Whether one end of Christ's coming into the World, was not to redeem men from
the Rudiments and Traditions of men, of which this is one; And whether it be
not against the Blood, and Spirit, and Gospel of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Hebr.
9.10, 11.

The Opinion of the Author in this Consideration may be set forth in two
Propositions.

The first is this:

One end of Christ's coming into the World, was to put an end to the Use and
Observation of the Ruliments and Traditions of men, and to the Use of the
Common Prayer Book, Established in the Church of England, by Queen Elizabeth,
King James, and King Charles the First, in the years 1500 and 1600, after his
coming into the World, or going out of it. The latter part of the Proposition
is evidently a conclusion flowing from the Consideration; for he says that
this Book of Common Prayer was one of the Rudiments or Traditions that Christ
came to put an end to.

In answer to which Proposition I say;

The end of Christ's coming into the World, was to complete the love and
kindness of God to Mankind, which was the redemption and salvation of men, as
is affirmed in the First to Timothy, chap. 1. verse. 15. This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners. And this he was to perform in two particulars:

First, In giving himself by the Passion of his whole Life and Death, a ransom
for all, 1 Timothy chap. 2. verse. 6.

And Secondly, In teaching the World by himself and his Apostles the way to
true Faith, and due Obedience, in order to their Salvation, through the
all-sufficient Sacrifice of himself, offered upon the Altar of his Cross, so
expressly, Acts the 3d, verse. 22, 23. Moses said unto the fathers, A prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; him
shall you hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall
come to pass, that every soul which will not hear that prophet, shall be
destroyed from among the people.

Now in answer to the Author's Opinion in this first Proposition, it would be
considered, what Christ, this Prophet, and his Apostles have done in respect to
this latter particular, by Confirmation and Abolition of the Laws and
Ordinances were in use and observation at his coming.

The Laws before Christ's coming are by Divines divided into Moral, Judicial,
and Ceremonial. The Moral Law contained in the Ten Commandments, are (...)
veritatis, of an everlasting truth. There was no end put to these by Christ,
but were ratified by the Command and Observation of himself and his Apostles,
Matthew the 5th, verse. 19. I am not come to destroy the Law or the Prophets,
but to fulfill.

Then there was the Judicial Laws, imposed upon the Jew^ by way of Penalties,
and other ways; (...) Upon the breach of some Moral Laws, as stoning to death,
upon committing Adultery, and restoring things stolen fourfold etc.

Secondly, Upon the breach of some Ceremonial or Typical Laws, as the stoning
to death the man for gathering sticks upon the sabbath day, Nam. 1^. verse. 32,
33. and cutting off those that should cat Leaven seven days before the
Passover, and such like. All which Judicial, and also all Ceremonial Laws, and
Typical Prefigurations of Christ were ended by our Savior's coming, Doctrine
and Death, as is evident, Colos. 2. verse. 14. blotting out the handwriting of
ordidinances which was against us, which was contrary to us: nailing it to his
cross. Yea, I say, they were all ended by him, together with several of the
Jewish Festivals, which the Apostle calls Rudiments, or weak and beggarly
Elements, as is to be seen, Galat. 4. verse. 10. Ye observe days, and months,
and times, and years, I am afraid of ye.

But now it remains that I answer to the following words next laid down
indefinitely, and Traditions of men, which must not be granted in its latitude.

By Tradition is understood for nothing taught by word or writing, for men's
observation; of which Traditions some are abolished, and others may, or must be
continued. There were some Traditions, besides Rudiments and Ordinances before
spoken of, that our Savi^^r condemned; one was the Command of the ^^ers,
concerning washing of hands before (...), as a religious Duty to be performed
before: this our Savior condemned, Matt. ^5. verse. 2, 3.

And there he condemned several Traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees, which
made the Laws of God of none effect.

But secondly, (Notwithstanding Christ's coming and putting an end to
superstitious, and wicked Traditions, as before mentioned,) There are some
Traditions must, and others may, and ought to be kept; some must be kept,
namely, such as the Apostle speaks of in the 2d Epistle to the Thessalonians,
chap. 2. verse. 15. where he says, Hold fast the traditions which (...) have
been taught, whether by word, or our epistle. These were the Doctrines and
Directions of the Apostles, in order to justifying Faith, and a right
worshipping and serving of God, and were of Divine Authority, and to be
observed.

And secondly, there were and are Traditions, though not of the same absolute
necessity with the former, yet that may lawfully, and ought to be observed. Of
this sort are the Instructions, Exhortations, and Reprehensions of the
Ministers of the Word, appointed and ordained (by them in Authority) to seed
that part of the Flock of Christ they be set over.

Also of this sort of Traditions, are all Injunctions, Canons, Liturgies,
Ceremonies; provided first, that they be either according to the Word of God,
or not against it.

And provided secondly, that the end of imposing them be good, that is, not to
make them essential parts of God's Worship, as if God's Worship and way of
Salvation were not completed as to the Esse, being, or substantials of it by
himself, without them. As also, that the end of those things enjoined be but
pro been, velmelius esse, for the well or better being of our Worship, in order
to obtaining God's Favor and Mercy; as also that we might tread the steps of
the true Worshippers of God in our lawful Forms of Prayer, joining together,
and uniting one with another in a more powerful and prevailing way with our God
than otherwise, according to the Exhortations of David and St. Paul, being for
the forementioned end; that of David, Psalm. 34. verse. 3. O, says he, magnisie
the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together. And the Prayer of St.
Paul for the Romans and all believers to be like minded, is for this very end
and purpose, Romans the 15th, verse. 5, 6. Now the God of all patience and
consolation, grant ye to be like minded ene toward another, that ye may with
one mind, and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But now how shall the Author make out the truth of what remains in the
Proposition, which is the point even only intended by him herein; namely, that
the Common Prayer Book Established in Queen Elizabeth's days, etc. as in the
Proposition, was one of those Rudiments, or Traditions, which Christ came to
put an end to. I think I have mentioned in my Answer to this Proposition, most
part of the Rudiments and Traditions that Christ ended and abolished at his
coming into this World, and at his death, and I cannot but judge it a great
piece of nonsense in the Author to say, that Christ came to end that Liturgy
which was not in being till above 1400 years after his coming.

Well, but perhaps the Adversaries will say, things that come to pass at any
time have a being in the foresight and foreknowledge of God, before they have
their actual being in the World, as it was said of Christ, Revelations 13.
verse. 8. That he was the Lamb slain before the foundation of the World.

To which I Answer.

Christ, the Son of God, was not the Lamb slain, only from the foundation of
the World, in the sacrifice of the godly, as in a type of him, but was also
said to be slain, in respect to the foresight and design of God the Father, who
of his everlasting love, gave him a ransom for Mankind by his death. And indeed
to foresee and foretell things before they happen, or come to pass, is peculiar
and proper only unto God, as is evident Isaiah 41. verse. 22, 23. And therefore
in this respect I can grant, that the Common Prayer Book had a being at or
before Christ's coming. But how can the Author make appear, that either Christ
or his Spirit have disallowed of it? As for our Savior, he was so far from
being against well composed Liturgies, and consequently of being against ours
(because as King Charles the First, the blessed Martyr, said upon the Ordinance
against the Common Prayer Book, in his seventh Paragraph, that he held this to
be a well composed one) that indeed Christ composed a Liturgy himself, to be
used by all that should be his Disciples, as Luke 11. verse. 2. which Liturgy or
Prayer of our Savior (as the aforesaid Martyr said in the Tenth Paragraph of
those Observations) was the Warrant and original Pattern of all set Liturgies
in the Christian Church. And I say especially of ours (the Author so much
inveighs against) because if it be not the best that ever was extant before it,
yet it was a Liturgy inferior to none.

So that for a blessed return and compliance of Dissenters to an Union with our
Church, I shall exhort all that shall peruse this small Tractate, to consider
diligently as to the Answers here to the several Errors couched in these
Considerations, so also diligently to ponder the exhortation of St. Paul to the
Philippians, chap. 2. verse. 2, 3. Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done
through strife, or vainglory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other
better than themselves.

The second Proposition in the 13th Consideration is this:

The Book of Common Prayer is against the Blood and Spirit and Gospel of
Christ. For proof whereof, he alleges 1 Pet. 1. verse. 18, 19. Hebr. 9. verse.
10, 11.

Answer.

Sure this man has eaten shame (as in the Proverb) and digested it, that he
dare charge such apparent untruths upon our Church, which is as full for
Christ, his Spirit, and Gospel, as any of the Churches in Christendom, I appeal
to any man that has perused the Liturgy and Doctrine of our Church for the
truth hereof, for condemnation of this present Error.

Our Church, in our Common Prayer Book, owns Christ the only Mediator of
Redemption, by the Merits of his active and passive Obedience, according to
that in 1 Pet. 1. verse. 18, 19, Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things,
etc but with the precious blood. For every where our Liturgy owns with the
Apostle there, that w^ are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ And for
evidence hereof, consider the conclusions of our Prayers, and Collects therein
and they shall see all begged there of God for the sake, merits, or worthiness
of Jesus Christ And if any man do but consider the Communion. Service, and that
of the Sacrament of Baptism, he must be wilfully, if not maliciously blind, to
say, that our Church or Liturgy is against the blood of Christ.

Further, For evidence of the Author's false charge here, let men consider what
Blessings and Thanksgivings we do annually offer to God for his giving his Son
to us, our all-sufficient Savior and Redeemer, in the joyful Commemorations of
his Birth, Resurrection and Ascension, etc. We own him the only Mediator of
Intercession in Heaven, and thereby to have obtained of the Father the sending
of the Holy Ghost upon the Disciples in the day of Pentecost; And that daily,
through his Intercession, he sends the Holy Ghost into our hearts, to sanctify
us, to lead us into all truths, guiding us thereby into the way of Peace and
Salvation.

How are we then against the Blood, or Spirit, or Gospel of Christ? If our
Adversaries will peruse that Service Book, and the Doctrine of our Church,
contained in the 39 Articles, and the Homilies, they shall find all things
therein agreeing with the Gospel, and the Writings of the Holy Ghost, delivered
by Moses, the Prophets, Apostles, and his other Penmen.

So that to conclude my Answer, as to what is objected against the
Common Prayer Book of our Church, in this 13th Consideration, or elsewhere, I
cannot think but that if St. Paul were now upon earth, taking the care of all
the Churches, as before he did, he would give the like approbation of our
Church both for Doctrine, and Discipline, as he did of the Colossian Church,
Coloss. 2. verse. 5. where he says, He was with them in Spirit, joying, and
beholding their Order, and stedfastness of their Faith in Christ.

To the 14th Consideration, which is this:

Whether at the great and terrible day of Judgment, any Magistrates, Ministers,
or People can justify before Christ, the Making, Imposing, Reading, or Hearing
of this, or the like Service?

To which I answer affirmative, They all may justify their so doing before
Christ, as has been evidenced in the Answers to the Propositions, and in what
has been laid down before for justification of set Forms, as before limited in
these Papers.

But then further, In this 14th Consideration the Author would have men
consider, Whether good men, as far as they build with this material (namely, by
worshipping of God by this Book of Common Prayer) will not at the day of
Judgment suffer loss.

To which I Answer.

Having considered of this Quaere, and the excellency of building upon Christ
the foundation of our hope by way of worshipping and serving God by way of
Prayer and Thanksgiving (as in our bounden duty to do) and performing the said
duty according to the Form of our Common Prayer Book: I see not how the
Builders, that build with this Material, devoutly and fervently in spirit, can
suffer loss thereby, that is, lose their labor in so calling upon God. For
further evidence whereof, I refer the Readers to my Observation of the great
benefit King Charles the First, of most blessed memory, and diverse there
mentioned, yea and the whole Kingdom have reaped thereby, in my foregoing
Discourse upon the the 6th Consideration.

But last of all he puts the Quaere, Whether those can stand then in the
Judgment, without fear, shame, and sorrow, that have cast out, persecuted,
imprisoned, or otherwise afflicted the true Preachers and Servants of God, who
did choose to obey God rather than men, and to obeserve his Divine Will rather
than men's Traditions.

To which I Answer,

That if by the true Preachers and Servants of God, he understand the
Nonconformists to our Church before the (...) Rebellion; or if he thereby means
the rebellion^ Army, and their Chaplains; then his Argument ^alls to the
ground, because then he argues, ex non supposins, and ex non supponendis, of
things not granted, not to be granted, for that they were neither true
Preachers, nor true Servants of God; for evidence whereof, I refer the Reader
to my Discourse upon the first Proposition, deducible out of this Author's 7th
Consideration.

And for further Answer to this Quaere, what the Author proposes to the World
to be considered of, I wish earnestly might be laid to heart, of all them that
are alive of the late Rebellion, for their true and unfeigned repentance, that
they might obtain at God's hand forgiveness of their sins, that are as red as
Crimson, in Persesecuting, Imprisoning, Impoverishing, Murdering, and
otherwise afflicting King Charles the First of most blessed memory, the careful
and godly Hierarchy of our Church, the true Preachers of God's Word, and others
the most faithful Servants of the Almighty, who did choose rather to obey God,
and to observe his Divine Will, rather than the Fanatical Inventions and
Traditions of a rebellious multitude.

FINIS.

