Liberty of Conscience ASSERTED, And SEVERAL REASONS RENDERED, Why no Outward
Force, nor Imposition, ought to be used in Matters of Faith and Religion: With
several SAYINGS, Collected from the Speeches and Writings of KING JAMES, And
KING CHARLES the First.

John Crook Samuel Fisher Francis Howgill Richard Hubberthorne.
Acts 5. 38, 39. Now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them
alone: for if this Counsel, or this Work, be of men, it will come to naught:
But if it be of God, you cannot overthrow it; lest happily ye be found fighters
against God.

This was delivered into the hands of the Members of both Houses of Parliament,
the last day of the Third Month, 1661.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

Liberty of Conscience Asserted, etc.
LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE ought to be allowed in the days of the Gospel in the
free Exercise of it to Godward (without Compulsion) in all things relating to
His Worship, for these Reasons following.

1. Because the General and Universal Royal Law of Christ Commands it Matthew. 7.
12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them: for this is the Law and Prophets. That which every man would have and
receive from another, he ought by Christ's Rule to give and allow it to
another. But every man is willing to have the Liberty of his own Conscience,
Therefore ought to allow it to another.

2. Because, No man can persuade the Conscience of another, either what God is,
or how he should be worshipped, but by the Spirit, which God has given to
instruct man in the ways of Truth.

3. Because, All Obedience or Service that is obtained by force, is for fear of
Wrath, and not from Love, nor for Conscience sake; and therefore will but
continue so long as that fear or force abides upon them.

4. Because, That by forcing, No man can make a Hypocrite to be a true
Believer; but on the contrary, many may be made Hypocrites.

5. Because, That in all forced Impositions upon men's Consciences there is
something of the Wrath of man exercised, which works not the Righteousness of
God, bur rather begets Enmity in the heart one toward another.

6. Because, that by forcing any thing upon men's Consciences, as to matters of
Faith and Worship, many are hardened in their hearts against the things
imposed; when as otherwise, through Love and gentle Instructions their hearts
might be persuaded to willing Obedience.

7. Because, That Persecution for Conscience contradicts Christ's Charge,
Matthew. 13. who bids, that the Tares (or false worshippers) be suffered to grow
together in the Field (or World) till the Harvest (or End of the World.)

8. Because, Force is contrary to the End for which it is pretended to be used
(viz.) the preservation and safety of the Wheat, which End is not answered by
Persecution, because the Wheat is in danger to be plucked up thereby, as Christ
says.

9. Because, to force, is inconsistent with the Belief of the Jews Conversion
(and other false worshippers) which is prayed for by the Public Teachers, and
cannot be attained, if Persecution for Conscience be prosecuted.

10. Because, they that impose upon men's Consciences, exercise Dominion over
men's Faith, which the Apostles denied, saying, they had not Dominion over any
men's Faith.

11. Because, Imposition upon men's Consciences necessitates them to sin, in
yielding a Conformity contrary to their own faith: for whatsoever is not of a
man's own faith, is sin.

12. Because, that Imposition and force wrestles with flesh and blood, and
Carnal weapons, which is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said, Our
Weapons are not Carnal, but Spiritual, and mighty through God: and we wrestle
not with flesh and blood.

13. Because, there is but one Judge, Lawgiver and King in and over the
Conscience, as the Saints have testified in the Scriptures of Truth; and
whosoever would intrude, so as to be Judge and Lawgiver over the Conscience,
intrencheth upon the Prerogative of Christ, Isa. 33. 22. James 4. 12.

14. Because, it is prophesied in Isa. 11. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb,
and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and there shall be no Destroyer in
all he Holy Mountain; and therefore no Imposition upon men's Consciences.

15. Because, to impose upon men's Consciences for differences in Faith, is
contrary to the Advice of the Apostle, who directs People to wait upon God to
be satisfied, and not to the Magistrate or Others, to be forced; who says,
Whereunto we have attained, let us walk; and wherein any man is
otherwise-minded, God shall reveal, even that unto him.

16. Because, To force men's Consciences, and to lay Yoaks upon them, is to make
void the Bloodshed and Sufferings of Christ, who sits upon the Throne of the
Conscience, and gives libeyty there; and commands us to stand fast in that
Liberty, and not to be entangled through the Impositions of men, or Yoke of
Bondage, Gal. 5. 6.

17. Because in all Nations the different Professions and Persuasions of
Religion, are either Friends or Enemies to the Governors: If Friends then
obliged by that Bond. If Enemies then Christ's Command is to take place, who
says, Love your Enemies; which if observed, Persecution for Conscience will be
avoided.

18. Because, Toleration of different Persuasions in Religion was allowed in
the Jewish State, as not Inconsistent with their Safety, and that in things
contrary each to other, as the Sadduces, Pharisees, Essaeans, Herodians with
Others.

19. Because, the True Religion cannot be Preached up by force of Arms, and
the Primitive Christians detested that Form of Proceedings.

20. Because, No man has such Power over the Souls and Consciences of other
men, as to lay a Necessity on them to Believe that which they do not Believe,
or not to Believe what they do Believe: True Faith being the Gift of God.

21. Because, If the Magistrate Imposes upon the Conscience, he must either do
it as a Magistrate, or as a Christian. Not as a Magistrate, for then Heathens
(being Magistrates) have the same Power to Impose; and so, by Revolutions and
Conquests, may come to give Laws to Christians, and Compel them to Idolatry. 2.
Not as Christians, for that Contradicts Christ's saying, The Kings of the
Gentiles exercise Lordship over them; but it shall not be so among you, for all
ye are, Brethren.

22. Because, By the same Rule and Reason that the Magistrate of one Nation
ought to Impose upon, and Persecute for Conscience, the Magistrates in all
other Nations ought to do the same; and so the greatest part of Mankind may
come to be Destroyed, there being more that Dissent, than are at Unity in
Matters of Faith and Religion.

23. Because, The Strength of Truth, and its Conquest over Falsity and Deceit,
is best Discovered by letting both have their Liberty, from out (...) and
(...)sion; For (...) ou(...)ard Force been less used, the prevalency of Truth
had been more manifest, and that wife saying, truly experienced in the World,
Viz. That which i^ of God will stand, and that which is not will come to
nothing.

24. Because, The Disciples of Christ are rebuked by him for desiring the
Destruction of those that were contrary to Him, and would not receive Him:
which Zeal is sharply reproved in His saying, They knew not what Spirit they
were of.

25. Because, To Impose upon men's Consciences, and to Destroy their Persons for
Difference in Religion, is Contrary to the End of Christ's Coming, who says,
He came not to Destroy men's Lives, but to save them.

26. Because, People of diverse Religions in one Nation, if not tolerated, must
some of them be destroyed, or removed by Banishment. If destroyed, the
Constancy and Patience of the Sufferers for their Faith, moving Pity and
Commiseration, makes men more ready to own, than to reject their Faith, and so
rather Multiplies, than lessens, the number of its Professors. If Banished,
this renders the Banished as so many Enemies abroad, ready upon all occasions
to disturb the Peace and Tranquillity of their own native Country. There is
therefore, in order to the outward welfare of all Nations, a kind of Necessity
for a Toleration in them of all Religions.

27. Because, To Impose upon men's Consciences begets a hatred against the
Imposers in those who are Imposed upon, and forced thereby to violate their
Consciences toward God in matters of Worship.

28. Because, Men are Commanded to be subject to the Powers that are, for
Conscience sake, and therefore such Powers ought not to Persecute men for
Conscience sake, being that is prescribed for the rule of Obedience; The
Scripture saying, Be ye subject not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake.

29. We find it Asserted by King James in his speech to the Parliament in the
Year, 1609. who said, That it is a pure rule in Divinity, That God never loves
to plant his Church with Uiolence and Blood; and furthermore said, It was
usually the condition of Christians to be Persecuted, but not to Persecute.

30. And we find the samething in substance asserted again, by his) Son Charles
the first, in his Book known by the Name of (...), Printed for R. Royston, as
follows.

Page 67. In his Prayer to God, he said, Thou see how much Cruelty amongst
Christians is acted, under the color of Religion; as if we could not be
Christians, unless me Crucify one another.

Page ^8. Make them at length seriously to consider, that nothing Uiolent and
Injurious, can be Religious.

Page 70. Nor is it so proper to ^ew out Religious Reformations by the Sword,
as to pollish them by fair and equal Disputations, among those that are most
concer^^d in the Differences, whom, not Force, but Reason ought to convince.

Sure in matters of Religion, those Truths gain most upon men's Judgments and
Consciences, which are least urged with Segular Ui^lence, which weakens Truth
with Prejudices.

Page 115. It being an Office not only of Humanity, rather to use Reason than
Force, but also of Christianity to seek Peace and ensue it.

Page 91, 92. In point of true Conscientious tenderness, I have often Declared,
how little I desire my Laws and Scepter, should entrench on God's Sovereignty,
which is the only King of men's Consciences.

Page 123. Nor do I desire any man should be farther subject unto me, than all
of us may be subject unto God.

Concerning Oaths.
P. 76. The Injoyning of Oaths, upon People, must needs in things doubtful be
Dangerous, as in things unlawful Damnable.

Some words of Advice from CHARLES the First, to the then Prince of Wales, now
King of England, etc.
Page 165. My Counsel and Charge to you is, That you seriously consider the
former Real or Objected Miscariages, which might occasion my Troubles, that you
may avoid them, etc.

Beware of Exasperating any Factions, by the Crosness and Asperity of some men's
Passions, Humors, and private Opinions, Employed by you, grounded ^^^ly upon
differences in lesser matters, which are but the Skirts and Suburbs of
Religion, wherein a Charitable Connivance, and Christian Toleration, often
Dissipates their strength, when rougher Opposition Fortyfies, and puts the
despised and oppressed party into such Combinations, as may most enable them to
get a full Revenge on those they count their Persecutors.

Page 166. Take heed that outward Circumstances and Formalities of Religion
Devour not all.

Page 164. Your Prerogative is best showed and exercised in Remitting, rather
than Exacting the Rigor of the Laws, there being nothing worse than Legal
Tyranny.

Acts 5. 33, 34, 35. Gamaliel said unto them, Ye men of Israel, take heed unto
your selves, what ye intend to do as touching these men, etc.
Acts 18. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Gallio said, If it were a matter of wrong, or
wicked lewdness, Reason would that I should bear with you: But if it be a
question of words and names, and of your Law, look ye to it: for I will be no
Judge of such matters.
THE END.

