Life and Death OF JAMES Commonly called Colonel Turner

Executed at Lime-street end Ianua the 21. 1663. For a Burglary and Felony
committed in the House of Mr. Francis Tryon of Limestreet, Merchant.

Licensed and Entered.

Quos perdere vult Jupiter hos prius dementat. London, Printed for T. J. 1663.

To the READER.
THE World having long looked upon this unhappy Person, as an Object of Wonder,
and a kind of Riddle, it will be very satisfactory to give an account of him,
as to his way of living, which has brought him to this manner of dying.

There are questionless some Concealments and Depths, which will never be
fathomed here by any Line or Research, unless Providence by its. All-seeing Eye
shall unfold the Mystery. For it must be granted, that some such reserved and
harbored Evil, (not yet producible) has by this Infatuation in the late
Burglary committed by him, brought him to this Exemplary and Ignominious Death.

His Excesses indeed lay the greatest and nearest Claim to it; and it will be
Charity to believe so while no worse appears. In the mean time Humanity
commands us to pity Him, in his Person, and in his Family, and Children, and
to indulge as much as will be allowed to Truth in what Criminal soever.

His Offenses have put him beyond all remedy of Excuse, or Favor, as to his
Story* but because in such calamitous Cases, more is commonly charged than
proved; the main Concerns of his Life hitherto disputed, are now cleared and
manifested to an impartial View.

Vale.
THE LIFE, etc.
AS there is a time for all things, so most of all certainly, for the end and
discovery of wickedness; nor does divine vengeance sleep when it winks for a
while at the secret impieties of Men: Indeed Public and notorious debaucheries
carry with them their own punishment, in that they so boysterously and
tempestuously agitate and distract the mind, and disorder and discompose the
body, so that the whole Man is like a raging storming Sea, that threatens
Heaven with its foaming Floods, but immediately with dismal noise descends
precipitantly to the bottom of its depth.

The Bluster and stir that this Man made in the World is hereby more fully
represented. A Man that had never the happiness of so much time, nor any such
sober deliberate thoughts, as to consider Himself: perpetually hurried from one
irregular and unruly design and business to another, as Waves break in a
Tempest, and so long tossed between the Rocks of Covetousness and Ambition, till
the fraught of his projections split and perished, and he imbarqued in them,
must needs run the same Resque and Fortune.

In nothing was he so happy as Mad men, whom he nearest resembled, for they dis
incumbered of the World, and raving but by fits, are easily satisfied with
short the pittances of allowance and necessaries, which simple and plain Nature
restored in a manner by the loss of (our too much depraved) reason, judges
requisite to sustenance and preservation: whereas the intemperance and wild
Luxury of this person was a Hectique and habitual distemper which deprived him
of the right use of his reason, and kept it in a continual and constant
vassalage to his vitiated sense and appetite, to such excesses of riot, that he
rather vomited than spoke or uttered his business, when the world and its
concernments (to say to worse) by fault of a right digestion, boiled and
froathed out of his mouth.

Yet as Mad and Phrenetick persons in Turkey are held in great veneration, for
that they suppose them to be ravished with some Divine and excellent objects,
and inspired in their fits from above, so by a kind of antiperristasis, or by
contraries, did the vulgat observation regard this man as a person sublimed in
this Humor, and Enthusiasted with some pragmatical Spirit and Agent, which in
the fumes of his Ebriety did dictate to him some strange and lucky things, by
which he ported and braved it in the World.

But for the full discovery of those means and methods (if there were any such
thing in his actions, or the menage of his life) whereby he carried on and
maintained that expense and quality he pretended to, we will in this Narrative
deduce him from his Originals, and through the whole course of his life to this
fatal period thereof, assuring the Reader that this is a perfect and just
account of Him, collected by a person that has long observed his practices,
and did conclude that the winding up of his story would one day require such a
Publication.

He was born at Hadly near Barnet in the County of Middlesex, His Father
Minister of the place, and reputed a very honest man, but none of the ablest
Preachers, who gave this his Son liberal education, and afterward put him to
Prentice to a Lace-man at the Lower end of Cheapside near the Miter Tavern,
where he served his time, but with such disturbance to his Master and the
Neighbors, by his sturdy and not to be governed behavior, that the whole time
of his Apprentiship was spent (like green wood, smothering it self out without
Flame or Heat) in a sober and unprofitable service, and so the perpetual
vexation of the people, who argued away the most part of it in answer to his
Wrangles, and cross-grained Quarrels, Enmities, and Cavils.

Nor was he less vexatious and litigious, when he set up for himself in the
Round Court in St. Martins le Grand, by the Shooe-makers, where he had not been
long, before he had raised a Civil War among the Inhabitants; as if
Piece-Broaking had been his Trade, and he had dealt in nothing but Rents and
Divisions: he himself engaged against all, and every body almost engaged
against him, and with one another, by reason of his perplexing and busy
Interest: nor is there any other memorial of his being, but his Infection he
has left behind him ever since; the Feuds, Differences, and Quarrels he
commenced here (as if his little skill in Law had intayled them upon the place)
continuing in some sort to this very day.

But a greater and more lamentable Dissension arising in the Kingdom, and
abating those lesser Animosities (as a Conflagration dimns lesser Lights and
renders them unobserved) this private Boute-feu (whether scorning to be
outdone by men of crosser and perverser Principles, and in opposition, and
mere thwarting to their Practices: or by some contrary motion of the same
Malign Planets, which influenced our unnatural Breaches: or being better
informed by the notoriety of that Rebellious Mischief) left his Shop and abode
in St. Martins (having publicly declared himself a Royalist, against the
stream of the madd Vulgar, that swarmed to the Defense of the CAUSE) and betook
himself to the Kings Armies; where, by reason he was a Londoner, he was the
more welcome; but of any Preferment he got thereby, either present or future,
we never could recover any Information. But of this something more shall be
said presently.

Glad were the People of St. Martins of his departure from them (the greater
Nayl driving out the less) as hoping of some respite from their continual
Jarrs, which had so incessantly disquieted them; Nor was He less happy in this
his Disjunction, in so fair a manner, and upon so good pretenses; For, besides
that he was lately redeemed out of the King's Bench Prison, in which his former
Contentions had engaged him; he was ready for the like restraint by his
practices in this place.

So that he made a Virtue of Necessity, and was Loyal, not out of choice and
praeference, but as the only way left to his Liberty: For he had been caught
betwixt the Officers, or the Sergeant at Arms, from the pretended Parliament,
then sitting at Westminster, if he had not escaped by a Gutter out of his
House; and it was a very good Color (and the best alleviation of that envy and
danger he had contracted) to blaunch those Enormities of his particular and
personal Evils, with his pretended Vindication and Redress of the Public.

This is the rather, and more amply instanced, because there seems to lie an
Imputation upon his Party by his Miscarriages; (although Persons of ordinary
reason cannot but distinguish between the general Cause, and the particular
Defense thereof) for that indeed he was of no Constitution, nor was framed to,
or could possibly assume the Vizor of the Reformation; and consequently where
there was no Zeal, nor austere rigid Aspect, no Preferment was to be expected,
And such was his equal fate either way, that he met not with it among those to
whose side he repaired; so that if he had not been more notorious for his late
Actions, than notable for his former; and more infamous for the Civil, than
renowned for his Military Employments, the World had been troubled less with
him now (while it labors with the noise of his story) than it has been for
the course of these 30 years last past.

But for satisfaction to the World, who will needs believe, that he is an
Eminent Cavalier, we will give an account of what has come to hand, or was ever
yet made out, concerning any Commission or Command in the Kings service. He
has often pretended that he was under the Right Noble Marquess of Newcastle,
in that Northern Army, and that he was Commissioned as Wagon Master-General
first, and afterward made a Colonel therein, and of this he has laid several
wagers, saying, that he had lost his Commission, but would bring a Certificate
to assert it, which at last he never did or could; but has suffered many
twenty shillings to be drunk as forfeited: And I could name a worthy Gentleman,
and Officer of the Militia in this Ciity, who has won some such sums upon
this very wager.

He has likewise been reported for a very stout daing person; Particularly,
there is a frequent discourse of a brave Exploit of his at Newbery, about whose
parts being gathering of Contribution, with a Party of 12 Men, commanded by
him; the Parliaments Garrison thereabouts conjoyning, to the number of 60 Horse
made toward them, to recover the money; of whose approach Colonel Turner
having notice, ordered his men to make fast their baggs, as well as they could
to the bows of their Saddles, by placing them as conveniently as they could
before them (which proved a good defense to their belly and groyns) and
presently to charge and break through the Enemy, which was gallantly attempted
and performed, and the men and money came clear off (as our information is) to
Wallingford Castle.

It is credibly reported likewise that in a Conflict and Skirmish between some
small parties near Stevenige in Buckinghamshire, he was wounded by a shot in
the Neck, and taken Prisoner by a Servant (belonging to a person of quality)
from whose mouth we had this story; and a Ring with a stone in it (with some
other things, the due spoil of the Victor) taken from him, which he said he
valued at 100 l. but when it came to be justly and skilfully prized, it was
worth no more than 5 shillings. And this Rhodomontade humor was so congenial
with him, and so inseparably fixed in him, that he could not dispense with it
in the very peril of his life, as we shall see in the Conclusion of this
Narrative.

For certain; there were several Indictments after the War expired, against him
in York City at the Assizes held there by the Judges of the Juncto for many
such like pranks, of forcing in Contribution from the Country, during the seat
of it in that County: so that if he had any Office, there is none so probable
as that of Plunder-Master General, then which (or some such new invented Title,
as Commissary to the Baggage, or Colonel of a flying Regiment of Straglers and
Free-booters, that may be adapted to him, I think none would better become this
Military Solicitor, for he had not yet quitted his former practice,

Trojani tempore Belli
Euphorbus eram.
He was by a transmigration, and the alteration of the State, like Copernicus
his moing Earth, the same person, under various and different Climates, and
temperatures of Air.

And this is all that is retrieved of him during the War (some such like
stories being of purpose omitted) besides some debauched and lewd actions of
his, as to Women in his quarters, which out of reverence to the Readers
modesty, and the civility of this discourse, which would not be too injurious
to the memory of any person though never so vile (without it might evidently
conduce to any virtuous advantage) are likewise to be forborne, considering
withal that the Military License, whereby quicquid lubuit licet, all things
are allowed to men of that Profession, if they can compass them (as will happen
in the best governed and most disciplined Armies) may be pretended as an
extenuation of that Crime.

Many are upon this account apt to believe, that like Don Quixot in his like
adventures, he might dignifie himself with the Titulado of a Colonel, but the
marring of his honor is, that there is no Squire, nor so much as a
Landsprezado to aver it.

Nevertheless, before we dismiss this Subject, we must review the York story,
where at the said Assizes he made out to the Jury, or they were so fairly
credulous, as to believe his own word, that what he acted against the Country,
was by commands upon him as an Officer in his then Majesty's Army, and that if
he had not obeyed those orders from his superiors, he had been liable to
sentence by a Court Martial, which would have been death inevitable.

Observable also herein was his cunning deportment at his arraignment, and Plea
to the Indictments being no less than 65 in number (as he himself has often
affirmed.) For whereas diverse other persons and Officers, less active than he,
being at the same time Indicted with him, upon the same account, pleaded, Not
Guilty, and stood to the Defense of their Cause by the disproof of Witnesses;
etc. (whereby they tacitly confessed the Trespass if witnessed, and were found
Guilty: He by pleading Guilty, and offering his Case as the Case of the Jury,
if they had been under the like Command, escaped Sentence, and came off without
the least Fine or Damage whatsoever.

By this it may appear, that he could not but have amassed great store of
wealth, by this his spoil and rapine, so grievous and notorious as above
expressed; and it was no wonder the Country should in some places be more
averse to the Kings Party, than in others, if they met with such Locusts and
Caterpillars as this man, who made it his business to squeeze and pill them.

As it will also give the best light (and for which purpose we have recited and
doubled that mention of it) unto his future condition of Life, for that it
influenced all his future actions and designs, and was the greatest and
principal motion of them. For though other Royalists, instead of getting, lost
almost all they had, in that unnatural and miserable War, this Prodigy of a
Cavalier, had heaped up great sums of money, which he hoarded in several
places, and afterward brought up to London, where with this stock he vampt his
old Trade of managing of Causes, disbursing the charge out of his own Pocket,
which was very acceptable to injured People, whose defense and just rights he
undertook, wherein also he was very lucky.

He has been heard to say, that he was not such a Fool, as to let the Rebels
run away with all the money and wealth of the Kingdom: nor so nice and
conscientious, as to leave a good booty to the Enemy, if force or finery would
help him to it: Nor so unwise when he had gotten it, to trust it in one place,
nor in London in one mons hands, if any search or inquisition should happen to
be upon him; For if one or two Rogues should chance to break or bankrupt, I
will have money, said he, in twenty men's hands, and the Devil is in it, if they
all fail.

And who now does not see, and cannot but admire the Justice of Heaven in the
Catastrophe and end of this Man, that at such time as the truly loyal and
indigent Officers are a paying those Dividents, which by Act of Parliament, and
their Committees, are apportioned to them, (the incompetence whereof is to be
bewailed) this Person should be called to this severe account and reckoning for
his beforehand unreasonable pay, and now expiate those outrages, and satisfy
in some part for those many scandalls, which have brought those undeserved
necessities upon the Gentlemen of the Royal Party. But to proceed.

He appeared first at his return to London in the Committees of Goldsmith and
Haberdashers Hall, sitting upon Compositions for Delinquents Estates, but those
places being too hot for him, and an old grudge hanging on the file, as being
formerly suspected of a hand in Mr. Challoners business (which he has vapoured
on since, and indeed was a real Truth) he was forced to abandon the employment,
by which there are too many in Town have gotten fair Estates, and do yet
(worshipped be their good fortune) enjoy them.

But money being his certain Friend, and having scrued himself therewith into
the acquaintance of men of fashion, and pretending to skill in all affairs;
what betwixt Broaking and Soliciting, he was grown famous in the Town, and
withal got money apace, so that it was not long ere he bought himself a Horse,
on which he ambled up and down the City, which rendered him more notable to the
observance of all men, and gave reputation to him as a man of very great
sufficiencies and abilities in his way. And hereupon it was that one Mr. Okeham
an experienced knowing Solliciter would needs buy a Horse in imitation of that
pomp, which he did in a Humor; but the Cost being greater than the Worship,
soon sold him again, while Mr. Turner was grown into a Proverb, or Byword,
Turner and his Horse, the World wondering which part of the Centaur was the
better Beast.

This busy negotiation he continued a good while without any blemish or taint,
(being most expert and frequent in the Sale of Lands decreed in Chancery, for
which bargains he would get a 100 pound in a morning, betwixt seller and buyer;
as also in the loan of moneys upon good security, to which purpose he
acquainted himself with all the monied men in London; and the recovery of Right
and Title to Lands unjustly withheld from the true Heirs) till his dealing
with one Mr. Galilee a Broaker in Finch-Lane, who pretending that he had right
to an Estate of an 100 pound per annum, in Norfolk, bargained with Colonel
Turner for the sum of 50 pound down, to prosecute his Title, and and did
afterward pay him several incident Law charges.

In order to this recovery, the suit being commenced in the Exchequer (by the
customary proceeding of which Court, the Plaintiff is bound to name a Lessee,
who shall satisfy the Damage and Costs to the Defendant if he fail in his
Suit, which by consent and appointment of Galily, as Turner affirmed, was one
Sampson) it came to a Trial, wherein Sampson was overthrown, (Galily having
sold his right some time before) and an Execution for Costs was taken out
against Sampson, and He by the diligent search of the Defendants found out and
served with it (being a Neighbor over against Colonel Turner) who expecting to
be freed by Galily, now disowning the matter to Turner, and that he never named
any such person, a difference arose between the Colonel and the Broaker, who
brought an Indictment against Turner for Barratry, which he swore to himself,
and although several Witnesses were produced for him, who testified how much he
had been their friend, in compounding, and paying some of their debts out of
his own Pocket, with other commendatory language; yet the Jury found him
guilty; but the Court not being fully satisfied, referred the difference to Sir
William Wild and Mr. Allen; but at last Turner was forced to refer it to Sir
William (for that he would be recorded next Term) who awarded that he should
lose all his Costs and charges, and pay to Galily either 40 or 50 pounds, the
whole business standing him in no less than 300 pound,

There is another story of him at the prosecution of one Batchelour, living
near Fanchurch Street, which does him more feigned reputation than the other
real discredit; these 2 fell out upon such broaking accounts, and in such a
virulent manner, that Batchelour procured a Friend of his to write a Book or
Pamphlet against him, wherein there was this notable passage, (Batchelour
intending to render him obnoxious to the Usurper) viz. This same Turner was
Knighted in the Field by the late King, for slaying, and killing, and undoing
the good and well-affected people of this Nation; A most dangerous and active
Fellow, and for his services so rewarded, etc. Which story he took not a little
delight in, nor would ever contradict it; but being asked by some Friends, why
he did not assume the style of a Knight, would answer, My condition as a
Broaker and Solicitor, will not comport with a Knighthood, but had I an Estate
and Lands of value, I would be as good, and as soon Sir James, as the best Sir
James in England.

Such a multitude of business was now upon him, that he kept two Clerks
constantly a writing, or running about, whom he used with great affability and
courtesy; He also kept a good hospitable Table; where, to give him his due, he
did liberally entertain such poor distressed Cavaliers as would resort to it:
Nor would he refuse their company at Taverns with his Clients, where he would
pay their share out of his own pocket, and lend them money besides.

He was likewise very charitable to the poor, and a favourer of the oppressed,
nor would stick for any pains or cost to do them Justice. It Is true, his Vices
infinitely far exceeded his Virtues, which were but glimmering and faint
appearances, while his Enormities were most evident and conspicuous: but
however, that little good that was in him, ought not to be suppressed, but to
be put in the balance against them, to let the world see, he had some humanity
in him, and not such a Monster as the Phanatique Party would by all means make
him. And this good quality I am apt to believe he owed to his Loyalty, in which
he had confirmed himself by a long adhaerence, the inseparable companions of
which are all the necessary requisits to a good Nature, which is generally
wanting throughout the Faction, a most supercilious, morose, and peevish sort
of people.

But this Humanity had its Excesses, and could not be contained within any
means or bounds, for he was full of extravagancies and high flights therein;
But of many such wild stories, we will only mention one. He had occasion about
the Arrest of a certain person to go to Colchester, in which business he used
the aid of some Officers of the Counter, as especial Bailiffs, as he did
frequently in the like Cases, and having effected his Errand, bought a Pipe of
Canary of the Man of the House, and set it abroach for all Comers, with other
liberal entertainment; and from thence carried his Company to Bishops-Storsord,
where having spent all his money, he took his Mare which cost him fourscore
pound, and rid presently to London, and brought Forty pounds more to discharge
the House.

Besides this Mare he was never without 3 or 4 hundred pounds of Horseflesh,
which has since given suspicion that he used the Highway, and a rumor is now
spread, since his discovery of this late Robbery, that he was the Head of all
the Highway men in England, how untruly, time will best discover; but it is
hardly believable, for that his practice could not bring him in less than 500
pound a year; however his exceeding prodigality had run him out of money of
late, and put him to his shifts, when he chose rather (as it is the fate of
great and ungoverned spirits, who have ruined themselves) to piece his ruins
by base attempts, then to sink obscurely into a Goal, and fall into poverty by
leisurable degrees.

Of late years he has dealt also another way by trading in Jewels, without
great choice and variety of which in his pocket he has not been seen, (upon
which account it was that he put his Son Ely Apprentice to a Lapidary and
Jeweller in Moor-Fields) and has sold and bartred some quantities thereof to
persons of quality, by which he cannot be supposed but to have gained
considerably; And therefore it must be some strange occasion, which the world
cannot guess, that has put him upon this foul and base action.

It is true, he has been noted for a most unjust and foul business, in the
Case of one Mr. Clench of Cambridge, who had occasion to borrow 400 pound upon
a Farm called Bendish, by Boston in the Beacon, in that County, to whom Mr.
Turner pretended, that because his Lands lay so far distant, he must give Bond
also with personal Security for the payment of the money at the day: which
being done, at the day of payment Mr. Clench taking up his Morgage, forgot his
Bond, which was afterward sued and recovered against him, but what reason
there might be for this as is accidental to cases of this nature I will not
determine.

And there are stories of his familiarity with Gowry Granger, and that he did
forge Bonds of 800 l. and sued them afterward; But all the enquiry that could
yet be made, would not arrive to any such particulars. To the same tenor is
that report of his having deseated a young Gentleman of 60 pound, by a promise
of procuring him a Fellowship in Cambridge by a Mandamus from the King: to all
which the Reader must suspend his belief, till there be a due conviction
thereof in some furthrr account, and the rather ought we to be thus civil to
him, because the story of the Lady Hewy^s 200 l. is a mere fiction, and devised
scandal.

For it appears so by a Letter under her own hand, wherein she certifies, that
a one Colonel Whitton whom she names, did receive of her the sum of 235 pound
for his procuring the preservation of her Husbands life; but she utterly denies
that it was this Colonel Turner, whom she never saw in all her life time, and
the said Colonel confirms as much, and acknowledges the receipt of the said
money.

There is another tumor, which might seem least of all credible, and that is
hi^ supplying Oliver (when in a straight for money, and his Red-coats in a
mutiny or combination by Lambert against him, with the sum of twenty thousand
pounds by his procurement, from his acquaintance in London: but it holds so
little analogy with his constant and public profession of his detestation of
the person, besides that Oliver had Beagles of his own for that game, that it
is more than dubious whether that be not an artifice to slurr his Name.

As to any treacherous correspondencies charged in general upon him, certainly
he could no way be guilty: for he was no way capacitated to the manage of a
design, as most palpably appeared in this last: nor was he a man of any
judgment or solid reason, but flash and vapor, and of such like sudden and
violent Effects. Besides he was all talk and prattle of what ever came
uppermost, nor would give way or Ear to to another man's discourse, as too
headstrong and passionate, though never so erroneous and mistaken.

So that it was concluded, the approach of the late happy Restitution, found
him in a very fair posture in all respects; Money, Friends, and Credit, and the
reputation of a considerable Royalist, until his pragmatical and ambitious
intrusion of himself into the Troop of my Lord of Cleveland, in
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, in order to attend the King at his Landing; where at their
Rendezvous in the same Fields, he was with some disgrace shouted out of the
Troop, my Lord having told him, that he had heard an ill report of him, and
would not therefore suffer him to ride under his Command; whereupon under the
color of fetching a graceful compass with his Horse, and to show his curvets
and agility, he galloped full speed out of the Field. He did acquaint my Lord
there, that he was falsely and maliciously abused and traduced, but my Lord
would accept of no such defenses,

In the same bold manner (notwithstanding his late repulse) he put himself into
the most noble Triumph and Cavalcade of the Coronation, where he had so made
his way, that he did ride through the City in a most gallant and costly
Equipage, as to himself and his Horse. And here was the top and height of his
Grandeur, and the limits of his Vainglory, as it proved the near term and end
of his happiness; This fatal business eveening as the most memorable thing and
passage of his life since that time, of which we will give a short account.

By his way of dealing he was grown very familiar with one Mr. Tryan, an
ancient wealthy Merchant, (who had lent him several considerable sums of
money, and of whom he might have had any thing upon his own word) and by the
liberty and freedom he used in his House, and frequent resort to the place
where the old man laid his Money and Jewels, which were pledged with him,
through some covetous instigation or necessity, he concluded (it being a sacil
attempt) to robb him; the which how he effected, we will relate from his own
mouth; as after conviction by a Jury, he confessed before the Lord Mayor, Sir
Richard B^^wn, Sir Thomas Allen, Sir Thomas Bludworth, Sir William Wade, and
others, to the purport of these words, viz. That he had designed this business
to have been acted some time before by the same persons that now were in it? to
which end James White, William Turner and a third person not yet discovered met
at the Red Bull in Bishops gate street, where Colonel Turner came to them at
the time appointed, and asked them whether they were fixed, ford at the way was
now made for them: Whereunto James white made this answer, that the third party
then in company was in drink, and so not fit to be made a companion at that
time in such an affair, and that He would not go, if the said person went.
Whereupon the execution of the business was from that time su'pended to a
second opportunity, which Colonel Turner undertook to watch for, and acquaint
them with.

On Wednesday, January 6. Colonel Turner met William Turner at the Cock behind
the Exchange, and there agreed upon a meeting of all the parties the next night
at the Red Bull in Bishops-gate-street aforesaid: where accordingly they met,
and after some stay Colonel Turner came to them, and told them, the business
was now ripe, the Old man was fast, and his Man and Maid were gone forth;
whereupon they immediately set forward to the work. Colonel Turner had
formerly found his opportunity to take the print of the Street-door Key in soft
wax, and by that pattern had gotten a new Key made, wherewith he readily, and
without noise opened the door, and first entered himself, his Accomplices
following him: when they were within they consulted how they should secure the
Old Gentleman; and presently resolved that he should be bound and gagged; and
to this part of the work William Turner and James White were assigned:
whereupon William Turner asked the Colonel how he should bind him, to which the
Colonel replied, that he should tie him hands and feet together, but allow him
scope, (so as not too much) but not hurt him: William Turner asked again, what
if the Old man should cry out? to which the Colonel replied, No matter if the
Old Rogue do cry out, he lies backward, no body can hear him. In prosecution
of these Instructions, they (conducted by Turner) enter the old Gentleman's
Bedchamber, White goes to one side of the bed, William Turner to the other,
they awake him, tell him their business, and presently fall to binding and
gagging him; which having done, they yet kept their station on each side of the
bed, partly by fear to awe the old Gentleman from crying out, but chiefly (by
the Collonel's instructions) to obscure him from the sight of the old Gentleman
(to whom he was so well known) in his passage for the Keys of the Closet,
where the prize lay; which Key having presently found, he himself alone enters
the said Closer, takes the Jewels, and pockets them privately, not acquainting
his Companions therewith; who perceiving their business done, as they were
directed, said, come, it is 12 a Clook, it is late, let us be going, therecome,
by to amaze the old man, as to the time and to defeat his witness, if he should
suspect Turner, who was got to bed by 10 that night, for he did not imagine his
man would come home sooner, or the old man get loose before the morning.
Colonel Turner then shows them the money, bids them go and secure the lower
door, and he would bring it down to them; which accordingly he did. The Sum
1023 pounds in Silver, and about 20 pounds in Gold. Both the Money, and the
Jewels, as they are charged in the Indictment it self, with their prizes, it
will not be amiss here to insert, VIZ.

The Jewels and price thereof.
pound. ONe pendant Pearl and stone, value 150 2 Jewels, with two Pearls, 17
Diamonds, and 8 Rubies, value 80 One Topus and a Pearl, value 20 One Jewel,
value 150 One Diamon Ring 300 One other Ring with 9 Diamons 9 One other Jewel,
value 30 One Gold Chain, value 20 One other Ring, value 6 Two Gold Rings, in
each of them a small Diamon 3 One Necklace of Pearl 300 One Pendant, value 300
One Pendant Pearl with Diamons 300 Four other Diamon Rings, value 200 One
Pendant Pearl 11 10 One other Necklace of Pearl, value 87 10 Two Jewels, value
500 One other Diamon Ring 50 One Locket, value 70 Two other Lockets, value 60
One other Diamon Ring 35 Six Bracelets, value 20 One Sapher Ring 40 Two
Lockets, value 100 One other Jewel 15 Two other Rings with Diamons, value 15
Thirteen Pearl value 24 Three other Rings set with Diamons and Rubies 43 One
other Jewel 15 Sixteen Rings with several precious stones valued 1454 One
Bracelet of Rubies 200 Five 22 shilling pieces of Gold 5 10 Seven 5 shillings
pieces of Gold 1 15 Five 2 shillings, 9 pence pieces of gold 0 13 9 Six 20
shillings pieces of Gold 6 Four 11 shillings pieces of Gold 2 4 Five French
Pistols of Gold at 16 shillings per piece 4 In Silver numbered 1023 One other
Diamon Ring 40

Having brought down the money to his Follows, they put it into Wallets
(brought with them for the purpose) and away they went into Dukes-Place, to a
House, where Colonel Turner had before hired a Room for himself, and Partners,
under the names of a Captain of a Ship, his Master, and Boatswain. Knocking at
the door, the Maidservant of the house came, with a Candle in her hand, which
Colonel Turner snatched out of her hand, and turning his Companions, laden
with their booty, up stairs before him, went just behind them with the Candle.
The money thus lodged, Colonel Turner (leaving James White, and the other
person, not yet discovered, to stay all night in the Lodging, which they
accordingly did) repaired to his own house, and ordered William Turner to go
also to his home in Old-Street, giving him for his present supply only 5
shillings, but promising at the next meeting, that he should have 100 pound
more; but this meeting was by full agreement of them all concluded to be not on
the next day, for that it would cause suspicion and danger, but on the
Saturday, being the next day after; the place of meeting to be the corner
Tavern, by the French Church, in Thread-needle-Street. William Turner came to
the house at the time appointed, and there staid in expectation of the
Colonels coming with the 100 pound, according to his promise, an hour or two,
but then went away, not without some wondering at this disappointment.

Having thus laid down the Fact, we shall next give the Reader in brief the
manner of the discovery thereof. As soon as the Thieves were gone, Mr. Tryan
having got the gag out of his mouth by its (...) in his under-jaw, attempted to
rise, and in doing so, fell with his side upon an Earthen Chamber Pot, and hurt
himself; but getting to the window, cried Thieves, I am rebb'd; whereupon one
Mr. Vanden Ankor, a Merchant, living hard by, burst open the door with a Crow,
and entered, but found no body. The Man and Maid being missing, it was first
supposed they had done the fact, but the man being found at a Dancing-school,
and telling his master, who demanded where he had been, that he supt that night
with Col. Turner; the Constable and one Capt. Bedford were sent thither, who
found him abed, and his Sons fast asleep, which was their private order) and
then de^ired him to come to Mr. Tryans, for he would speak with him When he
came he denied his man's being at his House at all, and kept a huge bustle about
who were the Thieves, which rendered him suspect; and pretended to spend the
next day in search of them; (All which passages will be made out in the ensuing
pages.)

On Friday he gave intimation to Mr. Tryan, that he had found the Thieves, but
required the same security of a dreadful Oath that he had passed to them, that
neither he nor they should be molested nor prosecuted; and on Saturday Sir
Thomas Aleyn found the money and him together, and brought him to Mr. Tryans,
when engaging for the money and jewels to be delivered that day, he was dismissed
home; whence Mr. Stubbs an Officer telling him the suspicion that was on him
for the robbery, he went to the Exchange as he usually did, and there vapoured
and boasted how he had got the goods again, while in the interim a private
resolution was taken up, to seize him by warrant from Sir Thomas Aleyn and
carry him to Newgate.

Turner returning home, and going out again to receive the money and jewels as
he pretended, was arrested in the streets by the two Coals, at the suite of 4.
Officers of the Poultry Counter, who had bailed him, and were now afraid of
paying the debt, to a writ of one Mr. Van de Burgh a Dutch Merchant, whom he
had defeated of 400 l. in this manner, which concerning his life we will
summarily relate: He pretended to redeem a Mortgage of 700 l. and bringing 300
l. with him catches up the writings; telling him that the other 400 l. being a
paying, he would carry the writings thither for the Gentleman, but neither
returned with money nor Deeds; for this the Merchant brought his writ, and had
judgment signed last Term for 805 pounds.

Turner being thus in their Custody, would by any means have got free of them;
pretending they would deprive Mr. Tryan of his jewels, etc. for that he had
appointed 3. a clock that afternoon to meet and receive them; but no way doing,
he proffered Mr. Tryans bond, which being not judged sufficient warrant in that
Case, they held him until the warrant was brought from Sir Thomas Aleyn to
carry him to Newgate, and not long after his wife brought the jewels, which she
said she received of a man in Whitechappel, in the street, etc. but that would
not avayle, for about one and two in the morning he was carried in a Coach to
the Press-yard by Newgate, and thence January the 15 and 16. to the Sessions
House, where he was Arraigned, Tried and Convicted by the proof following.

Sir Thomas Aleyn hearing of the mischief befallen Mr. Tryan his friend, went
to him to consult and advise with him about the recovery thereof, and the
discovery of the Thieves on Friday, and being much troubled at the business,
the same night late Mr. Love, sometime Alderman of the City, came to him, and
premising some words to him, That he hoped he would be a friend to Justice,
declared to him, that a woman formerly a maidservant of his, had acquainted
him that there was a sum of 500 l. left in the hand of a friend of hers in
the Minories; and that she conceived it was not well come by, or words to that
purpose; and that this Robbery of Mr. Tryant being so lately perpetrated, he
did conceive it might be some of that money. That the woman's name where it was
lodged was Mrs. Fry, a Sempster, at the lower end of the Minories, who having
revealed to her kinswoman how the money came thither, she had advised her for
fear of danger, to make a timely discovery thereof, which she agreed to, and
that in pursuance thereof she had acquainted him the said Alderman Love with
the matter.

Sir Thomas Aleyn then demanded who should be his guide to the said house? To
which Mr. Love replied, My maid (abovementioned) that knows you Sir Thomas,
although you do not know her, will meet and wait for you in the Minories early
in the morning, accompanied with another woman; whereupon Sir Thomas resolved
the next morning to go thither by 6. a clock; and accordingly in his way
thither met with Major Tasker, Major in the Green Regiment of the Trained
Bands, and after asking him whither he was going in such haste, enjoined him to
bear him company to such a place upon such a business, to be assistant to him
in the prosecution thereof, whereunto Major Tasker agreed.

In the Minories the said two women met with Sir Thomas and the Major as it was
concluded, and brought them to the House, where as soon as they entered, they
found Col. Turner with his hand on the Chest wherein most of the money was
laid, to whom (being something surprised with the sight of Sir Thomas) he said,
meddle not with the money, for that and you must go along with me, and
presently a Constable was called by Sir Thomas his order to keep the Peace; for
of a sudden about 6 or 700 persons were gathered about the door.

In the Interim Sir Thomas demands of Turner whose money it was, (finding it
sealed with the Lord Bishop of Chichesters seal, whose money indeed it was, and
as his Lordships acquaintance left in Mr. Tryans hands till he should have use
of it) who answered it was his own, and that he received it of a Goldsmith; but
being farther questioned of what Goldsmith, he was at a stand, and could not
tell.

In the mean while John Turner the son, who was also present, got out by a back
door, and leaping over the pales in a yard behind the house, escaped; and Sir
Thomas having called a Coach, with Major Tasker and Mr. Turner, attended by the
Constable, came to Lime-street to Mr. Tryans, Sir Thomas having understood from
the woman of the house, that the money was left there by Mris. Turner, for the
use of a decayed Merchants family, Colonel Turner having sworn that he would
keep no money in his house.

The substance of this he deposed at the Trial, where also Mr. Hanson a
Goldsmith deposed the Seal on one of the Baggs, to be the same with the Seal of
the said Lord Bishop of Chichester, on a Letter of his to Mr. Tryan, as he had
compared them.

Sir Thomas Chamberlain attested his observation of the busy and troublesome
intermedling of the Colonel amongst the neighbors and friends, when they were
consulting the means of discovery, and the Authors and setters of the Robbery,
whereby he administered visible cause of suspicion. This Sir Thomas Chamberlain
was instantly requested by Mr. Turner, for the dear sake of his Wife and
Children, to be present at his Trial, and he proved the most convincing
evidence against him.

His defense hereto being prolix and very impertinent, and of no weight with
the Jury, besides that it has been in part public, and is refuted by his own
confession as a made story, and so incongruous that no Art can make it hang
together, we purposely omit, and shall pleasure the Reader with some Novels
(which have been brought to our hand) during his restraint in Newgate.

The place no way dismayed him, nor did he alter or vary in the least from his
former course of life, never a day passing over his head wherein there were not
40. bottles of wine drank up in his Lodging.

The Sunday after his conviction (which was on Saturday night) his maid
attended him to dress his victuals, and a leg of Mutton being roasted for him,
which she had spitted with the pizzle on, he fell into a wild humor and some
unlucky words concerning the subject, and with the firefork struck through the
meat and spoiled it. The same day being advised to send to Sr. Thomas Allyn
that he would deliver his Petition to the King: He protested he would hang
first, and such was the humor of Honor and ambitious pride in him, that at
his Trial he frequently made asseverations by the no other invocation than by
my Honor. On Monday being sent for down to the Sessions when the Court had got
an intimation of the story, he refused to confess, as he was desired to do, to
a Commit of Aldermen, till my Lord Mayor came off the Bench to be there
present, and when he had made that confession, he was so bold and familiar with
some of those worshipful persons as to tax them of being too liberal in their
testimony against him.

He likewise frankly told them, that as to the Robbery, it was no such heinous
matter, for that the old Rogue, meaning Mr. Tryan, was a miserable fellow, and
that there was no more, or worse thing in doing of it, then for a Man to go to
a Drapers shop, and buy with his ready money as much Cloth as would make him a
Suit and Cloak, and then send for it home: The old fellow will boil
Marrow-bones one day, and the next day put in some Cocks or Capons Heads, and
make strong Broth of them.

After judgment, he was put in the dungeon with the rest that were condemned,
though much against his will, bidding the Officers go forward to his former
lodging in the press yard but it could not be allowed him for that night: soon
after Mr. Stubs the officer came to see him. whom he found with a quart pot in
his hand, and this language from his mouth, Stubs, I know you love burnt wine,
here is to you and drank to him, and gave him the pot into his hand, which
proving to be nothing but fair water he added, this is all the liquor that I Will
drink while I am in this world.

Notwithstanding he endeavored to prolong his life by always possible,
sending that night to Captain Tytus Gentleman of his Majesty's bedchamber,
with whom he had some former acquaintance, to entreat his intercession to the
King for a reprive; the messenger found the Capt. in bed, and received this
answer from him, that for any address to the King he knew 'twas in vain, by
what he had already perceived, but he would rise and come to him, which visit
as a noble friend he performed,

Next morning by the civility of Mr. Iackson Master of Newgate, he was removed
to his former Lodging in the Presse-yard, on this condition, that he should be
at the charge of two Waiters to guard him in his Chamber, which he gladly
embraced; and thereby importunate messages got speech with Mr. Tryan; to whom
he said: Lord! Mr. Tryan, what is the reason you would not come near me all
this while, knowing how much my life concerns you, for if I die you will lose
1800 l. which you know I owe you, and what good will my blood do you? to which
Mr. Tryan made answer, that he was willing to do any thing that lay in his
power (being here remembered of that dreadful Oath he had taken, etc. he
replied, he was no way unmindful of it, but had not the Law in his hands.) And
thereupon he consented and promised to go to the King with a Petition,
accompanied with Mrs. Turner; and accordingly did deliver on his Knees the said
Petition to his Majesty in the long Gallery, and continued in that posture of
kneeling, plucking the King once or twice by the Cloak as he was going from
him, urging his loss of the 1800 l, and his Oath aforesaid, till the King told
him he could not do it, for that he had received such an account of him from
his Judges and the Magistrates of the City; and as to his Oath, told him, 'twas
not his doing, but the Law, which absolved him from the obligation of it. He
then humbly requested Reprieve for some few weeks but the King would not
consent to days

The same time he labored by the Ordinary of the prison with the Lord Chief
Justice Hide, for a respite of three or four days for better preparation, but
neither could that be obtained.

All that Wednesday afternoon, although the Ministers were with him in
discourse, yet upon the coming in of any of his friends or acquaintance, he
would abruptly break off, and ask what news? no hope? nor resume the
conference with the Divines, but with some indisposition, such a trouble or
fear lay upon his spirit; notwithstanding upon some occasions (as his temper
was) he could not refrain from his usual freaks.

Thursday morning being come (which he spent wholly with the Ministers, and in
taking leave of his Wife and Children, both the Sheriff, in person were ready
to conduct him between the hours of ten and eleven to the place of Execution.
When, he came out of the Presse-yard, but seeing a Cart there prepared, and the
Officer bidding him go up, he replied, no, I Will speak with the Sheriff first,
and thereupon (without moving his Hat) he said to Sir Richard Ford, May not I
have a Coach? to which Sir Richard did answer, no, the King has ordered
otherways. Turner replied, Common Thieves, Felons, and Highway men have had
the privilege to go in a Coach to Tyburn, and may not I have the same favor?
but being again denied, he insisted that then he might walk it on foot, which
being also refused he went up into the Cart: then being led by the Officer to
sit down in the Body of the Cart in the usual manner, he urged very much that
he might be permitted to ride on the Coppes, but it would not be granted, and
so he was tied according to the custom of other Malefactors: At the setting
forward of the Cart he pulled off his Hat, and said, God be with you Gentlemen,
with a cheerful voice and countenance, which he also kept up till the very
last, when he was perceived a little to change and to tremble. He was
accompanied in the Cart by two Ministers.

Being come the place of execution he made a long speech full of tedious
tautologies, intending thereby (as is conceived) to spin out time in hope of a
reprieve. He insisted chiefly upon his commission, as an Officer under the
Marquess of New castle, for whose service he had raised a troop consisting of
97 men, for whom he said he never received above one months pay, and a weeks
pay for his officers. He prayed thrice, confessed to God and the people his
having been a blasphemer, drinker and debaucher, and asked Gods pardon for the
same, acknowledging his justice in bringing upon him this as a due reward of
his wicked life. He purged himself from the imputation of having any hand in
the fire at Loathbury. As also from the report that was very rise about the
town, of his having cheated the Lady Hewet of 235 l. under pretense of saving
her husbands life; but it appeared to have been done by one Col. Witton. After
many other un-necessary discourses (in so much that Mr. Sheriff told him 'twas
in vain to linger) he went out of the Cart and ascended the ladder, and had the
rope put about his neck: he sumbled with his cap a long while, and with his
teeth untyed the Ribbon wherewith his hands were tied, and then desired to have
them tied again, which being done, a friend telling him that the rope was on
the wrong side of his neck, he smartly (according to his old humor) said to
the executioner, how long have thou been a Hangman that thou know not how to
place a halter? which being then placed right, he after a small pause gathered
his cloak about him and gently turned himself off the ladder, having before
given order to the Executioner not to touch him, to whom he gave Forty
shillings.

This was the end of this unhappy person, who had lived to an old age in all
outward appearance of felicity, and affluence of all worldly pleasures, which
too eagetly and violently pursuing, he ran himself out of his life and fortune,
having left a numerous and calamitous family behind him, a Wife and six
Children: John and Ely (in prison upon account of the same fact) and Ienkin his
youngest Son, with Mary, Elisabeth, and Anne, the only remains of 27. Children
by this Wife* as they have been both heard to affirm.

I could wish he had not been guilty of some late barbarous and inhumane
actions toward the Corpse of some late executed persons, whatever they were,
and though never so justly punished; for it is seldom seen, that those who
have no reverence to humane blood, do ever find respect or favor to their
own, but come to some untimely and disastrous end: besides that it is a most
insolent and unmanly thing to triumph in the calamity of another.

And here the lustice of the King is highly to be magnified, who out of
constancy to his Royal word and Proclamation against Loose, Debauched and
Vicious persons has in all such cases abated not the least of his severity,
but has given way to the full course of the Law, and encouraged his Ministers
to be punctual therein: and may this demonstration thereof in the example of
this Man be a terror and timely warning to all persons who shall presume upon
his innate goodness and clemency as a sanctuary for their offenses.

It is not much more then half a Century since Mrs. Turner made the like noise
in the Town, and as if Fate were concerned to keep that flagitious fact in
fresh memory, it has revived it in a masculine dress and more man-like
offenses, by a confidence starcht stiffer then were any of her fopperies by her
yellow Invention.

We should now give the Render some divertisement after this sad story, by a
Collection of his Pranks and Exploits, but being loath to exceed this bulk,
which is more then enough, we shall instance only two, which may serve for the
rest.

At York Assizes, formerly mentioned, the day of his Trial, he had as many
Dishes of meat as there were Indictments against him, all carried up in sight
of the Court by Gentlemen, as he affirmed; at which time he laid a wager of 5
l. he should be hanged that Assizes, which coming to the Sheriff's ear, he
acquainted the Court what a mad fellow this Turner was; being thereupon called,
and demanded his reason for so doing he answered, If he lived he did not value
the 5 l. and if he died it would serve to buy Gloves and Ribbands for his
friends. He escaped upon this account, but several other Gentlemen lost their
lives.

His other was at Colchester aforesaid, where he hired a wagon (upon his coming
to town upon the arrest of M. Harvey's Father in law) to carry away all the
dead he should kill, to the affrightment of the fellow, commanding the Ostler
to stop up the well in the yard with hay, for not a person of them should be
put in there, to raise such a conceit in the minds of the towns people, he
caused all the companies drawn swords to be hung out of the window.

He made the Bell likewise to be tolled for own of his company whom he had made
dead drunk, and sent for the chimny sweeper to be his Doctor, and the searchers
to view the corpse, who said it was a sweet Corse, and had shillings a piece for
their pains.

These and the like Comical Frolicks have ended very tragically like a pleasant
way leading to destruction. But it is to be conceived those whimseyes were
merely to allay and pacify some troubles within, for that they were rather like
fits of a possessed person, then the results of innocent mirth, but let
judgment be left to God.

FINIS.

