THE Life and Death OF Mr. VAVASOR POWELL, THAT Faithful Minister and Confessor
of JESUS CHRIST.

Wherein his Eminent Conversion, Laborious, Successful Ministry, Excellent
Conversation, Confession of Faith, Worthy Sayings, Choice Experiences, Various
Sufferings, and other Remarkable Passages, in his Life, and at his Death, are
faithfully Recorded for Public benefit.

WITH Some ELOGIES and EPITAPHS by His FRIENDS.

Heb. 11.4. Who being dead yet speaks. 11.38. Of whom the World was not
worthy. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead, which dye in the Lord, they rest from
their Labors, and their Works follow them. Printed in the Year MDCLXXI.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
MR. Powel, a little before his death spent much time, and pains, in the
composing a new Concordance to the Holy Bible, with the chief Acceptations of
the principal words in the Old and New Testament, having also added marks to
distinguish the Commands, Promises, and Threatenings. The same is now Printed
for public good, and to be had bound up with the Bible in 8to. or in 12o. at
Booksellers Shops in London, etc. Also bound alone, at 2 s. in 12o. and 2 s. 6
d. in 8to. being more useful than any extant of like volume.

THE PREFACE.
THe holy Spirit tells us, that whilst the wicked are to perish as their own
dung their names rot, and memories blotted out, and cut off from the Earth.
That the memory of the Just is to be blessed, to be had in everlasting
remembrance, and as an eternal excelleny, they are to be the joy of many
Generations.

And therefore is it that the Pen men of the Scripture have been so careful to
transmit to posterity, so faithful an account of the Worthies of former
Generations, to instruct others (no doubt in like manner) to Record, and
Preserve the memories of Worthy men in after Generations.

And surely not without special design of singular use, and advantage when we
consider,

First, how much it tends to vindicate and preserve the precious savor of
their names, who for righteousness sake have been vilified, and reproached,
cast out as evil, and esteemed as Dung, and off scouring. And,

Secondly, How much God is like to be glorified on their behalf, for puttting
so much Heavenly Treasure in Earthen Vessels, and so fully magnifying his grace
in them, and by them.

Thirdly, (and especially) by the holding forth those Virtues, Graces, and
Excellencies, that shined in them, they may though dead, yet be speaking, and
so become living Monuments, Patterns, Examples, and Preachers, to them that
come after them. So that their Faith, Love, Patience, Humility, Zeal, Courage,
Wisdom, Temperance, may provoke, instruct, and comfort many: Their Temptations
Tribulations, patient Sufferings, and Experiences, help, and strengthen more.

And of admirable use to the Church (no doubt) in all ages have been the Books
of Martyrs, and Lives of the Eminent Saints, and Confessors, that have done,
and suffered worthily in their days: Men for the most part being apter to be
Governed by Example than by Precept.

And therefore are those frequent, and special Exhortations, Heb. 6.9. Be ye
followers of them, who through faith and patience, have inherited Promises.
Jam. 5.10. Take my Brethren the Prophets, who have spoken to you in the name of
the Lord, for an Example of suffering affliction, and of patience. Heb. 13.7.
Remember them which had the rule over you, whose faith follow, considering the
end of their conversation. Prove. 2.20. That thou may walk in the ways of
good men, and keep the paths of the Righteous. Cant. 1.8. Go thy way forth by
the footsteps of the Flock. Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace. Heb. 12.1. Wherefore seeing we are
also compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses (viz. the Catalogue of
Eminent Saints, Martyrs, and Confessors in the former Chapter) let us lay aside
(after their Example) every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset, and
let us run with patience, the race set before us, looking as especially unto
Jesus. Heb. 12.2. So also to Abraham our Father. Es. 51.1. That we may walk in
his Steps. Romans 4.12. The good Kings in Israel took David for their Pattern,
and therefore are said to do right as did David their Father, walking in his
way: The evil Kings were said not to walk with him, but taking Jeroboam for
their Example to follow his steps.

Fourthly, A faithful record of the worth and excellency of good men, is of
excellent use to help forward the conviction, or agravate and further the
condemnation of malicious Persecutors; who may thereby better understand who
they are they have gone forth against, what Persons of honor, worth, and
renown, and how like the Children of Kings, Judge. 8.18. And that the reason of
their so lifting up hand and heel against them, is no other than theirs of old
mentioned, 1 John 3.12. Joh. 5.16. Joh. 15.18, 19, 21. Joh. 16.2, 3. and 8.44.
1 Cor. 2.8. Joh. 7.7. Psalm. 35.7.

And to be informed therefore, of that undoubted wrath and vengeance that will
certainly overtake all such, who not only imbrue their hands in the innocent
blood of the Righteous in their day (which cries for vengeance against them)
but become guilty also, of all the blood that from the beginning of the World,
upon like account, and in like spirit has been shed, as Mat. 23.34, 35. And
that what evil, in word, or deed, has been done to any of the Saints, upon the
account of Righteousness, is reckoned as done to the very person of Christ,
Mat. 25.31, etc.

Fifthly, That Gods displeasure, and voice of his Rod, to the Generation where
such strokes are, may be the better felt, heard, and laid to heart, where such
persons of worth and excellency are snatched away, such Angels, Ambassadors,
Fathers recalled such shining Stars, burning Lights, savoury Salt taken away,
such Chariots and Horsemen of Israel removed, foretelling greater judgments
also near at hand, and loudly calling for due search after the cause, Jer.
2.20. as well as a true repentance, and speedy reformation for the same.

And so is the preserved Memory of the Just blessed, to the glory of God, to
present and future Generations, to Saints and Sinners, good and bad, here and
hereafter, in this World, and that which is to come.

In which blessed Service, is this designed undertaking, to be adding another
Link to the Chain of Worthies, another Witness, to the Cloud of Witnesses: by
endeavoring hereby to recommend, and preserve, his precious Memory, who by the
account yet obtained of him, you will perceive has attained so good a degree,
done so worthily in Ephra^a, and famously in Bethlehem, and certainly obtained
a name, if not with the three, yet among the thirty of our David's Worthies.

Which may be more obvious when you consider what is faithfully said of him.

First, In his eminent Conversion, who was taken in his Enmity and profaneness,
led gradually through legal darkness, terrors, and bonds to Gospel light,
love, and liberty.

Secondly, In his signal temptations, and tribulations, inward, and outward, by
Sin, World, Satan, and the gracious supports under all.

Thirdly, In his Narraritical dedication to the Ministry, wherein his dexterous
and eminent skill, unwearied activity, singular faithfulness, and admirable
success, appeared beyond many.

Fourthly, In the perils, hazards, jeopardies, persecutions, imprisonments that
he underwent for the Gospel, insomuch, that (it is conceived) it may be as
truly said of him, as any since the primitive days, what was said of the
Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 6.4, etc. 11.26, etc.

You have some account of him, not only in his heart-walk, but in his House
Church, and Generation walk also.

First, You have some discovery of his heart-walk, out of some part of his
Diary, wherein you find his vigilant, vigorous, and steady watch, not only to
improve the motions of the spirit, but to withstand the motions of sin and
Satan: his close and hard persuit after God, by all ways and means to keep the
heart clean, and the life holy, to keep up grace in the act, and godliness in
the power thereof, observing daily his spiritual experiences both in his
gettings, and losings.

Secondly, You have some account also of him in his family-walk (which so much
be speaks the Christian) wherein you find him as a man of knowledge, filling up
every Relation in the fear of God, managing his affairs with discretion, doing
not only the things that were just and equal, but singular also. Designing with
Joshua, that he, and his house might serve the Lord, which he cared for in the
first place, witnessing therein a singular love and regard to all the souls
under his roof. A strict and zealous observer of the Sabbath, a great lover of
Hospitality, administering with liberal heart and hand to all, especially to the
household of Faith, insomuch that the blessing of him that was ready to perish
came upon him, causing the widows heart to sing for joy, eyes to the blind,
feet to the lame, a father to the poor, and the cause he knew not, he searched
out, Job 29.30, 31. and so divising liberal things, by liberal things he stood.

Thirdly, You have some thing of him also in his Church-walk, wherein he
approved himself a workman that needed not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the
word, to every one a portion, giving bread in due season; taking heed to
himself, and to all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made him an
Overseer, to feed the Church of God, which he purchased with his own blood,
taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint but willingly, not for filthy
lucre but of a ready mind. And having the word of God dwelling richly with him
in all wisdom, did teach, and admonish, in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs.
A true lover, and an affectionate promoter of peace and holiness, a zealous,
and impartial withstander of sin, error, and profaneness. One that had
dexterous skill to get into the hearts of sinners. And one to whom the Lord had
given the tongue of the Learned, that knew how to speak a word in due season,
to him that was weary, very compassionate, and tender hearted, full of true
sympothy, and fellow feeling under all weaknesses, and temptations, that
attended any being experimentally able to administer consolation by the comfort
wherewith he himself (under many trials) had been supported, and comforted by
the Lord.

Fourthly, You have some account also how he behaved himself in his
Generation-Walk, wherein you will find he witnessed in a public spirit much
sincere love to his Country, great faithfulness, courage, and activity to the
Cause and Interest of Christ, as it was stated for him against Antichrist, and
so covenanted for, and pleaded in his day. And in the asserting and managing
thereof (it may be said of him that) he bore in his Body the marks of our Lord
Jesus, and to which he was faithful from first to last, even to death. And not
with so many that appeared so zealously, cursing Merozat first for not helping
the Lord against the mighty, and soon after fell in with the mighty against the
Lord: Nor with so many Princes, Elders, and Father's (contrary to former
Covenants and Engagements) who made a Captain to go back again into Egypt, to
the building again the things that they had pulled down, and pulling down the
things they had built. But did in that day of trial, you will find, as zealously,
and impartially, withstand his Friends for Hypocrisy, and Apostasy, as others,
for Profaneness and Superstition, foretelling, and lamenting such steps, as the
certain foundation of ruin, and confusion.

Neither did ^e see cause, as an evil doer, in reproach to Christ, and his
cause pleaded by him, to beg and give thanks for pardon, for serving of him.
Nor to deny, forsake, and forswear his Master, and Crucified Cause, but with
courage and faithfulness, you will find him ^earing of, and rejoicing under the
Cross, owning and confessing him, as well at Gibbet, and in the Supulchre, as
when the Hosannahs were sung to him. And so keeping the word of his patience,
serving his Generation according to the will of God, he fell asleep, dying in
the assured Faith, and Hope of the Resurrection of that Cause that he had so
done, and suffered for; so lived, and dyed in.

It is true, under all the Worth and Excellency spoken of, you will find him
also, a man of like passions with his Brethren, and not without his
infirmities, having all this Heavenly Treasure in an Earthen Vessel, and being
a Son of Adam, as well as a man of God, that he might not be esteemed of more
than was meet, and that Christ alone might have the preheminency, to be the
great Example, and to be imitated in all things, the best of men being no
otherwise to be followed, than as they follow Christ, because, as says the
Apostle, in many things we offend all. The natural infirmity that he much
groaned under, and complained of, was, passion and rashness, and which he
would, when overtaken with, make haste out of, and with due acknowledgements
for his evil therein, return speedily to a sweet frame and temper again.

It remains, that since the pleasure of the Lord is thus manifested in the
removing such a Father, with many other such like eminent ones a late from us;
that the due improvement of such sad providence be endeavored according to
the ends before hinted; whereby our holy Powels, excellent Bridges, worthy
Blakes, faithful Woods, may yet, though dead, live, and preach to us; and may
be a means to help forward the cry of doubling the spirit of the Elias's that
are taken away, upon the Elisha's remaining.

Mr. POWEL'S ACCOUNT OF HIS Conversion and Ministry.
Some Remarkable Passages in the Life of Mr. Vavasor Powel from his Conversion
to his Death, being the space of 30 years and upwards, written with his own
hand and found with the Confession of his Faith, and other Memorable
occurrences among his Papers

TIll the twentieth Year of my age, though I was trained up in learning from my
Childhood, yet I was as most Youths are, not only ignorant of the knowledge of
God, and of his son Jesus Christ, and of Regeneration, and other Mysteries of
the Gospel, and of my own miserable estate by Nature; but I was also very
active and forward in the persuit of the pleasures and vanities of this wicked
world, and justly termed as I was by my Companions and School-fellows, Dux
omnium malorum, Captain or Leader of or in all evil, only drunkenness I much
hated, looking upon it as such an unnatural thing that the most greedy silly
Beasts abstain from it, and I wondered that persons could delight in that which
had neither true pleasure profit nor honor in it; I had no esteem for the holy
Scriptures, nor cared at all to look into them, but either Hystorical or
Poetical Books, Romances and the like were all my delight, the Sabbath I much
profaned by all sports, though God was pleased to magnify his grace so much as
to make that the occasion of my Conversion: For being one Lords day a stander
by and beholder of those that broke the Sabbath by diverse Games, being then my
self a Reader of Common Prayers, and in the habit of a foolish Shepherd, I was
ashamed to play with them, yet took as much pleasure therein as if I had;
whereupon a Godly grave Professor of Religion (one of those then called
Puritans) seeing me there, came to me, and very soberly and mildly asked me,
does it become you Sir that are a Scholar and one that teaches others, to
break the Lords Sabbath thus? to whom I answered as those scoffers in Malachy,
Wherein do I break it; you see me only stand by but I do not play at all; to
which he replied, but you find your own pleasure herein by looking on, and this
God forbids in his holy Word, so he opened his Bible and read these words in
Esa. 58.13. and perticularly that expression. Not finding thy own pleasure upon
the sabbath day; such was the partinency of the place and the power that came
with the word, I was for the present silent, and took it so far into
consideration, as to resolve never to transgress in the like kind again, which
resolution God enabled me to perform, though as yet I was not at all convinced
of my lost estate by nature, nor of the want of Christ.

But about a year after I had a call to hear a godly excellent Preacher, who in
his Uses show d that they who would go to heaven must do four sorts of
services: Namely hard service, costly service, derided service, and forlorn
service; upon the last he did (as I thought) begin to put me to question
whether I was such a one as was singular, or did walk in that way wherein
fewest walked, or had performed any of those services, and the more I examined
my self, the more I was convinced I had not, which began to disquiet me much,
and made me go into private, where in darkness I struggled not knowing what to
do and was ashamed to inquire, having never yet read seriously any part of the
holy Scripture nor any other Godly book, nor never prayed privately except by
book, and forms, and that formally without understanding sense, faith or the
spirit of supplication, for which things I began to be troubled, but yet knew
not what course to take, but resolved to cast my self down before God on my
knees, and acknowledge I was in such estate I knew not what to do, unless he
would direct and help me, being much discouraged by my own weakness and
ignorance; then by a choice providence I came to find a book written by Doctor
Sibbes, called the bruised Reed, and by reading that I found there was
encouragement for weak ones, and such who had but a smoke of true desire though
the fire of grace did not appear in them, yet still I was like one groping in
the dark, till God sent a most holy sober mortified Christian to me, who seeing
me like a Char-coal that had been in the fire, yet without light and life, he
pitied my condition, and began to tell me, what a hard work the work of
conversion was, it being no less then to make a stone flesh, and darkness
light; these with many such words began to sink and to enter deep into my
heart, and from that time I took up the profession of Godliness although the
foundation work was not laid deep enough, so as to have the heart mortified
for, or from sin, but I was disquieted within me, and like a Boat tossed upon
the waves, that could make to no shore for safety.

At this time the Lord visited me with a very sore and great pain of the
Toothache, which continued diverse days and nights together, in great extremity,
so that with the violence thereof, I thought I should have been deprived of my
senses, or life; and by another good providence, I met with a little book of
Mr. Perkins, and in that, with this expression, if the pains of one little
bone, or tooth, be so grievous for a few days, what then will the pains of the
whole body and soul be in hell for evermore? Upon this my terror began in
Conscience to that degree, that it made the other pain to seem somewhat more
easy, and both together, put me upon crying out to God with greater sense then
before, and between fear and pain, a troubled muddy spirit of prayer began to
spring up, and perceiving I had some help, I pumped harder, and so found at
last my heart began to be enlarged with confessions, and my sins were brought
into remembrance, for which I arraigned my self, and lay in my own thoughts as
a convicted and guilty person; but all the while I knew not how, or by whom to
become guiltless, or to attain pardon, all this while I never looked on the
Scripture, nay, I laid aside that book called the bruised Reed, as too good for
me to read, and wherein I could expect no comfort.

But very shortly after, hearing of another very famous godly Preacher, I
resolved to go hear him, he Preached that day upon Mark 16.15. Go and Preach
the Gospel to every creature, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved.
Out of which words he showed, that as the Gospel was to be Preached to every
creature, so none could be saved but such as did believe in Christ, which
afterward, by comparing it with John 1:12. He showed that it was to receive
Christ, and thereupon he encouraged all to receive Christ, because he would
supply all their wants, strengthen them under all their weaknesses, succor
them against all their temptations and the like; upon the urging of which
motives, I was much encouraged and persuaded to be willing to receive and take
Christ upon his own terms; but then he showed that they who would have Christ
and salvation by him, must do the hardest, learn the harshest part with the
sweetest, and suffer the sorest things; which words being suitable to those that
wrought the first conviction upon me by another, they were so much the more
observable, and as a second wedge clave my heart somewhat more, made deeper
entrance, and caused further resolutions in me to seek to perform those
particulars, and to that end I began to read the Bible, to pray often in
private, and to hear the strictest Preachers, and to leave off my old
Companions, and to choose others who professed Religion, with whom I went to
private and public fasts, held Christian conferences, etc.

Upon further hearing concerning the old heart and body of corruption and that
every man had some master and beloved sin, and that there was a necessity of
having the heart changed, and corruption mortified, and subdued, the Lord
showed me hereby the sad, and lost Estate my soul was in for want thereof; and
now the work of compunction, and contrition began in me with many deep sighs
and bitter tears, self-loathing, and self-abasing, confessing of former sins,
sorrowing, and judgeing my self for them, and striving against them, and
seeking to kill them by long abstinence from Meat, by much watchfulness, by
drinking cold water only, many Months together, by tying up myself to eat so
many bits of Meat, (and that of the coursest sort too) at every meal (some
times six, some times eight, and twelve was a great meal with me) and by this
means I thought to overcome the Flesh, and flying sometimes to the holy command
of God against sin, by which I found no other relief than a Schoolboy does,
who complains to his Master against the hardness of his Lesson: Romans 7.9, for
the Commandment came, stirred and revived sin, and so I began to dye and
despair; the Law telling me I was a condemned sinner, the justice and terrors
of God did seize upon my Conscience, and the spirit of fear and bondage (as the
fruit of the Law, and an effect of Gods wrath) did bind me like a Prisoner, to
answer every breach of the Law, Romans 11.32. Not leading me to Christ, but
restraining me from him, and shutting me up in unbelief. And when sometimes
through energy and earnestness of spirit in Prayer, I called God Father, had
checks upon my Conscience for my over-confidence, and presumption; and to
pacify and silence this charge, I was forced to confess my sin of misbelief,
or false faith, and watch my tongue from uttering any such boldness for the
time to come.

Thus finding no relief from the Law, or command of God, but the threats and
Judgments thereof, scorching, whipping, and wounding my soul, I looked out for
some suitable promise not any promise of Justification, but of Sanctification,
as Ezekiel. 36.26.18. Mich. 7.19. That God would give a new heart, and would
subdue Iniquities. So I fell a praying over these, and the like promises; but
finding no answer of prayer, my heart no more sanctified, nor my corruptions
subdued. The next work (at the instigation of Satan) was to conclude that I had
no right to any promise, being out of Christ, and that all my prayers were an
abomination to God: and so I began to question whether it was best for me to
continue in prayer or to forbear. But I was not long under that temptation:
considering that prayer was a moral duty, and to be performed by all; and that
the sin of, or in a duty, should not make a man neglect his duty: for upon the
same account a man must leave plowing, because the Scripture says, the Plowing
of the wicked is sin, Prove. 21.4. Hereupon I purposed to be more diligent to
get into Christ, and to have a new heart, that so I might perform my duty
acceptably; I also resolved to prepare my self more for prayer, to search and
keep my heart more carefully, and closly in my duty to God; and if vain
thoughts, hardness, or streightness of my heart, etc. did prevail, then after
the duty, I had (as the Apostle says, Heb. 10.2.) conscience of sin, or my
conscience smiting, condemning, and disquieting me, sending, and driving me to
prayer again immediately, it may be twice, thrice, or oftener together; yea
making me often times to rise out of my bed several times in a night, and
forcing me on my bare knees on the cold floor, as if that had been more
pleasing to God: But all this being done in my own strength, under a covenant
of works, and to work a self righteousness (both to please God, and to pacify
my own conscience) as it was unacceptable to God, so unprofitable to me.

Then hearing that Christ was sent from, and tendered by God his Father to
sinners; I thought of coming to Christ, but durst not, through a mistake in the
meaning of some Scriptures, as that invitation of Christ, Matthew. 11.28. Come
unto me all you that are weary and heavy laden: and those words, Luke 19 10. I
came to seek, and to save that which was lost: from whence I concluded, that
none were invited by Christ, but those that are weary and heavy laden, and such
as see and feel their lost condition, whereas it is meant, that they in an
especial manner are invited. I concluded I was not yet fit nor qualified for
Christ, but must have a precious work wrought in me, to that end I supposed a
greater and clearer sight of sin was needful therefore I often and earnestly
prayed, that God would perform that promise, Ezekiel. 6.9. They shall loath
themselves for the evil they have committed in all their Abominations: Yea, I
desired (though not understanding what I said) that God would let Satan appear
in some shape to terrify me, that by that means I might see my danger, so much
the more to induce me to fly to Christ.

Hereupon Satan took advantage and opportunity, and as he did formerly to Saul,
so he appeared several times, and in several ways to me: as once like a house,
stood directly in my way, with which sight I fell upon my face as dead, and
after a while crying unto the Lord I had a little strength by which I was
enabled to go home, but was thereupon sick several days after: Another time,
being alone in my Chamber, late at night at Prayer, and the door shut, I
continued in Prayer till the Candle went out, and as I went on, I sensibly
perceived a strong cold wind to blow, my hair was like to Eliphaz, Job 4.14,
15. and had the same effect, for it made the hair of my flesh to stand up, and
caused all my bones to shake, and on the sudden I heard one walk about me,
trampling upon the Chamber floor, as if it had been some heavy big man, upon
which I grew so fearful, and unbelieving, that I ran down shutting, and hasping
the door after me, and called up some of the family, telling them there was a
thief in the room, but it proved in the end, to be no other than that spiritual
thief, and murderer Satan, who did both then, and at several other times
greatly affright and terrify me, not only by his secret workings in the
conscience, but by visible representations, and outwardly real apparitions: At
this time and long after, he also showed me my sins, in their number, and
nature, to be such, and so many as that there was no pardon for them, and
therefore tempted me often, and diverse ways to destroy myself: Sometimes by
casting my self into a River to drown my self, whither he brought me, and
whilst I reasoned the case with him, this was frequently his motive to me, the
fewer sins I committed in this world, and the shorter time I lived in it, the
less would be my torment: He often tempted me also, to destroy my self with a
knife, so that I was often necessitated to fling it out of my hand when I was
at meat alone in my Chamber, and to rise from my meat for fear, so that I durst
not for some time carry a Knife with me: But when the Lord did relieve
sometimes by one means, and sometimes by another, I was strengthened with this
resolution, that God should do what he would with me, for I would never do as
Judas did, destroy myself. When Satan saw that he was disappointed in that
temptation, then he told me that I was a Reprobate, and let me profess what I
would, my Damnation was sure, and my hypocrisy, and sins under profession,
would be worse than any other sins, and therefore it were better of the two,
to lay down my profession and the duties thereof, to that temptation the Lord
helped me to answer him thus: That whilst I lived in scandalous sins he never
thus tempted me, and I was resolved, if I knew God would Damn me, yet to have
as few sins as I could to answer for hereafter.

When these temptations failed, then he began to raise up Persecution against
me; as one day going through the Town where I was born, from Kingston to
Lanvaire-waterdine I met with two Gentlemen Kinsmen of mine (in their
drunkenness) who called' upon me to come to them, and without any the least
provoking word, or carriage, they fell both upon me, and one of them with a
Crab-tree Cudgel wounded me sore, and their pretense was, I had reproved them
for sin, but God raised me up, and gave me a heart freely to forgive them.

Another time, four men laid wait in a secret place, as I went upon a Lords day
in a morning to the Ordinance, with several weapons, being all of them, as was
confesseed by one of them afterward, under a vow to kill me: but God by his
providence prevented them, in sending two Strangers unexpected to help, who,
riding before discovered them, whereupon they fled; yet vented their malice upon
some other Christians, whom they wounded: But one of them that day came to a
Meeting, and in hearing of me was so convinced of his sin, that he was seen,
and heard publicly to repent for what he had done, and never after was known
to persecute any. Another time a very wicked man entered into an Oath, that
when ever he met with me, he would kill me; he waited his opportunity, dwelling
near me, several times to do it, and one Lords day he went to the place where I
preached, with a full intention, either at my going, or returning home, to
execute his purpose; but being at the Sermon, and hearing Christ so freely
offered to sinners, the word did so affect him, that he wept, saying, within
himself, what a villain am I to intend evil against such a man? And the next
day in the morning very early, he came to the house where I lodged, desiring to
speak with me in private, and with tears confessed this to me, and desired me
to pardon him, and pray for him, and ever after was very friendly to me.

Another time being in Brecknock-shire at an honest man's house, I preached to
several that were then together; my Text was in Ezekiel. 34.16. from which I
observed, That though the little Flock of Christ be despised, and dispersed;
yet they shall be gathered, prised, and preserved. As I was handling this
Doctrine, about twelve or sixteen lusty rude Roysters broke into the house, and
did several times attempt to offer violence to my self, and to the rest of the
Brethren with me, but it pleased God to restrain them; at length, by the
procurement of Mr. Hugh Floyd (the High Sheriff for the year) I was bound over
to the Sessions, and an indictment preferred against me; wherein I was accused
first for drawing away the Kings Subjects: Secondly, for speaking against the
Book of Common Prayer: Thirdly, for Sacrilege: Which last accusation was
grounded upon the drawing down of a Meeting House door, by me and the
Churchwardens, that the people which came in a great crowd, might hear with
the better convenience; but the Lord did so own his own Cause, and me the
unworthiest of his Servants, that I was then delivered also. Yet finding the
persecution so hot against me, that I could not be permitted to serve the Lord
there, I did by the advice of my Brethren, leave my Native Country of Wales,
and by the guidance and providence of God, was carried and conducted safely to
London, where I arrived in August, Anno 1642.

Another time, as I was preaching upon the side of a Hill (being denied leave
in a public place) a company of Roysters came with swords, slaves, and
fowling-pieces; and after some opposition, one of them cried down with him,
down with him; but the Lord stirred up some of the people to preserve me, and
prevent them.

Another time a wicked Butcher, who had long threatened me, laying wait as it
seems for me, he one night stood in a narrow passage, through which I was to
come, with a great Clubb, but his blow falling short of me by the protection of
God I escaped his hands.

During my abode in London, where I continued Preaching for above two years, I
had great experience of Gods goodness in providing for me, and in succeeding my
Ministry to the spiritual good, and conversion of many, but the greatest of all
my mercies, since my conversion, are as follows, concerning the time and manner
of my obtaining assurance.

After I had been about four years in constant doubts and great fears, as to my
eternal condition, being often times tempted by Satan to destroy my self; and
Preaching also to others shaking and terrifying Doctrines, particularly out of
Luke 11.21. Take heed les^ the Light that be in thee be Darkness. At that time
for a Months space or above, I was verey sad, melancholy* and much troubled;
neglecting to eat, drink, or sleep, and this was occasioned principly through
the apprehension I had of that distance which I saw to be between Christ and my
soul, which was set home upon my heart with much power, from these words, Cant.
2.9. Behold, he stands behind our Wall, he looked through the window upon me.
For I looked upon a Wall to be between Christ and my soul, then me thought he
came nearer, and looked through the window upon me; whilst I was in this estate
refusing to be comforted, the all-wise God laid his, hand of sickness upon me,
by which I was brought even to the gates of death, and in the sight both of
Physicians and Friends, and in my own expectation I was a dying man; yet much
more sensible of the danger I apprehended my soul to be in, than of my bodily
weakness, sweating with the horror of it, and diligently examining my self by
the best signs I could either find at that time, o^ had found before; which I
had writ down with the grounds of my fear in a little Diary, which Book I then
desired to see, but having lent it to a Christian Friend that was far distant,
could not; so that being satisfied (...) lay even at the next door to despair,
waiting for nothing less than to be suddenly cast into Hell. Whilst I was in
this Agony, the Lord God of all grace, who brought back from the depth of the
Sea, did about noon present to me that Scripture Jo. 3.36. He that believes
(...) the Son has everlasting Life. Which words were then revealed to me, and
opened thus: First, that there was nothing necessary to Salvation but only,
believing in Christ. Secondly, that to such as did believe in Christ, there was
a certainty of Salvation. My understanding being cleared in these two
particulars; I was then to seek and to learn whether I did believe or not, and
to know that I examined my self, what signs of true Faith I had, and how I
could prove that I did believe; and finding no certain evidence, being also
convinced that I had before, many years, gone in that way to no purpose, I
continued still in an hopeless state: but upon a sudden, and unexpectedly, a
mighty power, no less than that spirit which raised up Christ Jesus from the
dead, and which declared him to be the Son of God, did enable me to believe,
and witnessed effectually in me that I did believe: Which divine impression, I
look upon to be all one with that sealing spoken of in Ephesians. 1.13. And the
witnessing of the Spirit of God with our Spirits. Romans 8.16. and thereupon I
had perfect peace, my heart not at all condemning me: But according to 1 John
3.21. I had a confidence toward God, and not only so, but my heart likewise
was filled wtih admiration, and great joy, according to that saying, Whom
having not seen ye love; in whom though now you see him not, yet believing, ye
rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. 1 Pet. 1.8.

After this manifestation, and wonderful operation of God, which I could never
express, either by word or writing, so clearly, and distinctly as then I
apprehended and felt it in my soul: The Lord added the mercy of natural life
and health, and so I experience the fullness of those two Scriptures, Heaviness
in the heart of man makes it stoop; but a good word makes it glad. Prove.
12.25. And a sound heart, is life t^ the flesh. Prove. 14.32. And being restored
both to my health, and the exercise of my Ministry; I wa^ taught by the Lord to
preach in another manner than before. Namely, to lay Christ as the foundation,
and to Preach chiefly and mainly, and qualification, and duties in a secondary
and subservant way: Yet from hence also did Satan take occasion to thrust at
me; and throw me into the other extreme, even unto that, which is truly, and
properly called Antinomianisme, to destroy, and utterly deny the use of the
Law: but the Lord did timely, and graciosly prevent my fall in this also, and
to fulfill unto me that Scripture, He that fears the Lord shall come out of all.
viz. out of all extremes, as the foregoing words do show. Eccles. 7.18.

To omit many other remarkable providence of God toward me for the space of
two years that I was in London, as also his goodness to me for some space that
I was in the Army, I was at length called to Dartford in Kent: where, indeed
Gods favors of several kinds for the space of two years and an half, were very
many, as to own such a nothing Creature, and enable me to bring home in that
Town, and thereabouts (I hope to Gods glory I may speak it) many souls to
Christ: where also I gathered a Congregation among whom, I had very sweet and
comfortable Society.

After some time of my abode there, it pleased the Lord to visit that Town with
the Plague, where, about thirty Houses were shut up at once, and the dead
bodies were carried by my Chamber wall, and window; yet it pleased God to
preserve me and my Family wonderfully from the Disease, although I continued in
the Town, and preached constantly three times a week, and some that had the
Sickness upon them, came publicly to hear; After which, the Lord stayed the
Plague, and delivered me from that affliction also.

Yet not long after this, it pleased the Lord to visit me with a very dangerous
Fever and Ague, insomuch as I was in the eyes of all my Friends, and in the
judgment of Physicians also hopeless as to Life; yet God gave me Faith to be
healed by that means prescribed, James 5. And I sent unto some Godly Preachers
in London, desiring them to come unto me, and perform that duty of anointing me
with Oil: And whilst I was waiting for, and expecting their answer, and
questioning whether they would have Faith, and freedom to practice the same;
the Lord brought that Scripture to my remembrance, and fixed it upon me, Romans
3.3. Shall unbelief make the Faith of God of none effect? or shall they as it
was then applied to me, make void the Faith that God has given me, or hinder
me of being healed? whereupon I was confirmed that it should not, but I did
believe that God would recover me, and accordingly, after a sudden and strange
trance which I fell into, and continued in for about six hours, wherein I did
sweat abundantly, yet discerned not at all, during that time, how it was with
me, or what was done for me, my sickness presently abated, and I recovered.

Having spent above two years at Dartford, and being now upon my return home
into Wales, I was willing to take along with me a Certificate, or Testimonial
from the Synod which sat then, and had the trial of all Public Preachers. To
this purpose I applied my self to some of them, to whom Mr. Stephen Marshal was
one, they questioned me about Ordination, and told me, that unless I would be
Ordained they could not approve; to which I answered, I was willing to be
tried, as a Christian, and as a Scholar; but had some doubts about Ordination,
as that particularly, whether the Eldership mentioned 1 Timothy 4.12. were to be
understood of one or more Congregations, in which I was not yet satisfied; and
then addressing my self particularly to Mr. Marshal, and reasoning the case
with him, they at last gave me this following Certificate.

THese are to Certify those whom it may concern, that the bearer hereof, Mr.
Vavasor Powell, is a man of a Religious, and blameless Conversation, and of
able gifts for the work of the Ministry, and has approved himself faithful
therein; which we, whose Names are underwritten, do Testify: some of our own
knowledge, others from Credible and Sufficient information: And therefore he
being now called, and desired to exercise his Gifts, in his own Country of
Wales, he also having the Language thereof, we conceive him fit for that Work,
and worthy of encouragement therein.

In Witness whereof, we here subscribed our Names. Sep. 11. 1646. Charles
Heart, Prolocutor: Henry Scudder, William Greenhill, Franc. Woodcock,
William Strong, Joseph Caryl, William Carter, Thomas Wilson, Jer. Buroughs,
Philip Nigh, Stephen Marshall, Jer. Whitaker, Arther Salwey, Peter Sterry,
Henry Prince, Christopher Love, Tho. Froysell, Robert Bettes.


I may say through Gods grace (and that experime^tally) that God was pleased to
own me, a poor, n^thing creature in the work of his Gospel in Wales, bo^^ to
call, gather, and edify I hope, many souls there, yet not I, but the grace of
God in me, and with me: and among many other experiences of Gods goodness,
these following are some.

About the year 1647. the Island of Anglesey in North Wales, being then
un-reduced, the Parliament Forces went to reduce it, and their chief Officers
sent for me to Preach unto that brigade of Soldiers, and as I marched with
them unto the place, either the night immediately before, or the night before
that, it was revealed unto me in my sleep, that I should be wounded, and two of
my friends cut (and the very fingers were pointed out) which accordingly came
to pass, yet when I was in extreme danger between several enemies who fell upon
me, receiving that and some other wounds: there being no likelihood to escape,
I heard a voice as I apprehended speaking audibly to me, I have chosen thee to
preach the Gospel, to which I answered, O Lord then bring me off; and
immediately God guided my Horse (though he was very wild, and not well
commanded) to go backward out of the Barricado that I had entered at, and so I
was indeed miraculously preserved, although a good man a Captain who came to
relieve me was killed close to me, and as far as I could perceive the same
Bullet that was shot at me took him in the neck and killed him.

Many other remarkable circumstances there are in this deliverance which I here
omit.

Several other times also I have been delivered from perils by water, by
Thieves, by Enemies purposely lying in wait for me, who yet had no power to
hurt me, the Lord converted some, and graciously prevented and terrified others
from their purpose.

But I must not forget the favor of the Lord in answering prayer, of which the
most remarkable instances are these.

One time coming from Preaching I lost my way, and being out till it was far in
the night in a Wood or Forest, among Lakes, Briars and Thorns, I went up and
down while I was quite weary, but by looking up to the Lord, I was presently
directed into my way. The like experience I had another time, when another
Preacher and my self had lost our way in a very dark night, and had tired our
selves in searching to and from to no purpose, at last calling to mind how God
had formerly heard in that case when I sought unto him, we called upon the
Lord, who immediately pointed out our way, and it seemed as clear to us as if
it had been day light.

One Mistress Watkins of the Parish of Lanniggn in the County of Brecknock, a
gracious Gentlewoman, having kept her chamber and bed as was reported for two
years, and not gone from home for the space of four years, hearing that I was
come into those parts sent for me to come and visit her, she having it seems
some faith, that if I prayed for her she should be healed, that the next
morning she went between two and three miles on foot to hear me preach.

Another time one Elizabeth Morris of new Radnor, (a Religious Maid) having the
Falling sickness or Convulsion Fits, which took her many times in one day, one
night being at Family-Duty in a Brothers house in Town, whilst I was speaking
she fell into one of her Fits, but Prayer being made for her she recovered
before the prayer was ended, and for many years had no more fits, and I think
has not been troubled at all since.

Another time, viz. (Oliver Protect. days) there was mighty wet Harvest, which
continued several weeks, insomuch that much Hay and Corn was spoiled, but
diverse Christians that were dissatisfied with that Government, having met
several days to seek advice about it, came at last to draw up a Paper or
Testimony against it: And the day being come when we intended to subscribe it.
After spending some time further to seek the Lord, it being a great rain, so
that it did beat in through the glass windows into the room where we met, one
that was close to the window, being to conclude the duty, earnestly begged of
God that if he did approve of the work we were about, and would have us to
proceed therein, he would be pleased to grant us a sign of fair weather
presently, and before Prayer was ended, the Lord shut up the windows of Heaven,
and the Sun did shine gloriously, and some if not all of us did observe that
for diverse weeks together afterward we had exceeding fair weather, and so had
two mercies given us at once.

(The Paper thus subscribed, was called a Word for God, or a Testimony on
truths behalf from several Churches, and diverse hundreds of Christians in
Wales, (and some few adjacent) against wickedness in high places, with a brief
Letter to the Lord Genesis Cromwell, and both presented to his hands, and
afterward published in Print.

These few things of many which I have observed in my self, concerning the
Lords gracious and wonderful dealing with me, I have set down, not as boasting
or seeking praise to my self, but to keep a memorial of the Lords benefits, and
to stir up others, into whose hands these few notes may come, to have
confidence in the power and goodness of God who is the Savior of all men, but
especially of them that believe in him.

A CONFESSION OF FAITH. Drawn up by Mr. VAVASOUR POWELL, Concerning the Holy
Scriptures.
THE Holy Scriptures, containing the Old and New Testament, or the writings o^
the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, (commonly called the Bible) are the
Written word of God; which (besides the plain Testimony of Scripture, in many
places thus witnessing of it self) does most fully and convincingly appear, by
considering that what in Matthew is called the command, Mat. 15.6. That in Mark
is styled, The word of God, Mark 7.13. and the like may be observed, in
comparing Deuteronomy. 30.11, 14. with Romans 10.8. where the Greek word (...) which the
Apostle uses, and is translated the Word, is never taken for Christ, but very
often for the Command on Threatening, or Promise of God; in which sense it is
called the Word of God.

2. Not only the outward Letter, but the true sense and meaning of Scripture is
to be accounted Scripture; which appears from 1 Cor. 14, 34. Epb. 5.14. Heb.
12.21. Jam. 4.5. Where some things are said to be written, which in express and
plain words are not written, but by good and clear evidence collected thence.

3. The Scriptures were written, as primarily for Gods glory, so also that men
might be enlightened, converted, comforted and have Hope and Eternal life by
Believing, 2 Timothy 3.14, 15, 16. Neither do they concern, or were written for
the use of former Ages and Persons only; but belong to all Ages and Persons,
even to the end of the world, Revelat. 2.3.

4. The Scripture contains Milk for Babes, and Meat for them that are strong, 1
Cor. 3.2. Heb. 5.13, 14. And though there be some dark places, hard to be
undetstood, 2 Pet, 3.16. Yet what is necessary to salvation is plain, and may
be understood by the simplest and unlearnedest of the true Disciples of Christ
who are taught by the Spirit of God, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Prove. 6, 23. and 8.8, 9. and
28.5. Mat. 13.10. 1 Cor. 2.15. 1 John 2.20, 27. whereas those that otherwise
may be very learned, yet have not this spirit, they understand not the
Scriptures; but err and wrest them to their own and others Destruction, Isa.
29.11. John 7.48, 52. 1 Cor. 2.8, 14. Mat, 22.29. 2 Pet. 3.16.

5. This word, or Scripture, is the absolute, certain and infallible Rule of
Faith, and Life or Obedience; by which all Spirits, Doctrines, Men, and works
to be tried; and no other writings whatsoever, (though written by the most
knowing and holiest of men) are to be esteemed of equal authority,
infallibility, and Divine Majesty with these, Luke 16.31. 1 John 4.1. Isa.
8.20. And the Holy Scripture, next to the Spirit of God who gave it forth, 2
Pet. l. 19.20, 21. is she best interpreter of it self; All Preaching is to be
out of, and according to it, and nothing to be imposed upon or binding of the
Consciences of any, but what is contained therein or agreeable thereunto, 1
Cor. 2.13. Jer. 23.28. Mat. 28.19. Act. 18.28. and 28.23. Neither is there any
thing to be added to or taken from the Scripture upon pain of everlasting
damnation, -- Prove. 30.5, 6. Gal. 3.15. Revel. 22.18, 19.

The Principal Doctrines which are declared, and I have received from the
Scriptures -- are Concerning God.
There is but one, true, living God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. John 17.3. 1 These. 1.9. etc. of
whom, to whom, and through whom are all things, Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians.
4.6. The only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15. To whom be Honor and Peace everlasting.
Amen.

2. This God is a Spirit Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, most abundant in
goodness, mercy and truth, to all that love and fear him, John 4.24. 1 Timothy
1.17. Exodus 34.6. Neh. 9.6. and a rewarder to them that diligently seek him,
Heb. 11.6. But most just, dreadful and terrible to those that hate him, and a
consuming fire to such as go on in their wickedness. Mat. 1.15. Exodus 20.5.
Heb. 12.29. Psalm. 68.21.

3. This One God is distinguished into the Father, the Word (or Son) and the
Holy Spirit, Mat. 3.16, 17, and 28.19. 2 Cor. 13.14. Which are not three Gods,
but one God, 1 John 5.7. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. The Father begetting, Psalm. 2.7.,
Heb. 1.5. The Son begotten, and brought up with the Father from everlasting,
Prove. 8.22, 23, 24, 30. Micha 5.2. John 1.1. and 17.24. and the holy Spirit
proceeding from both, John 14.26. and 15.26. Gal. 4.6.

Concerning the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God.
The Word, or the Son of God the Lord Jesus Christ, is Jehovah, Genesis 13.7, 16.
and 18.1, 2. and 22.11, 14. Exodus 19.14. with Heb. 12.27. Isa. 6.1. with John
12.41. Isa. 45.23. with Romans 14.10, 11. The True and Mighty, yea Almighty God,
1 Ioh. 5, 20. Isa. 9.6. Tit. 2.13. John 1.1, 2, 3. Equal and One with God, John
5.18. Phil. 2.6 John 10.30: and 17.22. He knows and discerns the Thoughts
and Hearts of all men, Mat. 9.3, 4. and 12.25. John 2.25. Heb. 4.12. Which
evidently (with many other undeniable Arguments) prove him to be very God, of
the same Substance and Being with the Father; for none but God can know the
Heart, 1 King. 8.39. Jer. 17.10.

Concerning the Holy Spirit.
As the Lord Christ the Son, so likewise the holy Spirit is God, Acts 5.3, 4. 1
Cor. 6.19, 20. 2 Cor. 3.17. Acts 28.25. with Isa. 6.8.11, 12. In the 8th, verse
of which Chapter, the word Us (noting Father, Son, and Spirit, as also Genesis
1.26.) is called Jehovah, v. 12. showing that the Son and Spirit are the Lord
Jehovah, which signifies, as the Greek renders it, Ex. 3. 'O^^ -- One that has
his being of himself -- or as is more fully rendered, Rev. 1.4, 8. Who is, was,
and is to come.

Concerning Gods Decrees.
God to whom all his Works and People were known and foreseen from everlasting,
Acts 15.18. and who works all things according to the Counsel of his Will,
Ephesians. 1.11, did Determine and Ordain all things that should come to pass in
time, Acts 2.23. and 4.28. and 17.26. according to his own good pleasure and
purpose, Ephesians. 1.5, 9.

Concerning Election
God of his own mere love, before the foundation of the world, did predestinate
and Elect in Jesus Christ a certain number (known only to himself) as well of
Angels, as of Mankind, to be to the praise of his Grace, and to obtain
Everlasting Salvation through Jesus Christ, Romans 11.5. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.2. 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Timothy 5.21. Ephesians. 1.6. 1 These. 5.9. To whom God also in Christ has
given his grace, and promised everlasting life before the world began, 2 Timothy
1.9. Tit. 1.2, And all these that are so chosen, are written in the Lambs Book
of Life, shall certainly be saved, and cannot finally be deceived or fall away,
Rev. 13.8. and 20.15. Phil. 4.3. Luke 10.20. Romans 8.29, 30, 33, 38, 39. Mat.
24.24. Romans 11.7. John 6.37, etc.

2. Such of Mankind as were Predestined and Elected before time, were
Predestined and Elected unto to the Adoption of Children, that thorough (not
for, nor without) Real Sanctification, Sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus, and
Belief of the Truth, they might be saved, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Romans 8.29, 30. 2 These.
2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2.

Concerning Reprobation.
All those that were not elected to Salvation, as well Angels as Men, were by
God (for the glory of his Sovereign Power and Justice) ordained of old to
Condemnation, or to be dealt with according to Gods Justice for, and according
to, their sins, 2 Pet. 2.3, 4. Jude v. 4.6. Romans 9.22. Prove. 16.4. Job 21.30.
Jer. 6.30.

Concerning Creation.
That God, the Father, Son, and Spirit, did make the World, and all the things
therein, Visible and invisible, for himself according to his pleasure, and that
very good: and Man (or Adam) in particular Perfect, and after his own Image,
Genesis 1 Eccles. 7.29, etc.

Concerning the Fall of Man.
Some of the Angels (now called Devils) sinned, and kept not their first
Estate; 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude verse. 6. John 8.44. And Adam (comprehending also Eve)
sinned, and all mankind in him; whereby all are become sinners, and under the
Judgment of God, and by that one sin subject to Death, Bodily, Spiritual, and
Eternal: and all, as well the Elect as others, are born in sin, and are by
Nature the Children of Wrath, under the Law and Curse; out of which condition,
no man can redeem himself, or his Brother, Genesis 3. Romans 5. Psalm 51.5. Job.
25.4. Ephesians. 2.2. Gal. 3.10. Psalm. 49.7.

Concerning the promise of Salvation by Christ.
Immediately upon the Fall of Adam, God made a Promise of his Son, the Seed of
the Woman, Genesis 3.15. And afterward often before the Law, made and renewed a
Covenant with Abraham, and the Fathers, (called the Gospel, Gal: 3.8.)
concerning him, how all Nations (that is, all Believers) as well Gentiles as
Jews, should be blessed; that is, justified and saved through and by him, Genesis
12. and 17. and 22. Romans 4. Gal. 3. And therefore the Law that was given after,
was neither intended, nor able to disannull the Promise (or that Covenant) nor
to give Life and Salvation to any, Gal. 3. Romans 3. and 4.

Concerning the Lord Christ, and those that are Redeemed by him.
1. The Son of God did often appear, both in the likeness of an Angel, and of a
man, before and under the Law, Genesis 16. and 22. Exodus 3. Josh. 5. Jude. 2.1.
and 6.11, 14. and 13.6.22. He was also clearly represented by many Types and
Figures; by Men, sc. Adam, Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Joseph, David, Solomon,
etc. The Firstborn, the First Fruits, Sacrifices, and by many other things,
Col. 2.17. Romans 5.14. Heb. 8.1. and 9.11, 12.

2. All the Prophets did clearly prophecy of him: and some of them in
particular, that he should proceed from David, out of the Tribe of Judah, be
born in Bethlehem, of a Virgin; yea the very time when he should be born was
also foretold; and that he should be a Prophet, Priest, and King; a Judge and
Savior to his people; that he should Die, Rise up again, Ascend up into
Heaven, sit upon Gods Right Hand, make Intercession, give Gifts unto men, and
come again to judge the world; the fulfilling of which, the History of the New
Testament does plainly and fully show; so that there is a sweet and exact
Harmony and Consent between that and the Old Testament herein, Luke 24.25, 26,
27. and 45, 46, 47. Acts 3.18, 21, and 10.43. and 13.39, etc.

3. In the fullness of Time appointed and promised by the Father. God out of his
own free and great love sent this his only begotten Son into the world, Gal.
4.4. Ephesians. 1.10. John 3.16. Romans 8.32. And the Lord Jesus Christ out of the like
love willingly came into the world, took upon him the Nature of Man (or the
seed of Abraham) and the Form of a Servant, being made like unto his Brethren,
and in all points Tempted (or Tried) as we are, yet without sin; yet being made
sin, and a curse for his people, he dyed a shameful and a cursed death,
bearing as well the wrath of God upon his soul. as painful Punishment from men
upon his body. Ephesians. 5.2. Phil. 2.7. Hebrews 2.14, 17. 2 Cor. 5.21. Col. 3.13.
Matthew 26. and 27, etc.

4. The Lord Jesus Christ, by dying and offering up himself as a Sacrifice to
God the Father, through the eternal Spirit, has perfectly satisfied for the
sins of all that were saved before his coming in the flesh, or that shall be
saved hereafter; having also reconciled them to God his Father, and procured
everlasting redemption for them, Romans 5.9. Col. 1.21, 22. Heb. 9.12, 14, etc.

5. All those for whom Christ dyed, for them he rose again, appeared in Heaven,
and continually makes Intercession for; which he does not do for all, but for
those that God the Father chose in him, and gave unto him to be his Body, his
Church, his Children, Friends and Flock, John 10. and 15. and 17, Heb. 2. Ephesians.
1. 14. etc. And when mention is made of his dying for the world. 1 Timothy 2.5.
John 6.51. 1 John 2.2. etc. It is to be understood, as when Abraham is said to
be Heir of the world, Romans 4.13. that is, of all Believers in every nation
throughout the world, John 11.51, 52. John 17.9, 19.

6. There is no other Mediator between God and Man, but only the Lord Christ,
nor no other Foundation can be laid besides him, neither is there Salvation in,
or through any other, but in and through him alone; neither can any be
accepted, justified, or saved (either in whole, or in part) by the Law, or by
their own Righteousness and Works, 1 Timothy 2.5. 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. Acts 4.11, 12.
Romans 3.4, and 5. Phil, 3.8, 9. Gal. 2.16. and 3. etc.

Concerning Justification and Justifying Faith.
1. All the Elect of God were gathered into Christ, and their sins laid upon
him, and he by his own Perfect and Personal Obedience, without them, made full
satisfaction unto God for them and their sins, and they were accepted and
virtually justified in him as their Head and Representer, before they did
actually believe; as they were sinners in the first Adam, before they actually
committed sins themselves; as upon the payment of the Debt by a Surety, the
Debtor is as really and truly discharged, as if he had paid it with his own
hand; and Christ their Surety being justified at his Resurrection (as the
Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 3.16) must be justified also from that Debt which was
theirs (for he had none of his own, Dan. 9.26. 1 Pet. 2.22, 24.) and so
consequently they must be justified in him. Thus the Apostle plainly affirms --
God was in Christ (i. e. at the time of his Death; for with reference to that
does the Apostle there speak) reconciling the world, ( i. e. that World, as was
mentioned before, whereof Abraham was heir; viz. the Elect, both Jews and
Gentiles, Romans 11.12.15.) not imputing to them their Trespasses; 2 Cor. 5.19.
so the same Apostle in another place, says Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? (meaning hereby all the Elect, as well such as are to
believe hereafter, as those who do believe already) it is God who justifies,
who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed -- Romans 8.33, 34. And Christ
prayed on Earth, as well for those that were to believe, as for those that were
already Actually Believers -- John 17.20. And all Elect Children that dye in
their Infancy, must be so Justified from Original sin, for they cannot actually
believe.

2. Notwithstanding that Virtual justification, which the Elect have in their
Head Christ, as they are considered members of his Body, and Part of the
Universal Church; yet the Scripture shows that there must be, after they are
called by the preaching of the Gospel, a personal and (as I may call it) an
actual Justification of every one that is to be saved, Romans 8.30. and that by
Faith only, without Works, before God, Romans 3.23. -- 25. Romans 4.1, -- 5. Yet
that Faith which justifies, cannot be alone, but is accompanied with good
Works, which justifies Believers before Men, and manifests their Faith to be a
True and living Faith, James 2.17, 18. as the Fruits of Trees do show the
nature of them, but are no causes of their Root, Life, or Growth.

Justification is wholly of Gods Grace, through the Redemption, Righteousness,
and Blood of Jesus Christ, Romans 3.24, 25. whereby those who truly believe in
him have all their sins forgiven, which will never be imputed, nor remembered
against them any more -- Romans 3.22, 26. Hebr. 10.14.17.

True Faith also, by which the soul looks on Christ, takes hold on him,
receives him, becomes one with him, and whereby Christ dwells in the Hearts of
Believers, is the gift of God, John 6.44, 65. Ephesians. 2.8. and 3.17.

Concerning the Spirit of Adoption and Regeneration.
1. All those that truly believe, God gives unto them Power (or rather as the
word (...) signifies, Right or Privilege) to become his children, John 1.12.
and they receive the Spirit of Adoption, by which they are led, and enabled to
come with confidence and boldness unto God, and to call him Father, through
Jesus Christ, Romans 8.14.15. Gal. 4.5, 6. The spirit it self also dwells and
abides in them, as the chiefest evidence of their being the children of God, --
John 14.16, 17. Romans 8.16. 1 John 4.13.

2. Regeneration, Sanctification, and Repentance, (which are the same in
effect) is a renewing of the Heart, and a subduing and cleansing of the Power
and Filth of sin, with a quickening of the soul to live like Christ; these are
absolutely necessary to salvation, John. 3.3, 5. Romans 6, etc. Yet these also,
as well as Faith, are the gifts and works of God, which he gives through and
for the sake of his Son, and works by his Spirit in those whom he intends to
save, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27, 28. Acts 11.18, etc.

3. No man (much less all men) has by nature, or before his conversion, either
the Spiritual light, or true Faith, or Christ, or his Spirit in them, or a will
or love to that which is spiritually good, or power to come to Christ, or to be
subject to his Law and Will; but by nature and before conversion, the best are
blind, unbelieving, without Christ, and without the Spirit, unwilling, wilful,
weak and wicked, John 3.5, 6. Romans 5.6. and 8.7. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, etc. Yet sinning
against the Light and Law of Nature, and not worshipping God according to what
is revealed of him, by the works of Creation, they are left inexcusable, Romans
1.20, 21.

Concerning Redemption from the Curse of the Law.
All true Believers are really and actually redeemed from the Curse and power
(or Dominion) of the Law, and are under Grace, or the Blessings, Promises, and
Privileges of the Covenant of Grace, both Temporal and Eternal, -- Romans 6.14.
and 7, 4, 6. Gal, 3.13. On the contrary, all Unbelievers and wicked persons
are, and remain under the Law and Covenant of works, Gal. 5.4.

Concerning the two Covenants.
From the beginning of the world there have been two Covenants in being, viz.
The Covenant of Grace, and the Covenant of works, called the Law and the
Gospel; and all and every person in the world have been and are under one of
them; the first requiring the Obedience of works, the other the Obedience of
Faith; and these are the conditions of the two Covenants, Romans 10.4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10 11. Heb. 8.7, 8. etc. and 10.15, 16, etc. 22.

Concerning Perseverance in Grace.
Those that do truly believe, and are once in and under the New Covenant; and
in the true grace of God, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 5.2. cannot absolutely
fall and utterly perish, for they are passed from death to life, John 5.24.
they are in Christ and God the Fathers hand, John 10.28, 29. they have the
Spirit abiding in them unto eternal life, 1 John 3.24. they sit together in
heav^^ly places in Christ, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. and he makes intercession for them,
John. 17.20. and the Decree, Oath, and Promises of God are sure to all the
seed, Romans 4.16. that they shall not depart from God, Jer. 32.40. 1 John 3.9.
and that he will never leave nor forsake them, Heb. 13-5, 6. and that he or
every one that believes, shall be saved, Mark 16.16. and shall not come into
condemnation, for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.1.

Concerning assurance of Salvation.
i. Believers are to be exhorted to make their calling and election sure, 2
Pet. 1.10. and this they may certainly attain unto, for God has promised it,
Christ has prayed for it, and many of the Saints have attained unto it, 1
John. 2.3, 5. and 3.14. etc.

2. Though there are many signs and evidences of the truth of grace, laid down
in the Scripture; and such as Believers may find in themselves; as, Love to God
and to his people; respect to all Gods Commands; and hatred to, sorrow for, and
power against all inbred corruption, etc. Yet the chiefest and most undoubted
evidence is the spirit it self; 1 John 3.24. and 4.13. and the Witness and
Sealing of it, Romans 8.15. Ephesians. 1.13. which Believers have most commonly after
they believe, and not at their first believing, Gal. 3.14. and there may be a
true Faith mingled with much Doubting, Mat. 14.31. and many of the children of
light may walk in darkness, and be ignorant of their state, Isa. 50.10. Yet
such bruised Reeds God will not break, nor quench such smoking Flax, ( i. e.
such weak and Doubting Christians, or their Faith) till he bring forth Judgment
into victory, or help them to overcome, Mat. 12.20, 21.

3. It is possible also, that such believers as have attained unto a full
Assurance, may afterward (either through the hiding of Gods countenance for
Trial of them; or by falling into some great sin, or by some sore and violent
temptation, or through their Remissness in Religious Duties, or the like) have
their Assurance darkened, shaken, and weakened; and thereby their Souls may be
much troubled and discomforted, Psalm. 30.7. Cant, 2.1, 2. and 5.2, 3, etc. yet
in their darkest and most doubting condition, they cleave unto the Lord,
remember his former dealings, acknowledge these doubts to be their Infirmities;
and they find and feel some workings of the Spirit and Grace within them, and
still continue in Prayer and other Ordinances, waiting upon the Lord till he
return unto them, revive them, restore the joy of his Salvation, and settle
them in their old Estates. as he has promised. For this read Psalm. 22. and 51.
and 77. throughout, Lam. 3. Isa. 8.17. and 50.10. etc.

Concerning Growth and Perseverance in Grace.
1. Those that have true Grace, whether little or much, they should labor to
grow therein, and to add one Grace to another, going from strength to strength,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, and still pressing after the things
that are before, endeavoring to be holy, Merciful, and Perfect, as God is, and
to walk as Christ walked, 2 Pet. 1.8. and 3.18. Phil. 3.11. -- 14.2 Cor. 7.1. 1
John 2.6. etc.

2. Though there is to be a pressing after perfection, as also an attaining
unto it in some sense, as Perfection of Justification, and of the Truth of
Sanctification; and likewise comparatively some attain to more Grace than
others, who are called (...), or Perfect, by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.6. Phil.
3.15. Heb. 5.14. yet the best of Gods people, whilst they are on earth, have
sin in them working in their Members, and they offend in many things; knowing
also, and doing but in part (as the Apostles themselves acknowledged Paul,
Romans. 7. James, Jam. 3.2. John, 1 John 1.) and they that say they have no
sin, but are perfect (or without sin) they will be found perverse (as Job
says, c. 9.) and they deceive themselves, and the Truth is not in them, 1 John
1.8, 10.

3. As there is a growing in Grace, so there is a persevering, and continuing,
and holding on and out, in the Will, Way, and profession of Christ unto the
end, without turning to the right hand, or to the left; and without
backsliding, or halting between Opinions, or being formal and lukewarm in
Religion; But striving against sin, and seeking to overcome through many
sufferings, and to run our spiritual Race, till we finish our course: for to
such does Christ promise the Crown of Life, and in his grace and strength alone
we must overcome; and therefore must always depend upon, and humbly implore his
help, who is the Finisher, as well as the Author of our Faith, that we may be
able to withstand all evils, and to stand complete in the will of God, being
not high minded, but fearing; nor doubtful-minded, but believing, Matthew
24.13. Revel. 2.10. and 3.11, 15, 16. Heb. 12.1, 4. Phil. 4.13. Collos. 4.12.
Romans 11.20. Luke 12.29, 32.

Concerning Good Works.
1. They that do believe, and are Gods workmanship created thereunto, are to be
careful to maintain good Works, which tend to the praise and glory of God, and
the good and profit of men; and are also (as was intimated before) evidences of
a true and lively faith in God, and of our love both to God and Men, Mat. 5.16.
Ephesians. 2.10. Tit. 3.8, 14. Iam. 2.17, 18, 22. John 14.21. 1 John 3.^7. Gal. 5.6.

2. Those works only are to be accounted good works, which are commanded by
God, and agreeable to his Word; and not such as are devised and esteemed by men
only to be so: and to offer unto God any thing in his service which he requires
not, is abominable to him, and Unprofitable and Sinful to them that do it, 1
Kin. 11.7. Ier. 32.35. Mic. 6.6, 7, 8. Mat. 15, 9. Col. 2.20. -- 24. Tit. 1.14.

Concerning Baptism.
1. Outward Baptism, or Water Baptism, is a solemn significant dipping into, or
washing with water the Body in (or into) the Name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost only, Mat. 28.19. It signifies the Death, Burial, and Res^r
ection of Christ, also the spiritual cleansing and washing of Justification,
and Regeneration (or Sanctification) together with the Baptism, or powri^g
forth of the gifts of the Holy Spirit, Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Col. 2.12. Heb, 10.22.

2. Though Baptism be not absolutely necessary to salvation, yet being
commanded by Christ, it is the duty of all professing and visible Believers,
and penitent persons: Men and Women, to be Baptized once, and that upon the
first Believing and Conversion, and before they enter into a particular visible
Church, or partake of the Lords Supper: Acts 2.41, 42. Yet it is not Baptism,
but an Interest in Christ, that gives any a Right to either: Neither is it the
proper work of Baptism to conferr or work grace, but to seal, confirm and
increase it, 1 Pet. 3.21. much less are all those that are Baptized true
believers and saved, John 3, 3, 5. Acts 8.13, 23,

3. But in this of baptism, as in many other cases, difference in persuasion
and practice may well consist with Brotherly love and Christian communion, see
Phil, 3.15. Romans 14, etc.

Concerning Churches and Church Assemblies.
1. It is a Gospel-Ordinance for Saints to gather themselves together into
Christian societies, or particular Churches, that they may the better perform
such duties as they owe unto the Lord, and to one another: and it is the duty
of all believers, if possibly and conveniently they can, to join themselves
unto some such Church, and being joined, to continue members thereof, unless
some necessary and good reason occasion the contrary; and then to depart with
consent of the Church of which they are members, Cant. 1.7.8. Acts 2.47 and
9.26, 27, 28 etc.

2. The particular visible Churches under the Gospel did not consist of whole
Nations, Countries or Cities; nor of the generality and Multitudes of either,
but of such Companies (many or few in them) that did receive and profess the
Doctrine of the Gospel, were converted and called to be Saints, separated from
the world, both its sins and services; and united and given up to the Lord, and
to one another, to live according to the will of God in all things, Acts 5.12,
13, 14. and 17.4. and 19.8, 9. 1 Cor. 1.2, etc.

3. Such particular Churches had, and still have distinct power, each within it
self, of admitting and ejecting members, of choosing their own Officers, and of
orde^ing all other matters relating to the Church: and none of them, nor their
Officers were charged with the errors and evils of others, unless they were
among themselves guilty of the same; neither have any of them, or their
Officers any power over any other Congregation or Members; yet as those
particular Churches are parts of the Universal Church or body of Christ, which
is his fullness, so they are all to be helpful to one another, and to walk by
one and the same Rule, Acts 6 5. and 14 23. 1 Cor. 5.12. Rev. 2. and 3. Phil.
3:15, 16 etc.

Concerning Church Officers.
As Christ has given extraordinary and ordinary Officers, as Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of his body (or Church) in
general; and this without any limitation of Time, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.28,
29 so, for the feeding, teaching, ruling and ministering to the poor and sick of
the Church, the Lord has appointed Elders (or Bishops which in Scripture
language are all one, Asts 20.17, 28. Phil. 1.1. Tit. 1.5, 6, 7. and Deacons
(and Deaconesses) or Widows, Romans 16.1. 1 Timothy 5.9, 10. with other Helps, who
are to be chosen by the Churches themselves, and ordained as formerly they
were, either by Apostles, or some appointed by them, as Evangelists, or by some
Teachers in those particular Churches, 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy, 2.2. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5.21, 22, etc.

Concerning the Lords Supper.
The Lord Christ also instituted and ordained for his Church and Disciples
only, that especial Ordinance called his Supper, or the Communion of his Body
and Blood, to put them in remembrance of his Death, till he came again; and to
confirm that spiritual Union and Communion they have with him, and as an
ordinance to convey more Grace unto their souls: And this, together with
Baptism are, and may be accounted (though not so called in Scripture)
Gospel-signs and seals of the Covenant of Grace; as Circumcision and the
Passover were before unto the Jews, Mat. 26.26, 27, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 10.16. and
11.23, 24, 25, 26. Romans 4.11. Col, 2.11, 12.

2. The command and example of Christ and his Apostles, are to be observed both
in the giving and receiving of this ordinance: After the Bread and Wine are
Blessed (or set apart, and a Blessing sought on them) The Minister is to take
both of the Bread and Wine himself, and to give of both kinds to the Disciples
or Members of the Church, sitting or leaning, Mat. 26.20, 26. But to give it
privately to persons upon their sick beds, or to keep back the Wine from the
People, or under pretense of humility to give it unto the Congregation
kneeling, are contrary to the Institution of Christ, see Acts 20.7. 1 Cor.
11.20, 23.

3 As the true Churches and Disciples of Christ should often partake of this
ordinance, so those that are without Christ, his Covenant, and Church; who are
ignorant, unbelieving, and ungodly, have no right thereto at all: and Christ
forbids to give holy things to such; and they that eat and drink the same
unworthily do both profane and pollute the Name and Ordinance of God, and eat
and drink damnation to themselves, not discerning the Lords Body, Acts 2.42.
and 20.7. 1 Cor. 11.25, 27, 29, Mat. 7.6.

Concerning Preaching and Prophesying.
Preaching of the Gospel, or Evangelizing, which is to be to all Nations, and
to every creature, is to be performed by such as are gifted, called, and sent,
either immediately by Christ (as the Apostles, and seventy Disciples were) or
by his Church, Acts 13, 1, 2, 3. or, in case of Persecution, by such as are
scattered Members, to whom God may open a door for the preaching of his word,
to such as want the same, Acts 8.1, 4. and 11.19 20, 21.

2. Prophesying is another Gospel-Ordinance; which is either a foretelling of
some future things by divine Revelation, which is an extraordinary and peculiar
gift of God, yet promised, John 16.13. and given to several in Gospel-days;
Acts 11.27. and 21.9, 10. 1 Cor. 14.26. Ephesians. 4.11. or else it is a speaking
unto men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort: or a teaching of
believers to observe all things that Christ has commanded: which is a distinct
thing from Preaching, though of the same Nature, and does more properly and
peculiarly belong to the Church, and those that are within, as the other does
to the world, and those that are without, 1 Cor. 14.22. Mat. 28.19, 20.
compared with Mark 16.15.

Concerning Prayer.
Prayer is a special part of Gods worship, being a pouring out of the soul in
confessions, supplications, and thanksgivings to God through Christ, by the
help of his spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. Jude v. 20. 1 Timothy 2.1, 8. etc.

2. Though that most excellent and comprehensive perfect Prayer, that Christ
taught his Apostles, (...) Directory and Rule to Teach Believers to pray
accordingly; and likewise that very Prayer may be used Verbatim: Yet Christ did
not impose it upon them; nor tie them thereto, neither did Christ or his
Apostles ever ordain or impose any other form: much less then should any other
Persons usurp this authority over the Church and people of God; and therefore
all such as make, enjoin, or observe such humane Forms, follow the Traditions
of Men, and not the Word of God, see 1 Cor. 11.1, 23. 2 Cor, 1.24. Mark 7.6, 7,
8.

Though the Prayers of Unbelievers be abominable to the Lord, because of their
sins, and their being out of Christ; yet it is their duty to pray, and it is
lawful for believers to pray where Unbelievers are present: we find our Savior
himself and many of his Saints, using diverse gestures in prayer, as kneeling,
lying on the face, standing; all very lawful and acceptable, if the heart be
filled with true faith, love, sincerity, humility, and zeal to God.

Concerning singing of Psalms, Imposition of Hands, and other Gospel
ordinances, not yet repeated.
1. Singing of Psalms (particularly Scripture-Psalms) Hymns, and Spiritual
songs, is a continued Gospel-ordi^ance, and duty; and to be performed by all,
but espe^ially in the Churches, Mat. 26.30. Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Col. ^.16. etc.

2. Laying on of Hands, is one of the Principles of ^he Doctrine of Christ, and
a Gospel-ordinance, pra^tised in the primitive times, (and not yet abrogated,
^s appears by any Scripture) being used upon those that were sent out of the
Churches to preach the Gospel^ Acts 13.3. or upon believers after their
Baptism, in order to their receiving the Holy Ghost or the gifts thereof, Acts
8.17. and 9.17. and 19.6. or else for the healing of the sick, Acts 28.8, etc.

3. Visiting of the sick, and for the elders to anoint them in the name of the
Lord, is a Gospel Ordinance and not repealed, Jam. 5.14, 15.

Concerning Excommunication.
Another Ordinance continued in the Time and Churches of the New Testament, is
a power given by Christ to deal with such members as walk disorderly, 2 These.
3.6. that refuse to hear the Church, Mat. 18.17. commit some scandalous sin, 1
Cor. 5. or deny and destroy the Faith or Fundamentals of Religion. as the
Resurrection, etc. 2 Timothy 2.16.27, 18. and 1 Timothy 2.20.

2. The Ordinance is to be solemnly performed in the name of Christ, by the
whole Congregation (yet ministerially by the Officers thereof) and according to
the nature of the offense, whether by Admonition without Ejection, 1 These.
5.14. or Ejection and casting out, till repentance manifests it self in the
excommunicated Person, and then he is to be restored, 1 Cor. 5. with 2 Cor.
2.6, 7, 8. or else a^ utter and absolute excommunication, and rejectin^ of the
Person, till the coming of Christ, 1 Corin^ 16.22.

Concerning Magistrates and Rulers.
1. Magistracy is an Ordinance of God, and Ruler or Magistrates (whether
supreme or subordinate) an^ Gods Ministers, Reigning by, under, and for him,
entrusted with the sword of Justice, for the encouragement and praise of such
as do well, but a terror to evi^ works, or a revenger, and executor of wrath
upon those that do evil, Romans 13.2, 14. 1 Pet. 2.14. 1 Timothy 2.2. Prove. 8.16.17.
2 Chronicles. 19.6.

2. The most High God, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who rules in
the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, he exalts and
pulls down, alters and removes Kings and other Rulers at his pleasure,
Psalm. 75.6, 7. Dan. 4.25. 2 Chronicles. 11.4. 2 King. 9.3, 6, 7. sometimes giving
bad Rulers, and at other times taking away such as are good, in a way of
Judgment, for the sin of a people, 1 Samuel. 8.16.19. Hosea 13.11. 2 Chronnic.
34.28.

3. Though the worst Rulers do not Reign without the pre-science and permission
of God, yet such Governors as rule contrary to the revealed will of God, and
to the true end of Government. do rule without Gods approbation, and are
accounted by him as no^ Rulers, Hosea 11.4. Ezekiel. 34.5.10.21. Jer. 5.1. And
some of them are said in Scripture to have their power with, and to exercise it
for the Beast, and therefore are called the horns of the Dragon, and of the
Beast, ( Daniel 7.20.24. Revel. 13.1. Chap. 17.^3.16.)

4. As it is unlawful for Rulers to command any thing that God has forbidden,
and to compel men to obey the same, or to forbid any thing that God commands;
so it is lawful for the servants of God to disobey such commands, Dan. 3:18.
chap. 6.10, 11. Acts 4.19, 20. chap. 5.29.

Concerning Antichrist.
Though there were many Antichrists in the Apostles time, 1 John 2.18. yet
there was one in a more special manner to come after those days, who is called
the Antichrist, 1 John 2.22. the man of sin, 2 These. 2.3. the Beast, the false
Prophet, and the Destroyer, Rev. 13. c. 9.11.

2. This Antichrist is one that sits in the Temple of God, assuming and
exercising power above those that are called Gods (above Magistrates) 2 These.
2. who bears the woman or the Harlot, the City Rome which was built upon
seven hills, Rev. 17.3.9.18. who, under pretense of being for Christ, does
indeed fight against him, and destroy his true Worship, Rev. 13.7.11. who
deceive the world by his miracles and lying wonders Rev, 13.13, 14. 2 These.
2.9. whose reign was to begin at the fall of the Roman Empire, 2 These. 1.6, 7.
where together with him True Kings were to arise out of that state, and is to
give their power to him. Rev. 17.12, 13. All which since it is exactly,
faithfully and literally agree to the Pope of Rome, we may say concerning him,
Is this the Antichrist that is to come or may we look for another.

Concerning the conversion and calling of the Jews.
Though the Partition Wall between Jews and Gentiles was broken down by the
Death of Christ, Ephesians. 2.14.15. and now all true Believers both Jews and
Gentiles are brought into our Fold and special Fellowship, John 10.16. chap.
11.51, 52. Ephesians, 2.16, 17, 18. Yet is the generality a body of that Relation,
the Jews, for their unbelief, hardness of heart, rejecting of Christ, and
disobeying the Gospel, were rejected and scattered; so for the sake of their
Fathers Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and for the fulfilling of the promises
made to them. The Jews shall yet before the end of the world, be generally
converted and reconciled to God ( Romans 11.25, 26. to the 31.

2. Their conversion will be both a strange and a sudden thing, and therefore
is often called and compared unto the Resurrection from the dead, and to a
Nation born in a day, Ezekiel. 37. Isa. 66.8, 9.

3. This glorious and great work of their conversion will be wrought in an
extraordinary way, as their deliverance out of Egypt was, Mic. 7.15. Is. 11.16.
and seems to be by the appearing of the Son of Man, or of the sign of the Son
of Man, in the clouds of Heaven, Zceh. 12.10. with Rev. 1.7. Mat. 24.30, 31.

4. When the Jews are thus called many others will lay hold upon them and join
with them, because of the miracles and the appearance of God among them, Zach.
8.21, 22, 23.

5. They shall return out of all lands where they are now scattered into their
own Country, as they did out of Egypt and Babylon, Isa. 11. chap. 2.7.12, 13.
they shall re-build the City Jerusalem, Jer. 30.18. verse 31, 38, 39, 40. and
shall dwell there and their posterities therein, and in the Land of Judah,
Zach. 2.12. chap. 8.7, 8. chap. 12.6. and they shall partake in an eminent
manner of the spirit, and of his graces, Ezekiel 39.24. Zach. 12.10. and be
abundantly blessed with all coeternal blessings. The first and chiefest power
upon earth will be exercised by and among them. To the astonishment and
destruction of their enemies, Micah 4.8. chap. 7.16. Acts 7.1.6.

A Short Appendix to this Confession of Faith, or Signs of a True Believer.
1. HE is one that has had clear convictions of sin especially his master sin,
and unbelief also of the want and worth of Christ, and of punishment for sin,
as the due desert of sin, John 16.8.

2. He is unbottomed and broaken off from himself, he has no confidence in
himself (his birth education, parts, performances) and best works are impure in
his own sight, Phil 3. and 3. Isay 64 and 6.

3. He is hardly brought to believe, he hardly believes that he does believe,
and hardly casts away his confidence when he does once truly believe.

4. He prays to God most against his dearest and master sin, and praises God
most when he has po^er against it.

5. He never repents for any sin forsaken, or goo^ he has done, or Affliction
he has suffered to Christ.

6. In reading of Scripture he observes what help on his holiness, and teaches
self-denial, as well as wh^^ increases knowledge.

7. He cares not what he has, whether he goes, what he suffers with Christ,
and without Sin.

8, He is one that resolves to follow Christ through every condition, yet much
suspects and fears he shall not be able to hold out.

9. He seeks and prizes holiness, to serve God here, as much or more then
happiness hereafter.

10. Above all care, he bends himself to keep from his Master Sin, 2 Samuel 23.24.

11. He neglects not his duty though he knows there is great danger in doing it,
Dan. 6.10.

12. He is one that is careful to lay in, and to get true grace in his heart as
well as in his profession, like the wise Scribe, Matthew 13. and wise virgins.
Mat. 25.

13. He cleaves to the Lord and follows him in the worst of times, when others
forsake him, not crying Hosannah to day, and Crucify him to morrow.

14. He takes patiently and thankfully the harshest words and the hardest
dealings from God, 1 Samuel 3. and 18. 2 Kings 20.9.19. Job 1.14.

15. He is much affected with, and afflicted for the sufferings of the godly,
and sins of the wicked as David, Jerome, Lot, Paul.

16. He is one that when recovered out of his backsliding, remembers his
former good condition, with praises more to God, and hatred more to sin, Hos.
^.7, 14, 2, 3.

17. He seeks and esteems sincerity more then any garnishing gifts, and prizeth
plain and poor Saints that are honest and upright, more then those that has
parts and wealth, if less sincere.

18. He devoteth himself more to Gods fear, and desires grace for grace sake,
Neh. 1.11.

19. His chief delight is amongst the Saints, especially those that excel in
virtue.

20. He is one that upon the least apprehension of Gods withdrawing from him,
that seeks God the more earnestly.

21. He is one that upon every new mercy received is with new thankfulness
delighted.

22. He has such pity for perishing people, that he cannot but weep at the
sense of their ruin, Luke 19.41.

23. He is one that prosperity does not lift up, nor adversity cast down.

24. Every company is burdensome to him that is not designing Gods glory.

25. The longer he is acquainted with Christ, the greater is his affection to
Christ.

26. He is one that knows the voice of Christ, and will hear his voice only,
John 10.4, 5. 1 John 4.6.

27. He is one that lays the sins of Professors so much to heart, that it makes
him walk sadly.

28. He is one that prays at his first conversion, Acts 9.11. God has no
Still-born children.

29. He is one that upon self suspicion does greatly desire to be searched, and
does earnestly search himself that his work may be of God approved, Psalm. 77.6.
Psalm. 139.1.

30. Under deep distress or languishing, Gods promises are then most precious
to him.

31. His faith helps on his holiness, and his holiness holds up his faith:

32. Wherever he goes he carries a constant jealousy with him over his heart,
proving its affectedness to God and goodness.

33. He has a soft, circumcised new heart, and is a new creature, Ezekiel
36.26. 2 Corinthian 5.17.

34. The peace of Christ's house is the chief joy of his heart.

35. He is more afraid of the hell in sin than the hell after sin.

36. He does never resolve to go on in any known sin.

37. He is one that had rather dwell in a Cottage with the humble, then in a
palace with the Ungodly.

38. He respects all, and rejects none of Gods commandments.

39. He often asks his heart, what am I? what a doing? whether a going?

As an Appendix to his Confession of Faith you have here 12. brief Arguments
concerning Beleivers Baptism, which were bles'd to the satisfaction of a
Doubting friend (upon that subject) to whom he sent them.
1. BEcause God commands, Acts 2.38. and 10.48. and 22.16.

2. Because of the promises made to this Ordidance, and to them that submit
thereto, Matt. 16.16. Act. 2.38.

3. Because thereby they imitate Christ and his Apostles, Matt. 3.13. Luke
3.21.23. Act. 9.18.

4. Because it is one of the Principles of Religion, Heb. 6.1, 2.

5. Because it is part of righteousness, and practicing it is part of
fulfilling righteousness, Mat. 3.15.

6. Because of the significancy of it, signifies.

1. Jesus Christ's death, burial and resurrection, and our justification
thereby, Romans 6.3.4. Mar. 1.5. Act. 22.16. 2. Our putting on of Christ Gal.
3.27. 3. Our Sanctification is mortification and vivication, Romans 6.2.5. Col.
2.12. 4. The Baptism of the spirit, or the gifts of the Spirit, Act. 1.5. Tit.
3.5 6.
7. Because it is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace. coming in the room of
circumcision, Col. 2.11, compare with Romans 4.11. This such as are for Infants
Baptism acknowledge.

8. Because it was and still should be a badge of Christianity, and a
discriminating character of saints, and beleivers, from the world and
unbeleivers, Act. 10.47. 1 Cor. 15.29.

9. Because it is a concomitant of faith and faith, and it ought not to be
separated, Ephesians. 4.5. Act. 8.12.

10. Because not to be baptized is a rejecting of the Counsel of God, Luke 7.30.

11. Because it is one of the uniting Bands that joins the body together, and
one of the Churches breasts that nourishes her Children, 1 Cor. 12.13. Col.
2.19. Cant. 4.5. and 8, 8.

12. Because it is praevious and antecedaneous to Church Communion and to the
orderly partaking of the Lord's Supper, Acts 2.41, 42.9.18, 26.27, 28,

To which might be added the general opinion of both ancient, and modern
Teachers, and Churches as appears in their Confessions of Faith, and other
writings.

Neither is there any prohibition of reiterating the Ordinance (especially if
there be any deficiency, in the first reception of it, and that essential too
in Infant baptism, consider Mat. 3. with 2.14. and 19.3, 5.

Some gracious Experimental and very choice Sayings, and Sentences, collected
out of his Papers.
SAints should fear every Sin, but no Sufferings, Psalm. 4.4. Rev. 2.10.

There is a Guilt that Saints may communicate to others, and contract from
others, both to be removed by new Acts of Faith and Repentance.

It is a great ease to and unburthening of the Soul to confess Sin sensibly,
humbly, brokenly, and with hatred to it.

It is the property of a true Christian to justify God, and to judge himself
under the greatest afflictions.

It is and should be the care of a Christian, not to suffer for Sin, nor Sin in
^^fferings.

Account the least Spiritual things, better then the greatest, and best
outward, and Temporal things.

There is no real Bondage but what is either from, ^^r for Sin.

Christians will sooner overcome their outward Enemies by praying for them,
then by praying against them.

Bad times well improved, are far better then ^ood times, not redeemed, or
misspent.

Shut thy Eyes from beholding, thy Ears from earing, and thy Heart from
entertaining sin.

All Christians must be brought into the Fire before they will be brought to
close, for it is impossible to join cold Pieces, or one cold, and another hor.

He that is willing to part with his dearest Lust, will be willing to part with
his dearest Life also.

A Christian will have but little comfort to suffer for that which is but a
Notion in his Head, and not a setlend truth in his Heart, yet:

Note that the lesser the Truths are, which Christians do suffer for (if
rightly) the more there, Love does appear to Christ therein.

Gods Minnums or least things, are better then the worlds Mountains, or
greatest things.

The Saints are to bear a threefold Testimony, to and for Christ, and his
Truths, Breath testimony, Life testimony, and Blood testimony.

Speaking Words, maintaining Opinions, and the outward performing of Duties,
and partaking of ordinances are but the least things in Religion.

I never trusted Christ but I found him faithful, nor my own Heart but I found
it false.

Let Gods hiding thy infirmities and secret sins from thy Enemies, make thee
the freer and willinger to confess them unto him.

Learn to know sin to disallow of it, despise it, overcome it inwardly, and to
put it from thee to fear its return, and to be more estranged toward it, more
watchful to avoid Temptations, and wise to shun occasions, that lead to it.

The strength of all Corruption sometimes appears in one, and do but overcome
your master sin, and you overcome all.

The power and strength of Corrupion is but seldom known, to wit when
Temptations, Oppertunities, and occasions of trial come.

That Soul does grow empty, that is always letting out, but not careful to lay
in.

Let Professors take heed least they be always wooing Christ, and yet never
married to him, of being Concubines and not Queens, Cant. 6.8.

Lay in, lay up, lay out for Christ.

Remember that you shall shortly reach Immortality, but never Eternity.

Make Christ your all, and you will be sure to lay down your self, all

Consider that when you are not assaulted with Temptaions, Satan is damming,
and pounding, and and he will suddenly draw up his Sluice and let loose upon you.

Satan does not (like God) warn before he strike. Christ work is Wages, and his
Service perfect freedom.

The Love of the Master, the sweetness of the Service, and the greatness of the
reward are sufficient encouragements to serve Christ.

A Christians security and safety is in doing his duty, and he should study his
duty more then his safety.

He that loves not Christ more then his Lust or his Life, is like to lose
Christ, and his Life, but he that loves Christ more then his Life, shall be
sure to save, and keep both.

Strive greatly to have, and to exercise a good Conscience toward God, and
Men, and commit by Soul, Life and Cause to the Lord, and to ex^^ct the worst of
Men, and the best of Christ.

Christ is ^^^o the Soul as the Loadstone to the ^on drawing it to it self, or
the Cristial to the other ^tones, putting Beauty, and Luster on them.

A Christian beholds Christ in the deepest Afflicti^n, as well as in the most
spiritual Ordinance.

Corruptions are like Worms in the Maw, or Sto^ach which will eat through the
Soul, unless scat^red, killed and purged out.

The only way some times for a Christian to avoid the force of Temptation, is
(Soldier Like) to fall down on his face when he sees the Cannon, or Musket
fired against him.

Make haste to do thy work, Christian, and God will make haste to give thee thy
Wages.

Thou must dye once whether thou suffer or no, and thou can dye but once if
thou suffer.

The sins of Saints are new sufferings to Jesus Christ, and the sufferings of
Saints are the Wounds of Christ.

Reading the Scriptures helps Meditation, Meditation Prayer, and Prayer every
good work.

Men may come too late to God, (when the Door is shut) but God never comes too
late to Men.

Let the Child be contented to take the Breast, the Mother will give it, and
then it shall have both, so be contented with what Christ gives you, and you
shall want nothing.

To see the want of Grace is much, the worth of Grace more.

It Is hard to get Grace, hard to get assurance of Grace, hard to use it, and not
abuse it.

It Is very hard to behold our own Gift without Pride, and the Gifts of others
(if they excel ours) without Envy.

Do not commend thy Friend, nor discommend thy Foe too much, least thou be
judged to be partial.

He commands most and best, that commads in Love, Humility and Self-denyingly.

He has not learned to rule, that has not learning^ed to obey.

An even through Paced, Self-fearing, Heart melt-Christian is always best.

The world is a great nothing deluding the bad, disturbing, and distracting the
good.

Satan works more upon men by sleight then by might, avoid his cunning, and
thou will avoid his cruelty.

Hypocrites Hearts are like stinking Ponds wherein Frogs live, and Fish dye,
Lusts feed, and Grace (if it were there (starves.

The Devil is like the Turkycock, (or Crocodile) if you turn upon him he will
fly from you, but you fly from him, he will pursue you.

It is better sometimes to slight the Devil then to fight him.

Thoughts of our own death will tend much to deaden sin.

God has set the Tongue between the Brains, and Heart, that it may advice with
both, and within two Guards to keep it in, and yet it is unruly.

Prayer is a good preparative to suffering, when Christ had prayed he went out
to meet Judas, Ioh. 18.4.

Ruffling opinion sowing and Church railing Persons and Professors, have
commonly more Self then Grace.

It is the duty of a Christian to suppress and search himself, when he does not
know Evil by himself.

Christ and Sin are most magnified in the Eyes of Believers in their
afflictions, but in a different manner and to a different end, and then Christ
is most desired and Sin most despised.

A Christian should earnestly desire that his sin might sit in a white Cloud,
and that he might go out of the World, as a Perfume, and not as a Snuff.

The holy Law of God teaches a Man to see his own Deformity, and requires from
him a Conformity.

Sin is like a sleepy Lion in the Soul which Temptation soon awakens.

Christ puts most of his Oil in broken Vessels, in broken Hearts, there is
most Grace and best kept.

The less a man strives for himself, the more will Christ strive for him.

Oh my Soul look for death hourly, long for it greatly, prepare for it
carefully, meet and welcome it joyfully, for it is Christ's part to direct his
Spouse (the Soul to him) and thy Friend that comes to set thee at liberty from
thy sins, discharge thee from thy P^ison, dismiss thee from thy Debts, and
bring thee at once to enjoy all thy desires.

Oh Lord as a sign that I shall be able to dye for thee, let me find my
Corruption dying in me by power from thee.

He that will not take Example shall make an Example.

Afflictions are Christ's Love Tokens, Jer. 12.7. Heb. 12.6. Rev. 3.9. and
Christians are never more tendered, then when most afflicted, as Ephraim Jer.
31.20

A Christians Soul should be like the Dial going according to the Sun, or
following Christ.

Small sins yielded too, make way for greater, and one sin for another.

He that converts a Sinner covers a world (or multitude) of sins, and gains
more then a World, to wit a Soul.

Saints should labor to Lord it over their Corruptions, as their Corruptions
did formerly Lord it over them.

God has given a Man a little Mouth, and a narrow Throat, that Man may not
exced in eating.

To take pains about unnecessary and unprofitable things, is laboriously to
mispend time.

Zeal without Knowledge to guide it, is like mettle in a blind Horse which
stumbles and overthrows the Rider.

Young Christians commonly want a Curb, and old Christians a Spur.

Be not ambitions of Love, and thou shall not be so soon an object of Envy.

It is good to curb natural and acquired Gifts, but to give the Reins to Grace,
and let always Grace lead rule and master Gifts.

A Heart unconverted is contended with nothing but what is helping it unto
Hell, and it has never enough of that very sin, and the Heart converted is
never satisfied but with what helps it toward Heaven, and yet thinks he has
never enough thereof, viz. Christ and Grace.

Welcome thou (thy Landlord) Christ into thy Cottage now, and he will welcome
thee into thy Palace hereafter.

Get Christ (and Christian) to bind thy Conscience to the peace, and thy
Affections and Flesh to the good behavior.

Spend all thy Grace against thy Lust, but none for it.

Thy hardest duty in Christianity is to deny self, and to destroy sin.

As the Martyr professed he had rather be a Martyr then a Monarch, so should
every Christian.

It is a special favor, and great promotion to suffer.

Satan accuses God to Men, and Men to God, but Christ excuses and answers all
his accusations against his People.

Christians should do as the Shechemites did, when their City (their own Souls
in strength) was beaten down fly to their Tower even Christ.

The true knowledge of Christ brings consolation, and the right profession, and
practice of him persecution.

When a man is imprisoned, and shut up from Men, he is the more shut up with
God.

Account it not restraint as long as thy Heart can go out toward God, and his
People, and Ways in affection and prayer.

Retiredness and close imprisonment drives a man to hold closer Communion with
God, and to a stricter search of himself.

Take heed that preparatory meditation (to Prayer) does not prevent Prayer it
self, or put you besides Prayer.

One of the radical sins spoken of, (1 John 2.16. Is every man's master sin.

I often found my heart in days of Humiliation, more affected and melted by
the Prayer of weaker then stronger Christians.

I would be glad to be out of the World when I have no service to do for God in
it.

He that would live for himself (only or chiefly) in the World is not worthy
to live a day in it.

If I may have liberty to serve Christ, I would have the glory to suffer for
Christ.

Secret Prayer is either a familiar speaking to God, or with God, or a pouring
out of the Heart before God, through his Son our Savior by his spirit.

Sometimes Ejaculations, or short and sudden Pantings, and breathings out of
desires to God, may be more acceptable to him and prevailing with him, then
long Prayers.

There may be great difference between the temper of a Christian one time and
another, yea in the exercising of his Gifts in Praying, Preaching, etc.

True Godliness and Hypocrisy are best discerned in turnings, and changes
either when they change their conditions, by Marriages, or are exalted to
Offices, or when new opinions begin to grow.

Due sin may cause thee more sorrow, then all thy sufferings.

It is happy to dye in the Lord, and honorable to dye for the Lord.

Sins do dye and fall off from Christians as the Leaves fall from Trees in
Autumn by degrees.

Christians are now as Abraham was driven out of Egypt, and come where they
were before or into their first State, therefore they should offer to the Lord,
as he did, Genesis 13.3.4.

God is now spoiling us, of what would otherwise have spoiled us.

Churches gathered in prosperity, will hardly stand or continue together in
adversity.

A Child of God may know the weight of sin by Christ's sufferings, for if that
strong Heart of Steel, did bend under the weight of our sins, what shall poor
weak men do which is but a Reed or Rush.

As our good works and performances should have an operation upon our Souls and
Hearts, to strengthen Faith, so should our weaknesses and sins to work
repentance.

It is a great condescension in God to afflict or lay his hand upon man, and in
that sense the Apostle exhorts Beleivers not to despise or think little of the
chastning of the Lord. Heb. 12.3.

A Beleiver is to shut the Eye of Reason, if he will clearly see with the Eye
of Faith.

The promise is a Christian perspective, and his Faith the Eye with which he
looks through it upon Christ and God the Father in him.

A Prison or persecution is to a Christian as some scaring thing, that one sees
in the Night at a distance, but when he comes near it, and to know it, he is
not at all afraid of it.

Seek to find out your own Errors, before another find them out, and to write
your own Errata's.

When the Lord is trying his People, they should be trying themselves.

Christians should not desire deliverance before the time appointed, for that
is as if a Woman should desire to have her Child born before the full and due
time.

Christians are apt to feel, and fear punishment more then sin, which is the
cause of it.

Gods People must expect in the World, the entertainment of Strangers.

Sins in Saints are like Weeds weeded out of a Garden, or Field which lie in
the Alleys, or Veins, but never grow there again.

A Hypocrite is like a white Stone in the Water amongst other Stones, and of
that same nature with other Stones there, hard, heavy, cold, and inflexable and
differs only in color.

A true Christian is like a Flint-stone which though it falls into Water, yet
it keeps, and retains Fire in it still: so does he retain his Grace,
notwithstanding his corruption.

Labor to act those graces chiefly that are most contrary to your master sins
and chief corruptions.

The Lord has Saints enough to devide into three bodies, some to suffer for
him, some to destroy Babylon, and some to be for Seed-Corn, to sow again in the
Earth.

Learn by lighter Crosses to look and prepare for heavier.

In two Cases it is hard to Act Faith. 1. When there is nothing sensible or
visible to second, and support it, or 2. when there is very much to fill the
outward senses.

It is a very common and ordinary thing for most or all Professors, to be in
one or two extremes, either to over value, or under value Instruments,
Creatures and Ordinances.

The more Saints do believe and suffer, the more they may expect of the spirit.
John 7.8. 1 Pet. 4.14.

Be more thoughtful and careful how to use what you have, to Gods glory, then
to gain more.

The Lord freely gives, and justly takes away.

The exercising of Graces do naturally destroy sin, and the more you abound in
Acts of Grace the more you increase the habit Heb. 6.26.

The Law causes sickness of Soul, but the Gospel heals the same.

When Saints perceive their sins growing weak they should then prosecute them
most.

A Saint is to put forth his Faith in Prayer, and afterward follow his Prayer
with Faith.

In the midest of earthly business, the Soul should redeem some special time
for secret, and private duties.

It is the will of Christ that Saints should rejoice more in what Christ has
done for them, then in what they have done, or can do for him.

Learn to observe what God gives without asking, and what he gives in answer to
Prayer for the one begets Thankfulness, the other more Prayer.

Christ kept the Law legally, Beleivers kept it Evangelically, he perfectly,
they purposingly and endeavouringly.

A Beleivers assurance and chiefest joy, does not arise from his sanctification
(because that is imperfect here in degrees) but from his justification Romans
5.2. 1 Pet. 1.8.

Look upon Christ first without you, then search for him within you.

God makes us feel him (or his hand) that he may hear us, strokes makes Cries,
and Whipings, mornful complaints to him.

God troubles us, that we may turn to him, and leaves us a while for to see
whether we will follow after him.

Its strange and very bad sign to see Saints look more upon the sins of the
wicked to ripen them for misery, then after self humiliation and holiness to
ripen, and fit themselves for mercy.

He that cannot pity the sinner, and hate sin, does not reprove, out of love
to Christ nor from a gracious spirit.

He that loves not a Reprover, and prizes not his reproof neither profits
thereby, is more his sins, then his Souls friend.

If God has kept thee from falling still, fear, watch, pray, and live by Faith
on Christ.

No power can keep him in Bonds, whom truth and innocence acquits.

Due end in being in the world, is not to be to our selves.

Though the People of God may be killed, yet they can neither be hurt nor
overcome.

Christians though disagreeing in Opinion should agree in Affection, and
differing in Controversy, should agree in Charity.

It is a very sad thing neither to be careful to do well, nor repent of doing
ill.

The Portion that Christ gives us is not near so bitter, as his Cordial is
sweet.

The fear of death is ingrafted in the common nature of all men, but Faith
works it out by Christians.

Nothing will be terrible where the love of God is apprehended, and nothing
grievous where love to Christ is exercised.

Learn to prefer Christ before self, and suffering above sinning.

Look for suffering as for Exaltation, for it is an honor to be accounted
worthy, and a double honor to be enabled and carried through safety.

A Beleiver should learn.
1. To know God in Christ. 2. Himself in Christ. 3. Christ in him. 4. Himself
he was without Christ. 1. wicked and wretched, 2. unwilling and weak in good.
The Life of a true Beleiver, is.
1. In the Lord. 1. These. 1.2. 1. John 2.27. 2. On the Lord. Romans 1.17. Gal.
2.20. 3. By and from the Lord. John 6.57. 4. To the Lord. Romans 14.8. Luke
20.38. Gal. 2.19. 5. With the Lord. 2. Cor. 13.4. 1. These. 5.10. Romans 6.8.
The Care of a true Christian.
1. To wait on God. Isa 8.17. and 25.9. 2. To walk with God. Genesis 5.22.24. and
6.9.24.40. 3. To work all his works in and for God. Io. 3.21. Romans 6.10. 1.
Cor. 10.31. 4. To bring his will to submit to the will of God in everything.
Mark 26.42. Heb. 10.7.
A Christian should take heed least he be giving way to his Heart to steal out
now and then to sin, and get some sweet Bits thereof between duties.

There will be a reviveing of old sins, if there be not effectual repentance
for them, and a care by Faith through all Duties and Ordinances to get new
strength against them, and constant watch kept over them.

When God makes the World to hot for his People to hold, they will let it go.

A Christian comes not to know the weakness of his Grace till the Spirit ceases
to work in and by it, nor the power of his Corruption till Satan works therein
by his temptation.

A Christians Flesh should keep from the Show, and his Conscience from the
guilt of sin.

Where sin is not killed it will kill.

Sin has no Mother but a man's Heart, nor Father but Satan.

Sin draws the Soul into it, either by power, or policy, by force, or by fraud.

Christians should not give offense carelessly, nor take offense causelessly.

Fear thy Friends more then thy Foes, thy sins more then thy sufferings, and
liberty more then bondage.

Some Christians have four Thorns that greive them, a Thorn of affliction from
God, a Thorn of persecution from men, and (...) Thorn of Temptation from Satan,
and of corruption in themselves.

Self loathing destroys self Love much, and the more we loath our selves the
better we love others.

When a Christian comes to be as weary of his sins as of his sufferings God
will certainly put them to an end.

One of the chiefest works of the Soul, is self exmination, and yet a Christian
will find himself most backward thereto, and soonest weary therein.

The more a Soul is exercised in spiritual meditation, the less with carnal
Temptation.

The more frequent and powerful in private Prayer, the more free from, and the
more potent against corruptions.

Seasonable and unexpected mercies are very sweet and acceptable.

It is a common principle in nature that no man can or should judge his Enemy,
or be judged in his own Cause.

Slothfulness is the Cradle of sin which the Devil Rocks.

Christ will be soon sencible of those Saints sufferings that are sencible of
their own sins.

There is no power in the Creatures to do either good or hurt, but as God
disposes them, for it is God that puts their Sword into their hand. Ezekiel,
30.24.

Take heed of reproving or upbraiding another in self passion, or to provoke
his Passion.

The Lord now shakes his visible Church as a Tree is shaken, that the rotten
Fruit may fall off.

Careless hearing makes carnal Hearts, and carnal Hearts makes cursed lives.

He that will be much in self denial, must be much in self trial.

If we could be contented to be altogether without Christ, or with part of
Christ we need not suffer persecution.

When and where wickedness is most, then, and there, the godly should strive to
be most godly.

If Gods People could be diligent at their own work, and leave God at his work
they need not fear success.

As the Stars the higher they are, the swifter their motion, so Christians the
more spiritual the more active in the service of God.

Nothing comes amiss to a godly man but sin.

What a Preacer does, as well as what he speaks, is doctrine to the People.

The chief end of all Scriptures is to know God, and to worship him rightly
being known.

Christians, should take heed least God should sue them upon an Action of
Waste, for wasting time, and mispending mercies, etc.

Sense of misery must pr^ceed sense of mercy.

At the day of death (but especially at the day of Judgment) a Saint will wish
he had sinned less, served God better, and suffered for him more.

He is a strong Christian that seeks Gods glory more then his own salvation,
but no Christian that seeks neither.

Sin undiscovered, or unconsidered becomes sin unrepented.

There are many that serve themselves of Christ, but few that serves Christ for
his own sake.

Gods People have the love of God showed to, and set before them, shed in them,
and sealed to them.

Let not a Christian leave off his running till he comes to the end of his
Race, but like the Moon, though she be eclipsed yet forsakes not her Orb not
discontinues her course at all.

Be sure to praise God when thou receivest power against Sin and Temptation,
and you shall be sure to find God ready to give you power another time when you
want it.

Be still employed in doing good, and you shall not be much tempted, or
troubled with Evil.

Some Christians have more trouble from, and for Temptation and sin in one day
then they have for suffering many months.

Poverty is the gift God, as well as Riches.

When Saints perceive their sins growing weak they should prosecute them most.

A wicked man may give good Counsel from God to a good man, and he not taking
it may be destroyed; Pharoh, Necho, to Josiah.

It may be said of many a man that he is honorable, and yet a Leaper, 2. Kings
5.1.

There is no evil in sin, but there is some what in the name of Christ that
speaks the contrary as sin is darkness so Christ is light, etc.

A Beleiver is to shut the Eye of Reason if he will clearly see with the Eye of
Faith.

The great Principles and Mysteries of Divinity, (...) are to abide in God, to
live on God, to walk with God, and to live to God.

There are three sorts of Gospel Sacrifices. (1.) Thanksgiving. Psalm. 51.17.19.
Amos 4.5. Heb. 13.15. Hos. 4.2. (2.) Liberality to the Poor. Mich. 6.8. 1 Cor.
16.1.2. and 2. Cor. 18.19. Heb. 13.16. (3.) Our selves Romans 12.1.

Sanctifying Thoughts.
1. The Thoughts of God, free and constant love to me. 2. The thoughts of what
Christ has done for me. 3. The thoughts of what I have been, and done against
God. 4. The thoughts of what God and Christ are to me, and I to them. 5. The
thoughts of Christ's Excellency and some Saints Eminency. 6. The thoughts of
Death and Judgment. 7. The thoughts of what I shall be, and shall have
hereafter.
A Christian should be much taken and rejoice at.
1. The least Revelation of Truth. 2. The least Communion with God. 3. The
least additional measure of holiness. 4. The least success God gives him in his
work.
It Is observed that the first word spoken by Christ in his ministerial office is
an assertion to, or of the authority of Scripture. Mat. 4.4

God is not only the holy one of Israel, but the holy one in Israel. Ezekiel. 39.7.

By Prayer God does converse with me, by Preaching he does teach me, by
Meditation he does fill me, by Saints society he does warn me, by singing
Hymns he does ravish me, by his Supper he does feed me.

By his Love he does endear me to him, by his Son embolden me. By his Spirit
unite me to him; By his promises stay me with him.

Public Disputations are seldom rightly managed, being too often attended
either with firceness and frowardness too much insulting over an Adversary if
any advantage be gained, or be left to one^ self in some thing or other to be
worsted and shamed; Or if some good has been not to be so ready to give God
the glory as in other things.

A suffering Christian should see that Innocence be the beginning, and Patience
the end thereof.

Six necessary Questions that every Christian should ask his own Heart. 1.
Whether I am a Saint or a Hyppocrite, a wise or foolish Virgin? 2. What are the
truest and strongest grounds I have of my Saintship. 3. Whether if I be a true
Christian, is my Spirit Legal or Evangelical. 4. With which of the Saints
mentioned in Scripture, can I most compare my self. 5. What are the Reasons (in
respect of my self) why I continue without full assurance. 6. What is my master
sin, and what power has it in my Soul? or I over it.

God carries on the work of Grace in Believers. 1. According to their natural
parts and natural constitutions. 2. According to the means they are under,
whether Legal or Evangelical Preaching. 3. According to the things he has to
do by them, or calls them to suffer. 4. According to the shortness or length of
time they have to live. 5. According as they have been before the Conversion;
greater or lesser Sinners.

Recreations (the Object and Subject being right) must be. 1. Not on
Lords-days, Fast-days, etc. 2. Not in the Night, for it is given for rest. 3.
When we stand in need of it. 4. Seldom. 5. Not overlong. 6. Not over costly.
7. Suitable to men's conditions. 8. To a good end.

In Duties we should. 1. Look for to meet and enjoy God. 2. Expect to hear and
receive from God. 3. Return somewhat to God.

As a Watch must be daily wound up by him that carries it, otherwise it is
useless: So the Soul must be spiritually wound up by Christ, else it will be
unuseful and unserviceable.

Christ has more to do to bring us to be reconciled to God, then to bring God
to be reconciled to us. Reasons, 1. Because God is willing, Men unwil^ing. 2.
Because God is satisfied and contented with Christ's merits, so are not Men.

Soul freedom. 1. To be freed from doubts of its eternal condition. 2. Of
scrupulous opinions. 3. Of the power of Corruption. 4. Of stinging Conviction
of the Law. 5. Of the fiery fierce temptations of Satan. 6. From the fear of
death.

Saints do commonly slight and undervalue, what ever suits not with their own
Judgments.

James 1.8. A double minded man that is, a man whose mind hangs between a
double Object, Christ and the World.

A Saint that has been sick and near death and is recovered, and returns into
the World again, is like a poor peeld Sheep, that is brought out of the high
Hill and Storm, and almost to the Fold, and then chased again to the storm.

Or a weary Traveller that is near his home, that must needs return a great
part of his way to fetch, what he did neglect, Or a man that has been long at
Sea and is in sight of shore, but forced to Sea again. Or an Apprentice that
when he expects to be set at liberty, must serve another Apprentiship. Or
Joseph's Brethren, who returning home was forced back again into Egypt.

Things that seem small to Christians at a distance, when God brings them to
the Soul, they seem great (as persons or things at a distance) as sin, duty,
etc.

Two great Evils follow hardness of Heart. Romans 2.5. Impenitency and Wrath.

When may sin be said to be a man's own? 1. When he commits them out of his own,
as Satan does. John, 8.44. 1 John. 38.9. 2. When he hates it not but loves it,
yea more then any good. Psalm. 52.3. 3. When he nourishes it. Iam. 5.5.

They pick the sweetest bits to nourish the hearts. 4. When a man provides for
it. Romans 13.14. 5. When men live in sin. 1. Tit. 5.6. 6. When it is their
Element, meat, Prove. 1.7. Sleep. v. 16. Apparel. Psalm. 73. Chain. Prove. 10.23.

Men carry their lives, as men carry precious water in a brittle Glass. (2 Samuel
14.14.) or a Candle in a paper Lanthorn.

A Saints second part of Sin is sorrow.
A true Saint has his high places to walk upon. Heb. 3. Last, As 1. God
himself, his being, 2. Christ as Mediator, his Light, Strength, etc. 3. The
Spirit as his Air. 4. The word as his Staff. 5. Mount Zion as his delightful
place. 6. Gods decrees, as his Record. 7. Experiences, as his helps. 8. Hopes
of Salvation, as his encouragement.

The Evils I have feared and experienced in my self, are 1. To be hardened by
the deceitfulness and guilt of sin. 2. To have my goodness inconstant and
uncontinuing, as the morning Cloud or Dew. 3. Because I cannot attain to that I
urge and press upon others. 4. To find such little effect of the sufferings of
Christ, and of his Spirit in me, and of the Resolutions I make, and Duties I
perform.

Seek three things, 1. To secure thy Soul. 2. A sound Heart. 3. A sin-sick Soul
or a Soul sick of sin.

Take heed of presumptuous sin which is (in Heb. 10.) 1. A willing sinning. 2.
Knowingly. 3. Despising of the I^w. 4. Sleighting of Christ. 5. Doing despite
to the Spirit. 6. Falling into the hands of the living God without Christ and
Sanctification.

Some of the last Lessons I am endeavoring to learn.
1. TO keep Faith and to keep down Flesh. 2. To be bound as if I were free, and
married as if I were unmarried. 3. To dye before I come to dye, viz. Expect and
long for it. 4. To attend every Duty better, and to depend on them less. 5. To
realize and experience Spiritual things more. 6. To make eternal things nearer
by Faith. 7. To have all things I see hear and read, to leave a deeper
impression upon me, especially the sufferings of the godly, and the sins of the
wicked. 8. To get more Communion with God in my services and sufferings. 9. To
have my Heart to mind more what God intends, and does in the Nations then what
men do. 10. To account of Gods least things more, and of my own greatest and
best things less. 11. To make improvement of all former sins and sufferings.
12. To learn to feed upon Gods brown Bread, which is affliction, better then
formerly upon his white Bread, his Gospel Ordinances. 13. Not to think doing or
suffering work hard. 14. To get my self quite raised and recovered by virtue
from Christ conveyed by the Spirit through the Covenant of Grace. 15. To cease
from all childish things. 16. To do the work and bear the Testimony of my day
in the day. 17. to have a fixed or constant spirit ( for the word in Heaven is
the same. Psalm. 51.1 and 10. in the mar.) in God and in beleiving and doing
good. 18. To see that condition I am in, to be best for me.

Some of my last Experiences.
1. To see one sin after another more clearly. 2. To see that I am very weak,
and sho^t in that grace wherein I thought I most excelled. 3. That the sin that
had most strength in me through the assisting power of Christ, is grown and
growing much more weaker. 4. That I am more and more encouraged and helped to
believe by the strength of Christ, and that as sin has formerly weakened Faith,
so now Faith weakens sin. 5. The sin and danger of neglecting ones body, in
making it unserviceable to the Lord. 6. That when a Christian begins to grow
carnal and can less the Lord leaves him to him self for sometime, and either to
be assaulted and troubled with some Temptation, or to be overcome with some
Corruption. 7. That before God raises up a Christian to a more spiritual
estate, or causes him to suffer, God Many times lets him know himself by
leaving him to some corruption or temptation. 8. That when and from whom I
feared temptations at that time and from such the Lord did ma y lo^fly deliver
me ev^n from the thoughts of Evil. 9. That very day, and a few hours before my
g eat sickness in Sept, 9. 1664. I was strongly assaulted with Temptation, and
God in very mercy and wonderful seasonably did then lay sickness upon me, 11.
That a true Christian that is troubled with his Corruption, does rejoice
greatly when God does by any means prevent and preserve from them. 12.
Exceeding suitably did God one day apply the three following Scriptures. Esa.
54.14. Ezekiel. 34.21. 1. Pet. 3.14.16.19. 13. That to shun one kind of Evil I
found my self very ready to fall into another. 14. That affliction when it was
new, fresh, and first laid upon me, it made and left more impression then
afterward.

As a further discovery of Gods gracious actings in the Heart of this holy man,
you have this following taste of his Spirit in this Collection taken out of his
Dyary or Iornal, (it being his custom to keep a daily Observation and Record
of every every remarkable Providence occurring to him, and of the frame of his
Heart, in his spiritual getings and losings every day) which for the most part
were written in Characters yet some being at large, you have a few of them
hereafter inserted, which by Gods blessing may rend to the Edification and
comfort as well as Example of many.

His Book is entitled.

Some Memento's and Experiences of Gods gracious dealings with Vavasor Powel.

Deuteronomy. 8.2. And thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God leads
thee, etc.

Psalm. 143.5. I remember the days of old etc.

Can. 1.4. We will remember thy love.

Psalm. 34.3. My Soul shall make her boast of the Lord, etc.

Collections out of his Dyary.
THis day I observed as many days before that I have commonly Consolation and
Affliction in the same day, If I have comfort from the Lord that day by
Communion or communication or otherwise in the morning, I am sure to have some
trouble that Night, and if trouble in the Morning, I am sure to have some
refreshing that Night, but there is scarce one day wherein I have not some
breathings from God and to God, and as sure buffetings from Satan.

This day was a very comfortable day to me in the morning, I was refreshed by
those words 31. Ps. 15. My times are in thy hands, etc. by comparing that with
Ier. 20.12. I had much comfort in the society of Gods People, and several times
in Prayer that day, and power against evil thoughts, yet that Evening I was
assaulted strongly with sinful thoughts, but in my flying to God in prayer
against them they fled from me.

This day being the Lords day, I had some communion with the Lord in private
Prayer, and a greater sense of the sufferings of his People upon my Heart, and
it came into my Heart to ask earnestly of God, that I might love him better
then my Life, and better then my Lusts, remembering that Scripture in the 2 Timothy
3.2.5. That Self-love, and loving of pleasure more then God will be the two
chief Characters of Hyppocrites and Appostates, in the latter days.

In the Evening I was again assaulted with Evil thoughts, which necessitated me
to fly to the Lord in Prayer, and thence I learned this Lesson, that sometimes
the very sin of a Christian drives him to his Duty and Service, sometimes by
way of prevention either to the Scriptures, for some word of promise or command
against sin, or to Prayer, and sometimes after a Soul has sinned, it sees a
necessity speedily and earnestly to confess it, repent for it, resolve and
watch against it.

This day I enjoyed much consolation both from the Scripture specially, Psalm.
37.24.35.39. Though he fall (meaning the good man) he shall not utterly be cast
down, nor condemn him when he is judged, but the salvation of the Righteous is
from the Lord, he is their strength in the time of trouble, and the Lord shall
help them and deliver them, he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save
them because they trust in him, also by conference that day with several
persons, yet in the Evening I had strong assaults from Satan, from which the
Lord did in part deliver me, but yet much trouble from my own Evil heart, the
four following lessons, I was desirous to learn this Evening. 1. To get my Soul
more settled in the assurance and apprehension of salvation. 2. More sensible of
my own, and other men's sins, and my own and other men's sufferings. 3. More
humbled for my unprofitableness in my imprisonment. 4. More willing to dye, and
more mindful of death.

This day I received and unexpected mercy, and was prevented from a temptation,
which made my heart rejoice, and preventing grace especially that which
prevented from sin, have been frequently cause of rejoicing to me.

This day I had little change in the frame of my Spirit either to good or Evil,
but some sense I had of my own weakness, yet I had some comfort from those
words Psalm. 40.17. but I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks on me, and
Psalm. 42.8. Yet the Lord will command his loving kindness, and his Song shall
be with me and my Prayer unto the God of my life.

This day I had a good and comfortable day to my Soul especially in Prayer,
Four things I saw cause to be humbled for, First, that I had not more sense of
the sins, and sufferings of Gods People or of my own. Secondly, That the Works,
Glory, Ways, Ordinances and People of the Lord are in such Contempt. Thirdly,
that there is no more Stability, Zeal and Courage in the Saints for good, and
against Evil. Fourthly, That there continues still such darkness upon, and
divisions amongst Christians, I had it much in my Heart to desire two things
from the Lord (viz.) First, Power against my sin. Secondly, Preparation for
sufferings.

This day I was much troubled for hearing one swear several Oaths, and not
reproving him for the same and convinced also from, Psalm. 50.7. Hear O Israel
and I will testify against thee I am God even thy God, that God had many
things against me in particular, and I was convinced providencially of one
cause of my sufferings. Being a day to seek the Lord in private Prayer, I had
my Heart somewhat softened and yet I was troubled it continued so hard, and I
learned from the, 2. Cro. 6.37. That I should in this my suffering bethink my
self both what I was, and what I had done, that I should pray more earnestly,
and turn more thoroughly and perfectly unto the Lord, and that Evening I could
and did pray, most heartily for my Enemies, and Persecutors

This day being the Lords day, I had several times refreshings from the Lord in
Prayer, and in speaking his word, and that word in Job. 10.14. Was set with
weight upon my Heart, If I sin thou markest me and wilt not acquit me from my
iniquity, I learned thence what a dangerous thing it is to sin under
affliction, and the dangers did appear much by that place in Lev. 26.36. And
upon them that are left alive of you, (meaning those) that were unaffliction,
verse the 26. I will send a faintness in their Hearts, etc. The same day I had
a consideration of the great evil of sinning against the Lord after assurance.
This day I observed these words. Psalm. 59.3. For lo they lie in wait (David's
Enemies) for my Soul, the mighty are gathered against me not for my
transgression nor for my sin O Lord I could truly and with comfort say that
mine Enemies did persecute me, but not for my sin, or transgression which is a
comfort to me this day also by a special providence, God brought a dear Friend
who praying wit me, my Heart was much affected, and melted.

This day in the morning my Heart was very free to pray for my Persecutors, and
Enemies as freely and really is I was to seek and receive pardon for my own
sins, I had power also to apply those words to my self. Psalm. 62.2. He is only
my Rock and my Salvation, he is my defense I shall not greatly by moved, and in
verse 6. I shall not be moved, God did bring this Scripture as an Antidote for
that Evening, there came several persons one after another, to tell me that I
and several others were to be tried at the Sessions, and I observed that my
Heart was very little moved thereat, but could willingly refer my self to the
Lord, and be quiet in, and contented with his will, though never so contrary to
my own carnal and natural will.

This Evening in discourseing with a poor Christian ancient woman, I found by
the tenderness of Heart the had for sin and her zeal for God, that she was in a
far better temper of Spirit, then I was in which helped on my Humility
somewhat, this Evening also I had some power to resist Temptation and to check
Corruption.

I had my Heart enlargned and softened in Prayer, and through Gods goodness was
much freed from Temptations, yet had some bodily distemper, but I judged it
very little and light in comparison of what it might be.

I experienced the Lords coming in, and especially in Prayer I observed that
Scripture, Psalm. 68.28. Thy God has commanded thy strength, strengthen O God
that which thou have wrought for us, yet this Evening I was moved to passion.

This day spent so most part in writing Letters for Christian Friends, at some
of which my Heart was moved, having a great desire that they might continue in
the Faith, and stand fast in the Lord.

This day I was affected with some ill news I heard, and my heart was moved
with pity toward some in affliction, I had some comfort from, Psalm. 69. verse
36.29. Those whom thou have wounded (he persecuted and afflicted) are those
whom God has wounded, and though poor and sorrowful yet his salvation will set
them up on high, but especially from verse the 32. Their Hearts shall live that
seek God and this day in observing the Characters which a godly Preacher gives
in his Book of those that have their sins pardoned, that they are those that
seek pardon wait in the use of means till they obtain it, they do freely pardon
others and they do love God for his pardoning goodness, all which in a measure
(through free grace) I found in me, also Psalm. 71.20. Thou will bring me up
again etc. was very refreshing to me, This day being the Lords day I had
several considerations of the Sabbath, as it was a sign between God and his
People. Exodus 31.13.17. Ezekiel. 20.12.17. A sign of his favor in giving it to
them, and of his being in Covenant with them and they with him, if they
carefully observed it, and therefore it is called the Covenant. Exodus 31.17. As
Circumsion a sign of the Covenant is called a Covenant. Genesis 17.7. My heart was
moved to pray earnestly against sin, and those words in Psalm. 72.12 13, 14.
were precious to me, he shall deliver the needy when he cries, the poor also,
and him that has no helper.

This day I learned from Psalm. 74.16. The day is thine, and the night it thine,
that the State of affliction, as w^ll as a State of posperity is of the Lord,
and necessary, and to continue but for a time. Then from Psalm. 76.10. Surely
the wrath of man shall praise thee, and the remainder of wrath thou will
restrain, I learned not to be troubled at men's fury, for God would have glory
thereby, and God will restrain it when he will, this day I perceived three
things much wanting in me.

First, Love enough to Christ to make me willing to suffer.

Secondly, Repentance enough for Sin.

Thirdly, Care enough in Gods service.

This day I had some enlargement in Prayer, I learned also.

1. That Prayer is a special remedy or means to prevent the Soul from sin.

2. That ordinary spiritual Judgments (as hardness of Heart, etc.) go before
outward Judgments.

3. That it is a very sad sign as well as a great sin, to refuse the Lord and
his Counsel, God complains Psalm. 81.11. That they would not hearken to his
Counsels, and that they would none of him.

I had some sense (but trouble for want of more) of the sufferings of Gods
People (in S) and I was encouraged from the following Observations and
considerations.

First. That the man is blessed whose strength is in the Lord, Psalm. 8.4, 5.

Secondly, That when God will return to his People, and bring them back from
their captivity, he will forgive their iniquities, cover their sins, and take
away all his wrath, Psalm. 85.1, 2, 3.

Thirdly, That salvation is nigh to the People of God verse 9.4, That he will
set his People in the way of his steps, verse 13.

This day supposed to be the longest in the year I judge it my duty, to be
strict in observing what glory to God, or good to my Soul, such a long day
would produce, 1. In the morning (as the night before) I had my Heart drawn out
to pray earnestly against temptations especially one, and I observed presently
the temptation set upon me, but the Lord delivered me from it, and removed it
from me, for which my Heart was affected moved and raised to praise the Lord.
2. I learned that affliction draws out the Heart of the godly much in Prayer
and Supplication. Psalm. 8.11.13. 3. I learned that it is not enough for a
Christian to do good, but he should carefully endeavor to do the chiefest and
most seasonable good. 4. By visiting some of the poorest Prisoners, I observed
this, that sometimes in doing good, a man may be in danger of receiving evil,
or a good disposition may bring a man liable to temptation, in the morning I
had encouragement from Psalm. 91.9.10. Because thou have made the Lord, which is
my refuge, and there shall no evil befat thee, I had much refreshing also in
the communion of diverse Christians, I learned also from Revelations the
2.26.27. compared with the 12. Chap. 11. That he that suffers for Christ
overcomes, ferendo vincere spero, at the noise of the great thunder this night
I was moved to consider the greatness of Jehovah, whose voice was so loud.

I was troubled in the morning with many bad thoughts, yet had some trouble for
them but out of Psalm. 102.4.10.24. I observed three things, 1. That the heart
may be withered, 2. That after God has lifted up a Saint he may cast him down
again, 3. That David's argument to move God not to cut him off in the midest of
his days, was because Gods years were throughout all Generations.

Being the Lords day I found my Heart in as good a frame as I had any day both
in respect of tenderness and enlargedness in Prayer, and likewise learned
somewhat from diverse Scriptures, especially from 2. Pet. 3. From the
consideration of what God had promised to do, and the patience and long
suffering of Christ, and what the Saints did look for, what manner of persons
Christians ought to be, viz.

1. Holy in all manner of Conversation and godliness.

2. Looking and expecting the coming of Christ.

3. Diligent in geting assurance and being found acceptable.

4. Accounting that the patience of God intended from their good.

5. Watchful and careful, least they be drawn aside into Error.

6. Lastly, growing in Grace and in the knowledge of Christ.

I was observing from Psalm. 105.8. How God remembered his Covenant with his
People, yea and for them. Psalm. 106.47. also his mercy. Psalm. 98.3. And though
they either forget or neglect either the one or the other, yet what abundant
comfort is this to Beleivers.

This day was a very good day to me, in respect of several favors received
from the Lord, for which I desire to be earnestly thankful, I learned to
consider how far a man may go with a mere ascent to truth, without experiencing
the power of the same working in us, I was also earnest with the Lord that in
case he did not put an end to my sufferings, he would put an end to my sin.

This was a day better resolved on then observed Oh how often and in how many
ways are men disappointed in their purposes which shows all good to be in the
hand of God, and man to be a poor changeable weak Creature, yet from Psalm. 107.
I was noting how ready God is to hear the Cry of his People for four times in
that Psalm. He is said to hear their Cry in trouble and to deliver them out of
their distress, verse the 6.13.19.28. and yet it is as observable how backward
men a^e to return praises to God, and therefore in the Psalms it is also said
four times! Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness. ve^se
8.15.21.31. Though this Evening I had some inward refreshing, yet this Night I
had sore Temptations of several sorts.

This day my Temptations continued strong yet with a resolution (in the
strength of Christ) to resist and beware of them, and in consideration o^ the
words nevertheless notwithstanding, and yet which I find frequent in the
Scriptures used, and applied to Gods People, both after their sinning, and
under their suff ing. I had some comfort, as Psalm 106.8 44. 1 Kings 2. chap.
12. Psalm. 40.17. and 42.8

This d y from several Scriptures (as Psalm. 119. 4. Acts 6.4. 1 Cor. 7.3.)
compared togeth^r, I was convinced it was a special duty (in which I was too
n^gligent) to give ones self to P^ayer, I also observed that, neglecting the
season so servi^e or duty, p^oves sometimes a perfect o^ission of that d^^y, I
also was observing ^he great happin^^^ of a good m n above the wicked, that the
Lord stands at the right hand of the one, and the Devil at the right hand of
the other. Psalm. 109.31, compare^ with the 6. verse.

This day I was learning that a Christian should endeavor to pe^^orm all his
duties, (1.) more int^rely, or with his whole Heart, Psalm. 111.1. and 119. 2.
(2.) More delightfully. Psalm. 119.16.53, 47, 70. Romans 7.22. (3.) With more
judgment and discretion. Psalm. 112, 5. (4.) With perseverance, Col. 4.2. This
morning I was overcome with passion and frowardness, which made me enquire into
the reason of that and other Corruptions, I was observing this, that it is a
mercy to have the Soul come to its place again after sin, but far better not to
go out of its place at all, this Night I had a very sore and strong Temptation,
but was through the grace of God supported, and strengthened from the
consideration of Christ that was tempted, who considers those that are tempted,
also from his Prayer, John 17.11. and from those two promises, Isa. 59.19,
James 4.7. I fled to the Lord by Prayer and he delivered me, and I trust he
also will deliver me.

Being the Lords day I had my Heart in a reasonable good frame in the morning
in Prayer, I was observing that God exalts himself, even then when he
humbles himself to look on men. Psalm. 113.6. marg. I found my Heart much
raised and enlarged in Prayer for Gods work, and People, and had faith therein,
I observed from Isa. 38.17. For Peace I had great Bitterness, etc. I learned
that a Christians condition is murable, and therefore he should be contented
with his condition what ever it be, and whether comfortable or miserable he
should look that God may soon alter it, and he should not desire to go out of
one state into another, till he has gotten good by being in the former. 2.
That Gods love is not only seen in the removing affliction from us, but in
afflicting of us also. 3. That Gods People should learn to gain assurance, and
experience by affliction. This Evening I was much refreshed in reading Bains
upon the Ephesians. especially one chap. the 1.13. and the 4.30. Concerning the
sealing of the Spirit.

This day I observed the duty and resolution of a sincere Christian, viz. to
walk before the Lord. Psalm. 116.9. Genesis 24.40. I was also thinking how
necessary it is for a right Christian that desires to walk holily, to observe
carefully the inward workings of the Spirit of God, as also the secret ways
and methods of sin, I was convinced (also) how uneffectual it is for a
Christian to promise, or resolve any thing in his own strength.

I learned from David that he often mentions serving, and seeking God with his
whole Heart, which dutie^ I love, and would learn more experimentally, and
practically according to Psalm. 112.2.10.34.69.

This day I was enlarged, and somewhat softened in the duty of Prayer several
times, and convinced what an evil it is in Gods sight. 1. To be long under
affliction unhumbled, and uncleansed, Jer. 44.10. Jos. 22.17. and especially to
sin wittingly, and to add sin to sin, I was considering of four duties to
repent for sin to redeem time, to get fuller assurance, and to prepare for
Christ, I was also affected with some news that concerned the People of God.

This day I was observing that though a true Christian may have a sound Heart,
and Faith in the word of the Lord, yet he may be as a Bottle in the smoke dry
and withered, yea and fainting, and fail^ing, for the Lord and his salvation.
Psalm. 119.80, 81, 82, 83. I learned this also that disappointment ^n ones
expectation causes dejection and trouble.

This day having had a long and serious discourse with a knowing Gentleman, I
observed somewhat more then even I had done before, concerning the Image of
God, and the new man mentioned in Ephesians. ^. 24. Col. 3.10. I had consideration
also that Child of God may easily see to the end of, or beyond all that the men
of the world can do to him, I had some inlargedness and softness of Heart in
Prayer, also I observed several things from 1 Thessalonians. 2.

I observed the following Lessons. (1.) That by gaining understanding from and
delight in the Statutes and Precepts of the Lord, a Christian comes to hate
every falce and wicked way, Psalm. 119.97.104, (2.) To seek to get a Heart
inclined always to perform Gods Statutes, verse 112. (3.) That when a Soul
has an intention to keep Gods Commandments he will abstain from the company
of evil doers, verse 115. I had great trouble and sorrow in my Heart in the
Evening, from a Letter I had from a Brother tu^ned Quaker but my Heart was much
drawn forth to to pray for him.

This day being Lords day in the morning* I had my Heart drawn forth again to
pray earnestly for that Brother, and had my Spirit several times somewhat
revived this day, and among several other things, which I observed. 1. That a
Child of God be altered much in the frame of his Spirit from better to worse,
as Baruch, also Jonah etc. (2.) That a time of common calamity it will be a
mercy for a religious man to have his life as Baruch was p omised to have Jer.
45.5. (3.) I observing how God may punish a good man in the same kind that he
sins as Asa with pain in his Feet, a^ he had put the Prophet in the Stocks
before. 2. Chron. 16.10. and 12 compared (4.) Oh what an evil it is in a
Christian to sin, David was told that he despised the Lord, and his
Commandment, 2 Samuel 12.8.10. (5.) From Ezekiel. 10.11. that the Wheels (that is
either they Angels Saints, or the providence of God) they followed the head,
and turned not as they went so should we follow Christ. (6.) It is observeable
that God takes notice of all that is in the minds of men, Ezekiel. 11.5. as well
as all the words in their Tongues, as the frame of men's Spirits, so they think
of God, for if they be holy, and faithful they conceive so of God. This day
also I found the evil of my Heart to be in one frame when it should be in
another, as to rejoice when it should mourn.

I lost oppertunities this day to serve the Lord by discourses with several
sorts of persons, especially some that pretend to the Virgin life who mightily
slight Jesus of Nazareth and the Scriptures, which made me strongly oppose
them, and do with them as the Apostle commands, 2. John 10. that promise also
was sweet unto me. Psalm. 121.3. He will not suffer thy Feet to be moved.

This day in the Morning, and at Noon I had my Heart drawn out and softened more
then ordinary in Prayer, yet I found my Heart suddenly moved to anger, this was
in diverse senses a day of great kindness from the Lord; I was observing from
Hos. 12. (1.) That fear, care and trembling, are especial means to keep the
godly from sin. (2.) That sin does set the Soul of a good frame. (3.) That when
once the Soul goes out of a good frame it is hardly recovered. (4) That when
God is about to deliver his People from sufferings, he begins to deliver them
from sin.

I had expe^ience of this that it is far better to go to P air often then be
too tedious, and to consider of some especial p^rti^ular thing to pray for and
be importunate by promises and arguments for them, also I observed from Psalm
12^ 6. That weeping it one duty of Christian^ in the time of their Captivity,
and ha^ those that weep they shall sur^ly find a time of ^ejo^cing L^ke ^^.
6.21. J hn 6 20

This day I had my Heart much softened enlarged and warmed in Prayer, especially
one time, but in the Evening had conviction of my slothfulness, also of my
great indiscretion in discoursing about spiritual things, I observed from Psalm.
129.1, 2. Many times have they afflicted me from my youth, yet they have not
prevailed, that Gods People may be delivered under and out of affliction.

I was troubled this day at my ignorance both in natural and spiritual things,
and had th ough the Lords special favor to me a sweet fit of sorrow, and
repentance for my sins, with two special suitable Scriptures, he shall redeem
Israel from all his iniquities, Psalm. 130.8. and Hos. 3.1. Go yet love a woman
beloved of her Friend, yet an adulteress according to the love of the Lord, oh
what kind of love is this for God to love an Adulteress, and what comfort to a
poor Backslider, for to such these words are chiefly spoken.

Through the constant coming, and continuing of Friends, I had little time for
secret duties, which together with the saying of a grave Gentleman that this 40
years he had not neglected to read every day two or three Chapters in the
Bible, what ever his business were, convinced of my neglects in the service of
God, this day I met with a new affliction which too little affected me.

This day the Lord was pleased to set my thoughts on several Lessons, which
Christians should be learning in this day as (1.) To be humbled under the
mighty hand of God, 1. Pet. 5.5. (2.) To keep themselves undefiled, 1. Tim.
5.22. 1. John 5.22. (3.) Not to fear any Creatures, Isa. 41. Mat. 10.28.31.
Rev. 2.10. (4.) To lay to Heart the sins of the wicked, and the sins and
sufferings of the godly. (5.) To keep up their Watch. (6.) Not to neglect
Saints fellowship, Heb. 10.29. (7.) To get fuller assurance through our
repentance, etc. (8.) from Daniel 3.16, 17. I observed that 1. Great sudden and
^navoidable trial may come upon the Saints. 2. That true Saints will be more
fearful of the least sin then the greatest suffering. 3. That Faith in God, a
disregard of the World, and a devine resolution will carry Christians through
sufferings, I had my Heart drawn out in Prayer.

This day I took notice of three or four remarkable Providence, I was also
convinced of too much natural and self-resolution, also of my cowardlyness to
reprove sin in great Persons, I considered what an evil, and sin it is for one
to attribute to himself more then is due, and considering how God may make one
condition best for one one time, which is not best at another time, I had some
refreshing in Prayer this day.

This day in the morning there was a providence which I met with, which is like
to prove in the end very remarkable, but whether my acting and appearing
therein was from the Lord, I must leave the issue to manifest it, only from
thence I was observing 1. That Truth and Sincerity, right ends, asking Counsel
of God, and advising with the People of God. First, Is great satisfaction to a
Christian in what he does. Secondly, Yet when a man's judgment, and Conscience
is not fully in a man's business, he loses much comfort in what he does.

Lhis day in the morning I had trouble in my Spirit, for what I did doubtfully
the day before, and shed many tears for my dear Brethren that turned Quakers
especially Thomas Ell, I had also comfort from that Scripture Psalm. 138.7.
Though I walk in the midst of trouble etc. In the Evening I had consideration
and sight of several things amiss in me, and had my Heart affected in asking
for the same.

This morning I was troubled for a vile thought, and in the Evening troubled at
my impatience yet had sweet and comfortable refreshing from Dan. 11.35. and a
Heart to pray sensibly and affectionately for Gods People, and my hope raised
for them f om Psalm. 125.3. For the Rod of the wicked shall not always rest,
etc.

This day being the Lords day I had comfort from that Scripture, Prove. 24.16.
For a just man falls seven times and rises up again, and likewise from James
5 15. and John 1.5 8. especially from that place, Genesis 3.21. Where God is said
to make Clothes to Adam and Eve, and not only so but to Cloth them, or put
them on, from Dan. 3.17, 18. I observed that real Saints do fear the least sin
more then the g eatest sufferings, because sin is a worse evil then suffering.
2. Because therein they do imitate Ch is it suffering. 3. Because the evil of
suffering consists with the special will and pleasure of God, but so does not
sin. 4. Because they know that if they sin they shall suffer. 5. Because they
know if they choose sufferings they shall be either saved from it, or carried
through it. 6. Because they are under the promise if they suffer, but under the
Threats and Judgments of God if they sin.

This day being a day of writing to some Friends, I found my affection
quickened more especially toward one Brother that did abide loving and
faithful, and for some others that had turned aside. I observed this from Eves
words, Genesis 4.1. That one may receive a mercy from the Lord, which may not be
used for the Lord.

Psalm 139.10. I did observed two great comforts in case of banishment, even
there (that is the uttermost parts of the Earth. 1. Shall thy hand ^end me, 2.
Thy right hand shall hold me up, so from Psalm. 145.14. The Lord upholdeth all
that fall, and raises up all those that be bowed down, this day was a
reasonable good day to me.

This day had better intentions then performances yet I was convinced how short
I came of doing the good I might do, in a day place, condition I am in, and how
I come short o^ that which Paul mentions of himself, 1 Thessalonians. 2.2 We were bold
in our God, etc. I was sensible that I had ^on much of the boldness I had, and
especially in reproving sin.

This was a very good day in many respects, first I had diverse precious Friends
to visit me, Secondly a good L^ter expressing the state of my Friends in the
Country. Thirdly, another special and unexpected Providence. Fourthly, I had my
Heart several times in a good frame of Prayer. Fifthly, I learned f om Psalm.
149.2.4. How it is mutually between God and his People, they joy in him and he
take pleasure in them, I also was thinking of the grounds of Saints doubts
about their salvation, viz. Ignorance in the Covenant of grace, want of
observing their Hearts of keeping up Holiness Slothfulness, and favoring some
secret sin, and not profiting by ordinances.

I was noting that the wicked are not ashamed to profess that they endeavor
hurt to the righteous without a cause, Prove. 1.11. and that the godly should
g^ow more bold by how much the more their afflictions increase 1 Thessalonians. 2.2. I
had my heart this day so tned in P^^yer.

I was this day convinced of the negligence in that duty of desiring to see the
Faces of the Saints as Paul did 1 Thessalonians. 3.11. I received a special Letter
this day from our dear Brother I. B. which suited much with my condition and
judgment, I learned a word from one that I could not expect such words, viz. I
did not heretofore prize neither great things that were temporal of spiritual,
but now I prize the least things of either sort from 2. Cor. 7. chap. 4, 5, 6.
I observed 1. That in the greatest trouble Gods People may have the greatest
comforts. 2. That their comfort is originally from God. 3. That God may send in
these comforts at such times, and in such a manner as they expect not, this
Evening my Soul was a little refreshed by diverse promises and softened in Prayer.

Being the Lords day I observed from Prove. 3.16. In all thy ways acknowledge
him, that godliness is an eying of God, owning of God, imitating of God, and
respecting of God in all our ways, and upon the consideration of these two
following questions, ( I had many thoughts) some of which were refreshing and
satisfying to me from the first question how we may know that we have received
real good and benefit by our afflictions. Secondly, How we may know when God
does afflict in Love and Faithfulness, Psalm. 119.75.71. also diverse other
meditations from Rev. 12.10. They overcame by the word of their testimony, and
by the Blood of the Lamb, etc. and concerning the spiritual Race which a
Christian is to run, I had some enlargedness and tenderness of heart.

God according to his usual way and dealing with me, foreseeing what I could
not (to wit more approaching affliction) did this day administer an Antidote,
even comfort by Letters, from the hands of several special Friends, also those
words keep sound wisdom, keep my saying in the midest of thine heart, and keep
thy heart with all diligence, were ( I adjudged) words worthy of observation,
hearing this Evening of a gracious Brother and Preacher sickness, my heart was
moved earnestly to pray for him.

I observed in the Morning a special exhortaion out of Prove. 5.1. My Son attend
unto my wisdom, and bow thine Ear unto my understanding, also verse the 23.
that sin is a great folly, so chap. 18.13. Judge. 19.23. This day I received a
sad Letter from a Brother T. E. that is turned Quaker, which added much ^o my
affliction, the good Lord show him the E ^or of his way and humble and reclaim
him, this day I was sensible of my aptness to be angry, and was put seriously
to enquire into the voice, and will of God by these additional afflictions, and
I find a need of the continuance of them, and my heart brought into a more
submissive frame to bear and suffer his Rod.

This day I bless the Lord was a good day to my Soul, I had enlargedness and
much freeness with some measure of softness and earnestness in Prayer,
especially for the Saints of God, and perticularly for my own country
Christians, I had also a strong resolution to watch my self more carefully, and
do my duty more diligently then formerly, out of Prove, 7. I observed, several
helps or means to prevent, and preserve the Soul from sin, viz. 1. A laying up
the Commandments in the Heart. 2. A looking on them, or eying of them. 3.
Getting endeared affection to Christ. 4. By taking heed of the occasions
thereof.

This day was but a flat drowsy day to my Soul, nor great good gained, but sin
and grace not discernably active, and affections unwarmed and unquickened, yet
convinced of lost time, and comforted a little from 1 Thessalonians. 4. With thoughts
of Christ's coming.

I was this morning instructed from wisdoms words Prove. 8.8. (All the words of
my mouth are in righteousness, and there is nothing froward in them,) that I
should take more heed for the time to come, of a froward Month and Tongue, this
day also I hope I can humbly say it I enjoyed the Lord both in Meditation and
Prayer, and being sensible of the want of skill in beleiving, and more diligence
in sanctification, and thereupon I am resolved through grace and hope to be
enabled to take more heed to my ways, and as the Lord also presented that
Scripture (to me) These. 5.15. But ever follow that which is good.

This day I had a check in my Spirit for lightness of heart, and besides an
outward special Providence, I observed, I learned from the sin I saw, and heard
of in others to loath (or at least desired to loath) it in my self, I also
observed from Prove. 9.18. That one main Reason why People do not leave sin, is
because they do not know or consider the punishment of sin, also what a
commendable thing it is for Christians to be patient, and beleiving in all
Persecution, and Tribulations, These. 2.1. chap. 4.

This day being the Lords day through Gods grace, I had my heart much softened,
and enlarged to call upon God, especially one time I observed also that, that
want of the love to the truth, and love to unrighteousness, are the causes of
men falling from the faith, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.12. also another excellent Lesson
from that word 2 Thessalonians. 3.1^. where he speaks of busy Bodies, which signifies
properly to be too intent about the work we should not be.

This d^^ I had my heart set somewhat upon the consideration h^ t v^ p ^ ^ ^s,
P^ov. 11.2 12, 13. The ^ust shall be del^ve^ed and the just shall be saved on
of troub^e (...) d^ I was no^eing a great difference, between having the light
and the love of the truth, this day I received an Answer from a Christian
Friend, of a B^others business of concernment which signified his love and
care, and increased my affection to him, I was somewhat affected also with the
sweet Counsel of Christ, to the Church of Sardis.

I had my Soul in some good frame, especially in Prayer, and comfort from the
consideration of the promises, in Psalm. 1.3. That the good man shall bear
Fruit, and that his Fruit shall not wither, and Isa. 49.25. and Jer. 33.20.
From the stability of the Covenant, I likewise considered 1. That there is that
in Christ which answers every condition. 2. That we have done that which
deserves the worst condition. 3. That we should mind more the glory of God, and
our duty in our condition, and not strive to make our outward state in a
natural w^y sweet, which God intends to sweeten otherwise.

Next day I sound my heart in a hard and straight condition and frame most part
of this day, and not disposed to the duty intended as it ought and in the
Evening of this day I was moved to passion, but avoiding occasion^ y^ng to the
Lord I was delivered, and from Prove. 13.3 I learned two Lessons. First, to keep
my mouth, and to be well advised, I also found a great desire to grow in
plainness, and sincerity of heart.

This day by discourse I came to understand some Scriptures especially John
3.14. and the 11.10. (as is observed an written down in both those margen^s)
clearer then eve^ b^ o e, also I obse^ved where the word Soul (Nephesh) is
taken for ^ dead body* Numbers the 9.6. the 6. Chap 6. al^o two other necessary
and seasonable Lesso^s from Prove. 14.8.15. viz. To understand the way, and to
look well to my goings, also this Evening I had my heart a little more then
ordinary softened, and enlarged in Prayer.

This day I experienced but little good or gain gotten to my Soul, and found my
Heart but in a flat frame, yet I was affected a little with the consideration
of the great honor given by the Elders, and others to Jesus Christ, Rev. 5.13.
and I perceived more desire after true sincerity of heart, and observed a good
providence of God.

This day I observed a remarkable passage in a great man's suffering death, that
he vowed, and wished that if ever he did game again he might be hanged, and
hanged he was, a warning to look to our wishes, then I marked those two words,
Prove. 15.4. That perverseness in the Tongue is or makes a breach in the Spirit,
I was smitten in my Conscience for an evil thought, and convinced for my
unconstancy in good, and want of more sense of my own, and others sins, and
slackness in some services, but I had comfort from the 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. That
Gods faithfulness ingages him to perfect his work in his People and to preserve
them to the end.

This day being the Lords day I learned amongst many other Lessons from Ezekiel.
20. (1.) That when Gods People do come to ordinances, yet they should expect
good only from God the People sat before Ezekiel but inquired of God, verse 1.
(2.) That when People abuse their Gifts, God will pollute them therein, and
thereby, verse 26. (3.) That those that go on in sin cannot expect to find God
when they call upon him. (4.) That God may sometimes return the captivity of
his People before they repent, verse 42, 43, I was convinced that it is my
duty. 1. To study my duty more. 2. To strive to do my duty better, this whole
day I was troubled with the Headache, and pain in my Stomach, but I found the
Lord enabling me with much patience, and moving my heart to praise him that
affliction is not far greater Calm, joy and ease, came this morning from the
presence of the Lord, after trouble and pain, with a resolution to prize time,
and mercy, and to walk better and more diligently before the Lord who directs
the steps, Prove. 16.9. and he that keeps his way preserves his Soul, which
Scriptures I observed this Morning, this Evening I had some communion with the
Lord in Prayer, I was lead to look upon that duty, 1. Tim. 2.2.13. Of praying
for all men, and from what I heard of another to praise God for his goodness to
me.

This Morning I observed a special providence by the coming of a Friend to
visit me, and observed further from Prove. 17.5. Howbeit Gods affliction is
compared to a fining Pot or Furnace, to try and purge the Heart, also what a
sad thing it is to have good oppertunities and prizes put into our hands, but to
want improving hearts, or to have corruption hinder good, verse 16, 20. I found
no especial enlargment, nor communion with the Lord this day, but rather a
provocation to pride yet of that good word in Tim. 1.3. chap. 2.6. met with me.

This day (being willing to wait upon God,) I found him good to me in softening
and enlarging, and drawing out my Heart in Prayer, and I had some comfort from
those words, Psalm. 9.9. The Lord will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge
in times of trouble, and verse the 18. the needy shall not always be
forgotten, yet this Evening I was set upon by temtation which in part prevailed
and in part was resisted.

In the Morning fowl and and sinful thoughts came into my heart, but God made
them bitter and burdensome to me, and now little sins begin like Flies to be
more troublesome to me yet I much su^pect my self if the Lo^d left me to my
self never so little, and short a time, I had some joy and strength from Prove.
20.21. Wait on the Lord and he shall save thee.

This day my heart was somewhat melted and warmed in duty, and I found power to
resist temptation, I had also my heart in a reasonable good measure brought to
consider, why the Lo d afflicts me and adds afflictions, and was thoroughly
resolv^d in two things, that I would do what I could to pacificy God, and to
please him, and to believe in his free grace through Christ, let him do what he
will with me. I was observing three comforts to the righteous from Prove.
21.18.28.31.

This day was a good day both inwardly and outwardly especially outwardly, I
had some thoughts of Gods judgment to fear them and to endeavor to shun them,
and to entreat the Lord not to let me share with the wicked in their
punishments much less their sins, I observed from Prove 22.14. that it is a sign
of hatred to be left to sin, an excellent promise in verse 23. also twelve
Lessons Paul teaches 1. Tim. 4.

This day being the Lords day I had some e^joyment of the Lords presence (as I
observed) and among other things I observed first from Ezekiel. 39 26. That the
first thing that the Lo^d does in the Redemption o^ his People is to b ing them
to remember their sins, and to repent for them* and so having cleansed, and
saved them from their iniquties, Jer. 33.8. Ezekiel. 36 29. he woe ks th^n ^^eir
temporal and outward deliverance. 2. From the f^st verse that when the Lord
has given his ^pi^^^ to (...) People he never forsakes them more. 3. From
Psalm. 80.5, 17. I had considerations of the great suff^rings of the Church of
God of old, and the ground of their comfort which is Christ. 4. From Rev. 12.
was much refreshed to consider that the Church when she went to the Wilderness,
yet that was by Wings that God gave her, and likewise in the Wilderness there
was a place prepared by God for her, and there she was nursed her whole time.

This day I observed from Lev. 26. Gods way of dealing outwardly with his
People either in mercy or affliction, according to their obedience or
disobedience, but though they have sined and brought punishment upon
themselves, yet upon their confession of sin, humbling of their hearts, and
accepting of their punishment, God remits their sins, and removes the
punishment, this day God in his providence ordered that I should hurt and
bruise my Leg which might have been much worse, I humbly praise God for it, and
hope to profit by it.

This day my heart was very much enlarged, softened and quickened in Prayer
twice (but especially once) and raised through the power of God exceedingly to
be willing to suffer, I learnt. 1. To beware of slight and short repentance (a
thing I often consider off) 2. To fear secret self conceitedness, after the
well performing of a duty. 3. To take heed of the corrupting Flies of vain
thoughts and idle words. 4. From P^ov. 24.1. Not to desire the company of evil
men. 5. To see, consider, look and receive instruction from the Evil of others.
6. That such as do the will of God but not with a good end shall be punished,
Hos. 1.4.

This day I was troubled with vain and wandering thoughts in solemn duties yet
was made sensible of them, and in some measure resisted them effectually, I
Learned from Prove. 25.22. how to perform my duty toward my Enemies, and from
chap. 26. 26. the danger of keeping secret sins, that God will discover them
before the Congregation.

God favored me this day with kindness from, and affected me somewhat with the
relation and reading of Gods wonderful and strange works, at which I desire to
stand in admiration, and to fear and tremble, also to be affected with the
sufferings of other Saints, that differ from me: I observed also from Prove.
26.23. How a wicked Hea t may be covered and undisce^ned, as a Potshe d covered
with dross, also from chap 27.12. the Character and care of a prudent man, viz.
to foresee the evil and hide himself, and from 2. Tim. 1. to learn to partake
of sufferings, and not to be ashamed of sufferers.

This day though I rose earlyer then ordinary, yet through the multiplicity and
continuance of company, I made not such good imp^ovement thereof, I cannot say
I profited much or gained or learned any thing, unless it w re from P ov.
27.12. That a prudent man foreseeth the evil and hides himself, also from 2.
Tim. 2.11.12. I ^^se ved great encouragement to suffer for Christ, because we
shall live and reign with him, also to labor to be pure, fit Vessels for the
Lord, to follow after Righteousness, Faith, Peace, Charity, etc.

I was convinced this day of four things I was too negligent in, viz. Studying
the Scriptures sending to the Christians (especially those to whom I relate,)
finishing somewhat I intended and begun, and improving my Talent in this place,
more to the benefit of other poor Souls, I had my heart softened, and in some
measure enlarged this day in Prayer, and truly affected with some Christians
that came to see me, I had some comfortable considerations from three promises,
Prove. 28.10, 20, 26. The upright shall have good things in possession, who so
walks ^prightly shall be saved and who so walks wisely shall be delivered,
I had also comfortable from Hos. 3, 4.5. Compared together and was put to
conside^ those in 2. Tim. 3.2 etc.

This morning though too slothful, I had some b^eathings of the Spirit of the
Lord, and kindled affections in P^ayer, those words in Prove. 29.25. were some
comfort and support to me the fear of man brings a s^a^e, but who so puts
his trust in the Lord shall be safe, among other considerations I had this day
1. I considered that it was the needful^st thing in a dangerous time to get
assurance of Gods favor and salvation, and to make have to repent and return
to the Lord. 2. To consider our spiritual warfare, and to q^i^ our selves like
Christians in striving for victory over our ^piritual Enemies I had comfort
from that blessed p^omise Ier. the 33.7 8.

Th^s d^y I had no great benefit to my Soul only from Hos 4 8.10 12. I observed
(1.) That to have the heart set on iniquity. (2.) To leave off taking need to
the Lord. 3. To lose the heart, or have it indisposed to good. 4. To go from
under God. 5. To be left ^o ^^n o^ igno ant of the mind of the Lo^d, are most
sad things al^o from the 2. Tim. 4. (1.) To Watch (...) all ^hi^g. 2. Endure.
3. To be doing our p^es^n^ duty. 4. Looking for our cha ge, and d^^ n^^ng o^
God to be kept ^^om evil, were m^ ^^aso^^^e pre^^nt L^ssons.

I ^ound some softn^s^ and ^^n^e^ity of heart thi^ da^, and h d t^re spe^^ ^^^d
(...) in things in my hea t to de^i^e ^^om Co^^ 1. (...) A th ough repent^nce
(...) recove^y (...) of fo^mer sins. 2. To be per^^ctly p^^served ^o the ^^^e
to come from evil. 3. To be (...) or my dissolution, or sufferings. I received
much kindness from the Lord this day, the words in Hos. 5.15. Till they
acknowledge their iniquity (or be guilty) I considered and thought I c^^e short
thereof yet those words Prove. 28.13. He that confesses and forsakes his sin
shall find mercy.

This day I enjoyed some measure of the Spirit in softening and drawing out of
my heart in Prayer, and somewhat in beleiving, and tenderness toward others,
and those words Eccles. 3, 18. Of Gods manifesting unto men that they are but
Beasts, I desired to apply, and to take heed of being guilty of any of those
sins mentioned, Hos. 4. (1.) Of setting the heart upon any iniquity verse the
8. 2. Of leaving to take heed to the Lord. 3. Of losing the heart, or growing
heartless in good. 4. Of going from under God, also from Titus the 1.14. not to
give heed to the Commandments of men.

This was a day wherein God abounded in kindness toward me, yet I was
convinced that I was not guilty enough, or sensible enough of mine iniquities,
(as God requires Hos. 5.15. and from Titus 2. I learned that a true Christian
especially a Minister of the Gospel, should be 1. Sound in doctrine, 2. Sound
in Faith, and sound in Speech. And concernining beleiving I had three things.
1. To study more the grounds of Faith, and the reasons inducing thereto, 2. Not
to give way to any thing against beleiving. 3. To maintain Faith by holiness.

This day God was pleased to enlarge my heart in good, and to weaken corruption
making me sensible also of the present evils both of sin and suffering, I
learned from Titus 3.8.9. That R^generation, Justification and Adoption are of
Gods Love, Pity, Mercy and mere Grace, also to be ready to, diligent in, and
profited by every good work, and to be angry with my self for sinful things,
and deny my self in lawful things, oh my trouble! that I resolve some things I
have not power to do.

This day I learned in the morning three things, 1. His coming into the World.
2. His walking before, and living in this world rightly. 3. His departure out
of this world, also this day in the Evening the Lord showed me kindness in some
degree, and I had the consideration of the state to others upon my heart, yet I
was convinced that I wanted more softness of Heart.

Though this day was somewhat painful to my body yet I had some refreshing
thereon to my Soul for 1. I observed out of Heb. 12.16. Encouragement to
suffer, also inquiries into Beleive^s building upon the true Foundation, from
Math. 7.24. withal, many comforts from Christ's carriage between his
Resurrection and Ascension from this day to the 29. I observed not much save
that my heart was in an ordinary Frame not much elivated in good, nor cast down
with evil.

God moved my heart to praise him for his mercy the night before, and indeed it
was worthy of praise, and I found a very great encouragement in my spirit to
the Lord for it, this day I received diverse Letters from my Friends in the
Country, which were very refreshing, and the Lord came very seasonable into my
Soul through many expressions in Psalm. 91.

It pleased the Lord this day to draw forth, and to enlarge my heart much in
Prayer, with many tears, and from the 1. Kings and Ier. 50.20. To comfort me
much in respect of the p^^^^n of sin, also to consider four Lessons. 1. To be
think my self more of the sins I had committed. 2. To confess them more
sensibly. 3. To turn from them more effectually. 4. To look upon it as a work
of Christ (a it was to the Priests under the Law) to cleanse the Sanctuary
either the Churches of God of the hearts o^ his People, 2. Chron. 29.16.

This day did God tenderly afflict me in my head yet wonderfully whilst I was
at Prayer removed it, I perceived it in the middle of Pr^yer departing from me,
I heard also from Christians in the Country which much refreshed me, I observed
two comfortable words from Ier. 50.33.34, 51.53. For the Church of God, and
methought according to that Scripture Psalm. 102.14. I had some, pleasure in the
Stones, and did favor the dust of Z^on, and from Hos. 8. I observed son
Lessons 1. To take heed of leaving, to take heed to the Lo d especially in an
evil time. 2. Of short repentance. 3. Of being a Vessel of no delight in Goes
sight. 4. Of being giving up to sin,

Being the Lords day I think I may say it was a sweet day to my Soul in ^ivers
^espects.

This day was good to the outward man, but I sound a carnal rickling of self
conceitedness in some thing I had done and was doing, and I was convinced that
my time stole away insensible, I observed that the Character of bad profession
are out of Hos. 10. are (1.) To bring forth Fruit unto themselves 2. To have a
divided Heart. 3. To be worse by affliction. 4. To have the evil of evil, verse
14.

This day I would ever remember because of my great folly in my great
frowardness toward my Wife and another, my Conscience reproved me for it, and
I was convinced from Prove. 14.17.29. What evil I did thereby.

Being a day of Prayer I found my heart by Gods goodness much enlarged,
sorrowing much for the faults of the former day I learned from Exek. 10. Three
duties 1. To know the time. 2. To redeem it, and 3. To consider how soon it may
be at an end.

Being the day my Wife went to W. I found an inclina^ion in me, to ^owardness
but God restrained it and I found that Evening a continued sense and sorrow of,
and for my former evil, I learned from Eccles. 11. (1.) That a man should
hasten to do what good he can, because of the evil that is coming upon the
Earth. (2.) Put away evil from my Flesh.

This day and night following I was much troubled with temptations, out of
Eccles. 12. I observed many things that should move to mind their mortality,
and that there is a time when the days will be so evil that they will not be
desired also in the 9. and 10. it is said twice that the Preacher sought out.
1. Matter. 2. Words.

This day I had power to repulse temptation also a consideration that the
blessed and righteous man. 1. Does not go in sin presumptuosly. 2. Nor continue
in sin carelessly, nor 3. Give way to sin con^ivingly, I also considered that
God in affliction does no more to a Child of his then the Angel did to Peter
Acts the 5. Smite him to awake him out of Sleep.

Being the Lords day I was refreshed in the morning with the presence and
spirit of God in Prayer, and from the consideration of the wisdom,
watchfulness, and inweariedness of Satan in deceiving and tempting, I should
learn to be watch ul, and careful in keeping from the same.

The following Week my Book being from me I did not write my observations, only
I remember that upon the s^atch day I had comforts, both by power I had against
temptations, and from a Letter I had which came from several Friends in Wales.

Also the last day of the week I found my heart much intent upon preaching, and
with tears I did both study my Sermon, and pray for a blessing thereon yet had
not liberty to preach it.

Also the following week wherein I was in wards, I had not my Book only I
remember 1. That I was well contented with my condition. 2. Very cheerful and
comfortable. 3. Had a greater mind to do good. 4. Free from temptation. 5.
Resolved to let the Lord himself bring me out in his time and way. 6. When I
came out was stird up to praise the Lord, yet was not without temptations
afterward.

Some Lessons that I hope I have learned, or gained more experience in since my
imprisonment.

1. To be more sober and serious in my carriage, and to shun and loath (more)
jesting, jearing and foolish laughter, vain speaking, and unbeseeming behavior.

2. To prize secrecy, or being in secret for private Meditation,
Self-examination and Prayer more then before.

3. I have gained more power against passion, and anger (besides some other
corruptions) and more moderation in discoursing with men of differing
judgments.

4. A very great and earnest desire that there may be a general Union between
the Saints of God, at least a forbearance toward one and other, wherein they
cannot agree.

5. And especially a Heart really to pray for, and to pardon my worst and
greatest Persecutors.

6. To justify God willingly and fully in all that he has done, and to
acknowledge that it is not without cause nor so much as mine iniquityes have
deserved, God dealing with me under the Covenant of Grace and as a Father.

7. To look more at the good and gain I have received from the Lord in and by
sufferings, then at the time or nature of sufferings.

8 To know, remember, confess, and bewail many sins which I was long ago
guilty of.

9. To search and find out many weaknesses which I was guilty of in Preaching,
perticularly levity, setting forth Self, and natural pa^ts too much.

10. To understan^ diverse Scriptures clearer, and better. I hope, then I did
before.

11. To withdraw my eyes, ear and heart from tempting objects.

Being the Lords day, I was in the morning refreshed p ivately and in the
afternoon the Lord was pleased to meet with my condition, unexpectedly in two
things, also I observed the special care of the Church to please Christ, and
her fear to displease him, mentioned three times Cant. 2.7. and 3.5 8.4.

This day from Isa. 1. God poynted out two things to me (1) To cease from sin,
cease to do evil, verse 16. (2) I will take away all thy ^in, ver. 25. I also
apprehended that the P^ophesy in that 2 chap. is not yet fulfilled, compare
verse 4.19 21. together, and those words in verse the 9 forgive them not, etc.

This day I had a strong conviction of the sin of resisting, or neglecting the
motions of the spirit, and upon a temptation to give way to sinful thinking, I
found power to side with and embrace the spirits motions rather then the other,
I had a Letter from C. R. P. that refreshed me.

I was observing that when the Lord does intend to secure a person and preserve
it, he does sanctifi^ and purge it, that from Isa. 4.4.5. ye or when he does
intend to make use of a man, 2 Timothy 2.20.21. two other Scriptures I hope were
l^^d to my heart 2 Kings 10.9. But J^h^ took no heed to walk in the Law of the
God of ^s^^el withal h^s heart, but espe ially to take heed of sin of
trespassing in affliction, more against the Lord 2 ^n on. ^8 22. two sins I was
likewise convinced of ^m^pend ng time, and doing nothing extrao dinary for God,
and having a very straight dry h^^ ^row^ d God his cause, people and ways.

This d^y ^^ing p^^t of it spent in prayer, I found my heart so ^e that
affected (though often mo^e) and my soul was v^^y desi^o^s ^o have power over
my affections and (...) I observed from Isa. the 5 5. That when God does take
a^^^ me cy he does the same time give men up ^o judgment b^t in the 13 verse
of that Chap. there S n ^xcellen^ promise that when the Lord is exalted the
lambs shall feed af er their manner, that S^ in ^^e Phil. 1.29. For unto you it
is given in the behalf of Christ (was I get to me) i. e. by grace from (...)
his ^^ke to believe and s^ffer, or on his behal i. e. for taking part with
Christ ye suffer.

I was assaulted to the morning with temptations, yet after some di^tu^bance,
had some freedom from them y^^ observed a seasonable word from Isa. 6.6.7.
That as soon as h^ Angel had taken the live coal from the Alta^ and touched and
laid it upon the Prophets mouth declared, that his iniquityes were taken aw^y
and his sin purged so God can easily and speedil^ ^^move ^^n from any other
Saint.

This ^^^^ning having some p ovacation I found my ^el^ ^e^dy p esen ly to be
mo^d it (...) against him that accused ^e (...) toward my self, also too much
inclination to self justification, suitable also in my course of reading, was
that Scripture Isa. 7.12. where Ahaz thinking at least seemingly to avoid
tempting God by asking a sign, run into another sin, viz. disobedience and
Rebellion against God.

This day I had some full refreshings from the Lord, and a fuller sense of
things upon my heart then ordinary.

This was a day of light affliction upon my body, of pain in my back which I
supposed might have inc^eased, and heightened to a heavier distemper, but ^he
Lo^d removed it by his b^essing upon small means. I was d^awn out in my spi it
to p^aise God for it ^as also to observe how the profits did take notice how
the hand of the Lord was stretched out still, Isa. 9 12.17 ^0.4 whence I would
learn to obs^ve the hand of God in affliction, also I took notice of two sore
evils in the people under affliction (1.) Not to return unto the Lord (2.) not
to seek him in affliction yet two special promises chap. 10.20.21. That they
should stay upon the Lord, and return to the mighty God.

Thi^ ^ay being the Lords day, I had some real breathings of the spirit of the
Lord in prayer, as I conceived also freedom from temptation, and a heart to
praise God ^or it in some degree. I was taken up with several thoughts, which
often amuze me. (1.) Of the word Patience of God. (2.) of his special love, to
me, rather then others (3.) of his infinite wisdom and power in the
resurrection of man.

I had many observations as from Isa. 11.3. that Christ a spirit of quick
understanding, or scent, or smell, as it is in the margent, in the fear of the
Lord, such a spirit would I have; I was also strong^y persuaded that, that
Chapter, was not yet fulfilled, also sweet was that word to me Chap. 12.1.
Though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away and thou comfortest
me.

This morning I was troubled with sinful thoughts and truly there are the sins
that trouble me most, but I found a heart to pray against them earnestly.

But God brought a most sweet word in a sweet manner to me, viz. Ier. 13.19.
Thou shall call me thy father, and shall not turn from me, also another word in
Chap. 5.10. Go up upon her walls, but make not a full end. ^lso from Isa. 14.3.
The Lord shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from thy
hard bondage and in the 30. verse, the needy shall lie down in safety.

Some experiences recorded by him in a sickness he had the 3. of the 3 month,
1658.
Isay 28.9. The writing of Hezekiah King of Ind. when he had been sick, and
recoverd of his sickness.
1. When the Lord was pleased to visit me upon the sudden so sharply that I
thought li e was flying, and death seasing upon me, God showed me that all the
world and creatures therein were all helpless.

2. Looking up to God with a weak faith, and in few words the Lo d was pleased
to give some ease and releif by mitigating the pain.

3. Afterward when I came toward my designed place, God ordered that some
professors should meet with me, who showed mercy both in bringing me into a
house and giving notice to brethren.

4. That when I came to the house in extremity of pain the Lord did give me
some sudden and sweet sleep for 3 hours or more.

5. That both upon the way when I was scarce able to stand and in the house,
when I was thirsty the Lord did enable me to deny my self that I neither sat
down on the grass, nor drank, both which would have been very hurtful.

6. That the Lord did move the hearts of the Brethren to come so willingly and
express so much affection to me.

7. That God moved my heart and strengthened me to come home that night which
proved advantageous.

8. That when the disease was at the highest and sorest, the Lord was pleased
in that state to keep the eye of my mind directly upon himself.

9. That when I was much troubled about my Will, and was afraid the Lord would
have taken me away before I had finished it, God heard my weak senseless crying
unto him and gave me much satisfaction when it was done.

The Lord did not let loose any of my spiritual enemies, sin, or Satan upon me.

The Lord supported me with his former fatherly dealings, and the succors,
comforts and experiences he had afforded in the like afflictions.

The Lord kept my spirit indifferent and unbyassed toward life or death, not
desiring the one more then the other, but willing that God should choose for me.

The Lord showed me things nearer th^n I saw them before, and smaller things
(as duties sins, etc.) seemed greater to me then they had done.

I was helped by the Lord to bea^ the affliction with that patience that I was
so far from thinking it too heavy that I wondered it was so light.

I found a quicker discerning and a better taste to try words then before, and
to know who spoke and what was spoken discreetly, seasonably and effectually.

That I had more sense of other sick and suffering Saints then I had before,
especially the poor and the rather because I considered how they wanted the
accommodations I had.

As I had no extraordinary discoveries of the Lord, so I had several small and
mediate expressions of his tenderness and kindness.

I had clearer knowledge and greater conviction of some sins particularly.

1. Self which I found to cleave to me ever to the end.

2. Of Frowardness, which I saw to be an abhoring to the Lord, and it troubled
me much to hear it in my Family.

3. Wordliness, especially in having to do with worldly men.

4. Slothfulness in private duties.

5. Want of more care to ref^rm my Family.

6. Using too many words about earthly things with my Wife.

7. Using too much fleshly wisdom in my preaching, and too much time, wi^h too
many words in my Sermons, and too many complements to Saints, offering
Sacrifice or doing service unto the Lord, when God would have me be receiving
mercy from him, this God showed me once when being weak I went to perform duly,
I had comfort from the Lord.

1. From several Scriptures as Romans 14 8. Philip. 1.21. Job 33.26. Psalm. 71.3.
Esaiah 1.25 Ezekiel. 21.44 Prove. 1^. the last verse, John 16.14. Ioh. 17. Prove. 7.
to 21.

2. Gracious Answers of Prayer, and feeding upon promises.

3. From the Visits and Prayers of the Saints.

4. That when I was to dispose of the estate the Lo^d had given me, I did find
I was more thoughtful how to do it to Gods glory then I was to get it.

Some few of the Hymns found within his Papers.
A Hymn on the Sabbath day.
THe rest of rests to me is Christ in whom I do rejoice;
His day a Sabbath is to me; It Is not mine but his choice.
He rose and rested on that day, to show his work was done,
His blessed example is my Rule, his Candle is my Sun.
This is the Queen of days to me; For it is my Kings birth day:
He was begotten from the dead, that I might live for aye;
Not live in lust to do my will, but live to please my Lo d
To preach his word and sit at board, among ^a^^ts of one accord.
To pray and preach, to sing and praise, to meditate and talk
From day dawning unto dark night, should be our work and walk.
Another on the same.
The Sabbath is a day of rest, from Service, Work and Sin:
When God had ended all his work, the Sabbath did begin.
God set apart the seventh day, and did it sanctify.
Adam in innocence was bound, that holy kept should be.
Then to the Jews God gave command, this day for to observe;
And sorely punish wicked men, that from the Law did swerve.
But when the time that Jewish rites, were to be done away,
Christ did set up instead of it another called by day.
This was prefigur'd in the Law, and foretold frequently,
This Christ and his Disciples kept, strictly and ardently.
This mind^ us, that the work is done, which Christ engaged to do.
Christ's resurrection was thereon, which makes us keep it too.
Some without ground would slight this day, counting alike all days:
Yet I with Saints will keep the same, to celebrate Gods praise.
Upon my going forth to Preach.
To be my Shephards underling, his Sheep to seek and save,
It joys me more then any thing no work else do I crave.
To free a Soul from Death and Hell more then my life I prize:
Converting Preachers (make me one) shall shine, for they are wise.
O let me Lord have skill to bring, thy lost and scattering Sheep
Into thy School and Fould also, to teach and feed and keep.
My Lambs and little Ones are like to perish and be lost;
Oh seek and save them Lord thy self, thou know how much they cost.
Thy precious Blood was shed for them, that they might ever have
Enjoyment of thy precious self, this had, no more they crave.
Upon the occasion of preaching upon a Mountain.
How fair and eek how beautiful are those Messengers Feet,
That preach glad tidings on the Hills, their voice must needs be sweet.
Sweet is thy holy Trumpets sound, that calls and summons all,
To lissen to and list themselves under the General.
God gave his Law at first, on smoaky Mount Sinai,
God often times did appear to his in such a place and way.
Alters were built by Saints, to worship the true God:
The Temple on a Mountain was built, where God made his abode.
Christ did resort to Hills, to Watch, to Preach to Pray,
Christ was transfigured on a Mount, clad in divine array.
On a Hill he tried was, and that he overcame,
When from a Hill he did descend, he had the greatest fame.
Christ wrought great Miracles on a barren Hill,
Christ did ascend from off a mount, the Scriptures to fulfill.
Upon a Mount in Galile Christ gave commissions
To his Apostles for to preach unto all Nations.
From off a Mountain high John saw that glorious sight,
The new Jerusalem (Christ's br^de) clothed in white and bright.
The Mountains minds us of Gods faithful promises;
Gods Wisdom, Might and Providence, on Hills appear all these
The prosecuted Saints did hide themselves in Hills;
Their the Idolators worshipped God after their crooked wills.
Christ Kingdom and his Church, his Mount of holiness.
Shall break and quell all Mountains, and, all Hills of wickedness.
Gods Moun^ains shall bring peace: the Hills shall leap and sing:
On Mount Olive Christ will stand, to judge the world as King.
The barren Wilderness shall be a fruitful Land:
Upon the thirsty parched ground Pools of Water shall stand.
This Cloud of Witnesses, do all agree to teach,
That it is lawful on a Hill, or Mount to Pray and Preach.
Here on appears the Grass that feeds the Beasts, and Beasts Men,
Why should not men upon a Hill praise God for their fond then.
That God who dwells on high, and yet is every where,
Will now be served in Spirit in every place with fear.
My Pulpit and my Pew, shall be a Turfe of Grass,
As well as Wainscot in a Kirk for I prize every place
Alike to worship God, who dwells every where,
For that which I in places look, is whether Christ be there.
Upon Preaching in a Market place.
A Merchant brought from far, rich Ware and Pearls to sell,
Where many came, but not to buy, yet some approved well.
The Sellar and the rate, and rich Commodity;
Some ask the Servant what is the price, he said, it is cheap, come Buy,
Here Is Gold and rich Garments, here is Oil, here is Milk, here is Wine,
Thou wants come quick, accept of Christ and all there shall be thine.
Who is thy Master Christ, in Power he is here,
In Person in high Paradise; would you go to him there?
O yes to Heaven we would go: how shall we thither reach?
Come near and hearken to his Word; his spirit will you teach.
The pirit said i will show and work what is to be known and done
They a^swered make us willing Lord, then to thee we will run.
A Dialogue betwixt Time and Youth.
Time speaks. Time, I am ho^e headed ready to depart,
I waited for thee, but thou have not heart
To think, how I have turned so often my Glass;
The least and lowest Sands runs now apace.
If once I turn my Back, no locks behind;
Thou Wilt seek me, when and where thou wilt not me find,

Youth. Youth, My aged Father do not weary be,
Have patience yet a while. I will apply
My self, to that which profits in the End:
It Is time enough for young men to amend.
I must have recreation fit for Youth;
Let Old men (if they will) ply Time and Truth.
Time, Farewell the Glass is out, Death takes my place.
Youth, Oh time I pray thee stay, whilst I have grace.
Our Time is short, our journey long our Work undone in part;
Our Thread near spun, our Glass near run, all this unlaid to Heart.

Upon the apprehension of Christ's love to me, and the feeling of my love to him.
Who would not love thee Lord more then Self, Sin or World?
Who would not ravished be? That sees thy Love, or thee?
Who can think of thy Name? and not leap at the same
My names V.P. who Lord loves thee.
Upon the occasion of a Toothache.
No pain like that my Savior bore for me,
No suffering like, his suffering on the Tree,
Which he did bear not for himself but me.
Oh what love was herein
A plated Crown of pricking Thorns he wore,
Blows on his Head, Spits on his Face he bore
Besides base shame and scorn, sure this was sore:
But more he bore for sin
Gaul was his Meat, and Vinegar his Drink;
A Brook he drank from Pottom to the Brink:
My Blood should write his Bruises, not my Ink;
Thy Blood Lord wrought my Peace
A Flood of wrath streamed through his Soul within,
The Law him lashed, so did Satan and sin.
Till Death him sunk and Grave swallowed him in;
Thus did my Lord decease.
Shall Tooth ach then or pain from one small Bone
Make me have sense of Self more then that one;
Come thoughts of Christ's pain in, mine own begone:
For Christ will heal thee sure
That Balm and Brazen Serpent, that cures me
Is that which cured the Worlds great malady:
Nothing like this Panpharma^on can be
Which Tooth and all will cure.
The Saints Portion after death.
Strangers we are whilst we are here, clad with carnallity.
Sojourning toward our long home, even Eternity.
It Will not be long before we reach unto our journeys end:
Our Morning's past, Evening does have, toward our rest we bend.
Who knocks? It Is I, what is thy Name? my Name is dreadful Dea h,
What is thy business now with me? it is for to fetch thy Breath.
We come my Friend I looked for thee come show me thy Commission
From Christ thy Master, and my Lord with thee then i will begone.
Lo here it is take it and read: hold it is his Seal and Hand;
I know it will, here i will not dwell, but obey his command.
Come thou away, come quickly dear; I long to see thy Face
My Father also sent for thee, come quickly come apace.
I come, I come; open then the Door: give light for it is dark:
The entries straight; Lord lend thy hand, that I may reach the mark.
The Gulf twixt thee and me is great; I cannot through it venture,
Till thou lets down thy safe Drawbridge, I have no hopes to enter.
Centenel let down the Bridge, let in my Friend to me:
Oh welcome, welcome my dear one my Heart did long for thee.
Now sweet Son, thou shall see my Face, for which thou did so long:
Thou shall with me abide for aye, Angels and Saints among,
Thou shall not Sigh, nor Sob again; thy Sins thou shall not see.
Thy Blemishes and Weaknesses no longer trouble thee.
Thou shall have rest from thy Labors: thy works shall follow thee:
All Angels and all Saints that are, or ever were thou wilt see.
Thou shall be Crowned with Righteousness, yea with a glorious Crown.
Yea thou shall in full brightness shine, as does the beauteous Sun.
Thou shall sit on my Throne, to judge Angels and wicked Men:
Thy Scandals shall be washed off, sitting on high till when,
The Kingdom I deliver up, to thy Father and min^,
Who shall be all in all for aye, in whom we will be and shine.
Hallelujahs to thee my Lord, to thee for ever more,
To thy Father and sweet Spirit, I three in one adore.
Upon the Persecution.
It Is a sad age, when there is such rage against poor harmless Doves,
Who through their need seek Meat to feed, from him their Soul that Loves.
A sudden change yet not so strange, is come upon poor Saints:
Alas dear ones! God hears their Groans their moans and sad complaints.
The wicked strive, Husbands from Wives, to separate and part,
And the Shephards from their own Herds, that jointly with one heart,
Would serve their Lord with one accord after his Word and Will:
But Dogs and VVoolves and cruel Elves, that seek themselves would kill.
The innocent that no hurt meant, but spent their time and strength,
To seek the way that poor Souls they, through Christ may gain at length.
That great reward which God prepared, and cared for long ago,
They will obtain and the same gain, in spite of every Foe.
Another.
O God our God we by the Rod, are brought in part to see;
There is no man, that will or can, but thy s^le ^^^esty,
Hear the complaints of thy dear Saints, who in great sufferings are
Or will pity, or justify them, though they harmless are.
Thy holy Laws and blessed Cause, are like to suffer too,
The work thou did once in the midst, of us they would undo.
After the 25. Psalm.
God is our hope and stay, our refuge in our need
He is our Shephard he will preserve, and his own Sheep wrll feed;
He Will feed them with his Word yea also with his Rod;
And he will manifest himself, to be their mighty God.
If any do them hurt, their Foes he will surely slay:
And who they be that hinder them, such he will remove away.
He that does touch them, the Apple of his Eye
Does touch, and he is sensible of all such injury.
VVo unto those, that do, his little ones offend
T'wer better a Millstone were hanged, on their Necks without end
And they cast in the Sea, that is quite bottomless;
Then to come under Gods sore Curse, that punishment is less.
But happy are all such that follow their good Lord,
And patiently upon him wait, hearing his holy Word;
And in him do believe, and for their sins repent,
These shall not be ashamed at last, nor for their sins be shent.
Upon the Saints suffering.
This is the Fire through which thou do, purge away Dross and ^in:
This is the Water that does wash, in part the filth of sin.
This is the Wind that blows away our Chaff, and which light is.
This is the School wherein we learn the best experiences.
This is the way wherein we do follow the Son and Saints:
This is the way to liberty, with thee by our restraints:
This is the Food and Physic which thou give to thy Children:
This is the means when they have sinned, to bring them back again.
This is that which tends to divorce thy People from this World:
This is the Storm that tends to drive, thine into one accord:
This is the Hedge and Wall that keeps thy People from ranging:
This is the Chain that binds them up, from the accursed thing:
This is the Fullers Soap that does both whiten them and try:
This is the Fire in which they do their Lord most glorify
With patience and contentedness therefore our sufferings we
Will endure without murmuring against men or against thee.
V. P.

Some remarkable Passages in the Life and Ministry of this worthy Servant of
Christ, communicated by some faithful observing Christians and his ancient
intimate acquaintance.
MR. Vavasor Powel was born of honest and honorable Parentage, his Father Mr.
Richard Powel of a very ancient Family in Wales, living in the Burough of
Knocklas in Radnorshire, where his Ancestors had lived for some 100. years
before him: His Mother of the Vavasors a Family of great antiq^ity that came
out of Yorkshire into Wales, and so by both allied to most of the best
Families in North- Wales, though his best pedigree and highest descent was
that which he derived from the most honorable Family of Abraham. For the
unworthiest persons many times p etend to the hi^hest worldly discents, the
newborn being only the best born.

He was brought up a S^holler and taken by his Uncle Mr. Erasmus Powel to be
Curate at Clun, where he also kept Schooll in which time it pleased God in the
midest of his vanity and enmity to Christ and his People, to call and convert
him (especially by the minist y of that eminent Servant of Christ, Mr. Walter
Cradock) which was attended with deep humility in sigh^ and sense of sin, and a
lost estate by nature, and led b^ a Spirit or Bondage, through legal Terrors to
clear manifestations of the love of Christ in Go pel Life and L^b^^ty,
encountering with manifold temptations within and without, not only by Satan's
assaults in the mind, but by his visible appearances sometimes in one shape,
sometimes in another, to terrify and afright him, especialy in Prayer and in
his drawing nigh unto the Lord, but by Faith he still got the victory over him.

He in a little time profited above many, and being very zealous and full of
Love to Christ, did bestir himself exceedingly in preaching the Gospel,
laboring therein more abundantly then any we have known giving himself wholly
to the work both in public and private, God also accompanying him with his
blessing and presence in great success, the generallity of the Country being
then as Feilds, white unto the Harvest, flock ardently to his Ministry, and
many by his Preaching were turned to the Lord, so that Radnorshire that before
was a dark Country, came to have much light and in a short space many eminent
Professors begotten in it, at which Satan begun to rage exceedingly and stirred
up some of his Instruments to persecute the truth, laying wait for his life and
liberty, some by a judicial way, some by violence till they drove him out of
the Country, from whence he went to London where in the time of the War he
continued sometime, he was called to Dartford in Kent where he was very
succesfull in his Ministry to the gathering of a Church, afterward times
growing more peaceable, he was called into Wales again, where he renewed his
former labors, preaching the Word in season and out of season, so that by him
Christ made manifest the savor of his knowledge and grace in every place
throughout the Country, insomuch that there was but few (if any) of the
Churches, Chapels, Town halls in Wales wherein he did not preach Christ, Yea
very often upon Mountains, and very frequent in Fairs, and Markets, it was
admirable to consider how industrious he was by his often preaching in two or
three places a day, and seldom two days in a week throughout the year out of
the Pulpit, nay he would sometimes ride a hundred miles in a week, and Prrach
in every place where he might have admission both day and night, if he passed
through any Fair, or Market, or near any great concourse of People (so great
was his love to Souls) he would take the oppertunity in his Journey to preach
Christ, yea his whole life was a continual preaching, giving seasonable
instruction to every body he met with being fruitful and exemplary in Word,
Doctrine, Conversation, Spirit, it was his custom where ever he came to leave
some spiritual instructions and gracious favor behind him.

He was endued with such courage of mind and furnished with such ability of
body, that he went through his work with great delight, many admiting how he
was able to hold out, he was an able Minister of the new Testament, and always
in readiness upon all occasions to fulfill his Ministry, and like the good
Householder brought forth of his Treasury, things new and old, being very
indefatigable in his work, speaking and praying sometimes, 3. 4. nay 6, and 7.
hours together; he was very faithful in delivering the word of truth, and in
explaining it to the meanest capacity. and still endeavored to suit his
discourse to the occasion and condition of the Hearers he neither regarded nor
feared the frowns, or favors of great men, but faithfully and courageously
would warn, and reprove them to their Faces, he was very affectionate in
drawing and inviting Sinners to Christ, and as sharply would here prove the
profane the rebllious Hyppocrites and Backsliders, and most compassionately
sympathize with the weak, afflicted and tempted, he was very excellent in the
illustrating of his doctrine by familiar Comparisons, Parables and Similitudes
which used to be very profitable to the hearers, tending greatly to imprint the
truth in their minds, and which was so much the way taken by our Savior that
it is said without a Parable he spoke not, he had a ready wit well read in
History and Geography, a good natural Philosopher and skilled in Physic, which
greatly furthered his invention, but above all very powerful in prayer, much
endued with the Spirit and an Eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, which
was so admirably imprinted in his memory, that he was as a Concordance where
ever he came, so that a Scripture could hardly be named to him, but he could
tell you the Chapter and Verse, he had such an admirable memory that if he
heard two or three Sermons together, he could repeat them verbatim, though
toward his latter end by his long imprisonment, being kept from the exercise
of his Gifts his memory was impaired.

He was very exact in keeping punctual to his appointed times of Preaching,
having diverse Lectures both Weekly, Fornightly, Monthly and two Months, and
Quarterly besides, extraordinary appointments both in England and Wales, from
which no ill weather Frost nor Snow, nor ordinary difficulties could hinder.

One time as he was going to Preach his Horse fell lame, and could not well
reach the place appointed on Foot, he being in a great straight bethought
himself of the way that one David ap Hugh took in like case and addressed to
it, viz. alighted off his Horse and went to Prayer and begged strength of God
both for himself, and Horse to perform his Journey which accordingly was made
good to him, for mounting his Horse he found his lam^ness was departed.

One time he was to Preach at Lempster in Herefordshire, upon a first day of
the week, having the day before preached by the way, and as he was coming late
at night, he had a very grievous fall off his Horse, which bruised him much
that he could not come further that night, and questioned whether he should be
able to stir the next day yet Prayer being made he was enabled to reach the
place early in the morning, and to preach thrice that day.

Another time he was to preach at a place called Cery, to perform which he was
constrained to ride night and day, until at last his Horse tired, so that he
was forced to leave him by the way, and perform the rest of his Journey a Foot.

It was his usual custom in riding to places to Preach, if he overtook any
aged People going on foot toward the meeting, to set them on his Horse, and to
walk himself by their sides, which he would do for miles together.

Many have been the difficulties, and hardships he under went in his itenerant
preaching, sometimes forced to lie in the poor Welsh houses upon the Mountains
where he could find little accommodation for either Horse or Man, and yet could
as cheerfully spend the night in examining and instructing the poor People, as
if he had, had the best entertainment in the world, for it was his meat and
drink to do his Masters work, in gaining and edifying of Souls, and it was his
custom to reward the poor People, as much for their course Bread and Cheese,
and hard Lodging, as if he had been in the choicest Inn.

He met many times with very hard measure from wicked Drunkards, and debauched
Persons by often lying in wait for his Life, and by many Baffitings and Stripes
which he received from them, and he was ve y much prejudiced by Blows upon his
Head, yet freely did he use to forgive his most mischeivous and malicious
Enemies and Persecutors, never prosecuting any of them, though he had great
advantage against them, and many friends that would have righted him and
punished them, but patiently did he bear in his body the marks of the Lord
Jesus, and most Christianly did he undergo all the unjust reproaches he met
with from wicked men, rendering blessings for cursings love for hearted, he used
to say he would not take a great deal by the year for the reproaches he met
with, all for Christ which he could not be without.

He was exceeding hospitable, the Feasts that he used to make was not for the
rich, but the poor and aged, whom he often invited and supplied with Clothes,
Shoos, Stockings, and all other necessary accommodations.

He was very free in the entertainment of Strangers, and all Saints, his house
being common for them, and great resort was to him from most parts of Wales,
and many from England, and was so free hearted that he would use to say he had
room for twelve in his Beds, a hundred in his Barns, and a thousand in his
heart, and so liberal that he would wrong himself to do good to others, he was
very merciful to all poor People, and when in the greatest have he would not
let the poor cry in vain, and severally would he with his Alms impart some good
instructions to their Souls.

He was very loving and courteous to all his Neighbors, and much beloved by
them.

He was very zealous against false doctrine and Errors corrupt and
Antichristian dece verse.

He did spend and was spent in his Masters service, laying out himself, and
what he had for him, not serving him for filthy lucre but of a ready mind,
finding his wages in his work, and therefore having freely received he freely
gave, little outward advantage accrued to him by his ministry, from the
Churches in Wales, he received nothing but neighbourly and brotherly kindness,
which he was as ready to requite, and much more willing to give then receive,
and as freely did he contribute the necessities of others as any, the
Parliament ordered him 100 l. per annum, out of a sine cura whereof he received
about 60 l. for seven or eight years, many considerable gifts he refused, and
never did he get any thing by the Act for the propagation of the Gospel in
Wales, as was slandrously laid to his charge, for which his vindication in
print to this day unanswered, may stop the mouth of Envy it self.

And he made it appear in the Consciences of all that knew him that wealth, and
worldly advantages was not the penny he entered the Vineyard for, but the
gaining of Souls, his temporal Estate as well known was more before the War,
then at the time of his imprisonment and death, being indeed a despiser of the
world, and which was no more his temptation, then it was Luthers, he was of a
noble generous free Spirit, and as some term it much a Gentleman in all his
deportment.

He was very humble and plain in his carriage prefering others before himself,
though far inferior in Gifts and Grace to him, and a most ready servant to do
good to all both for Soul and Body.

He was very just in all his dealings and would rather receive wrong, then
offer injury to any, and kept still a great jealousy over himself least he
should do any thing unbecoming the Gospel.

He was very pitiful to all in distress whether Saints or sinners, and
especially in the case of sin, which he would deeply lay to heart, and weep
bitterly in consideration of the weightiness of sin upon there Souls, and
greatly would he lament the scandalous offenses in Professors, which tended so
much to the dishonou^ of God, grief of the Saints, and ha^dening of sinners,
and indangering their own Souls.

He was very active in doing good, and little time spent by him in idleness,
after great and tedious Journeys and pains in Preaching, he would be as fresh
to attend any work for God, as if there had been no such thing, it was his
constant practice to be speaking of good to all he conversed with, and to
convert worldly discourse into spiritual things, and when he apprehended any to
discourse of the things of God in a common light Spirit, he would endeavor to
work them up to more seriousness and spirituallity.

Where ever he was, at home or abroad, he would be still furthering of good
things, and improve all oppertunities with whom so ever he conversed were it in
his Journey; or upon the Road to instill something for the good and benefit of
their Souls, wherein as a follower of his Master, he was a lively pattern to
the Saints, and wherein God blessed him exceedingly.

He was to receive exhortation admonition and reproof, (being under all his
excellencies and great worth a man subject to passion and infirmity) which he
would embrace with all humble submission and acknowledge thankfulness, and his
Conscience was so tender that he would of himself both privately and publicly
express his fears and jealousy of himself, and would desire others to tell him
his faults which he might not so well discern in himself.

He was a faithful and diligent observer of the out goings of God upon his
Soul, whereof he kept a daily account and record, taking notice both of the
actings of grace, and the stirrings of corruption, and the assaults of sin and
Satan, or World made upon him.

It was his daily practice to draw forth some instruction, and advantage from
every object, and every thing that accrued, viz. from Scriptures ordinances,
Gods dealings with him in every respect from conferrences with Saints, or
Sinners, from any providence or accident whether prosperous or adverse from
Creatures Heaven, Earth, Seasons, from the graces, and virtues as well as
failings and infirmities of Saints and Professors.

A great observer of D^eams, and what God might speak to himself or others by
them, for warning instruction, or reproof.

He was very heavenly, his Heart so set with diligence and intentness upon the
things of God, that when he was alone, and none to discourse with, he would
many times be singing of Hymns in his house and elsewhere, and often in his Bed
as soon as he awaked in the morning, being excellent at extempory Hymns, which
have been to the refreshing of many, who have declared to have enjoyed as much
of God in joining with him therein, as in any other ordinance.

And his Soul did follow so hard after God, that he has been heard to pray
very audibly and fervently in his sleep, and yet knew it not when he avvaked.

He was of an undanted courage for God, no fear of suffering could turn him
back in the work of the Lord, he had such a fervent zeal for Christ, and the
Truth, and such enmity to, and hatred against, that he regarded not the
greatness of men, in administering reproof to them, what danger so ever might
accur to him thereby, he used to say he feared the corruption of his Heart more
then any sufferings he met with from men.

He with much compassion, and feeling affection used to sympathize with the
vveak, and tempted; making their condition his own, but would magnify his
office with great zeal, by improving the authority Christ had given him to
curb the insolent, stubborn, and rebellious.

He was one of a worthy public Spirit zealous in, and furthering of all
things that might tend to promote the good of his Neighbor and Nation, but
especially the Saints, and Sion, in advancing the Name, Interest, Kingdom, and
Sovereignty of Jesus Christ, and seting himself withal his might against
Babylon that common public Enemy of mankind.

He was very tender of the Consciences of others, though differing in judgment
from him, and where he discerned sincerity, and truth of Grace, expressed much
endeared affection to them as Brethren, being a dear Lover and Promoter of love
to Saints as Saints, without relation to particular persuasion, or private
opinion.

He was exceeding successful in the work of the ministry, which was sealed to
him by the conversion of many Souls confirmation, consolation and edification,
of more both in England and Wales.

He was instrumental to the gathering of Churches, to the healing and composing
of many differences and breaches, wherein he traveled much by Messengers
Letters, Conferrences and Journeys far and near.

It was his usual course in order to preserve and maintain life and love
amongst the Churches, he most nearly conversed with, to put them upon the
debating and resolving of several questions from time to time, he handed to
them which proved exceeding profitable to the increase of knowledge, and to the
ends proposed.

He was much in visiting from house to house, taking a particular account both
of inward and outward man, inquiring after their family, walks, duties, and
deportments, and in an especial manner did he with diligence attend the sick,
administering all things necessary for Body and Soul, Exhorting, Comforting and
Praying with and for them.

He was exceeding zealous to keep the Communion clean and pure, by keeping a
diligent Watch, putting forth early warning and reproof against the first
appearances of envy, and scandal, and a faithful rejecting the hardened and
impenitent Sinners, in which Cases he used to be mighty powerful in the
administering of that ordinance of excommunication showing the terribleness
thereof so that many hearts would tremble greatly thereat, and yet be found
also therein with great tenderness, and heart meltings to the offenders
themselves.

As he was Master of a Family, he was wonderful careful to do the things that
was just and equal, and principally he did design to promote the power of
godlidess amongst his Servants, he used to tell them that they should at any
time leave work to pray or read, and when he sound them at any times in the
Feilds reading or confering about the things of God, he would bid them go on
and continue in it, and oh how few are they that prefer and promote the good of
Souls, before their own worldly profit and advantage, but are rather so
oppressing their Se^vants, that they can hardly have any time day or night to
give God what he requ res.

He used in his Family sometimes to repeat Sermons, and inquiring what they
remembered thereof, sometimes what they had read that day in the Scriptures, and
what they had observed in their reading, what providence they had taken notice
of, and what instruction from them, sometimes propounding useful questions to
them to resolve, sometimes read and expounded a Chapter and informed himself
how they understood it, and what they remembered from it, sometimes sing an
Hymn, and pray constantly, which duties he performed twice a day, if no more
when at home, and usually would alter both his method and his hours, designing
to bring them up to the life, and not so much to live in the form of duties.

Those Servants that he saw careless of their Souls, or sleep in duties not
remembering what they heard, he would charge warn and rep^ove them most
strictly, and threaten to turn them out of his doors, if they did not reform.

When his occasion led him abroad to preach which was very often, he left with
them strict charge to perform the Family duties amongst themselves.

As he was a housekeeper had all things provided decently and in good order,
his Husbandry and all his affairs well contrived and managed with great
discretion.

This following account so well agreeing with the former, and given in by his
dear Wife Mr. Kathetherine Powel is thought meet here to be inserted.

He was exceeding tender to all persons, to their inward and outward man,
bountiful in heart and hand to any he saw need, or desire good from him, a
fifth part of all his income, either of the little he had of his own or
otherwise (by providence came to him) he dedicated to the Lords service and
gave it to any in want, much of it would he give to poor carnal persons, saying
we should not only be kind to one another, for God is kind to the unthankful
and unholy, and that Christians should do good for the honor of the Gospel,
striving by this as well as otherways to make the poor World in Love with (or
at lea^^ have nothing to say against) the good ways of God not the Professors
of it,

Though he suffered much, and of various kinds, yet never retaind anger, or
disgust to the instruments, but could weep in secret for them, that their sins
might be blotted out.

No^ ever did I know by any surprising trial, unfitted for Prayer, or any
service for God.

A man of great sincerity and plainness, either spoke his heart in what he
spoke, or else spoke not at all, nor omited speaking what he thought was his
duty for fear of displeasing any, and yet a most winning, obliging carriage to
all persons, a man very observant how his Soul prospered, to which end he writ
every night what he had gained or lost therein that day, either in the
Scriptures, Prayer, Christian converse, or other duties he was exercised in.

A man of great Faith in all things, God has promised to his People, relating
to inward or outward man, and as to his own particular, when there was at any
time shortness in either, he went with much humble holy boldness (through Faith
in the Blood of Jesus) to tell God what he wanted who did give, eminent returns
of that kind.

A man of great humility esteeming inferior Christians before himself, and
willing others should do so too.

A man much in Prayer he set aside one part of the day alone, to seek God for
Sion, not mixing other requests at that time, and constant in Family duty,
morning and night at least, and with his Wise before he went to Bed
(notwithstanding which) immediately before he composed himself to rest, took
leave by committing again by a few words in Prayer to the Lord, and so in the
morning when he awoke renewed Communion afresh with God, sometimes, first by
Prayer, sometimes (when his heart overflowed with spiritual joy) in Songs or
Hymns of Praises, and that with a very broken and melting Frame.

A man very conscientious and exemplary in all relative duties, and very
punctual to his word, if he promised any thing it was as binding to him as the
most legal obligation, he was naturally of a hasty spirit which if at any time
brake out, he would in a short space recover himself, and come out of it return
to as sweet and amiable a frame of spirit as could be desired, and heartily
acknowledge his passion and mourn over it.

He was a very strict and conscientious Observer of the Sabbath day, viz. The
first day of the week the Christian Sabbath, not doing or speaking of that day
what he saw lawful upon other days, attending the duties thereof from Evening
to Evening, and as to the change of the day and the duties required in
sanctifying thereof, he has with great judgment asserted from the Scriptures
too large to be here inserted.

To these foregoing Testimonies, tending to preserve the savor and precious
memory, of this eminent Servant of Christ, as well as vindicate him (from those
reproaches that for zeal to his Masters service he was loaded with, and that
not only from bad men but through Emulation prejudice or mistakes even from
good men also) it is thought meet to add also the following Testimonial by some
of his ancient acquaintance and persons of known worth and integrity.

As for his birth we took notice that Gentlemen of the best Rank in the County
of Salop, Radnor, Mountgomery, etc. saluted him as their Kinsman, and for his
Education (though from his Childhood brought up a Scholar) we measured it not
by every dutty Way he has traveled, or fowl Dunghill he has ^^oden on, but
by the endowments of his mind as a man, a Christian, a Preacher, His dexterous
faculties both natural and acquired, his Scripture, Learning and Gifts of
utterance, adorning those several capacities. If that saying be true Bonus
Textuarius, est bonus Theologus, we may attest him to have been none of the
meanest, we chiefly p^ized his nurture and proficiency under Christ: But lastly
we look upon his work as a Flower above all in his Garden, for Beauty, Savor,
and medicinal virtue, he was an indifatigable Labourer in the Harvest, Peaching
almost every day in one Parish or other (and twice or thrice a day often.

1. Christ and Moses excellency, or Zion or Sina's glory treating of the two
Covenants.

2. A Dialogue between Christ and a Publican Christ and a doubting Christian.

3. Christ exalted by the Father, God the Father glorified and man's Redemption
finished.

4. The Bird in the Cage.

5. Common Prayer no Divine service.

6. Sufferers Chatichisme.

7. A Scriptural Chatichism.

8. Sinful and sinless swearing.

A Scripture Concordance.

He has written several Books none of which impeaded one Sermon.

His acceptance was more then ordinary above many of his fellow Laborers in
the Gospel, as appeared by the numerous concourse of Auditors to his frequent
Lectures, who were as unwearied in hearing as he in speaking, his success also
was answerable, who saw not his Labors prosperous? Who can blast that which
the Lord blesses, or dares villify what the King delighted to honor, he was
no fruitless Itinerant but fully approved himself a Workman, that needed not to
have been ashamed to be employed by the head of the Church of Christ, to
convert, comfort, edify many Souls to reprove, rebuke, exho^t all.

Welcomed wherever he came, whether by the morally civil or the truly
Religious, the quickness of his imagination, strength of his memory, fullness of
his conceptions, variety of his discourses, and readiness of utterance,
challenging more then ordinary respect from the former, and the exemplariness
of his piety, the tenderness of his affections, the forvvardness of his zeal,
the holiness of his doctrine, and eminency of all his Graces, endearing him to
the latter, only the superstitious hated him, but he never prophesied good
concerning them but Evil.

We confess to you that we our selves have had as deep prejudice against him,
as any could have, but have been taught by experience this better Character of
him.

He was a man in whose bodily temperature, the nobler Elements of Fire and
Air have had the predominancy, as the rushing mighty Wind, and the Cloven
tongued Fire have in his mental temperature, which carried him above Earthly
interest, toward his Celestial Center, he had a Body of Steel made as of
purpose for his never resting indifatigable Spirit, which by his extraordinary
motion and agitation, might have worn out many ordinary Cases, his Labors
were his Recreations, and there was no time more burdensome than while he
was from under his burden, he had a Heart feared none but him that is to be
feared for his mercy; that loved none but Christ and those that carried some
price of his Beauty, and yet hated none but those that hated love it self, and
in them too, rather their divlish vizer then their persons, for he would often
melt in private mourning for those that had the most inflamed hearts, against
Christ and his People, his Head was not only a Fountain of Tears, because men
keep not Gods Law, but also a Conduit of divine instruction teaching them how
to keep it. His Tongue was as the Pen of a ready Writer, which was touched with
a Coal from the Altar, that it knows no difference between rich and poor, mean
and honorable. His Ears were sometimes open to those that came, but with the
Colors of Christ about them, but neither they nor his Purse that to the poor
and needy, that would not only dose out his Silver to them, but what he had in
the name of the Lord to distribute to their precious Souls, his Hands were lift
up against none but such as appeared to him to be Iorams or Ahaziahs, nor
stretched out to draw in any but good Iohanadabs into the Chariot of Aminadab.
He was a Latimer for his plain dealing, a Luther for his zeal, and we may
boldly speak it a Paul for his diligence It was the Mantle of the great
Prophet, that was his Raiment, the Power and Spirit of him, that was greater
then Elias rested on him, by which he was made instrumental in the doing of
wonders, even the reviving of many a Shumanites Son, many a dead Soul, there
are many Servants of God in Wales, that can say of him, as Paul does of
himself, that though they had many Teachers, yet they had not man, Fathers in
Christ.

He was for many years a daily miner at the works of Christ, and we are
confident that there is not this day in England a Labourer of his time, that
can show more ^ight Silver O^e of his own raising then he, go out of the Welsh
Mines. witness his gathered Congregations in Mount Gomery, Radnor and Cardigan
shire abounding with hopeful visible Converts, to whose Ministry most in those
assemblies have acknowledged themselves to own their blessed changes, who would
be ready to attest the same unto the World by annexing hereto a List of their
Names were it thought necessary, besides what success the Lord gave him
formerly in London. Kent and other places, where their remains many living
Monuments of his powerful undeceiving Ministry, many its true were filled with
envy toward him, yet being above discouragement, whilst he was permitted was
still striving to follow his Master as near as he might, going about doing good
continually, and to heal every Soul-disease amongst the People, still laboring
and endeavoring to cause the sleepy to awake, the Deaf to hear, the Blind to
see, the Lame to walk, many of such good works did he do, and for which of
those was he stoned esteemed, as Dung and offscouring, and accounted as one of
whom the World was not worthy. H. P. A. M. E. H. L. P. I. N. E. V. T. L. E. A.
I. G. I. Q. C. L.

A faithful Narrative of his sufferings and imprisonment.
Manifold were the Perils, Buffitings, Seisures, and Imprisonments he underwent
in his attending and pleading Christ's Cause and Gospel, insomuch that it may
truly be said of him, as the Apostle spoke of himself, 2. Cor. 6.4. etc. That
in all things he approved himself a Minister of God, in much patience in
affliction, in necessities, in distresses: In Stripes, in Imprisonments, in
Tumults, in Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings: By honor and dishonor, by
evil report and good report, as a Deceiver yet true, and 2. Cor. 9. In
journeyings often in perils of Waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils by his own
Countrymen, in perils in the City, in perils among false Rulers, in weariness
and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, etc.

First of the Perils and Buffitings that befell him.
Many were the Assaults, Buffitings and Lyings in wait for Life, that attended
him in his Ministry whereof you have the following instances.

Once he was sorely beaten by two of his Kinsmen at Knocklas in Radnor-shire,
for reproving of them for sin, insomuch that his Head and other parts did swell
and grow black, being struck by one of them with a Crab-tree Cudgel, and with a
strong Arm, and yet to admiration as he himself expresses it, that he felt it
no more then if a Child had struck him with a Bullrush.

Another time he was sorely beaten in Marion-shire.

Another time a Butcher at Vainvatre lay in wait in a narrow passage, to take
away his life, and did assault him, but God strangly delivered him.

At another time four men entered into an Oath to kill him but God strangly
preserved him, and at the designed meeting where they intended the mischief,
one of them was convinced.

At another time one came to a Meeting where he preached, at Newtown, with a
full purpose to kill him, but was that time convinced and converted by the
Word, and confessed and begged pardon for his wickedness.

Another time a man of Welsh Pool entered into an Oath to kill him, and designed
to attempt it at Guilsfeild, where he preached, where he was also at the same
instant converted by the power of the Word.

Another time a woman came with a Knife to kill him, as he was preaching in a
Market place at Machinleth, but was prevented.

At another time at Dollgelli in Marionshire, as he was preaching he was
assaulted by a rude rabble, who with Stones, Swords, Staves and Pol-Axes,
attempted him and many of his company but he was strangly delivered, though in
their hands.

Not long after in the same Town being indicted and acquit at the public
Assizes for a Riot, upon the the former business a wicked Fiddler was hired to
kill him, who with a Weapon under his Coat attempted it twice vvhilest he
stood at the Bar, but was prevented.

Another time going to preach in Mallwyd Kirk yard, several rude People
assaulted him and his Friends where he was sorely beaten and bruised on his
head.

A Soldier shot a Brace of Bullets at him looking out of his Prison Windovv in
Mountgumery but God preserved him.

Upon the taking of Anglesey he was in the midst of the Enemy, and
particularly assaulted by one that knevv him, Wounded in the Head, Hand and
Grine, but God brought him off as before.

Four times he was delivered out of the hands of Robbers, and several strange
preservations were, vouchsafed him from perils by Water both in England and
Wales, and wonderfully protected in seven dangerous falls from his Horse in
his journyings upon the Lords service.

Of his several imprisonments.
1. The first of that kind he met with, was in Brecknock-shire, about the
year 40. where he being Preaching in a House; was about 10. a Clock at Night,
seated with 50. or 60. of his Hearers, by fifteen or sixteen lewd Fellows,
pretending a Warrant from one Justice Williams, who took them forthwith away
in the Night toward Belt the said Justices house, but in the way meeting
with a Kirk and an Alehouse (too common yoke Fellows in Wales) they would
have haid them into the Alehouse, which they refused and chose the Kirk
rather, where about Midnight he went to Prayer, sung a Psalm, and taught from
Mat. 10.28. Fear not him that can kill the Body, etc. and it was observed that
one of the chiefest and vildest of the troublers did weep sorely, the next
Morning he was brought to the Justices house, who not being at home at their
first coming in, he betook himself to his Bible, and preached there again,
vvhereat the Justice when he came in was much enraged to find him at such
work in his house, but two of his Daughters who seemed to relish the Word,
begd him not to do any thing against him and his Companions, but such was his
rage that he presently committed them to the Constables hands, who was so
favorable as to permit them freely to enjoy religious exercise and worship,
which they did at the said Town of Belt, and the Neighborhood generally
attended both that Night and the next Morning, the next day the Justice sent
for them again, to examine them further having got two or three more Justices
and six or seven Priests with him, where after much conference and many
threatenings discusts them at that time.

2. Another time Preaching at Launger in Radnorshire, in the Field the public
place not being able to contain the Company, Mr. Hugh Lloyd the high Sheriff
came with a Band of men and took him down out of the Chair wherein he Preached,
and after examination committed him, and charged several Constables fifteen or
sixteen being present to execute his Mitimus who all but one refused the same,
who took him into his custody, and undertook to convey him to Prison, and as he
went with him his house being in the way the Constable permitted him to lodge
at home that Night, who was so convinced whilst he was at Family duty, that he
declared he could not go a step further with him, though it should cost him his
life, being persuaded he was one of the Servants of Christ, and so took leave
and left him in his own house, though because of the cruelty of the Justice
durst not return home but went for sometime out of the Country, yet to prevent
damage to the man, but especially scandal to the Gospel, bound himself with two
sufficient Sureties to appear the next Assizes in Radnorshire, where appeared
accordingly and their three Bills of Indictment preferred against him, from
which upon the Traverse the Judges and Jury befreinding him, he was acquit and
the Judges afterward inviting him to Dinner and desiring him to give Thanks,
one of them said it was the best Grace he ever heard in his Life, giving him
great countenance which proved much to the furtherance of the Gospel in those
parts, to the great offense of the high Sheriff, who afterward upon the coming
on of the War persecuted him out of the Country.

He being in London about the time that General Cromwell took upon him his
supreme Power (so impartial was he, and so great a Lover of Justice that what
ever had been, the endeated intimacy and freindship betwixt him and the
General, yet) did he that day he was Proclaimed (which was the 19. December.
1653.) Witness against that Action to those persons that were appointed to
Proclaim him.

And on the said day being the second day of the Week did he with others Preach
at Black friars, where he also bore a public Testimony against it. Upon the
fourth day of the same Week, he and another were taken into custody by several
Messengers from the Council, and carried Prisoners to White Hall, many friends
came thither to accompany them to observe the issue, during the time they
attended in the outward Rooms Mr Powel took occasion to Preach to the People
from a portion of Scripture, and in the midst of his discourse was sent for
in^o the Council and committed Prisoner for words spoken in Black friars, he
continued in the custody of the Messengers, till the last day of the same Week,
being the 24. of December and then was discharged. On the next day in the
afternoon at the public Meeting House in Newgate-market called Christ Church,
he Preached from those words Acts 5.25. Then came one and told them saying
behold the men whom ye put in Prison, are standing in the Temple and teaching
the People.

He joined (as you have heard) with several Christians in Wales, in that Letter
and public Testimony that was sent to Oliver Cromwell against his Usurpation
which he he understanding before it came up, caused a Party of Horse to be sent
for him, and to be b^ought to his Major General at Worcester, they took him at
Aberbecham in Mountgumery shire.

From a day of Fasting and Prayer, and detained him sometime a Prisoner upon
that account.

Upon the second Month called April 28, 1660. Early in the Morning, Mr. Powel
dreamed that a company of Soldiers were coming to take him Prisoner; which he
no sooner awaked and had told his Wife, but he heard at some distance either a
Carbine or a Pistol discarged; which made him prsently conclude, that his
Dreams was true, and was then immediately to be fulfilled: Whereupon though he
had opportunity enough to make an escape, yet he chose to stay, and to prepare
himself for a Prison: Therefore as soon as the Soldiers came into the house,
he presented himself unto them, and told them he understood their design, and
was as willing to go along with them, as they were to require him; and so by
them was carried to Prison, which according to their Warrant was to the next
Sessions, Salop being 17 miles off where he was committed (with several others)
to the custody of a Marshal; From thence he was conducted to Salop, where he
continued Prisoner about Nine Weeks, and then by an Order of the King and
Council, was released with the rest of his B ethren.

Mr. Powel being thus set at liberty thought it was his duty to improve that
mercy, by continuing to Preach as he had done formerly; but one Sir M. P. at
that time the High Sheriff of the County of Mountgomery, sent to prohibit his
meeting, and upon Mr. Powels refusal to neglect the oppertunity of serving God
among his People, the High Sheriff wrote a Letter to Secretary Morice, wherein
he accused Mr. Powel of Sedition, Rebellion and Treason, and the like Crimes,
which, though untruly Suggested, yet at that time easily believed, and he
doubted not but to procure power to imprison one, who was represented so
dangerous, but before any return came, so willing are some men to be doing, Mr.
Sheriff directed a Warrant to take Mr. Powel and make him Prisoner, which was
accordingly done, where he was continued several Months, all o^dinary ways of
releif by Law, allowed in such Cases, being wholly obstructed.

The Jailer in whose hands Mr. Powel was kept, was one that formerly told this
story concerning himself; How being one night in his Bed, there appeared to him
about Eleven of the Clock at Night a bright shining light, and in the light a
speckled Bird, which bad him read Mat. 3.2. Early in the morning he got up, and
having no Bible of his own, he went to borrow one of his Neighbors, and found
these words, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; Upon which he
entreated Mr. Powel, before he was a Prisoner, to Preach, and to take this Text
for his Subject; And then he was so affected, as at the Sermon he was observed
to weep, and confessed afterwads to some, that he was almost wrought upon; But
a little time wore out that Impression, for at Mr. Powels coming to Prison, he
was so much altered from any thing of good, that he not only very uncivilly
used his Convincer, but very often sought to trapan and ensnare his Prisoner.

After some Months stay, the Sessions came, and after much importunity Mr.
Powel was called, and instead of being released, or having any just cause
rendered why he should still be continued in Prison, the Oaths of Supreamacy and
Allegiance were tendered to him, and though he urged, that it was necessary he
should first be cleared of that which was already charged upon him, before he
entered upon any new Matter, especially since those Oaths were designed against
the Papists, who he saw were spared, and of him, as to any inclinableness unto
Popery, they had no suspicion; Yet neither in this could he be heard, but upon
his refusal of those Oaths, so arbitrary and unnecessarily tendered, he was
again committed unto Prison, the Judge refusing to take any Bail for him, till
the next Sessions.

But he had not long continued here, when upon a false information returned
against him, one of the Messengers of the Council (Mr. Wick^m) was sent down
with a Warrant to bring him before the King and the Council; whether he was
brought within few days following; and whilst he was waiting at the Council
door, a Cavilier Captain one of his own County came to Mr. Powel, and upbraided
him, advising him to run away, for that would be his best course: To whom he
replied, before all the other Company, that God had made him to stand when he
and his Companions the Cavaliers had run away; To which no answer was made,
neither by that Captain, nor by any of the Company; But after 6. or 7. hours
waiting, one of the Clerks of the Council, came with a Warrant in his hands,
which he delivered to the Messenger, to carry Mr. Powel Prisoner to the Fleet,
where he was detained almost two years, wanting but six Weeks, and for above
12. Months of that time, in so close a Confinement that he was not suffered to
go out of his Chamber Door, which, together with the offensive smell of a
Dunghill, which was just before his Window, did so much impair his Health, that
he never after perfectly recovered it.

Whilst Mr. Powel was thus a Prisoner in the Fleet, his Enemies could not
satisfy themselves by exercising cruelty upon his Body, but they also
endeavored to take away his good name and credit, by spreading a Report that
he was in Prison there for a great part of the Revenew of the Tithes of Wales.
From which Aspersion though many worthy Persons had formerly cleared him, by a
Book Printed in the Year 1653. called Examen and Purgament Vavaseris; Yet noe
knowing how far such a Report might influnece to the reproach of the Gospel,
Mr. Powel did then write a brief Narrative concenting the proceedings of the
Commissioners in Wales against the ejected Clergy, and therein, as knowing his
own intigrity, he did defy all his Enemies to prove the least Title of that
Slander; To which Vindication no reply was ever put, nor indeed can be made:
since all that knew Mr. Powel, must affirm this of him, that very few in this
Self seeking Age were more of the Primitive temper, in seeking the Souls,
rather then the Goods of others; which, though pressed upon him with much
importunity, he has often refused; And so far was he from desiring unjustly to
enrich himself, that he did voluntarily quit the oppertunity of justly doing it.

Having now spent almost two years in the Fleet, there came a sudden order for
the sending away of him and Colonel Rich, which without giving them so much as
two hours time to provide themselves, was executed upon them, upon the last day
of September 1663. and in the Duke of Yorks Pleasure Boat, whereof Captain
Lambert was Commander, they were both conveyed to South Sea Castle, by
Portsmouth where Mr. Powel continued about five years not being restored till
the removal of the Chancellor Hide did open a Door for him, (as for many other
Prisoners) to sue for his Habeas Carpus and so at length he obtained his
liberty.

Mr. Powel after his release out of South Sea Castle had scarce his liberty ten
Months, when passing from Bristol through some Parts of Monmouth-shire, he
having in that County several opportunities in diverse places to preach the
Gospel: People of all sorts as well Profane, as Professors showing much
willingness to embrace the same, he judging it his duty being called by the
Lord, and desired by the People, passed out of Monmouth shire into a place
called Mertur lying in the mountian parts of Glamorgan-shire, where he found in
the Churchyard of the said Parish a great Congregation of People waiting to
hear the Word of God: to whom after Prayer, the said Vavasor spoke from the 17.
Ier. verse, 7, 8. From which Scripture, he showed first who was a blessed man,
and secondly wherein his blessedness did consist.

But whilst he was endeavoring to do the Lords work, the Parson of Merthur one
George Jones a man notoriously known in the Country, for many horid vices, (as
Whoredom, Drunkeness, Cheating and putting away his Wife) posted away in the
time of Sermon to Cardiff which was about 12 or 14 miles off, and it being at
the end of the Quarter Sessions there: he found but two of the Deputy
Lieutenants tenants in the Town fudling after their usual manner, Dr. B.
to whom the said Jones made complaint, and false information, nay if one of
those Deputy Lieutenants may be credited, he took a false Oath, to wit, that
the said Vavasor, and the Congregation to which he preached were met near 2
miles from that place, and many of them armed both which were false.

Upon this information, or deposition, Those two Deputy Lieutenants Mr. E. T.
(in O C. time Lord Thomas) and Dr. B. an Officer in the Bishops Court, g anted
their Order to Major I. C. Major of the Militia of the said County, to desire
and require him to take too his assistance military Officers and others, and to
apprehend, attach and being the said V. P. to his Majesty's Goal at Cardiff:
and the Keeper of the said Goal, and his Deputy, and Deputies are required to
receive and detain the said V. in safe and close custody, until such time he
should be delivered by due course of Law. But showing no particular ground at
all in the said Order or Commitment but Letters received from the Earl of
Carbury, Lord Lieutenant of North and South Wales: which Letter Dr. B. himself
confessed afterward, were written by him and bore date in the year 1665 and
made no mention (as others the D puty Lieutenants confess) of V. P. name: and
if they had, yet the said V. was at that time, and several years before a
Prisoner, and in Nov. 1667. was set at liberty by order from the King, and his
Council, to which order the Deputy Lieutenants ( viz. the Earl of Carbury's)
own hand is at. Let any unbiassed judicious Person (nay the worst Enemy) be
Judge of that illegallity and irrationality of this action of which it seems by
what follows, those two Deputy Lieutenants who committed the Prisoner, were
themselves suspicous, (especially the Dr. and therefore a more general meeting
of the Dep. L. was appointed at Cowbridge the 17. October. whither the Prisoner
was (by order from the Dr. and another of the Dep. L. commanded to come: where
were present six of the Deputy Lieutenants, and in the Room the Major C.
aforementioned with some other Gentlemen. The Prisoner being called in, Dr. B.
questioned him, who it seems was appointed to manage the Examination and
conferrence with the Prisoner, which take as follows, as near as can be
remembered in their very words: at least here is the sum of it impartially set
down.

Dr. B. Mr. Powel what business had you in this Country.


Mr P. Sir that had been proper to have been asked me before you had committed
me, but however I am not unwilling to give you an account thereof: Having
several occasions to go to Bath and Bristol, (and particularly an intent to
drink of a Well that is good a) against a Distemper, I am troubled with, viz.
the Stone- I came into Monmouth-shire, and so through some parts of this
County, intending to travel toward my own Habitation, and Sir I think I may as
well travel through the Country as another Traveller, being no Vagabond nor
other suspicious Person.


B. But were not you in Newport, and in other places in Monmouth shire
preaching.


P. Sir I perceive you are a Doctor of the civil Law, and there is a Maxim in
that Law, Nemo renetur Seipsum accusare, no man is bound to accuse himse f, but
Sir I am neither ashamed nor afraid to own what I did, for it was but what I am
commanded to do by my Lord, and Master Christ, to wit to preach his Gospel.


B. What authority have you to preach?


P. Sir I have sufficient authority.


B. From whom.


P. From God and Men.


B. Are you in Orders.


P. Sir if by Orders you mean to be ordained, and appointed to be a Minister, I
am.


B. From whom had you your ordinantion.


P. I have told you already from God and Men, and Sir you are none of my Bishop
to catechize and examine me, and therefore ask me such Questions as are ad^^em,
and which belongs to you to ask, and me to answer, and Sir since you do not, I
desire to know by what Law you proceed against me, so as to imprison and detain
me without any proof against me, or examination of me first.


B. Sir you have broken the Law by preaching without orders, and you came with
some 100 yea a 1000. Horsemen with you into Newport, and the Mayor of Newport
came hither to complain against you.


P. Its true I came to Newport and Preached there, but Sir that is not in your
County, nor under your Cognizance, yet I shall satisfy you that that Report
you heard was false, for there came with me about four or five Horsemen: and if
I preached it was not without the Mayors privity and consent, as several
credible Gentlemen will attest if need be.


B. But you had a Conventicle at Merthur, where were abundance of People, they
say a thousand at least, and some of them armd.


P. Sir we had a Christian meeting at Merthur, but no Conventicle: For Sir a
Conventicle is so named from convenire in malum, and your Law says it is a
Meeting together under pretense of Religious worship and service, to plot or
design evil against the King and his Government. But our Meeting was no such
meeting, for we did not pretend to worship God, but did it really, viz. pray;
preach and hear Gods word, and it appears ab effe^tu that there was no such
intention in our meeting, for after the exercise we all departed peaceably to
or toward our several Habitations, and whereas you say some were armed, your
information is not true, for there was not any that I saw, and I believe none
had any more then walking Staves or riding Rods in their hands.


B. But yet this was a Transgression of the Law?


P. I am sure it is no Transgression of the Law or command of Christ who
commands his Gospel to be preached to every Creature: neither Sir do I know,
this to be any transgression of the Law of the Land: if it be, it is and has
been for many Months tolerated generally throughout the Nation and I my self
has enjoyed my liberty both in London, and other Countries without
molestation: Notwithstanding I have been where Persons a^e as knowing and
zealous for the Laws as you are or can be, and I supposed I might as well have
done the like in this County, especialy hearing of the moderation of the
Gentlemen of these parts.


B. What we do, we do in reference to the Laws, we are sworn and bound to keep
them.


P. Sir if you do things with reference to the laws, you must be impartial
therein, and observe the rules of the Law, together with the true intent of it,
which is not to punish the good but the evil, and you would do well to put the
Laws in Execution against Drunkards, Swearers, Sabbath breakers, Whoremongers,
Papists, and other Offenders and Malefactors.


B. The Dr. being touched with his own guilt herein, he turns to the rest of
the Gentlemen, and says, Do you hear how he charges us with neglect of
executing the Laws, etc.


P. Sir I do not charge you, but I say you would do well to put the Laws in
execution against such transgressors as I have mentioned.


B. Do we not do it, and now the Dr. began to be angry.


P. Sir your own Consciences and the Country know what you do therein, but sir
I desire again to know what law do you charge the breach of it on me, and by
which you imprison me.


B. Then the Dr. called to his man to teach him a Satchel or Bag that had some
writings in it, which he drew out, and took first the Act made against
Conventicles by the present Parliament, and gave it Mr. Powel, and asked him
whether he had seen it.


B. Yes said Powel I have seen and considered it.


B. Well what say you to it?


P. First I answer as I did before, that our Meeting was no Conventicle nor a
private but a public Meeting. Secondly, That it is the opinion of diverse
learned Lawyers, that that Act is now out of date as seems by the last proviso
therein and I was upon that Act before a learned Lawyer, and Justice of Peace,
who understood it in that sense, and discharged me. But, Thirdly, Its apparent
you have not proceeded with me according to that Act, for you have apprehended
me in my lodging a day after, and not in the exercise. Again your Order and
Commitment was not as you were Justices of the Peace but Deputy Leiutenants,
and so your Officer Major Carn, when I desired to see his Authority, he laid
his hand upon his Sword and said that was his Authority. Again sir, be pleased
with the rest of you Gentlemen, to consider that my Commitment is not grounded
upon that Act, but upon the Lord Lieutenants Letters written several years
before, when I was in Prison elsewhere, and yet in November last, by Order from
the King and his Council (to which Order the Lord Lieutenants hand is) I was
set at liberty.


B. But we did not know that.


P. Then sir I make it known unto you now.


B. But were you set at liberty in November last?


P. Yes sir that I was.


B. But had you no hand in the Plot in the No th.


P. No sir nor head neither, nor did I hear of it till a while after it was
discovered.


B. I am sure you were then charged with it.


P. So have I been with many other things that are false: but Gentlemen I
desire you to take notice how groundless that report was, by this instance. I
was committed Prisoner in the year 1660. and continued so ever since till
November 1667. in several Prisons, whereof the five last years in South sea
Castle near Portsmouth, and in the year that the Plot was, I was so sick that I
kept my bed most part of it, much liker to dye then to live, as the Governor
and other Gentlemen there can testify.


B. Then the Dr. gave Mr. Powel a Letter the King wrote to the Arch Bishop
containing direction how and what Doctrine Preachers, should preach, forbidding
to meddle with the doctrine of reprobation, Controversies, matters of
Government, etc. and asked Mr. Powel whether he saw that.


P. No sir I do not remember I saw it.


B. Then gave it to Mr. Powel to read, who after he had read it, returned it and
said,


P. Sir this Letter does not concern me but such Ministers as are settled in
Parishes, which the Bishops are to see they do accordingly, but I am none of
them, yet there is something in the Letter which makes for me, because I do in
my preaching preach the Gospel and against sin, and do not meddle with
controversies as that letter directs.


B. But here is another Letter upon that written by my Lord Chancellor.


P. What Lord Chancellor do you mean, Chancellor Hide.


B. Yes.


P. Sir I shall not show that respect as to receive, much less to read the
letter of one that would have betrayed his King and Country, and I wonder how
you dare now mention his name, thereupon some of the other Deputy Lieutenants
smild and covered their faces.


B. What say you of the Canons of the Church, the 20th. Canon forbids men to
Preach without O ders.


P. Sir what have I to do with your Canons, which are not stablished by Law:
you know sir, that it is the opinion of many learned Gentlemen of the long Robe
as well as others, that your not only Canons are without force, but that your
Episcopal Courts have no power to impose Oaths upon persons.


B But there are others of a contrary opinion.


P. Then sir let that matter rest, till it be determined by wiser men then we
are.


B. But what say you of the Doctrine of the Church of England, contained in the
39. Articles.


P. For the Articles that concern the Doctrine of the Church (mark I say the
Articles that concern the Doctrine thereof, I say not the Discipline) I hold
them to be generally sound and consonant to Gods word: and I am more for them
then most of your Praelatical and Parochial Ministers who are Arminians in
their principles and Preachings: which Doctrine is contrary to the Doctrine
contained in the Articles of the Church of England.


B. When were you at the public worship.


P. What public worship do you mean sir? The public worship of God?


B. The public worship of the Church?


P. What sir, do you make a difference between the public worship of God, and
the public worship of the Church. If by public worship, you mean Prayer,
Preaching, reading the Scriptures, singing of Psalms, etc. It is my practice to
be as often as I can at that worship. Here again the Dr. was at a stand, and
replied not: but some other few passages past between them, which the Relator
remembers not. Then the chiefest of the Deputy Lieutenants, S. E. M. very
civilly and mildly desired Mr. Powel to withdraw, and they would consider of it.


P. Sir says he I will, but first I crave leave to speak a few words, which I
humbly leave to your consideration, I am (though your Countreyman, yet) a
stranger, having been not above twice before in your County, and at this time
but one day only, and that in tran^i^n. I have been taken in my lodging, and
committed Prisoner without any just ground that has been yet objected: There
is neither Sedition Treason nor any other crime laid to my charge, the ground
specified in my commitment I have already showed to be a mistake which I have
rectifyed. All that is pretended against me, is that I preached a Sermon in
Merthur in this County to a poor willing people, against which Sermon there is
no exception made: and seeing it is so, I desire you to consider, and seriously
to weigh whether you do well to imprison me upon such account especially, since
there is such a general tolleration (at least connivance) of such things now
throughout the Nation: and I my self have found it in diverse other places, and
having heard of the moderation of you Gentlemen of this County. I was emboldned
so much the more to preach the word of the Lord, hoping to have furtherance,
and no hindrance from you therein. I bless God I am not ashamed of what I have
done, nor afraid of men, having looked so many men, and Death in the Face so
often, and therefore the will of the Lord be done concerning me: though I would
desire you to consider the words of Christ, with the same Judgment ye judge,
ye shall be judged, and be sure as the Apostle says That he that shows
judgment without mercy, shall find judgment without mercy.


B. If you think we wrong you you may remove your self by a Habeas Corpus.


P. Doctor when you have done your worst (as you do) I must do my best: but I
wish the Lord may forgive you, the inury you do me and others. Gentlemen if I
have said any thing amiss or provoking, being to speak to things suddenly, I
would desire that that may be no cause of any other proceedings, then you
intended, but look into the true Cause of my sufferings, and so he went out.

The Deputy Lieutenants had some hot discourse before Dinner about it, and it
was supposed the most part of them were inclining to release the Prisoner, but
as it seems some false Report was sent out of Monmouth-shire, against him,
concerning some words, that the Prisoner should speak a Sermon in that County,
which being afterward enquired into, was found false, and Dr. B. himself. said
if that Apostate that raised the Report were in his County he would bind him to
his good behavior. Yet thot with the earnest instigation of Dr. B. prevailed
so far as that when the Prisoner was called again before Sunset or a little
before: most of the Gentlemen were moved against the Prisoner, some judged
because the Dr. misrepresented a Pass^age of the Prisoner mentioned before and
spoken only to the Dr. viz That when he had done his worst, he told them the
Prisoner bid them all do their worst, which he; neither said nor intended it.
But others supposed, that Wine had prevailed so far over some of them (as too
o^ t it does) as to make them now speak for the first, and fastest, yea at once
who had not a word in the Morning to say. And thus in a great confusion the
Prisoner with threatening words and strict charge given to the Tailor by some,
he was again remanded and recommited: and in his going forth he told them
Gentlemen what you have done I submit willingly to, being no more troubled at
it then at this Hair, and so drew one of his Hairs. and my Prayer shall be for
you that you may find more mercy from ^od, then I have found from you. But that
God that I serve is able to save me,

This meeting being ended they put the Prisoner under a new Commitment, which
was drawn before by the Doctor or his Clerk as some saw it in the next Room in
a Statute Book.

Hereupon the Deputy Lieutenants it seems writ a Letter to the Lord Lieutenant
Ca^bury to signify what they had done and they received an Answer from him to
render them thanks, and to detain the Prisoner till further order. Thereupon in
one day viz. 30th. of October there were two new Commitments again upon the
Prisoner. One subscribed by two of the Deputy Lieutenants commanding the
Prisoner to be kept in safe custody till furorders from the Deputy Lieutenants
of this County, who subscribed the Warrant of his ^ommitment at ^owbridge. The
other Commitment by five to keep him in safe custody till they did receive
further orders from their Lord Lieutenant to both these Commitments Dr. B. hand
is set, both bearing the same date, as was said before viz. October 30. 1668.


Upon the 8th day of November 1668. Sir John A. Knight. and Dr. W.B. Esquire. came to
the Angel in C. and sent for Mr. Vavasor Powel to come to them which he did
accordingly.
Dr. B. WE have received an Order from the Council to tender you the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy.


Mr. P. Gentlemen, if that be your business, I pray you let me return to my
Prison again, for I am committed already, and I think it is neither regular nor
usual to tender them to a Prisoner; you should either before my commitment,
especially before presentment or indictment against me have done it, or upon
examination, or have convicted and indicted me first; and then tendered them,
and so the Prisoner went toward the door, intending to return to the Prison.


B. Thereupon Dr. B. went between him and the door, and said, nay stay Sir, you
shall not be gone, and so called for some of the under Officers, or Deputies.


P. Sir, though I might have continued in my Prison and not have come hither,
and may yet choose whetheir I stay or no, yet as I was willing to show that
respect to you in coming, so to express my readiness to answer any thing that
may be objected against me, I do not mean to depart without leave.


B. Come Mr. Powel, Will you take the Oaths, for we have an Order from some of
the Council, and my Lord Keeper to tender them to you.


P. Sir, I desire to see your Order.


Sir J. A. Let him see it.


B. No he shall not see it.


P. Sir, you may choose, but if you have such an Order, it would be civility in
you, and some satisfaction to me to let me see it.


B. We might have tendered the Oaths to you at the last meeting.


P. For it had been more proper for you to have, done it before you had
committed me then either [which was after my first commitment several days,]
then or now: But Dr. you have at first dealt very illegally by committing me
without cause or color of cause, and so run your self into a Praemunire, and
ever since your work has been to seek to set things aright, but all the while
you do wrong me and the truth, the Lord forgive you.


B. If I have wronged you I have an estate to answer, question me for it.


P. Though that I might do so, yet I bless God I am a Christian, and my
principle, as well as my practice, is rather to forgive wrongs, then otherwise:
leaving and committing my cause to God who will plead it, but D^ctor you are so
transported with zeal against those people called Phanaticks, that you forget
Law and Reason.


B. Wherein?


P. You forget Law when you commit a man before any examination either of him,
or against him: And it is against reason to commit a man to Prison by virtue of
Letters from the Lord Lieutenant, which were dated four or five years ago, when
I was elsewhere a Prisoner, and discharged within the year by an Order from the
King and his Council, to which Order the Lord Lieutenant own hand is,


B. The Letters were not of so long a date, for they were dated in the year
1665.


P. Mark that Gentlemen (said Powel) to them that stood by, he himself
confessed those Letters were written in the year 1665. which is at least two
years ago, and my order does plainly show (bearing date Dec. 1667) that I was
set at liberty long after the date of those Letters.


B. Well, will you take the Oaths, yea, or no, for we must return your answer.


P. I pray you let me know whether my liberty does depend upon the taking or
refusing of them.


Sir John A. and the Town Clark would persuade Mr. P. to take the Oaths, and
then he should know.


P. If I may not know that, I may as well forbear declaring whither I will take
them or no, since I am a Prisoner already.


B. But you must give a positive answer whether you will or will not take them,
therefore let us know what your answer is?


P. Since you do press me so much to give my answer, my answer then is this,
That I have taken them already, and I conceive I am not bound by the Law to
take them again, that is my answer.


Then Sir John A. made some sign to the Doctor to show Mr. Powel the Oaths in
the Statute Book: and so the Doctor sought them but could not readily find
them, then the Town Clerk went to help him, and one of them said the Oath of
Allegiance was in decimo sexto Jacobi, the other Doctor said it was in another
place, but neither of them knew where.


P. Gentlemen, Are you so unacquainted with the Law? the Oath of Allegiance
which you look for is in Tertio Jacobi, and there you find the occasion of it,
which was the Gunpowder Treason: and that Oath was never intended so much
against Protestants (though Non conformists) as against Popish Recusants, and
yet which of them have it imposed upon them, or are imprisoned for want of
taking it.


B. Well, will you take them, here they are, and we tender them to you?


P. I have answered you already and need give you no other: Yet I will say
more. That if you can prove that you have power to tender both the Oaths to me,
and that I am in either of those capacities, that the Statutes primo or quinto
Eliz. mentions, I will take them, but I know you cannot.


A. and B. Well, will you put that answer under your hand, and so tender Mr. P.
paper.


P. I am free to put it under my hand, but you may if you please return my
answer, if you must return any at all. But Sir John A. and the Doctor could not
agree in that particular how Mr. P. should do it.


B. But we have power to give that Oath to you.


P. Sir, if you have, I say again, I will take it, therefore peruse that
Statute; so Sir John A. looked into the Statute, and spoke somewhat to the
Doctor privately, which seems by the Drs. answer to him was, that they could
not. For the Drs. answer was, but we can.


B. But why are not you bound as well as others.


P. Because that the Statute directs the Oath to be taken by Officers
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and such as were to receive public profits, and
other persons mentioned both in that and the other Statute of the Fifth of
Elizabeth, and though I may be looked upon as an Ecclesiastical person, yet it
appertains to the Bishop to give it me.


B. Are you a Minister Ordained?


P. I have heretofore told you I was.


B But by whom?


P. Did not I tell you by God and Men.


B. I, you mean the man Christ.


P. If I did so, my meaning is right, but I mean by such men as he has
appointed.


B. Come, come, your Conscience tells you, that you care for a Bishop no more
then another man.


P. That's true enough, I care for him and you alike, yet of the two I respect
you more being a Civil Magistrate.


B. But will you take them, answer yea or no, and veral other words the Doctor
urged Mr. Powel again.


P. If you must have yet a more positive answer, since you will neither let me
see the order requiring me to take them, nor show me that the Law which ought
to be your rule, does impose them upon me: though I do not absolutely and
peremptorily refuse them, yet I will not take them now.


B. Here Dr. B. interrupted Mr. P. in his speech, and cried out to some present
to bear witness that he said he would not take them: thereupon one in the room
said I do bear witness.


P. Sir, (said he to the Dr.) you deal very dis-ingeniously to catch at
advantages, when none are given, and to abstract and separate my words: and
Sir, said he, to the other man you are also very uncivil to bear witness before
you hear me out: and so Mr. Powel turned him to Sir John A. and said, I desire
you would both hear, and observe what I say, and intended to say, but that I
was interrupted* That since I have taken the Oaths already, and that I shall
not know upon what terms I am to take them again, and the Law requires it not
from me, I will not take them at this time, but will take further time to
consider thereof.


B. Thereupon the Dr. went down stairs, and so Mr. Powel departed, and as he
was going with the Deputy Keeper, the Doctor bid the Keeper keep him safe, etc.


Mr. Powel (turning to the Doctor,) I would have you know, that neither my
principles, nor cause, put any necessity upon me to make an escape, but I hope
I shall be able to stand when you fall, meaning in the great judgment, when
and where the wicked shall not stand. Psalm. 1.6. and so went to his prison
again.


A Brief and true Relation of a third Convention of Mr. Vavasor Powell, and the
transactions between some of the Justices of the Peace of the County of
Glamorgan, and him at the Town hall in Cardieffe, the 13 of Jan. 1668.
THe 13. of January, 1668. in the afternoon the Jailer was commanded to bring
the aforesaid Prisoner to the Bar, before Sir John A. Knight. H. H. and Dr. W. B.
Esqs. Sir John A. spoke to the Prisoner as follows, or to this purpose.

Sir John A. Mr. Powel you have by Order of the Council had the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy already tendered unto you, and now we tender them
again unto you, will you take them?


Mr. P. Sir I desire leave of you and the rest of the Bench, as necessarily
previous, and antecedaneous to my answer, that I may be satisfied first in two
questions.

1. Que. In what capacity does the Law and you look upon one, whether as a
public or private person? If as a private person (as I suppose it and you do)
then one of these Oaths by Law cannot be tendered to me.

2. Quest. What tender do you count this, whether a first or second? I have
just cause to propound this Question: for one of you that sits upon that Bench,
as I am credibly informed from one that has seen his Letter, has informed the
Council or some of them, that the Oaths have been tendered twice before now to
me, and that I refused them: with other things as false; so that my taking of
them now would be but as the Poet said Clipeum post vulnera sumo. To take the
Buckler after I am wounded. Hereupon the Dr. knowing himself to be guilty, did
in great fury break out into several hasty expressions, all tending to silence
the prisoner, and commanding that the Oaths be showed him, and if he would not
take them, let the Jailer take him.


P. Sir, it do h not become a man of your learning or place to be so angry, and
the wrath of man does not eff ct the righteousness of God; and Sir, if you will
be Dr. Saul to persecute the truth and people of G d as you do I hope I shall
be as Deacon Stephen to st^nd up for them: and Dr. if you please, let you and
I, either according to Law or Reason discourse this point; and let the Bench
and Court judge thereof.

Hereupon Dr. B. went away in a great fury (to fetch a Lawyer as they said, to
answer him) in omuch that some of the people called him D^ctor Fury which was
afterward fathered upon Mr. Powel, though he did not say so.


Sir John A. and the other two Justices moved Mr. Powel to take the Oaths again.


P. I beseech you Gentlemen, give me leave to speak a few words first, and then
I shall directly answer you, whether I can and will take them, yea or no,
(there being a little silence he went on) and said These two Oath, were framed
and imposed (as I suppose you well know) the first of them, viz. the Oath of
Supremacy, in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, immediately after that hot
persecution of the Papists in Queen Marys days, and it was no doubt intended
chiefly against Papists, and to be a test and trial of all persons that were
admitted into, or continued in any public Offices, either Temporal or
Ecclesiastical. The other Oath of Allegiance or Obedience, was imposed upon
that notorious act, the Gunpowder Treason, and the substance of both of them is
to acknowledge the Queen or King of England to be the Supreme Magistrates of
these Kingdoms, and that no Prince or Foreign power had any right thereto: nor
the Pope nor any other had power to dissolve or discharge any subject from
their Obedience to the Queen or King, and this power I do freely and heartily
acknowledge, and so far I do here declare, if it gives you satisfaction.

Justices said no, you must take the Oaths as they are tendered.


P. Why may not that satisfy you which satisfied the King and his Council, for
in my Case stated and presented to them the last day before my discharge, I did
signify that I was not free in Conscience to take those Oaths in the way they
are now tendered, and yet they were pleased to grant me their Order for my
discharge.


Sir I. A. But they did not know you refused the Oaths.


P. Yes Sir, but they did, as you may see, if you please look upon this Copy of
my Case which I presented to them, which I desire you to read, and their Order
for my discharge, and so Mr. Powel rendered them the Copy, which they refused
to receive.


Justices, But we have an Order from the King and his Council, requiring you to
take the Oaths.


P. Sir That Order was procured by false information against me to the Council
(which is punishable by the Law) but I pray you let me see the Order, that I
may know what it requires, and comport my self with their command as far as I
can.


Sir I. A. No, we will not show it.


P. Sir John, the last time I was before you, you would have had the Dr. to
show it, and why should you now be against it?


I. B. Tender them unto him, the Oath of Allegiance first, or words to that
purpose.


P. Do you require no more then the taking of that, and shall the taking
thereof be (as the Apostle says of an Oath) an end of the strife?


Justices, Do you take that first, and you shall know that afterward.


P. Does my liberty depend upon taking or not taking it.


Just. Do you take it.


P. Gentlemen, you deal very strictly and severely, and this is summum jus,
which is summa injuria; for as our learned Casuists and Divines, as Dr.
Saunderson, Mr. Perkins, and others say, that in taking of an Oath men must
take them with respect to the Glory of God, a man's own advantage, or the good
of another, but as you tender this, I cannot see how I do either if I take
them, for this Ordinance of God is made a snare to me, for I am as a Martyr
said, imprisoned without cause, and now this is made as a cause of detaining me
there. Be pleased Gentlemen to give me leave without offense to put you in mind
of some words in your own Commission, several times reiterated, Thas you are to
execute Justice, secundum legem, and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae,
according to the Law and Custom of England. The Law of England does not require
that men should take the Oaths as often as every Magistrate pleases to tender
them, for as the L. Cook that was the glory of the Law, shows in the 7th. book
of his Reports in the Case of Postnati, Calvin's Case, a man is bound to take
the Oath of Allegiance but once in his life time. And for the custom of England
it is not usual to imprison a man without cause (as I have been) or to impose
upon men Oaths, when and whilst they are prisoners, unless they desire their
liberty upon the account of taking them.

Dr. B. Upon this Dr. B. came in again in a great rage, and said (as some
report) why do you suffer him to bark at the Bench, but that neither Mr. P. nor
several others present did hear) why do you suffer him to speak, and show
contempt to his Majesty, he has said that neither the King, nor his Council
had power to tender him the Oath.


P. Sir, I wonder how you dare speak so and wrong me publicly before the Bench
and the Court, I appeal to them, or either of them, or any here present whether
I spoke any such thing, or any word tending thereto, at which all were silent,
knowing it was a false accusation, as one of the Officers of the Court, (no
friend to Mr. P.) afterward confessed, but wished he had spoken it, that they
might have had such an advantage against him. But hereupon the Dr. again went
out in a fume, and came in no more.


Justices. The three Justices remaining, prayed Mr. Powel again to take them,
and would suffer him no longer to speak, but bid one of the ^fficers of the
Court show him the Oaths, and give him the Bible, bidding him lay his hand on
the Bible.


P. To what end do you tender me the Bible? I am not to swear by the Bible, but
by God himself, and in that manner which his word directs.


Justices, The Law requires you should do it in this manner.


P. What Law?


Justice H. The Law of the Land.


P. Which Law of the Land? there is the Common Law, the Statute Law, and the
Civil Law, I have not read that by any of these the laying of the hand on a
Book is absolutely required, or essential to an Oath.


Just. H. Yea, the Law does require it.


P. I pray you Sir what Law? be pleased to instance in these acts, by which the
Oaths are enjoined, there is no such ceremony required, nor I suppose by
another law; to this neither he nor any other replied, only another Mr. H.
said, but

Another Justice H. It is the common practice, and why should you differ from
it?


P. Sir Common practice is not my Rule, but what is grounded upon Gods word, or
good Reason, I shall observe.

Sir I. A. Come, let us trouble our selves no further he refuses to take them,
or words to that purpose.


P. I desire all the Court to take notice that I have not refused to take the
Oaths, but I having taken them already, am not bound to take them again, and
that they are not tendered me according to Law.


Just. Then the Justices commanded the Jailer to take the Prisoner away.


P. Gentlemen, since I may not be further heard about the Oaths, I desire to be
heard in somewhat else, (with much ado they granted so much leave) will you be
pleased to take sufficient Bail till the next Sessions?


Just. The Justices were silent, the Jailer made answer publicly, no.


P. Sir, Are you one of the Judges of the Court that your No should stand? But
the Justice did not give him the least check for his sawciness. Then P. said
further, Gentlemen, I have been near eight years a Prisoner, and in 13 Prisons,
and yet in all these I have not received so much incivility as from this man
Mr. Jailer, and therefore I desire liberty to take a private Chamber in the
Town, giving security for my true Imprysonment, but to this the Justices
returned no answer, but commanded the Jailer to take the Prisoner away, which
was done accordingly, and returned to Prison again.


About three months after this, a friend in London got a Habeas Corpus to
remove him to the Common Pleas Bar, which the Sheriff refused to obey, then
came an Alias under Penalty of a 100 l. upon which they sent him up: but would
not let him know of his journey before hand. But about 8 a clock one night the
Under Sheriff came to give him notice to be gone in half an hour, and so took
him with a Guard 8 miles that night, being the 16 of the 8 month, 1669. and
brought him to Westminster to the Common Pleas Bar the 22 of the same. Where
upon the Examination of the Return, it was found illegal, but S. M. their
Council pleaded he had nor had time to view it, and desired time till next day,
which the Judges granted. Thereupon Mr. P. moved the Court to take bail then,
and discharge his guard which had been granted, but that S. M. said, No my
Lord, then he will go preach, to which the Prisoner replied, that it was as
lawful for him to preach as for him to talk there at the Bar. The next day he
was brought into the Court again, and the return was again argued, the Prisoner
having the liberty to open his Case himself, and though the return was by all
the Judges judged false and illegal, yet was Mr. Powel committed to the Fleet
Prison by the Court, where he remained a Prisoner from the 24 of the 3 mon.
1669. till he was discharged by death the 27 of the 8 mon. 1670.

Of his Sickness and Death.
THe 25 of the 7th month, being the first day of the week, he preached
forenoon and afternoon, many being admitted to hear him, and that with much
life and zeal. First, from those words John 6.37. All that the Father gives me
shall come to me, and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. And in
the afternoon from Hosea 14. latter part of the 8. verse. I am like a green
Firr Tree, from me is thy fruit found. These were the last Sermons he ever
preached. At night, he was weary as he used to be, and took some refreshing
after his exercise, and rested well that night: But in the morning after he was
up found himself not well, his Stomach oppressed with inclinations to vomit and
purge, and as his manner was did by drinking plain posset, provoke himself to
Vomit, and so went to his Study as aforetime. In the afternoon came a friend
who desired he would meet him at London the 5th day after about some business
of concernment, which he promised to do: The next day and day following his
distemper increasing, some friends judged it inconvenient for him to go to
London as he promised, and therefore dissuaded him what they could but in as
much as it was to do some service for some of the Lords people, he said he
would trust God with his preservation; and upon the 5th day went accordingly by
water to the Temple stairs wrapped warm, but upon landing found stimself unable
well to go, which constrained him to take Coach, and that shook him very much,
but came to his friends house and dispatched his business. That night he took
one of Mathews pills, and slept very well, but in the morning after he was up,
and had brohe his fast, fell very sick and vomited, yet afterward somewhat
better again. He then wrote a Letter to a friend in Wales, telling him he was
not well, and that that might be the last Letter he should ever write to him,
and so it was. He returned that evening to his prison, and upon his going to
bed found his distemper to grow upon him, which so continued the next day as to
cause him to keep his bed the next morning being the Lords day several friends
came to see him, and would needs send for a Doctor, hough he was not very free
thereto. When the Dr. came he appoints him several things and read his bill to
him, which he approved on, but told the Doctor that he had no medicine for
Mortality, saying his days were accomplished, his Gripes and Bloody Flux
increased violently upon him, notwithstanding all admi^ostrations to him, and
very little check for ten days usuld be given to it, though variety of means
were used, and that such as had been blessed to help others in his Case.
Afterward the Blood staid, but his Flux remained, and was for some time so
moderate, that there was great hopes of his recovery, though himself said
otherwise all along, the Dr. ordered he should be kept from speaking much, but
so zealously was he affected for the glory of God, and with the love of Christ,
that neither his pains, bodily weakness, tender advice of friends, could
possibly restrain him; but would notwithstanding all, brake forth into high and
heavenly praises, sometimes by prayer, sometimes by singing. His patience under
all his pains was very great, when there came one of his greatest gripes he
would bless God, and say he would not entertain one bad thought of God for all
the World. The sight of the pardon of sin and reconciliation with God was so
clear and without interruption, even to the last, that it was as a fire in his
bosom till he spoke of it, and very hardly would he be restrained at any time,
and when he had spent his strength in speaking, then would he compose himself
to get a little more strength, that he might go on to speak further of the
Grace of God toward him, and to give seasonable advice to all about him, and
so continued till God took away his strength and speech from him. The Thrush
growing so sore in his mouth, that he could speak no more to be understood, and
yet then by signs would signify that all was well within. He enjoyed his
understanding to the last, which he said he had begged of God. His remembrance
of Gods people and prayers for them was very frequent, and particularly his
Christian friends in Wales, earnestly desired the Saints to be of one mind.
Some that were frequent with him in his sickness, say that such an earnest of
glory their eyes and ears never heard nor saw before. He kept his bed a month
within one day, and so finished his course service and suffering at four of the
clock in the afternoon, upon the 27 of the 8 month, called October, 1670. at
Karoone house the then Fleet Prison in Lambeth.

Some few of his Deathbed expressions, collected by some friends that were
about him.
IF the Devil should tell me I am proud, or unfruitful, or unthankful, I have
cause to believe him, for I can charge my self with a great deal, but if he
should tell me I have no grace, and am not Christ's, I should not believe him.

He did bless God that he had not withdrawn the light of his Countenance, nor
left him to be buffeted by Satan, nor to the Love of any thing in the world, to
make him desire to live here any longer.

Speaking of the Martyrdom of the Saints, said, I had rather have dyed for
Christ then for sin.

He said three things I did design in the whole course of my life, viz. To be
clear in the Righteousness of Christ, for justification, that I might exalt the
grace of God to poor sinners, and admire it to my own soul.

Secondly, To be sincerely to God what I did seem to be to man, that I might be
upright in what I did, and really that which I did profess.

Thirdly, That I might walk answerably to the Love and Grace of God, which he
has bestowed upon me, and added. The two first I have much endeavored, but
the last I have been very short in.

My principle was to promote holiness, love, and union among the Saints, and
have sometimes denied my self in my own judgment, that so I might have an
opportunity to promote other truths among different Brethren.

These 30 years since God wrought upon me, I do not remember that ever I had
one hard thought of God, nor repent me that I did make a Profession nor
progress in the ways of God, notwithstanding all my reproaches and sufferings.
But have had much cause to wonder at Jesus Christ, that has called me an
undone sinner, me an undone sinner, and counted me, me a vile wretch, worthy to
suffer any thing for his names sake; and this he did speak with so much
brokenness, and spend his strength so much that those Christian friends that
were near unto him, did entreat him to compose himself if it might please God
to give him a little rest, and at another time to this purpose.

I have been much considering, since I was upon my sick bed, how the Lord
Jesus, whilst upon the Earth, carried it to poor sinners, and am much satisfied
that it is a great fault among Churches and Christians that they have no more
pity and bowels to poor sinners, and use no more means to gain them unto Jesus
Christ; further adding, that Jesus Christ had such compassion to sinners when
he was upon the Earth, that therefore he was called a friend of Publicans and
Sinners.

After some time of silence, he breaks out in these words: Oh now I find more
in that word then ever I did, they overcame by the blood of the Lamb. Though
God has given me a very tender, good, and affectionate Wife, yet I do not
grudge to part with her to go to Jesus Christ.

When a Christian friend speaking to him, said, that now he had a great deal to
take comfort in, both in what he had suffered for Christ, so and in that he had
been an instrument to convert so many souls to Christ. He answered, that his
Religion now was in the Righteousness of Christ, Sincerity, and Uprightness.

He did bless God that it was not now with him as it was in South-Sea-Castle,
because there he had no friends about him to do any service of love for him as
now he had.

When there was some hopes of recovery, his wife asking him whether he would be
willing to stay with us if God should restore him, answered, I am willing to do
what God will have me, but yet unwilling to come back again into the storm.

When his friends endeavored to keep him from speaking, he said, you restrain
me, and will not let me speak for Jesus Christ, and then would weep and grieve
that he was not permitted to speak as much as he would.

When he spoke of sufferings to come, he gave two words of advice, to the
Saints, and those that were round about him; as,

1. To keep all things clear betwixt Christ and the Soul, and Christ and
Conscience, that there might be no sin to offend Christ, neither in the guilt,
nor filth of it, nor no grace counterfeited nor corrupted to provoked Christ,
nothing espoused to steal away the affections from Christ, but that the soul
stand clear in its faith and love, and every grace, and stand loose from
duties, ordinances, nearest and dearest relations, that so there might be no
cause of difference betwixt Christ and the soul.

That Christians should be faithful to the death; for he that indureth to the
end, the same shall be saved.

Another time speaking to the Dr. returning him thanks for his Cure, told him,
Contra vim mortis, non est medicamen in hortis.

Another time, after he had been composing himself to rest, and had slept
awhile, he awoke, and said, He had been with Paul, Harrison, Craddocke, and
others of the Saints deceased. At another time, that he was brought into a fine
pleasant Garden, where he saw a fine Mansion house on one side of it, into
which he was to go; but he was had on the other side of the Garden, where there
was a thing like a Coffin made up with deal Boards, from whence he was
afterward brought to the Mansion house; was satisfied in his dream, that that
was his passage through the grave to glory, and did then again say, that all
would be in vain that was done to him; however did assure those that were
concerned about him, that their Labors should not be in vain, but God would
remember it as a kindness done to himself.

Another time he expresses himself after this manner. Sad times will come, and
many of them that stand now will fall, some shall be put into Prison, some
impover^shed, some banished, and some put to death, and the Saints scattered,
so that their differences shall be done away; when they are in their greatest
distresses, then the Lord will appear for them, and will save them with a
mighty hand.

In his sickness, he beged of God that he would please to continue his
understanding, in which God did graciously answer him, even to the last, to the
admiration of the Dr.

Did very often and very earnestly press the Saints to be of one heart, and to
lay aside all their differences.

About praying for Magistrates, said, I have been blamed and judged by some
Christian friends that differ from me, for that liberty I took, as if I had
backsliden from my former Principles, which the Lord knows I did not out of
fear, but according to my Principles and Conscience, yet do now see that in
some things therein I was right, and in some things wrong; To pray for them as
sinners, that God would show them their sins, therein I was right, but since
such a time (naming the time) God has showed me, that prayer should not be put
up for them as Magistrates, and named two Scriptures.

On the Death of Mr. VAVASOR POWELL.
HEre weary Nature, and unwearied Grace,
By ways unlike have finished their race.
For under their Directors eye they tend,
By diverse means to the same blessed end.
Nature by her decays accomplished is,
And Grace by thriving brings the soul to bliss;
Trouble adds wings to both, and speeds their way
Unto Eternal Rest, where is perfect Day.
This was thy prayer, to hastens whose desire,
Grace, Nature, Trouble, do in one conspire:
Nature impaired by Sufferings, hastes t'entomb,
Her wearied Limbs in her great Mothers womb:
And grace grown near to Glory, brooks no more
A distance from her fullness and her store;
So have I seen a pleasant stream to glide
With gentle calmness to the Ocean side;
Adorning in his way the neighboring Fields,
With the rich fruits which his free bounty yields.
When boisterous Winds and Storms assault with force,
His peaceful streams, envying his work and course:
As him forbidding any more to bring
Himself an homage to his Lord and King;
With whose rebuke provoked, he summons wide
The strength of's Waves for to control their pride;
And heightened by opposing presses on
With violence unto his Ocean.
Such was thy course, seeking even from thy Youth,
The eternal Spring of Goodness and of Truth.
Refreshing others with the influence
Of Crystal Living streams, derived from thence:
When wrathful Tempests unprovoked did swell,
Striving thy laboring mind for to repel
From her just course, this made thee speed thy love
To Freedom, Rest, and what is else above:
There full repose, light, truth and peace do bless
Thy welcome Soul with sacred happiness.
Nature now faints no more, nor does Grace grow,
And Trouble's left behind to us below.
Upon the Death of that painful and Laborious Servant of Jesus Christ in the
Work of the Gospel, Vavasor Powell, who died the 27 of the 8 month, 1670.
LIke to the ripened shock of Corn that is brought
Into the Barn, or like a Shipfull fr ught
With Indians riches, which through raging Seas
Ariveth at the Harbor of its ease,
So Vavasor was gathered into rest,
With Heavenly treasure, being greatly blessed.
A tried faith more precious then the Gold
That Ophir yielded Solomon of old,
A patience wrought by Bonds, to such degree,
As made him triumph over misery,
Heavenly experiences, from patience gained,
With such a hope, as makes not ashamed,
Did freight this Pinnace, which with furled Sail,
Safely is entered now within the Vail,
Where all the Saints shall Land, Though Billows swell,
Opening their Jaws to swallow up like hell.
Yet know proud waves, although you rage and rore
You shall but break your selves against the shore,
Then be encouraged you that spread your sails,
On foaming furyes, blown with various gales,
To make a happy Port you need not fear
Whilst you with Vavasor your course shall steer.
If the Olempick Agonists did fight
And run, and wrestle; with their utmost might.
If they did think it of so great renown,
To win the prize, though but a withering Crown,
If they did streine and strive with all their powers,
To wreath their heads about with fading Flowers,
Then surely Heaven, and a Crown of Life,
Is worthy of a Christians greatest strife.
Thus Powell thought, and therefore did engage
Against Sin, and Satan, and a wicked age.
And like a Rock that is assaulted by
Impetuous waves, yet lifts his head on high
As unconcerned, and makes his standing good,
Against the batteries of the Ocean Flood,
So Powel helped by an Almighty hand,
In perils, prisons, deaths, unmoved did stand
In the Lords work, until he gave that call,
Come up to Heaven, and reap the fruit of all.
An Achrostick upon his dear deceased friend. Mr. Vavasor Powell.
V ain World, to undermine unto thy shame,
A ll those choice Pillars that bear up thy frame,
V nto approaching Christ, when they shall fly,
A ll thy proud p^mp in fiery flames shall lie,
S lighted Ambassadors, when called home,
O ften bespeaks great evils for to come,
R epent then persecutors, and be kind,
P owell has prayed that you may pardon find,
O h now these offers of soul saving grace,
W hich he from Christ proclaimed, do you embrace.
E ntred he is to glory, through that way,
L aid open by him, whilst he here did stay,
L ove thou the Paths of Life, in this your day.
An Elogy on the Death of the Precious and Faithful Servant of the Lord, Mr.
Vavasor Powell, who dyed in Prison for the Testimony of Jesus Christ.
TRiumphant holy soul at last set free
By Order from above, to Liberty,
Most Glorious, from Bonds of 10 years date
In closest Prisons, Castles desolate.
In Jeremiahs Dungeon, and with John,
In Patmos Isle Brother Companion.
The Accusers charge the same pretended crimes
For witnessing against Sodom's sins o'th times,
For the word of God, and Testimony true,
To Jesus Christ, and what Obedience due.
To his blessed Gospel, Kingdom, Government,
Over Saints and Nations in establishment.
England with Sackcloth gird thy self, lament
And howl, who stonest zealous Prophets; sent
To call and warn, and witnesses do kill,
To stop their mouths, thy measure great to fill,
Thy day is come, year of thy visitation
Thy bloody sins presage thy desolation.
Lament benighted Wales, thy Prophets gone
Who over thee used to weeps and still bemoan
Thy sins and souls, when willing hearts did fly
(Like Doves to th'windows) to's blessed ministry
Cry out, my Father Isreal's Chariots gone,
The Horsemen also, and l'me left alone.
Where is Eliahs God? Oh cry let some
A double portion of his spirit come
On mournful watchmen left, whose souls do give,
The Lord no rest, till Zions glory live,
Here is the patience of the Saints that keep
Christ's testimony till they fall asleep.
Victorious soul, hence from thy labors rest;
Thou dying for, and in the Lord art blessed,
Thy soul made up of love, and not confined
To narrow judgment, but with Saints combined,
As Saints in tender, sweet Communion,
Still mourning after all their Union.
Under the Altar now thy blood does cry
How long? till Christ arise to victory.
Mean while white Robes are given thee until
The last sore Plagues the Nations shall fill.
And Saints with Crowns return, dust raised again,
To Judge the world with Christ, and with him reign.
VAVASOR POWELL. Anagram. Up al leau' Sorrow.
V nto thy longed for Jesus thou art fled,
A ll Saints the while lamenting thou art dead,
V pon them yet methinks I hear thee call,
A Las why weep you I am out of thrall?
S ouls where I am do Hallelujas sing,
O have and follow to attend your King.
R est thou sweet soul in thy eternal joys.
P oor mortals what have we but transient toys?
O nce thou did live to Preach thy Saviors grace,
W ell now rewarded with his glorious face.
E nvy did haste thy joys, create our woe.
L ord pardon them that know not what they do,
L et us turn grief to care, lift up our hearts,
Thou art secure, may we so act our parts.
An Epitaph.
A Corpse lies here whose soul's above
Debaucht men's hate, devout men's love,
The Welsh men's friend, the maul of sin
Who wooed all, did many win,
Within this Grave, one lies inhum'd
Whose prayers the prisons had perfumed,
Haunted by Nimrods in his Life,
Waits for the joy of the Lambs wife.
In Honorable memory of my Esteemed Friend VAVASOR POWELL.
Acrostick.
Anagram Pale Sorrow Vale.

V ain are those hopes fixed on best things below,
A s providence by proof this day does show.
V jew well this Tomb, there rests in this place,
A Cabinet of Gifts, experience, grace,
S o famous, faithful, forward in Gods ways,
O ut doing most, 'bove most deserving praise,
R eaps now rewards, is crown d with conquering Bays.
P owell the great Apostle once in Wales,
O n stubborn hearts his Doctrine much prevails.
W ith dexterous skill, and with admired success
E ach Sermon Preached abundantly was blessed,
L abouring and suffering till his strength did fail,
L et all mourn moderate, but Pale Sorrow Vale.
Veiled first in flesh, then Prison, now Earths womb
Possess thee till Christ glorious day does come.
Upon the Death of that Faithful Servant of the Lord, and constant witness of
his truth, Mr. Vavasor Powell, who dyed a Prisoner of the Lord, the 27 of the 8
month, 1670. VAVASOR POWELL.
Anagram V. P. a savor well.

An other. Lov's paver awe.

V aliant for truth on Earth, a good degree
A among Gods worthies was attaind by thee
V ast was thy knowledge, thy experience such,
A s few there are do equalize by much,
S o Wales thy native Country can tell,
O f how great worth, how much thou did excel.
R eproach'd, however thou did Savor well.
P roved thou wast by trials manifold
O re, now refined into purest Gold,
W eeping we are left, thy sable shrone about
E ach thought of thee a fresh sigh sending out,
L ook here Lov's paver has to death resigned
L ook once again a Woe is left behind.
Unworthy world, thou in it could not rest,
Paid off thy score, received the quietus est.
If I would choose how I discharged would be,
Fain would I choose a like discharge with thee.
On Vavasor Powells death, a Memorial by (...) Friend, in three Elegies.
1.
VIctorious cruel death! O greedy grave!
A mbitious still the sweetest blood to have;
V ain's thy assauit, thou have here but lost thy sting,
A nd now among the just his spirit shall sing.
S ure you are deceived, this partial victory,
O re flesh and bones; the holy soul made free.
R eleas'd at once from flesh, and prison too,
P owells discharged; which Power refused to do.
O kind and friendly stroke! what death kind grown;
W ell was it said, and true! even deaths our own.
E re long, how he escapt, his judge will try,
Life, sucked by long confinement, makes a cry.
Vile age, the virtuous ones thus to suppress,
Promoting vice on high and wickedness.
A Threnetick for Sion: 2 Elegy in 12 Odes.
1.
But stay what is this? something's amiss,
About this guilty City,
Hark what a cry, echoes on high,
Which few hear, fewer pity.
2.
The voice is Sions, among the Lions,
And in the Leopards Denns,
Alas shhe cries, where shall my eyes
From tears be wiped, and when?
3.
My sighs and sorrows, by tears plough Furrows
Upon my face; it grieves,
That widows scorn, must thus be born,
Whilst yet my husband lives.
4.
At once affected, and yet rejected;
What bought and sold again?
By blood once saved, yet now enslaved
To fierce and bloody men?
5.
Ah what is the reason (in such a season)
Of hopes of prayers and tears?
Our lights so misted, and bands so twisted,
And yet, lo greater fears.
6.
That Turtle Dove, Christ's only love,
Over flames hangs in suspense,
My sons decease, and griefs increase,
Gods anger's more intense.
7.
My helps are gone, and now I Have none
To take me by the hand,
The best are taken, the rest be shaken,
O't puts my loins to a stand.
8.
Sure 't bodes a stroke, if God revoke
Ambassadors of peace:
Our days soon end, if to contend
His spirit (our lights) must cease.
9.
Ah dying Nation! watchmen their station
Must leave and warn no more;
This is the sting that wrath will bring,
Thy judgments at the door.
10.
Thy Bartholmew, cold sweat, adieu,
VVinters approach impart
How fast thy day posteth away,
O't strikes me to the heart.
11.
But yet is hope, if God with soap
Thus wash our spots and blood,
Light will return, dross only burn,
All this is for our good.
12.
Though Jacobs glory be transitory,
Though thin and lean his flesh,
Yet from his Urne, there shall return
A rose more sweet and fresh.
3 Elogy is V. P. Encomium, or Character.
BY stock he was of Welsh descent,
In stature mean, yet meek, content.
In holy tongues, and learning, he
Commenced to very great degree;
Some 30 years to Christ estranged,
And then by grace was called and changed;
He labored in Christ's Ministry,
And many a soul thereby set free,
A learned Tongue and skill he had
To speak for Christ, to good, and bad:
Though to die childless 'twas his Lot,
To Christ he many a soul begot:
His parts were quick, yet lowly minded
With vain applause not swelled or winded;
A man of sorrows, prayers, and tears,
Long suffering under wrongs and jears;
Most apt and ready to forget,
Affronts, assaults, many and great;
His labors in his Gospel station,
Found universal acceptance.
And though of such we 'ave got so many,
He might as ill be spared as any.
Failings he had, but where is he,
From more and greater, that is free
His bonds bespoke him, fully known,
At utter odds with Nimrods Throne;
He lay confined, the Oath about,
Till Angels came to fetch him out.
In's sickness (though it gave little rest)
His witness (even at last) was best.
He hated both the beast and whore,
To's death (as through his life before)
His glass was run, his bonds death breaks,
And yet behold (though dead) he speaks,
In 1000 that his grave attended, mind
What Epitaph he left ingrav'd behind.
He lived desired, and died lamented,
Death him required, his bonds prevented.
Per J: M.

An Epitaph upon that faithful Minister, and eminent Confessor of Jesus Christ,
Mr. V. P. VAVASOR POWELL.
Lies here enterred who was a successful T^^cher of the Past; A sincere witness
in the Present; A choice example to Future ages. F^^ which he being called to
several prisons, was their tried and found faithful, would not accept
Deliverance, expecting a better Resurrection, in hope of which, he finished his
Life and Testimony together, in the 11 year of his Imprisonment, and in the 53
of his Age, October. 27. 1670.

In vain oppressors do themselves perplex,
To find out acts how they the Saints may vex
Death spoils their plots, and sets the oppressed free,
Thus Vavasor obtained true liberty,
Christ him released and now he is joynd among,
The Martyred souls, with whom he cries how long?
Dan. 12.13.
FINIS.
Errata's.
Reader,
Through much difficulty in attending the Press, several Errataes have happened,
which be pleased to mend with your pen, viz.

IN Pref. page 2. l. 7. for Narraritical r. Nazaritical, p. 10. l. 2 for Gou r.
God, p. 14. l. 8. for Preach r. Preach him p. 16. for Char. Heart r. C. Herle.
p. 29. for seen down r. set down, p. 44. l. 4. for our fold, r. one fold, p.
44. l. 6 r. yet as the generality or body of that Nation. p. 39. for and
Christians, r. Oh. Christians,

p. 41. l. 4. for due sin, r. one sin, p. 44, l. 23. for due end, r, one end. ^
37. for by Christians, r. of Christians, p. 55. l. 7. for safety, 1. safely, l.
11. for he, r. when he, p. 47. l. 11. for judged, r. judge, p. 48. l. 12. f.
prodeed. r. precead, p. 61. l. 6. for so most, r. f. the most, p. 62, l. 19. f.
ordinary, r. ordinarily. p. 67. l. 33. f. even, r. ever, p. 68. l. 22. f. be,
r. may be, l. 24. s. a time, r. in a time, p. 83. l. 3. f. comfortable, r.
comfort, p. 85. l. 14. f. thereon, r. therein, p. 91. l. 15. f. profits. r.
Prophet, l. 28. f. amuze did amuze, p. 97. l. 9. f. my Lambs, r. thy lambs. p.
114. l. 8. f. accrued r. occurred, l. 36. for against, r. against sin, p. 115.
f. of churches, r. of many Churches. p. 118. l. 13. f. I know, r. I know him,
p. 123. l. 5. for go out, r. got out, 126. l. 7. f. Scared r. Seized, p. 127.
l. 4. f. discusts, r. dismissed, l. 26. f. where, r. where he, l. 27 f. their r.
their had, p. 181. l. 13. f. real. r. several, p. 187. l. 13. f. anothey, r.
any other, p. 190. f usald, r. cold, 144. l 2^. for provoked r. provoke, 202.
l. 3. f. haunted, r. hauled, 203. l. 14. f. shrone r. shine, p. 204. l. 5. f.
this r. it is, p. 20^. for adieu, r. and dew.


