Memoranda: TOUCHING THE OATH Ex officio, Pretended Self-Accusation, and
Canonical Purgation. Together with some NOTES about the making of some New, and
alteration and explanation of some Old, LAWS. All most humbly submitted to the
consideration of this PARLIAMENT.

By EDW. LAKE, Philo-Monarcho-phil.

Justitia Reip. Basis. LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane, 1662.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM, EARL of STRAFFORD, Viscount Wentworth, Baron
Wentworth of Wentworth Woodhouse, Newmarch, Oversley and Rabye, Knight of the
most Honorable Order of the GARTER.
MY LORD,
SUch has been the power of Custom for many Ages, that the Authors not only
of just Volumes, but of small Treatises too, have ever been desirous (I know
not whether I may say, Ambitious) to dedicate them to some person of eminent
quality and condition, as it were Clients to their Patrons, for the protecting
and crediting them. Hereby the Authors have oftentimes gained their desires,
and the Patrons (especially when the excellency of such Books did deservedly
acquire it) addition of honor and fame, and also propagated the continuance
thereof to all posterity. Numerous instances hereof might be given, but
Mecaenas may be instar omnium; which name of a Nobleman has in a manner
monopolized all noble Patrons, as Patron (...).

My Lord, I am far from having any such opinion of this small Treatise, (indeed
not deserving that name, being in great part but an epitomized Collection, and
the rest brief Memoranda's or Notes, rather to excite others to proceed upon
that Subject, then to rest on this:) though if by this, or any other Act of
mine, any access of Honor could accrue to your Lordship, I hold my self
justly obliged humbly to present and tender it. But, my Lord, the full scope of
my intention in this Model is, to the best of my Judgment, (which I always
submit to better) and of my skill and power, to contribute something tending to
the further happiness and continuance of Truth and Peace, with Justice and
Honor, in this Church and State, now by Gods blessing (to whom be all Honor
and Praise) ex post-liminio, as it were, freed from Slavery and Tyrannical
Oppression, and restored to a capacity of their pristine Beauty and Splendor,
by the most happy Restoration of our most Gracious SOVEREIGN, whom God
preserve: This, I am sure, (as my Heart prompts me to speak) is my sole
intention, which aims only at the advancement of the Public Good, and is not
tainted with any dram of private Interest. And, my Lord, knowing you do
Patrizare that most honored Father of yours, (whose Memory must never perish,
whose Loss this Church and State have too sadly felt, but Quis talia fando,
etc.) and that I may say as Tertullian (de Resurrectione carnis) says of the
Phoenix raised out of the ashes of his dead Sire, Alter idem. Justitiae and
Honoris cultor sincerus maxim, as he was; that emboldens me to desire your
Lordships leave to prefix your Name, that this may be as an Accessory to follow
its desired Principal: And knowing you to be such, I cannot but (as all, that
know you as well as I, I am confident do) wish for the common good, that your
Lordship were put in statum merendi, into the sphere of your proper Activity,
that the Public might reap the benefit thereof, of, and that your Talent might
be no longer (as it was whilst Rebellious Usurpation caused it, and did obicem
ponere; now removed) wrapped up in a Napkin, nor your Candle hid under a Bushel:
So wishes, so prays,

MY LORD, Your Lordships much bounden and most humble Servant, EDWARD LAKE.
Westminster 11. November. 1661.
To the READER.
SOme account may perhaps be expected to be given of this small endeavor,
touching the passing that Act of clearing the doubt touching Coercive Power in
Causes Ecclesiastical; wherein is that Proviso that forbids all Ecclesiastical
Judges to tender or administer an Oath to any person Ex Officio or otherwise,
or Purgation; whereby any person may confess or accuse himself, so as to make
him or her liable to censure or punishment. There were not a few persons,
unfriends at least to the Discipline of the Church of England, that insulted
much (as is touched hereafter) and clamoured of the oppression of the
Ecclesiastical Courts, that has been (say they) all the time before the
passing of that Act, that took away that Oath: It was suitable to their
interest to call that oppression. When Brutus had murdered Caesar, he called
him Tyrant; Ita enim appellari Caesarem facto ejus expediebat, says Velleius
Paterculus, Histor. lib. 2. From the time of passing that Act, till within
these few days, I expected from abler pens some Vindication of the proceedings
of Ecclesiastical Courts, as touching such Oath and Canonical Purgation, and
the lawful and expedient use thereof before that Act; but none that I hear of
attempting it: I looked upon the cause as a Derelict, took it up, and though
(by the late iniquity of the times) I being too much several ways unfurnished
for such a Work; yet, if but to give some satisfaction to indifferent men, and
to wipe away at least in part causeless calumny, and to stir up others to a
further prosecution hereof; I conceived I might adventure upon this little
Model or Platform, and perhaps more fitly at this time then another, till a
more complete Structure may be raised upon this subject, if more be needful;
being so learnedly and fully handled, especially by Doctor Cosens sometimes
Dean of the Arches, and that late glory of our Church Doctor Andrews, late
Lord Bishop of Winchester. That I should escape from objections and censures
too, I can scarce suppose, upon such a Subject as this is, ungrateful to such
men as are haeredes ex ass, to the ancient opposers of it, and are inveighers
against it; and those that executed it, quos laeserint, oderint, always
excepting the Members of both Houses of Parliament out of that number. Some too
perhaps may dislike my Dedication of it (though no Act more free then that) as
not to some of my own profession, or rather to my own most Learned and Pious
Diocesan, the Reverend Father in God, Doctor Robert Sanderson Lord Bishop of
Lincoln; having relation to him by Office of Trust: To him and them I should
rather have made my address then Dedication, and have herein consulted with
them, had time and convenience served before I had attempted this, and not
carry Owls to Athens, go about to give instruction to them, from whom I should
rather have received it. But as to that most Noble Person, to whom this is
inscribed, though according to his Birth and Education, his motion has always
been in an higher Orb and Contemplation of affairs of greater moment, more
immediately enabling him to serve his King and Country: But (they by being
somewhat more particularly concerned in a great part of the subject matter
hereof) therefore by some may be supposed partial and interessed. Yet even in
the subject matter of these Memoranda he is not unversed, if not more
particularly; yet as comprehended in that generality of Learning and Knowledge,
whereto he has from his younger years been habituated to, at the feet of such
a Statesman, as was his most accomplished Father, and such Instructors as he
by his especial and most discerning choice appointed him; and all this
perfected up by most advantageous acquisition by travel and residence in
foreign parts, amongst those who are justly ranked in the number of the most
Civil, Learned, and Wise in Europe, and so consequently in the Universe; and so
need not mine or others instruction herein more then others, not professed
Lawyers. But all that is comprised in this Model, both in the Memoranda's and
the Notes, somewhat grounded upon some years experience I have had, and
tending, as before, at least in my wellmeaning opinion to the public good
solely; is so most humbly offered to consideration, if by those in Authority it
be thought fit. He is, I conceive, very fit to further and advance this, both
in consideration of his abilities, and his being empowered as others of his
noble rank and quality in the Supreme Judicatory of this Kingdom; and by his
own Genius and propensity, willing and desirous to effect any thing aiming that
way, as less cannot be expected from the Son of such a Father, and Husband of
such a wife, his most noble and most virtuous Lady, (a pair in respect of the
mutual parity of their most intense conjugal affection, and parentizing love to
Loyalty, Justice and Honor, hereditary virtues flowing in their veins from
their most Noble Loyally, Gloriously Acting and Suffering Parents; not easily
paralleled) and therefore I have not so much Dedicated this to him, as
supplicated his effectual adminicular hand hereto.

Upon the whole matter as touching my self, this Model, as also, if not more
especially the Notes subjoined; I having had no small share of Sufferings in
the time of exilement of Monarch and Monarchy, and so consequently of joy and
gladness in the happy Restoration of both; in my due gratitude and obligation,
both by tie of natural duty, and of God and Man's Laws, have made it part of my
study to endeavor to contribute my well-meaning mite to the public good, and
the prevention of such miseries for the future, as too lately we have had too
sad experience of. Instances might be given of many that have published their
endeavors heretofore to such public ends, which have not proved ineffectual,
and more especially Mr. Spencer touching the State of Ireland in Queen
Elizabeth's time. If in any measure never so remote, they may any whit help to
attain to that end they aim at; I shall be glad of it, and with that true
candor submissively offering them, always protesting as I now do, that if
there be any thing herein, contrary to Gods word directly or indirectly, or to
His Majesty's Prerogative, or the known Laws of the Land, Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, or the politic Government either in Church or State, or which may
give just offense: I do hereby absolutely retract it, as no ways by me
intended or thought of, wishing this small taste may stir up others (more able)
to make a further and better progress in this kind.

Anno 13. CAROLI II. Regis. An Act for explanation of a Clause contained in an
Act of Parliament made in the seventeenth year of the late King Charles,
entitled, An Act for repeal of a branch of a Statute primo Elizabethae,
concerning Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical.
WHereas in an Act of Parliament made in the seventeenth year of the late King
Charles, entitled, An Act for repeal of a branch of a Statute, primo
Elizabethae, concerning Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical; it is (amongst
other things) enacted, That no Archbishop, Bishop, nor Vicar General, nor any
Chancellor, nor Commissary of any Archbishop, Bishop, or Vicar General, nor any
Ordinary whatsoever, nor any other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer,
or Minister of Justice, nor any other person or persons whatsoever, exercising
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority or Jurisdiction, by any Grant,
License or Commission of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or by any
Power or Authority derived from the King, his Heirs or Successors, or
otherwise, shall from and after the first day of August, (which then shall be
in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred for y one) award, impose
or inflict any Pain, Penalty, Fine, Amercement, Imprisonment, or other corporal
punishment upon any of the Kings Subjects, for any Contempt, Misdemeanour,
Crime, Offense, matter or thing whatsoever, belonging to Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Cognizance or Jurisdiction, whereupon some doubt has been made,
that all ordinary Power of Coertion and Proceedings in Causes Ecclesiastical
were taken away, whereby the ordinary course of Justice in Causes
Ecclesiastical has been obstructed: Be it therefore declared and Enacted by
the Kings most excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the
Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority
thereof, That neither the said Act, nor any thing therein contained, does or
shall take away any ordinary Power or Authority from any of the said
Archbishops, Bishops, or any other person or persons named as aforesaid, but
that they and every of them exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, may
proceed, determine, sentence, execute and exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and all Censures and Coertions appertaining and belonging to the
same, before the making of the Act before recited, in all causes and matters
belonging to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, according to the Kings Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Laws used and practiced in this Realm, in as ample manner and
form as they did, and might lawfully have done before the making of the said
Act.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the before recited
Act of decimo septimo Caroli, and all the matters and clauses therein contained
(excepting what concerns the High Commission Court, or the new erection of some
such like Court by Commission) shall be and is hereby repealed to all intents
and purposes whatsoever: Any thing, clause or sentence in the said Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and it is hereby enacted, That neither this Act, nor any
thing herein contained, shall extend or be const^ued to revive or give force to
the said branch of the said Statute, made in the said first year of the Reign
of the said late Queen Elizabeth, mentioned in the said Act of Parliament, made
in the said seventeenth year of the Reign of the said King Charles; but that
the said branch of the said Statute, made in the said first year of the Reign
of the said Queen Elizabeth, shall stand and be repealed in such sort, as if
this Act had never been made.

Provided also, and it is hereby further enacted, that it shall not be lawful
for any Archbishop, Bishop, Vicar General, Chancellor, Commissary, or any other
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer or Minister, or any other person
having or exercising Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to tender or
administer unto any person whatsoever, the Oath usually called the Oath Ex
officio, or any other Oath whereby such person to whom the same is tendered or
administered, may be charged or compelled to confess, or accuse, or to purge
him or her self, of any criminal matter or thing, whereby he or she may be
liable to any censure or punishment: any thing in this Statute, or any other
Law, Custom or Usage heretofore to the contrary hereof, in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend or be construed to extend to give unto any Archbishop, Bishop, or any
other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, Officer, or other person or persons
aforesaid, any power or authority to exercise, execute, inflict or determine
any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Censure or Coertion, which they might not by
Law have done before the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred thirty and
nine, nor to abridge or diminish the Kings Majesty's Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical matters and affairs, nor to confirm the Canons made in the year
One thousand six hundred and forty, nor any of them, nor any other
Ecclesiastical Laws or Canons not formerly confirmed, allowed or enacted by
Parliament, or by the established Laws of the Land, as they stood in the year
of the Lord One thousand six hundred thirty and nine,

The Contents of the Chapters.
Chap. I. THe endeavors of the Innovators to change the course of
Ecclesiastical proceedings. That stupendous Fanatic Hackett his fearful end.
Mr. Cambdens judgment touching the Innovators. Their perseverance in their
design of Innovation in King James his time and afterward. The pretended
taking away the Coercive power from the Ecclesiastical Courts how gained, what
use was made of it by the Innovators, and how they boasted of their benefit by
it. Two passages in the Long Parliament touching two Inconformists. Page 1.
Chap. II. The two Proviso's in the late Act that takes away the doubt touching
Coercive power in Ecclesiastical Courts. Dr. Cosens Apology for sundry
proceedings by Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. That groundless Opinion, That a
several Royal assent to the executing of every particular Canon is required, is
confuted. The validity of the Ecelesiastical Laws. The clamours of
Inconformists, Innovators and Fanatics, against the putting of Ecclesiastical
Laws in execution, though the Ecclesiastical Officers and Ministers are by Act
of Parliament severely commanded to do it. p. 10. Chap. III. The Heads of the
several Chapters in that Apology of Doctor Cosens. Part 1. p. 27. Chap. IV. By
the late Act the manner of proceeding in Ecclesiastical Courts is not altered,
but left as it was. A summary relation of what Dr. Cosens in his Apology has
asserted and made good by Gods Word, the practice of the Primitive Christians,
the opinion of the Fathers, the Laws Canon and Civil, and the Laws of the Land
allowing and warranting them. The like practice at Common Law, and at Geneva
and other places, pretending strict Reformation. p. 24. Chap. V. That it is
consonant to Gods Word to give such an Oath Ex officio, or otherwise. p. 28.
Chap. VI. That the opinion and practice of the Primitive Christians, and the
Fathers of the Church, was to administer such Oath Ex officio, or upon
Accusation, and for Purgation Canonical, with the practice at Geneva. p. 33.
Chap. VII. That the like practice touching these Oaths, is and was in all
Foreign Christian Nations, and other Nations not Christian, guided only by
the Light of Nature. p. 37. Chap. VIII. That by the known Laws of this Land,
the Ecclesiastical Judges were so warranted and commanded to give that Oath,
according to the Canon and Ecclesiastical Laws. p. 39. Chap. IX. That Oaths
administered to parties touching matters damageable, criminal and penal to
themselves, are urged and required by Temporal Courts, and by the Laws of the
Realm. p. 41. Chap. X. The inconveniences and hurt that probably may follow, by
the forbidding the ministering of an Oath Ex officio, or any other Oath, whereby
such person, to whom the same is tendered or administered, may be charged or
compelled to confess or accuse, or to purge him or her self of any criminal
matter or thing, whereby he or she may be liable to any censure or punishment.
Praise of the Civil Laws. Civilians first, and last, and greatest Sufferers.
Amity 'twixt both Robes. His Majesty's and the Lord Chancellors savours to
Civilians.
TOUCHING The OATH EX OFFICIO, AND CANONICAL PURGATION.
CHAP. I. The endeavors of the Innovators to change the course of
Ecclesiastical proceedings. That stupendous Fanatic Hackett his fearful end.
Mr. Cambdens judgment touching the Innovators. Their perseverance in their
design of Innovation in King James his time and afterward. The pretended
taking away the coercive power from the Ecclesiastical Courts how gained; what
use was made of it by the Innovators, and how they boasted of their benefit by
it. Two passages in the Long-Parliament, touching two Inconformists.
FOR many years together now last past, some men have very earnestly
endeavored to have taken away, or at leastwise have much altered the
proceedings in the Ecclesiacal Courts of this Kingdom, used according to His
Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws, touching the Administration of the Oath ex
officio, and at the instance or promotion of a party accusing, or stirring up
the Judges Office; to any party accused, or called, or enquired after by the
Judge Ecclesiastical ex officio, or otherwise; whereby, as they phrase it, he
must confess or accuse himself, and so render himself liable to penalty or
censure. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth they prosecuted it vehemently if not
violently, and as before that time some Anabaptists in Germany had done the
like in such Cases. Of their practices that way here, that most Faithful,
Learned, and Grave Historion of ours, Mr. Cambden gives us an account in his
Annals of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, printed at Leyden in the Low Countries
1625. It is in the year 1590. After he has there given a Relation of that
stupendous and blasphemous Fanatic Hackett, of his beginning, how illiterate,
insolent, fierce, and revengeful he was, that meeting one that had been his
Schoolmaster an ingenuous person, under a color of embracing him bit off his
Nose, and the poor miserable deformed man, beseeching him to give it him again,
that whilst it was green and fresh he might sow it again to his face; he would
not do it, but like a dog swallowed it down; and so averse was he to all
piety, that, that heavenly Doctrine he had heard in Sermons, he made sport with
it, with his pot-Companions on the Ale-benches. Afterward when he had
prodigally wasted his Estate which he had got with a Widow whom he had married;
on a sudain he claps on the vizard of most specious sanctity, is wholly taken
up in hearing Sermons, reading the Scriptures, and pretending to I know not
what, heavenly Revelations, and counterfeiting an extraordinary calling,
insinuated himself into the acquaintance of several Divines, that with
inflamed zeal, labored to bring in the Presbyteriall Discipline of the Church
of Geneva, into the Church of England, amongst whom was one Wigginton a
Minister, and if ever any, an haire-brain'd one, and a contem^er of
Magistrates. Then he goes on and relates Hacketts and his Accomplices most horrid
and ridiculous madness, such as had not such a worthy Author and others related
it, we might now doubt of the truth of it, as the next Age will probably do of
our Modern Fanatics late pranks: there he relates his fearful blasphemous
speeches, as he expired and was turned off the Gallows, upon whom that pious
and Learned Author gives this grave censure, Ita hostis humani gencris,
dementat quos sanctitatem simulare, and ad solrietatem nolle sapere
deprehendit. Thus the enemy of Mankind infatuates those whom he perceives to
be counterfeitors of holiness, and will not be wise with sobriety.

And then after a line or two upon Arthington and Coppinger, two of Hacketts
Accomplices he goes on thus. "Nec hii soli, sed etiam alii, qui receptam in
Ecclesia Anglicana Doctrinam, Episcoporum vocationem damnando, and Praesules
contumeliose calumniando, hactenus frustra impugnarant. Nunc pertractis in
eorum parts nonullis, juris Anglici peritis, in little Jurisdictionem and
delegatam a Regina in Ecclesiasticis causis authoritatem, ut prorsus injustam,
and linguas and calamos strinxerunt; declamando ubique, etiam libris
publicatis, homines contra Regni leges, in Foris Ecclesiasticis indigne
opprimi. Reginam ejusmodi authoritatem ex jure non posse delegare, nec alios
exercere delegatam. Fora illa non posse a reo Jusjurandum Ex Officio exigere,
cum Nemo seipsum accusare teneatur. Jusjurandum illud homines ad sui
condemnationem cum ignominiosa confusione, vel in spontaneum perjurium cum
animarum exitio praecipitare. Praeterea de aliis, quam matrimonialibus causis,
non debere cognoscere, ex hujusmodi Veteri Rescripto."

Mandamus Vice-Comiti Comitatuum nostrorum S. N. etc. quod non permittat, quod
aliqui in Balliva sua in aliquibus locis conveniant, ad aliquas Recognitiones,
per sacramenta sua faciendas, nisi in causis Matrimonialibus and Testamentariis.

"Contra, Juris Ecclesiastici Professores Regiam in Ecclesiasticis authoritatem
propugnarunt utique Parlamentaria Authoritate in Regina investitam. Hanc
oppugnare, nihil aliud esse, quam in Majestatem irruere and Sacro Sanctae
Praerogativae violato obsequii juramento insultare. Fora Ecclesiastica de aliis
quam Matrimonialibus and Testamentariis posse cognoscere, ex statuto
Circumspecte agatis and Articulis Cleri sub Edvardo Primo, docuerunt.
Rescriptum sive legem illam prolatam, suspectam esse, quia temporis est
incerti, and variae Lectionis. Alibi enim legi. Ad recognitiones vel sacramenta
praestanda. Recognitionem item facere non significare, testimonium perhibere,
vel respondere in jure, sed debitum agnoscere, and fateri vel placita de
Catalogis vel debitis tenere. Juramentum ex officio, in foris illis, ut in
aliis, ex omni memoria fuisse exactum, ad simoniam, adulterium and alia
tenebrarum opera rimanda, praesertim cum Insinuatio, ut loquuntur, fuerit
clamosa. Et quamvis nemo teneatur seipsum prodere, tamen per famam proditum
teneri ostendere, utrum possit suam innocentiam defendere, and seipsum purgare,
quandoquidem poenitentia imposita, non sit poena sed medicina ad peccatores
curandos, alios a peccato deterrendos, and scandalum tollendum, juxta illud in
Sacris Literis." Pro anima tua ne confundaris dicere verum. Est enim confusio
adducens peccatum, and confusio adducens gloriam and gratiam. "Sed quid de hiis
immoror, quum dissertationes Richardi Cosini Legum Doctoris and Johannis
Morrisii and Lanceloti Andrews eruditae hac de re utrinque praestent? Regina
haud ignara suam authoritatem per Episcoporum latera in hoc negotio peti,
adversantium impetus tacit infregit, and Ecclesiasticam Jurisdictionem
illaesam conservavit. That is, Not only these, (speaking of Hackett and his
Accomplices) but others also, who had hitherto, though in vain, impugned the
received Discipline of the Church of England, by condemning the calling of
Bishops, and contumeliously slandering the Praelates; having now drawn into
their party some Common-Lawyers, sharpened both their Tongues and Pens against
their Jurisdiction, and the Authority which the Queen delegated in
Ecclesiastical Causes as altogether unjust, declaiming every where, even in
Books published, that men were unworthily oppressed in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom. That the Queen could not by Law
delegate such kind of Authority, nor others to whom it was delegated could
exercise it. That these Courts could not require the Oath ex officio from the
defendent party, when as no man is bound to accuse himself. That Oath
precipitates men to condemn themselves with ignominious confusion, or into
wilful perjury to the destruction of their Souls. Besides, they ought not to
hold cognizance of any other causes then Matrimonial and Testamentary,
according to that old Mandate or Rescript," We command our Sheriff of our
Counties of S. N. etc. that they suffer not any in their Balive to come
together in any places, to make any Recognizances upon their Oaths, but in
Matrimonial and Testamentary causes. "On the other side the Professors of the
Ecclesiastical Laws maintained, the Royal Authority in Causes
Ecclesiastical as vested in the Queen by Authority of Parliament. To oppose
this, was nothing else then to offer violence to Royal Majesty, and violating
the Oath of obedience, to insult over the Sacred Prerogative Royal. The
Ecclesiastical Courts may hold cognizance of other Causes, then Matrimonial
and Testamentary, by the Statute of Circumspecte agatis and Articuli Cleri, in
the time of Edward the first as they made it appear. That Rescript or Law
which they produced was suspected, because it was uncertain for the time, and
is variously read. Elsewhere I have read it, To perform Recognisances and
Oaths, and to make recognition or recognizance, does not signify to give
testimony, or to answer in Law, but to acknowledge and confess a debt, or to
hold plea of Inventaries or Debts. That the Oath ex officio has time out of
mind been given in these Courts as in others, to sift out Simonie, Adultery,
and other works of darkness; especially, when the Insinuation as they call it,
becomes loud." And though no man is bound to betray himself, yet being
betrayed by fame, he is bound to show himself whether he can defend his
innocence and purge himself, seeing the penance enjoined is not a punishment,
but a medicine to cure sinners, and to deter others from sinning, and to take
away scandal, according to that in Scripture, Be not confounded in speaking
truth for thy souls sake, for there is a confusion that brings sin, and there
is a confusion that brings glory and grace. "But what do I dwelling upon these
things, when the Learned discourses hereupon on both sides are extant of
Richard Cousin Doctor of the Laws, and John Morris, and Lancelot Andrews? The
Queen not ignorant that Her Authority was in this business struck at through
the sides of the Bishops, tacitly crushed the violence of the Adversaries, and
conserved the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction inviolate." Thus in a few words he
sums up part of the marrow of these Learned dissertations, and gives his
sound judgment thereupon. But still they went on in their design, in which I
believe they will ever be found immovable. We have had sufficient experience
that way at what they aim, and that there is no hope of bending without
breaking too. In their admonition to the Parliament in that Queens Reign they
tell us, to this effect at least, that if they cannot have what they desire by
fair means, they will have it by a way shall make our hearts ache; and I think
they have indifferently well made their words good. Yet blessed be God, we are
delivered again from them, God give us care to beware of them, and not to fall
again into their snares by those blessed Titles of Mercy and Moderation,
heavenly good surely, if rightly applied. Let us but contemplate our fresh
miseries, and the murder of our blessed King and Martyr, King Charles the
First, and his (...), it is well to be hoped 'twill prove as much or more
effectual, then the Pages Memento to Philip of Macedon in another case. These
men, for they were all of the same Leaven, still persisted in their design, all
along the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and upon King James his coming in, thinking
upon that change to have wrought something extraordinary upon a Prince that had
a great access of Dominion, and probably at his entrance would endeavor to
satisfy all or most, so far as with reason it could be expected, and to
ingratiate himself as far as fitting with his new Subjects. But it was our
happiness, though his trouble and vexation, that he was well acquainted with
the factious and seditious humors of that gang in Scotland, (with whom and
ours here of the same mould, I believe ever was and will be a correspondence
and cooperation.) Ex viridi observantia this is too demonstrable. They then
set upon King James with their most humble Petition, called The Lincolnshire
Ministers Petition, perhaps denominatio a majori; it was a complication of many
parts: there they desire favor for tender Consciences, and thereupon was the
Conference at Hampton Court granted, where their Reasons were, as it were,
brayed in a Mortar, and they or most of them seemed satisfied; but many of them
at least, soon returned to their vomit. In that Petition they promise all
obedience, and profess they hold it contrary to Gods Word, and the practice of
the Primitive Christians, to resist the Prince, or to get Reformation by force
or violence. To this effect they supplicate and hold forth; yet I believe it
may be proved, that some of these individual persons in that Petition, adhered
expressly to the late Rebels against His Majesty, if they were not actually in
Arms against him, as most if not all of their Opinions were. How they crept in,
or rather marched on furiously, though slily in the the late Kings time, till
they had weaved up their Web to their desire: we have seen and sadly felt. When
the High Commission and Star Chamber were taken away, a great point was gained:
To speak of nothing else but the subject upon which I am. Yet by the way it is
observable, that many, if not most, moderate men are of opinion, that the
Government will not be well settled, till both these Courts, though happily in
many particulars altered and regulated, or (...), some other Courts much like
them, be established; where extraordinary crimes and persons may be ordered:
and in the former, the High Commission, the shifting of criminous persons from
one Diocese to another may be met with. It was no small part of their design,
to trample upon Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and to take away the coercive
power, and to make it precarious and ridiculous: as they would interpret that
Statute, which, if credible relations be true, was but strangely got; insomuch
that a great leading Member in the House of Commons then in that long
Parliament, cried out, Digitus Dei fuit in eo; that though it were not
intended, yet the words would bear it, which he rejoiced at; though many, and
not of the least, able Lawyers in the Kingdom were not of his opinion. That
Coercive power, for no other have the Ecclesiastic Courts, (except Suspension,
a degree below it, which amounts but to a small coercion to refractory persons,
in regard it goes no further, the secular arm cannot be called upon that;)
that, I say, that coercive power is Excommunication. That is the power of the
Keys, how far that power may be staid, retarded or forborne, I intend not to
dispute; but that it shall be totally taken away from the Church, Quasi non
esset Deus in coelis, that surely is not to be believed, that it can be done by
any power under Heaven. But that taking away that coercive power from the
Ecclesiastical Courts, as they interpreted it, (and they knew they had
argumentum a fortiori to maintain it) did not a little further and heighten
their design. At the time of their raising their Militia against the late King,
a person of no mean quality at a great Assembly made his Harangue to the
people, (as I heard it from a very credible person, who said he was then and
there present and heard it) and then and there enumerated the many great
blessings this Nation had received from that blessed Parliament, (as he called
it) That Ship Money was taken away, and the Star Chamber was taken away, and
the High Commission was taken away, and the Spiritual Courts too are taken
away: A man could not meddle with a Wench, (his expression was otherwise, which
I am not willing to mention) but he must be questioned: Hinc illae lacrymae.
Indeed that was a great Eyesore. Delinquents never love the Judges that punish
them.

At laus summa, viris displicuisse malis. And this did not a little advantage
the cause they had then in hand, very many persons that had been justly
questioned in these Courts flocking in to their colors. But I take no delight
to rekon up these strange passages, (to call them no worse) which were not a
few when that storm was in raising, which afterward shaked all the corners of
the Land. Two only which concerned Ecclesiastical proceedings, (to meddle with
no other of higher nature, that the world rang of, and I would the memory of
them could be perpetually abolished) I shall briefly touch, which amongst
others were these: A grave and able Civilian, and then a Member of the House of
Commons, was accused by an Inconformist, that he had excommunicated him, for
not kneeling at the Communion when he received. I was present, and saw and
heard it, and to my best remembrance it was for not kneeling at the Communion,
at least it was for not performing some other Ceremony; so that as to this
matter it is all one. The Civilian being called up to a Committee of the Lords,
then in the Long Parliament, out of the House of Commons, to answer it. By his
Counsel he desired time to send into the Country, where it was pretended to be
done, to know whether he had done any such thing; it being impossible for him
to remember every particular that he had done in his Jurisdiction, and that
particular, he said, he did not remember. He had time given, and informed
himself thereof; and at the next appointed time of his appearance, by his
Counsel, pleaded that he had done no such thing, as he was accused of. The
Accuser said, then it was done by his Deputy or Surrogate: That was denied too.
Then he said, he was sure it was done by the Spiritual Court; and so it was,
but not by any Spiritual Court where that Civilian had to do: Then the Civilian
pleaded, that if he had done that whereof he was accused, he doubted not but he
could have justified it: but since it appears that he was unjustly accused, and
reaped some discredit by being thus questioned, and had been put to trouble and
charge thereabouts, he desired reparation and charges: which by many of the
Lords was yielded to, yet by the major part it was carried, that he ought not
to have it; and the reason was rendered, because it would deter others from
complaining. Si satis est accusasse, quis erit innocens? Nay, how far may it
tend to the ruin of some, if some men be maliciously set upon them, to
multiply accusations against them?

The other was: Another Inconformist complaining of his being questioned in the
Ecclesiastical Courts for his Inconformity: In defense it was alleged against
him and proved, that he had said, He would as soon bow at the name of Judas, as
at the Name of JESUS: and I diligently inquired, but never heard he was
punished for it. But would there had been no more then these, though these are
too much: Would some had not gloried, had not triumphed in their shame.

Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos. CHAP. II. The two Proviso's in
the late Act that takes away the doubt touching Coercive power in
Ecclesiastical Courts. Dr. Cosens Apology for sundry proceedings by
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. That groundless Opinion, That a several Royal
assent to the executing of every particular Canon is required, is confuted. The
validity of the Ecclesiastical Laws. The clamours of Inconformists, Innovators
and Fanatics, against the putting of Ecclesiastical Laws in execution, though
the Ecclesiastical Officers and Ministers are by Act of Parliament severely
commanded to do it.
BY the late Act before mentioned, where the Doubt (so it is called there)
about the Coercive power in Ecclesiastical Courts is cleared and taken away.

One Proviso is, That that Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend,
or be construed to extend, to give unto any Archbishop or Bishop, or any other
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Judge, etc. any power or authority to exercise, etc.

If any be peccant that way, it ought to be amended.

Another Proviso forbids any Archbishop, Bishop, etc. to tender or administer
unto any person the Oath usually called the Oath Ex officio, or any other Oath,
whereby such person, to whom the same is tendered or administered, may be charged
or compelled to confess or accuse, or to purge him or her self of any criminal
matter or thing, whereby he or she may be liable to any censure or punishment.

This being now forbidden by Act of Parliament, every Subject ought to give
obedience therein: But some now insulting and upbraiding the Ecclesiastical
Courts, that all this while they have oppressed the Subject, with that
proceeding which the Parliament has taken away, renewing the old cry in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and ever since against such proceedings, which never till now
(I always except what was done in the late times of usurped government) were
legally prohibited. Though I am far from questioning the reasons whereupon that
Act passed, but do humbly submit to it both in word and practice; yet I hope it
will be allowed to make some defense against such persons, as so tax such
proceedings before the passing of this Act. And herein I shall follow that most
able Civilian, Richard Cousin Doctor of the Laws, and Dean of the Arches, in
that his Apology for sundry proceedings by Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, etc.
Mr. Cambden, as before, mentions him with honor, as surely he well deserved,
and that work of his, if nothing else, evinces it. Mr. Swinburn in that Work of
his of Last Wills and Testaments, printed at London for the Company of
Stationers, 1611. in the first part, sect. 6. numb. 8. fol. 17. writes thus of
him, and of that Work of his, that Apology: I find, says he, written by that
learned and no less religious man, Doctor Cosins (as I take it) in that worthy
Work entitled, An Apology for sundry proceedings by Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, etc. and so he goes on. Upon this subject he has written so
fully, that, I believe, little can be added to it; and if any should go about
it (excepting such additions as well may be added, by reason of some
emergencies since the time he wrote, and some other additions and explications,
not derogatory from him) they would be forced very much to plough with his
Heyfer, which would but look too much like a Plagiary. I could wish the book
were reprinted, and happily it will be so, which may serve for Topics to this
subject. For as all the Poets after Homer are said to drink of his Fountain,
according to that picture or statue of his, that denotes as much, with that
Inscription, Ridet anhelantem post se vestigia turbam. Even so must, I
conceive, all do from Doctor Cousin, that shall write upon this subject. I was
upon Epitomizing that Apology of his, and had made some progress therein; but
upon second thoughts desisted, thinking it better to refer the Reader to him,
rather then to adventure to abbreviate him, and thereby perhaps wrong him: an
offense that too many Epitomizers are guilty of; therefore, I say, I shall
only make use of some Notes, as confessed arrows out of his quiver, and sippe
of some others elsewhere, and point the Reader to his full stream, where any
that list may drink their fill.

Upon these words in the late Act; Provided, that this Act., nor any thing
therein contained, shall extend, or be construed to extend, or give unto any
Archbishop, Bishop, etc. any power or authority to exercise or execute, etc.
any jurisdiction which they might not have done before the year of our Lord
1639. or to abridge or diminish the Kings Majestics Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
matters or affairs, nor to confirm the Canons made in the year 1640.

I say, upon these words some are ready (mistaking questionless the words and
meaning of that Act) to renew that old exploded Opinion, or rather groundless
Fancy, That a several Royal assent to the executing of every particular Canon
is required. Hereto Doctor Cousin answers, That admitting this were true, then
all the other opinions of those that oppugn the ordinary Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical stand in no stead, and might be spared, because this would cut
off all at once. For none that exercise ordinary Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical,
have it in particularity, (which by the oppugners seems to be meant) otherwise
then by permission of Law, to every of their proceedings, and impossible were
it, by reason of the infinity of it, and troublesomness to procure such
particular assent to the execution of every Canon. His Majesty's Delegates,
when Appeals are made to His Majesty in Chancery, would signify nothing, could
not exercise the power to them delegated, by reason of the want of such
particular assent; and it is a gross absurdity to grant, (as even the Oppugners
and Innovators do) That Testamentary and Matrimonial causes are of
Ecclesiastical cognizance, (to say nothing of the rest of Ecclesiastical
causes) and yet cannot by reason of this want be dispatched, nor can be dealt
in by any other authority, according to any Law in force. This would speak a
defect in the public Government, that the Subject should have a right, but no
likely or ready mean to come by it; and great offenses by Law punishable, and
yet no man sufficiently authorized to execute these Laws. Since the abrogation
of Papal pretended Supremacy, when the ancient rights of the Kings of England,
of being Supreme Governors over all persons within their Dominions, as well in
all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal; and that no
foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has or ought to have,
any jurisdiction, power, superiority, preeminence or authority Ecclesiastical
or Spiritual within this Realm, and so forth, as in the Act and the Oath.

Since these rights were, as it were, ex postliminio restored, and declared to
have been, as they ever ought to have been, in the Kings of England, many Laws
have been made in several Parliaments for the strengthening of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and the more effectual execution thereof, and some of the
Ecclesiastical Laws were enlarged, astered and explained: 25 H. 8.19.
The Statutes for Delegates upon Appeals. 27 H 8 130. 32 H 8.7.
Not long after, two Statutes for assistance of ordinary Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and for the speedier recovery of Tithes in Courts Ecclesiastical.
34 and 35 H. 8 19.
The like for the recovery of Pensions, Procurations, etc. 1 Ed. 6. c. 2.
In the time of Edw. 6. in a Statute (since repealed by Queen Mary) a great
number of particular causes of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, are there (by the
way) rehearsed, that Ordinaries and other Ecclesiastical Judges might and did
then put in execution.


So 1 Mar. c. 3. 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz c. 23. and 9. That Perjury or Subornation
in a Court Ecclesiastical shall and may be punished by such usual and ordinary
Laws, as heretofore have been, and yet are used and frequented in the said
Ecclesiastical Courts. Which proves the usual practice of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical hitherto used (without any special assent) to be lawful.

So 13 Eliz. c. 4. etc. 10. and many more in the same Queens time, and King
James, and King Charles the First, that blessed King and Martyr. I say, many
are the Laws that have been made for the strengthening of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and the more effectual execution of it; and some of these Laws
were enlarged, altered and explained. But never was there any Law, Custom or
Act of Parliament, that required a several Royal assent to the executing of
every particular Canon. Many are the reasons which Dr. Cosens gives in the
first Chapter of his Apology against that particular Assent; wherein he shows
his great candor, and ingenuity, and desire to give abundant satisfaction to
all Opponents, though never so unreasonable, that were it not as clear as the
Noontide light, that no such particular assent is needful, some might think
that he feared his cause, and be ready to say, that Defensio nimis operosa,
reatum quasi arguit.

But touching the validity of the Ecclesiastical Laws, there needs, I conceive,
no more be said then what is expressed in that Act of Parliament 25 H. 8.19.
the Ecclesiastical Laws, that were in use and practice before that Statute, are
thereby established thus:

Provided that such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances and Synods Provincial,
being already made, which be not contrariant nor repugnant to the Laws,
Statutes and Customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings
Prerogative Royal, shall now still be used and executed, as they were before
the making of this Act, until such time as they be viewed, etc. by the 32.
persons mentioned in that Act: which is not yet done.

The Ecclesiastical Laws, which have been made since that Act, and all that
ever hereafter shall be made, so long as that Statute stands in force, (the
requisites in that Act being observed) are thereby, I conceive, confirmed, or
to be confirmed. The Submission and Petition of the Clergy mentioned in that
Act is, That they would not enact or put in ure any new Canons, etc. in their
Convocation, without the Kings Royal assent and authority in that behalf.

There it is said, That the Convocation in the time coming shall always be
assembled by authority of the Kings Writ, and that the Clergy must have the
Kings most Royal assent and license, to make, promulge, and execute such
Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances, Provincial and Synodal: else they may not
enact, promulge or constitute any such Canons, etc. And this course has ever
since been observed. Every Convocation called by His Majesty's Writ and the
Clergy, had especial license from His Majesty to enact such Canons, etc. and to
execute them.

The Provision following being observed, which is this, Provided that no
Canons, Constitutions or Ordinances, shall be made or put in execution in this
Realm by authority of the Convocation of the Clergy, which shall be contrariant
or repugnant to tho Prerogative Royal, or the Customs, Laws or Statutes of this
Realm, any thing contained in that Act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

If any be put in execution contrary to this Proviso, and contrary to any
after-Acts of Parliament, whereby His Majesty has further power acknowledged
in causes Ecclesiastical, then it is illegal: but that is much sooner alleged
than proved. The particular Ecclesiastical Laws in force, have by Dr. Cosens
and others been sufficiently demonstrated, I humbly conceive. In case any
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical or Civil within this Realm, be not derived or
claimed from the Crown, as to the execution of it at least; then the former
objection were of force; but another Act of Parliament, 8 Eliz. c. 1. shows the
contrary sufficiently: where all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is acknowledged
United to the Crown, as there fully: and that very clause 1 Eliz. 1. together
with His Majesty's Letters Patents directed forth for confirming Archbishops
and Bishops, is brought in the preamble thereof as a strong proof, without
scruple or ambiguity, that the authority and jurisdiction by the Clergy
executed, is thereby given them from Her Majesty. This also, were there nothing
else, were sufficient to entitle them the Kings Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws,
as well as other Laws, are called the Kings Majesty's Laws. But they are up and
down in the Acts of Parliament called the Kings and the Queens Ecclesiastical
Laws, 1 Eliz. c. 2. 5 Eliz. c. 25. 25 H. 8.27. etc. and even by the
Note-gatherer, that great oppugner, against whom the Doctor writes, they are
called the Ecclesiastical Laws of England. And in this late Act above mentioned
they are called the Kings Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws.

Yet for executing of these Laws by the Ecclesiastical Judges, what outcries
were made against them? especially in the beginning of the late Long
Panliament, by His late Majesty, of blessed memory, called the Black
Parliament, Summa imis miscendo; and what favors were then afforded to those
Boutefeu's, as we have since had sad experience of them, God grant we may be
cafeful of them for the future, I am unwilling to recite. Ecclesiastical Judges
are not only tied by their offices and Canon. 117. Canon. and Constitut. 1604.
Oaths, but* at least in some particulars, for which they have, though most
unjustly, been much clamoured against) are most severely by Act of Parliament
charged to see the execution of, if not of others too, yet of one especial
Ecclesiastical Law; for their care wherein some of them have been well-nigh
ruined: that is, that according to that Act of Parliament, 1 Eliz. c. 2. For
uniformity of Prayer and Administration of Sacraments, every person should
diligently and faithfully resort to their Parish Church or Chapel, where
Common prayer and such Services of God shall be used, upon every Sunday and
other days ordained and used to be kept as Holy Days, and then and there to
abide orderly and soberly, during the time of Common prayer, Preaching, or
other Service of God to be used and ministered, etc. Then follows thus, And for
due execution hereof, the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Lords Temporal,
and all the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, does in Gods name
earnestly require and charge, all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor themselves to the utmost of their
knowledge, that the due and true execution hereof may be had, throughout their
Dioceses and charges, as they will answer before God for such evils and
plagues, wherewith Almighty God may justly punish his people for neglecting
this good and wholesome Law. Who would think, (had we not sadly felt their
designs) that the great Magnifiers of Parliaments (for which I discommend them
not, so they keep within due compass) would have been so bitter against those,
that acted but according to these strict Parliamentary charges?

CHAP. III. The Heads of the several Chapters in that Apology of Doctor Cosens.
Part 1.
C.1. THe particular distribution of causes proved to be of Ecclesiastical
cognizance, besides Testamentary and Matrimonial. With a discourse of

C.2. Bishops Certificates against persons excommunicated, being a special
point of their voluntary Jurisdiction, where there is no party that prosecuteth.

C.3. That matters in the former Chapter adjoined to Testamentary and
Matrimonial causes (though properly they be not of Testament or Matrimony) are
of Ecclesiastical cognizance, and how far.

C.4. General proofs out of Statutes, that sundry other causes besides
Testamentary and Matrimonial, are of Ecclesiastical cognizance.

C.5. That Suits for Tithes of Benefices upon voidance or spoliation, likewise
that Suits for Tithes, Oblations, Mortuaries, and Pensions, Procurations, etc.
are of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, is proved by Statutes especially.

C.6. That Suits for right of Tithes belong to the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
and how far, is showed out of the books and Reports of the Common Law; so of
places of Burial and Churchyards, and of Pensions, Mortuaries, Oblations, etc.

C.7. Of right to have a Curate, and of Contributions to Reparations, and to
other things required in Churches.

C.8. Proofs in general, that sundry crimes and offenses are punishable by
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and namely Idolatry, Heresy, Perjury, or Laesio
fidei; and how far the last of these is there to be corrected: also of
disturbance of Divine Service, or not frequenting of it, and neglect of the
Sacraments.

C.9. That Simony, Usury, Defamation or Slander, beating of a Clerk, Sacrilege,
Brawling or Fighting in Church or Churchyard, Dilapidations or waste of an
Ecclesiastical Living, and all Incontinency; are punishable by Ecclesiastical
authority, and how far.

C.10. Several other matters reckoned in this tenth Chapter, as ordeining of
real Compositions, and disannulling of them, suspension ab ingressu Ecclesiae,
etc. Interdiction of a Church, Sequestration, Excommunication, Parish-Clerks
fees, Goods due to a Church detained, Blasphemy, Idolatry. Apostasy from
Christianity, violation and profanation of the Sabbath, Subornation of
Perjury, Attestation of a woman's chastity, Drunkenness, filthy speech,
violation of a Sequestration or Induction, hindering and disturbance to carry
away Tithes, enjoining of Penance corporal, contempt of obeying the Decrees of
the Ecclesiastical Judge, Fees due in Ecclesiastical Courts, Curates and Clerks
wages, Forgery in an Ecclesiastical matter, as of Letters Testimonial, of
Orders of Institution, burying of excommunicate persons, communicating with
excommunicate persons, frequenters of Conventicles, digging up of Corpse buried,
and generally for any matter Ecclesiastical indefinitely, by the Articuls
cleri, may be cited: All these are of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and proofs
that any Subjeet, Lay or other, may be cited in any cause Ecclesiastical.

C.11. That Laymen may be cited and urged to take Oaths in other causes then
Testamentary and Matrimonial.

C.12. The grounds of the opinions to the contrary examined and confuted.

C.13. That judgment of Heresy still remains (at the Common Law) in Judges
Ecclesiastical, and that the Proviso touching Heresy in the Statute 1 Eliz. 1.
is only spoken of Ecclesiastical Commissioners thereby authorized.

C.14. That by the Statute Her Majesty may commit authority, and they may take
and use for Ecclesiastical causes Attachments, Imprisonments and Fines. Herein
he writes also how the Law was at that time.

C.15. That an Ecclesiastical person may be deprived of his Benefice without
indictment or prosecution of party.

C.16. That after forty days an excommunicate person may be otherwise punished
then upon the Writ De Excommunicato capiendo, and that the said Writ may and
ought to be awarded upon contempts arising on other causes Ecclesiastical, then
any of those ten crimes mentioned in the Statute 5 Eliz. 23.

C.17. Of a Prohibition, what it is, where it lies not, and where it does, and
how it cease by a Consultation, and of the Writ of Indicavit.

C.18. An Analysis or unfolding of the two special Statutes touching
Praemunire, with sundry questions and doubts about that matter, requiring more
grave resolution.

Then in the second part of his Apology the Doctor sets forth his Proofs,
together with his Answers, to the objections made against the manner of
practice of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical by those that oppugn it.

C.1. Of the distinction of Offenses, and several kinds and ends in punishing
them, with the necessity of punishments.

C.2. Of two sorts of prosecution of crimes and offenses, viz. by a party, and
of office; the practice of them in Scripture, and in the several Courts of this
Realm.

C.3. Of the sundry kinds of objecting crimes by a party mentioned in the Civil
Law, as by reason of a man's public charge and function; also by way of
Exception, Supplication, Complaint, Delation and Accusation. The true
signification of the word Accusatio, its diverse acceptions, definition and
exposition thereof, with some reason of the frequency of Accusation in Courts
of the Civil Laws in former times, is also declared.

C.4. That the prosecution of crimes by way of Accusation, is in most places
forbidden, or grown into disuse. The reasons hereof be, partly the danger to
the Accusers, and partly the hatefulness of that course. Therein also is
disputed, whether all Accusation be unlawful, and certain points delivered to
be observed by all them that will accuse others.

C.5. Of the several acceptions of the word Officium, the signification of the
words Inquisitio, Question, crimina ordinaria and extraordinaria, the reason why
enquiry by office came in place of Accusation. Of Enquiry in general and
special, of-Enquiry special, Ex officio nobih sive mero, mixto and promoto, and
of the privileges of proceeding ex mero officio above the other.

C.6. Of Denunciation, a special means of stirring up the office, of the
manifold use thereof on the other side the Sea. The general acception of that
word, and of four kinds of Denunciation, how they differ one from another, what
is required in them, and when a Denouncer is to be condemned or excused of
expenses, and what course of dealing against crimes and offenses, is holden
both in Courts of the Ecclesiastical Commission, and in ordinary Courts
Ecclesiastical of this Realm.

C.7. That the Civil and Canon Laws allow sundry means to ground a special
Enquiry of office against a crime, besides Accusation and Presentment: therein
is also contained an Answer to a supposed Rule, end declared how from general
they descend to special Enquiry. And that besides those two, either a fame, or
clamosa insinuatio, or private judicial Denunciation, or Canonical
Denunciation, or Indicia, or taking with the manner, or other notoriety of the
fact, or impeachment by some of the Accomplices, or collusion of the accuser, or
the not objecting in due time, or when the Enquiry tends but to a spiritual
punishment, may severally any of them serve to warrant such enquiry, with some
observations touching the nature of most of these.

C.8. That to proceed sometimes against an offense, otherwise then upon
Accusation or Presentment, or then upon an Appeal or Indictment, which two at
the Common Law have respective correspondence unto the two former) is no
diverse, much less any contrary or repugnant course to the Laws, Statutes and
Customs of this Realm. This is proved by Common Law, Statutes, and practice in
proceedings informative and punitive, with answer to certain objections made to
the contrary.

C.9. How the second opinion (here to be treated of) is, that no Lay-person may
be cited of office in any cause but Testamentary or Matrimonial; and that the
drift of that opinion is against proceeding of office in matters criminal. The
necessary use and equity of proceeding (sometimes) criminally by the Judges
office in Courts both Temporal and Ecclesiastical.

C.10. Contains an Answer to some further objections, made against the
convenience and reasonableness of proceeding against crimes, of office.

C.11. That the Laws of the Realm do use Enquiries and Proceedings ex officio,
that they allow it in Courts Ecclesiastical, with answer to some objections
that are made to the contrary.

C.12. Is set down a Reply to the Note-gatherers answers, given to certain
reasons, that have been made long ago, for to show the like course to be also
practiced in Temporal Courts; and an answer to his reasons brought to prove,
that in proceeding of office there is some contrariety unto the Laws of England.

C.13. That the Enquiry ex officio against crimes, is allowed both in Civil and
Temporal Courts, and in Ecclesiastical also, by the two Laws Canon and Civil.

C.14 Contains an answer to such objections, as upon the Civil or Canon Laws
are brought against all proceedings of office in causes criminal, by the
Treatisor and the Note-gatherer.

C.15. Enquiry and proceeding of office, without an accuser, and grounded upon
some other of the means, before proved sufficient to enter into such enquiry, is
approved by sundry examples of Scripture.

C.16. An Answer is made to such objections, as out of Scripture or
Ecclesiastical Writers, be made against criminal proceeding of office, by the
Note-gather and others.

In the third part he concludes upon the whole matter, for which his Apology
was made.

C.1. Of the lawfulness of Oaths. What an Oath is, and the reason or original
formal cause of the use of Oaths.

C.2. An Answer to certain doubts made concerning oaths, as namely, why in
Scripture God is said to have sworn, how by Oath he is said to be called to
Witness. An Oath no tempting of God, but a part of his Worship. Why
nevertheless some are repelled from taking Oaths. Whether Adjuration be lawful.
After whose meaning an Oath is to be understood. Whether every promissory Oath
be simply to be kept. Whether an Oath may be dispensed with, and how far, and
whether a Christian may by mutual Oaths, contract with him that swears by
false gods.

C.3. Division of Oaths according to the outward form of taking them, according
to the matter and inward form of them, with plain description of every kind of
Oath.

C.4. That the Ceremonies used in taking and giving of corporal oaths, with
laying hands upon the Bible or Testament, and swearing by the Contents of it,
are not unlawful.

C.5. The true issue of the next Opinion in question. Two sorts of crimes and
offenses prohibited. In what causes an Oath here spoken of may not be
ministered, and the manifold convenience and necessity of an Oath, sometimes to
be ministered in a cause criminal and penal unto the party, with some few
objections touching inconveniences thereof, answered,

C.6. That Oaths of men touching matters damageable, criminal, and penal to
themselves, are urged and acted by Temporal Courts, and by the Laws of this
Realm.

C.7. Wherein are contained Answers to such Objections and Reasons, as be made
for proof of a contrariety or repugnancy in these Oaths, unto the Statutes,
Laws, or Customs of this Realm, and a Reply to the Treatisours Answers made
unto certain Objections, supposed likely to be made in justification of this
kind of Oath, by the Temporal Laws.

C.8. That ministering of such Oaths, is by the Law of the Realm, allowed unto
Judges of Ecclesiastical Courts, and some few Objections made to the contrary
answered.

C.9. That such Oath touching a man's own crime is allowed both by the Canon and
Civil Laws; how far, and in what sort, and that the like is established and
thought equal, by the Laws and Customs of sundry other Nations, as well ancient
as modern.

C.10. An Answer to some Objections pretended to be made against this kind of
Oath from the Laws Civil and Canon.

C.11. That not only such an Oath may be taken, but also being by Magistrates
duly commanded, ought not to be refused, is approved by Scriptures, by practice
of the Primitive Church, and of late times; together with a Reply unto certain
Answers made unto some proofs here used.

C.12. An answer unto such Objections, as be pretended to be gathered from
Divinity, Divines, and from the examples of godly men against ministering Oaths
unto parties in matters of their own crimes.

C.13. Four several opinions of the Innovators against the parties taking of an
Oath in criminal causes, with Answers also unto their Reasons and Objections.

C.14. That a man being charged by authority to discover his knowledge touching
some offense, which his Christian brother is supposed to have done, is bound to
reveal it, though it may breed trouble and punishment to his broaher, and the
Reasons to the contrary are answered and refuted.

C.15. Their Arguments are answered, that condemn the ministering and taking of
an Oath, as unlawful, because they have not distinct knowledge given unto them
of every particular before the taking of it, and the like course by Examples,
is upproved lawful and godly.

C.16. That after the party has answered upon his Oath, it is neither unusual,
unlawful, or ungodly to seek to convince him by Witness, or other trial, if he
be suspected not to have delivered a plain and full truth; and somewhat also in
approbation of Canonical Purgation, with answers to the Treatisors Objections
against them.

CHAP. IV. By the late Act, the manner of proceeding in Ecclesiastical Courts,
is not altered, but left as it was. A Summary relation of what Doctor Cosens in
his Apology has asserted and made good by Gods word, the practice of the
Primitive Christians, the opinion of the Fathers, the Laws Canon and Civil, and
the Laws of the Land allowing and warranting them. The like practice at Common
Law, and at Geneva and other places, pretending strict Reformation.
AS to the proceeding Ex officio, or otherwise in the Ecclesiastical Courts,
according to Law and the due former practice, nothing in that late Act is said
against it; and theresore implicitly, at least, it is allowed and approved.
Rati habitio mandato aequiparatur, it is a Rule of Law. The Law in that case
remains at it was before, nothing need be said in justification thereof, but
only as touching the Oath Ex officio, or other Oath, not to be administered as
there, and touching Purgation.

Touching the Proviso's in that late Act, that which forbids Ecclesiastical
Judges, to exercise any power, etc. as there; and that other Proviso that
forbids them to tender, or administer unto any person whatsoever, the Oath
usually called the Oath Ex officio, or any other Oath whereby such person to
whom the same is tendered or administered, may be charged or compelled to
confess, or accuse him or her self of any criminal matter or thing, whereby he
or she may be liable to any censure or punishment. I say, touching the former
Proviso he has, I conceive, given full satisfaction in that his Apology, in
answering to the objections made in his time thereabout. Therein also he
clearly and fully justifies the proceedings of Ecclesiastical Courts in general
and particular cases. And to that other Proviso touching the Oath Ex officio,
or any other Oath; and touching Purgation, as in that Act, I humbly conceive,
salvo meliore judicio, he fully and clearly evinces it, that the saw and
practice thereof was just, to tender and administer the Oath ex of^icio, or at
the instance of a party, for the finding out of Simony, Adultery, and other
crimes and deeds of darkness, (...) mae probationis, so (...) evil may be
removed from the and. Always provided that there was just cause for the
Ecclesiastical Judge so to tender and administer that Oath; that is, that there
was, before such oath was so administered or tendered to any party, due proof
made of a common fame, that the party was guilty of such crime, touching which
such oath was to be administered; or at least there was, as in some cases,
denunciatio Evangelica, or canonica, or insinuatio clamosa, or other sufficient
indicia praesumptionis or suspicionis, to induce the Judge to tender that oath;
and so the practice always was, and if it ever was otherwise, (as I believe
that will scarcely be proved) it ought not to have been. He sets down the due
cautions that ought to be had, when it is very probable that the person to whom
that oath is tendered, will forswear himself, then to forbear it; and that in
capital crimes, to the danger of loss of life or limb, it is not the practice
in any Courts to administer such oath, for that very fear of Perjury; it being
too much to be feared, that too too many would rather forswear themselves then
endanger either life or limb, (though in some places of Scripture it appears,
that even in such cases such oaths have been administered.) The Father of lies
could speak truth in such a case, Skin for skin (or rather as some learned in
the Hebrew would have it) Job ^ 4.
Skin after skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life. There also
he shows the weakness and inconcludency of that vulgar Saying, Nemo tenetur
seipsum prodere or accusare, being indeed the trite and general objection. That
a man is not properly said to betray or accuse himself, when as public fame,
or other sufficient indicia, presumptions or suspicions have accused him, these
are instead of the accusers: and it seems dis-ingenuous at least, in those
especially that pretend to Learning, and have or might have examined the
Canons, and Ecclesiastical Laws in that point, to urge one piece of a sentence
and leave out the rest; where they found or might have found that sentence,
Nemo tenetur seipsum prodere or accusare, they did also or might have found
that which follows in that sentence, viz. Sed proditus per famam, tenetur
seipsum ostendere, and innocentiam suam purgare. The accuser of his brethren
cited Scripture to our Savior; says he, Mat. 4 6.
He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall
bear thee up, etc. leaving out that in the Text that follows after these words,
Psalm. 91.11.
He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, that is, to keep thee in all
thy ways; which alters the case. That note or comment upon the Law, (or if
they will needs call it a Rule or Maxim it matters not) Nemo tenetur seipsum
prodere vel accusare, sive propriam turpitudinem revelare, is to be understood
in crimes simply secret, and which are no ways disclosed or come to light. But
when such secret sins are by some of those ways, that open a way to enquiry of
a person supposed criminous, come abroad, and so in some sort are manifested;
then those former rules cease, and that of St. Chrysostom comes in, Homil. 31.
ad Hebraeos, Non tibi dico, ut te prodas in publicum, neque apud alium accuses:
but upon such disclosing, then Proditus tenetur seipsum ostendere, and
innocentiam suam purgare. This is for the avoiding of scandal, and that the
party may be reformed. Therefore does Aquinas himself reason thus, Thom. 2.2.
Cum quis, says he, secundum ordinem juris a judice interrogatur, non ipse se
prodit, sed ab alio proditur, dum ei necessitas respondends imponitur, per eum
cui obedire tenetur.

As for tendering the Oath to the party where there is an accuser, that is not
done upon the crime till the fame be proved, or sufficient presumptions,
circumstances, indicia, or suspicions, or semiplena probatio, the oath of one
sufficient witness at least, to induce the judge to give that oath, though
penal in some sort to the party.

This practice he proves consonant to Gods Word, to the practice of the
primitive Christian, and the opinion of the holy Doctors and Fathers of the
Church; as also consonant to the practice of Geneva, and other at least
seemingly strictly reformed Churches: and to the practice of all Christian
Nations, and other Nations not Christian, guided only by right reason and the
Law of Nature: as also that by the known Laws of this Land, the Ecclesiastical
Judges were so warranted and commanded to give that oath: the Ecclesiastical
Laws and Canons being full and clear in that point. Then he shows how the
proceeding at Common Law in this Land is the same, not only in some criminal
but civil causes also. For private debts 'twixt private persons penal to them,
as in Wagers of Law, sometimes for a greater, sometimes a lesser debt, 'twixt
two private parties, with the parties oath that is accused, and his
Compurgators too; even as in Purgation Canonical in the Ecclesiastical Courts,
together with other Purgation or Decisory Oaths at Common Law. Proceedings in
Chancery, with the several species and kinds of cases, wherein such Oaths at
Common Law are tendered, being very numerous, and are by him cap. 6. in the
third part of his Apology, and other parts thereof reckoned up, and fully set
forth. And if this may be done in civil causes, ought it not much rather be
allowed the Church in criminal, which works only, medicinaliter, to
reformation? the Commonwealth works ad poenam, the Church not so; this to the
amendment of the party, to bring him to a voluntary submission, and to take
away the offense and scandal which he has justly given to his Neighbor, and
to lead a new life; that (perhaps) to the loss of liberty, corporal punishment,
or livelihood at least, besides the infamy of being convicted of doing
dishonestly and unworthily.

CHAP. V. That it is consonant to Gods Word to give such an Oath Ex officio, or
otherwise.
Romans 13.
EVery soul is to be subject to the Higher Powers. This is to be understood in
all commands not contrary to Gods Word; in such comes in the Apostles rule,
Acts 5.29.
It is better to obey God then man. That the giving such an oath is not
contrary to Gods word: An oath duly imposed by the Magistrate, necessitates the
Subject to take it, as appears by the commandment of God himself, Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his name. The like is
given by the Lord in the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 4.25.
O Israel, thou shall swear, The Lord lives in truth, in judgment and
righteousness. Joshua gave charge to all the Magistrates of Israel, that Josh
13.2,7.
They shall not make mention of the Gods of other Nations, nor shall cause to
swear by them. Saul did not only charge the people with an oath, but 1 Samuel 14.
made them vow with a curse, not to eat any food that day till night: therefore
one of them reported to Jonathan, Saul's son, That his father had made the
people to swear. Some would cavil at this, as but an Adjuration, and would
without reason difference that from an Oath; but in that Chapter, 1 Samuel 14. it
is four several times called an Oath. The wise King Solomon imposed an oath
upon Shime^ in a cause capital to him, 2 Kings 41.
Did not I make thee (says he) swear by the Lord, etc. So King Saul 1 Samuel 24.
urged David to swear unto him. For a private offense only between Neighbors,
King Solomon testifies that a necessary oath of Purgation may be required by
the Complainant, 1 Kings 8.
When a man shall trespass against his neighbor, and he lay upon him an Oath
to cause him to swear, etc. King Josias 2 Chronicles. 34.
made a covenant and vow, and caused all that were found in Jerusalem and
Benjamin to stand to it. Nehemiah Neh. 5.12.
caused the Priests to swear, etc. It is assigned for a special mark of a Godly
man, Number, 30.3. Psalm. 15.4.
To swear to his neighbor, and not to disappoint him, though it be to his own
hinderance.

Abraham said thus to his servant, I will make thee swear by the Lord God of
the Heavens, etc. Genesis 14.3.
this in a private cause, much more a Magistrate in a cause wherein the
Commonwealth or Church of God has Interest, to have it sincerely dealt in.
Genesis 25.33.
Jacob moved Esau to the sale of his birthright, and took an Oath for
confirmation of it. Deuteronomy. 19.17.
A man supposed to have born false witness against another, is thereof brought
in question, and re-examined; if it be objected, it was not upon oath, by
consequence of reason it must be upon oath, when what he has said before upon
oath is re-examined, and this in a case very penal to him. The oath of
Adjuration is very frequent in Scripture, Prove. 29.14. about not declaring
cursing which he heard. By the History Jud 17 1,2.
of Micah, as we are 1 Cor. 10.3.
bound to do all to the glory of God; so it belongs to the glory of God for a
man, by due presumptions (burdned with a crime, and charged by the Magistrate)
to confess of himself; as appears by the history of Achan. The lot fell upon
him, but this was but an inducement to ground a special Inquisition against
him; if hereupon he might have been executed, Joshua needed not to have
required any further confession of him; Lev. 5.1.
but he goes further with a most solemn Adjuration, (in those days used for an
oath, the Hebrew word signisying both, and being translated sometimes
juramentum, and sometimes adjuratio. Josh 7.9.
Son, give glory to the Lord God of Israel, etc. albeit the punishment was
capital, Ezra 10.^.
Ezra adjured the Chief Priests, etc. Calvin in his Institutions gathers,
that Achan took an oath. When a man is found secretly murdered in the field,
and the murder is not known, nor suspected; yet all the Elders of the next City
thereunto should use certain Ceremonies, and then swear, Deuteronomy. 21.
That their hands have not shed this blood, nor their eyes have seen him that
shed it In Leviticus a certain Sacrifice is to be made for certain sins,
amongst which this is one, as Arias Montanus translates it out of the Hebrew;
Levit. 5.1
If a soul, or a man shall have sinned, and have heard the voice of (...)
Adjuration or Oath, etc. That which is here said, if he ha^ heard the voice of
an Oath: the Geneva Translation offers it thus in the Margin, as if it were
nearer to the Hebrew ^en the other in that Text, viz. If the judge has taken
an (...) of (...) other. When a man delivers money or stuff on trust Exodus 22.
to be kept by his neighbor, if it happen to be imbezelled away, and the thief
be not certainly known or found, by the Law of God he must take a necessary
oath of purgation and enquiry. The same also is a little after established by
God touching any quick goods happening to be left in deposito. A sacrifice of
Atonement for such a sin of Perjury is prescribed, Ibid. v. 10.
If any do sin (says the Lord) and deny unto his neighbor, etc. Number. 5.14.
If a man be moved with a jealous mind against his wife, she is not only to be
charged with an oath, but to have further trial to drink the bitter waters.
J^r. 38 14.
When the Prophet Jeremy was charged by the King in a generality, to answer that
which he would ask him, the Prophet promises so it should not be capital to
him, he would answer it. Whether upon oath or not oath, (for before God it is
the same) no doubt he answered the truth. Jer. 37.13.
The same Prophet, when he was charged with a particular high crime, refused not
to answer, or bid them prove it, but roundly answers it. 2 Kings 5.
So Elisha examineth Gehaz^ his servant. Gen 43.3.
Joseph in Egypt gave an oath to his brethren. Ezekiel. 7.13.
Zedckiah took an oath of Subjection, and is blamed and punished for breaking
of it. 1 Samuel 21.2.
The oath given to the Gibeonites was to be kept, and the violation of it
punished. For the manner of proceeding, or the cause of questioning, we see
many instances: First, in flagranti crimine, John 8.4.
if a party be taken in the manner, as we say; or the fact is manifest: as Number.
25 8
Zimri's was. Deuteronomy. 21.1
Or though the fact be manifest, the person committing it is unknown, or the
question is of the person, the fact being unknown; as in John 7.18.
Achans case. Or by indicia, suspected signs; so Genesis 3.8.
Adam hiding himself: So against Gen 4.6.
Cain, Abel not appearing: Adam impeacht Eve, and Eve the Serpent, and both
were punished upon it. Or upon infamy and cry, Genesis 18.20.
The cry of the Sodomites being great, I will descend, says the Lord. And such
kind of Enquiries are made both in the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.4
If a report shall come to thee, or thou shall hear; as also in the Gospel, as
against the incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5.1.
It is reported. Or by suggestion or complaint, as in Job ^.11.
Jobs cause, where the Devil was Accuser. Joseph only upon suspicion gave his
brothers the oath. Evangelical denunciation, as Mat. 18.7. when Church or State
are in danger, as in the Valley of Achor, that is against the troublers of
Israel, so signifies the word Achor. When Peter and John were examined in the
great Council, Acts 4.7.
By what power, or in what name they had done that miracle; Peter full of the
Holy Ghost answered plainly and truly, though it might have been capital to
him. What spirit are they of, who being required by lawful Authority to answer
in matters not capital, yet will not answer at all? for upon a man's own
confession judicial, though not upon oath, he may be equally convicted. Acts 6.
In the proceedings against St. Stephen there were no Accusers in truth, but
those who by Subornation denounced him to the Priests, and who are twice-called
witnesses, because they deposed against him; yet he refused not to make answer,
though capital to him. Acts 22.
When the Captain asked St. Paul, whether he were not that Egyptian that made a
Sedition, etc. he answered directly and denied it. Likewise the same Saint
Paul, in all other his conventings before Authority, mentioned in the Acts Acts
4.25, etc.
(even at the suit and accusation of a party) refused not particularly and
truly to answer to all that was objected. And all this is done to the sifting
out truth, and punishing crimes, either truly so, or at least thought to be so;
and criminous persons are questioned, as well of the fact, as circumstances or
fame; Gen 3.9.
Have thou eaten of the fruit of the forbidden tree? So the Princes questioned
Baruch about Jeremiahs book, Jer. 26.17.
Tell us, how did thou write these words? So Ezra 10.11.
Esras examined the questioned persons concerning their own fact. So the Acts
23.20
High Priest, having committed Saint Paul, examined him further, for oftentimes
Accusers (as the Heathen could observe) fall off; all cannot, some will not
accuse; what then? many crimes, being the deeds of darkness, cannot be Ephesians.
5.11.
revealed; Prove. 16.5.
Because hand is in hand, and they will not bewray themselves. Because the name
of Doeg sounds harsh, and to come forth to accuse a man is accounted poor and
odious, a matter of cost, danger and Prove. 25.8.
Infamy; must Villainy therefore be hid, and scattered abroad, and get strength,
till they break out to the destruction of the Commonwealth? Or because none can
or will (for it is all one, whether one will not accuse or cannot accuse)
therefore it is not lawful to question? and without an Oath it is to little
purpose* theresore God commands that way of Adjuration or giving an Oath. 1
Kings 2^.
So the King adjured Micheas, Mat. 26.93.
so the High Priest our Savior, and both of them answered. But should any
question Adjuration, even a clear oath was lawfully given even to the actor; as
Exodus 22.8. 1 Kings 8 3. and therefore more then permitted to the Magistrate.
For surely it were hard, if every private man might require an oath of the
questioned, and not the Magistrate: should it be lawful in the case of a Pawn,
and not of a Kingdom? An oath is an end of controversy, says St. Paul; Heb.
6.16.
then an oath to be taken for that end. In a case Matrimonial, which is merely
Ecclesiastical, Interrogatories were administered with oath, (as in a cause of
Incontinency, Number. 5.) and the proceedings being by Enquiry, without any
accuser at all. And this which is to be noted in the case in Esdras, Esdras
1.8,9.
they are no ways forced to it, but desire to take their oath first, and to be
examined after; then which there is no cause more suitable, then to the
proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts before the passing of the late Act, and
against which the Innovators heretofore used to take exceptions. In some of
these abovementioned instances, we see how oaths were administered even in
capital causes, much more may they be where there is not that danger, nay, no
danger of loss of Goods, Liberty, or any other loss; but only for a medicine
to the soul, for reformation of manners, and taking away scandal and offense
given. They were questioned too, we see, upon small suspicions, signs,
presumptions, or any other causes of question, nay, nothing at all as to the
person questioned, upon whom no true color of suspicion lay, (something like
our Coroners proceedings in some cases) but only a fact was committed, that
was apparent, whereof it was possible that he was not guilty, as in the case of
a person found slain; then much more ought it to be upon great suspicions,
presumptions, or public fame thereof proved. This being thus by Gods Word, in
the next place we may look into the practice and opinion of the primitive
Christians hereupon.

CHAP. VI. That the Opinion and Practice of the Primitive Christians, and the
Fathers of the Church, was to administer such Oath Ex officio, and upon
Accusation, and for Purgation Canonical, with the practice at Geneva.
IT is well said by an ancient and learned Cromatius in 5 Mat. Facit. canon.
36. council. Tolet. quart.
Writer, Dominus inter juramentum and loquelam nostram, nullam vult esse
differentiam. And Aquinas says, Thom. 2.2. qu. 69. art. 3.
If he which is brought into question, and interrogated by the Judge without
his oath, shall answer untruly, that therein he sins deadly. The old
Christians in the primitive Church were far from such shifts of answering
dangerous questions propounded to them by Heathen Magistrates, or from
answering untruths to them. Tertullian is herein very plentiful, especially in
his book called Apologeticon: Tertul. in Apol. c. 1.
A Christian, says he, if he be indicted or denounced to the Magistrate, he
rejoices in it; if he be accused, he propounds no defense; when he is
interrogated, he most willingly confesses; and when he is condemned, he gives
them or God thanks. And much more has Tertullian to this purpose. St.
Augustine Aug. sermon. 28. de verbo Apost. cap. 6.
does plainly establish and allow of Oaths taken concerning a man's open
offenses, being indeed such also in their own nature, If perhaps (says he)
thine Oath be urged, (meaning a Decisory oath, be exacted of thee by a private
person) say not, I will not swear, for it comes of evil which thou do, but
yet of his evil that exacteth it of thee; insomuch as thou have no other means
but thine oath to purge and clear thy self of the matter in handling. Aug.
ibid. c. 10.
In another place he speaks and allows of oaths taken in way of purgation of one
suspected for theft: Aug. ep. 137.
and in another place he says and approves of the same practice at Millain;
this was in a civil cause criminally moved, and for theft; a crime, though not
simply capital by the Civil Laws. In another place; Aug. in qu. Lev.
In denouncing others (says he, speaking of Denunciation of faults to the
Magistrate) this moderation is always to be used by us, that we relate it unto
such which may rather help than hurt him, (in case the party shall swear
falsely) either by correcting him, or by deprecation to God for him, so that he
will by confessing his fault apply this remedy unto himself. Chrysostom. hom. 16. ad
pop. Antioc.
St. Chrysostom allows of Decisory Oaths or Wagers of Law, and testifies that
such necessary oaths were in those times imposed to exact men's confessions, and
whether they had stolen some certain thing or not. This he allows touching
mere crimes in their own nature, and that upon the instance of a Plaintiff
particularly interested but in his goods and chattels.

This kind of oath was not only allowed in the old Church, but commanded to be
put in use (as lawful and consonant unto Gods Word) against persons convented
and had in suspicion, even in one Church, which the most and hottest oppugners
of this oath do reckon to be best, yea, and almost the only Reformation that
may rightly be so called: For in the Discipline of France, concluded of in the
National Synod there, 1559, 1561, 1563, 1565. it was thus declared; The
Ecclesiastical Senate or Consistory, act. 12.
The faithful may be constrained by the Consistory to tell the truth, so far
forth as it derogateth nothing from the duthority of the Magistrate.

They may be constreined, say they, but there is no compulsion, but either
Civil, which they will not arrogate to themselves, as torture or racking,
imprisoning or fining, etc. or else by the parties oath, which upon pain of
Perjury, if he once swear, or of conviction if he will not, does as it were
constrein a man to say truth. And that an Oath is meant by the Canon of the
French Church, we are taught both by the History of Camperell a French Minister
at Geneva, as also by that of those who danced in Widow Balthazars house there.
Interepist Calv^n. in folio page 421, 422.
Camperell was appointed by the Consistory of Elders there, to be examined upon
his Oath upon certain Interrogatories, whereof also two concerned what he had
in his very purpose and intention of mind. Calvin. Farello page 64. epist. in
folio.
The Dancers, because at first they denied it, were put to their corporal oaths,
to declare the whole truth of that merriment. And all dancing there is held as
an offense and grievous crime, as appears by the Ordinances of Geneva, and by
the very last frame of Discipline concluded 1571. by the French Churches.

For Purgation Canonical, as it was used in the Ecclesiastical Courts of this
Kingdom, in a word it is the same in these Courts in a criminal cause, as at
Common Law a Wager of Law is in a civil cause; differs no more then thus, this
is touching out Lands or Goods, that touching our Good name and Credit. It is
so far from being condemned by good and godly Bishops in ancient times, that by
whole Councils it has been prescribed: Council. Tribur. canon. 21.
Let a Layman, says one Council, if need be, purge himself by his Oath, and
let a Priest by the consecration of the holy Sacrament, be interrogated. And
another Council thus, Ivo. lib. 5. ex council. Agath.
Let a Priest, if he can, purge himself of the crime with seven of his Order,
and a Deacon with three. So was it decreed by a third Council, Ivo. ibid. ex
council. Herde^.
If a Priest or Minister be infamed amongst his charge, and it cannot be proved
before the Bishop by witness, let him be suspended until he perform due
satisfaction, lest the faithful people be scandalized: But, as our Elders have
taught, then is the satisfaction due and orderly, when according to the Canons,
or as the Bishops shall judge fit, he joyneth unto him seven Compurgators, and
swears by the holy Gospel laid before him, that he has not committed the crime
laid unto him: When he is thus purged, then let him again freely execute his
office. And in another Council we find Council. Worm.
Purgation prescribed for Theft, and also for Adultery; and according to the
prescriptions of these Canons and many others that might be alleged, examples
of sundry ancient Bishops in the Church, that have themselves made their own
Purgation, for avoiding and removing scandal and offense. 12 qu. 4. c.
Mandastis.
Sixtus the third, an ancient Bishop of Rome, but upon the accusation of one
Bassus, did willingly make his Purgation upon his oath in a Council. Ivo. Carn.
l. 5.
And so did Leo, another ancient Bishop of the same See, purge himself with
twelve Bishops. Gregory the Great enjoined unto Greg. ep. 23. ad Justin. Presb.
Leo, Id. ep. 8. l. 2.
Memius and Id. ep. 8. l. 7. and ep. 79.
Maximus, three Bishops, to clear and purge themselves of several crimes by
their oaths, whereof the last was for Simony. Innocentius also caused the
Bishop of Trent to purge himself likewise of the like crime of Simony. And what
be the Oaths touching Goods stolen or imbezelled, which were left with a man
upon trust appointed in Exodus, Exodus 22.7,8.
and those in Salomons Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple; ^ Kings 8.31.
other than oaths of Purgation of a crime, imposed by the party having an
interest? Likewise the oaths mentioned in Leviticus Lev. 6.2.
concerning goods denied, that are pretended to have been left in deposito; or
goods gotten by robbery or violent oppression, or casually found after they
were lost, yet by the finder denied; are they not for purgation and clearing of
the party from the crimes imputed? and in some respect also decisory of the
whole controversy, unless sound proofs touching the true guiltiness of the
party may afterward be found out and used? Number. 5 14.
The Oath of Jealousy taken with a further solemnity of Purgation, and imposed
by the Priest, a public Magistrate in that behalf, is an oath not only of
Enquiry, but of Purgation, to the woman denounced for suspicion of Adultery by
her husband. Duet. 21.8
Lastly, the oath imposed by Gods Law, upon the Elders of the City situated
next unto the corpse of a man which is found secretly murdered; is a plain and
most direct oath of Purgation, even in a crime (in his own nature) evil and
capital to the offenders. For justifying of the Oath Ex officio, and at the
instance of a party, and of Purgation with Compurgators, all in a manner as
above, the authority of the Civil and Canon Laws is manifoldly extant; but that
even the oppugners doubt not of, nor deny, but reject them, as in their conceit
unreasonable and ungodly; and therefore it is needless to name them, being so
easy to be seen, and obvious to every common eye. The received use of them,
amongst most Civil Nations, make it to be little less than Jus gentium, and
therefore by moderate and grave men not to be slighted,

CHAP. VII. That the like practice touching these Oaths, is and was in all
Foreign Christian Nations, and other Nations not Christian, guided only by
the Light of Nature.
TO prove this in Christian Commonwealths, the Canons of the Church, and the
practice thereof in all such sorreign Christian Nations evince it; then which
nothing is more manifest: To cite the particulars, at leastwise to recite them,
would be voluminous; scattered all along the Civil and Canon Law. Dr. Cosens,
in his third part of that Apology, chap. 9. quotes many of them, as they were
used in the Roman Empire, before Constantines time as well as after. Cons^d.
Hungar. de^uram purga^
By the customs of Hungary there be many and long Constitutions made for the
taking such Oath, and of the manner of it. M^rian. in^ qualit^ qu. 84. Casonus
in Pract. fol. 8^, number. 3.
It is testified also to be the usual practice of all the Dominions in Italy,
that the party convented in Temporal Courts, whether by way of Accusation, or
at the Prosecution of another, or by way of Enquiry, Ex officio judicis, must
swear to declare the truth, in all those things that shall be asked of him,
even of the crime it self. This is much stricter than in the Laws of England,
Ecclesiastical or Civil.

Ordenances du France, live. 2. tom. 2. tit. 14. du droit deres^ have passage,
etc. page 895.
For Merchandises to be carried out of France, the Merchant must under his hand
particularize the commodities with the weight and measure thereof, that there
be no deceitful or forbidden Merchandise there, and upon the truth thereof he
is to swear.

Ordonance de France premter an. 1539. artic. 38.
In another Ordinance there, the Plaintiffs swear to the truth of what is in
their Bills, and the Defendants answer upon oath, to confess those things
which be within their knowledge. Marcus deciscor 674.
In other matters criminal it is reported to be the custom of France, for the
party Defendant only to make faith when they are objected, and he is thereupon
to answer, whether he has committed them or not; but he is not to take a
corporal oath, betwixt which two (before God) there is no difference. Grand
Constumier enter les constumes du Normandy.
But by the custom of Normandy, the Appealed of murder must upon his oath
(holding his Adversary by the hand) solemnly swear whether he has committed
such fact or no: and Stamford affirms the Law of England to be the same in
like case of Appeal.

Amongst Nations of far elder times (in most flourishing Commonweals) oaths
were taken by Plaintiffs and Defendants, in all causes whether civilly or
criminally moved. Ex Polluce Sig^nius l 4. c. 4. de^pub. Athen.
So among the Athenians, besides a sum deposited to be forfeited by the
failer. Aeschines contra Timar^um; page 7. Grae e.
When Aeschines accused Timarc^us of a foul crime perpetrated upon him by one
Misgolas, Misgolas was to be put to his oath. Plato lib. 11. de legibus.
Plato commends Rhadamanthus, that strict Justicier, feigned by the Poets (as
Aeacus and Minos also were) to be a Judge in another world over Ghosts
deceased, for his justice; I say, he commends him for exacting an oath in every
cause in controversy. Arist. Polit. lib. 3, 10.
Aristotle, Plato's Scholar, testifies and commends the like course.
Herodotus in ^rato, lib. 6.
The history of Glancus, an ancient Spartan, that most just people of Greece,
evidences this; there the oath of a thing left in Pawn was usually given,
Glaucus and his whole Family rooted out for denying such a Pawn left with him.

D^ctis Cretens. lib. 2. beth Trojani.
King Agamemnon solemnly and publicly took his oath, that he had never polluted
Hippodamia by Incontinency: so was the custom in Greece in matters criminal.
Homer. Iliad l. 19. v. 257.
Homer mentions the same King purged himself also in another form, but with
an oath too, that he had not violated Brise^s.

Pausanias Eliacis.
In the Olympic Games, the Gamesters with their Parents and Brethren swore they
had used no fraud nor deceit.

Cato de re Rust. c. 144, 145.
In the old Roman Commonwealth, private Householders put an oath to their
Laborers that gathered Olives, that they had not stolen nor imbezelled any,
etc. A^c sinal^ sect. 1. de juram. calum. etc. inter solicitudines. X^philanus
in Comodo. Tacit. lib. 2. Anal.
So the old Roman Law is upon presumptions, he that refuses to take the oath,
though the came be criminal, is taken for convicted. Victoria^us, General of
Germany, displaced his Legate or Lieutenant, for refusing to take an oath that
he was not bribed. So Tacitus speaks of a solemn oath, which the Senate caused
to be taken by way of Purgation in high criminal matters.

When the Praetor, one of the chief Magistrates in Rome, had made choice of
450. Judges to decide causes, Lex Servilia Glauciae apud Sigonium, l. 2. c. 6.
de^ud^.
he was to swear he had chosen none of them dolo malo, or for any sinister
respect. And much more might be instanced to this purpose, to show the justice
of such proceeding.

CHAP. VIII. That by the known Laws of this Land, the Ecclesiastical Judges
were so warranted and commanded to give that Oath, according to the Canon and
Ecclesiastical Laws.
2 H. 5. c 1.
ORdinaries are authorized to enquire of the Foundation, Estate and Government
of Hospitals, being not of the Kings Foundation, etc. and to make correction
and reformation according to the Laws of holy Church, as to them belongs: now
by those Laws Enquiry touching crimes not capital is made by the Defendants
oath, as is notorious and before proved, and this cannot but be penal to the
parties visited when guilty. 22 H. 8. c. 5.
Executors and Administrators are to take the oath of the truth of the
Inventory; yet this may imply Perjury, or discovery of a man's own fault. 1
Eliz. c. 2.
Ordinaries are to enquire of, as heretofore has been used by the Queens
Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws, about uniformity of Common prayer.

5 Eliz c. 1.
Ordinaries may give the Oath of Supremacy to a Clerk within his Jurisdiction.

5 Eliz. c. 9.
In this Act of Perjury the Laws Ecclesiastical have the powers reserved to
proceed as before, which was by oaths.

That allowance is made by Common Law to Courts Ecclesiastical to enquire, (and
so consequently by such oaths) appears by two precedents of Consultation set
down in the Register; Regist. tit. Consultation. fol. 48.
the first allows of an Inquisition made by the Dean of Yorks Official for
defects in a Chancel, etc. Ibid. fol.
The other besides a consultation conteins a commandment to the Ordinary to take
full information, by way of Inquisition and other means, touching the value of
Tithes. Ibid. fol. 5^. b.
An Ordinary proceeded against a Parishioner ex officio, as for a crime for
Tithes detained by him. Ibid. fol. 49.^.
Ad correctionem animae, the Ordinary proceeded against a Layman for Usury,
even at the instance of a party grieved: so in several other cases, as in the
same Register mentioned, fol. 43, 50, 51, 54, 55, 57. Upon the cavils of some
busy people against Oaths ministered in Courts Ecclesiastical and Temporal, a
Constitution Provincial was made against it: Constitut Provinc de haercticis,
c. nullus.
Let no man, says that Constitution, presume to dispute, etc. against Oaths,
which are made either in Ecclesiastical or Temporal Courts, in cases
accustomed, and in usual manner, etc. By this appears the practice of such
Oaths in both Courts: A Treatise touching Constitut. Pro^ine. and Legatine, c.
23. printed by Tho. Godfrey.
and Quintilius German in Henry the Eighths time, who wrote against some
Provincial Constitutions, allows of such Oaths to be taken. Many more
instances hereof may be given, but it being apparent and notorious, that such
proceeding Ex officio, and at the instance of the party, and Purgation in
manner as before, was constantly practiced in the Ecclesiastical Courts,
according to the Canons, Constitutions, and Laws Ecclesiastical, before 25 H.
8. and by the aforesaid Statute of 25 H. 8. such Laws and practices have been
confirmed, not being contrariant to the Kings Prerogative, or the Law of the
Land: And it appears that in such cases, according as is practiced in the
Ecclesiastical Courts according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, it is so far from
being contrariant, that it is most consonant, and allowed and commanded by the
Temporal Laws of the Land. say, it appearing by the Acts and Records of
Ecclesiastical Courts, that such proceedings were so constantly upon oath;
there needs no more be said for justification thereof, but it may safely be
concluded, that (before the making of that late Act) the Common Laws and
Statutes of this Realm allowed such Oaths to be tendered by Ecclesiastical
Judges; and therefore the oath of the party, in some matter of crime that might
be damageable and penal to him, was both in practice, and was allowed also to
be practiced (in Courts Ecclesiastical) by the Laws of this Land.

CHAP. IX. That Oaths administered to parties touching matters damageable,
criminal and penal to themselves, are urged and required by Temporal Courts,
and by the Laws of the Realm.
IN the Chancery, when the proceeding is moved civiliter, and not criminaliter,
not to any public punishment, but to the private Interest of the party, and
sometimes lewd practices and misdemeanors criminal be in the Bill set forth;
yet must the Defendant make particular answer thereto upon his oath. So in the
Court of Requests, in the Marches of Wales the Court of the Council there, and
in the North parts; so that to the intent of a Defendants being urged by oath
(sometimes) to discover himself in a matter criminal, it comes to as much in
these Courts, as is challenged for unlawful in Courts Ecclesiastical: and the
Chancery must needs be the ancientest court of this Realm, because from thence
all original Writs and commissions do come, whereupon the other courts do
ground all their proceedings; therefore probably, as in sundry other points of
proceeding there, they drew the exacting of the Defendants answer upon oath
from the Civil Law: For that court of Chancery being here in time and nature
the first, (after the Roman yoke, before the coming in of the Saxons, was
shaked off here) it could not take light from other courts of the common Law,
but from some other, that was before both it and them. The Romans, under whom
we were then, gave us these Laws most probably; so they used, as their
Histories testify, to most Provinces they subdued. Many of the same Laws were
taken up and retained by the Saxons, especially until the coming in of the
Norman Conqueror, who established the customs of Normandy. Amongst others they
retained, till then, that Law was one, That all brethren should participate
alike their fathers Inheritance. Cicer sanil. ep.
We read of Trebatius, an ancient civil Lawyer, often mentioned in the Pandects,
(who lived in Julius Caesar's time, before our Saviors birth many years) did
remain at Samarobrina in this Isle of Britain; Forcatulus.
and afterward that famous Lawyer, Aemilius Paulus Papinianus, did profess the
Law, and kept his Tribunal seat at the city of York.

For the court of Star Chamber and High Commission, I mention not the
proceedings there, because those courts are taken away, though (as before)
perhaps the want of them, especially if in some things regulated, will by many
every day be more thought of: the proceedings there are in fresh memory, to
have been in like manner upon oaths in criminal causes.

In all the courts of Record at Westminster, do not the Judges by corporal oath
examine any person, whom they have cause, in discretion, to suspect to have
dealt falsely about the return of any Writ, entry of rule, or such like matter,
not being capital? 13 E. 1. stat. Winton.
Men are to be assessed, and sworn to have such assessed Armor in their houses.

17 E 2. Prerog Reg. c. 4.
The Kings Widows sworn not to marry without the Kings License, 25 E. 3. de
serve. c. 2, 7.
Laborers are to take an oath to do the labors appointed, etc. and if they
refuse they are to be put into the Stocks. 27 H. 4. c. 17.
Another Statute much to that purpose. 8 H 6.7.
The Sheriff may upon oath examine the choosers of Shire-Knights for Parliament.
27 E. 3. stat. staple.
Those that ship over Woolls may be put to their oath by the Mayor, etc. and
several more, as 11 H. 7.33. 51 H. 3. 27 E. 3.6. 23 Eliz 6. etc. all which
oaths, though necessary and equal, may bring great damage to the party.

Other Statutes there are, that may tend to make the party discover even
matters criminal or penal to himself. Stat. de Exen. de inquisition.
supercoronator. and 14 Ed. 1.
The Statute of Inquisition upon Coroners, the Enquirers shall make all the
Bailiffs swear, That they shall well and faithfully do that which they have in
charge by the King and his Council, and that they shall conceal nothing of it.
This is general, and may be penal to the Bailiff.

E. 3. stat. de moan. a c 9.
Mayors and Bailiffs in every Port where Merchants and Ships be, shall take an
oath of Merchants and Masters of Ships, that they shall do no fraud against
that Ordinance touching Money. This may be penal too, and to discover their own
guilt.

The Statute 19 H. 7. c. 14. gives authority to diverse great persons, to
examine Defendants informed against for certain offenses, and breach of
Statutes, as well by (...) as otherwise, by their discretion, and to adjudge,
etc. In several other Statutes, where it is said to examine, is me^n, upon
oath, otherwise it could not be so understood of the Witnesses; as 18 E. 42. 11
H. 7.23. 19 H. 7.14. 3 H. 7.1. 21 H. 8.10. 5 Eliz. 9.

24 H. 8.6.
Vintners put to their oaths, whether they keep their wine to sell by retail or
in gross.

34 H. 8.4.
Concealers of Bankrupts goods to be examined upon oath, etc.

5 Eliz. 1.
The Lord Chancellor ex officio to give the Oath of Supremacy to whom he thinks
fit: this may be penal to the refuser.

13 Eliz. 3.
Such as be supposed to be parties and privy to the fraud used in conveyances by
Fugitives over the Seas, may be examined upon their corporal oaths, etc. the
refusers to be fined. In which, as in the other Statutes, it is evident, that
it may many ways happen, that such oaths may tend to the urging them to
discover matters criminal and penal to themselves, that are appointed to take
them: and the four last alleged concern oaths given, where neither Bill nor
yet Information is preferred against the parties examined, and therefore to be
tendered more then ex mero officio.

In matters that induce damage to him that swears, there be sundry examples
at the common Law; one or two may suffice. T. 25 E. 3. fol. 44.
A woman covert Baron (being to acknowledge a Fine) if it be doubted whether she
be 21. years of age, she shall be examined upon her oath.

P. 3 H. 6.38.
In an Action of Detinue of goods, the Plaintiff was examined where they were
delivered.

H. 3 H. 6.30.
A Plaintiff examined where an Obligation, which he pleaded, was made.

Sheriffs, Stewards of Liberties, Reeves, Bedel of Strayes and Waifes,
Rent-gatherers, etc. or other Accomptants to the Prince, or other great Lord,
are usually urged to their Accounts upon their oaths: this may be penal and
ignominious to them.

Stamford Pleas of Crown, l. 3. c 14. M. 34 E. 3. fol. 3.
In an Appeal of murder (as before) the defender must before battle swear his
innocence.

One sworn of a Jury, and departing from his fellows, and returning, was by the
Judges ex officio examined upon his oath, whether he had talked with the
Defendant.

T. 7 H. 4. fol. 19.
A Tenant of Land was examined by the Judges, whether he confessed the Action of
the Demandant by covin, which was found.

P. 9 H. 5.1.
A woman that brought an Appeal for the death of her husband, but supposed by
another name then she had indeed, was hereupon examined.

H. 35 H 6. and Fitz H. Abridg. tit. ex^minat. number. 17
A suspected Jury to have received a letter from the Defenfendant,were all
examined upon their oaths.

M. 35 H. 6.11.
A Sheriff examined supposed to have made a false return,

Brook tit. Ley-gager, number. 77.
They have a custom in London, allowed good by the Common Law, to cause the
Plaintiff to swear to the truth of his Declaration; which if he do, then the
Defendant is condemned; if the Plaintiff refuse, he is barred.

19 H. 6.43.
The like Decisory Oath at Common Law, which is peremptory to the Plaintiff, and
so is the Wager of Law ex part defendentis.

44 E. 3.41.
In an Action of Detinue for a Chest sealed, with certain Gold, Silver, etc. the
Defendant tendered his Law, (that is, his Oath) Quod non detinet, and the
opinion of the Court was, he should have it.

Dr. Cosens, chap. 3. in the third part of his Apology, writes thus: The grand
Jury (as I take it) have their oath given to enquire and present, their own,
their fellows, and others faults. And Part 3. chap. 14. he says, that at
Assizes and Sessions Grand Juries are urged by oath to enquire and present
Treasons, Murders, and other Felonies, breach of the Peace, violation of
sundry Laws and Statutes, common Nusances, etc. Now if one of the Grand Jury,
being to be sworn, would deny to take the Oath, except he might have some
certain offenses (usually given in charge) left out and foreprised severally
out of his Oath, lest otherwise he should thereby be driven to accuse himself:
Or if one supposed most able to give evidence to the Coroners Inquest, upon a
murder committed, should desire to be spared from telling his utmost knowledge
thereof upon his oath, lest thereby he be driven to accuse himself: would the
Judges spare them, and not rather repute them to be guilty of these crimes, for
which they refuse to take oath and discover their knowledge? And why not then,
other men should not, upon crimes nothing so penal, who refuse to take the oath
to answer them, be judged by any man to do it upon good ground and conscience?

10 H. 6.7.
If a Tithingman refuse to make Presentment, the Steward of the court may amerce
him.

19 H 7. c. 14.
Chief Constables and Bailiffs were to give evidences upon their oaths, touching
unlawful Retainers, within the precinct of their Offices, and upon concealment
were to be punished. And many more such.

Therefore hereupon may it not be concluded thus? That whatsoever the
Ecclesiastical Laws do allow and require, being not contrary nor repugnant to
the Prerogative Royal, nor to the Laws Statutes and customs of this Realm, that
may be lawfully practiced by Judges Ecclesiastical. But this oath is such, by
reason that sundry Temporal courts (by Law) hold the like course, and do not
prohibit it in Courts Ecclesiastical; so that not being so much as diverse
courses, they cannot be contrariant or repugnant, therefore these oaths were
lawfully practiced in courts Ecclesiastical: or thus, That which is justice and
equity in one court, cannot be unjust, unequal, or cruel in another court, that
is thereunto no less authorized than the first: But such be these Oaths, as
appears by the practice of the aforementioned Temporal courts, therefore they
are lawful and equal also in Ecclesiastical courts.

CHAP. X. The inconvenience and hurt that probably may follow, by the
forbidding the ministering of an Oath Ex officio, or any other Oath, whereby
such person, to whom the same is tendered or administered, may be charged or
compelled to confess or accuse, or to purge him or her self of any criminal
matter or thing, whereby he or she may be liable to any censure or punishment.
Praise of the Civil Laws. Civilians first, and last, and greatest Sufferers.
Amity 'twixt both Robes. His Majesty's and the Lord Chancellors favors to
Civilians.
DOctor Cosens has touched upon some of such inconveniences in general, not
much in particular, sparsim in that his Apology, but not in any one distinct
chapter. Some of such as I have thought of I shall set down.

That Evil should be removed is often inculcated in holy Writ, and that right
and justice should be done in all causes, as well criminal as civil, public
and private, all Laws sacred and profane command: this tending to the
well-being, even the being of all Kingdoms, Commonwealths and Governments
whatsoever; as the contrary to the desolation and destruction thereof, and of
all commerce and humane society. That in respect of the whole Church and
Commonwealth punishments are most needful; the sacred Writ shows it, and gives
many examples, where for the sins of a few, whole Armies and Societies have
been punished. Josh. 7.
Achans stealing of the accursed garment, etc. was a cause of the overthrow of
Israel in battle. 1 Samuel 4.
So for the sin of Eli and his sons, many thousands of the Israelites were slain
by the Philistines. 1 Kings 1.2.
Solomon giving charge to kill Joab, says, Smite him, that thou may take
away the blood which Joab shed causless, from me and the house of my Father.
And for Jonas his disobedience the whole Ship was in danger to have perished.
The Heathen could say, Justicia est Reipublicae basis. Aristot. Rhetor. T^odor.
c. 14.
Aristotle could say, that punishment is a remedy to be used against faults;
and Cassiodor, Remedium est contra peccatum accelerata correctio.

For all crimes and offenses are but as so many Maladies and distempers in the
body of the Commonwealth, which if suffered to grow without the curb of Law,
will quickly like a Canker disperse, either to the destruction or eminent
danger of both: So that the necessity of punishment, and forcing justice to be
done, both in civil and criminal causes, by the very ends unto which it is
referred, clearly appears. A^g inc^. (...) tract. 7.
Charitas non est sed languor, ubi mali mores digna poena non castigantur. Idem
ep. 50 ad Bonifac. c. erro^. did. 83.
Error, cui non resistitur, approbatur. Cassiod l 3. u. c. epist 14.
Malum, cum perseveret, augetur. C^cum Tanto de ceasu tudine.
Tanto sunt graviora peccata, quanto diutius animam detinent illigatam. Tully
says, Cicer. pro M^.
Impunitatis spes, magna peccandi illecebra. C^d And. did. 45.
Quae est ista misericordia, quae bonitas um parcere, and omnes in discrimen
adducere? The very Light of Nature did teach even Heathen men thus, F. add.
Aquild. I^a vulnerat.
Interest Reipublicae delicta puniri^ and H. de fide pur. l. 7. sect. final.
Poenas ob malesicia solvi, magna ratio suadet. Now, if upon such weighty
reasons, it be most needful that Justice be duly administered, and crimes
punished, (for in criminal matters the greatest care is to be had, though no
neglect neither to be in commutative and distributive justice to have that
rightly performed) it must be granted, that all due and good means may be used
to attain that end: Qui dat finem dat media ad finem. F. de injur
Peccata nocentium expedit esse nota. Now when crimes cease to be secret, but
are by fame, or by such ways as is aforesaid, so far discovered; if there be
(as very often there is not) no other way to discover them, that so the evil
and the scandal may be taken away, but by putting the party to his oath,
thereby to clear himself, if further due proof thereof cannot be made, or by
refusal of the oath to be taken pro confesso: then it follows, the evil and
scandal must still remain, and all the sad effects thereof to Church and State
may be expected to follow.

Be the fame of a crime, Adultery or the like, never so pregnant, that Town and
country, even the Kingdom ring of it: though an Adulterer and Adulteress have
cohabited together a long time, yet if they were not taken or seen in flagranti
crimine, or seen in bed together, which is a violent presumption, equivalent to
a proof; and the parties deny the fact: some make it disputable, whether or no
any manner of punishment (the fact being neither proved nor confessed) can be
laid upon the parties for this great scandal to the Church.

Some hold, that by the words of this late Act, that an innocent party, upon
whom a fame is unjustly raised, and the beginning of it cannot be found, as
often has happened, yet though he offer to purge himself, the Ecclesiastical
Judge is not to tender or administer the oath to him; though this seems
otherwise, because the oath is forbidden but only in such cases, whereby the
person to whom the same is tendered or administered, may be charged or compelled
to confess or accuse, or to purge him or her self, of any criminal matter or
thing, whereby he or she may be liable to any censure or punishment. But in
this case of voluntary offer to take the oath, that reason of censure or
punishment cease.

Reg. juris.
Volenti non fit injuria neque dolus. Such course by way of oath to find out the
sin being forbidden, how great an encouragement it may prove to commit such
sins, is obvious to the easiest judgment. It was extreme to make Adultery
punishable by death, though that extreme be to be avoided, the contrary too
must be shunned.

If it be lawful at common Law, as in a Wager at Law, and many other cases, as
before touched, to tender and administer such oaths, and in such causes as need
it not so much, as these causes ordinarily do; wherein before that late Act it
was administered in Ecclesiastical courts: then why not in Ecclesiastical
courts? Except it be said, that the same course shall be taken to forbid it
also at common Law, which, I suppose, is not intended; since Jury men, as Dr.
Cosens (as before) in that his Apology affirms, had an oath given them to
present their own and their fellows faults. Now such in Ecclesiastical
proceedings.

The inequality of the punishment as to the difference of Sex. Indeed the
permission of punishment as to one Sex, the Man, and the punishment to the
weaker Sex, the Woman, who therefore deserves more commiseration: that
inequality, I say, cannot at best but seem strange. For the man will always
probably (except either by Gods grace he will glorify him, by confessing his
fault; or else, as before, be taken in flagranti crimine; or with such violent
presumption as before) escape punishment though never so guilty: It is peccatum
concatenatum, there must be two to act it. In that sin the man without the
woman, or the woman without the man, signify no more then the letter q without
an u following it, to make it into to a syllable. As for the man, his crime is
transiens, leaves no vestigia behind it to discover him: not so oftentimes in
the woman, the infallible indiciu^ of her fault, her crimen manens appearing to
every eye, though she is no more guilty thereof then the man: whom if she
rightly name or accuse, yet that works nothing against him, except to keep the
Bastard child as the reputed father thereof; wherein not a few light women
probably name not the right father; so her single testimony serves to punish
either the right or wrong father, but not to take away the scandal or evil
caused by the man that offended. Our English Nation has been accounted very
friendly and favorable to the weaker Sex, and very many are the privileges and
honoraries we give them more then in other Nations; for which in the opinion of
generous minds we are accounted more honorable then others; insomuch as some
have said, If there were a bridge 'twixt Dover and Callis, all the women in the
Continent would come into our Island. But by this we may seem to hazard that
honor.

In Simony, Usury, and many other crimes of Ecclesiastical cognizance, be the
fame, circumstances, suspicions, and all other inducements never so strong; yet
this Oath being not to be administered, the offender scapes, neither the evil
nor scandal is removed.

Bishops by the Statute 1 Eliz. 1. are to give the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy ex officio to others, or whether it be ex officio or ad instantiam
partis, the matter is all one; it is forbidden to give it to any person, whereby
he may be charged or compelled to confess, or accuse, or to purge him or her
self of any criminal matter or thing, whereby he or she may be liable to any
censure or punishment. The refusal of this oath is penal, and perhaps the
person was so accused to the Bishop, or there was a common fame thereof, or
other sufficient inducement to enquire thereof; if the party refuse to take
this oath thus tendered to him, then is he by the Law liable to Censure and
punishment for it: and I conceive it is not thought fit, that such a person, be
he a Recusant of what kind soever, should plead this Statute, that this Oath
should not be tendered to them.

By the Law all Bishops and Ecclesiastical Judges, when they give Institution
into Benefices, or give license to preach, teach school, serve Cures, and in
other cases, are to give to the parties the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy:
should these parties refuse to take these oaths, it were penal to them.

When the Bishops make their Chancellors, Commissaries, Advocates, Registers,
Proctors, or the Deans and Chapters, their Commissaries, Officials, or
Auditores causarum, or the Archdeacons their Officials, or any other
Ecclesiastical Officers whatsoever, the same oaths are to be given them: should
these parties refuse to take these oaths, it were penal to them. So a greater
part of the course of proceeding in Ecclesiastical Courts is taken away, then
perhaps many think of.

So in the Oath of Calumny and of Malice, to be tendered in the proceedings in
Ecclesiastical Courts; if the party refuse to take them, it is penal to him. And
in many other cases, easy to be enumerated, but this may suffice.

The guiltless and innocent have no benefit by taking away this oath,
especially that of Purgation; nay, (admitting that which, as above, some
affirm, That though they offer to take the oath of Purgation, the
Ecclesiastical Judge is not to minister it) in that case they are endamaged by
it, and cannot make their innocence appear in such a way and means as the Law
did afford, and to be restored to all intents and purposes to their good name
and fame, of which they were in a great part (though unjustly) bereaved; and
might have a good Action against any, that after such Purgation defamed them,

The guilty hereby escapes punishment, which he may in some sort lucri loco
reponere, if it may not be said of him as Virgil of the stinging Be, ammam in
vulnere ponit. Reg. juris.
The rule of Law is, Nemo ex delicto consequitur beneficium.

The great Hypocrisy of those Innovators and Fanatics in Queen Elizabeth's,
King James's, and in the late blessed King and Martyrs reign, King Charles the
First, (to go no further) that then pressed the taking away of that Oath, and
some of them we have seen go much further of late; who would be thought to be,
and so hold it forth, that they are the greatest Zelots to have those sins
punished, that by that means would escape it; yet cry, like the Lapwing,
furthest from their nest; they would not have the means left to find them out,
that so they might be punished: and other use for their ends (which we have
sadly felt) they made of it, as is touched above. Herein they somewhat resemble
Julian the Apostate, (...). He would seem to be a hater of a long incompt
Beard, and entitles that Tract of his (...), An hater of Beards; and yet he
says there of himself, (...), etc. (...). Longam istam barbam addidi, etc.
ideo diseurrentes in ea pediculos perfero, tanquam feras aliquas in sylva.

Many other inconveniences and hurts, that too probably may be feared to arise
from the prohibition of these oaths, in such cases as before, might upon
further consideration be enumerated: and though in the last place, yet even
that too, of adding further discouragement to the professors of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws, who have not had a few for a long time together, may
perhaps deserve to be thought upon. It is too visible that there are not a few,
that would not have them enjoy so much of practice and power, as that without
which the State can scarce spare them, that is in maritime causes touching
Traffic and Commerce with Foreigners; a point eminently considerable as to
the benefit of this Nation. For the Law it self, surely all Scholars and
ingenuous men, of what Robe or Profession soever, cannot but honor it for the
Antiquity, and in a sort Universality, and Excellency of it, and the great
number of Nations, and so many, and noble, and well-civilized exercise, that
were anciently, and in great part, and yet are governed by the rules thereof,
and the helps received from it even by our own Nation too; many ways
demonstrable. Before our Saviors time, as is touched before, in the time of
Julius Caesar, Cic. famil epist.
0 an ancient Civil-Lawyer, and often alleged in the Pandects, remained at
Samarobrina in this Island of Britain; and after that the Oracle of that Law,
Forcatulus.
Aemilius Paulus Papiniamus, professed the Law, and kept his Tribunal seat of
Praetorship in the City of York: and no inconsiderable part of the Municipal
Laws of our Nation have flowed from that Fountain, and drawn many Rules and
Maxims thence. So that it may, as that learned Civilian, Sir Rob. Wiseman
Knight, Doctor of the Laws, His Majesty's Advocate general for the Kingdom of
Engl. in that Treatise of his of the Excellency of the Civil Law, be truly
styled The Law of Laws; and as it was said to that Roman orator highly
commending Eloquence, that he lifted her up to the skies, that he also with her
might be raised up thither; so he in that learned and judicious Tract of his,
setting forth the due and just honor and Encomium of the Civil Laws, deserves
to be thereby perpetually honored. And for the professors of the Civil Law in
this Nation, their share of sufferings in these late tempestuous times was the
earliest, began first, some years before the Loyal Clergy were destroyed: For
upon the passing that Act for the taking away the High Commission, in the tail
of it was that sting, which (as the then more powerful part interpreted it)
took away the coercive power from the Ecclesiastical Courts, and so in a manner
made them useless and precarious, if not ridiculous; and within a very few
days after passed that Act for Poll-money, where every Ecclesiastical Judge,
that had any Ecclesiastical Office of Judicature, (though some of those places
were not worth 30 l. per annum, nor 20 l. per annum, and some less) paid 15. l.
a greater sum then some men paid of 10000 l. per annum, and more in Land of
Inheritance: So sharp-sighted was that Act toward that then in a manner even
ruined profession. The reason of it was visible enough, and no ways
dishonorable to that profession or professors, who acted justly according to
the known Laws of the Land; had they done otherwise, surely they had not wanted
legal punishment, as the times then were, and the cry that was then unjustly
raised against them; when the furious flame of Civil war broke forth, that
wasted the Church, all loyal Churchmen, and all that had dependence or relation
to them, in regard of any Offices or Places, as most, if not all, Civilians had
then. As to the Civilians, Sublatum fuit questionis subjectum, their Offices
and Places were quite taken away. Indeed the most reverend Fathers the Lords
Archbishops and Bishops, with Deans, Chapters, Archdeacons, and other
Dignitaries in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, tasted of the same cup, were
A la mode then, but not so soon as the Civilians, root and branch destroyed:
but the Beneficed Rectors and Vicars that for their Loyalty were thrust out of
their Benefices, had a small pittance reserved them, (though when paid at all,
miserably shrunk and lessened almost to nothing) that is, as they called it,
the Fifths of their Livings: But as to the reverend Prelates and Dignitaries,
and the Civilians, there was nothing left, under such pitiful Step-fathers,
were the then nicknamed Fathers of their Country, the prevailing party in that
Long Parliament, during the time of the long continued usurping Power, even
till His Sacred Majesty's happy Restoration; those causes and businesses,
which of right ought to have been agitated and dispatched by Civilians in their
several Offices and places, many of them, as canses of Defamation, Matrimonial
causes, Tithes, if not Legacies also, and several other branches of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, were all along dispatched at Common Law or
Chancery, contrary to all Law and equity; Probate of Wills, and granting of
Letters of Administration, with all the connexes and incidents thereunto
belonging, and from thence arising; were by Commission from that usurping
Power, committed to a few persons of their own gang at London, so that the
Subjects from all parts of the Kingdom were to prove the Wills of the dead, and
take Administration of Intestates Goods, pass their Accounts, and act the rest
concerning them, there before them at London. The Executors and Administrators
must either come up thither personally to them, to take their oaths, or else
have Commissions down into their Countries to do it; and the charges to the
Subject for such Probate of Wills, Letters of Administration, and the rest,
whether they went up themselves to London to dispatch them, or more especially
if they sent up by others thither to have them done, as most commonly they did,
and not scare one in forty did otherwise, and it was the cheapest way probably
for them so to do, in regard of the charges, to send up by others that also had
other business of their own there: Yet, I say, by these means, and the great
Fees taken, the charges for proving every Will, taking Letters of
Administration, and the rest, came ordinarily to about six times (sometimes
much more) as much as was taken and due before these troublesome irregular
times, by the Ecclesiastical Judges and Officers to whom of right they
appertained: that is, the Fees and charges usually came to 50 s. or 3 l. or 4
l. or 5 l. and sometimes to 6 l. or more. Had such a Grievance, and so general
throughout the Kingdom, reigned in the time of Kingship, when faithful and
peaceable men acted according to the known Laws of the Land; surely the fall of
Nilus to the Cadupes would not have made such a noise, as our factious Stentors
would have then bellowed out. And too much of the grievance still remains, such
Wills, Inventories, Bonds so Administration, with the dependancies thereupon,
remaining still at London, whether the Subject, when they have occasion to see
or use any of them, or sue for any thing concerning them, must either
personally repair or send for them, or sue there: which is well hoped will by
this happy Parliament be remedied, and a course taken that they may be
transmitted into every County whence they came, for the Subjects ease, and that
they there may sue upon occasion, for any Legacy or other matter concerning
them. Should it be demanded at whose charge this should be done; the dictate of
Reason, I humbly conceive, answers it; Qui commodum habet, idem and onus habere
debet. And thus for no small number of years our Places, our Livelyhoods, were
unjustly taken from us, only for our Loyalty; whilst others, that did it,
gloried in their shame, took our bread out of our mouths, and did eat whilst
we fasted and well nigh starved; and yet such is the unsatiablenesse and
unreasonablenesse of some of our causeless persecutors, that they could well
be content we should still continue in the same oppressed and miserable
condition: And when His Majesty was happily restored, (for which all thanks,
praise and glory be ever rendered to the God of miracles and mercy) the
Civilians, as they were (as is before touched) the first and earliest
sufferers, so were the last (not a small time after the most reverend Bishops,
and especially after the rest of the Loyal Clergy were restored) that were
readmitted to their places and Offices; and when that was done, still for a
considerable time they were but precarious, and of little use or value as
before, till the doubt touching coercive power was by Parliament taken away,
which was not till the later end of Summer 1661. and then with the Proviso
against the Oath Ex officio and Purgation, which not a little diminishes these
Offices, besides upon reasons known, the forbearance of the full execution of
such Offices, as yet, so far as by Law they might execute them, is considerable.

Some Civilians, who in contemplation of their natural duty, and of their Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, served His Majesty in his wars against his then
rebellious Subjects, thereby lost all their Fortunes both real and personal,
that their enemies could find: and certainly never were more sedulous and rigid
scrutators, or more rapacious Harpies, that would not let scarce any thing
pass their clutches. Non fuit Autolyci tam piceata manus. And such suffering
Civilians, both so in their Livelyhoods, their quotidianum, and their persons
and liberties very often, humbly hoped when a time of re-settlement should
come, that they should have been looked upon as well as others of the same
profession, that sat still, underwent none of these dangers or hazards, nor
suffered perhaps any thing, or but little in their Estates or otherwise,
especially in comparison with the others, or as well as others that had some
competency by reason of practice under the usurped Powers, as to take and
execute Offices under them of great benefit, and I had almost said that way, if
not otherwise also, immediately acted against His Majesty and his Authority,
contrary to their natural duty, and Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. To plead
before the usurping powers, even after the end of the war, it was not, at least
for a long time, permitted to those Civilians of the Kings party, especially
those that had served him in his wars here. For my own part, though I could
never satisfy my Conscience so far, as to plead before any of the usurped
powers, not so far to acknowledge their power, though some years before His
Majesty's happy restoration, I was both here and in Ireland invited and
desired to do it, yet I would not do it, nor ever did that way or any other
give any acknowledgment of their power, or touch any of their Pitch, more then
by a forced acquiescence, and sitting quiet and still when I was constrained so
to do. Yet, I say, I am far from censuring any of these worthy and learned
persons of either Robe, that did either agere or defendere before that usurping
power, by way of pleading: I would not be mis-understood, as to be thought so
much as to think amiss of the noble Profession or Professors at Common Law,
both which I love and honor, and do very well know, and have heard many of
them, suitable to their Births, Breedings, and loyal and generous Minds,
commiserate the oppression of the Profession and Professors of the Civil Law,
and wish that the proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Courts, by the Oath Ex
officio and Purgation, might continue as it was before that last Act that took
it away; even for the justice of it, as they conceive, as also lest it might
seem, at leastwise in some men's judgments, to savor of a kind of partiality,
that these Oaths Ex officio and Purgation should continue in proceeding at
Common Law, and not in the Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Courts, or Courts
Christian, as at Common Law by the Laws of the Land they are styled; a Title we
like well, and surely that Nickname, suitable to such debauched and dissolute
persons that gave it, because in these Courts their unclean crimes were
punished, and that did commovere bilem; though they were punished there only,
as before, Medicinally, to acknowledge their crimes, to ask God and the
congregation forgiveness, and to take away the evil and scandal, and not
mulcted or corporally punished by imprisonment or otherwise: I say, that
Nickname, should it be given at all to any court, as it ought not, it would
rather lean to such courts as inflict corporal punishments and mulcts upon such
criminous persons, by Imprisonment, keeping the Bastard children, whipping, or
otherwise corporally punishing them. I wish and hope, that as both the
professions of both Robes sit as sisters under one Crown, derive from one and
the same head, and draw from one and the same Fountain; so each knowing their
certain bounds and limits of Jurisdiction, (which, if not clearly and
explicitly settled, I wish and hope will be) may proceed christianly,
charitably and friendly in their several spheres of activity, without clashing
or the least dissension, to Gods glory, the good of this Church and Srate, and
the just distribution of Justice, to the benefit and comfort of all the
Subjects in His Majesty's Dominions. Let us all remember, that not long since
there was a generation of men, then too much in power, that had an equal tooth
against both the Professions, would gladly have seen the destruction of both,
and made too great a progress in it. The noble Professon and Professors of the
common Law, could then expect little more favor then Polyphemus promised
Ulysses, that he should be the last that should be devoured. And probably
enough some of them stirred up some of the lesse-considerable common Lawyers,
and such as favored their side too much, (for in all Professions there is good
and bad) to be iustrumental in the abolition of the Civil Law; and when that
was done, when the outworks were taken in, then to have a bout with the Fort
it self. They have showed their Method: No Bishop, no King. But concord and
peace, it is to be hoped, will duly and indissolubly cement these two
Professions, if amongst our selves we do not ponere obicem, and dis-joyne the
union. Let us never forget St. Paul's good counsel and caution; All the Law is
fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye he not consumed one of
another. For the Civilians, if they have many enemies and but few friends, (as
was said by one, that it is hoped has no disaffection to that profession or
professors of it, but rather in a just resentment of their oppression, suitable
to his birth and noble disposition) if so, I say, they may comfort themselves
in this, that they were put to the test in the beginning of the Long
Parliament, when their factious Accusers were sufficiently numerous and
virulent, and had they been found guilty, they had not then escaped punishment,
severe and infamous enough. They could not easily have been highlier justified
then that way, which made it appear to all the world, that that clamorous
party, through the sides of the Civilians, intended to strike at and wound
their Superiors, and so serve turns and ends, and compass their long-weav'd
design. If the Civilians do their parts in their Functions, uprightly and
diligently, which their own consciences doubtless will prompt them to, and the
vigilance of their factious Adversaries over their actions, may serve to keep
them awake; it is to be hoped they will every way find comfort and
encouragement: However that peace at the last, and the continual Feast in the
interim, will buoy them up above the greatest waves of envy or malice. Good men
will be their friends, though the contrary be their enemies: and one Cato is
better then a Theaire. And we cannot but be confident, that we shall never have
cause to say, as some said in another case; Non nos Resp. sed defuit nobis
Respublica.

We have a gracious KING, whom God protect, bless, and prolong his days: Et
Spes and Ratio studiorum in Caesare. He, we doubt not, will, as before him his
Royal Father, Charles the first, King and Martyr, and his Grandfather King
James, of blessed memory; look upon us with a favorable eye, according as he
finds we endeavor faithfully and diligently to serve the Church and State,
that is to serve him: they who fail therein deserve not to be remembered. And
besides the general, His Sacred Majesty has in particular demonstrated his
gracious favor that way, by the addition of honor and honourary revenue to
the Masters of the Chancery, Civilians for the most part: an act that, if
possibly there can be an addition, adds to the just obligation of duty, service
and gratitude which they owe his most excellent Majesty. And all due
thankfulness and honor the same Profession must ever acknowledge and render
to the Right Honorable the Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor of England, for
his special favors to that Profession and Professors, and for his mediation
and being instrumental (as none, I believe, can suppose otherwise) in the
obtaining that favor and bounty to the Masters of the Chancery, and by
furthering the continuance of His Majesty's gracious inclination toward them.
We bless God, and His Majesty and his Lordship for it, and are, I hope, and
ever shall be most thankful for it, and rejoice and comfort our selves in it,
and Rumpatur quisquis, rumpitur invidia.

Now (as in the Preface) I thought fit to subjoyn that little Manuscript,
touching the Oath ex officio, with that Determination touching the same, by
that glory of our Church, the late Lord Bishop Lancelot Andrews Bishop of
Winchester.

A Manuscript treating of the Oath Ex officio, said to be Doctor Davenants,
late Lord Bishop of Sarisbury.
1. THat which the Commons House complained of is, that the Commissioners
Ecclesiastical proceed Ex officio, that is, (say they) without a known Accuser.

2. And that they cause men to answer upon their oath, that which they would
have is this.

1. That no man should be dealt with, but an Accuser should stand forth, and
that no Oath should be ministered to a man in his own cause.

That which your Lordships have enjoined me, is to show my opinion, whether the
courses complained of be warrantable by the Word of God or no.

Two parts there are distinctly to be spoken to, the one of proceeding without
a known Accuser, the other of proceeding by way of Oath.

I begin with them generally at large, and after as they concern Ecclesiastical
proceedings.

1. The end of all Judgments in all Courts, is to remove evil. The Heathen man
says, Interest reipublicae ut malefics tollantur: the health of the civil body
consisting no less in removing evil persons, then does the natural in purging
out evil humors. And the very same is Gods course in his Commonwealth; ten
several times in Deuteronomy he repeats it, Vt sic tolletis malum de medio
Israelis.

2. Evil then is to be removed, not only civil but Ecclesiastical; so does God
take express orders, that corrupt Religion, contumacy in disobeying his Priest,
Incontinency, Defamation, (matters all of Ecclesiastical cognizance) should be
removed, expressly terming every one of them malum in Israele. And so in the New
Testament does the Apostle speak of the case of Incest; Vos autem auferetis
malum de vobis. These then are evils, and Ecclesiastical evils, and to be
removed.

3. If they must be removed they must be known; for St. Hierom says well, Quod
ignorant medicina, non curat. Physic both corporal and civil must know the
peccant humor, before they can purge it.

4. If know it they must, by the parties themselves they shall never know it.
The first that ever did trespass, were not so ready to commit sin, but they
were twice as ready to conceal it. And as Tertullian says to good purpose,
Reliqui omnes congeneres primo: All other offenders do as the first did, seek
to keep their offense from being known. The offenses themselves, ye know, are
called opera tenebrarum, and Incontinency, that defiles the body as well as
the spiritual Whoredom, which is corruption in the Worship of God; either of
them, we know, is angularis actio, and kept from knowledge as much as may be.

5. Then, if they must be known, and will not by the parties themselves, some
other means must be used to bring them to light; where if there be a party to
stand up and accuse, it is well, and he not to be refused. But we know, and I
refer my self to your Lordships, that it is holden an odious matter to be an
Accuser, and with the better sort of men more odious: Few that be well disposed
will be gotten to it, and even they that will, I refer me to your Lordships
again, whether Solomon says not true, that One evil will not be accused but
out of another evil: that is, grudge or spleen to wreak our selves upon some
party, that we conceive has wronged us; otherwise the faintness of men to
become Accusers will make that much evil will not be removed, if this be only
the way to remove it; but God says, All evil must be removed so near as may be.

6. For that cause God has authorized those that hold Judicial places for the
removing of evil, not only to receive accusations when they be brought against
it, but if none be brought to make enquiry after it, in the 13, 17, and 18 of
Deuteronomy, that by enquiry it may be found, and found it may be removed:
Which Enquiry is not left at large promiscuously, hand over head, but has his
limitation upon what ground to proceed. Now, if you ask what ground we can
have, no better rule for it, then if we follow Gods own proceeding in his
judicial courses; for the judgment is Gods properly, and not Man's; and there is
nothing more to be desired, then that God would give the King his judgments;
for the judgments of all those that be in place, are then best when they are
likest Gods: the rather for that God, needing not to hold any course of
Enquiry, because to him all things are clear and manifest, not only then but
before they be done, and yet binding himself to a certain way in his
proceeding, no other reason is or can be rendered, why he should so do, but
only to instruct us how to proceed by his example. In Gods court, true it is,
there is an accuser allowed, even the accuser of us and our brethren, who (we
see) is sometimes heard and received, though his suggestions be untrue; as in
Jobs case. But is there no proceeding but upon accusation? I take it to be very
clear, that it will fall out, diverse judgments of his having been given upon
another ground.

In Adams case no accuser stood forth, what was done was as yet not known,
only he was taken in suspicious manner, flying from God, lurking in a Thicket;
which was plainly species mali, and God thought it meet to be enquired on: and
so may we upon like suspicion, though there be no accuser, even by his Warrant.

In Eves case neither had she any accuser, but by examining Adam she came to be
impeached tanquam particeps criminis, at the least; which, as we know, was by
way of detection, which is not properly accusation, yet sufficient enough to
ground a sentence upon, as (we see) God did, and they that sit in his place may
do the like.

In Cains case it fell out clear otherwise then in Adams, for in Adams the fact
was unknown, in Cains only the party, for the murder was evident.

Now to find out the party, the way which God takes is by presumption, for
that there had been malice born Abel by Cain, and he admonished thereof, his
very countenance bewraying as much; this did God hold cause enough to ground an
Enquiry upon, and so may we. In the case of Sodom there is yet another way;
clamor multus est, says God, there is a great rumor or fame runs upon
Sodoms naughtiness, I will go down and enquire of it, says God in express
words. So that whether there be accusation or no, vehement suspicion, or
detection, or strong presumption, or fame will supply the want of an Accuser;
and the Judge even by very duty is authorized to proceed to enquire upon any of
these.

A little to insist on this of fame, whereof our Savior Christ in the Gospel
has made that a branch which we call denunciatio Evangelica; when a party of
good credit discloseth unto the Judge a fault, but will not sustain either the
hazard, trouble or charge of an Accuser. Yet does our Savior Christ give
warrant to the Church, even in that case to call the party, and take order with
him. But this point of proceeding upon fame, has not only warrant of
proceeding in Gods example, but in his express charge; two several places of
the Law where the ground is, Deuteronomy. 30.12. Deuteronomy. 17.4. If it be told thee that
such or such a fault is done, the proceeding is perscrutando and interrogando.
Perscrutando, that is, by searching and evidence; Interrogando, that is, by
interrogating the party about the fault suggested. And we see plainly in a case
of Ecclesiastical correction for matter of Incest, the Apostle goes no
further, but lays this for his ground, There goes a report, that such a
party there is among you. As therefore when an accuser offers himself, he is
not to be rejected; so though none do, rather then faults should go
uncensurable, the Judge even of very duty is to search them out: In his search
not proceeding without some of these that have been mentioned, but with these
he has good warrant, even as good as Gods own example and commandment.

Sufficient has been said to show, that without an Accuser a Judge may proceed
by enquiry to interrogate a party, but whether upon his Oath, that is the
second point to be showed, no less warrantable by the Word of God then the
former.

In the case of the Woman suspected to have made a fault to her husband, and
that upon no other ground, but upon her husbands own jealousy; the
Ecclesiastical Judge was not only authorized to examine her concerning it, and
then to rest on her denial; but also to put her to her oath, and make her to
abjure it with execration, as it is plainly, Number. 5. And it is a case of a sin
against the seventh Commandment.

In a sin against the eighth Commandment, betwixt man and man: If one had
committed ought to another trust, and were persuaded that he had played false
with him, he might bring him before the Judge, and have the matter searched
into, and at the Plaintiffs instance the Judge was to lay an oath upon him, and
the other not to refuse it. And of this there are more cases then one, Exodus
21. And if in private causes betwixt man and man this manner of proceeding be
allowed, it will follow a fortiori, if for the private benefit, much more that
which God grants to a private man, it is to be presumed he will not deny to a
Magistrate: that which to satisfy one party he licenseth, he will likewise
think meet to license for the taking away of offense, and giving satisfaction
unto many. And the chastity of a man's Wife shall never be more precious to him,
then the keeping of his own Spouse the Church, free from the like stains of
pollution.

In a sin against the sixth Commandment, a case of Murder, one is found slain;
no man can be accused or suspected for doing it: In this case the Governors of
the next City to the body so found, are by the Law to come to the place to
offer a sacrifice, to invocate the name of God, and solemnly to testify by
that Invocation, that they are no way; privy to the murder. This is the
course in the Law of Moses, but before ever the Law was written, we see the
very same holden by Joseph under the Law of Nature. In a matter of State, in a
suspicion of a sin against the fifth Commandment: It pleased him to charge his
ten Brethren as Spies coming to discover the weakness of the Land; there was no
party to accuse or to say ought against them, yet for all that he put them to
it sub attestatione juramenti, to answer, They were no such men.

The very like course was holden in the search for Elias; he was thought to be
the cause of the long and great drought: The King sent all over the Land to
seek for him, and to have him apprehended; these especially that were thought
to be the Professors of the same Religion, all denied him; it would not serve
the turn, he put them to their oaths, and they refused them not, yet was there
none to accuse them at all. Yet for the good (as it was supposed) of the State,
this course was well allowed.

So have we Interrogatories administered, and the parties sworn to them, in
cases of the fifth, sixth and seventh Commandment.

And if this may be done in civil causes, and be not unlawful in them, we argue
that much rather it ought to be allowed the Church in her proceedings.

First, for that both Commonwealth and Church be to remove evil, yet work they
not both one way; for the Commonwealth, as it is well known, does agere ad
poenam; the Church never so, but does only agere ad poenitentiam, seeks to
alter men's minds, from the evil courses they have entered into, seeks by
making them to yield to a voluntary submission rhemselves, to take away the
scandal, whereof they have been a cause.

Now there is great odds between those, and great reason more means be allowed
those, that seek for nothing else, but the reformation of the party and his
souls health; and those that end their proceedings always in the loss of life,
limb or liberty, or living, as does the Civil.

Besides, it is well known the civil power has many ways and means to sift
out the truth, though not by this, That the Church (if Accusations cease) has
none, but this only. Indeed therefore most proper and peculiar to her, because
an oath is the bond of the Soul, and they be the sole causes the Church has to
deal with.

The inconvenience is none at all: for admit a party should thereby disclose
his offense, yet grows thereby no damage unto him, in that his repentance
only and reformation is thereby sought, and wrought, and nothing else.

Thus reasons the Church, but for her practice takes her ground to be full and
good out of the fifth of Numbers, in a case of suspected Incontinency, which is
merely Ecclesiastical. And again, out of 1 Esdras 8. and 9. in a case
Matrimonial, which is merely Ecclesiastical also. In both which Interrogatories
are ministered with oath, the proceeding being by Enquiry, without any Accuser
at all. And that which is to be noted in the case in Esdras, they are no ways
forced to it, but desire to take their oath first, and be examined after. Then
which there is no case more like to the proceeding at this day, against which
exception is taken.

Out of these six it is manifest enough how agreeable to the Will of God this
proceeding is: But beyond all this is the seventh in the fifth of Leviticus,
where it appears that God is so careful to have all evil removed, as leave is
given by him upon a fault committed, the party being unknown, to lay a solemn
charge, and to bind it with a curse, and that at large, to take hold of any
that were privy to the fault done, and did not come and reveal it.

Which course was clearly of the nature of an Oath, as does plainly appear by 1 Samuel 14. where it is said four several times, that Saul bound all the people
with an oath, not to taste of any thing till the Sun went down, that they might
pursue their enemies without any intermission: Which oath is judged by the
Expositors to have been nothing else but the public denouncing of a curse, or
adjuring them in the name of God not to do it, seeing it is held a thing
impossible, that he should call so many thousands in particular, to take every
man an oath, the time being so short, and he in such haste to pursue the Enemy.
But it is a thing, as Nazianzen says, not unusual, either before Christ or
since, in the time of the Primitive Church, to make such adjurations, whereby
the Church ever thought, quod poena commissi revolvitur in conscium, that he
that concealed was subject to as great a curse as he that committed it.

By all which it is evident, that such proceeding by oath may be, and is not
unlawful.

This, as before, is by some said to be Dr. Davenants, late Lord Bishop of
Sarisbury, and others say it was the late Lord Bishop of Winchesters, that most
learned and pious Bishop, Dr. Lancelot Andrews. Whose soever it was, it seems
it was to give satisfaction to the Lords of the Council touching such
proceedings Ex officio, and upon oath; and it is to be believed it gave them
satisfaction, the Law so long after continuing the same, and no ways altered.

The Theological Determination of Dr. Lancelot Andrews, afterward Lord Bishop
of Winchester, had in the public Divinity-Schools in Cambridge, in the Month
of July 1591. upon this Question following.
Rendered into English for the use of the mere English Reader.
Whether by Gods Law it be lawful for the Magistrate to require an Oath of the
Party, (that is, the party guilty or Defendant?) and in what case, and how far
it is lawful?

TOuching the questioning of parties guilty or Defendants by the Religion of an
Oath, as also of such parties taking such Oath, or lawfully declining it; of
late has a Question arose, Whether by Gods Law it be lawful for the Magistrate
to require an oath of the party (that is, the party guilty or defendant) and in
what case, and how far it is lawful? This question, to prevent any confusion
upon your memory or my own, I will divide into five branches; and indeed in
this short two days space I have not bethought my self of a more distinct
method.

1. Whether it be lawful to exact or require an oath? 2. Whether it be lawful
for the Magistrate to do it? 3. Whether from the guilty (or defendant) party?
4. Whether it be lawful in every cause, or not in capital causes, but such as
receive a milder punishment? 5. How far this is lawful, and in what cases?
Of which questions the first three have nothing of question in them, if we be
sound in Divinity; therefore I shall in few words dispatch them.

And first of all, it is a sacred right that such an oath may be lawfully
required: In which matter I think it is very behooveful (as Christ did in the
case of Divorcement) first of all to enquire what every thing was in the
beginning: in the revolution of time many things are changed, the beginning is
the most certain rule. Therefore I ask where and when the first mention of an
oath is made in Scriptures? I find Gea. 24. Abraham forcing his servant to
take an oath, in these words, and with this ceremony; Put thy hand under my
Thigh, and I will make thee swear, that thou shall take a wife for my son, of
my Kindred. So the first oath mentioned in Scripture, is here expressed: and as
it is the most ancient and first, so it is the most frequent and only mention
almost of such a thing. This very term (to Swear) you will scarce any where
find it in the Old Testament, but either under the word Hiphil, that is the
Imperative, commanding conjugation, in respect of him that gives the oath: or
under the word Niphal, that is the passive suffering conjugation, in respect of
him that takes the oath. And under the same rule are the Greeks, amongst whom
Orcos is the name of the oath, which almost solely the holy Ghost acknowledges
in the New Testament. In that word is a kind of straitning necessity, and as
they say, an exigengy no less then there is in the word Orcos; for from the
same word comes both, that is of straitning. Thereupon comes that common
Proverb, War and Oaths are voluntary evils; and that they may be good, they
ought to be pressed and expressed as St. Augustine of Oaths says wittily)
either by the Authority of him that gives the oath, or at leastwise by the
hardness of his heart that believes nor So that it is a sin either to swear or
to make war, except it be at least in some manner exacted, and upon some and no
light cause. Therefore that it may be required, or rather that it ought to be,
the very force of Nature, the very force of the term it self evinceth it,

But whether from the Magistrate? (this is the second branch.) Yes surely from
the Magistrate.

So the Divines of old; Not only every body but every soul is to be subject to
the Powers, Romans 13.1. Therefore the Powers have power to commit the body to
custody, by imprisoning it, lest it escape: And so likewise the soul, to commit
that to custody, by laying an oath upon it, lest it should have any subterfuge,
by which name God himself has most fitly called an Oath, the Bond or prison of
the soul, Number. 30.13. by which the soul may as it were be tied up; and being so
tied up, may be bound to answer appositely and readily. But yet it comes
nearer: If it be lawful for the Master to force his servant to take an oath, as
Genesis 24.3. Abraham did; if a father to his son, as Jacob to Joseph, Genesis 47.29.
if a brother to a brother, as the same Jacob to Esan, Genesis 25.33. By how much
better right is it lawful for the Magistrate to do it to his Subject, whose
command is more excellent then any other command? I add also about the right
settling in marriage of a son, if that be lawful, as Abraham to his servant; of
choosing a fitting place of burial, as to Joseph; of passing away the right to
Birthright, as Esau; and in private causes, I add also of the least
concernment, if compared with the public: Then surely by better right may the
Magistrate do it, in the common cause of the Commonwealth, whose Interest is
greater then any other Interest. And that is provided for by Gods Law, Exodus
12.8. in express terms; in the case of a Pawn, says God, let them come before
the Magistrate: In which place the Magistrates are named by the name of God
himself, and not by any name, but by that very name which is taken from the
force of an oath: as though he should say, Let them come before the
Oath-givers, or those who (when they give the Law in Gods stead) in his
Judgment and in his Name may require his Oath to be taken: That is, Gods
Deputies, Psalm. 82.6. in Gods judgment: 2 Chro. 19.8. the Oath of God: Eccles.
8.2. therefore to the Magistrate. It is lawful to the Magistrate, I say, as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil. Before him that is the Ecclesiastical Judge by
Law, the Woman is commanded to purge her self in a case of suspicion of breach
of Wedlock bond, Number. 5.19. Before him that is the Temporal Judge by Law, the
man is commanded to purge himself in a cause of suspicion of breach of Social
promise or Contract, Exodus 22.8. The practice whereof we see (and the practice
of the Saints is the Interpreter of the Commandments) of the Ecclesiastical
Judge in Ezra, who required an oath in a Matrimonial cause, Ezra 10.5. Of the
Temporal Judge in Nehemiah, who forced an Oath in a cause of Usury, Neh. 5.12.
Neither has the pious and religious Magistrate only right to do this, but the
Heathen Magistrate too, and that to Gods people; Zedckiah gave his Oath of
Allegiance to Nebuchadnezzar, 2 Chronicles. 36.9. though forced he gave it, and
rightly too, if we believe Ezekiel; and afterward by a sacrilegious boldness
he attempted to break it, he escaped not unpunished for it, Ezekiel. 17.13. Lastly,
I add that this was not lawful to do to their own people only, but also to
guests and strangers, living within thrir Territories, either for trafficking
or any other cause: In which regard Joseph, now become Viceroy of Egypt,
imposes an Oath upon his Brethren in a case of Treason suspected, though both
by Law and by Nature they were Canaanites, Genesis 43.3. therefore hence it now
appears, that it is lawful to impose an Oath, and that it is lawful also to the
Magistrate.

But whether is it lawful to do it to the party, that is, the party guilty or
defendant? (the third thing I propounded.) Nor can that be called into
question, Exodus 22.8. He to whom the Pawn was concredited is the party guilty
or defendant, Number. 5.19. The woman suspected by the jealous husband to have
wronged his bed, is also the party guilty or defendant: but to each of them is
this oath to be given, nor is it lawful for them to decline it. In a few words
I will sum it up: Whether one deceitfully keeps his neighbors goods, or
perfidiously deteins his friends goods, or restores not to the owner his found
goods, when he requires them, Levit. 6.3. or (as it seems to me) in any other
crime, (for it is mentioned indefinitely, 1 Kings 8.31. in whatsoever he shall
sin) it is lawful for the Plaintiff or Agent to impose an oath upon the party,
that is the guilty or defendant, or to lay an oath upon him, as it is in the
Hebrew phrase; nor is it lawful for the guilty or defendant party to refuse it,
whether it be imposed by the Agent or Plaintiff, or by the Magistrate. Indeed I
cannot deny, but we are fallen into such times, that it may be expedient to
impose the oath upon the party, Agent or Plaintiff, and not only upon the
Defendant; for it may happen that they may both prevaricate, that is, the party
Agent or Plaintiff by calumniating, and the party guilty or defendant by
Tergiversation. But if we would take the Law from Heaven, from the holy Writ,
to the party guilty or defendant, it is more necessary to be given. Examples are
thereof: Scarce will you find in the Law an oath laid upon the Agent or
Plaintiff, but very often may you find it upon the party guilty or defendant:
Moses renders the reason of it; The actor (who for the most part is the party
endamaged) he is inflamed with anger, he is wholly wrapped up in the Leaven of
anger and revenge, struck through with the sting of malevolence, will be rash
with his mouth, which the Wiseman forbids to be in an oath, Eccl. 5.1.
therefore the matter of an Oath herein is altogether unfit. But the party
guilty or defendant, whom the Law always supposes to be guilty of the crime
charged, till the contrary appear, is much fitter: In him there is less
prejudice, less of affections, besides perhaps of fear, which is as it were the
heart of an oath. Therefore it is lawful to lay it upon the party guilty or
defendant, and fitting too to do so.

Now I come to the fourth branch; In what cause this is fitting: which is more
intricate, and has more question in it. And I shall not seek any where else
for the division of these causes, but in our Law, that is, the Law of Divines:
there in the holy Law some are called wrongs or prevarications, Exodus 22.9.
some capital causes, Deuteronomy. 21.21. whereof some of those being heinous, are
punished with loss of life, life either by being deprived of natural life, or
civil, that is, Banishment, or (as the holy Writ speaks) rooting out, Ezra
7.26. To which are allied causes of blood, such as are Deuteronomy. 25.12. Lopping off
a limb; and there in the second Verse, inflicting of stripes: but these others
were not so great, and were partly punished by pecuniary Mulcts, partly by
imprisonment, Esth 7.26.

Was there any place for such an oath to be given, in such crimes as were
punished by loss of life? truly I do not persuade to that. First, the practice
in Scripture contraries it; for I see when Achans life was in question, Joshua
dealt thus, Tell me, my son, swear not to me. So likewise Saul in the like case
concerning Jonathan, Tell me Jonathan, do not swear to me: a willing, not
express confession; a simple interrogation, not under the bond of an oath. But
(which is the hinge of the question) I see the Prophet Jeremy himself
interrogated by the King himself, I will ask thee a thing, hide nothing from
me: The Prophet covenants with him, If I declare it unto thee, will thou not
surely put me to death? (nor did Jeremy thus covenant without the dictate of
the holy Ghost:) as if in such causes God had given an immunity of answering,
Jer. 38.14. And indeed Reason persuades the same; for indeed so ought
Inquisition (as far as it may be) to be made by the Magistrate, that the
manifest loss of souls may be avoided. When as from the mouth of the greatest
Liar that most true sentence proceeded, Skin after skin, and all that a man
has will he give for his life, Job 2.4. it is to be feared that that,
whatsoever, or all that a man has, will comprehend as well the conscience of
an oath, as the fear of God, and what else soever comes under the notion of
Religion, as men are, and as they are disposed. Wherefore, though I define
nothing (I know not how) in such causes as these, in regard of the present
danger of Perjury: yet I think it is best to forbear the imposing of an Oath.
And the Laws which we use (at least according to leave or permission) judge the
same. But in other cases, being of lesser offense, and so punished more easily,
I think otherwise: Except perhaps we take that sentence out of the Comic Poet,
and place it in Divinity; An Oath is for the keeping of a thing, not for the
losing of it: For by that general Law it is provided, Lev. 5.4. -- If a soul
swear, pronouncing with his lips, to do evil or to do good, whatsoever it is
that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid from him when he knows
of it, then he shall be guilty in one of these. And whereas this cannot be
understood of the Evil of guilt or of a crime (as we speak in the Schools) lest
an Oath, which is a bond of piety, should become a bond of Iniquity: it
follows, it must hold in an evil of punishment; in which kind it is neither
lawful to refuse an oath, nor after it is taken to break it.

1. Not to refuse it. Solomon wittingly and prudently laid an oath upon Shimei,
to the loss of his liberty, that he should not go beyond Cedron; and he
lawfully laid this oath on him: and when afterward Shimei (having sworn not to
pass these bounds) yet did it, he lost his life for it, and justly, not only
for passing beyond Cedron, but for the violation of his oath, 1 Kings 2.43.
What would you have? even profane Shimei refuses not an oath, though to the
loss of his liberty. Nor Micheas, who by the King was bound up under the
Religion of an oath, (neither was that once only, or that the first time, but
it had been done sometimes before) when he was free, refused; but being sworn,
refused not, but answered: though his certain punishment was before his eyes,
though for his answer he was to be sent to prison, 1 Kings 22.16. By which
example it appears, as well that it was then the custom in Israel to take an
oath to answer, as also that the Prophet Micheas durst not (perhaps he was
ignorant of Gods Law in that point) do as we do now-a-dayes, either covenant
that the oath shall not entangle us, or endanger our liberty; or if that may
not be granted, then to use Tergiversation.

2. Not to break the oath. That is, (as the principal argument) if it may
lawfully be performed: for except it be so, rightly says St. Augustine,
Justice breaks unjust bonds. I hope the Magistrate shall not have less power
then every one of the vulgar, and every private person: every of them have at
least that small power. If he be sworn to his loss, yet he must not change in
that he has promised to his neighbor, Psalm. 15.4. and if not his promise to
his neighbor, then not to the Magistrate, by a better right sure, or equal at
least. What then? even profane Esau revoked not his oath, though it was to the
loss of his Inheritance. But that private men, once for all, may know under
what Law they are in this case, it is not lawful, no not for a King, to do it:
Zedekiah took an oath to his loss, and as at the first view it seems, even as
well to his own slavery, as the slavery of his people, Ezekiel. 17.13. he changed:
but God both detested and revenged that fact of his. Nor is it lawful for a
Commonwealth so to change: The Commonwealth of Israel made a League with the
Gibeonites, and swore to it, and this was contrary both to their profit and the
public command of God: Joshua ( Josh. 9.15.) though not fit to have it
changed, and he thought right: The same oath Saul afterward presumed to
change, though he did it in zeal toward Israel, yet that was expiated, first,
by the danger of the loss of his Kingdom, and afterward by the cutting off his
posterity, 2 Samuel 21.2. Therefore this is not lawful for a King, a
Commonwealth, nor a private man to do. Now I conclude: So be it there be not
danger of loss of life in it, in matters and causes, which are punished either
by pecuniary Mulcts, or by imprisonment, it is lawful for the Subject to
undergo that oath, and for the Magistrate to require it. But in this point is
much doubting; this Oath, how far it is lawful, and in what manner and case?
Which whilst I treat of, all my action is (as they call it) the pursuing of
the Judicial proceedings, by which it may be known at length, in which way we
may go where we may go no further: and hereof I see three parts, (as far as
concerns our purpose) which are thus designed in holy Writ, 1. The admission of
the suit or complaint, as the Hebrews call it; that is, the entrance of the
cause into judgment, out of Isaiah 1.23. St. Paul calls it receiving an
accusation, 1 Timothy 5.19. The second is the state and position of the cause,
that is, the foundation of the suit or complaint, as the Hebrews give it the
name out of Deuteronomy. 19.13. The Greeks call it, the matter to be judged and
determined. St. Paul (if I be not deceived) says it is an end of strife, Heb.
6.16. The third is, Inquisition upon the proofs, that is, as the Jews call it a
Pervestigation or sifting of the suit or complaint, out of Job 29.16. the
Greeks call it a Structure of the cause. St. Paul calls it a confirmation, Heb.
6.16. (for with the fourth, which all men call the Sentence, I have nothing to
do.) Therefore these three things are to be in all Judiciary proceedings, That
the party ought to be lawfully questioned; after that, the state of the cause;
then, the proofs are to be looked into. And in the first part there is no use
of an oath, that I know or have read of: yet that I should enquire hereof, some
men's error makes me do it, which error I shall lessen this day, (if it may be
done) who think themselves not sufficiently accused, nay they think they shall
accuse themselves, except an accuser step forth and show himself; and who
falsely and rashly suppose, and yet the suppose it, that that oath which is
required of them for the stating of the cause, that is the second part, that is
to be required to the first part, this is the admission of the suit or
complaint.

So I propose it thus: In every suit or complaint the matter either is so
apparent, as that it is manifest as well concerning the fact as the person:
whether the person be deprehended in the deed doing, that is, (as they say)
taken in the manner, as she was, John 8.4. Or so with an high hand, or (as we
use to say) with a notorious boldness, as attempted before the Magistrate and
all the Congreation, as was Zimri's wickedness, Numb. 25.8. In which cases so
openly acted there was no need of accuser or witness: or if it be so, that the
fact is manifest, but the person is unknown; as in the dead body found, but the
murderer is not known, Deuteronomy. 21.1. or the person is known, but the fact
unknown, as in Achans case, Josh. 7.18. In which matter so controverted, a man
may, by the judgment of the Divine Law, be called into question four manner of
ways.

For either one may be brought forth upon some signs o^ presumptions, as in
that first piece of Gods justice, (which all humane justice imitates) it was
done against Adam, without an accuser, only upon signs and presumptions, that
is, that he fled, and hid himself amongst the Trees, (a sign of a guilty mind)
Genesis 3.8. In the second piece of justice against Cain, that likewise was upon
signs and presumptions, (that is, Abel appearing no where) effusion of blood
being found, Cains anger or envy toward Abel foregoing it, Genesis 4.6,10. This
is the first manner.

The second is, Or one may be brought forth upon the impeachment of another, as
in that very first piece of justice; Adam only was cited, but he being
questioned (as usually it happens) impeaches Eve, she likewise the Serpent,
Genesis 3.12. and so they two hereby were made parties guilty or defendant.

The third is, by Fame, or rather Infamy, as for the most part suspicion
follows in the neck of the facts of wicked men, talk or fame follows the
suspicion, and insinuation or complaint follows the talk or same: And thus was
the course against the Sodomites, Genesis 18.20. The cry of the Sodomites is
great, I will go down now and see, etc. says the Lord. And after the same
manner were Inquisitions made both in the Law, If it be told thee, and thou
have heard it, Deuteronomy. 17.4 and in the Gospel against the incestuous person, 1
Cor. 5.1. It is reported.

The fourth is by Suggestion or Complaint, as in Jobs case, cap. 1.11. where
the Accuser of our brethren (as St. John calls him) would have made that holy
man guilty of Hypocrisy, a false crime, yet a crime; and that partly
juridically, under which name amongst the Hebrews they were called Masters of
the suit or controversy, Isaiah 50.8. (we translate it Adversary.) And here
the punishment of the offending party was sought after, that he might give
satisfaction to the person wronged; partly (as it is called) Evangelically,
wherein one is denounced or reported to the Church, where only the medicine or
remedy is sought after, that the Church may have satisfaction in cause of
scandal: In the first, the thing it self (as we use to say) speaks and
impeaches the party guilty; in the second, one guilty person impeaches another;
in the third, the speech of the people is the Accuser; in the fourth, any one
under the proper and true name of an Accuser.

To this I add a Fifth, but not (a^ these) as an ordinary remedy to determine
the controversy; but plainly an extraordinary one, not to be put in practice
but in the Valley of Achor, that is, against the troublers of Israel; (for so
the word Achor sounds) that is, in some-heinous wickedness, or the state of the
Church and Kingdom being in danger: in such cases we run to extraordinary
remedies, that is, to Lots as Joshua did, which in certain causes is not
granted, Josh. 7.16. In this Joseph made use only of his own suspicion, Are
not you Spies? (says he) to see the nakedness of the Land ye are come, Gen
429. and when they denied, yet without sign or token, fame or any Accuser, he
questioned them, thrust Simeon into prison, and forced the rest to take an
oath: Nor did they appeal to the Law of Nations, or complain that they were
used contrary to Law and right. For where the peace of the Commonwealth is
concerned, that is of such moment, that I doubt not, that God suffers his
spirit of jealousy to come upon the Magistrate, touching the safety of his
Israel, no less then he suffers the Husband to have his, touching the chastity
of his Wife, Number. 5.14. For the matter in question, it is in a main degree,
dangerous, that it ought not to be dissembled: and the persons with whom it is
acted use not to bring in any witnesses, (but such as are guilty themselves) by
whom they may be convinced. And as to the crime we speak of, it is of that kind
of wickedness that leaves no prints, footsteps or marks behind it, by which
they may be taken hold of: Wherefore in those cases it is no less lawful to
question or accuse upon suspicion only, then it is by the Pillory, Stocks, or
A punishment amongst the Heathens, where the party was put into a Boat, and
another Bo^t whelmed over him.
Boar, (for such purpose these things were in Gods Jer 29.26
Commonwealth.) Bither of which in other, either controversies or crimes, no man
allows. Well does Seneca (if I temember well) render the reason hereof, Where
Villainies run riot beyond measure, it is unjust that justice should be tied to
degrees: to which that plainly extraordinary question of him; who about that
wicked extraordinary act of Achan betook himself to lots, is not very unlike.
The God of Israel would have them to be troubled, that go about to trouble the
Israel of God: and hereof the Valley of Achor is a perpetual monument. Now,
whomsoever the Magistrate calls in question by any one of these four, or if it
concern the peace of the Commonwealthy; or of the Church, the fifth way either)
foregoing, the party is lawfully called. Nor is there any reason he should
fear, that he should accuse or bewray himself, he is now lawfully accused and
bewrayed. He is, now that he is accused and bewrayed, to take care how he shall
lawfully defend himself. And hitherto of the right of Accusation.

Now I assume the second. The matter being thus before the Judge brought into
doubt, the party guilty or defendant, either confesses the crime committed, as
Achan did, and then the Judge has no more to do but to pronounce sentence; or
(which is most commonly done) denies it: which Solomon most elegantly
expresses, Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his
neighbor comes and searches him. Now the party guilty or defendant denying,
by repelling the objection, and the Agent or Plaintiff affirming his intention:
thereon arises that contradiction St. Paul speaks of, Heb. 6.16. the bounder or
end of which contradiction is, that which in every Judicature is sought for, as
there the Apostle observes; but no bounder will be found, till the matter be
put in an equal balance, except the one party have a better confirmation then
the other; it is the Apostles word in the same place, therefore it is the Judges
part to enquire on which part that lies. It Is but a light labor and little
praise to end such contentions, as are easy and plain; but that is the worth of
a Judge, to sift out such causes, where the right is obscure and perplexed: The
cause which I knew not, I searched out, says Job of himself, Job 29.16. And to
do that dexterously and fitly is the honor of a Magistrate, says Solomon,
Prove. 25.1. to whom himself, that sentence he pronounced, in that most
difficult cause 'twixt the two Harlots, touching the uncertain mother of the
surviving child, was an high honor, 1 Kings 3.27. But before these
confirmations, that is, the foundations of the cause, ought to be or can be set
forth, it is necessary some state of the cause must be settled; or as it were a
hinge must be, on which the cause may be turned, and that first of all to be
made manifest, what and how far he affirms and the other denies, wherein each
of the Litigants may rightly call the other, to set soot to foot and hand to
hand. Says the Jew, and prudently does he say it, First of all place me the
comroversie upon his foundation; which except you do, (as very aptly some speak
out of Prove. 21.) the whole Action is but mere vanity, tossed on this side and
that side, this way and that way, 'twixt the Agent and Defendant: which as we
cannot endure here in the Schools, much less ought it to be suffered in
Judicature, whose proceeding thoroughout, ought to be solemn and sacred, and
the very Justice of Justice, as it is, Deuteronomy. 16.20.

This subject matter to be judged, or state of the cause, or (if any would
rather call it so) the bounder of the controversy, is to be sought out, either
in the behalf of the guilty or defendant party, or of the Agent: Not of the
Agent, oftentimes he cannot, because oftentimes there is none such, when one is
called into question upon presumption, or else upon fame; and when there is, he
is almost rapt and transposed, or is driven on, either out of hatred or some
other oblique desire, that he himself is unstated; so that from him in vain is
the state of the cause required: Wherefore to the party guilty or defendant is
this favor granted, or rather this honor is given, (who is always a person
certain, and whom the Law accounts not convicted for guiltless) that he should
either by affirming or denying fix to himself the state of the cause; yea, that
by his answer only the state of the whole controversy may be settled, and not
only the state of the controversy, but (except he be convinced of falsehood by
the testimony of two witnesses beyond all exception) an end too of the
controversy. But that he may not, if he be loose and free, depart from that
state so by him sixed, and afterward not stand to that state, but shall recoil
and go back from his purpose; a bond, a bond of the soul (as God gave it the
name) he is to enter into, that is, a religious affirmation, by which his soul
is as it were bound up with a chain, to speak out the truth holily and
sincerely, that is, the truth (not that absolutely, but) as he knows it or
believes it; nor must go contrary to his conscience, which we call lying, but
even as he were acting with God himself, so must he act with the Magistrate,
that is Gods Lieutenant, that represents him, and requires right.

That Israel and the people of God proceeded thus, (that is, swore to make true
answer) that practice of Michaeas (of which I made mention above) and that,
which is much apter, that other in that questioning of Elias, 1 Kings 18.10.
evince it; where, when they had expressly answered, He is not with us, the King
not herewith contented, forced them to an oath, that they had not found him: as
if no Law could compel a man, to rest on the answer of a man unsworn.
Wherefore as it is altogether fit, that the party guilty or defendant should be
bound up, lest he might evade or change the state of the cause, and thereupon
one state, and then another follows, and indeed so there will be no place of
consistency or settling the cause: So he ought to be bound up, not with his
bare naked answer, or (as others would have it) with a pecuniary Mulct, (these
are not bonds of the soul, which is the Interpreter of Truth) but with that
alone, true and only bond of the soul, that is, by an Oath. And thus at length
the whole hinge of the cause being fixed as it ought to be, let us proceed to
those Confirmations, as St. Paul calls them.

Neither is it fitting (as I hear some complain) that the guilty or defendant
party should be so bound up, and the Agent altogether free. Nor is our Law so:
but as it is not safe for the party agent to be sworn, for the reasons that I
have twice named, Apot. 12.10.
(and God himself suffers Satan, whom he knows to be a Calumniator, to be also
an Accuser) yet the accusation is so to be put into suit or action, and the
accuser is so by contract to give security, under the penalty of a certain
pecuniary Mulct, or of a certain note of Infamy, under the price of the loss of
his time, Exodus 11.19.
(as the Law speaks) except he prosecute and prove the suggestion and accusation
he has given in: So it is provided for on both sides; on the one side by the
Religion of an Oath, on the other side by a double Mulct, and no simple Infamy;
so that the Agent cannot calumniate, nor the party guilty or defendant cannot
fly back. Now that first of all the guilty or defendant party should be sworn,
and then answer, (which some cannot away withal) it is just and lawful; for if
he should do it unsworn, he should do it but in a trifling manner, (that is,
being free from the Religion of an Oath) if any clause in the action should
more closely press him, he should refuse to answer, should turn himself to and
fro, seek shifts, diversions and cautels, should answer nothing explicitly and
home; that which in conscience of Religiou he is tied to do, after he has bound
himself by oath to do all things holily and clearly, that he had rather be
guilty of doing an injury then of Perjury, and would rather subject himself to
loss then damnation.

Shall we take a form hereof from the Law and the holy Writ? none seems to me
fitter for that purpose, then that questioning of Ezra, in the 9. and 10.
Chapters of Ezra, where the parties guilty or defendant answer, but first were
sworn: The order and course of which judicial proceeding was this; some of the
principal persons come, and relate the matter to Ezra, of Marriages contracted
by many (suppose an hundred and ten) with strangers, chap. 9.1. Ezra forces
those guilty or defendant parties, even many of them not guilty or complained
of, to take an oath, chap. 10.5. he forces them too in a cause, in which they
might be convinced by witnesses: but first he forces them. After that, as in
the 5. chap. 16. verse, Esdras with the rest, to whom the care of that cause
was delegated, sit upon the cause, which the third Month after they bring to
effect. Which form being used by Ezra, a ready Scribe, and skilful in the Law
of his God, it may answer the desires of any man not unjust, as to the practice
of the Law, as they speak) and the knowledge of the rules thereof. And this is
the former use of an oath, just and lawful, in the settling of the foundation
of a suit or controversy.

The other is, when arguments are used to make good the snit or controversy
begun. Now the arguments, or these Confirmations, to which the Judge gives
credit, are partly marks and presumptions, (such as the nature of the cause
bears) certain and undoubted, partly in corrupt and sound testimonies.

Presumptions or marks, such as are brought forth by the Parents in the case of
the slandered Virgin, Deuteronomy. 22.17. Testimonies, upon whose credit the whole
action is confirmed, Deuteronomy. 19.15. In the number of which (I say of Testimonies)
I place an Oath, and that bounder of controversy, or (as they speak) that
decisory oath of controversy, Heb. 6.16. The Hebrews out of the old Canon make
two parts, or rather, if you will, two kinds of an Oath.

The former is a solemn contestation, wherein any call God to witness for want
of other witnesses, who either cannot or will not bear witness, even God they
call to witness, who is present every where and in all actions, and has the
right of a witness: The Lord Jehova lives, before whom I speak; this is a form
of contestation, Judges 8.19. The later I may call it an Execration, wherein a
man gives oath to his contestation (or joining issue in the cause, as it is
called) pawning as it were his salvation, and renouncing all the hope and help
he has from God, if he bear witness falsely: So do the Lord to me, and so let
him add; there is a form of Execration, 1 Samuel 14 44. Neither have Divines
thought it of less concernment, or that the guilty or defendant party was
less bound, whether he used either of those forms, or both. I add also,
whether the Magistrate contest the guilty or defendant party, or by adjuration
he be execrated, or he do it to himself by taking an oath; for it is all one
whether this or that be done: whether an oath be laid upon the guilty or
defendant party by the Judge, or he lay it upon himself. And that they take for
granted, as well by Prove. 29.24. in regard of the position, as by Judges 17.2.
by reason of the condition. But this controversy brings another: I prosecute
not that, I prosecute that I begun, touching Arguments.

Now God has given power to the Judge to enquire of the Arguments touching the
crime, and of citing the Testimonies; as also to the giving of oaths, and that
for the collecting the consirmations of the cause. That power is mentioned
Deuteronomy. 13.14. Thou shall enquire (says the Lord) and that in general; whereof
he subjoynes two kinds, the first, Thou shall search, that is, presumptions and
arguments. The second, Thou shall ask, that is, witnesses and those that are
knowing of the passages concerning that cause.

The Arguments. So it was lawful for Joseph to search his Brethrens sacks, that
he might find the Cup taken away by theft, Genesis 44.5. So is it lawful for our
Magistrates to search the hidden corners and secretest rooms of the house, so
to find out marks or presumptions of suspected crimes.

Testimonies. So it is provided by Gods Law, Lev. 5.1. If a soul hear the voice
of swearing (the Chaldee Paraphrast, a most ancient Interpreter of the Law,
has added to it, Here feems to be some mistake in the printed Latin.
nor where we have erred; nor is it to be doubted but that it was according to
the sense of the ancient Church, even before Christ's time) made or given by the
Judge, and he can be a witness of that matter, as one that saw it and knew it,
(in which place the Septuagint turns the word knew it, into being conscious of
it) if he that is so conscious of it, shall be called forth to give his
testimony; if he reveal it not, he shall bear his own imquity. Therefore it is
lawful to make inquisition, and upon oath.

And first of all it is lawful to make Inquisition touching the party guilty or
defendant, even amongst others, though his Brethren, though they be religious
persons; as Obadiah touching Elias, 1 Kings 18.10. There is no Nation or
Kingdom whither my Lord has not sent to seek thee, and when they said, He is
not there, he took an oath of the Kingdom and Nation, that they found thee not.
And methinks it is likely, when this Oath was common to the whole Kingdom, it
fell also upon those religious men, whose Knees were not bowed to Baal, nor had
their lips kissed him, neither did they in this cause (though it was to the
prejudice of their Elias, and that too before wicked Magistrates) refuse to
give their testimony. Neither is it only lawful to enquire concerning the
guilty or defendant party, amongst others only; but also to enquire of him
himself, concerning himself. The great Judge gave us a precedent herein, in
that first Inquisition that ever was, Genesis 3.11. Who toldihee that thou wast
naked? have thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou should
not eat? So the Princes interrogated Baruch touching Jeremiahs book, Tell us,
how did thou write all these words at his mouth? So Esdras the very parties
guilty or defendants touching their own fact, Esr. 10.11. So the High Priest
committed St. Paul to custody, to enquire something of him more perfectly, Acts
23.20. For oftentimes Accusers fall back, (which the Heathen man long since
observed:) All cannot, some will not accuse; what is to be done then? Some men's
wickedness, because they are truly the works of darkness, nor can be brought
to light, Ephesians. 5.11. because they join hand in hand, nor will discover
themselves, Prove. 16.5. Because the name of Doeg is harsh, and even the very
thing, to go forth to accuse, is now become poor and odious, a matter of cost,
danger and infamy, Prove. 25.8. And shall we suffer wickedness to lie hid and
spread abroad, and by delay to gather strength, till at length it break out to
the ruin of the Commonwealth? and because no man can or will (for it is all
one, whether he will not or cannot accuse) is it not lawful to enquire? surely
it is lawful. But it is in vain to enquire without the bond of an Oath. The Holy
Ghost in the old Testament expresses it by the word adjure, and so the King
adjured Micheas. In the New Testament also by the word adjure, so the High
Priest adjured our Savior, Mat. 26.63. and they both made Religion of not
answering to the Question. Touching the Hebrew word there is no question, but
that both by the force of the name, and the use of it, it imports an Oath. I
add, nor is there of the Greek word neither, if Beza and the rest of the
Translators, render right that request of the Devil, which is in Mat. 5.7. I
adjure thee that thou torment me not: that is, assure me by giving me an Oath
or swearing to me, that thou will not torment me. So seems it to them: but that
term of Adjuring I pass by. I take the other (if it be another) of laying an
Oath upon the party guilty or defendant; that is, that by Law it is permitted
to the party agent to force him against his will to take an oath, Exodus 22.8. 1
Kings 8.31. and therefore it is more then permitted to the Magistrate. Surely
very bad were the case of our affairs, if every private man should have power
to require an oath of the party guilty or defendant, and the Magistrate should
not have power: if in the case of a Pawn it should be lawful, and not of a
Kingdom: if one may be forced to swear, that he has not put his hand to his
neighbors goods, and cannot be forced to his oath, that he has not put forth
his hand to the peace of the Commonwealth. If, as to the Law, his case be
better that makes troubles in the Church of God, then his that has done it
about his friends money. Compare these one with another: First, the Magistrate,
then the party agent, one perhaps of the meanest of the common people; then the
case of a man's small sum of money, and the case of the Commonwealth further;
that Pawn sometimes may somewhere be discovered, but those clandestine
conspiracies cannot (unless you grant such Inquisition) for that is vanished
into the air, left no impression behind it. Either I am very much mistaken, or
(whether you consider the persons or the matter, or the moments, or the events
of the things) the equity and necessity of an oath is here greater. Therefore
that the party guilty or defendant should be so interrogated in his own cause,
it is allowed by Gods Law: and that also by the laying on an oath is lawful. And
this last use of an oath is just and lawful, not only that the state of the
question may be settled by the answer of the party guilty or defendant, (as
before is laid down) but also that the confirmations of the cause, that is, the
pillars of the proofs may be gathered together, whereupon the Judge may rely
to determine the suit on one side.

This may suffice for this purpose, unless that, as I believe, there rest one
knot or another, not worthy the loosing: but that (as the world goes
now-a-adayes) every scruple that men make, becomes a rock; they complain, that
by these means men are compelled to an infinite oath, except before hand they
may have the Question, and afterward take the Oath. The reason hereof I have
given before, and therefore will not here repeat it: This only I maintain,
that the usual oath given cannot be declined by reason of Infinity. For whilst
those bounds, and as it were ends of an oath, the Prophet Jeremiah speaks of,
Jer. 4.2. (which always in Divinity were accounted the bounds, and as it were
the ends of an oath) in truth, justice and judgment: whilst these were
observed there was caution enough had: nor other ends does the Scripture
acknowledge or require.

1. In Truth: that is, truly. That no man be compelled to swear contrary to
that he knows; as it was charged upon Micheas, 1 Kings 12.16. Tell me nothing
but truth in the name of the Lord. Or if any man like better that Attestation
of St. Paul, Romans 9.1. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also
bearing me witness in the holy Ghost. This is enough for the first part.

2. In Justice: that is, justly. That nothing be sworn but what is possible: in
which case Abraham's servant took care, Genesis 24.5. Perhaps the woman will not be
willing to follow me, etc. The Heathen themselves too had that caution, So far
as I know and am able. And also to the honesty of it; wherein they in Ezra
10.3. made provision, that is, According to the Law. St. Paul also, Acts 23.3.
Command thou me to be smitten contrary to the Law? This is sufficient for
the second part.

3. In Judgment: that is, maturely not rashly; (for so do the Interpreters
distinguish it.) Of which, says Solomon, Eccl. 5.1. whilst thou art speaking
to God, Be not rash with thy mouth; but taking due time to deliberate
thereupon, answer. These are the ends of an oath, which the Scripture
acknowledges; nor do they require more, as it is defined, if these three ends
be kept: 1. I will speak nothing but truth in the name of the Lord: 2. Of such
things I know and as far as I am able, and according to Law: 3. Taking so much
time to think on it, that there can be no danger from an infinity or
endlesnesse. Though every petty question is not clear, (which often happens
from the occasion) 'twill be safe enough to contain within these bounds; not to
answer any thing falsely or rashly, nor to answer concerning such things which
he remembers not, or is not bound by Law to it: that is, he will do that, which
without an oath he is bound to do. And he that desires to be more safe then
thus, in my judgment rather desires to arrogate an infinite liberty, then to
decline an infinite oath; or he is guilty, or something else that I will not
speak of.

And now, whilst thou art taking care how to avoid a sin by swearing, I think
it matters not much, whether before hand thou promisest by a promissory oath to
speak truth, or afterward thou swearest by an assertory oath, that that which
thou have spoken is true: It comes to the same pass before answer, by
promissory oath to promise to deal truly, or after answer by an assertory oath
to attest, that thou have dealt truly: I have said, and I will say; I have
done, and I will do: there are two times, but the Oath is the same. Wherefore
as to the matter I think it matters not much, yet thus far it may, that it much
conduces to the managing of suits at Law, both that they may be clear and
explicit, as also readily dispatched. That they may be clear and explicit,
lest (if the party guilty or defendant, being not tied by the bond of an Oath,
may seem to be at liberty to prevaricate) the whole controverted action may
float up and down, and have neither foundation nor hinge. That they may be
readily dispatched, lest (in case the party guilty having answered, will not
swear to the truth of his answer) the Judge should be compelled osten to
iterate the questions, and act the same thing over and over. It is also
considerable too, because in that form of judgment, which is most agreeable to
Gods Law, Ez^a 10.5.
and suitable to this Law of ours which is called into question, this order is
observed; first of the oath, and then of the question; and the at their request
concerning whom the question is made. For whereas for the dispatching of
controversies, Gods Law has made accurate provision; nor in Scripture is there
no sooner made mention of judgment to be given, Exodus 8.14.
then that it should be done speedily, lest if it be long in doing it become
^our. Rightly did they require, Ezra 10.13. that he might not be necessitated
upon the judgment seat, to give answer to all questions: It was tedious, not
the work of one day; therefore after he had in a solemn place given them the
oath, they might come afterward at leisure, at times appointed, and enquiry
might be made into the several circumstances of the fact, by virtue of the oath
before taken. The same practice is used now by us, and the same custom
prevails; which, whether you look upon the advice, is most just; or the
Ordinance, it is most like the Divine Law. For if the Questions must go before
the Oath, (so that it should be unlawful for any to take an oath but in open
Court) surely one day would scarce suffice for one cause, and the people
(contrary to Jethro's advice) should stand in judgment from morning to the
evening.

That last is, which some (doubtless for want of understanding) would have the
Oath so given them; that after they had taken the Oath, there should be no
farther enquiry: And this they hold, grounding themselves upon that sentence of
St. Paul, An Oath is the end of all strife. Heb. 6.16.
I stand not upon it that it may be so interpreted, that the original Greek
word there peras, rather is the State of the Controversy then the End of it:
But be it so, the end; let the Oath be the end, but not every Oath, or by
whomsoever taken, or howsoever performed (this can scarcely be thought to
proceed from a man in his right wits) but I hope it must be such an Oath, of
the credit whereof there may be no contradiction: in case the Contradiction
ought to be ended by that Oath. Wherefore if the Judge must end the Suite or
Controversy without contradiction, it must be so clear, that no man even
without Examination, or after Examination, will or can contradict it. For to
desire to free every Oath of every man from all Inquisition, what is it but to
plead for perjury? What else is it, but as it were upon warning given, so by
this kind of Authority given; to solicit men of loose Consciences to commit
this wickedness? For whether the Actor, or Defendent, or Witness take it, the
Oath is of the same Conscience, of the same face, there is an end: if one will
swear that what he sues for, or complains of is his, is true, presently he
carries the Cause: But afterward, it must be unlawful to enquire whether he
has sworn true or no, Because an Oath is the end of all Controversy. If this
be granted, it makes well for perjured men. Let them make their peace with God
as well as they can; from the Law they need fear nothing, nor shall be punished
by the ear for what they sinned by their mouth. How juster is that? Yea truly
if the Oath be sound, let the Inquisition thereupon be twice, or thrice, or
seven times, if it be thought fit, it will always as out of a furnace come
forth more clear and pure, and the very Inqusition it self, will become an
acquisition of more credit. But if the Oath be not of good, but doubtful credit
or suspected: Let it be inquired into, and let Justice break unjust bonds.
Surely this is reason, and is it only reason? Does not the Law say the same?
Whether one contend by oath, either in his own cause for himself, or in
another against another for himself. For himself: The woman of suspected
chastity, when she had upon her oath denied the adultery, laying a most heavy
curse upon her self if she were guilty; was she thereupon presently dismissed?
(for an Oath is the end of all controversy:) No, a new question was made,
whether she had sworn truly or no? for proof whereof she was to drink the
Bitter waters, which would be the confirmers of the Oath if true, and the
revengers if false, Number. 5.24.

Against another: When the Law had provided, that out of the mouth of two or
three witnesses, who being sworn had given testimony against a man, the matter
should be established, Deuteronomy. 19.15. Lest any man should take humane testimonies
for Divine Oracles, in the next Verse it is commanded, that the suspected
witness must stand before the Lord, the Priests, and it must be enquired into
whether he has carried himself sincerely and truly in the testimony he has
given; but if he be convicted of falsity, then shall he be punished as he
should have been whom he complained of. But I shall transgress upon the time,
and upon the Church too, (the Clock having a while ago called us off) if I
should further follow these trifles, which whoever list may bray with
arguments, they of their own accord so overflow: therefore I restore you to
your selves and conclude. If (as the Prophet says) Isa. 28.17.
this Judgment, which we use, be laid to the Line, and Righteousness to the
Plummet of Gods Word, there shall be in those things no sin. For the Magistrate
to require, and that from the party guilty or defendant, (especially if the
cause be not capital, or a cause of Blood) an Oath; and that he may do it so
far, whether it be that the controversy may thereby be set upon its
foundation, whilst the state of the cause is sought for: or that the truth of
the proofs may be made evident, whilst the question is handled. Nor does the
ends of the Oath, or the order, or the examination, offend against Divinity,
and therefore cannot be declined. They that decline it, first they do it out of
ignorance of Gods Law: then the example is dangerous, that one may thus for his
pleasure enquire into public judgments without judgment: if we may call into
question the rest of the affairs of the Kingdom, and the moments of the
Commonwealth: lastly the Law it self if it make not for us. That God Almighty
may avert this from us, to whom turning our selves let us pray, that he will
give us grace to be modestly wise and sober in all things, to see in our minds
how irreligious it is, how unchristian to decline the judgments of our Nation:
but rather with all our endeavor, with all the strength and force of our Wit
to maintain them, which maintain the Commonwealth and us all; for next after
God and his service most true is that saying of Elihu, Job 36.17
Judgment and Justice maintain all things.

Upon the consideration most especially of what has been written by Dr.
Cosens, in that Apology touching the Oath Ex officio, and Purgation, and what
is said in that short Manuscript, and in the Lord Bishop Andrews Determination
thereupon, and of the inconveniences and hurt that probably may be feared to
ensue upon the prohibiting that Oath and Purgation, together with the practice
still at Common Law in the like cases, and the rest that is here set forth; as
it is hoped that Act may be thought fit to be revised and re-examined, and
perhaps altered: so with the like humility, all that is said or shall be said
in this Treatise, is most submisly tendered to His Sacred Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this happy Parliament now assembled,
to be weighed by them, if so to their Wisdoms it shall be thought fit;
otherwise to be as unsaid and retracted, as is every thing there, if it be
dissonant to Gods Word, His Majesty's Prerogative, the Laws of Church or State,
or the known Laws of the Land, or the just policy and government in Church or
State, or against Christian charity or brotherly love.

Should any man object, That some Civilians desired that this Act, whereby the
Oath Ex officio and Purgation is forbidden, should pass at the end of the
recess of Parliament, the latter end of this last Summer, 1661. when many other
Acts of great concernment were in agitation, and some then passed, and some
stayed, supposed that they will be resumed and considered of at the next
meeting of Parliament: that, I say, this Act should not stay (as some would
have had it) till that next meeting, but rather pass now, though with these
Proviso's on it. I can say no more then this, that Certa incertis praferenda;
if they could not have all they would have, yet to have something, that in a
manner wanted all, was but reasonable prudence: it had perhaps savoured of
morosity to have done otherwise, especially considering that those that have
long fasted would be glad to eat; though, I hope, these that administered this
food to them, did not fear they would (as hungry men use to do) feed too fast,
to their hurt, not to their nourishment, and therefore did set the less meat
before them; but upon a pause after this refreshment there may be a supply:
Neither need (I humbly conceive) any thing that is already done, hinder the
review or alteration of this Act in that point. For it is no new thing nor
discommendable, (but contrary) to make Laws upon present reasons or
emergencies, and yet upon future accidents or contingencies, and variation of
the times and occasions, and other necessary requisites, which could not well
be foreseen at the making of these Laws, nor perhaps dreamt on till they
happened; to alter, change or repeal the former. Hereof many instances might be
given, but in so plain a case I shall mention but one, and that in a matter of
Ecclesiastical cognizance, touching Precontracts of Matrimony, in 32 H. 8. c.
38.

32 H. 8. cap. 38. What Marriages are lawful, and what not.
WHereas heretofore the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome, has always
entangled and troubled the mere jurisdiction and regal power of this Realm of
England, and also unquieted much the subjects of the same, by his usurped power
in them, as by making that unlawful which by Gods word is lawful, both in
marriages, and other things, as hereafter shall appear more at length, and till
now of late in our Soberaign Lords time, which is otherwise by learning taught
then his predecessors in times past long time have been, has so continued the
same, whereof yet some sparks he left, which hereafter might kindle a greater
fire, and so remaining his power not to seem utterly extinct.

Therefore it is thought most convenient to the Kings Highness, his Lords
spiritual and temporal, with the Commons of this Realm assembled in this
present Parliament, that two things specially for this time be with diligence
provided for, whereby many inconveniences have ensued, and many more else might
ensue and follow: as where heretofore diverse and many persons, after long
continuance together in Matrimony, without any allegation of either of the
parties, or any other at their marriage, why the same matrimony should not be
good, just and lawful, and after the same Matrimony solemnized, and consummate
by carnal knowledge, and also sometime fruit of children ensued of the same
Marriage, upon pretense of a former contract made, and not consummate by carnal
copulation, (for proof whereof two witnesses by that Law were only required)
been divorced and separate, contrary to Gods Law, and so the true Matrimony,
both solemnized in the face of the Church, and consummate with bodily
knowledge, and confirmed also with the fruit of children had between them,
clearly frustrate and dissolved: Further also, by reason of other prohibitions
then Gods Law admits, for their lucre by that Court invented, the
dispensations whereof they always reserved to themselves, as in kindred or
affinity between Cousin-germans, and so to the fourth and fourth degree, carnal
knowledge of any of the same kin or affinity before in such outward degrees,
which else were lawful, and be not prohibited by Gods Law, and all because they
would get money by it, and keep a reputation of their usurped jurisdiction,
whereby not only much discord between lawful married persons has (contrary to
Gods Ordinance) arisen, much debate and suit at the Law, with wrongful
vexation, and great damage of the innocent party has been procured, and many
just marriages brought in doubt and danger of undoing, and also many times
undone, and lawful heirs disherited, whereof there had never else, but for his
vainglorious usurpation, been moved any such question, since freedom in them
was given by Gods Law, which ought to be most sure and certain. But that
notwithstanding Marriages have been brought into such an uncertainty thereby,
that no Marriage could be surely knit and bounden; but it should lie in either
of the parties power and arbiter, casting away the fear of God, by means and
compasses to prove a precontract, a kindred and aliance, or a carnal knowledge,
to defeat the same, and so under the pretense of these allegations before
rehearsed, to live all the days of their life in detestable Adultery, to the
utter destruction of their own souls, and the provocation of the terrible wrath
of God, upon the places where such abominations were used and suffered. Be it
therefore enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, That from the first day of the Month of July next
coming, in the year of our Lord God, 1540. all and every such Marriages, as
within this Church of England shall be contracted between lawful persons, (as
by this Act we declare all persons to be lawful, that be not prohibited by Gods
Law to marry) such being Marriages contracted and solemnized in the face of the
Church, and consummate with bodily knowledge, or fruit of children, or child
being had therein between the parties so married, shall be by authority of this
present Parliament aforesaid, deemed, judged, and taken to be lawful, good,
just and indissoluble, notwithstanding any Precontract or Precontracts, of
Matrimony not consummate with bodily knowledge, which either of the parties so
married, or both shall have made with any other person or persons, before the
time of contracting that marriage, which is solemnized and consummate, or
whereof such fruit is ensued or may ensue as before, and notwithstanding any
Dispensation, Prescription, Law, or other thing granted or confirmed by Act or
otherwise. And that no reservation or prohibition, Gods Law except, shall
trouble or impeach any marriage without the Levitical degrees. And that no
person of with estate, degree or condition he or she be, shall after the said
first day of the Month of July aforesaid, be admitted to any of the Spiritual
Courts within this the Kings Realm, or any his Graces other Lands and
Dominions, to any process, plea or allegation, contrary to this foresaid Act.
Rep. 1 and 2 P. and M. 8. Rep. 1 El. 1.

This Act was not many years after repealed, as follows,

2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 23. Part of the Statute of Precontracts repealed.
Whereas in the two and thirtieth year of the reign of the late King of famous
memory, King Henry the eighth, because that many inconveniences had chanced in
this Realm, by breaking and dissolving good and lawful marriages, yea,
whereupon also sometime issue and children had followed, under the color and
pretense of a former contract made with another, the which contract diverse
times was but very slenderly proved, and often but surmised by the malice of
the party who desired to be dissolved from the marriage which they liked not,
and to be coupled with another: there was an Act made, that all and every such
marriages, as within the Church of England should be contrcted and solemnized
in the face of the Church, and consummate with bodily knowledge, or fruit of
children or child, being had between the parties so married, should be by
authority of the said Parliament deemed, judged, and taken to be lawful, good,
just, and indissoluble, notwithstanding any precontract or precontracts of
Matrimony, not consummate with bodily knowledge, which either of the persons so
married or both, had made with any other person or persons, before the time of
contracting that marriage which is solemnized or consummated, or whereof such
fruit is ensued or may ensue, as by the same Act more plainly appear: Sithence
the time of the which Act, although the same was godly meant, the unrulinesse
of men has ungodly abused the same, and diverse inconveniences (intolerable in
manner to Christian ears and eyes) followed thereupon, women and men breaking
their own promises and faiths made by the one unto the other, so set upon
sensuality and pleasure, that if after the contract of Matrimony, they might
have whom they more favored and destred, they could be contented by lightness
of their nature, to overturn all that they had done before, and not afraid in
manner, even from the very Church door and Matriage feast, the man to take
another spouse, and the espouse to take another husband, more for bodily lust
and carnal knowledge, then for surety of faith and truth, or having God in
their good remembrance, contemning many times also the commandment of the
Ecclesiastical Judge, forbidding the parties having made the contract, to
attempt or do any thing in prejudice of the same.

Be it therefore enacted by the Kings Highness, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, that as
concerning Precontracts, the said former Statute shall from the first day of
May next coming, cease, be repealed, and of no force or effect, and be reduced
to the estate and order of the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, which
immediately before the making of the said Estatute, in this case were used in
this Realm: so that from the said first day of May, when any cause or contract
of marriage is pretended to have been made, it shall be lawful to the Kings
Ecclesiastical Judge of that place, to hear and examine the said cause: and
(having the said contract sufficiently and lawfully proved before him) to give
sentence for Matrimony, commanding solemnization, cohabitation, consummation
and tractation, as it becomes man and wife to have, with inflicting all such
pains upon the disobedients and disturbers thereof, as in times past before the
said Statute, the Kings Ecclesiastical Judge, by the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws,
ought and might have done, if the said Statute had never been made: any clause,
article or sentence in the said Statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it enacted, that this Act do not extend to disannul,
dissolve or break any marriage that has or shall be solemnizated and
consummated, before the said first day of May next ensuing, by title or color
of any Precontract, but that they be, and be deemed of like force and effect,
to all intents, constructions and purposes, as if this Act had never been had
ne made: any thing in this present Act notwithstanding.

Provided also that this Act do not extend to make good any of the other
causes, so the dissolution or disannulling of Matrimony, which he in the said
Act spoken of and disannulled. But that in all other causes and other things
there mentioned, the said former Act of the two and thirtieth year of the late
King of famous memory, do stand and remain in his full strength and power, any
thing in this Act notwithstanding. Stat. 1 Eliz. 1.

By these the inconveniency appears, of taking away or altering an ancient
long-settled Law, practiced long in all Christian Countries, as this was; which
had it not been good, probably the inconveniency and hurt of it had appeared in
so long a time; and the Law for the Oath Ex officio and Purgation is of like
antiquity and practice in all Christian Countries, without inconvenience or
hurt thereby arising as yet, that I ever could hear of; therefore such Laws
ought to be deeply weighed and considered of, before they be repealed or
altered.

And now that I am speaking of repealing and altering old Laws, and making new,
I thought fit to close this Tract with some Notes of mine, drawn up almost all
of them in the time of the usurped Government, and some after His Majesty's
restoration, and communicated to the sight of some of Quality, touching the
repealing or altering of some old Laws, and making new. Some are already past
and effected, as that for the Lords the Bishops sitting again in the Lords
House in Parliament, and other things. These I offer with all humility to be
considered of, if it shall by those in Authority be thought fit, otherwise to
be as unsaid: Protesting that I retract, as before, any thing which is here
mentioned, that shall appear contrary to Gods Word, His Majesty's Prerogative,
or the Laws of the Land, or the just policy and government of any of His
Majesty's Dominions.

Touching Parliaments.
Parliament proceedings.
AS a Parliament well constituted and acting regularly, conduces much to the
happiness of King and Subject: so any exorbitancy or deviation therein (of
which surely all unbiassed men cannot but confess we have had too much sad
experience in the Long Parliament) works the contrary: corruption optimi pessima.

In the time of the Long Parliament some, as it were, idolized it, even almost
to an opinion even of Infallibility, of which they have made too much advantage
to the misery of King and People.

Some advised then, that that great Wheel, that great Court should have had its
sphere of activity, its known certain bounds publicly declared, and not have
been like a great River prodigiously overflowing all its banks and bounds.

Such a Parliament acting regularly, is it not probable the Members thereof
would not so much have thirsted to lengthen, much less to perpetuate it?

They were called up to consult; may not he that calls his Counselor forbear
consulting him when he pleases, and dismiss him?

Ordinance of Parliament.
The extent of an Ordinance of Parliament, having by some been tentor'd then,
even almost to Infinity, might it not have been precisely circumscribed, and
the exact definition of an Ordinance given?

Privileges of Parliament.
As also the just privileges of Parliament explicitly have been made known,
that the Subject might not then have sworn, or promised, or protested, to have
maintained and observed them, and yet could not possibly know what they were.

That due care should have been taken, that they might have been observed and
kept inviolable on all sides, neither diminished nor scrued too high, and both
the Members of the Houses and the People to have had their just rights entire:
and for this purpose that that Protestation then put in by the The Bishops
Protestation.
Lords Spiritual the Bishops, with their Petition to have the force removed that
kept them from the Lords House, should have been well considered on, and the
right of Protestation in Parliament declared and maintained, being a great
privilege. And whether after a just Protestation unjustly rejected, and the
Members kept out of the House, by force, that so protested and petitioned,
whether the other Members could then have proceeded further in the House?

In the late Kings time, in the beginning of his Reign, when the Earl of
Arundel was imprisoned in the Tower, about his sons marriage of the Duke of
Lenox's daughter, being of the Blood Royal, without the Kings consent; the
Lords would do nothing in their House till he was restored, in regard he was
committed only for a misdemeanour, and neither for Treason, Felony, nor breach
of peace, in which cases they then confessed, a Member of Parliament in
Parliament time might be kept prisoner. The King none of the three Estates.
And the Lords Spiritual being one of the three Estates, as 1 Eliz. 3. and
elsewhere, and the King being none of the three Estates, (the contrary whereof
has been falsely held) but the Head, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons, being but Members; and further, the Lords Spiritual being one of
the greatest Estates of the Realm, as 8 Eliz. 1. Some doubted whether one of
the Estates can destroy another, and whether that come not near the
contradicting that Axiom, that the Parliament cannot be Felo de se: whether
that concerns not the Lords Temporal and Commons, as well as the Lords
Spiritual? As for His late Majesty's assent, it is known how far the prevalent
power in both Houses then carried that, and other things too, to the misery of
the Kingdom: Who knows not in what condition the King then was? forced to fly
by reason of the tumults from Westminster to remoter places.

And as touching that Act of Parliament for their expulsion out of the Lords
House, it is not to be forgotten, that when it was first brought into the Lords
House it was rejected, and ought not to have been brought in again that
Session; yet afterward it was contrary to the order and course of Parliament,
brought in again when a great part of the Lords were absent, if not upon just
fears frighted out of the House; and it being scarce safe for the King to deny
them any thing, in that dangerous condition he was then in. As also that such
Concessions or Acts as then, contrary to the Kings free will, were wrested from
the King, were not to be accounted legal, or good, or valid; whereof several
instances may be given heretofore of such, and amongst the rest one 15 E. 3.
the King then yielded to and granted certain Articles, pretended at least to
have the form of an Act or Statute of Parliament, expressly contrary to the Laws
of the Realm, and his own Prerogative, to which he had assented to eschew the
dangers, which by denying the same were like to follow: in the same Parliament
it was repealed in these very words following; It seemed good to the said
Earls, Barons, and other wise men, that since the Statute did not proceed of
our good will, the same be void, and ought not to have the name or strength of
a Statute, and therefore by their counsel and assent we have decreed the said
Statute to be void, etc. And perhaps it deserves to be thought of, how far in
this case that Act of 42 E. 3. c. 1. reaches, where it is set down, that the
great Charter should be kept in all points, and if any Statute be made to the
contrary, it shall be holden for none. And one especial Law in that Charter is,
for the preservation of the rights and liberties of the Church, whereof this of
the Lords Spiritual, their liberty of sitting and voting in the Lords House, is
a known special liberty and privilege, and most ancient.

Proceedings of the House of Commons.
If we look back to the Long Parliament, was it not fit that that House of
Commons should have been justly regulated to act no further or otherwise, then
according to their just power, and the Commission and Summons by which they
were called? which Commission or Writ of Summons is the foundation of all power
in Parliaments, as it is well expressed by the Lords and Commons assembled at
Oxford, Declaration of the Treaty, p. 15. What fearful exorbitances have been
that way, the more sad it is to remember, the more care ought to be taken to
prevent it for the future. The House of Commons in former times being desired
by the Lords Honse to consult with them de arduis regni negotiis, to which the
Lords are called, and the House of Commons remembering their call and
commission, ad consentiendu^ hiis quae tunc and ibidem, etc. as in their Writ
of Summons, humbly referred it back to the Lords as matters too high for them.
And it may seem against the honor and gravity of Parliaments, or either House,
as also to the grievance of the Subject, for both or either House, or the
Committees of either of them, as in the Long Parliament, to trouble themselves
with matters of very small or inferior nature, much below them, and in cases
where the Law has sufficiently provided remedy, and is still in force to be
executed by the proper Judges. Were it in making new Laws thereabouts, that
ought to be so: but I mean in making orders about the execution of such Laws,
which properly belong to the ordinary Judges thereof, and are usnally executed
by them, especially touching inferior matters, it looked then in that Long
Parliament, as though they would have swallowed up all other courts, and made a
kind of Justitium in them, during the time of their Session; such as meddling
with the appointing of Churchwardens, and such like petty matters. The late
Long Parliament deviated much, especially the pretended House of Commons, then
to omit, as being too notoriously deplorable, the Iliads of miseries this poor
Nation has thereby undergone, besides that horrid one of the murder of our
late King, of ever blessed memory, King Charles the first, acted by a pretended
House of Commons. Was not that then too frequently practiced worthy then of
reformation? that is, the judiciary power being in the Lords House, and the
Commons House having power only over their own Members in some cases, and not
having power so much as to give an Oath; yet how often did they then upon small
matters, unworthy of their cognizance, in regard they might have been so easily
remedied by the known ordinary Laws of the Land, and the ordinary competent
Judges thereof, call orthodox, conformable and worthy Ministers, to appear
before them from very distant remote places, sometimes near upon 200. miles,
for setting a rail about the Communion Table, according to the command of the
Ordinary; or matters of such inferior nature: these brought on and fomented by
Inconformists then, to the great mischief to this Nation, too too much
favored, promoted and prosecuted by the then prevailing power. The Fees and
charges were then very high, insomuch as some Ministers were almost, if not
altogether, undone, before they could get up thither; and when they came, by
reason of multiplicity of business in the Commons House, they staid there long
and upon great charge, paying high Fees still to the Sergeant or other Officers
of the House, whilst they lay under restraint, which oftentimes was very long.
When a charge after long delay was given in, then they gave their answer, after
a long stay too: Then a Committee of many Members was appointed to examine
witnesses, which was done without oath; then after a long time the cause was
reported, many of these Members not having heard the whole cause, but some one
part, some another; yet often concurring at the voting and reporting the cause
to the House of Commons: which was a strange kind of proceeding, to call it no
worse. In the Star Chamber and High Commission none used to give sentence but
such as heard all the cause, and they usually excused themselves when they had
not heard all the cause. Now, when the House of Commods had proceeded thus far
upon the matter, yet they had done little or nothing, but vexed and undone a
poor and perhaps guiltless Minister: for they were to transmit the cause to the
Lords House, and there to begin it de novo, examine the witnesses again upon
oath, which, as before, the other House could not do. And here it is to be
considered, whether or no it were not anceps perjurium, a dangerous temptation
to witnesses, that perhaps have spoken too largely being unsworn, will, if but
for fear of loss of Reputation, confirm upon Oath what they have said without
Oath. It is to be feared also, some poor men foreseeing this unevitable course
of undoing them, have either wronged their own cause, and betrayed their
innocence, by confessing themselves guilty; or, ad redimendam vexationem,
compounded with their prosecutors, even to their own undoing, or well nigh. If
there had been cause, and that it could not properly in an ordinary way have
been remedied by the proper competent ordinary Judges; why should not the cause
have been begun, heard and determined in the Lords House at first?

Could the Houses, especially the Commons House, then have been brought into
such due order, as not to act extra spheram activitatis suae, it is well to be
hoped they would not, as above, have been desirous to lengthen or perpetuate
that Parliament, when they can, as by right, repeal no old, nor make no new
Law, nor tax the Subjects estate, nor make Ordinances to have the force of
Laws, without His Majesty's assent. King Henry the Eighth suffered the Houses
of Parliament in Ireland, for a matter of two years or thereabouts, to continue
petitioning him to dissolve them and dismiss them home, which he would not do
till he saw cause. Though this is not in his commendation, yet hereby the just
power of the King appeared, and the right of his Prerogative, which has been
too long and too much trampled upon. And surely the Law in this point is the
same in Englaud as in Ireland, that the just bounds and limits on all sides
might be preserved inviolate.

Touching the Age of Parliament Men.
Age of Parliament Men.
In the Lords House none sit there under 21. years of age, and some wish none
might under 30. though there they are singly for themselves, and represent not
others, as in the House of Commons. But in the House of Commons there has been
sometimes, as was in the Long Parliament, Members about 16. or 17. years of
age, if not some of them under, and their Suffrages and Votes were of as much
force as the eldest, most experienced in the House. And it has been the
observation of some experienced and wise Parliament Men, that oftentimes in
that House those that had the shortest wings were the highest flyers, and such
as these could add number, and so consequently weight, to a side.

The inconvenience and hurt that arose from hence is easily demonstrable, and
has too much appeared by frequent experience.

Some have wished that there should have been no Member of the Commons House,
under the age of 30. years, there being so large a field whereout to choose
Parliament Men for every place, and it being even as it were ex diametro
contrary to the nature and denomination of a Parliament, which is but a great
Senate, so called a Senioribus, the constituting Members thereof.

Touching the Election of Parliament Men.
Election of Parliamentmen.
Some have advised that it should be clearly free, without such ambient means as
were used in the Long Parliament by some Factions: and whereas every man may
give his suffrage for Counties, that has 40 s. per annum, and in Cities and
Corporations without such a value, that being the old custom. And that which
was 40 s. per annum in former Ages, is worth now ten times as much well nigh,
if not more: So consequently the Electors should be of better estate.

The great number of Buroughs and Corporations.
There being such a vast disproportion betwixt the Cities, (always excepting
London) and Corporations, Buroughs especially, and the Counties wherein that
Borough and Corporation is situate for number of Inhabitants, which heightens
the concernment. In some Counties there being so many Corporations, that the
County having but two Parliament Men to represent them, be the County never so
great; yet every petty Corporation (whereof in many Counties, especially in the
West, there are very many such) has as many to represent it, of equal power in
the Commons House, with any other Member of County or City. So that the
Parliament Men serving for Cities and Buroughs, are in number by many degrees
far much more then for Counties, which has been conceived to have been no
small cause of our late troubles.

Some advised for that reason, and for other reasons too well known, notorious,
and obvious to every indifferent eye; that the number of these Buroughs should
be much lessened, or at leastwise that power of Electing Parliament-Members:
Especially so many of these Corporations, Cities and Buroughs, having in these
late troubles so clearly forfeited their Charters.

Touching the manner of proceeding in Parliament, in the Commons House in the
Long-Parliament.
It has been ordinarily observed as is touched above, that in Committees in
that Long-Parliament, some have given their Suffrage or Vote Negatively or
Affirmatively, upon the cause when it was to be reported; though they have not
heard the whole cause, and sometimes but a small part of it.

Great numerous bodies being sometimes too ready to divide into parties and
factions, as has been seen too often in that Long-Parliament, and so
consequently endeavoring to heighten their own side; have taken hold of, and
created all occasions and advantages that might further it. Oftentimes the
Younger tyring and wearying out the Elder, or more incurious Members by long
Speeches, and continuing the sitting of the House long and late in the night,
till it was grown thin, and by the departure out of it, of so many of the more
Aged and less sedulous Members, that the remaining party, according to the
destined and strongly preoperated design, grew prevalent.

To instance no more (and happy had it been for these miserable Kingdoms, that
it never could have been instanced) that fatal great Declaration, or as the
late blessed King and Martyr called it, the Appeal to the People, hammered out
that way, by wearying out so many of the Members, by sitting so long, even all
or the greatest part of the night, may witness this to all posterity: Which
gave occasion to some to call it a Nocturnal Parliament, but very appositely
did Sir Benjamin Rudyard, one of those ancient Members that was so wearied out,
when one asked him what he thought of that Vote so carried for that
Declaration, so late in the night, or rather in the next morning? answered,
that it looked like the verdict of a starved Jury.

Many other indirect ways (to call them no worse) were used by interessed
parties in that Long Parliament, to compass their ends, much by surprises, when
too many Members, either wearied out, as before; or else gone out, ither upon
their pleasure or private concernments; or thereupon absenting themselves from
the House, then the House being thin'd according to their desires, they easily
gained the major part of the suffrages, or else clapped in early into the House,
whilst the negligent party were in bed, or absent upon their private business,
neglecting the public to which they were called; and so carried it, and by
such like ways contrived and effected their labored ends, perhaps by their
engines so laid, to draw away many, whose company they would gladly have been
rid of, out of the House, and to keep them out when so absent, or to hinder
them from coming in at all. Such may not improperly be called Parliament
Decoyes, or rather, as in that Long Parliament, when some of the Members
impeached eleven of their number, upon one of them in the charge against him
they fixed the stigma of the Parliament-driver, and when it made for them,
imputed it to him for a crime.

It would be voluminous to reckon up the several species of the sinister
artifices and gins, which were then dexterously used in that Long Parliament,
to promote unrighteous ends; very often by tumults, which were at the best of
some factious persons, by clamours and menaces, as it were, to force away such
Members as they knew would oppose their designs. By Petitions too, which were
but a kind of Tumults too in another dress, and most shamefully carried on and
gained many times; whether we consider the inconsiderableness of the
Petitioners, Oyster-women, Barbers, School-boyes, (as in some Petitions against
Bishops) if not others, as much if not more contemptible: or whether we
consider the number of the Petitioners, many subscribing them that knew nothing
of the contents of the Petition, if not sometimes giving power, with a strange
implicit faith, to cerrain men of their Faction, to set to their hands to what
Petitions soever their party should frame; the Petitions perhaps framed in
London, and never sent into the Country, but thousands of hands sent up in
Schedules, to be put to whatsoever the framers should please; if not also,
which is much the same, some Petitions sent up out of far distant remote parts
from London, with very many hands subscribed, and the Petitions after they were
come up to London altered, and yet the same hands continued or set to it:
Insomuch as in the time of that Long Parliament it was at least once observed,
that some Petitions, or a Petition, with some thousands of hands subscribed,
and coming from some parts remote from London, and brought into the House of
Commons, and there read in the morning, took notice, being mentioned in the
body of the Petition, of some passages of words spoken in the House the
foregoing evening: whereupon one merrily asked, What notable Mercury had that
last night gone from London into those remote parts, and got so many hands in a
nights time, and brought them back thither that morning? This did almost put
some to the blush, if that had been possible; happy could it have suffundere
sanguinem, ruborem; the want whereof did effundere sanguinem, cruorem: So
common was this stratagem of Petitioning grown, that it gave occasion to some
Satyrist, to paste up that Distich upon one of the Back-doors leading to the
Lords House, viz. Bellua multorum capitum, ^pulus suit olim,
At nunc multarum bellua fit manuum.


It was long before the Romans would publish a Law against Parricide, and such
unnatural and horrid crimes, and the Historian gives the reason, Ne dum
prohibent, jubent; and happily that reason may well forbid me and others from too
much enumerating the unjust subtilties and deceitful ways of this kind; and
rather were it to be wished, that if possible they were buried in perpetual
oblivion, and no Topics were left of them, except as Landmarks to avoid and
detest them: For which ends, to good purpose perhaps it might be time well
spent, to ruminate upon the Journals of the Long Parliament, with their
Declarations, Ordinances and Remonstrances, and His Majesty's Declarations
answering and confuting them, especially that of Aug. 12. 1642.

For reformation of such obliquities, of tireing out the Members, and
surprising of them in a thin House, (for as to that way of Petitions and
Tumults, it is to be hoped it will not be attempted again.) Some wished this
might have been remedied, if thought fit, by fixing a competent time for so
many hours of the day to sit in, not to be exceeded but by consent of the major
part of the Houses, to be constituted as hereafter follows.

A competent number of Parliamentmen to be at every debate.
That no Vote should have been passed in either House, without a matter of two
parts of three, or more, (as should be agreed upon) of the House heard the
matter fully debated; and that no matter to be debated should be propounded
till such a number had been visibly present in the House, which might at the
first sight have been easily discerned, if the seats in the House had been so
particularly disposed, that without telling their particular number by the
Clerks, or any other, it might have been known: which might have been easily
done thus:

The manner how it may be constantly observed.
In the House of Commons, each long seat in the uppermost part thereof, down
toward the door, to contain thirty or forty partitions, or more or less, as
the length of the seat will bear, so that in each partition there could not one
man sit, and an order made which seat should be first filled, and which next,
and so successively one after another, and none to go into the second seat till
the first were filled, nor into the third till the second were filled, and so
to the rest in like manner. And to make it at the first view clear, the number
of every partition in order to be in great legible figures set over the head of
the person that sits in that partition, as 1. 2. 3. 4. etc. then it being known
(being made so plain and certain) how many persons each seat, when filled,
contained, as thirty or forty, etc. each seat being to contain equal numbers,
if that may be, at least each seat of the side, so many and each at the end, so
many equally. It is quickly determined, by seeing how many seats are filled, or
how many are in such seats: whether the number required to be at the passing
such Vote, be then there or not. The seats for Privy Counselors may,
notwithstanding this, be distinct and kept for them, and for Committees some
such course to be taken too, if need were, in a due proportion.

In the Lords House such distinctions of seats and partitions cannot be
conveniently so done, in regard of the requisite priority of place there, which
is otherwise then in the House of Commons; yet the competent number there,
(that House being not near so numerous as the Commons House) which had need be
as many in proportion as the Commons House, might have been quickly and easily
discernable.

The number of forty in the Commons House, and a much less in the Lords House,
though by many accounted to be a competent number to make up an House; we have
seen how upon design ill use was made of it in the Long Parliament, which could
not easily (perhaps not at all) have been done with so great a number. To
instance no more, the pitiful number of Peers present at the passing that
pretended Ordinance for the late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's death, may be
thought on.

Fees to the Officers of Parliament.
Some advised, that it might have been considered, what Fees should have been
taken by the Officers of Parliament, Clerks, Sergeants, and other Officers:
some then conceiving them to have been very high.

Touching new Laws, Declarations, etc. to be made, and old Laws to be repealed
and altered.
WE have seen in that Long Parliament what ill constructions were made by some
men of Precedents in foregoing Parliaments, accounting what has been once done
there, quo jure, qua injuria, right and good, and to be deduced into practice;
even those strange irregular acts in the tumultuous times of Richard the
second, and Henry the fourth: nay, we have seen how Spensers Treason,
distinguishing the person and office of the King, so declared to be Treason by
Act of Parliament many ages since, even urged for right; to instance no more.

Some have advised, that such precedents, acts and proceedings should have been
examined, and by public Declaration by Act of Parliament purged or abolished,
or declared illegal.

Acts of Oblivion, etc.
And that, if but for that reason of preventing that male construction of citing
ill precedents for Law, that an inspection should have been made into the Acts
of Amnesty and Oblivion, passed in the first years of the Long Parliament, and
also that passed this last Parliament. We have seen, especially if we looked
Northward, how soon after such Acts of Indemnity and Amnesty, the Delinquents
(as though they thought themselves justified in their former crimes) fell again
into the same.

And that there should in those past (and due care be had for the same in the
future) have been a specification made of the crimes and offenses intended
there to have been pardoned and put into oblivion, lest otherwise implicitly
and insensibly they might have been taken not to be crimes, and Loyalty and
Fidelity (tacitly at least) accounted crimes, and so creep into precedent and
example for the future.

And that the first Paragraphs in the late Act of Pardon, Indemnity and
Oblivion, might, if thought fit, be considered of; where in the first place are
pardoned, All and all manner of Treasons, Misprisions of Treason, Murders,
Felonies and Offenses, crimes, etc. counseled, commanded, acted or done, since
the first day of January, 1637. by any persons before the 24. day of June,
1660, etc. by virtue or color of any command, p^er, authority, commission,
warrant or instructions from His late. Majesty King Charles, or His Majesty
that now is.

Though there might be some obliquity, error or abuse in the execution of
Commissions from their Majesty's, yet some stumble at these expressions of
Treasons, Murder, etc. to be committed by Commission from the King, as without
all question was committed by Commissions granted by others, and yet here they
look like equal and eaven crimes: which no loyal man can own. It neither hurts
nor hinders the pardon, but rather more strengthens it, that the crimes
pardoned are specified: and let the application be made only to them that are
guilty of them, not to the guiltless, and such as deserve honor and reward,
for that which some would at least imply to be criminal; much less no ignominy
or reproach.

Surely the Loyal party that acted according to the known Laws, for so acting
needed not His Majesty's pardon: Facinus quos inquinat aequat. Some men cannot
think themselves cleared, except they can taint others guiltless with the
imputation at least of these crimes, whereof they themselves only are
culpable; and it is a question, whether their true meaning be not, that they
would have an Exculpation (a term we have more lately had from the North) and
even a justification from their known crimes, at least to be accounted no
greater crimes, then the actions of those that acted by the Kings authority,
according to the known Laws of the Land, which they well know are no crimes,
but the contrary.

It is obvious to every eye, how some have sweat to have justified all the
illegal Acts of the Long Parliament. Some make little or nothing of the
endeavors, that then were, to have killed the late King in Battle, but only
of putting him to death in cold blood.

Restitution of some goods where the property is not altered.
And that, if thought fit, that such goods whereof the property is not altered,
as Household Stuff, Plate, Furniture of beds, Pictures, Hangings, eminent
Jewels, or such like, plundered or taken away wrongfully, either by pretended
Sequestrations, spoil or otherwise, should be restored to the owners, or (in
some cases) a just value repaid for them, with a just consideration to be had
of the parties from whom they were taken, and of their actings; and not to
remain, as they do, in the view of the owners, perhaps purposely in despite
exposed to such public view. This works contrary to His Majesty's pious
intention, and that Act of Oblivion; it continues, does not abolish, the memory
of our former divisions, when the spoiled shall see, as a continual Eyesore,
their proper goods in the possession of the spoiler; whilst the spoiled for
want of them perhaps is ready to starve, and perhaps the spoiler makes his
livelihood out of them, if not steps of preferment too. The Heathen Poet could
say of the Civil wars of Rome, Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos.
But surely this looks like a continued triumph after the War.

Reparation to persons spoiled.
Some have wished that that motion in the last Parliament, or Assembly, or
Convention, that ended in December, 1660, made in the Lords House, might be
renewed, that the spoiled party might at least in some good measure be repaired
by some public Tax made for that purpose, and due consideration to be had of
such suffering spoiled persons, that constant never-changing Loyalty may have
some encouragement and comfort, besides that of a good conscience.

Touching the Long Parliament.
Some have wished that it might have been by Act of Parliament declared; if
thought sic, that the Long Parliament (notwithstanding that Act for the
continuing of it till it should be dissolved by Act of Parliament) was
dissolved or declared void and null, from such a day as should have been by
advice of the Judges and learned in the Laws agreed upon.

And that also, if thought fit, consideration should have been had particularly
from what time that dissolution, annulling or making void should have
commenced; whether from the time that His late Majesty was driven from the
Parliament by tumults and riots; which, as is known, some, if not many Members,
especially of the then Commons House, (in that Long Parliament) that took up
Arms against the King, were so far from causing to be suppressed, though His
Majesty desired it, that they were set on by them; as is notorious.

And also, if thought fit, that if not from that time, yet from the time they
voted to live and dye with the Earl of Essex, by them voted to be their General
against the King, and upon the matter causing those Members to leave the House
that would not vote with them. And whether that His Majesty calling them
afterward a Parliament, as they alleged, when they were in Arms against him,
(though perhaps His Protestation to the contrary was entered in the
Council-book) could any ways entitle them to a lawful Parliament?

And also, if thought fitting, that it should have been by Act of Parliament
declared, that any Member of Parliament offending against 25 E. 3. in raising
or bearing Arms, or maintaining them against the King, ipso facto ceases to be
a Member of Parliament, for that a Rebel and a Parliamentman are (...).

And also, if thought fit, that the Judges of the Land, consulting together,
should have declared (as they did in King James his time, in that case about
Watson and Clerk, the Seminary Priests, that the Kings Coronation was but a
Ceremony, and that without it the King was a complete King) that that Long
Parliament was dissolved from such a day, as they should have found by Law that
it was dissolved or annulled; whether it was from the time of His late
Majesty's expulsion from his Parliament, as before; or from the time of voting
to live and dye with the Earl of Essex, or of their Votes of no further
addresses to the King, who called them to consult with him; whether they did
not then openly dissolve themselves, by refusing to consult with him? or from
his death, when they could consult no more with him?

And also, if thought fit, that it should have been so declared and enacted,
that though the King had passed an Act, that the Parliament should fit till
they were dissolved by an Act of Parliament; and that if it had been expressed
that it should be so, notwithstanding that His Majesty should dye in the
interim; yet such an Act could not bind him nor his Successor, especially when
in that Act for continuing that Parliament, till by such Act it should be
dissolved, there is no such mention that it should continue after his death
that called it; and that the King cannot be concerned, at leastwise concluded
any ways in any Act of Parliament, to his damage, prejudice or diminution of
his Royal Prerogative or Authority, except (at least) he explicitly and freely
consent to it, and be specially comprised and named in that Act to that
purpose; or whether he can though he so consent: it following plainly, that if
by taking up Arms, or bearing Arms against the King, a Parliament Man ceases to
be so, nor can sit any longer in the House. Then in that case none ought truly
to be accounted secluded or excluded Members, but only these that would not
then vote to live and dye with the Earl of Essex, nor would assent to the
raising of arms against the King; but thereupon left the House, or were
expelled thence either by the Votes of the rest, or by menaces, just fear, that
might incidere in constantem virum, or by tumultuous force: so that if the
Parliament (if not by the reasons aforesaid, yet) at least by the death of the
King being dissolved, as to think the contrary is most void of reason or truth;
if, I say, it had not been so dissolved, then those secluded or excluded
Members, they only ought to have been restored, and none of the rest that
acted against the King by taking up Arms against him, or acting against him,
ought to have been restored: Such offended against the Act of 25 E. 3. raising
Arms against the King, etc. counterfeiting or making a new Great Seal, etc. and
their being Members of Parliament, being as before inconsistent; and for the
void places His Majesty to issue out Writs for free, legal and new Elections.

The keeping of the Records in the Tower.
And also, that the keeping of the Records in the Tower, should be in the hands
of a known trusty Loyalist, and none other, in regard of the danger of
imbezelling or corrupting them, by any person of other principles not affected
to Monarchical government by Law established, to the great damage of the King
and his Subjects.

The Militia.
And also, that the Militia, and all Offices and places of trust and
concernment, for the peace and safety of the Kingdoms, and for the prevention
of future Faction, Sedition and disturbance of such peace, and endangering such
safety, should be committed only to the hands (and especially for a competent
space of time, as by such free and legal Parliament, or by His Majesty shall be
agreed upon) of known experienced Loyalists, and not to any that may be
reasonably presumed or suspected to be otherwise. That rule may sometimes hold,
and not be rejected: Qui semel est malus, semper praesumitur esse malus,
presertim in eodem genere delicti.

Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy explained.
And also, if thought fit, that the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, should
have had some explanation, alteration or emendation, especially in that point
of not resisting the King.

In the second Homily of Obedience, which book is confirmed by Act of
Parliament, it is there expressed in terminis, as the Doctrine of the Church of
Engl. that it is not lawful in any case to resist the King. That this should
expressly have been put into these Oaths, and that all persons whatsoever, which
are to take the Oaths of Allegiance or Supremacy, or that have taken them, may
take them with such emendations; it being too notorious what strange
interpretations have been made of these Oaths, as that they were made only
against the Papal power, and as though nothing else were to be resisted. And in
the beginning of the Rebellion in Scotland, the orthodox Divines of Aberdeen
maintaining, according to that Doctrine of the Church of England, That in no
case the King is to be resisted, and that so to do was contrary to Gods Word,
and to the opinion and practice of the primitive Christians: The other Divines,
fomentors of that Rebellion expressly denied this, and alleged that the reason
why the primitive Christians resisted not, was because deerant illis vires; the
very same reason that Bellarmine gives for the same: so well do these two
Factions concur. Though by the History of those times it appears, and
Tertullian openly pleads it against the Emperor, that it was not for want of
strength, for they had enough, but that it was contrary to their conscience,
guided by Gods Word, so to resist. And therefore why not much need, that all
persons whatsoever should take this Oath, to declare their opinion in this
point?

And also, Robbery, the Law to be altered.
if thought fit, that the Law concerning Robbery ought to be in many cases, and
especially for the first offense, mitigated, and not made capital: but that
restitution be made to the party robbed, and if the Robber be not able to do
it, then to be forced to work it out. Which course, some think, would probably
more terrify idle persons that turn thieves, who had rather dye desperately,
then lead perhaps a long and wearisom life. Hereby many may repent and amend,
and do good service to their King and Country. The party robbed also hereby
gets restitution, which seldom or never happens as the Law now is. Our Law
(contrary to the practice in other parts of the Christian world) hereby becomes
harder then the Levitical Laws: Some have hereupon said, that the Gospel, the
Spirit kills, and the Letter gives life, contrary to St. Paul, which seems
something Anti-Evangelical; The yoke of the Gospel should be easy.

And also, if thought fit, Against condemnation upon a single testimony.
that none should be condemned to dye upon a single testimony, when there is no
other kind of proof by circumstances, or violent or vehement presumptions,
equivalent to a witness, that makes a kind of semiplena probatio at the least,
as in the Canon Law: In the mouth of two or three witnesses every saying shall
be confirmed, says the Levitical Law: which is repeated in the New Testament,
and in a manner at least is made Lex Evangelizata. The Lawmakers (Truth,
Justice in the abstract) could as well have said, In ore unius vel duorum
testium, as duorum vel trium, if he had thought it so fitting: and yet (as
before) the Gospel seems to pinch harder then the Law. To that Objection, That
then many Malefactors would escape; it may be answered, That secret things
belong to the Lord, and to him they are to be left, and that it is better ten
Knaves should escape, then one guiltless man should be hanged. We have seen and
heard, how even in a manner miraculously God has often revealed murder and
great crimes, that we may suppose, that when such crimes cannot be in the
ordinary way detected, it pleases God they shall be done extraordinarily. Many
instances might be given of the sad consequences, by putting to death upon the
testimony of a single witness: Judge Fortescue, in his book De laudibus legum
Anghae, relates a passage about a Gentlewoman in Sarisbury, that was put to
death, even burnt at a stake, for murdering her husband, and that sentence
given upon the testimony of a single witness, which witness not long after upon
his death, voluntarily and in a most penitent manner confessed, he had given
false witness against that Gentlewoman, and that she was no ways guilty of
that murder for which she was put to death: And Judge Fortescue there speaking
of the Judge that gave sentence against her, has these words, (as I take it,
or to this effect, the book is not now by me) as they are there in the Latin
version out of the Law- French; Soepius iste judex mihi fassus est, quod
nunquam in vita sua animum suum super hoc facto purgaret.

A notable instance this way (to relate no more, being numerous happened in
London not many years since, as it is credibly reported: A young man, a Lawyers
Clerk, made love to a Gentlewomans Chambermaid, and a fellow servants of the
Chamber-maids, keeping company much with her, and the young man using also kind
dalliance toward her, she conceived that he loved her better then the
Chambermaid; but afterward perceiving she was mistaken, she boiled with
revenge against him, and the Devil watching as a roaring Lion whom he may
devour, instigated her to accuse him of theft, that he had stolen from her
Masters house, and taken away under his Cloak a Silver Boll: Upon this bare
single testimony of hers the Jury found him guilty, he was condemned and dyed
for it. Not long after the Chambermaid, grieving for the loss of her espoused
husband, seeing her fellow servants Trunk or Box unlocked, lift up the Cover,
and there saw that very Boll, which she very well knew, for which the young man
was condemned and suffered; she calls up her master, who found it to be the
same Boll, which she, he showing it to her, could not deny; upon this she was
prosecuted, condemned and suffered death; and the Chambermaid fell mad with
grief, and dyed: And all this came from this judgment upon the testimony of a
single witness. Should any object, That this might happen upon the testimony
of two or more witnesses: It is possible, but not so probable; and the safe way
is to follow the Rule aforementioned.

In the case of Treason two witnesses are required, and very requisite: and in
other crimes, capital especially when also in many cases that are not capital
two witnesses are required, why might it not be reasonably expected? though the
atrocity of Treason is high, yet as to the person offending and suffering the
punishment by loss of life is little different.

Touching Juries.
And also, if thought fitting, that Juries of life and death, as also in other
Actions both criminal and civil, should be considered of, and better Juries
impanelled then often are; and the Sheriff and Undersheriff, and other
inferior Officers power in impannelling such Juries, be looked after. 40 s.
per annum, as is touched above, was in the beginning of that Law or custom of
trial by Juries, a good considerable estate, and so the persons probably more
considerable and knowing. They anciently used to be twelve Knights, so says
Sir Edward Coke in his Comment upon Littletons Tenures, citing Mr. Lambert.
Many instances might be given of the strange Verdicts given by some such
Juries, out of their ignorance, or wilfulness, or both; who oftentimes expressly
deny to follow the Judges directions, but go quite contrary: but I spare to
instance them, in reverence to the Law under which I was born and live, and the
practice thereof, both which especially in most parts thereof, are very
excellent. And we see what Pamphlets have been published by John Lilburn, if
not by others too, affirming the power of Juries, not as is commonly held, to
be only in matter of fact, but in matter of Law too; and how they have
controuled learned Judges in their Verdicts, and obstinately carried it against
them: and how the meaning of that Axiom, Ex facto jus oritur, has been
extremely racked. The meaning of Legalis homo, to qualisie him to be of a Jury,
is not, nor formerly was, meant to be only a man of 40 s. per annum, but to be
at least in some good measure in legibus peritus, as some are of opinion, and
so as it were a kind of assistant to the Judge.

New (...)
And also, if thought fitting, that new Laws should be made upon emergencies and
accidents, when they happen, and are notorious and publicly known, be the
crimes never so heinous and horrid. Till they have happened it may be thought
fit, not to make a prohibitory Law against them for the reason before mentioned,
Ne^dum prohibent, jubent.

(...)
As namely of making Eunuchs of men or women. That case may be remembered of the
Horse-gelder in Nottinghamshire, that spayed a young woman: and being a casus
omissus, the Judge could find it no more then a misdemeanour. It has been
anciently forbidden by the Imperial Laws, and the punishment is capital. Cod.
de Eunuchis lib. 4. tit. 42. l. 1.

The stealing of a Winding Sheet out of a Grave.

(...)
That abominable baseness of a woman and a Mastiffdog, not far from Temple Bar
London, not many years since: if the Law be not plain enough in that case, that
it may be amended.

Stealing or men, etc.
The stealing of men or women, girls or boys, by these extraordinary thieves
called Spirits, or others, to be carried into remote Plantations, where
probably their Parents shall never hear of them. Shall we provide good Laws
against the stealing of our Cattle and our Goods, and not of our Children? Such
kind of Plagiaries have been more taken notice of in other parts, and severely
punished. St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.10. amongst those against whom the Laws are made,
reckons up the (...), Men-stealers.

Against delays in Com^
And also, if thought fitting, that a select Committee should be appointed to
consider of the dilatory proceedings in all Laws both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, delaying of justice being almost as bitter as injustice, and the
promise is as well not to delay justice, as to do justice. Many instances might
be given of delays in justice, and perhaps none more then in actions upon the
Writ of Formedon, especially where there are many Copartners, which I have
heard some Common Lawyers complain of.

Fees in all Courts.
And also that such a select Committee should consider of Fees in all Courts,
and to fix a settled rule for them, that only such may be taken as cannot
justly be grievous to the Subject, and yet may be sufficient for the Officers
that receive them: due consideration being had of their respective qualities,
pains, charges, and all incidents and circumstances concerning them; and of the
great rates of all commodities, raised exceeding highly since the time that
such Fees were settled, especially in Ecclesiastical Courts, 21 H. 8. this has
always been a consideration for the raising of Fees.

Against the (...) examining of witnesses upon oath in the Defendant, defense.
And also, if it shall be thought fitting, that the practice of the Laws
touching Non-admission of witnesses to be sworn upon oath, in defense of the
party prosecuted against by the King, should be amended. And whether it seem
not strange to some, that A. B. being indicted at London, for killing C. D. at
Barwick upon Tweed, in such a place there, on such a day, about such time of
the day; and the accused party endeavoring by the negative pregnant to defend
himself, would prove, that that very day he was perhaps at St. Michaels Mount
in Cornwall, about the same time of the day, and so could not be then at
Barwick, and he produces sufficient witnesses upon this, yet they must not be
examined upon oath; and why should the Jury rather believe witnesses without
oath, then sworn witnesses, especially when they hear no just exceptions
against the sworn witnesses? which happily the Defendant cannot at least upon an
instant give, perhaps having not heard of them, till the very time of their
production against him at his trial; and the cause being heard so summarily as
is usual, and so exceeding small time of defense given, that he cannot possibly
enquire after them, to resute their testimony by just exceptions against them.
The usual answer is, Witnesses must not be examined upon oath against the King,
as though it concerned not the King as much to save a guiltless man, as to hang
a guilty. It was accounted a good speech of that Roman Emperor, that said,
Mallem unum servare civem, quam december occidere hosts.

Against the examination of witnesses, in the hearing of one another.
And also, if it be thought fitting, that witnesses should not be examined, as
usually they are at our common trials, both in civil and criminal causes,
openly in the hearing of one another; when it is to be feared that it has
happened sometimes, that the craftiest witness has been put on to speak first,
and he has thereby given aim dangerously to the rest.

Should any object that in such summary proceedings it cannot well be
otherwise: May it not be answered, that it is to be feared there may be more
haste then good speed? and they might be examined privately and apart, not in
the hearing of one another, even in such summary causes, almost in as short
time, and according to the course of the Civil Law, that examines so apart;
their testimonies, when all taken, might be published, and if need be even in
their own presence, to confirm them viva voce. Daniels hearing of the cause
'twixt the two Elders and Suzanna seems to be summary, and yet he takes that
course: had he not done so, probably it had gone hard with Suzanna; for it
scarce can be supposed, but if the two Elders had been examined in the hearing
of one another, they would have jumped in their testimony, and not varied; as
they did in the species of the Trees; no doubt the latter would have concurred
with the former.

That person; wrongfully accused may have reparations from the accuser.
And also, if it be thought fit, that though the parties be accused in the Kings
behalf, as commonly they are in cases of Extortion, or other crimes or
offenses; yet if upon the traverse they defend themselves, and prove themselves
to be guiltless, they should have due reparation, both in point of reputation,
and trouble, and charges, from the party that caused them to be so indicted;
otherwise it is very possible and probable, especially in point of supposed
Extortion, for any man to be undone, when one or many, malicious or ignorant
men, or both, may so, and very often indict any man, who, though he prove
himself never so guiltless, and that it is no extortion but that the accuser
was mistaken, and that it proceeded from his ignorance or malice, or both: yet
he shall have no reparation, and it is well known that some so indicted, could
have proved themselves guiltless, but knowing it was very chargeable, and to
have justified themselves so often, as some malicious or ignorant men would
have indicted them, would have quite ruined them in their fortunes; therefore
to prevent that, have betrayed their own innocence, confessed themselves guilty
of the accusation, and paid the Fine or Mulct, as many degrees easier: This is
hard, Crudelis est sibi ipsi, qui famam suam negligit; what then, qui prodit?
May it not be enquired then, if it be not fitting, that both a more easy and
less chargeable course might be taken upon the traverse, and also that the
guiltless accused party should be duly repaired both in reputation, and in
charges and trouble? though I am not so rigid as to think upon a Lextalionis,
but in some few special cases.

That the Act for abolishing the Court of Wards and Tenures may be repealed.
Also, if it be thought fitting, that the Tenures and Privileges taken away from
His Majesty, in that Act of abolishing of the Court of Wards, and the Wardships
also should be restored, (only if any abuses have been crept in, in the
execution, they may be regulated and amended) as that very able and most
industrious Gentleman, Fabian Philipps Esquire, has learnedly and fully set
forth in that book of his on that subject, entitled, Tenenda, non tollenda, or
the necessity of preserving Tenures in capite, etc. and if it should be thought
fit still to continue the abolition of Wardships, etc. whether the Tenures
notwithstanding should be continued? and whether a fitter retribution to His
Majesty should be made, then by Excise of Ale, etc. I need say no more of this,
but let Mr. Philipps book plead for it.

Rates to be set upon some Commodities for the sale of them.
And also, if it shall be thought sitting, that upon many more commodities then
are yet, the known rate and value of what they should be sold for, should by
indifferent and knowing men be set down, considering the great hurt done by
selling many commodities at unreasonable rates, upon some accidental straits,
in regard of some accidents of time, place or persons; and many imposing upon
the unskilful and unwary buyer very often, as is notorious, demanding more then
double the price they will take. In foreign parts, both upon books and other
commodities, fitting rates are by Authority set down, whereby the seller may
have a just gain, and the buyer not be overreached. Certum quid is the great
satisfaction to the Subjects, as in Fees certain in all Courts, so at least in
many commodities.

About dignity and precedence.
Also, if it be thought fit, that in point of dignity and precedence, a fixed
certain plain rule might be set down; which probably would take away much
emulation and grudging, and quarrels oftentimes, amongst many, if it were
clearly once determined: And amongst others, if it were so determined, who
should have precedence, the eldest son of him whose father was a Knight, and
the first Knight of the Family; or the eldest son of him whose father was but
an Esquire, but the eldest son of a Knight, Senior to the Knight, father of the
former, or whose Grandfather or direct Ancestor from whom he is lineally
descended, and is eldest son and heir, was a Knight: the second conceiving it
is his right, in regard he is the direct descendant and heir to the Senior
Knight.

And that, if it shall be thought fitting, no person that bore Arms against the
late King, or His Majesty that now is, or had any pretended Commission or
Authority so to do, shall own the Title of General, Lieutenant General, Major
General, Commissary General, Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, Major, Captain,
Lieutenant, Cornet, Ensign, or any other Title, by reason of any such pretended
Commission or Authority; nor any person shall so call them by any such Title
under pain of a great Mulct toties quoties to be inflicted, both upon the
person that owns such Title, and on the person that gives it, or so calls them.
Nemo ex delicto consequitur beneficium; and so bad a cause ought not in any
implicit manner to be approved; and rightly considered, it is an infamy to the
parties to be called so.

Against the Act of limitation of actions in some cases.
And also, if it be thought fitting, that in regard that many, who took the
Kings part in the late wars, could not have their right of suing for their own
just due debts, owing them and contracted either before the wars, or in the
time of the wars, in the Courts of Justice then in being; so that six years
were elapsed, according to that Act of 21 Jacobi 16. touching limitation of
Actions, and so they are thereby excluded to their great impoverisliment. There
should be an abrogation or suspension of that Act, so as to give remedy in this
case, that the spoiled may have reparation or retribution of justice, (if not
reward) for his Loyalty.

Against multiplicity of Statutes upon one and the same subject.
And also, if it be thought fit, that where Laws are doubtfully penned, they may
be explained, and where there are multiplicity of several Statutes touching the
same subject, some repealing part of a Statute, some enlarging and altering, so
that the true meaning of the Statute becomes difficult and perplexed, that in
such cases all the said Statutes several so concerning the same subject, may be
repealed, and one plain and clear Statute thereof to be made; as namely these
several Statutes in the Reigns of King Edward 6. Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth,
King James, and King Charles I. touching the prohibition of eating Flesh in
Lent, and other Fishdayes, and concerning Fasting-dayes, may be so repealed and
made void; and one Statute made, clearly and plainly to comprehend all that is
necessary upon that subject.

Touching Ecclesiastical Persons, Courts and Causes.
The Clergies Proctors in the House of Commons.
SOme have wished, if it were thought fit, that now the Lords Spiritual the
Bishops being restored to their right in the Lords House, that the Clergy
should have their Proctors to sit in the House of Commons, (if they desired it)
representing the body of the Clergy, as they used to do till about Henry the
sixths time, or not long before, as it was then used, since which time it has
been disused. Some have affirmed, that a Clergyman of competent temporal
estate, having in King James's time been chosen Burgess for a Corporation, was
not suffered to sit there, nor a Clergyman to say Prayers there. Nor will some
yield they can vote to choose a Parliament Man, either in County or Borough: so
little of representation have they; and yet when in Convocation they give the
King Subsidies, their grant must be confirmed by Act of Parliament. Anciently
such care was taken that Bishops should be present in Parliament, that in their
absence their Chancellors were summoned to sit there.

About augmentation of Vicaridges.
Also, if it be thought fit, that whereas before the dissolution of Monasteries,
the Bishops had power to augment poor Vicaridges out of the Tithes of
Impropriations, so they are now commonly called, though the true name is
Appropriations, the Tithes having been appropriated to some Monastery or
Religious house or other, before the dissolution, and after that falling into
Laymens hands, who held them improperly, living by the Altar and doing nothing
there, got the Nickname of Impropriators and Impropriations, which now holds
good; such is the tyranny of Custom in this and many other cases. Or if there
were no Vicaridge endowed, the Bishops might endow one, nay, and go so far as
to leave to the Appropriator (which then was that Religious house to which it
was appropriated, who then thought themselves as worthy to be kindly used, as a
man would think our Lay-Impropriators Impropriators can do now) not much more
then a 50. part of the Tithes, or thereabout.

Against Mensals.
It seems hard that the Lay-Impropriator should have a matter of 200. or 300 l.
per annum, or more, and the poor Vicar a matter of 20. Marks, or 20. Pounds, or
thereabout; and hardest in Mensals, that is, as it was usual, when a Religious
house could procure from the Patron the right of Presentation to some Living
near their Monastery, whither one of their Monastery might repair to officiate,
and return home to his D'orter at night; then they often procured these Livings
from the Popes, to be annexed and appropriated to their House, ad supportandam
mensam, thereupon called Mensals, the Cure to be so discharged by one of their
House, and no Vicaridge to be endowed, and all the Tithes and profits to come
to the Monastery. And thus it stood at their dissolution, and such small care
was taken, that so they came into Laymens hands, who allow them something or
nothing as they please, some inconsiderable small Tithes, or some pety small
pension of 5. or 6 l. per annum, or sometimes something more or less.

Near Market Towns and great Towns commonly were one or more Monasteries
scituared, and the Abbots and Priors ordinarily got all or the most of the
Livings in such Towns for Mensals, as before: so that we see them at this day
such pittyful small things as they are, and tenuitatem beneficiorum necessario
sequitur ignorantia clericorum: and in such Market Towns to supply the Vicar or
Curate, Lecturers are taken in, and they must live of the benevolence of the
people, which is usually, or at least amongst many of them more or less, as
the Lecturers preaching pleases them; so he must humor their fancies or fast.
And there must be a Lecture-day commonly on the Market Day too, that the
Country people coming thither may drink in his Doctrine; which oftentimes has
been very strange, and what the conseouence of this has been, we have sadly
felt of late years, being not the least cause of our miseries; God grant it may
be prevented for the future.

It is alleged, that the power of the Bishops in use and practice before the
dissolution of Monasteries for augmentation and endowment of Vicaridges is
taken away, these Impropriations being turned into Lay-fees. Yet, I humbly
conceive, (salvo meliore judicio) that the King had no more transferred upon
him, then what the Abbots and Religious persous had: Nemo dat quod non habet.
Nemo plus juris in alium transfer potest, quam ipse habuit. Reg. juris. Nor
was more transferred to the possessors or their Ancestors, then what the King
had: If so, then what was legally done in such cases, by the Bishops before the
dissolution; why may it not now be done too? and yet some moderate remedy
should be found for the purchasers, especially those that have so long enjoyed
them; and the Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and others, namely the Bishop of
Lincoln, who had very many great Manors taken from his Bishopric, which are
at this day in Laymens hands, and a competency, such as it is, made up to him,
almost, altogether out of small Impropriations. He and others should be duly
considered, and not detrimented hereby.

Touching the bounds of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical and Civil.
And also, if it shall be thought fit, that the bounds of Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, may be clearly set down and fixed, to take away
all matter of contention, that for want of it may arise; so that probably as
few prohibitions as may be, need be sued forth. But as they now are two
Sisters, under one and the same Crown, so they may live peaceably and friendly
for ever.

The Ordinaries power about distribution of Portions, etc.
And also, if it be thought fitting, that whereas the Ordinary, according to Law
and long practice, has distributed portions to the widow and children upon
Intestates goods, upon the Administrators giving up their Accounts to him, for
which they enter Bond upon their taking out of Letters of Administration, which
distribution and bonds, and bonds taken for performance of Wills, are by some
excepted against: that that and all other just powers of the Ordinary may by
Act be ratified.

Against concurrence of Jurisdiction; Peculiars, etc.
And also, if it shall be thought fitting, that for the quiet and ease of the
Country, and in regard sometimes of the inconvenience and disorder in the
execution of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, no peculiar Jurisdiction, nor
concurrency of Jurisdiction be suffered, (the parties that have Interest
therein to be otherwise satisfied.) The instances of the inconveniences of such
peculiar and concurrent Jurisdiction may be given, but I forbear lest I might
seem partial.

All Wills, etc. proved at London from remote Counties, to be transmitted into
the several Counties.
That all Wills, Inventories, Bonds for Administrations and Accounts, and other
proceedings touching them, which in the late Usurpation were out of all places
brought to London, and no Record thereof in the County or Diocese, where the
deceased dyed; so that the Subject is put to great trouble and charge, sending
to London when he has occasion to use any of them, and may be forced to sue at
London when he would recover his right thereupon.

That all such Wills, Inventories, Bonds, Accounts, and all other proceedings
concerning the same, or true copies thereof, to be made valid and authentic by
Act of Parliament, be transmitted at the charge of the Register at that time,
into the Registry of the Bishop of that Diocese, where the party deceased dyed,
or had his principal mansion or dwelling house at the time of his death, or
rather in regard of the largeness of some Bishops Dioceses, including many
Archdeaconries and many Counties, they should be so transmitted into the
respective Registries of every Archdeacon or Commissary of the said
Archdeaconry, and that every person concerned may sue for their right thereupon
before the Bishop of the Diocese or his Chancellor, or such Commissary or
Archdeacon, or his Official.

During the late troubles the Episcopal and Archidiaconal power having been de
facto abolished or suppressed, the Subjects have been forced to their great
charge and trouble, to prove all Wills, and take Administrations, etc. at
London, before Commissioners or pretended Judges there for proving of Wills,
and granting of Administrations, etc.

Degrees of Marriage.
That the Act of 32 H. 8. about the prohibited degrees of Marriage, be by Act of
Parliament explained.

Traitors heads.
That the late Traitors Heads and Quarters, of the Murderers of our late
Sovereign, of blessed memory, and the others, that are set upon wooden stakes,
should be set upon Iron pikes or stakes, as Piercy and Catesby's Heads were
upon the Parliament House.

Touching the suppressing of all Books and Writings, published against the
Regal Rights, or the Right of the Subject.
About the suppression of seditious books.
SOme have advised, if it be thought sit, that a most choice and able Committee
be appointed to enquire after all Books and Writings whatsoever, which have
spoke against the Regal Right, or the Right of the Subject; that they may, as
many as can be got, either be purged or burnt, and declared against by
Authority, and not remain as apt fuel for a new flame, but be buried as far as
can be in perpetual oblivion. And perhaps in the first place, as most
pestilent, those Tracts that have been writ about that ridiculous contradiction
in adjecto of the two Houses coordination with the King the Monarch, when, as
before is specified, the King is the Head, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and the Commons, the three Estates, by several Acts of Parliament specified,
Lippis and tonsoribus notum: yet urged for designs mischievous abominably, as
we have felt.

Spensers Treason.
As also that traiterous distinction of the Spensers, 'twixt the Kings Person
and Office, by two Acts of Parliament declared Treason; yet in these late times
maintained by too many.

Goodwins book justifying the murder of the King.
Goodwins book for the justification of the murder of the late King, and many
other of that kind.

Mr. Bucks book of Richard 3.
Mr. Bucks book of Richard the third, wherein he seems to impugn the right of
the King from the daughter of King Edward the fourth, wife to King Henry the
seventh, too much leaning to, if not affirming Richard the thirds right, by
that monstrous Act of Parliament that illegitimates Edward the fourths issue.

In Sir Edward Cooks book entitled, The third part of the Sir Edw. Cooks
Writings.
Institutes of the Law of England, concerning High Treasen, and other Pleas of
the Crown, 1658. Printed at London by M. Flesher for W. Lee and D. Pakeman,. Le
Roy, page 7. he puts it down there for Law upon the Statute of 25 E. 3. c. 2.
De proditionibus, That if Treason be committed against a King de facto, and non
de jure, and after the King de jure comes to the Crown, he shall punish the
Treason done to the King de facto, and a Pardon granted by a King de jure, that
is not also de facto, is void.

Strange would have been the consequence of this, if Cromwell had been made
King, as some desired, and a loyal man should have killed him in order to the
restitution of the true King de jure, our dread Sovereign King Charles the
second: Or should a loyal man for the same end have killed him, though he had
but (and de facto, non de jure) the title of Protector, how far would that have
extended by the words in the same sect;. may be considered, where he says,
that Statute of E. 3. is to be understood of a King regnant, and as follows
there, and as he says most truly, a Queen regnant is within these words,
Nostre Seigneur le Roy; for she has the Office of a King. So perhaps it
deserves to be examined, whether some of note and power, in the time of
Cromwells Usurpation, did not affirm that Cromwell was within these words,
Nostre Seigneur le Roy.

In regard Sir Edward Cooks Writings are by many held in high repute, and some
have not stuck to style him the Oracle of the Law; therefore his Writings
require to be more strictly looked into, and that if any errors be found
therein, they may be detected and expunged, as being more dangerous, then in
other men's Writings not of so great repute: Corruption optimi est pessima.

Illegal and seditious speeches.
Also it was advised, if it shall be thought fit, that such Speeches as have
been publicly made by any Judges or noted Lawyers upon the Bench, or in any
public Assemblies, against the Regal or Subjects Right, or the Law of Nations,
which may give just offense to our Neighbors, may be taken notice of, and
publicly declared against: Such us that, when that Act of 25 E. 3. was
alleged, to justify Cromwells Usurpation, and that Seigneur le Roy in that
Statute included Cromwell the usurping Protector. And that speech of a great
Lawyer at the trial of the Portugal Ambassadors brother, when it was alleged
that he was by the Law of Nations to be sent back cum postulatu to his Master
the King of Portugal, to be by him punished for his offense committed here, and
that that Commission for trying him here, without the consent of the Portugal
Ambassador, was the first Commission that ever was granted here to try any
Ambassador or his servant, without the Ambassadors consent. Even the Bishop of
Ross, Ambassador from Mary Queen of Scotland, though she was de facto deposed,
or forced to renounce the Crown there; when he had committed a great offense,
yet was only dismissed, and not further questioned. But to all this and much
more that Lawyer replied, What have we to do with the Law of Nations, if it be
contrary to the Law of England? One pretended afterward to excuse him, and
that he spoke but according to the words in the Statute of 21 H. 8.21. where it
is said, We are free from any subjection to any man's Laws, but only to such as
have been devised, made and ordained within this Realm for the wealth of the
same, etc. which words are intended against the Papal Usurpation imposing Laws
upon us.

The illegal Preface to the Propositions at the Isle of Wight.
As also, if it be thought fitting, that that Preface to the Propositions sent
by the House to the late King at the Isle of Wight, which seem to strike at, if
not to take away the Kings Negative voice in Parliament, expressly contrary to
many Acts of Parliament, the Kings most known Prerogative, and the most known
Custom and Law of the Land; be declared illegal and derogatory to His Majesty's
Prerogative, and just right.

Rectifying of translation of some words.
As also, if it shall be thought fitting, that the translation of the Greek word
(...) in Romans 13.1. to higher powers, altered to the supreme powers; for so
(...), 1 Pet. 2.13. is translated, whether to the King as supreme. The two
Houses, and Powers inferior many degrees to them, have by some been interpreted
to be meant by higher powers, and strangely has it been wrested, if not
exclusive of the King.

As also, if it shall be thought fitting, that that expression Illegal
Declaration.
about the time of His Majesty's coming over, in one of the Declarations or
Remonstrances, that the Government was by the King, Lords and Commons; being
derogatory to His Majesty's Prerogative and Legislative power, and the
Government being in him radically, and but derivatively and subordinately in
any others, for and under him: Therefore to be considered of, altered and
amended.

The Printing-press.
As also, if it shall be thought fit, that the Press be carefully looked into,
that no seditious Books or Pamphlets be vented, to poison the people, or to
confirm any in their bad principles. The want of this care has grown into a
great Seminary of mischief, which if nothing but our sad experience of it,
should make us more wary for the future.

A body of the Law to be framed.
As also, if it shall be thought fit, that (according as was begun by the late
Lord Chancellor, the Lord Viscount St. Albanes, which as it is said King James
put him upon) a Body of the Laws should be digested and compiled, and then by
authority of Parliament be ratified.

Further touching Ecclesiastical matters.
Ecclesiastical Courts to be Courts of Record.
The Ecclesiastical Courts proceeding according to His Majesty's Ecclesiastical
Laws, sitting under the same Crown with all other Laws, some advise, if it
shall be thought fit, that to all intents and purposes of Law they should be
Courts of Record, as well as any other Courts.

Reading the Articles of Religion.
By the Statute 31 Eliz. c. 12. the Incumbent is to read the Articles of
Religion within two months after his Induction: and it is said, some have not
taken Induction at all, because they would not read the Articles. Had the
Statute limited it within that time after Institution, it had met with that
fallacy.

Signing with the Cross in Baptism.
In the form for Private Baptism, when the child privately baptized is
afterward brought to the Church to have the Baptism published, at the
receiving the child then into the Congregation there is no Interrogatory,
whether in the private Baptism it had been signed with the sign of the Cross,
(as commonly, if not altogether they are not;) neither is there any mention
then at the publishing of the Baptism, of so signing it. And it has been
found, that some persons have pretended weakness in the Infant, when it was
not so, only to avoid the signing of it with the Cross.

Churching of women privately.
There being no Law that allows private Churching of women, it is wished it
might be always public in the Church, and with a Vail: and if within the
month the woman be not able to come to Church, to defer it till the recovery
of her health.

Touching Absolution.
In Cathedral and Collegiate Churches usually one of the Singing-men (though in
orders) gives the Absolution, and the Blessing at the end of Service; which
some wish might be done by the Bishop if present, or Dean, or some Dignitary,
or more eminent person present.

And that the Anthems and other parts of the Service, which are performed
singing, or in a singing tone, may be made more intelligible to all the
Auditors; who many of them are scandalized by the contrary, which might be
helped by some small alteration in the composure: so that (as sometimes was
practiced, and that without any hinderance to the harmony) first one of the
Singing-men to declare out of what Chapter and Verses, or part of the
Scripture, that Anthem is taken; or what Hymn or Spiritual Song it is: and then
immediately before the singing each Verse, with a clear audible voice to read
it. This would help much, but the best way were, that the Singing-men and
Choristers were taught exactly to sing most articulately, clearly and plainly,
and not to drown the words in their mouths that they cannot be understood; but
openly and distinctly sound forth every syllable, that they might be as well or
better understood, then when they only read them. And this has been most
commendably done by some expert Artists that way, and might by all: Mr. John
Frost, late (...) Westminster, and one of the Gentlemen of His Majesty's
Chapel Royal, gave a most clear and most deservedly worthy to be imitated
precedent hereof; then whom never any man read more plain and clear, and yet
what he sung was (if possible) more plain and clear then what he read.

Touching the Writ De excommunicato capiendo.
By the Statute for the trial De Excommunicato capiendo, the person
excommunicate is to be published in his Parish Church, which sometimes the
Minister refuses, or there is no Minister: In which case it is wished it might
serve to have it fixed upon the Church door upon the Lords day, or a copy left
at his dwelling house, and the forty days to commence from that time.

FINIS.
A Table of the Particulars contained in the Notes touching alteration of some
Laws.
TOuching Parliament proceedings. Page. 97 Ordinance of Paerliament ibid.
Privilege of Parliament. ibid. The Bishops Protestation. Page. 98 The King none
of the three Estates. ibid. Proceedings of the House of Commons. Page. 99 Age
of Parliament Men. Page. 102 Election of Parliament Men. Page. 103 The great
number of Boroughs and Corporations. ibid. Touching the manner of proceeding in
Parliament. Page. 104 A competent number of Parliament Men to be at every
debate. Page. 107 The manner how it may be constantly observed. ibid. Fees of
the Officers of Parliament. Page. 108 Touching new Laws. ibid. Acts of
Oblivion, etc. Page. 109 Restitution of some goods where the property is not
altered. Page. 110 Reparation to persons spoiled. Page. 111 Touching the Long
Parliament. ibid. The keeping the Records of the Tower. Page. 113 The Militia.
ibid. Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy explained. ibid. Robbery the Law to be
altered. Page. 114 Against condemnation upon a single testimony. Page. 115
Touching Juries. Page. 116 New Laws to be made upon new accidents. Page. 117
Making of Eunuchs. ibid. Stealing of Winding-sheets. ibid. Stealing of men.
Page. 118 Against delays in Courts. ibid. Fees in all Courts. ibid. About
examination of witnesses in defense. ibid. Against the examination of witnesses
in the hearing of one another. Page. 119 Reparation to persons wrong fully
accused. Page. 120 The Act touching the Court of Wards and Tenures to be
repeated. Page. 120 Rates to be set for buying commodities. Page. 121 About
dignity and precedence. ibid. Against the Act for limitation of Actions. Page.
122 Against multiplicity of Statutes upon the same subject. ibid. The Clergies
Proctors in the House of Commons. Page. 123 About augmentation of Vicaridges.
ibid. Against Mensals. Page. 124 Touching the bounds of Jurisdictions. Page.
125 The Ordinaries power about distribution of portions. ibid. Against
concurrence of Jurisdictions. ibid. Wills to be transmitted into the several
Counties. Page. 126 Degrees of Marriage prohibited. ibid. About the suppression
of seditious books. Page. 127 Spensers Treason. ibid. Goodwins book. ibid.
Bucks book. ibid. Sir Edward Cooks writings. Page. 128 Illegal and seditious
Speeches. ibid. The illegal Preface to the Propositions at the Isle of Wight.
Page. 129 Rectifying the Translation of some words. ibid. Illegal Declarations.
Page. 130 The Printing-press. ibid. A body of the Law to be framed. ibid.
Ecclesiastical Courts to be Courts of Record. ibid. Reading the Articles of
Religion. ibid. Signing with the Cross in Baptism. ibid. Churching of women
privately. Page. 131 Touching Absolution. ibid. Touching the Writ De
excommunicato capiendo. Page. 132
FINIS.

