AN ANSWER To the BOOK of Sir THOMAS MANWARINGE Of Pever in Cheshire Baronet,
ENTITLED A Defense of AMICIA Daughter of HVGH CYVELIOK Earl of Chester.

Wherein is Vindicated and Proved, that the Grounds declared in my former BOOK;
Concerning the Illegitimacy of AMICIA, are not Evinced by any solid Answer or
Reason to the contrary.

By Sir PETER LEYCESTER Baronet.

Anno Dom. 1673.

TO Sir Thomas Manwaringe Baronet.
SIR,
YOU are pleased to tell me in the Front of the Epistle before your Book, That
it will appear strange to those that know the nearness of Blood betwixt us,
that you should appear in Print against me.

Truly I believe it is only the Zeal of your Opinion, touching the Legitimacy
of Amicia, which perhaps has taken but too deep a root within you, that makes
you now endeavor to incline the World to be of your Opinion; and that the
grounds alleged in my Book (swaying my Reason to the Contrary Opinion) are no
just grounds to support it: But though we differ in Opinion, yet we may be
loving Friends: for I hope we are Pii Adversarii, both Contending for the Truth
rather then Victory: And therefore wish that we may be firmly united, as well
in the bond of Friendship as Nature; and that as much as ever, without any
Animosity at all.

And you tell me further, That if I would have been contented to have delivered
what I did conceive concerning Amicia, as an uncertainty only ( as I have done
that of Roger, Son of the said Earl Hugh) I know you would have rested
satisfied, without giving me or the Reader the trouble of any one of your Lines.

To this I say, I remember well you moved me to have put Amicia under the head
or notion of the doubtful Issue of Earl Hugh; at which time I told you, I must
either put her under the Title of Lawful Issue, or Unlawful Issue; for there
was no Medium: She must certainly be either Lawful, or Unlawful, if any
Daughter at all: And I thought it not fit to put down in my Book any third
Title of Doubtful Issue: But till now, I never understood you would be content
with the words which I put down concerning Roger Son of the said Earl; for else
(if I know my own mind) I should certainly have gratified your desire therein.
For in the next Page of my Book, I say, I shall then add the Reasons why I
conceive her to be a Bastard; which is the very Expression that I used to the
rest.

There are yet two or three things in your Epistle, which in the first place I
desire to observe unto you.

The first is, That you say, you very much wonder when I mention Raufe
Manwaringe Chief I apprehend not why you call him chief Justice of Chester,
when in those Ages there was only one Judge of Chester at a time.
Justice of Chester, and his Son Roger, and William Manwaringe younger Son of
the said Roger, that I take not notice that they were all three Knights;
because I had seen Proofs thereof by many Deeds, where the word Dominus is
prefixed to each of their Names; which was not (that you know of) used to be
done to any in those elder Ages, but those that were Knights, Clergy men only
excepted.

But I am very confident, that it was applied also to the better sort of
Gentlemen in those Ages, who were no Knights; nor is it a sure Rule to be
always understood of a Knight, unless the word Miles do follow; and in those
elder Ages it was sometimes prefixed, and oftener omitted, even to the same
men; as Domino Galfrido de Dutton, who in the Original Chart of Nether-Tabley
writes himself only -- Ego Galfridus de Dutton dedi, etc. and several other
Deeds I have seen of the same Person (who was lineal Ancestor to Warburton of
Arley) wherein I dare affirm among the Witnesses subscribed, he has five times
and more the word Dominus omitted, for once that we find it prefixed to his
Name; and am very confident was not in him, as many others also, to be
construed any more then Master Geffrey Dutton, and that he was no Knight; for
when the Party makes a Deed, he will usually use what Title he has, especially
if he be a Knight (for Esquires in those Ages were none, which came not to be
added in old Deeds till after the Statute of Additions under Henry the fifth,
although it was first made a distinct Title under Richard the second) he will
be loath to loose that Title: whereas Subscription of Witnesses, which are put
by the Writer of the Deed, many times have some distinction of the better sort
of Gentlemen from the rest by the word Domino; which word is never used in old
Deeds by the Party himself, but where it is joined with another word, as Ego
Willielmus Manwaringe Dominus de Peever; so also in your Book, p. 70. where it
is so used -- Ego Robertus Dominus Moaldiae; for ipsa vox (Dominus) primo de
Imperatore, postea de Rege, demum de quovis Territorii Domino enunciata fuit:
Spelmanni Glossarum, p. 182. b. And in Subscriptions it is very uncertain;
sometimes added, and sometimes not added: And so are the placing of the
Witnesses in those Subscriptions of elder Ages very uncertain also; for we may
observe that the same men, being Witnesses to several Deeds, are many times one
put before the other in one Deed, and the same put after the other in another
Deed: As to the word Dominus, if you please to look back on those your
Ancestors mentioned in those Deeds put down in your Book, as p. 27. Radulfus de
Meidnilwaringe Omnibus, etc. you have here no Title used, and yet this was
after Bertrey his Daughter was marriageable; but you will say, possibly that
was before he was Justice of Chester, see then p. 70. Testibus Radulfo de
Menilwarin. tunc Justiciario Cestriae, etc. without any Domino prefixed; and
very many others I have seen also, where he is so Subscribed; look but into
your own Deeds diligently, and tell me if you find not many more Subscriptions
mentioning Roger Manwaringe, and William Manwaringe, without the word Domino
then with it; and not any Writing thus, either Ego Rogerus, or Ego Willielmus
Manwaringe Miles; see also p. 69. where most of the Witnesses are put with
Domino prefixed; and p. 70. the next Deed following, Raufe Manwaringe then
Justice, Hamon Mascy, Guarin Vernon, and William Venables (who are all
Witnesses to the other Deed) are in this put down without Domino prefixed; nor
is there any one in this Deed, which has Domino prefixed: So that it is plain
it was sometimes added by the Clearks, and sometimes not added at pleasure: and
also used to the better sort of Gentlemen who were no Knights, as well as to
Knights and Clergymen: And at this day, as the word [Sir] is in common
Discourse applicable to Persons of Quality from the highest to the lowest in
it is larger notion, so Dominus is applicable to any Knight or Gentleman; as if
I should say, Domine, quaeso, number hoc verum est quod dico, necne? but in this
thing here spoken of, I remember you did mention it to me; and I fully intended
to have called them all Knights, but I know not by what Fate it was forgotten;
whether by my intentness on more weighty things to amend them before my Book
went to the Press, or my Book having been now above a year and a half out of my
hands since I sent it away from me, it seems I lost the opportunity and forgot
it; and I had rather give to any, especially to your family; more then is due,
then less; howbeit it is not possible for me to place my words so in every
particular, as can give all men content.

Again you tell me, That you might take notice of my mistake in my Book, p.
336. where I blame the Herald who in Queen Elizabeth's time made for the then
Sir Randle Manwaring's Coat, Barry of twelve Pieces Argent and Gules; for which
I cited Guillim's Heraldry; but that was the mistake of Guillim, not the
Herald; for that which the Herald did then allow (which I Blazoned amiss) was
Argent, six Barrulets Gules -- And the Manwarings of Pever ( now next heir Male
to Manwaringe of Warmincham) have a good right to the six Barrulets with which
Sir Roger Manwaringe did Seal, as well as they have to the two Bars which Sir
Thomas Manwaringe of Warmincham did bear.

But here is the Herald's error, that it should be given by him to Manwaringe
of Pever now in these late Ages as his most proper Coat; whereas ever since the
time of the said Sir Roger Manwaringe, as well the Heirs of the right Line, as
also the Manwarings of Pever (after they became next Heir-Male) have constantly
born the two Bars for some hundreds of years without alteration successively,
and not the six Barrulets at all till this Change of the Herald in Queen
Elizabeth's time: why now, though the Posterity of Sir Roger might have
continued the right of six Barrulets, yet they changed the same to two Bars
which after so many Ages has now gained an Hereditary right; for at first
Coats were assumed at Pleasure; but from Henry the Third's time downward Arms
began to be made Hereditary; and most Gentlemen from that time downwards did
bear the Coat of their Ancestors, as it were hereditarily; and here is the
Absurdity, that the Herald alters the Coat again to six Barrulets, after so
many Ages past, when the two Bars had been so long retained as an Hereditary
right; for let any man but imagine what confusion Changes would make, in case
every Son should vary from his Father by bearing a distinct Coat, and stick to
no certainty: wherefore it seems absurd, and I know not whether it may destroy
a right already gained in this Case; for it is usage only that makes a right
herein, as you may see in the great Suit between Scroop and Grosvenour, in the
Marshall's Court under Richard the Second, concerning the bearing of a Coat of
Arms, whereto both challenged a right and Property by Usage, but no other way.

And thirdly you tell me, That you suspect I have branded several Persons in my
Book with Bastardy, without direct Proof thereof; and although you concern not
your self for any, but some of those by me mentioned, when I write of the base
Issue of Hugh Cyveliok; yet if you make it appear that I have there without any
certainty aspersed two other Ladies besides Amicia, you hope I shall have no
just Cause to blame you.

Truly I shall not, For those you hint upon, but name not, I can make no answer
to take off your suspicion, till I know who they be; but the other two Ladies
besides Amicia, I conceive you mean Geva Daughter of Hugh Lupus, and the Wife
of Bacun Daughter of Hugh Cyveliok; which two you bring in upon the account of
Amicia: for those being proved Bastards, will be a great blow to Amicia; and
had not the Case of Amicia been concerned, I believe these two had never been
spoken of by you, nor suspected nor doubted of: But if I do make good what I
have Alleged, I hope then you will recant for branding me with an Aspersion;
which I think I shall do, with as much certainty as the nature of the thing and
times will admit.

So much touching your Epistle: and now I proceed to the rest of your Book.

Page 21, 22.

WHere in the first place you wonder, That I should so peremptorily call Amice
a base Daughter of Hugh Cyveliok, unless I had more sure grounds to go upon;
and though it be your Task only to defend Amicia, yet you suppose you shall
make it appear before you have done, that I go on no absolute certainty, in
calling Bacun's Wife, Mother of Richard Bacun Founder of Roucester-Priory,
another base Daughter of Hugh Cyveliok, or in calling Geva a base Daughter of
Hugh Lupus: and then you would remind me of what I have been formerly told,
that those Heralds that gave Manwaringe of Pever the Quartering of the Earl of
Chester's Coat in Queen Elizabeth's time, were Mr. Cambden, and Mr Erdeswick,
Persons that you do not know why I should so much mislike their boldness and
ignorance (as I call it) for their so doing.

Whereunto I say, My grounds are certain enough to prove them all three
Bastards, and such as yet is not refelled by you, by any substantial Answer to
the contrary, and I believe in the Loose it will so appear; as to the Heralds
you mention, you say you would remind me that you had formerly told me of them;
but you never told me till long time after that part of my Book was written;
what then? Mr. Cambden I hold a most Learned man, and one of the best
Antiquaries of our Nation in this last Age; but yet for doing this thing,
whether Cambden himself, or who ever else, I say he was overbold in it, and it
is erroneous; for though in the Age of Henry the Second Quartering of Coats was
not in use, yet about the Reign of Henry the Fourth, every Gentleman began to
Quarter the Coat of the chief Heir with whom his Progenitor had matched; and
after Edward the Fourth's time, marshalling of many Coats together came into
use, and this was to show their right; so says Cambden himself in his Remains,
p. 225. of the Edition thereof put out by Philpot. Now between the Age of Henry
the Fourth and Queen Elizabeth had elapsed above 150. years, time enough to
have taken notice of such a Quartering, if it had been right and due; but you
ingeniously confess in the place cited, that perhaps in strictness it may be
true, that it does only belong to those of the whole-blood to Quarter Coats,
and that to show their rights; yet it being now a common practice for those of
the Half blood to do it, you know not why it should be accounted a crime in
your Family more then in others in the like Case: True, it is as lawful in your
Case as any other, if your Case be the same with others: I say, the Quartering
of the Coat of a Coheir ought not to be given by any Herald to any, but the
Coheir of the Whole-blood; which in strictness, you do confess; Is not that
Herald then to be misliked, both for his boldness and error, who shall at any
time give it to the Half-blood? but in this Case I believe it will not appear
to be given to the Half-blood, as you call it; unless it be meant of a
Half-blood illegitimate.

Page 23.

You say, Because Manwaringe was not an equal Competitor to the Coheir of the
Earl of Chester, could be no substantial Argument to prove Amicia Illegitimate;
and so you pass to illustrate your Ancestour to have been seized of a good
Estate of Lands.

Whereunto I say, I do not urge that for an Argument of her Illegitimacy, we
shall come to that anon. I only there observed chiefly, that she was no Coheir,
which you grant; and therefore the Herald ought not to have given to Manwaringe
the Quartering of the Earl of Chester's Coat at all; which you do grant to be
in strictness true, and which I have touched immediately before; and I shall
likewise grant your Family to be a Family of good Quality, both at that time,
and at this present also; I should be loath to say to the contrary: but as to
your note of Dukes and Earls to have been anciently Judges of Chester, you
should have distinguished of the times; for that was not till the Reign of
Richard the Second (who made Deputies to act in their stead) before which time
you find no such great Persons Judges there; nor from Henry the Seaventh's time
downwards.

Thirdly, Page 24.

You say, The case was not the same with the other Daughters of the Earl of
Chester, when Rafe Manwaringe married Amicia, as it was afterward; for Amicia
was married in the life time of her Father Earl Hugh; whereas those four came
to be such great fortunes upon the death of their Brother Randle Earl of
Chester and Lincoln without Issue, to whom they then became Heirs, they being
his Sisters of the Whole-blood; and though all or most of them were married
before they became to be his Heirs, yet the said Earl Randle having never had
Issue, the expectation of that Estate added to their other Fortunes, must needs
make them very considerable Fortunes; whereas Amicia was but of the Half-blood,
being a Daughter of Earl Hugh by a former Wife.

My Answer.

Herein first you beg the Question, which was never granted, nor can ever be
proved, That Amicia was of the Half-legitimate Blood to Earl Randle by a former
Wife of Earl Hugh: but dato hoc, sed non concesso: It is more rational to
imagine, that Earl Hugh matching his only Daughter by a former Wife (as you
suppose) in his lifetime, would have married her to as considerable a Person,
as was either provided by himself, or his Son, for his younger Children by a
second venture, whose expectation (which you conceive added to their Fortunes,
whereby they matched to so great Persons) could not be much, being grounded
upon great uncertainties, since it could not be foreseen (when they married)
that their Brother should dye without Issue, who afterward married two Wives
successively, purposely to have Issue of his own Body to inherit his own Lands.

Page 25.

You say, That I acknowledge I have been informed that three eminent Judges,
and four Heralds, are of Opinion that Amice was Legitimate; and was also told
lately by one, whom you hope I have no reason to discredit, that since then
several other Judges and Heralds have been consulted; all which did concur in
the same Opinion, that Amicia was no Bastard.

My Answer.

Whereunto I answer and confess, I was so informed; but it was you your self
who informed me; nor did I ever yet see any Opinion under their hands, nor
their grounds and reasons for such their Opinions attested: what can be made of
this? Let the ingenious Reader judge of the Argument: some Judges and Heralds
are of that Opinion, Ergo she was Legitimate. In these Cases all that can be
said Pro and Con should have been put indifferently on both sides, when any
grave Person is to be consulted; which hitherto has been done privately on the
one side only, without hearing the Reasons on the other side; and you know how
Opinions are not rarely given according to the putting of the Case, but very
frequent and usual; when many times even the Lawyers themselves differ in their
Opinions: But I can compare this to be like nothing more then going about to
get hands to a Petition or Certificate. It is not Opinions that ought to sway
the Judgment of all indifferent Readers, but solid Reason. And I shall desire
to be Confuted with substantial Arguments, not Opinions of this or that man.

And now I come to your Reply against my Answers given to the Arguments for
Amicia, which I shall fully comprehend in short, that the Reader may with less
trouble better apprehend the Point.

Page 30, 31.

Where you say, That my Answer is, that it is true, the Law is so taken at this
day; i. e. that Lands cannot pass in libero maritagio with a Bastard: but I
doubt whether it was so taken in the elder Ages of Henry the Second, and
upwards: and also that I cite Glanvil Chief Justice of England, who lived in
the time when Amicia lived: and that I do also show you a Precedent, where
Lands were given by the Father in free Marriage with his base Daughter: and I
say further, that the Common Law in sundry other things is at this day altered
from what it was in former Ages, long after the time of Henry the Second; for
which I cite Cook upon Littleton in several places: These are my words.

Your Reply, Page 30, 31.

Hereunto you reply to what I urge out of the Lord Cook; That you conceive the
Common Law, where not altered by Parliament, is the same at this day that it
was formerly: and you cite Cook upon Littleton, p. 115. b. ( which should have
been fol. 115. b.) who says, It is a Maxim of the Law, That whatsoever was at
the Common Law, and is not ousted or taken away by any Statute, remains
still; and so consequently you argue, that if it ever were the Common Law, that
Lands or Services might pass in libero maritagio with a Bastard, or one that is
not of the Blood, it would be lawful to do so still; because that part of the
Law is not ousted or taken away by any Statute: -- So that the places which I
have cited, do not prove, That the Common Law at this day does vary from what
it was in former Ages in any particular; but only that it was taken to be
otherwise in those days: just like some Cases in our Reports, which at several
times have been adjudged directly contrary to each other; but notwithstanding
the Law was still the same.

My Answer.

To this I Answer; First, To the Maxim of Law, wherein it is said, that
whatsoever is not ousted or taken away by any Statute, remains still; wherein
the word Ousted must needs be understood disjunctively, or conjunctively: if
disjunctively, then the words (not ousted) must be understood of some other way
than by Statute; and then it is as much as to say, not altered: and so implies
a common practice of the Law, in such cases, contrary to what it was formerly.
If it be understood conjunctively, then the words must needs bear this sense;
that the Law is the same still in all points as it was before, except where
taken away by Statute: And thus understood, I shall produce you Cook against
Cook, in his Book upon Littleton, fol. 34.. 39. His words are these -- In
ancient time it appears by Glanvil, l. 6. c. 1. it was taken (that is, the
Law was taken) that a man could not have endowed his wife ad ostium Ecclesiae
of more than a third part; but of less he might: but at this day the Law is
taken as Littleton there holds; which is, that a man may endow his wise ad
ostium Ecclesiae of his whole Land, or of the half, or other less part. So that
here we see the Law in this case is altered, and without any Statute; ergo the
Law is altered without any Statute. Also Ibid. fol. 8. a. toward the bottom,
-- Of ancient time the Heir was permitted to have an Action of Debt upon a Bond
made to his Ancestor and his Heirs; but the Law is not so at this day: But
herein was no Statute made to take it off; ergo, the Law in that case is
altered without any Statute: And so in many other Particulars, which might be
here cited; wherefore methinks it is the better exposition of that Maxim, that
the words be understood disjunctively; and so it thwarts not with that which
the Lord Cook says in these other places: and the word (or) is merely a
disjunctive.

Your Second Reply, p. 31, 32.

But you go on and say, you would come as near me as you can; and you
acknowledge, that though the Common Law was ever the same, where not altered by
Parliament; yet in former ages they did in some Particulars take the Law to be
atherwise than they now do: and if I could prove that they did so in case of
free-marriage, it would take off your Argument; because the ancient Deeds and
Grants are to be expounded as the Law was taken to be at the time of the Grant;
as Cook upon Littleton says, fol. 8. b. For say you, that if it had been
taken in former ages, that Lands might have been given in free-marriage with a
Bastard, or one not of the blood, it would have certainly been observed by some
of the Sages of the Law.

My Answer to your Second Reply.

I pray you, if in former Ages the Law was taken otherwise in some particulars,
than at this day it is taken: which has now joined (to strengthen it) the
common practice of the Nation (which I take to be the Common Law at this day)
for many Ages together, without any contradiction; what rational man can deny,
but the Law in such particulars is clearly altered? For in those Cases (I speak
not of any altered by Act of Parliament) I would ask you whether the Law be now
altered or no? If it be altered, then you are in an error, to say the Law
remains the same; and if it be not altered, then the former Law is still our
common Law, and not the Common Law as at this day it is taken; which is used
otherwise at this day than formerly: Then our Common Law in the particular
cases mentioned, and at this day used otherwise than formerly, is no Common Law
of England; because (say you) the Common Law cannot be altered without an Act
of Parliament, but remains still the same; and so the Judges of England in
all these cases, at this day do not judge aright according to our Common Law: I
pray you, see what absurdities follow hereupon: And as to proving of Lands to
have passed in free-marriage with a Bastard in the Age of Amicia, I have
already given you a Precedent for it; and the Lands did pass accordingly: and
shall make it good (when I come unto it in its proper place) that Geva was
certainly a Bastard, by as good proof as possibly can be expected in such a
Case: But more of this, when I come to Geva.

Your third Reply, page 33.

In the next place, you have a long Harangue from p. 33, to p. 41. wherein you
endeavor to restrain the words of Glanvil, which are these, -- Quilibet liber
homo quandam partem terrae suae cum filia sua, vel cum aliqua alia qualibet
muliere, dare potest in maritagium: and first, you begin to prove it by
Scripture, Deuteronomy. 14. where a Liberty was given to the Jews to eat whatsoever
their soul desired; and yet this must be understood of such meats as were
legally clean and allowed them by the Law.

My Answer to your third Reply.

I have seldom known, nor I believe any other, any such Question as this,
whether Hugh Cyveliok had a former wife, to be proved by Arguments of
Scripture, or Nicety of Law; which is merely a Question of History: For the
Text urged by you, Deuteronomy. 14.26. I find no such general Latitude, which needs
any Exposition as you mention: The words are, -- Thou shall bestow that money
for whatsoever thy soul lusts after, for Oxen, or for Sheep, or for Wine, or
for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy Soul desires. The Text is clearly
restringent to those things here mentioned, which they were allowed to eat and
drink according to their Law. What is this to the point in hand? ergo Glanvil's
words, Cum aliqua alia qualibet muliere, must be understood to be agreeable to
the Law of the Land where he lived; that is, (as you would have it) to any
except a Bastard, or a Woman not of the Donors blood: But how does that appear
to be the Law in Glanvil's time or upwards? He was the first who reduced our
Law into writing: Omnium primus (...) reddere aggressus est, says Spelm. in
his Gloss. p. 333. And it is easy to observe how lame and imperfect our Law
was in those times, toward what it was in Littleton's time; and especially
compared with these last ages: But in short, your Expositions all along to page
41. by Bracton, or Fleta, or others, or making Glanvil to fight with himself,
unless Glanvil's words be interpreted as you would have them, I leave to wise
men to judge, who will take pains to scan them, whether they be pertinent. For
that wherein you say Glanvil contradicts himself, because he says, that none
can give Lands in remunerationem Servitii sui to hold good after the death of
the Donour; what is this to the point, why a man cannot give his Lands to any
in libero maritagio? or that it was not usual in those days to pass Lands in
free marriage with a Bastard, calling her only his Daughter, without the
addition of Bastard, and thereby, owning her to be of his blood and kindred?
The sum is this; The Lawyers of latter ages do expound the Law, That Lands
cannot pass in free marriage with Bastards; ergo it was so taken in Glanvil's
time, and his words must be so understood, though he say no such thing: This is
a great Non sequitur. And yet our Lawyers say now, Bastards are capable of
receiving Lands after they have gained a Name by reputation; which Amicia had
gained; as we see in the Deed, where she is called and owned by the Earl for
his Daughter: But you tell me in the Close, page 41. That the Common Law has
always been the same, because Cook on Littleton says, That the Common Law
has no Controller but an Act of Parliament: which I have told you, must be
understood, whilst it remains the Common Law; which yet may alter, and has
altered, in sundry Particulars, without any Act of Parliament; as I have before
proved.

But here I must turn you back to p. 12, and 13. where this has been
sufficiently answered before.

Page 42. Your Fourth Reply.

You say, There is not any weight in what I say, viz. That it seems to me in
those elder ages Bastards were reputed of the Blood, by the frequent
Appellation of them by the names of Uncle, Brother, Daughter, Cousin, etc. for
by the same reason I should repute them of the blood now, this Age being as
Civil to them in their expressions, as any Age could possibly be.

My Answer.

But where do you find almost in any Deeds of these last Ages, where such are
not now called Bastard-sons, Bastard-daughters, Bastard-brothers, etc. in all
Settlements and Conveyances of Annuities or Portions; which in the very ancient
Ages was never used: Nay, what say you, if I affirm they be of the Blood both
now and in former Ages? though the Law will not allow them so, because they now
are esteemed in the eye of the Law quasi nullius filius; for if A. have a
Bastard son or daughter, which is really his; they must needs be of his blood:
For no Law can extinguish Nature; though by the Common Law they are not now
esteemed so. And what if I say, that the reason why in the Deeds of those elder
Ages they were called Daughters without any addition of Bastard, whereby the
Party owned them to be of their Kindred and Blood, was, that the Inheritance of
the Lands passed in libero Maritagio with such, might descend to their heirs?
For our Lawyers now tell us, that Bastards are capable of receiving Lands after
they have gained a Name by Reputation; why may not then Bastards, having gained
the Names of Daughters, receive a Grant from their owned Fathers, either in
Frank-marriage, or otherwise.

And now you come to Geva, and my Precedent.

Page 43.

For the Precedent I have given, wherein (I say) Lands were given in libero
maritagio, you conceive it will not hold; 1. Because it does not certainly
appear that Geva was a Bastard; for in all the Records that I cite, she is
called Earl Hugh 's Daughter; and in one of them, she calls Randle Earl of
Chester her Cousin; which makes it probable, that she was legitimate; especially
since you do not find by any Deed, Record, or Author whatsoever, that she is at
any time called a Bastard.

My Answer to the first Reason.

Though we find her not called Bastard in express terms; yet we find it implied
in an Author contemporary, by certain and sure consequence, which I believe can
never be fully answered.

Secondly.

These words of Ordericus p. 787. -- Richardus pulcherrimus puer, quem solum ex
Ermentrude filia Hugonis de Claro monte genuit, consulatum tenuit, etc. by
which words you are not satisfied, but he might as well mean, that Richard was
the only Son, as well as the only Child begot on Ermentrude: for there is no
necessity to take the word (solum) adverbially: neither is it marked as an
Adverb in Ordericus his Book; though it be so in mine: -- And though he tells
us, p. 522. that. E pellicibus plurimam sobolem utriusque sexus genuit; yet be
says not that Geva was one of them.

My Answer to the Second Reason.

But you will not perhaps be satisfied of his meaning; for he says not, Quem
solum filium, as you interpret him; but indefinitely, Quem solum ex Ermentrude
genuit: So that, whether solum, be understood adverbially (which certainly to
most men will here seem more proper) or whether you take it for a Noun, you can
make no more of it in English than thus, Richard a beautiful youth, whom only
Earl Hugh begot on Exmentrude, etc. For whether we English it, whom only he
begot; or whom he only begot, it retains the same sense; for if any other
person, either Son or Daughter, were begotten on Ermentrude by Earl Hugh, then
could it not be said that Richard was only begot on Ermentrude; and can any man
now imagine from this testimony of Ordericus, that Earl Hugh had any other
Issue by Ermentrude but only Richard? So that if we believe Ordericus, who
living in that Age, knew the truth better than we can now, Geva was no Daughter
by Ermentrude; and by certain consequence must be one of the base Issue
mentioned by Ordericus, though he names none in particular: and she cannot be
by any former Wife (your old Subterfuge) because Earl Hugh had never any other
Wife; which ought either to be proved by you, or else no good reason appears to
the contrary; and then sure the Deed proving Geva had Lands given in free
Marriage, the precedent holds and proves, that Lands in those elder Ages passed
with Bastards in free Marriage, whom they owned for their own Children, (...).
quod erat demonstrandum. I add further, that if Hugh Lupus had a Daughter by
Ermentrude (for you your self confess and expound the words of Ordericus to be,
that Earl Hugh had no other Son) what advantage is it for your purpose, unless
Geva was that Daughter, and so she be legitimate? See now, then Geva must needs
be Sister of the Whole-blood to Earl Richard, and by consequence sole Heir to
her Brother of all the Earldom; as you interpret Ordericus: and so I leave it
to every Readers Judgment; and then by your own Argument, she should have had
the Earldom.

Thirdly, Page 45.

Then you proceed to my Objection, That if Geva had been Legitimate, her Issue
ought rather to have succeeded into the Earldom of Chester then Randle de
Meschines, after the death of Richard Earl of Chester: That does not at all
follow (say you) because it is possible the Earldom of Chester at that time (as
most times Earldoms anciently were) might be entailed on the Heirs-Males only,
and then the Male Line being extinct, why might not the King confer it as well
upon Randle de Meschines who was a near kinsman, as on a stranger, which later
course is also usual at this day; and it is very probable, that the Earldom was
entailed on the Heirs-Males only; for James York in his union of honor, p.
105. says, That this Randle was made Earl by grant of King Henry the First; and
if so, it came not to him by Descent; and so all that I object, you say, is
fully answered. But if it had been so, that the Earldom had been to descend to
the Heirs general; if Geva was Daughter of Hugh Lupus by another Wife besides
Ermentrude, then the Earldom of Chester would have descended from Earl Richard
to Randle de Meschines by his Mother, being Aunt of the whole blood to Richard,
and not his Sister Geva, or her Issue, they being but of the Half-blood.

My Answer to the third Reason.

Let any ingenious Reader observe, whether, any substantial Answer be here
given at all; you say it is possible that the Earldom was then entailed on the
Heirs Males only; but will you argue upon possibilities, to prove a thing de
facto? but suppose it were so entailed, why should not the King have conferred
it on the Issue of Geva, before Randle de Meschines, that being the Issue of a
Sister, and Randle the Issue but of an Aunt? or why may you think that the King
(though he gave it to Randle) did not give the honor and Lands unto him as in
whom was the greatest right to have it? but to this you give no Answer at all;
but we find not that the Issue of Geva ever moved for it. The true reason being
that her Title was not good; but had she been Legitimate, it is more then
probable, she would have looked after the obtaining of so great an inheritance,
yea and obtained it too before Randle: Nay, had she been but of the Half-blood
(which is your old and only Subterfuge) she would by all probability have
buzled hard for so great an Estate in those Ages, before she had lost it; but
you are now come to an excellent way of arguing by ifs, and ands, and
possibilities; by which means Answers may be made to any thing even to
eternity; but if you would substantially prove Geva to be of the Half-blood,
then must you prove Hugh Lupus to have another Wife before Ermentrude, and Geva
to be the Daughter of that very Wife; I would fain have you but to prove that
ever he had another Wife by any Historian, or Record; this would be something;
but what you here say, is nothing; and then you Instance, that the Earldom of
Chester probably was entailed on the Heirs Males only, becauses James York
says, that Randle Meschines was made Earl by the Kings grant; and if so (say
you) it came not to him by descent; who must grant it him, but the King? what
does hinder, but the King gave it to him as one who by descent had most right
to it, although he was not the direct Heir Male of Earl Hugh, but of another
Family, yet a near Kinsman by marriage? And therefore must now come in by a
Grant; yet for all this, no necessity, that the Earldom was entailed at that
time on the Heirs Males only.

Fourthly, Page 46.

And now you come to show me a Precedent (which I desired) where ever the Heirs
of an Aunt inherited before the Heirs of a Sister, both legally born, etc. And
now you will show me where an honor in such a case came to the Heirs of the
younger Sister, and not to the Heirs of the elder Sister; which is full as much
(say you) as if it were done in the case of a Sister and an Aunt; and you
Instance out of Birds Treatise of Nobility, p. 96. in the Case of Raufe Lord
Cromwell, being a Baron-by Writ, died without Issue leaving two Sisters and
Coheirs: Elizabeth the eldest Married Sir Thomas Nevill, Joane the younger
Married Sir Hunt Bourcher: Bourcher was called to Parliament as Lord Cromwell,
and not sir Thomas Nevill.

My Answer to the fourth Reason.

Bird indeed alleges this Precedent in the place cited; where he tells us
before, That the Question or point [that is, whether a Barony by Writ may
descend to the Heirs Females or no?] is somewhat perplexed, by means of
difficult Presidents; and now in this place he says (coming to compound the
Controversy) that it is observed, that some Precedents do prove that Baronies
by Writs have descended unto Heirs Females, whose Husbands have been called to
Parliament, whether in regard of themselves, or in regard of their Wifes, it
matters not: and secondly, out of the Precedents it is to be observed, That the
King is nevertheless at liberty to call to Parliament, whom he shall think most
meet in his Princely Wisdom, as his Majesty's Progenitors in former Ages have
observed; and then he brings in the Case of the Lord Cromwell before mentioned:
thirdly, it is observed, that if a Baron by Writ dye without Heir Male, having
Daughter, or Sister, or other (who can challenge the Lands of such Baron
deceased) the Title of such Heir Female has been heretofore allowed, etc. Now
the Case comes as near to the Case of Geva, as an Apple to an Oyster; for let
any rational man be Judge, whether the King by his Pretogative Summoning by his
Writ to Parliament the Husband of the younger Sister and Coheir, before the
Husband of the elder Sister and Coheir, both of them sharing the Lands
equally, be any thing to the Point of Geva, or to satisfy why she should not
have had both the Earldom of Chester, and all the Lands thereof, had she been
legitimate, and by consequence sole Sister and Heir to her Brother Richard Earl
of Chester. And in this Case of the Kings Writ proposed, yet you see the
Sisters shared the Lands, as by right they ought to do; and so I shall pass to
your next Reason.

Fifthly, Page 48.

But now you come and ask me what I will say, if this Deed which I allege to
be made to Geva, will not at all concern Amicia; because Cook upon Littleton,
fol. 21. b. (which in your Book you have miscited also by putting the Page for
the Folio) tells us, that these words [in liberum maritagium] are words of Art,
and so are necessarily required: As if a man give Lands to another with his
Daughter in Connubio soluto ab omni Servitio, yet here passes but an Estate
for Life: And the words in the Deed to Geva are not in liberum maritagium, but
in libero conjugio; and so are but like the words in Connubio soluto ab omni
Servitio, which make but an Estate for Life; and so might be passed to a
Bastard or any other -- and then after you say, the Deed to Geva is worded as
if it intended only an Estate for Life, there being no mention of her Heirs:
and secondly, it is given to Geva alone, and not unto a Husband with her;
whereas that given to Manwaringe with Amicia in free Marriage, mentions their
Heirs.

My Answer to the fifth Reason.

Though the Lord Cook say, That by these words in Connubio soluto ab omni
Servitio, there passes but an Estate for life; yet he says not, That by these
words in libero conjugio, passes only an Estate for Life: nor in Case the
words had been in libero Connubio, he says nothing of them; although you are
pleased to say, That the words in libero Conjugio, are but like the words in
Connubio soluto ab omni Servitio, which make but an Estate for Life. I think,
Sir, you and I being no professed Lawyers, had best to leave these things to
the Sages of the Law; and notwithstanding the Criticism, I beg both your
Pardon, and my Lord Cooke's too if he should have said it (which I do not find
that he does) in this Case of Geva; for the Lands in the Deed mentioned did
descend to her Heirs by Basset: and even at this day it is called
Drayton-Basset, in distinction of other Towns called also Drayton; because the
Bassets were anciently Lords thereof; and this very Deed was taken out of a
Manuscript in Arundel-house, wherein the old Deeds belonging to the Bassets of
Drayton-Basset in Staffordshire were enrolled about the Reign of Richard the
Second, as you may see it mentioned in my Book. Again you say, The Deed to Geva
is worded as if it intended only an Estate for Life; and is made to Geva her
self without the words [her Heirs] mentioned therein; where you are to take
notice, that this Deed of the first Randle Earl of Chester is but a
Confirmation to his Cousin Geva of a former Deed, Sicuti Comes Hughes ei in
libero Conjugio dedit; which Deed (may be) had the Land passed to her and her
Heirs, or to her Husband with her and to their Heirs: But for certain, she and
her Heirs by Basset had the same Land, however Earl Hugh's Deed did run: I add
further to your Objection, that it was intended but for Life, because given to
her only without the word (Heirs): Cook upon Littleton, fol. 21. b cites
Peter Saltmarsh Case, and Fitz Herbert de Natura Brevium, fol. 172. that Lands
may be given by a Man to his Son in Free-marriage; and why not as well to his
Daughter alone in Free-marriage? which words of Frank-marriage do of themselves
create an Estate of inheritance, as Cook says in the same Page. And now we
have done with Geva; and I appeal to the indifferent Reader, whether my Reasons
alleged for her Bastardy in my other Book, be by you in the least taken off by
any solid Answers or Reason to the contrary; although in your Book you brand me
with an aspersion of her.

Page 50, 51.

And now you come to the second Reason alleged, To prove that Amicia is
legitimate; which you say has its full strength yet, and is not at all
weakened by any thing I have said: For in my computation according to
reasonable suppositions it cannot be well affirmed, that Hugh Cyveliok was
above seven or eight years, or thereabout, older then his Wife Bertred: But by
your computation, you say possibly he may be 26. or 27. years older: whosoever
will take pains to scan both our computations, will see which is more moderate
and reasonable: in yours you suppose Maud, Earl Hugh's Mother; to be born the
second year after her Mothers Marriage; and Maud Married in the 16th year of
her Age, and Earl Hugh born in the 17th year of Maud's Age which falls in Anno
1129. and so all in the utmost possibility; and if we may compute by
possibilities, as you do, I say Earl Hugh might be but four years older then
Bertred; but if you will go by strong probabilities, that Earl Randle ( Father
of Earl Hugh) was Married by Robert Earl of Gloucester unto Maude his Daughter,
thereby to draw him to the Part of Queen Maud his Sister, about the very year
1139. before which time we find no mention in our ancient Historians of
Randle's actings against King Stephen; but in that very year we do, and then by
some of them styled Son in Law to the Earl of Gloucester; but not before that
year, that I remember: I say, if we reckon by utmost possibilities, Earl Hugh
could not possibly be above 16 or 17 years older then Bertred; but rationally
we may imagine he was not so old by many years: and though your ghesses may be
a little in the dark, yet I think I am about the very time of his Marriage: so
that if your Argument carry its full strength, it is certainly but a little
strength, if any at all; it is but this: Earl Hugh was older then Bertred, Ergo
he had a former Wife; and of your account, you say you may abate me several
years, and yet Earl Hugh be a great deal older then his Wife: wherein you say
true: but I can gather no such quantity of years in respect of his Age,
reasonably to suppose him to have had any former Wife.

Page 52.

The third and fourth Reasons (you say) are only urged as concurrent Proof
with the Argument brought from the words in libero maritagio: So then your
Achillean Argument failing, all the other fall to the ground; to which has
been spoken before.

Page 52, 53.

But yet you muster up all your forces to strengthen the third and fourth
Reasons for. Amicia: as Hugh Cyveliok's Countess being witness to the Deed of
Amicia in libero maritagio [and yet you, that take no notice of the Law in
ancient times from the Law of later Ages, and insist so much upon Law, cannot
but know a Wife is no good Witness either for or against her Husband, and yet
both here and in sundry other Deeds we find them put as Witnesses to their
Husbands Deeds:] also Raufe Manwaringe calling his Daughter Bertrede after the
name of the Countess [ methinks he should rather have called her after the name
of his former Countess, Mother of Amice, if Earl Hugh had had any such Wife]
also Roger Manwaringe in another Deed calling Randle of Chester and Lincoln
his Uncle: Raufe Manwaringe being with the Earl at Coventry and a Witness to
his Charler to his Burgesses there: also Roger Manwaringe, and Henry de Audley
who Married his Sister, being Witnesses to the Deed of Randle Earl of Chester
and Lincoln, concerning the Abbey of Deulacres: Henry de Audley's being a
Witness to the Deed of Robert de Fernans (this is far fetched) whose Mother was
one of the Sisters and Coheirs to the aforesaid Earl Randle: as also Rafe
Manwaringe being a Witness to one Deed of Hugh Cyvelioks, and to three other
Deeds of the said Earl Randle: These (say you) are such circumstances as show a
more great and constant intimacy between the said two families, then probably
would have been, if Amicia had been a Bastard.

To all which is easily answered, that being Witnesses to Deeds argues no great
intimacy with the Parties; and though the Judge in regard of his place were
more conversant with the Earl, yet Amicia may be a Bastard for all this: Let
the Ingenious Reader judge. The like multitude of Charters, or more, you may
find, whereto Philip Orreby Judge of Chester was Witness in like nature; and
also many other. Gentlemen, as well as Roger Manwaringe and Henry de Audley:
But I speak not this to lessen your Family, but to show the weakness of the
Argument.

Page 54.

You say, Although I object that frequently in Histories and Records Bastards
are called Brother, Uncle, Cousin, Son, and Daughter; you grant it to be true;
but that (you say) was done either when Persons came to be great, as Robert
Earl of Gloucester did; or else done by their Relations out of humility. But I
can hardly find one (you believe) that I can certainly prove to be a Bastard,
or the Son of a Bastard, who does presume in a Deed to call so great a Person
as the Earl of Chester was, his Brother or Uncle, unless he came to be a very
great Person himself.

Indeed Precedents are scant; but some there be: What do you think of Ranulpho
de Astbury nepote Comitis Cestriae; who is put the last of all the Witnesses in
the Deed, as you may see in the Addenda of my Book? Certainly he was but an
ordinary Gentleman, nor Knight, nor Lord: But you will say, I cannot prove him
a Bastard; yet I should be glad to find out his Extraction, if he were not:
it is a shrewd presumption.

And now we shall come to another of like Nature.

Page 54.

Here you tell me, you believe Richard Bacun 's Mother was not a base Daughter
of Hugh Cyveliok, nor any Daughter of his at all; because we find in
Monasticon, part 2. page 267. in his Deed of the Foundation of Roucester-Priory
in Staffordshire, his Uncle Randle was living ( where take notice he calls
Randle Earl of Chester his Uncle) and a William was then Archbishop of York,
and R. then Bishop of Chester; and there was neither Archbishop of York whose
name was Will. nor Bishop of Chester whose name began with R. in the time of
Randle Blundevil; and therefore you think it was Randle de Gernoniis, that
Bacun calls Uncle, and not Randle Blundevil.

But truly you are deceived in it: For it is true, as you observe, that there
was no such Archbishop of York called Will. nor Bishop of Chester whose
Christian Name began with R. both living at one time, either in the time of
Randle de Blundevil or Randle de Gernoniis, that I can find: nor was the Bishop
of Chester (being also Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry at this time) then
subject to the Jurisdiction of York, but Canterbury: Wherefore I do conceive
the Roll, from whence the Deed in Monasticon was written, is mistaken in Will.
and R. and miss-writ therein from the Original Chart it self; so that certainly
here is a mistake: But that which is the greatest certainty to guide us, is the
body of the Deed it self; which seems to be perfect and right; wherein he tells
us, that he has procured the Confirmation and Warranty of Randle Earl of
Chester his Uncle for the ratifying of that his Grant. And the very next Deed
following in the Roll, and transcribed in the Monasticon, is the Deed of Randle
Earl of Chester with Confirmation and Warranty accordingly; whereunto Roger
Lacy Constable of Cheshire, is a witness, who only lived in the time of Randle
Blundevil, and of no other Earl of Chester; as you may see it clearly proved
among the Barons of Halton, in my Book; nor is there any other Deed of
Confirmation and Warranty to be found by any Earl, save this; wherefore
certainly it must be Randle Blundevil, whom Richard Bacun calls Uncle in his
own Deed of the Foundation of the said Priory; and then must it necessarily
follow, that his Mother was the Daughter of Hugh Cyveliok; and it is plain, she
was no Coheir to Randle Blundevil: and it does not in the least appear, that
Hugh had any other wife, save Bertred the Mother of the Coheirs: nor does it
appear, that ever she had so much as any Land in libero maritagio; which you so
much stand upon in the case of Amicia. And now let every man be Judge, whether
I have aspersed (as you call it) this Lady unjustly; and whether she be not a
Bastard in the opinion of all impartial Readers: which word aspersed, you might
well have spared; for Aspersion is when a man maliciously seeks to throw dirt
in another face unjustly; of which sort of men I hope you do not judge me to
be. But these matters fall unavoidably in my way; the truth whereof (as near as
I can) I only do endeavor to find out.

Page 57.

And now you come to answer the Arguments and Reasons which I bring to prove
Amicia a Bastard.

Arg. 1.

If Hugh Cyveliok had no other Wife than Bercred, then Amicia must certainly be
a Bastard; for she was not a Daughter of Bertred, as is granted on all sides:

But Hugh Cyveliok never had any other Wife than Bertred; Ergo Amice was
certainly a Bastard.

Now the Minor is to be proved by the Affirmer; for oportet affirmantem probare.

Your Answer to the first Argument.

By this Rule (you say) I am as much bound to prove her a Bastard, as you are
bound to prove that Hugh Cyveliok had a former Wife; because I clearly affirm
that, as you affirm the

My Reply to the first Answer.

I confess what you say to be true; yet the Rule of the affirmative part to
prove, in Logic always holds true: for a Negative cannot be proved. But I say
further, that I have proved her a Bastard by this Argument, unless he had a
former wife; for you must either deny the Major, or the Minor, or grant them;
wherefore the affirmative part lies now on your part to prove.

Your second Answer to my first Argument, page 58.

A less proof will serve by many degrees to prove a thing done long since, than
will be requisite to prove a thing done lately; the like reason is in all Cases
of Antiquity; So that if you only prove her called Daughter, being so long
since, she ought to be presumed legitimate, unless the contrary do appear; for
the proving she was not by Bertred, does not prove she was a Bastard, but only
proves she was either a Bastard, or else by a former wife; and our Law at this
day is, That a Bastard shall not be allowed to be proved a Bastard but in his
life time; why should Amice then be charged with Bastardy so many hundred years
after her Decease?

My Reply to your second Answer.

Where you say, if you only prove her called a Daughter, being so long since,
she ought to be presumed legitimate till the contrary appear: I shall grant it;
but here are many strong reasons to the contrary; and you are now to answer the
Argument in hand; and for your asserting, that my proving she was not by
Bertred, does not prove her a Bastard, but proves she was either a Bastard, or
else by a former wife; this is not to the Point; for the Argument runs, If he
had no other wife but Bertred, and she no Daughter to Bertred, then certainly
if she be a Daughter, and so called, she must needs be a Bastard: and as to the
point of Law you urge, that a man cannot be proved a Bastard but in his
lifetime to the prejudice of an Estate; because the dead person cannot answer
to the exception: Yet though the Law allows not this in Pleadings, what hinders
but Bastardy may be proved by History or Argumentation, after the Parties
death? Suppose in a Register-Book I sind such a Bastard Christened one hundred
years ago, may not I justly call that Person a Bastard, whom I find so
Registered? The law may make a Bastard legitimate by Act of Parliament: as we
find in the case of John of Gaunt's Children by Katharine Swynford, 20. Ric.
2.1397. according to all intents and purposes in the Law, excepta dignitate
Regali, whereby they shall inherit as if they had been lawfully born; but may
not we therefore call them Bastards? No Law can make a Bastard once born, to be
no Bastard in nature; for quod factum est semel, infectum reddi non patest. And
to this your second Answer, I believe it is clearly evinced without further
demonstration.

Your third Answer to my first Argument, p. 59.

You conceive that the passing of Services in libero maritagio with Amice, does
absolutely prove that she was a lawful Child, and by consequence must be by a
former wife; and that she would not have been styled as she is in the Deed,
unless she had been a legitimate Daughter: and you cite Spelman 's quoting
Coustum. du Normand. Art. 77. Quoties enim agitur de honor vel commodo
filiorum; appellatione filiorum non comprehenduntur Bastardi.

My Reply to your third Answer to my first Argument.

This is what before you have said over and over again; and has before been
answered by me: But I conceive, that neither the naming of her Daughter in the
Deed, nor passing of Services with her in libero maritagio, does at all prove
her legitimate; for I have before told you, and shall entreat the judicious
Reader to look back where I have before spoken of it; That in those ancient
Ages the word daughter was frequently used without the addition of Bastard,
both in old Deeds and Histories: nay rarely or never was it otherwise used even
to Bastards as well as Lawful Issue; whereof are sundry Examples, as is well
known to all such as are skilled in Antiquities: and by your own Argument, if
she were not called his Daughter, no estate of inheritance could have passed by
the Deed, though she were a Bastard; because hereby she is owned to be of his
Kindred and Blood; and that Lands have passed in libero maritagio to some such,
who are known to be Bastards, though not so named; whereof I have showed a
Precedent of those Ages in my Book, which is not refelled yet by any solid
Reason to the contrary, as the ingenuous Reader may perceive supra, page 18. of
this Book, and deinceps. And what you add out of Spelman, is little to the
purpose, that in cases of honor and profit distinction was then made, that by
the appellation of Sons, Bastards are not comprehended by the Customs of
Normandy: what then this supposes that in other cases and formerly by the
appellation of Sons, Bastards were comprehended: This makes directly against
you: and you know what Spelman says in the very words next following -- That
the ancient Northern People admitted Bastards to succeed in their Inheritance;
and that William the Conqueror was not ashamed of that Title, who began his
Letter to Alan Earl of Little Britain (as he did many others) Ego Willielmus
cognomento Bastardus. But what is all this to the answering of the Argument, or
proving Hugh Cyveliok to have had a former Wife? only you would have the words
in libero maritagio to prove Amice absolutely legitimate: this is all the
Answer you give to the Point; and this will not do it, as is before proved;
whither I have referred the Ingenious Reader.

Your fourth Answer to my first Argument, p. 60, 61.

And here you say, that if all must be Bastards, if we could not tell who were
their Mothers, nor directly prove their Fathers married, we might then conclude
most Persons Bastards; and so you could frame my own Argument against me thus;
-- If Roger Manwaringe ( who lived about 1119.) had no wife, then William,
Randle, and Wido ( Sons of the said Roger) were certainly Bastards: But Roger
Manwaringe aforesaid had no wife; ergo, etc. Now if this Argument against
Amicia will hold, it would also hold against these three Children of Roger, and
so against all others in like nature.

My Reply to your fourth Answer to my first Argument.

Here you argue well; and I say to your Minor, that Roger had a Wife, though we
yet know not who she was: and this appears certainly, because the Lands
descended from heir to heir. But I frame my affirmative part more formally
thus: -- If the Son and Heir of Roger succeeded by descent in his Inheritance,
then Roger had a wife; But the Son and Heir of Roger succeeded by descent in
his Inheritance; this is apparent by the enjoyment thereof from heir to heir;
ergo, Roger had a wife.

If you deny the Sequel of the Major, I prove it thus -- No Bastard can succeed
in the Inheritance without a special settlement; ergo, if the Son and Heir of
Roger succeeded by descent in the Inheritance, then Roger must needs have a
Wife; and nothing appears here of any special settlement.

And so you see, the Argument retorted is answered.

Now if you could prove by like Reason, that Hugh Cyveliok had a former wife
before Bertred, it would be some Answer; but the passing of Lands in libero
maritagio in that age, is no certain Argument of Legitimacy; for then I confess
you would prove ex consequenti Hugh Cyveliok must needs have another wife;
which is the chief contest between us; for all the rest of your Arguments for
her Legitimacy, are little material, and not solid. Now you repeat this often
over and over again, where you have as often been told, that Land in those former
Ages did pass to Bastards in libero maritagio; whereof I have given you one
Precedent; which neither yet has been, nor (as I conceive) can be rationally
answered: Besides the words of Glanvil, implying the same; and the Term of
Bastard, was, for certain, usually omitted in the Deeds and Histories of those
times; and the owning them for Daughters in their Deeds, possibly that the
Lands might pass to their Heirs, as owning them to be of their Kindred and
Blood, are all Reasons against the Deed; that it does not prove her legitimate:
Neither is the Case of Amice, and the three Sons of Roger alike; for there is
nothing that appears against them, either to prove or suspect them for
Bastards, as there is in the case of Amice; for here is a wife of Hugh Cyveliok
certainly recorded; a Son and four Daughters carrying away all Earl Hugh's
Lands: also Earl Hugh certainly known to have sundry Bastards; and Amice having
no share of any of the Lands whatsoever, though the Eldest Daughter of Earl
Hugh legitimate by a former wife, as you suppose: all which carries more than a
bare probability that Amice was a Bastard. And therefore here is a necessity of
proving a former wife, which I firmly believe Earl Hugh never had: And to this
you say, the falling of the great Estate to the Coheirs, was the cause of their
being taken notice of by the Historians of that Age; which Inheritance (say
you) came to them as Sisters to Randle of the whole blood (although you prove
not that Earl Hugh ever had any other wife) and Amice, you say, was of the half
blood; but you prove it not. And you say further, that Ric. Bacun's mother was
not any Child of Earl Hugh: But that she was Earl Hugh's Daughter, I have
clearly proved before, page 23. So that all these strong Presumptions of the
Bastardy of Amicia, I leave to the Reader, to judge whether any thing has been
substantially said by you to evince any man's impartial judgment to the
contrary, or that has at all answered my first Argument.

And now you come to answer my second Reason or Argument against Amicia, which
I framed thus, -- Whatsoever is given in frank-marriage, is given as a Portion;
now the release of the Service of one Knights Fee in Frank-marriage (according
to your Deed) seems not a competent portion for a legitimate Daughter of the
Earl of Chester; especially for the eldest Daughter: for so she must be, being
of the first venture, which is always more worthy then the second; and we find
the other Daughters Married to four of the greatest Persons in England, which
is a strong Presumption that Amice was a Bastard: methinks res ipsa loquitur.

Your Answer to my second Argument, Page 64, 65.

To which you Answer, That it will not hold; for though what is given in
Frank-marriage, be given in consideration of a Marriage, yet it cannot properly
be called a Portion -- etc. and further you say, that if she had been but a
Bastard, yet being a Bastard of so great a Person, she would have had a great
deal more given her then these services -- But you perceive, if this Deed of
Earl Hughe's had been lost, I would not have believed that Sir Raufe Manwaringe
had had any thing with Amicia: because then it would not have appeared: which
is a strange way of arguing, about things that were done so long since. And if
this be a good Reason, you wonder I do believe that Earl Hugh had any Portion
with his Countess Bertred, because (for ought you yet know) it does not appear
that he had. Again you say to my alleging how the other four Sisters were
Married, that you have answered that before. And though I say, that if Amice
had been legitimate, she being of the first venture, would have been more worthy
then those of the second -- yet in this Case, when there be Sisters of two
Venters, and the Brother be of the second Venture, and the Sisters claim as Heir
to their Brother, then the Sisters of the Second Venture shall be preferred
before those of the first Venture: and then you close your Answer in telling me
that you do not understand why I call this gift of Earl Hugh's (as I do in two
several places) a Release of the service of one Knights-Fee.

My Reply to your Answer to my second Argument.

Whereunto I Reply, to what is necessary to be replied unto herein; first,
whereas you say, That if she had been a Bastard, yet being the Bastard of so
great a Person, she would have had a great deal more then those services given
her: it may be so; what then? here is no reason that we can suppose she had any
more Lands, neither any Money answerable to the eldest Daughter of the Earl
legitimate, for the other Sisters had all the Lands of Earl Hugh; and we find
not any more Lands bought by Earl Hugh for Amicia; but you perceive, that if
this Deed had been lost, I would not have believed, that Sir Raufe Manwaringe
had had any thing with Amicia; which (say you) is a strange way of arguing
about things done long since: and how do you know, that I should have believed
that he had had nothing at all? but you would have me suppose, that Amicia had
as much Money as any of the Coheirs; I am sure she ought to have had so, had
she been legitimate; but I believe neither you, nor I, nor any other Person can
imagine so: And if the Deed mentioned had been utterly lost, I should not then
have believed that there was such a Deed: for how can any man believe that
which he never knew, nor heard of? de non Apparentibus, and non Existentibus,
eadem est ratio: and though I may well suppose, that Earl Hugh had a good
Portion with his Wife; because he was so great a Person, yet neither I nor any
person (that knows it not) can well ghess what it was. And had it only appeared
by Record, That Sir Raufe Manwaringe had Married the Earl of Chester's
Daughter, and nothing appeared what was given, I should then have believed she
had had a greater Portion given her, then what is mentioned in your Deed: but
the Deed appearing, and so small a Portion mentioned therein, makes it more
strong that Amicia was a Bastard. And lastly, that you may understand, what I
mean by calling Earl Hugh's grant a Release of the service of one Knight's Fee;
because the grant to Raufe Manwaringe with Amicia in Free Marriage is only the
service of Gilbert Son of Roger, to wit, the service of three Knights Fees, he
and his Heirs doing to Earl Hugh and his Heirs the service of two Knights Fees:
so as the Earl hereby reserves to himself the other two Knights Fees as
formerly; but now remits the service of the third Knights Fee: nor is it the
grant of any Land, but of services incident to Land; but what all this is to
the taking of the Argument proposed, I leave to the Reader to Judge.

Thirdly.

And now you come to my third and last Reason, which I did put as a probable
concurring Reason, That all the Ancient Historians of our Nation, who lived in
that Age, and have Recorded the other Daughters and Coheirs; yet not one of
them mentioning Amicia: which probably one or other would have done, had she
been a legitimate Daughter.

Your Answer to the third Reason, Page. 67.

Whereunto you say, You conceive there is no weight at all in it; whereof I am
so sensible, that I conceive it not evincing; nor do those Ancient Historians
take upon them to give an account of all the Children of Earl Hugh, but only
of the Heirs of Randle Blundevill: and yet (you say) this Reason is as strong
as my first Reason.

My Reply.

I do confess I urged it but for a probable Reason; and yet (you say) it is as
strong as the first Reason: Then you might have done well to have answered the
first better: whereunto I am sure you have made no substantial Answer as yet:
wherein I appeal to all indifferent and judicious Readers, who shall read this
Book. And for the probability of this, you say, That the Historians take not
upon them to give an Account of all the Earls Children, but the Heirs of
Randle; but do you find that they have left out any of his legitimate Children,
except this whom you suppose legitimate?

And then you tell me, Mr. Cambden has mentioned Amicia, though not among the
Coheirs, yet without the brand of a Bastard: you know well, he is but of very
late standing, and not an Historian Contemporary with Amicia: and so you and I
do now mention her. And then you tell me over again (which I have before
Answered) that those Judges and Heralds that have seen your Deeds (of which I
have heard, but I am sure I yet know not who they be, nor ever saw any thing
attested under any of their hands, nor their Reasons nor grounds for their
Opinion) and you mention Mr. Dugdale in particular, for whom I have ever had a
great esteem as a diligent searcher of Antiquities, all which you again and
again affirm to be of your Opinion, that Amicia was legitimate; but because I
have before spoken of this Supra, page 10, 11. I shall only ask here, what
weight can be drawn from this? some Persons are of that Opinion, Ergo it is so:
whole Councels have erred, unless like the Romanists, you will say The Pope
cannot err: And perhaps those Persons you mention, never heard what is to be
said against that Opinion: whereas it were but equal that in consultation of
Opinions, both sides should show what could be said Pro and Con both together;
which hitherto (for ought I know) only one Party has privately put the Case,
as he pleases; I have often told you, I would have you confute me with Reason,
not Opinions: for one man may be of one Opinion, and another man of another
Opinion; but it is firm Reason which must sway every man's Judgment.

Page 69.70, 71, etc.

And lastly, you put down two Deeds, wherein Sir Raufe Manwaringe Justice of
Chester is subscribed Witness before the Barons of Cheshire; for which you
think it will be difficult to give a Reason, if Amice were a Bastard.

To this I say, it will not be difficult at all to give a Reason: and much more
easy, then to give a Reason, why Amice should be no Bastard, because Sir Raufe
Manwaringe is sometime Subscribed before the Barons of Cheshire. The Reason I
give is this, that anciently in those Ages, the Justice was put sometimes
before the Barons, and sometimes after; and sometimes after the Constable, and
Dapifer, and before the rest of the Barons, as it happened: for proof, see the
Deed in my-Book making the Baron of Halton, the prime Baron, page 160. where
the Justice comes after all the Barons; also in the Deed of Earl Randle to his
Barons, page 162. where the Justice comes next after the Constable and Dapifer,
and before the other Barons; see also in my Book, page 130, 131. two Deeds made
by Hugh Cyveliok: In the one, the Justice is put after the Constable and
Dapifer: In the other, the Justice is put before them; many other like examples
may be produced else where: I will appeal herein to Mr. Dugdale, or to any
Antiquary in England: and considering the great uncertainty of Subscription of
Witnesses in old Deeds, sometimes putting one before another, in one Deed, and
again putting the same Person after the other in another Deed; sometimes
putting Domino prefixed before the names of some Persons in one Deed, and
omitting the word Domino before the names of the same Persons in another Deed,
whereof I have spoken, page 5, 6. in the beginning of this Book. I say, had you
well considered or observed these things, it was not worth your labor to have
added those three or four leafs in the close of your Book. And now I appeal to
all Readers, whether those Grounds and Reasons alleged in my former Book
against the legitimacy of Amicia, as also to prove the Bastardy of those two
other Ladies (as you call them) Geva, and the Mother of Richard Bacun, be
evinced by any solid Answer or Reason given yet to the contrary.

And so I take my leave for ever of this Trivial Controversy; but shall ever
remain,

Mobberley May 15. 1673. SIR, Your affectionate Cousin and very humble Servant
PETER LEYCESTER.

Courteous Reader,
I Have here in the end of this Book an opportunity to Rectify some Omissions
and Errors in my former Book, which escaped me through misinformation of
others, and desire thee to pardon and amend them, as follows.

Page 206. after the last line but two, should have followed this --

-- Also another John Brereton, son of George Brereton of Ashley Esquire was
Baptized at Bowdon the 20th day of June, 1576. he was afterward Sir John
Brereton Knight, the King's Sergeant at Law in Ireland; he died without Issue,
whose-Widow Married the Lord Chief Justice Bramston: Sir John left all his
Personal Estate (which was great) to his Widow, and Caius-Colledge in Cambridge
where he was educated, and to Randle brereton his youngest Brother; which
Randle lived in London and Married, and had Issue by his Wife a Daughter
Married to Mr. Bourcher of Glocestershire, and a Son called also Randle
Brereton who has an Estate in Lincolnshire, and is the only Issue Male, or
Heir-male, of all the Family of the Breretons of Ashley now surviving, 1672.

Page 210. line 27.

Where these words [ With the little Fields above, lying up to Aston Townfield]
are totally to be expunged.

Page 214. line 18, 19.

Where it is said -- [ Daughter and sole Heir of Sir Henry Willoughby] Read --
Daughter and sole Heir to her Mother, and Daughter and Coheir to her Father
Sir Henry Willoughby; for Sir Henry had three Daughters and Coheirs: Anne;
after the death of Sir Thomas Aston, Married Mr. Gray younger Son of the Earl
of Stamford; she was by the first Wife of Sir Henry; he had also two Daughters
by his second Wife.

Ibidem page 214. line 25.

Read -- He was Loyal to his Prince, and raised a Regiment of Dragooners for
the King at his own cost and charge, and was a Gentleman of good Parts: but was
unfortunately -- etc.

Page 223.

The 6, 7, 8. lines are to be expunged totally.

Page 233. line 4.

There it is said -- Maud Married Sir Robert Nedham of Shenton in Shropshire]
which words are to be expunged there.

Page 315. line 5.

Where it is said -- George Venables of Agden Esquire one small Tenement] Read --
George Venables of Agden Esquire three small Tenements in Mere, in possession of
William Occleston, Michaiah Bower, and Peter Chorton.

Page 315. line 13.

It is there said -- Edward Allen of Rosthorne, one small Tenement in Mere]
Read thus -- Edward Allen of Rosthorne, one small Tenement in Mere in
possession of Henry Hunt, and two parts of John Occleston's Tenement.

Page 316. line 18, 19.

Where it is said -- Geffrey Cartwright Gentleman, has lately bought the
Shaw-house in Millington, from Millington of Millington] Read thus, -- Geffrey
Cartwright Gentleman, has the Shaw-house in Millington, which Richard
Cartwright his Father bought of Thomas Shaw, 1646. which Land was formerly John
Wilkinson's; and Shaw came to it by Marriage.

Page 326. lin. 16.

Where it is said -- Came to Francis Cholmondeley] Read thus -- Came to Francis
Cholmondeley for his life.

Page 327. line 10, 11.

It is said -- Thomas Brook, Second Son married Jane Daughter of one Weston of
Sutton nigh Frodsham, Tenant to Warburton of Arley] instead whereof read --
Thomas Brook, second Son, married Jane Woodfen, Daughter of Richard Woodfen of
Sutton near Frodsham-Bridge: Her Mother afterward married William Weston of
Astmore in Halton; so that Weston was but her Stepfather.

Page 327. line 13.

Where it is said -- Richard Brook, third Son of Sir Richard; Professor of
Physic, died at Boughton nigh Chester, without Issue, anno Dom. 1667.] put out
the words [without Issue]: for he had Issue by Sarah his former wife, daughter
of Judge Warburton of Hifferton-Grange in Weverham Lordship; although he had no
Issue by Anne his latter wife, the Widow of Edward Holland of Denton in
Lancashire, Esquire and Daughter of Edward Warren of Pointon in Cheshire Esquire

Page 334. line 33, 34.

Where it is said -- Which Chapel Margery his Wife surviving erected, with the
two Monuments therein for her self and Husband, anno Dom. 1456.] instead
whereof, read thus, -- Which Chapel this Randle caused to be erected, with the
two Monuments therein for himself and wife, an. Dom. 1456.] for Margery died
before him, to wit, 27. Hen. 6. and he died 35. Hen. 6.

Page 280. line 44.

Where in the Margin it is said -- Corrupt pro saltuariis, id est, Forrestars]
Read -- Corrupt pro saltationibus, aut saltatoriis, id est, Deerleaps.

Page 335, line 12.

Where is omitted as follows -- Agnes, another Daughter of John Manwaringe,
Esquire, married Sir Robert Nedham of Crannach in Cheshire Knight, and
afterward of Shenton in Shropshire; which Shavington, vulgo Shenton, was
estated on him by Judge Nedham, who purchased the same: And this Match
appears by a bluish Marble-stone or Monument, in the Chancel of Adderley-
Church in Shropshire; whereon are the Pictures of the said Sir Robert Nedham
and Dame Agnes, and seven Sons and two Daughters; as also an Inscription (all
of them in Brass) as follows, --

Here lies buried under this Stone the Bodies of Sir Robert Nedeham Knight,
and Dame Agnes his Wife, Daughter of John Manwaringe of Pever Esquire which said
Robert deceased the iiij. day of June; Anno Dom. 1556. And the said Agnes
deceased the 11. Day of May, Anno Dom. 1560.

Page 345. line 36.

The word [where] is to be expunged: for the Lady Mary Cholmondeley died at
Vale-royal, which she purchased, and gave it to Thomas Cholmondeley her fourth
Son, and his Heirs.

Page 361, line 19.

Where it is said -- Died unmarried, 1653.] Read -- Was never married; he
drowned himself the sixth day of July, 1653.

Page 374. line 4.

Read Sir Amos Meredeth Baronet. a.

Page 376. line 26.

Where is omitted -- Hugh Toft, another Son, Parson of Alderley, and after of
Stopport, 8. Hen. 4. lib. C. fol. 229. T. number. 40, and 42.

Anno 1402. 3. Hen. 4.29. Novem. Nobilis Vir Johannes le Manwaringe Dominus de
Stockport praesentat ad Ecclesiam de Stockport Hugonem de Toft Capellanum, post
mortem Jacobi de Bagiley ultimi Rectoris, lib. B. p. 12. d.

Page 381. line 28.

Where is omitted -- also another Son, called William Leycester, who died
without Issue.

Page 392. line 22.

Where should follow thus -- The said Robert Venables bought all the
Demain-Land, and also Wood 's Farm with the Mills, called Cranage- Mills. But
the Tenements were some of them bought by the Tenants themselves, and some of
them by others.

Page 437. line ult.

Add there thus -- Only Dodleston remains yet to Cheshire, and Marleston nigh
Eccleston, and Claverton and Lache nigh Chester; which were all part of
Atiscros-Hundred.

These Amendments, Reader, will set thee straight in the Perusal of my former
Book; together with the correction of the Errata 's of Printing, committed by
the great negligence of the Printer; which are now mentioned and rectified by a
distinct Page at the end of the said Book.

Farewell.

FINIS.

