A DESIGN OF A British Dictionary, HISTORICAL and GEOGRAPHICAL; With an ESSAY,
Entitled, ARCHAEOLOGIA BRITANNICA: AND A Natural History of WALES.
By EDWARD LHWYD, Keeper of the Ashmolean Repository, Oxon.
BEING invited by some Persons of Quality and Learning, to attempt something
further in the Antiquities, and Natural History of Wales, than has been yet
performed; and also finding my self more Inclined, and (as I presume) better
Qualified for an Employment of that kind, than for any other: I have here made
bold to offer some Proposals toward such a Design, to the end that if the
Works above mentioned may seem conducible to the Advancement of Learning, and
worthy of the Favor and Encouragement of those amongst the Nobility and
Gentry, whom it more immediately concerns, I may forthwith resolve on the
Undertaking; or desist, in case they shall appear otherwise.

In the Historical and Geographical Dictionary, a brief Account is designed:

I. Of all Persons memorable in the British History, whether mentioned by the
Romans, or Writers of our own Nation: And of all such Authors as have written
in British; whether Welsh, Cornish, or Armorican.

II. Of all Places in Britain mentioned by the Greeks and Romans; and of all
Hundreds, Comots, Towns, Castles, Villages, and Seats of the Nobility and
Gentry of chiefest Note now in Wales: As also of the most Notable Mountains,
Rivers, Lakes; Barrows, Forts, Camps; and all such places as either retain any
Monuments of Antiquity at present, or seem from their Names to have had such
heretofore. Throughout this whole Work, an Interpretation of all such proper
Names, as are now intelligible, is intended; with Conjectures concerning some
of those which are more obscure. And in this Part, it is presumed, we may
proceed with greater Security here, than might be expected in most other
Countries. For, whereas in other Parts, the Names of Places have been so
corrupted by Foreign Languages introduced by Conquest, that few of them are now
intelligible to the best Critics; Wales has not been subject to such Changes,
the Modern British being probably one surviving Dialect of the Language spoken
by the first Inhabitants of this Island. The End I propose herein, is, the
rectifying several Errors already committed in the Interpreting the Names of
Places in this Kingdom; and the preventing of many more in Wales and Scotland;
as also in some Places of England, where the British Names, either entire or
corrupt, are still preserved. But we need not make any Apology for Etymological
Observations, since Bochartus, Mr. Camden, Boxhornius, Ioannes Ger. Vossius,
AEgidius Menagius, and many other Learned and Judicious Authors, have given the
World such ample Testimonies of their Usefulness; provided they be cautiously
handled, with due regard to the Corruption of Languages, and free from the
Extravagancy of Fancy.

The Essay entitled, Archaeologia Britannica, is designed to be divided into
Four Parts.

The First to contain, A Comparison of the Modern Welsh with other European
Languages; more especially with the Greek, Latin, Irish, Cornish, and Armorican.

The Second, A Comparison of the Customs and Traditions of the Britans, with
those of other Nations.

The Third, An Account of all such Monuments now remaining in Wales, as are
presumed to be British; and either older, or not much later than the Roman
Conquest: viz. their Camps and Burial-places; the Monuments called Cromlecheu,
and Meineu gwyr; their Coyns, Arms, Amulets, etc.

The Fourth, An Account of the Roman Antiquities there, and some others of
later Date, during the Government of the British Princes; together with Copies
of all the Inscriptions of any considerable Antiquity, as yet remaining in that
Country.

The Natural History may be divided into Five Sections.

The First whereof may contain, A General Description of the Country, in
respect of its Situation, and Quality of the Soil: An Account of Meteors; with
Comparative Tables of the Weather in several places: Also of the Sea, Rivers,
Lakes, Springs, and Mineral Waters.

2. An Enumeration and Description of the various sorts of Earths, Stones, and
all Mineral Bodies.

3. Of Formed Stones; or such as have a constant and regular Figure, whereby
they are distinguishable from each others, no less than Plants or Animals.

4. Of Plants: wherein we shall only take Notice of such as grow spontaneously
in Wales, and have been rarely, or not at all, observed elsewhere in this
Island: adding a Catalogue of such as are found in England, or Scotland, and
have not been observed in Wales.

5. Of Animals, in the same Method.

Thus I have given a Scheme of what seems to me at present, most likely to find
Acceptance amongst the Learned and Ingenious: But this I offer with Submission
to those of greater Judgment and Experience; and shall be very ready, in case I
undertake the Performance, to admit of any Alteration or Amendment (agreeable
with my Capacity) which they shall think fit to recommend.

Now in order to the Performance of what is here proposed, 'twill be necessary
to travel Wales, at least four or five Summers; and likewise to make one
Journey into Cornwall, and another into Ireland, or the Highlands of Scotland,
for parallel Observations, as to their Language, their Names of Towns, Rivers,
Mountains, etc. it being certain, that the want of such actual Surveying, has
been in all Ages the occasion of much Error and Ignorance in Writings of this
nature. During these Travels, I propose to my self the collecting Materials for
each Work; but shall endeavor to prepare the Dictionary for the Press within
the space of five Years; and the Archaeologia within two Years after at
farthest. As to the Natural History, I can set no time for its Publication, as
not being able to guess how tedious it may prove, and having some thoughts of
writing it in Latin, and publishing it in several Sections apart.

But before we engage in a Work so very tedious and expensive, it seems
necessary to understand, what Encouragement we are to depend upon; since
nothing of this kind has been undertaken (nor indeed could well succeed) in
any Country, without such an assurance. It Is well known, no kind of Writing
requires more Expenses and Fatigue, than that of Natural History and
Antiquities: it being impossible to perform any thing accurately in those
Studies, without much Traveling, and diligent Searching, as well the most
desert Rocks and Mountains, as the more frequented Valleys and Plains. The
Caves, Mines, and Quarries must be pried into, as well as the outward Surface
of the Earth; nor must we have less regard to the Creatures of the Sea, Lakes,
and Rivers, than those of the Air and Dry Land. But it is not the Expenses of
Traveling we are only to regard; the Charges of the Figures or Draughts of
such new Discoveries as will occur, must needs be much more considerable: not
to mention, that a Correspondence as extensive as we can settle it, must be
maintained with the Curious in these Studies; and such new Books purchased, as
are pertinent to our Design; and that Laborers (especially in Mines and
Quarries) are to be rewarded for preserving such things, as they shall be
directed to take Notice of.

Upon these Considerations, I hope it will not be thought profuse Liberality,
(provided those who are competent Judges approve of the Design) if an Annual
Pension be allowed toward it, by such Gentlemen as are of their own free
Choice inclined to promote it, for the space of five Years: The Money to be
delivered on the First of March, or any time that Month, into the Hands of some
Friends in each County, who are pleased to take upon them the trouble of
Returning it. And if this Proposal finds Acceptance, my Request is, That those
Gentlemen who are pleased to further the Undertaking, would subscribe their
Names to this Paper, adding how much they are disposed to contribute Yearly.
And if what is subscribed, shall answer these Considerations, my design is
(with God's permission) to begin Traveling next March. I am very sensible,
that such an Encouragement is above my Merits; neither can I promise my Patrons
a Performance (if it please God I may live to go thorough with it) any thing
answerable to their Generosity: But whatever shall be the Success, I intend not
to spare either Labor or Charges; and being engaged in no Profession, nor (by
the favor of the University) obliged to Personal Attendance in my present
Station, nor at all confined with the Care of any Family, I shall have little
else to mind, but to endeavor the Performance of this Task to my own Credit,
and the Satisfaction of those Gentlemen who shall think fit to encourage me.

Oxon, October. 20. 1695.

