Christopher Bernhard Van Gale Bishop of Munster etc

portrait of Christopher Bernhard van Gale

THE LIFE AND ACTIONS Of the late renowned PRELATE and SOLDIER Christopher
Bernard van Gale, BISHOP of MUNSTER, Prince of the Holy Empire, Administrator
of Corvay, Marquess of Stromberg, etc.

In which is an account of the most Considerable Actions of Europe in his time.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took, Rob. Harsord, and Sam. Carr. 1680.

TO THE READER.
MEN that perform great things have generally their particular Historians, who
in their Writings Record their Actions; But these are many times no more than
the Flatterers of their choicest and most memorable Deeds, not making any
mention of their Vices and Miscarriages: a thing which this short Story of the
Late Bishop of Munster cannot be said to be guilty of, at least to the utmost
of the Authors knowledge. From his very Birth, to the fiftieth year of his Age
there is no notice taken, no mention made of him, neither in History nor in any
public Acts or Records; so that in all that time it is impossible there should
be any thing considerable concerning him delivered to posterity; only that he
lay under the misfortune of Res angusta domi -- How he employed his time from
the forty seventh year of his Age, or thereabouts, the Reader has here a short
but impartial account; from which they that are pleased with variety of
Transaction, and love to observe the Intreagues of Ambition, and all the
windings and doublings of Human Policy, cannot choose but receive as much
satisfaction as so short a Compendium can afford; and yet not so short neither,
if we consider in what a narrow compass the several Lives of Plutarch lie, in
few of which there is more diversity of Transaction to be found. It being a
thing greatly to be admired, that a Prince of so little Power and Authority, by
reason of the small extent of his Territories, should nevertheless so order his
affairs, as that the chiefest Potentates of Europe still sought his friendship,
at no small expenses of their own. While, by a wary and seasonable change of
parties, he still preserved himself entire. But I shall not anticipate the
Reader with a Preface Relation, when the Story it self is so near at hand.

THE LIFE AND ACTIONS OF Christopher Bernard van Galle, Bishop of MUNSTER, etc.
WHen Christopher Bernard de Galle was bred up by his Uncle Bernard Malingcrock
out of mere Compassion and Charity, being the poor Orphan of an unfortunate
Gentleman whose Estate the Law took from him, and who died in Prison for having
slain another Gentleman, of which we shall make a more ample relation in the
following Pages, he little thought that he was then hatching up not only so
large a Theme for History, but one that should make it so much his business to
trouble the repose of so many Countries, and bring so many Kings and Princes to
interest themselves in his Affairs, while he either ruined or helped to ruin so
many vast Territories.

Histories already written are plentifully stored with examples of persons, who
from the meanest condition of mankind, have been advanced to the highest
dignities of Empire and Sovereignty. Of these, some have reigned and ruled with
great honor and applause; but others, and they the greater number, have ruined
their Subjects, and been plagues to their Neighbors. I confess, to name them
all or to make a Catalogue of their Actions would be too tedious, and therefore
I leave it to the judgment of them who have any knowledge of the Actions of our
Bishop, whether he ought to be ranked in the lesser number of the first, or the
greater number of the latter.

Before the time that he was advanced to the Bishopric of Munster, and till
the Year, 1650. there is no mention made of his name in any Book that I know
of. But since that, he has given occasion enough to men both to write and talk
of him; though much more to his disadvantage then otherwise, and therefore his
memory will never be accounted the most Renowned in Story. Since then we find
nothing remarkable in the first part of his Life but what has been already
observed in the Preface, we shall presently go on to his Election to the
Episcopal Dignity, which was as full of troubles and interruptions as his
Government afterward. Nevertheless before we come to that, it will not be
amiss to say something of his natural disposition, by which (not bridling but
rather somenting his Passions) he executed those things which were done by him
when he had power and opportunity to do what he intended.

The Sieur Valkenier in his Europe Troubled, p. 138. describes his humor to be
ambitious, martial, restless, inclined to change, and altogether covetous to
heap up Riches for his Heirs. Certainly his Ambition and Passion for the Wars
which he occasioned were immoderate, and this was the main motive that incited
him to undertake so many Actions. It was more for ruining his Neighbors
Country then for preserving his own or his own subjects. More addicted to seek
occasions for War, then to sue for Peace. He loved the Art of War better than
the Art of Preaching. He wore at the same time the Helmet and the Mitre, the
Sword and the Crosier, but preferred the former always before the latter.

And indeed he was a good Soldier upon several occasions. He was subtle and
full of ^ atagems, and very artfully dissembled his Designs till ripe for
Execution; and continued open Friendship till he was ready to strike these whom
he designed to fall out withal. When he intended Eastward, he seemed to bend to
the West. Our State, among others, has had often experience of this particular.
His Conduct, besides that he was never deceived by his Generals in the number
of his men, appeared at the Siege of Groaning, where his Order and Discipline
were without blame.

Toward the end of July he took a review of his whole Army. In the Morning he
called his men to their Arms by beat of Drum and sound of Trumpet. After that
he caused Proclamation that every Commander should forthwith repair to their
several Charges, and Order the Soldiers under their Commanders into their
several Ranks and Files, as well the Horse as the Foot; Then he appointed
certain Commissioners to count the Ranks and Files, and tell how many was in
every Company. The Roll being completed, was delivered to the Bishop, who paid
out his money according to the Complement of men given into his hands. By which
means he knew exactly how many men he had in his Service, Every Month he made
the same review, whereby he did not only gain time, but prevented the deceits
of Officers upon the like occasions.

Besides all this, he had the Courage of a Soldier; and he showed his
undauntedness at the same Siege. He went frequently into the Trenches, to take
care of things, and to correct such miscarriages as he observed, never trusting
to any one person but himself. And still as he passed along, it behooved the
Soldiers either to be delving or shooting; So that they loved his room much
better then his company. Sometimes he stayed two or three hours in the
Trenches, hazarding his person in the most dangerous places. Nevertheless he
was prudent for all that; for he never exposed himself to those dangers, but he
was attended by nine or ten persons, habited like Footmen in the same Livery as
himself, which prevented his being discovered by the Enemy.

Thus our Bishop showed himself to be a brave and vigilant Captain: but such a
one as undertook unnecessary Wars, and such as the occasions thereof were
sought by himself. Should it be objected that the Sword of a Prince, and the
Bishops Crozier have no correspondence together, it may be answered that he was
not only a Spiritual but Temporal Prince. Should any one go farther and ask the
same question as was asked the Bishop of Cologn upon the same occasion, If the
Devil take the Secular, what must become of the Spiritual Prince? We can give
no answer till we hear what the Bishop said for himself.

His restless humor has been sufficiently apparent. He never could be at
quiet; but there was a necessity for him to be in Arms, or in some contest
before the Chamber of Spiers, sometimes against his own City and Subjects,
sometimes against the States General, the Dukes of Lunenburgh, etc. No person
that had any intricate and perplexed cause needed have done any more then gone
to him; for he never denied them his Assistance, especially if he perceived any
advantage accrewing to himself.

All the world knows how inconstant he was in his words and his actions. The
Alliances which he confirmed by solemn Oath and his Episcopal Cross, endured no
longer than stood with his Interest and Convenience: He never continued long in
Friendship with any Prince, whom he did not either leave in the lurch, or else
become his Enemy. England, France, the Low Countries, and several others can
well testify the same.

His Avarice was a great, if not the principal cause of his Inconstancy. For
when he had got the sum agreed upon, he offered his assistance to another, to
make a new profit to himself, though it were to the disadvantage of him that
was the first purchaser.

He was so much a slave to his Covetousness, that it was usually said of him
that he would serve the Devil for money; he would willingly have had all the
money that was in the world, for gain was the chiefest part of his Religion,
Neither did he spare any deceit, or act of violence which was profitable to
him: For which reason he was a continual stumbling block to his Neighbors, and
a thorn in their Eyes; so that the Emperor never durst put any confidence in
him, finding him to be of the disposition of Ishmael whose hand was against all
the world.

The Sieur Valekenier has very well observed that profit had the only Ascendent
over him, as being the only thing whereat he aimed. The words of that famous
Writer are these: For, says he, Whatever filled and crammed his Chests and
Coffers was his Interest as he has openly confessed himself, and has given the
world reason to believe by his actions. And indeed, as he is an Ecclesiastical
Prince, that cannot leave his Bishopric to his Kindred, and will therefore be
nothing endamaged by the ruin of it, for that reason be only endeavored to
heap together vast Treasures for his Heirs, who could expect from him nothing
but ready money. So that if the States of the United Provinces had offered him
more money then the French, he would have soon laid aside his old Antipathy, and
have become their choicest Friend. Though he knew well, that if by the
uncertain chance of War be should happen to be expelled his Bishopric, a rich
Abbey in France (well deserved by his Faithful services) might prove more
profitable to Europe troubled p. 183.
him then all his Bishopric, whose Inhabitants were so impoverished.

Beside what we have already said, he was altogether void of pity. He is
accused to have pocketed up the money which has been sent by other Princes or
Kings to make a divertive War for their convenience, and then to have laid
insupportable burdens upon his own Subjects. That he quartered Soldiers
continually in great numbers upon his Subjects, who made no sin of violating
married women, ravishing Virgins and committing daily Robberies, the relations
whereof never moved his heart. When a considerable person and very aged,
belonging to the Chapter of the Cathedral Church, laid before him one day the
miserable sufferings of his Subjects, as well by their Taxes, as the Insolence
of the Soldiers, he made answer. That it was not for him to suffer himself to
be insulted over by his Neighbors, but to defend his Honor. Which could not
be done without a War; and to make War there was a necessity for money and
Soldiers. The first he could legally demand from his Subjects, as being set
over them for their safety and honor. For the other, it was impossible to
Discipline them so exactly. If his Subjects did fuffer any hardship, he was
sorry for it. But as these inconveniences were the companions of War; he hoped
ere long for better times. That if they considered what others suffered, they
had reason to count themselves happy, and to thank God that they had a generous
Prince that would take no affront, but was mindful their Honor. He suffered his
Soldiers to commit those insolences in his Enemies Countries that the people
dreaded the very name of Munsterians. The French were rigorous enough in those
Places and Cities of the Low Countries where they had their Garrisons, but not
to be compared with the Bishops men for cruelty.

It is credibly reported that at the Siege of Groaning, some of his Chief
Officers expressed their sorrow for the loss of so many brave and valiant
persons; and desired him to have pity upon the miserable cries of the wounded,
beseeching him at the same time that care might be taken of them, to which he
returned for answer, How! Are you one of my Officers and suffer your heart to
melt upon the sight of a few dead men, or the sight and groans of the wounded?
A good Soldier ought to have as little Compassion as the Devil. However he
would sometimes disguise his Natural Cruelty, and appear tender and pitiful,
for fear of distasting his Soldiers, and being also afraid lest his Subjects
should have an utter aversion against him.

There are some perhaps who having read thus far may accuse me of prejudice and
partiality. But they must know that as yet, we have not begun the History, we
have only made a preliminary description of the humor and disposition of the
Bishop, in respect of whom we thought ourselves not so much confined to the
Duty of a Historian as to the bounds of Truth, wherein we have followed the
best relations of the time, as well in High German, as Dutch.

Ferdinand Duke of Bavaria Archbishop of Cologne, Bishop of Hildesheim,
Paderborn, Liege and Munster, dyed in the Year 1650. The Archiepiscopal See
fell to Maximilian Henry Duke of Bavariae, after he had been eight years
Coadjutor to his Uncle. A while after he was also Bishop of Liege and
Hildesheim. The Bishopprick of Munster fell into the hands of Signor
Christopher Bernard de Galle, though by virtue of an Election altogether
confused and extraordinary, caused by the dissension between the Dean and the
Chapter of the Cathedral Church of Munster, of which more in due place.

Historians differ as to the employment which Monsieur Christopher Bernard
enjoyed before he was Elected. Some will have him to have been Warden of the
Chapter. Gotfred Schultz in his Chronicle of the Year 1650. p. 23. writes thus:
'At Munster the Chapter of the Cathedral put by several considerable persons
that stood for the Ecclesiastical Dignity, and at last chose for their Bishop,
Monsieur Christopher Bernard their Warden. In the beginning of the little
Preface there are these words; A Warden was advanced to be Bishop. But in the
eighth part of the Theater of Europe. Fol. 91. we find that his Uncle
Malingcrot, Dean of the Cathedral had advanced him in the Chapter. Both the one
and the other may be true, that is to say, that first he might have been only
Sacristain, and after that preferred higher, and so by his Uncles means attain
the Bishopric.

Monsieur Christopher Bernard, was scarcely advanced to the Chair, but word was
brought him every day, that the Citizens of Munster not being satisfied with
his Election, talked of him with a great deal of scorn and contempt: that they
continually divulged bitter Lampoons and reproaches against him, and that they
gave little respect to his high Dignity. Part of this indeed was true: but his
Flatterers had added much more then was really so: and this it was that
exasperated the Bishop against them: however he concealed his hatred for a
time. Many of the Magistrates were willing to have punished the Authors of
those Satyrs; but others privately favored them, so that they could not agree
upon that point among themselves.

It is reported that this discontent among the Citizens on the one side was
this, that after the Chapter had in such an irregular manner passed by so many
persons of worth, they should advance to so high a Dignity not only the son of
a private Gentleman, which was tolerable enough, but the son of a Criminal,
which was insufferable. On the other side because they well enough understood
by several actions of Christopher Bernard in his mean Estate, what they were to
expect from him, when he came to be a Prince.

Monsieur Bernard Malingcrot his Uncle a very learned man, as most Writers
affirm, but very self-willed withal, became his mortal enemy after his
Election, and prosecuted him publicly every where not only in his common
speeches but his writings, reproaching him that his Election was neither
regular nor just; that it was faulty both in the manner and the person, and
that Christopher Bernard ought not to be acknowledged for lawful Bishop. All
which more incensed the people against him, as being a person that had never
been in any credit amongst them, whereas Malingcrot had lived in long
Reputation within the City.

And now it will be time for us to declare the reason why the Uncle so hated
his Pupil, as also to relate the manner of the Bishops Election, and what
happened before and after.

It is a thing well known by the Popes Bulls or Right Ecclesiastical, that when
the Episcopal See happens to be vacant, it is the Deans duty to assemble a
Chapter within six months, for the choice of another Bishop, otherwise after
the expiration of that time the Pope has Authority to supply the vacancy by
putting in any one of his own choice.

Malingcrot would willingly. have been Bishop himself, and indeed deserved to
have been advanced to that Dignity, as well for his wit and learning as for his
extraction: which may seem improbable, considering the meanness of the Bishops
birth; but is allowed however for truth, in regard that Malingcrot, was related
to the Bishop by the Mothers side and not by the Fathers.

Malingcrot therefore aspiring to the Mitre, delayed the Election much longer
then was pleasing to the Canons; so that the fifth month was already at an end,
and no day yet prefixed; whereby he thought more easily to have attained his
ends. But many of the members of the Chapter, especially the younger sort, had
little or no kindness for him. For he was a severe man, and one that while he
was Dean had not only sharply rebuked them in words but also inflicted rude
Penances upon them. So that they feared he would be more rigorous when he came
to be Bishop.

Thus while he delayed to call the Chapter, notwithstanding the importunities
of several, the Members of the College met Christopher Bernard de Galle, the
Deans Nephew at a Feast near their College. They were there very frolic, and
at length in the height of their jollity they began to cry aloud, Long live
Bishop Bernard. Which acclamations when they came Malingcrots ears he took them
for a good Omen, in regard his name was also Bernard, believign himself to be
the person intended. But soon after he was informed that the Chapter had
proceeded very far toward the Election, and that they had nominated his Nephew
Monsieur de Galle, to be Bishop of Munster, which Election they besought him to
consent to, and confirm with his signet.

The Dean was very ill satisfied with what had been done; he upbraided the
Canons with their ill and disrespectful language toward him, according to his
usual custom; and for that contrary to their duty toward him, without his
knowledge and consent, they had assembled together in an improper place to make
a Bishop. That it belonged to him, as Dean, according to the Ecclesiastical
customs and privileges, to call a Chapter, and take their voices in order.
Which not being done, but having acted contrary to Rules with a premeditated
design, the Election was illegal and void: and for that reason, he would never
approve of it.

Nevertheless the Chapter would not alter the resolution which they had taken,
and made their Applications to the Pope to confirm the Bishop newly Elected.
Malingcrot vigorously opposed it; alleging among other reasons, that their
Election was altogether illegal, being done contrary to Law and Form, without
his knowledge, as Dean; without any necessity or apprehension of danger, when
there was time enough to have proceeded legally; besides that they had chosen a
person not fitting or proper to be admitted to so high a calling, which ought
to be undertaken by persons of irreprehensible conversations. Now it was known
to all the world that the Father of him who was Elected to the Bishopric had
killed another Gentleman, for which reason he had been deprived of his Estate,
and died in Prison.

The Chapter alleged on the other side, that necessity had compelled them to
pass to this Election. The needless delay of the Dean put them in danger of
losing their great privilege of a free choice; there being so much time
elapsed. As for the Criminal act of the Father of the Elected Bishop, they
excused it in this manner; saying, that it could not be accounted a Capital
Crime, since it was not punished with loss of life; and therefore that could be
no impediment to keep his son from the benefit of their Election.

Malingcrot replied, that then when they made their choice there was time
enough to have proceeded according to due form. That it was in his breast to
appoint the time, so that he left time enough for the Election. That he would
not lose his privilege of limitation of time; that a particular favor to let a
crime go unpunished did not justify the action. At length by his writings he
so far prevailed with Innocent the X. as to forbear the Confirmation of
Christopher Bernard till the fifth year, that is to say, for so long time as
the Pope should live. But when Alexander the VII. came to the Chair in the Year
1655. he forthwith confirmed him in his Dignity, and so Christopher Bernard
prevailed at length.

So long as Malingcrot lived at Munster he never ceased giving out invective
speeches against the Bishop, and many as well of the Council as of the people
gave credit to him. For in regard that he had bred him, every one believed that
he could not choose but know his Genius and Disposition better then another: And
certainly the preceding life of the Bishop had not been so void of blame, but
that he had given occasion enough to let the world see several of his vices.
This was that which engaged the Bishop, who resided at Coesweld, to
Excommunicate the Dean, his Uncle; who after that retired to Cologn, where he
met with Sanfelicio, the Popes Nuntio at that time; to whom he made out his
business so well, that he was not only freed from his Excommunication, but also
had liberty granted him to return to Munster.

This very thing did not a little contribute to the ensuing troubles;
particularly then when upon the Feast of St. James the Apostle he showed
himself in all his Ecclesiatical Robes. Old and young, men and women, in short,
all sorts of people crowded to see him, overjoyed at his return. Insomuch that
there was a universal cry among the multitude, Let Malingcrot stay with us, and
let Galle go where he pleases. And this was that which made the business worse,
and excited a stronger inveteracy in the spirit of the Bishop, not only against
the Dean his Uncle, but against all the Citizens of Munster. He imagined, and
perhaps not without reason, that he should from time to time become more odious
to them; and therefore he could not hope for much good from them. For this
reason he required the Townsmen, that for the security of his person, they
would receive an Episcopal Garrison; and because they gave him a denial, he
sought how to attain his ends by force.

Before we go any farther, we will give the Reader a description of his Town
which is seated in Westphalia. This Diocese contains twelve Cities, whose
Magistrates are all of the Roman Catholic Religion; of all which Munster is the
Metropolis. The Inhabitants are particularly addicted to Tillage: they also
breed and feed great store of Cattle and Sheep, but especially Hogs, of which
they make great advantage, by reason of the vast quantities of Westphalia Hams
which they send abroad into Foreign Parts. The Nobility govern the Country, and
live in their Castles; but the Country and their Herds and Flocks afford them
their maintenance. Only for their Agriculture, they have the privilege to be
served by the Country people that are under their jurisdiction, being as it
were their slaves, and whose duty it is at the first word to be at their
service. The place where now the City of Munster stands, was formerly called,
Mimgarde in the Dubigines or Dulgumnies. It received the name of Munster from
the Latin word Monasterium, signifying a Cloister or Convent, which Bishop
Armaud the first, in the Reign of Charlemain, in the Year 785. when this
Province was first made a Bishopric, caused to be built there in honor of the
Holy Virgin Mary. The Land round about it no way to be despised, no more than
is all the rest of Westphalia. The City has nine Gates well provided and
guarded with Bulwarks and Bastions. There are three to the East, that of St.
Maurice, St. Servaise, and Horst Gate. Two toward the South, St. Ludgers and
St. Giles's. Two to the West, St. Mary's Gate, and that of the Jews field. Two
to the North, that of the Cross, and Newburgh Gate. The City is encompassed
with a double Wall and a double Moat; which the River Aa fills with water, and
then discharges it self. It contains also five Colleges, that of St. Paul's the
Cathedral, St. Ludgers, St. Maurices, St. Martins and one more.

The Bishop therefore not being able to incline the Citizens to answer his
expectations, adjourned the Chapter of the Cathedral, and the greatest part of
the Nobility to Coseweld. There the business was variously consulted, but they
could not come to any agreement, so that the Assembly brake up.

In the mean time Malingcrot, from whom the Bishop had taken away the Office of
Dean, and who lived as an exile at Cologn, resolved one day to revisit the Town
of Munster, and to celebrate the Feast of St. James. But before he could get
into the Town, he was discovered by the Bishops men, taken Prisoner and carried
before the Bishop, who seriously exhorted him to quit his Rebellious humor and
not to envy him the honor wherewith God had favored him. But these calm words
took no effect. On the contrary he began to upbraid his Nephew, with what he
had done for him after his Fathers misfortune, and how he had preserved him
from the jaws of misery; that he had made him a Canon, and then a member of the
Chapter. But that after all his kindness, he had rewarded him with nothing but
ingratitude.

Thereupon the Bishop made sure of him; ordering the Jesuits and other
Ecclesiastical Persons that were at his Devotion to persuade him, but all to no
purpose. So that at length he dispossessed him of all his Dignities, and put
him under a Guard of Soldiers in a certain house in the Country; and in that
condition he ended his days. He showed himself however very Liberal to all the
poor Students that came to visit him, of which his bounty drew a good number.
But he received them all civilly, and never dismissed them but with a handsome
gift, telling them withal this Lesson: When it shall be your turn to come to
preferment, said he, remember me in your writings, and consider what it was
reduced me to this condition.

Now in regard the Bishop continued his Levies, the City of Munster could not
but easily conjecture, that he was making those Warlike preparations against
them. Nor did he want the assistance of others; For though Francis William
Bishop of Osnaburgh, and Adolph de Veck, Bishop of Paderborn, loved their
Tranquillity too well, to interest themselves in his troubles; yet the three
Ecclesiastical Electors of Mayence, Treves and Cologn, sent him some of their
Troops. Before he came to any Acts of Hostility, he dispatched to the City
Monsieur de Morien, hereditary Marshal, to make an agreement with the
Inhabitants. The Council put in writing the causes why they could not entirely
confide in their Prince, and what it was that burdened the City. And indeed the
Peace would soon have been concluded, would his Highness but have remitted or
at least abated the burden of their Taxes. Nevertheless a Truce was agreed
upon thereby to prevent farther extremities.

With these hopes the Pacificators parted, and M. the Marshall took with him
the Articles proposed by the City together with their first Declaration. At
that time Nicolas Dragter Syndie of the City, coming from the Hague, was taken
Prisoner by the Bishops men; which yet more exasperated the Townsmen. Soon
after open acts of Hostility began. The City put it self in a posture of
defense. The Citizens stood to their Arms and took their Oaths at the Council
rather to lose their lives than the Liberties and Privileges of their
Ancestors.

The Bishops Army was reported to be Nine Thousand strong, in Horse and Foot.
He assailed the City very vigorously, shooting continually, and threw
Fireballs into it, which set fire on several houses. The Ecclesiastical
persons ran to the Churches, to beseech Almighty God to infuse thoughts of
Peace into the hearts of the Bishop and the Citizens. The old people and
children, who were not fit for labor, went every day in public Processions
from one Church to another, accompanied by the Dominicans. The lusty women were
divided through the City, and had their particular employments allotted them,
some to fill Tubs of water, others carried Raw Hides to clap upon the Granado's
and Fireballs that were thrown into the City. There was no place free from the
Cannon-bullets which flew thick about their Ears. Insomuch that as one of the
Priests was saying Mass in the Church of St. John, while he was Elevating the
Host, a Bullet took him away from the Altar. Nevertheless the Citizens made a
Sally and killed a good number of the Episcoparians.

In the midst of all this roaring of the Cannon, the Nobility sought all means
imaginable to bring things to a reconciliation. To which purpose they assembled
together at Gueest. Thither the Nobility flocked in great numbers, being ill
satisfied with the Bishops proceedings; and some there were that did not
forbear to say openly, That a Siege so pernicious and violent was not the Act
of a Prince, but of a Tyrant. They also sent to his Highness their Letters of
complaint in reference to the said Siege; The Contents whereof were, That the
agreement, which he was about to have made before, had been prosperously
concluded, had he not so soon begun open Hostilities. That without the knowledge
and consent of the Nobility and the Cities in general, he had brought Foreign
Forces into the Country, and raised men upon his own particular Authority. That
he had assaulted the City of Munster like an Enemy contrary to the privileges
of the Country, which he had confirmed himself in these words, We will not make
any War or Alliance with any person, without the consent of the Chapter of the
Cathedral Church and other Estates of our Country. And expressly against what
was concluded at the assembly at Coesweld, that all new Levies should be put
off, etc.

Then they complained that he had put the Country, that had not yet recovered
the miseries of the preceding Wars, into a new confusion, that he had shed the
blood of the Innocent, made many Widows and Orphans whose tears and moans cried
loud to Heaven. And therefore they besought him to raise his Siege, and send
away his Foreigners; and for his own right, to stand to the determination of
the Imperial Court. That he would no more oppress either them, the City or the
Country, but that he would assume the Peaceful thoughts of a Father, a Prince,
a Bishop and a Pastor of the Church. Otherwise if he would not lend an Ear to
their just complaints, they protested their innocence of all the misfortunes
that should fall upon his Highness and the Country. This Letter was dated the
first of September, 1657.

The Bishop answered fully, that he had never other thoughts than to preserve
his subjects in repose with the care and fidelity of a Father. That he always
was for Peace and Union, but the City of Munster by its obstinacy had deserved
not only this, but a far more rigorous punishment. That he had proceeded no
otherwise than a Prince and Sovereign Lord ought to proceed against Rebels. If
the City or Country should suffer any damage thereby, time would repair it.
That the City had rejected the Justice of the Imperial Chamber, in regard they
had desired succors from the Hans Towns and the States of the United
Provinces. In conclusion he desired the Nobility to assist him as their Prince,
to reduce a Rebellious City to Obedience.

In the mean time the Bishop endeavored by all manner of means to do what
mischief he could to the City. Night and day he played with his great Guns, and
sent in his Bombs and Fireballs which did great Execution. Which so heightened
the indignation of the Townsmen against the Bishop, that because they would not
forget the year wherein their houses had been so ill handled by Fire, they
caused new Colors to be made with these words GaLen InCenDIt VrbeM, The
numeral Letters whereof are M. DC. LVII. With these Colors they marched about
their Streets, and these Ensigns they flourished upon their Bulwarks. As for
their Bishop they gave him no other Title than that of Murderer, and Destroyer
of their City. The women themselves, at other times mild and tender hearted,
animated their Husbands against him, as an Oppressor and a Tyrant.

In the mean time the Pope sent a Letter to the Bishop which did not very well
please him. For that therein he adviz'd him to forbear all farther acts of
Hostility against the City, or otherwise he threatened to Excommunicate him.
The Electors of Bavaria and Saxony wrote to him also to the same effect, but in
vain, for he still pursued his design.

The sixteenth of September the Bombs caused a terrible Fire at Munster, which
lasted from Midnight till Morning. Of all the former Fires this was the most
lamentable. After which the Bishop made a proposition to the City, to receive a
Garrison of a thousand men, and to Cashier their Commander Wittenburg; upon
which conditions they might have Peace. But they by no means would give their
consent.

The three Electors Treves, Mayence and Cologn, exhorted the City to
submission; but all to no purpose. The Citizens exasperated would not be
reappeas'd. The Commonalty encouraged one the other, and lifting up their
hands, cried aloud. Be of good Courage Munster, be of good Courage, the
Hollanders are coming to thy assistance. For the States General had sent them
some succor. Nevertheless they were much endammag'd by the Bombs and Granado's.
Two Churches, and above two hundred Houses were already reduced to Ashes.
Afterward the Bishop made a general Assault, but was repulsed with loss. The
seventeenth of October a Truce was made for four days. Which so enraged the
Citizens, that they openly reviled the Council, and were within a little of
laying violent hands upon them.

All this while the Deputies of the Chapter of the Cathedral, of the Nobility
and the Town did all that lay in their power; so that at length an agreement
was made the twenty first of the said Month. That no person should be called to
account for the troubles past, neither in Munster, nor without the City, nor
suffer either in Body or Estate. That the Prisoners on both sides should be
released. That the Council of the City should retain in their service three
hundred Foot, and admit of five hundred Episcoparians, as also the ordinary
Guards of the Bishops Body, both Horse and Foot. That their Commander should
take an Oath, not to act any thing contrary to the Privileges of the City.
That when the Bishop was in the City, he should give the Watchword, and in his
absence, that the Citizens Council should appoint it. That, in regard the
Dispute about the Keys was before the Imperial Chamber, the issue of their
sentence should be expected. In the mean time, that the Citizens and Council
should open the Gates of the City to the Bishop at all times, when by him
required, or thought convenient, and that they should give him all the honor
and respect due to his Person and Quality. On the other side the Bishop
promises to preserve the Privileges of the City, and the Burgomasters and
Council promise to keep their Oaths inviolably.

The Bishop would not have consented to Conditions so favorable, had not the
forces of the States General been upon their march for the relief of the City.
They consisted of forty five Troops of Horse, and ninety seven Companies of
Foot. This Army made an alteration in the Bishops thoughts, who in the
beginning of December, made his Entry into the City. He was received as became
him, by the Council. The Townsmen were in Arms all along the streets as he
passed. But not a person would uncover to him, as he rode in his Coach, nor
give him those Volleys of honor which are customary: their outward behavior
being correspondent to the inward thoughts of their hearts. And this was the
end of the Siege. Of the besieged about fourscore were slain; but the Bishop
lost above two thousand. This was also the second agreement between the Bishop
and the City concluded in 1657. The former being made in the Year 1655.

Though the Peace were concluded, the Bishop still retained in his service
several Troops and Regiments; and he entered into Alliances with other Princes,
without the knowledge and consent of the Estates, and by consequence, contrary
to their confirmed Privileges. Which caused both suspicion and hatred; so that
there was no good intelligence between the City and the Bishop. The
Burgomasters mistrusted the Bishop, and the Bishop had no affection for them.
This was the occasion of new differences which increased from day to day; from
whence might easily be discovered the flames of a new approaching War.
Whereupon the City sent their Deputies to the States of the United Provinces
who returned with a favorable answer.

About this time a report was divulged over all Westphalia, that the
Munsterians were resolved to admit the public exercise of the Reformed Religion
into their City to oblige the States General. But the Council published an
Edict, wherein they declared this report to be a mere Invention. And thus
things passed on, till the Year 1660. at what time the flames of a new War
burst forth again.

By the Treaty in the Year 1657. It was concluded that the old and new
differences between the two parties, lying before the Imperial Chamber at
Spiers, should remain as they were. At length the Chamber came to a Final
determination, to this purpose, that since the City could not sufficiently
prove their rights pretended in reference to the Garrison, that the Keys,
Walls, Gates, Bulwarks and Watchword should be at the disposal of the Bishop
as their Prince. The Burgomasters and Counselors were much dissatisfied at the
sentence, and craved a rehearing. On the other side the Bishop complained, that
they refused to submit to the sentence of the Chamber, and demanded Mandate of
Execution, which was granted him, if the City at the end of two months did not
fairly comply. In regard then that they did not submit, but sought for Foreign
assistance, upon the tenth of Jan. 1660. the Council received an Order Imperial
that they should recall their Deputies out of the Low Countries, and cancel
whatever had been treated upon, under penalty of Excommunication. Neither had
they above two months time to show their submission to the Chamber, and their
promise of amendment and obedience for the future. And this affair the Bishop
managed so well that all things went according to his wish.

The City trusted in the succors that were promised them by the States
General, who had assured them of assistance, in pursuance of the League made
with the Hanse Towns, wherein Munster was comprised. So that at the same time
the States sent a Letter to the Bishop, desiring him that he would either
pursue his action at Law, or make a fair agreement, lest they should be forced
to concern themselves in the business.

Nevertheless, a little while after the Munsterians sent Orders to their
Deputies at the Hague to return home and desist from Treating any farther. This
was after the Imperial Command.

The Bishop made great complaints against the City at the Emperors Court,
sharply accusing them of disobedience to the Emperors Orders: withal requesting
that the Emperors Orders might be put in Execution. The Council wrote to the
Emperor that they had obeyed, and had Commanded their Deputies home from the
Hague, upon which their being Excommunicated was put off. Thereupon the Bishop,
not being able any longer to curb his unquiet humor, began to block up the City
with his Forces. The Emperor sent to let him know, that he expected, he should
desist from all Acts of Hostility, and permit the City a free Trade. But he
slighted the Emperors injunctions, and pros^cuted his own affairs. Whereupon
the City, for the maintenance of their Lib^rty, put themselves in a Posture of
Defense

The States General endeavored to compos^ the differences, and to that purpose
sent their Deputies to Munster, but without any success. It the mean time the
Bishops Soldiers exercis'^ all Acts of Hostility, spoiling and burning the
Corn upon the Ground, that the Townsmen might have no benefit of their Harvest.
Or the otherside Monsieur Aitzma earnestly recommended to the States General
the care of the Town, to which the chiefest part of the Provinces were readily
inclined, but the Province o^ Holland would by no means consent. At the
beginning of November the Council of the City sent a Letter in C^phers to
Monsieur Aitzma earnestly pressing him to put the States General in mind of
their promises; but notwithstanding all the endeavors of Monsieur Aitzma,
though Friesland thought it necessary; though Guelderland, Overyssel, and
Groningen were of the same opinion, yet Holland opposed them all. Brandenburg
also dissuaded the relief of the City. So that Munster was now left to itself,
not a little complaining against the United Provinces.

The twenty first of Jan. Bernard Zimmerscheyd, the Burgomaster with six others
of the Council, ventured out of Town to the Quarters of the Bishop, where they
were heard by two of the Bishops Counselors. They implored his Highnesses
favor toward the miserable Inhabitants of the City, and besought him for the
love of God that they might be admitted into his presence to understand his
resolutions. Thereupon the question was put to them, whether they did not
acknowledge in the presence of God that they were Rebels. The Burgomaster,
shrugging his shoulders, excused the Magistracy so far, that it was not in
their power to curb the violent humor of the Populacy. To which he was
answered in this language. Obey then the Emperors Commands, disband your
Soldiers, bring the Keys of the City to your Lawful Prince, and receive his
Garrisons, otherwise your Prince will teach you with a far more numerous force
to reverence and obey your Sovereign.

Thereupon in regard there was no Corn left in the City, nor no money to pay the
Soldiers who were already two months in arrears, there was a necessity of
submitting to whatever the Bishop required; which brought them to an absolute
surrender the 18. of March upon these conditions. That the Gates should be
guarded by the Episcopal Troops; that the Citizens should refuse the assistance
of the States General and of all others. That they should pay the Bishop at
present 40000. Crowns, and afterward an Annual tribute of 7. or 8000. Crowns,
upon which consideration they should have their pardons. That six persons
should be excluded from this pardon, who were nevertheless to be free from
Corporal punishment or life. That they should receive an Episcopal Garrison
without limitation. That they should surrender the Keys to the Bishop; and that
whatever concerned the security of the City should be absolutely at the Bishops
disposal.

Scon after, in a great deal of have he began the foundation of a Citadel,
called Munsters Crawbone. He regulated all the Colleges and Fellowships of the
City, and set up a new form of Government, which began to require an account
from some part of those who had formerly born Offices. Four Receivers were put
in Prison upon pretense of having falsified their Trust. One of the
Counselors, excluded from pardon, was constrained to pay the Bishop 2000.
Crowns, and an Ancient Burgomaster as much; after which they were both banished
the Country.

Thus Prince Christopher Bernard reduced the City of Munster under his
subjection. And now he might have lived in quiet, had not his boistrous and
r^stl^ss humor stirred him up to new undertakings; and therefore to find
himself employment, he roused up quarrels that had lain long a sleep. He set on
foot an old dispute, and published a writing concerning the contest about
Borculo; in reference to which affair it was by him alleged, that the Imperial
Council of Spiers had given sentence in savor of the Bishop, declaring that
that Signory was a Fee belonging to Munster, and by consequence escheated to
him. In opposition to this the Count of Stirum had the Decree of the Court of
Guelders, as being in possession, who thereupon, a while after* caused an
answer to the Bishops cla^m to be published in writing. This was done in the
year 1662. The year following the Bishop sent Monsieur Braybeck, Dean of the
Cathedral of Munster, as his Ambassador, to the Hague, where he attended the
States General with a Memorial, desiring them in the name of his Prince, that
they would favor his just demands, and restore to him the Signory of Porculo
and its dependencies, which the Arms of the States had put into the possession
of Count Justus of Limburg, in regard it was done by the Province of Guelders
in the Year 1616. Moniseur De Estrades also, the French Ambassador, was very
serviceable to the Bishop, and smartly put the States in mind of having a
respect to Justice and the Alliance between his Master and the Bishop.

The Deputies of Guelders affirmed that they took the business upon themselves*
However certain Commissioners were named, but nothing more done that Year Next
Year, Monsieur Braybeck pressed the same demand again. For which reason the
States General would have ordered certain other Commissioners to enquire into
the affair. But the Province of Guelders would by no means consent thereto,
because they had pas^d sentence already; as also for that the Signiory of
Borculo belonged to their Province, and by consequence the business concerned
them in particular, and not the Generality.

At the same time the Prince of Lichtenstien had laid claim to a certain debt
which he charged upon the Signiories of Esens, Stedesdorp and Witmond, which
his Mother-in-law had enjoyed by the death of her Brother-in-law. This debt was
demanded from the Prince of East-Friesland, who was by the Imperial Chamber
condemned to pay it. The Bishop of Munster altogether for having his Oar in
every Boat, had so brought it about, that the Emperor offered him a Commission
to put the Imperial sentence in Execution. In the mean time he labored to make
the best use of the Opportunity, and to bring his matters about to his chiefest
advantage.

To this effect, he so wrought it, that these two powerful Neighbors the
Prince and he, under a pretense of hunting the Wild-Boar, should meet together
in Westphalia, in August* 1663. The Bishop was very urgent with the Prince to
deliver him up Eyderland promising in lieu ther^of to take upon himself the
whole deb^ of Lichtenstein, and that he would satisfy the clamer. Had this
proposal succeeded according to hi^ wish* he would have ordered it so, that the
Princ^ of Lichtenstein should have gotten little enough But in regard this
request of his was looked upon as prejudicial to the States General, this
Proposal did nothing please the Prince of Friesland and therefore he objected
several Obstacles; particularly that the said Eyderland was under the
protection of the States General, and engaged for a certain sum of money. So
that no such thing could be done, as well in respect of his Brother, as in
respect of the States, who had a share and interest in this affair.
Nevertheless he took time to consider of it, as a thing that required a more
thoughtful deliberation.

Six days after the Bishop sent Monsieur John Schuylemburg, who was fled from
Groningen, to the Prince to persuade him with all his might to give him the the
possession of Eyderland. The Magistrates of Groningen had sudden intelligence
thereof, and gave present Order to the Commander of the Fort of Langueracker to
seize upon Schuylemburgh with a party of Musketeers; but he having secret
notice thereof, escaped in a Country man's Cart to Aurick; where he showed his
Orders to the Prince of East Friesland, whom he very zealously urged to the
same surrender but had from him a generous denial. So that Schuylemburg by
by-ways was glad to recover Munster as well as he could.

Nevertheless the Prince offered to pay at the Feast of St. Michael or fifteen
days after, at Meppen, in the Country of Munster, to those of Lichtenstein the
Rents of 135000 Crowns, grown due since the end of the last Diet: and after
that at the Feast of St. Gregory, 166^. the Capital of Vianne also, of 135000
Crowns; and in three Years next following, the Capital or Principal of Bierum,
with the Interest. Lastly to pay Annually the fourth part of the Rents
escheated before the end of the Diet, upon condition that the Bishop of Munster
would make good his propositions to the Prince of Lichtenstein, who was not
likely to get better.

The Ambassador of Munster assured the Prince that if these Conditions were
observed he would stay the Execution which he had a Commission to make; which
was put into writing and signed by both sides. The first time was hardly
elapsed, when the Prince desired some little longer time. But the Bishop
unwilling to let slip the opportunity, immediately dispatched away some Forces
from Munster to Eydersconce, belonging to the Prince of East Friesland, to
begin the said Execution. There were not above eight or nine men in the Fort at
that time, because the Prince expected no such sudden Attacque, so that the
Episcoparians suddenly made themselves Masters of the place. Elverfield, whom
the Bishop sent upon this exploit; was more wary in keeping it afterward,
refortifying it, and storing it with all manner of Warlike Provision and
Ammunition.

When the News of the surprise of Eydersconce was brought to the Hague, they
presently adjudg'd the Bishops manner of proceeding irregular, and unhandsomly
carried, in regar^ the States had written to him, that they would pay the first
135000 Crowns either to him, o^ the Prince of Lichtenstein, when they of East
Friesland had given them security for the money, which would be done in a short
time. More than that, they resolved to raise a considerable Force to employ, as
they should see cause, if the Bishop refused to restore the Fort upon the
payment of the first money.

Nor could the States be blamed for interesting themselves in this affair. For
besides that they were obliged to take into their Protection the Prince of East
Freesland; they had just reason to suspect a Prince, who was of such a
turbulent humor as to seek all occasions of quarrelling, and sought nothing
more than to nestle himself upon their Frontiers with a Foreign Militia; a
Prince who demanded from them Borculo and other places; and a Prince who was
not a little supported by France.

These Forces therefore being raised were committed to the charge of Prince
William Frederick of Nassau, Governor of Friesland, consisting of Ninety nine
Companies of Horse and Foot, in all 4971. men.

In the mean time, the States used all their endeavor during the Winter, to
free the Sconce without the effusion of blood. To this purpose they writ to the
Bishop and the Prince of Lichtenstein, offering their mediation; they desired
them to send their Plenipotentiaries to Lierwert, as they would also theirs.
They professed to pay the first upon quitting the Sconce: but they could have
no answer. On the other side Everfield the Governor, sent to all the Bailiffs
and Receivers of Friesland, within a months time to bring with them the
Registers of all the Revenues, and charging them withal not to pay any money,
but to such Receiver as either the Bishop or the Prince of Lichtenstein should
appoint.

Seeing therefore that they could not persuade the Bishop by fair means, the
States General resolved to go on with their designs. However they writ first to
the Bishop, to give him notice of their intentions, letting him know that they
were obliged to protect the Prince of East-Friesland, and his Country against
all manner of violence; and at the same time offered satisfaction for
Lichtensteins debt. At last they adviz'd him before the tenth of May to quit
the Fort and Country, or that they should be forced to make use of such means
as God should direct them.

The Bishop answered, That he had always made it his business to live in a good
Correspondence and Amity with the United Provinces; that he had not been severe
with the Prince of East Friesland, but had given him his own time; and
therefore the States General had no such reason to use such threatening language.

While this Letter was upon the Road the States Forces were marching from their
several Garrisons to the General Rendesvouz. In the mean while M. Brabeck came
from the Bishop of Munster to the Hague to make an accord: and all things
seemed to look with a fair prospect. The Prince of East Friesland was ready to
pay. The Bishop or the Prince of Lichtenstein were ready to receive the money;
so that there was no farther dispute but only about the quitting the Fort. At
length an agreement was made the 25. of May. The Prince of East Friesland was
to cause 270000 Crowns to be paid at Meppel for the first and second payment;
as also 150000 Crowns for Interest. The Bishop of Munster was to give an
acquittance, and the fifth of June he was to begin to quit the Fort, that is to
say, the next day after the payment of the money.

Men thought that now every thing was concluded upon. So that Order was given
to Prince William of Nassan to forbear any acts of Hostility against the Fort,
which was already Besieged, and reduced almost to the last extremity. The 31.
of May, New Style, being the last day of the Truce, and the time appointed for
the Plenipotentiaries of Munster to be at Prince William's Quarters with the
confirmation of the League, four or five persons accompanied with one Horse man
passed from the Prince of Tar^nt's Quarters, who was General of the States
Horse* by Stapelmer, which was Prince Williams Quarrer. Among these were two
Ambassadors from the Bishop. The States Deputies observing it, went to them:
but they told them without any Complements, that they were sent by their Prince
to Treat with the Plenipotentiaries of the Prince of East Friesland, to whom
they were going with that intent. The States Deputies made answer, that they
hoped they had Orders to Treat with them also, as being the States Deputies in
the Army, but they made them the same cold and careless answer as before.

Now in regard it was five hours after the Conclusion of the Truce, and for
that the States Deputies were altogether ignorant of the meaning of so strange
a proceeding; and had reason to doubt whether they were the Bishops Deputies or
no, since they would not declare who they were; besides if they had that
absolute power, that it ought to be examined and known; it was thought fit to
continue the Attacque, as they did the next day. So that the Fort was battered
from six batteries with sixteen pieces of Canon, several Granado's were also
cast into it, which did good Execution.

In the mean time the Bishops Plenipotentiaries got to the Prince of East
Friesland, and produced the accquittance. But all very ill drawn, and which
gave no satisfaction. The Ambassadors of Munster also publicly declared that
their Lord and Bishop could not stand to the accord as it was worded in
wri^ing. So that it being then impossible to discover his designs, signs, the
Siege was carried on with greater violence, and the Besieged were forced to
surrender upon Articles the fourth of June; and to receive the States Garrison.

Several of the Neighboring Princes understanding these proceedings, had no
good wishes for the Bishop, as being a plague both to his Neighbors and his
Subjects. The Princes of Brunswick, Wirtenbergh, and Hessen disapproved his
proceedings, as being a very unjust thing to prosecute an Execution, or to
remain in possession of the Lands Mortgaged, when payment was offered upon just
acquittances. They were more glad to see the Eyder Sconce taken by force, than
that it should have been quitted by agreement; to the end the Bishops wings
might be in some measure clipped. For such an Execution had not been made in
several Ages; And should it come to be used, none of the Neighbors could hence
forward be secure, since few Princes were to be found without teeth.

Thus ended this War, which was but the beginning of another that followed, far
more dangerous. The turbulent Bishop, who had already been in Action against
the Prince of East Friesland, the Count of Bentheim, the Count of Styrum, the
Count of Floderf and others, studied to make use of the first opportunity to
assault and revenge himself upon the States General. But it behoov'd him to
stay till some other Prince, more potent than himself, should think it
convenient to make use of him: An opportunity that soon presented itself. For
the English being then engaged with Dutch in a bloody War, and prudently
designing to find them work by Land, as well as by Sea, make agreement to that
purpose with the Bishop, and furnished him with money. Who thereupon immediately
began his Levies and raised a considerable Army, both of Horse and Foot. It was
not known where the storm would fall; So that East Friesland, Oldenburgh, and
all the Neighboring Princes were much concerned. The States General and their
subjects were no less startled in regard of the great preparation which the
Bishop made of Bombs, Granados and other Fireworks.

The States had most reason to be jealous that the storm would light upon their
heads. And therefore they Levied an Army of 4500 Horse, and 40500 Foot, of
which 5600 were designed for the Sea. It was also necessary that the Forts
should be provided, and therefore because those Forces were not sufficient,
they resolved to take into their service some of the Lunenburgh Companies. They
also advertised the King of France of the Bishops preparations, proposing at
the same time whether it were not convenient to prevent the Bishop of Munster,
and send a flying Army into his own Country, and to carry the heat of the War
thither, rather than to suffer him to enter the Low Countries. But the King of
France did not like that proposition, judging it more proper to stay and
observe which way the Bishop would move. For otherwise the whole Empire would
be in an uproar, if they should attacque the Bishop first. The Low Countries,
said he, has Enemies enough; and therefore it is not good for them to awake
sleeping Lions. The Bishop is of no such importance, but that it will be easy
to put a stop to him. And therefore it will be better to abide his small power,
than all the Force of the Empire. This Counsel was approved and followed.

At length a Trumpet arrived at the Hague from the Bishop, with a Letter to the
States General; which was indeed no more than a Declaration of War. He first
complained of the affront and damages which he had received, which obliged him
to demand satisfaction; and to secure himself for the future. To which end he
placed his refuge in God, and the succors of the Potent Princes his Allies,
which the Providence of God had raised him. That the States General had nothing
to do to meddle with the Execution of the Sentences of the Empire. That they
had fallen upon his Country contrary to all Equity. That they had plundered the
Houses of his Nobility. That they had deprived the Husbandman of his labor;
they had tormented, beaten, roasted his subjects; they had not spared God
himself; they had handled the Cross of Christ worse than the Turks would have
done; burnt his Churches, dishonored the Sacred Host, and taken Eyder Sconce
from him in despite of the whole Empire, regarding more their own interest than
the advantage of East Friesland: all which he was then forced to suffer, having
sent a part of his Troops to assist the Emperor against the Turks. That they
detained from him his Signiory of Borculo; and moreover, that the Court of
Guelders had condemned him in the sum of 150000 Livres* They had taken, and put
to the rack severa Roman Catholics, out of a hatred to their Religion. All
which things he had sent to let then know, to the end they might give him
satisfaction and security for the future, etc.

The States made answer that they had never made War upon him in his own
Country; only that they had been constrained the last year, where he entered
their Territories, and took from then the Fort of Eyder Sconce, to repel Force
wit^ Force: and that they had not only given him, but the Emperor an account
of their actions That they have been always obliged to protect East Friesland
against all violence: being no^ only a Frontier of their Dominion, but engaged
to them for several great sums of money. Tha^ though their Army had marched
through some part of his Territories, yet that plunder and pillage had been
restrained under pain of death. That they could not imagine such a spoil of
Churches and Temples, but that it was only a pretense to color his designs.
However if any such damage had happened, he ought to have demanded
satisfaction at the time when the crimes were committed, and not eight or ten
months after. And therefore the States might with more justice require
satisfaction from him, since he had put them to such vast charges for the
retaking of Eyder Sconce, which was engaged to them: which when they had done,
they meddl'd no farther with him. That they were surpised at his demand of
Borculo, as a Signiory which they detained from him: When it was well known
that that dispute had been ended, not by Judges interested, but by such as had
been chosen by both parties. In the same manner was the business of the 150000
Crowns, which he owed to the Count of Styrum, brought to determination. That it
had been always their desire to live in Peace and Friendship with him, but
since he had attacqu'd their Forts and Places of strength, and had begun to
harrass their Territories, they would not neglect any means, that God should
afford them, to bring him to reason, till they had received full satisfaction
for the damages which they had sustained.

The Bishop was so high and so hasty, that he would not stay the return of the
Trumpet, nor the States answer: but of a sudden enters Overysel, harrasses the
Country with Fire and Sword, made himself Master of Euschede, Oldenseel,
Ommersum, Almelo and Diepenheim. H^ found Borculo quitted, only there were in
the Castle a hundred men Commanded by Ensig^ Eek, who plied their Guns so well,
that he wa^ forced to sound a Retreat after he had sustain'^ no small loss. But
he renewed the Assault wit^ more men, and tired the Garrison with numbers, till
they were forced to surrender. Afte^ that followed other places, which could
not defend themselves, as Lochum, Wildenbergh House Dorts de deutecorn, etc. so
that the passage of the Issel lay quite open.

The States General were very much disturbed at an Invasion, so terrible and so
unlookt for* They had to do at the same time with the pui^sant King of England
and the Bishop of Munster* There was a necessity for their Ships to be provided
with men, and their Forts and Frontier Towns with Garrisons, which caused so
great a scarcity of men that they had hardly enough to withstand the Bishop.
Thereupon they made new Levies and sent the Count of Waldeck to the Princes of
Lunenburgh for a supply of 6000 men. But they refused without the consent of
the Elector of Brandenburgh; and he refused, unless they would suddenly quit
Orsoy, as also the Castle of Guennip and Emmerick or the Wessel, when the Peace
should be concluded with the Bishop. The Elector also desir^d the States, that
their Garrisons in the Cities of Cleves should forbear to make any incursions
into the Country of Munster, as he had also requested of the Bishop that those
Garrisons should not be molested by him. Nevertheless the King of France sent
them above six thousand Horse and Foot, the choicest men which he had in his
service, Commanded by M. Despradelles, a valiant and experienced Captain.

As for the Bishop of Munsters Forces they committed all sort of outrages
imaginable: For in regard he seldom paid his Soldiers, but left them to
subsist upon Contributions and Plunder, every one pillaged and robbed for
himself. The Emperor offered his Mediation to the States to reconcile the
difference; but they answered that they could not enter into a Treaty till the
Bishop had quitted all the places which he had taken. They also wrote to the
States of Munster to persuade the Bishop to restrain his men from committing
those murders, and acts of violence and cruelty, in that barbarous and unheard
of manner, and to quit the places which he had taken, or otherwise that they
should be sound to proceed against them both in general and in particular
according to the common Customs of War.

In the mean time the Bishop had sent a part of his Forces into the Province of
Groaning. They marched over the Moor or the Bourlang to the Convent of Ter
Apellel, and made themselves Masters of it. Which caused a great Ter^or at
first, but the fear was soon over. The Dutch got together about four hundred
Foot and eighty Horse. These between Sellinguen, and Lipzenbuysen, set upon
1600 Episcoparians, killed a good number and took a hundred Prisoners. The rest
fled to the Marshes, and in great fear quitted Ter Appellel, the Dutch in this
enterprise not having lost above thirteen men.

Another Party of the Bishops Forces, consisting of five thousand men, made an
Incursion into the Drenth, and marched directly to Groningen. At the Bridge de
Punter they were repulsed with loss: but near Suydhaven they got over, thinking
to have surprised Winsschoten, and Beylinguerde. Prince Maurice came with equal
Forces to Scheemte and Miende with an intention to have enclosed them in, but
they made a shift to get out another way.

The most part of the Bishops Army caused a continual fear all along the Yssel.
The Bishop himself lay at Deuteron, where he caused the Country people of
Troent and other Places to acknowledge him for their Sovereign and to come to an
agreement with him, that two thirds of the Crop should belong to him; and one
to the Husband man. Here the reproach which the Ambassador of France cast in
his teeth, in the name of his Master the King of France, was a a sharp one,
That though he were an Ecclesiastical Lord, he had falsifi'd his Faith, since
he had engaged to France, not to enterprise any thing against the Low Countries
without his Masters knowledge, which promise he had ignominiously broken. He
desired assistance at the Diet at Regensbergh. But it was answered him, that he
had undertaken that War of his own head, without any provocation of the
Hollanders, and therefore even let him end it of himself. The Empire did not
think it convenient to meddle with needless and unprofitable Quarrels. If he
had brought his affairs into confusion, his best way would be to quit himself
as well as he could. Several of the Roman Catholic Religion, repaired every
day out of Holland to the Bishop, some out of hopes of booty, others to assist
him and to exterminate those that they called Heretics, and with an intention
to spread the Roman Catholic Religion. Whereupon the States issued forth a
public Placaet, that they should return again within fifteen days upon pain of
death or perpetual Banishment.

The Bishop being repulsed in the Province of Groningen, harrass'd and ruined
all the Villages that could not defend themselves. His Troops that had been in
Wischoten, and Heyliguerlee, for want of Provision, were retreated into the
Country of Westwoldinger while the States Troops retook Lochum. After that the
Army of the States increasing and the Lunenburgh Troops approaching, the States
of Munster began to fear being overlay'd on the one side by the States Forces,
while the Lunenburghers assailed them on the other; and therefore sent their
Deputies to the Bishop, and the Bishops Counselors themselves represented to
the Bishop the danger he was in, desiring him to think of Peace. But he made
them answer either in his sury or else in his despair. He would hazard all
Westphalia in this enterprise. Let the worst come to the worst, he had nothing
to lose.

The States had a design to visit the Bishop in his own Country; for which
purpose they had already 17000. men upon the march: but the fierce cold of the
Winter then approaching stopped their progress, so that the Soldiers were
forced to retire into their Garrisons. The Bishops Troops also quitted the
field, after they had offered Battle to the Hollanders. Between Delden and
Enschede they attacqu'd 1200 Horse and Foot, who were sent to make themselves
Masters of the Castle of Wickelen, and put them to a considerable defeat: and
thus ended the Year 1665.

The next Year the Elector of Brandenburg^ had taken the States part, upon
certain conditions, and labored to reconcile the differenc^ between the States
and the Bishop. The State were altogether for Peace, and the Bishop saw that
the Fortune of the War began to turn, for he was wholly expelled out of the
Province (...) Groningen, and the Commanders for the Stat^ General were
preparing to lodge their Troops i^ his Territories so soon as the season would
permit; which made him bend his Ear to an accord; to which end he desired
nothing more than a meeting at Cleves.

In the mean time some attacques were made by parties of both sides, but of
little consequence, till at last a Peace was concluded in April, upon several
conditions, The chief of which were, That there should be an Act of Imdemnity
for all, except Traitors. That the Bishop should quit all places which he had
taken during the War. That he should withdraw his Forces out of all the
Territories of the States Dominions. That the Bishop should disband his Troops
after the Ratification on both sides, and should retain no more than what the
Mediators should determine to be sufficient for his Garrisons, which was 3000
Horse and Foot, and that he should not raise any new Levies unless it were for
the security of the Empire, or of his Alliances, provided also they were not
prejudicial to this Treaty. That the Bishop should quit all Alliances
prejudicial to this Peace, and never make any new War against the Republic.
The States for their parts oblige themselves to perform the same promises on
their parts. That the Bishop shall quit his pretenses to the Signiory of
Borculo and its dependencies, without prejudice to the rights of the Empire.
That neither the Bishop, nor his successors nor his subjects should intermeddle
with any affairs that concern the States General. That the Emperor, the King of
France, the Electors of Mayence, Treves, Cologne and Brandenburgh, the Bishop
of Paderborn, Pal, Nieubergh, and the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, shall
be Cautionaries for the observation of these Articles.

This was the sudden conclusion of this War so suddenly entered into. The
confirmation and publication whereof was made by the Bishop the 20. of April,
with these words. Promising to observe and inviolably to follow in all points
and clauses the said Instrument, and not to suffer any proceeding or act to be
done against the said Articles.

But within a few years after it appeared how well he kept his word.

The Bishop had also sought to pick a quarrel with George William Duke of
Brunswick and Lunenburgh, concerning the Office of Herbstad, and other things.
As also against Ernest Augustus Bishop of Osnaburgh, touching the City of
Hoxter. But these things were also adjusted in the Treaty with the States: so
that the Bishop was constrained to quit his unjust pretensions.

The time agreed upon for the Bishop to quit those places which belonged to the
States General being come, the Bishop raised still some new Cavils first in
regard of the Prisoners, and then as to the Contributions; touching the
quitting of some particular places; concerning East-Friesland; and as to some
damages which he had sustained. This was the occasion of another meeting at
Noordhorn in the Country of Benthem, and another Treaty in the month of June.
He evaded after a strange manner some words of the Peace: by which it appeard
that it was sorely against his will, that he quitted Borculo, for he kept that
place as long as possibly he could. And being pressed to performance by M.
Syburg the States Envoy, he cried out, My City of Borculo; my City of Borculo,
that belongs to me both by the Law of God and men! Than after a short sinlence,
he added, I will take care that it be quitted.

After the conclusion of this Peace the States recalled to mind the
inconveniences they had suffered upon the Frontiers of the Spanish
Low Countries, not only from the Munsterians, but also secretly from the
Spaniards themselves under the name of Munsterians. For that reason they
resolved to make their complaints at the Court of Madrid and to demand
satisfaction by M. Rensmoude then their Ambassador in Spain. To which purpose
they send him a Letter to this effect for his Information.

At what time the Bishop of Munster was designing to a attacque this
Commonwealth, he was known to have made public Levies at Brussels, Lovain,
Anwerp, Gaunt, Bructelst, Guelders, Santvliet, Lier, Gueel and other parts.
Some of the Governors and Officers of the King of Spain were so kind as to
Cashier their own Troops and Companies, and suffer them to List themselves in
the Bishops service, which was the reason that so many Robberies and Violences
were committed against the subjects of this State by those that quartered in
the Spanish Frontiers. Gentlemen of Quality were massacr'd in their Houses and
Castles; many were taken Prisoners, beaten, put to ransoms, or carried away with
their goods. These Munsteria^ Birds of Prey always made their retreats to those
places where they had been raised under the Jurisdiction of the King of Spain.
There they were in safety, there they sold their stolen good belonging to the
subjects of this State: not i^ huggermugger, but publicly; as if the Frontiers
of the King of Spain lay only for a convenient prejudice to the Low Countries.

The States had made their complaints by their Deputies to the Spanish
Ambassador, requirin^ satisfaction and security for prevention of the like
disorders for the future: but yet no recompense was made to their content and
sati^faction. On the contrary the Levies co^tinu'd publicly, and several
places were assign^ within the Jurisdction of the King of Spain f^ the
Rendesvouz of those Levies. Whole Companies marched out of Brussels for Wille^
broeck, and all by the connivance of the Ma^ques of Castle Rodriguez Governor
of the Low Countries.

In the said places they had formed designs against several of the most
important Frontier Cities and Garrisons belonging to the States, of Breda,
Clundert, Willemstad, Lillo, etc.

Of these and several other vast injuries and damages they had often
complained, but could never obtain satisfaction.

These and many more complaints the States ordered their Ambassador to exhibit
to the Court of Spain, to which the slow Spaniard had not time to give an
answer this Year. So that the so long talked of Year 1666. made its exit with no
other advantage to the Hollander than the Peace of Munster. But in the Year
1667. that unquiet man of God began again to make considerable Levies both of
Horse and Foot. The States General having intelligence thereof, and no way
confiding in him, wrote him a Letter, to let him know, that it was conorary to
the seventh Article of the Treaty, seriously requesting him to desist and not
to give his neighbors just occasion of jealousies and suspicions. Thereupon he
returned the States this answer, That when he had made a Peace, it was his care
to keep it. But considering the great Levies made by his Neighbors, he could
not but think it convenient to raise so many men, as were allowed him by the
Constitutions of the Empire, the Instructions of the Peace, and the privilege
of Princes. However that he had no design to employ them, but only for the
security of his own Country, and no way to the detriment of his Neighbors,
more especially of their Lordships the States General. What should they do? For
they then knew not how to rely upon the words or protestations of the Bishop,
yet they could do no other than seem to be satisfied with his Apology.

The same Year he caused more disturbances by choosing for his Coadjutor
Ferdinand de Furstenbergh, Bishop of Paderborn, Prince of the Holy Empire,
Count of Pyrmont, etc. against the consent of most of the members of the
Chapter, who would fain have chosen the Archbishop of Cologn. But the Bishop
of Munster spoiled their design, by excluding some of the members, inveigling
others with fair promises, and menacing others, and so by force advancing the
Election of the Bishop of Paderborn.

But to put a specious gloss upon this Election the Bishop published a large
relation thereof, of which we will give the Reader an abstract; only it must be
considered, that this was the Bishops own work, and that therefore he framed it
after the most advantageous manner for himself. In the forefront he places
Pope Alexander the sevenths Letter, being a serious exhortation to him to take
a Coadjutor and a Successor.

Pope Alexander the seventh.
Venerable Brother, our greeting and Apostolic Benediction. The Letters which
we have sent you from time to time, apparently testify how much we are
overjoyed to understand with what care you interest yourself in the advancement
and establishing of the Catholic Religion, and that you have reduced to your
Obedience the Rebellious City of Munster. But in regard that both experience
and Histories assure us, that the Benediction of prosperity loses its glory,
when we take no care to Establish what we have acquired, and do not make use of
the means which we have learnt to our cost by the same experience, and by which
the Universal Religion and Peace may remain inviolable. Methinks therefore
there can be no better means to take away all occasion of disputes that may
arise after your death, by the Election of a Successor, than to think of taking
a Coadjutor, to cut off all opportunity of discord which may reduce your
Country to confusion and misery. And therefore we exhort you seriously to
deliberate speedily with your Chapter concerning this matter. And if you are
engaged, according to the custom of some Chapters in Germany, not to take a
Coadjutor without the knowledge and consent of the Chapter, we discharge you by
virtue of this our present Letter from any such obligation, and give you withal
the Apostolical Benediction.

Written from Rome the 16. of September, 1665. The eleventh Year of our
Pontificate. J. Florentine.


There are some who have made the following remarques upon this Letter. 1. That
the Bishop, according to the opinion of those who were acquainted with the
business, made it his own request to the Pope for this Letter. 2. That those
who are called the Vicars of Christ are of a different judgment. Pope Innocent
the X. would never confirm nor acknowledge for lawfully Elected Bishop
Christopher Bernard. But Alexander the VII. was no sooner mounted to the Papal
Chair, but both Confirmation and Legitimation were allowed. 3. How it is
possible that the Roman Catholics should confide in their Princes, whether
Ecclesiastical or Secular, seeing the Pope can so easily discharge and
disingage them from their Promises, Oaths and Allegiances confirmed and
concluded even among the Roman Catholics themselves.

The Bishop received this Paternal exhortation with a wonderful respect; and in
regard he had been acquainted with the disorders in the last Election, he
earnestly desired to make choice of a Coadjutor. To this purpose he caused the
Members of the Chapter to assemble the 23. of May, where he proposed his design
by two of his Counselors; who in a short speech represented to them, that it
was not unknown what praiseworthy actions his Highness had performed in the
beginning of his Government, having delivered and retaken the Forts and Cities
of his Country, as Coesweld, Veche, and Beverguere. That he had composed
several differences with a most pious care and zeal; that he had reduced the
City of Munster to his obedience, and so firmly settled Peace within his
Territories, that all his Subjects quietly enjoyed the Estates which God had
blessed them with. But since his Highness was now in the Sixtieth year of his
Age, and that by consequence he could not expect to live long; as also for that
to prevent the disorders of Elections, his Holiness had adviz'd and exhorted
him by his Letters, to take the first opportunity to choose a Coadjutor and
Successor; He was resolved so to do. He knows, said they, that there are
persons capable of the Employment both here and in other places; but his
Highness would propose no-person in particular. If they had a mind to choose
any Neighbor Prince, or any other Catholic Prince, he would by no means be
their hinderance, but leave the Chapter to its liberty. To which he expected a
fair answer.

Then the Popes Letter to the Chapter was produced as follows.

ALEXANDER VII.
My welbelov'd Children, our greeting to you, and our Apostolic Benediction.
In truth you have not deserved a little honor, for having assisted your Bishop
in reducing and quieting the City of Munster, and in the confirmation of the
Catholic Religion. But you will be thought worthy of a greater honor, if by
yonr unanimous Counsel you establish upon solid foundations what you have s^
happily obtained: But since experience tells us that after a Voyage
prosperously performed, there is most danger to be feared at the entry of the
Haven itself, you have the same reason to fear that after the decease of your
Pastor and Bishop (if while he is yet living, you do not take care to choose
another Successor in his place) lest the winds of discord should drive your
Vessel upon dangerous Rocks, and cause you to lose what you have acquired with
so much labor. Therefore We admonish you that in order to Ours, and the will
of your Protector, to whom We have discovered the thoughts of Our heart of Our
own accord, setting aside all partiality, you assemble unanimously, and make
choice at least of such a Coadjutor, who is to be also your future Successor,
whose virtues and merits may be able to sustain so ponderous a weight. And to
you, my beloved Children, We give Our Apostolical Benediction, as a Father.

From Rome the twenty sixth of September, 1665. In the eleventh year of Our
Pontificate. J. Florentine.


This Letter being Read, and the Bishops Agent withdrawn, the Chapter fell to
debate the proposal. Some of the Canons of the Cathedral Church were of
opinion, that the affair was of that importance, that it required a longer time
to be considered of: and that the question ought to be put, whether a Coadjutor
were to be chosen? and this too to be consulted at leisure. Others thought it
more convenient to comply with his Holinesses Exhortation, and his Highnesses
desire, who better knew the condition of the Church and Country. Nay they
thought they had already neglected too much time in fulfilling the Popes will,
who had desired a settlement of this affair toward the end of the Year 1665.
and that now the Year 1667. was far spent, by the intervening of several
accidents, and that by consequence the business ought to be no longer delayed.
Thereupon it was carried by the major part of voices, that the 19. of July,
should be appointed for the Election of a Coadjutor, and that the Letters of
Citation should be dispatched, notwithstanding the Protestations of the rest.

Thus there happened a great contest between the Members of the Chapter, not so
much in reference to the Person, whom they intended to choose; but whether they
ought to admit of a Coadjutor or no. As for the Protestations of several, they
were little regarded. Others say, that the Bishop had packed the voices under*
hand; and that he had gained to his party some by promises, and others by
threats.

In the mean while the Elector and Arch Bishop of Cologn, Maximilian Henry, had
tran^ferr'd his Canonship of Munster upon M. Ern^ Leopold de Bockenford, the
Baron of Neselr^ his, upon M. Armand Theodore de Bockenford and the Baron de
Lebradt his, upon M. William de Wene, whose Plenipotentiaries appeared (...)
Munster in the Month of June, and there demanded, that after the usual
examination (...) their Nobility, their Masters Escutcheon mig^ be publicly
hung up in the Chapter house. The two first were refused, as not having right
(...) admission into the Chapter. The first because the Translation was made
from one kins^ to another, contrary to the Edict of Pope Pi^ the V. The second,
because it was adjudg^ that the Letter of Transportation was def^ctive. However
the first was admitted; pe^haps because they durst not offend an Elect^ and an
Archbishop.

Armand Theodore de Bockenford, and Hen^ William de Wend, protested three days
aft^ against the resolution of the Chapter; and persisted for hanging up the
Escutcheons. T^ Dean thereupon, a second time, consulted the opinion of the
Chapter, laid before them the inequality of the voices, to which he added his
own, and pronounced Sentence, that the Escutcheons should be hung up, though
the rest that opposed it had at least as many voices as the Dean, according to
the Episcopal Narrative.

These so ordered it, that not only the Escutcheons were not hung up, but also
took away the Deans vote, that theirs might be the more effectual. And for so
doing, they urged, That they had permitted him to be Dean for so many years
upon sufferance, whereas he was no Priest, which the Dean ought to be, and that
notwithstanding, that by virtue of that obstacle, he was to have no voice in
the Chapter, according to the Canon Law, yet he had always given his voice in
all things. But now they from whom he had taken the plurality of voices, by his
second vote, being no longer satisfied, had taken from him the privilege of
voting, till he had showed the Bishop his admission into the Order of
Priesthood. Beside that they had sufficient to object against the Translation
of the Archbishops Canonship upon Ernest Leopold de Bockenford, and therefore
they publicly protested as well against his reception, as against the hanging
up of his Escutcheon; though it had been before unanimously consented to,
because, at that time, there was no obstacle to the contrary.

Others relate this affair quite after another manner than the Episcopal
Narrative. That is to say, that the Bishop would not have the three new Canons
received by those whom he had packt, because they should not act against them
in the business of their Escutcheons. And that they had excluded the Dean,
because they knew he would not be a party in their Cabals. That for the same
reason also he was to lay aside others, of whom he had hitherto taken no
notice, notwithstanding that their sentiments and actions were then as well
known as now. That they themselves who now refused the Dea^ and the other
persons, had a hundred times solicited them for their voices upon other
occasions, and without any opposition, had acknowledged them for lawful. That
the Bishop by this and his consequent Actions would bring it to pass, that
those who did not exactly approve his designs, should oppose him on purpose,
that he might thereby take an occasion wholly to exclude them.

Seeing then that the Members of the Chapter (that is to say, they who had
excluded the said persons) were jealous lest the Dean, as also the Vicar Baron
of Bucholtz should find a way to make any farther interruption, either by
giving their voices illegally or by any other means, they requested his
Highness to stand by the resolutions which he had taken, by all manner of
expedient means, and to forbid the Dean upon a penalty to give his voice any
more; that the errors already committed might not spread themselves any
farther. Now because the Bishop could not refuse this request, as well for that
the fact was apparent, as also that he might not seem to neglect Justice and
the Holy Canons, he commanded the Dean in writing, to forbear giving his voice
in the Chapter, till he had made himself out to be a Priest. This same Dean was
M. Jodocus Etman de Brabeck, whom the Bishop had formerly employed to the
States General to demand the Signiory of Borculo, and upon several other
Affairs. Besides that, he excused the Dean from his Employment, as being
accused by a part of the Members of the Chapter, for having acted against some
Ecclesiastical Laws in the Translation of Prebends, etc. Which suspension
should continue, till such time as he had the Popes Absolution. This he caused
to be published by his Commissaries in the usual place.

In the mean time the Ecclesiastic Fiscal had made an exact search into the
lives and conversations of those Gentlemen who had voices in the Chapter,
knowing that the Sacred Canons excluded all from the Election who were
punishable. And thereupon, a certain Ecclesiastical Person was accused before
his Highness, for having publicly kept a Concubine four and twenty years, and
for having to do with several other women, to the great scandal of the Clergy
and people; Besides that in the Administration of the Arch-Deaconry, he had
assumed to himself a greater Authority than the Pope, dispensing, with an
unsufferable arrogance, with several Marriages in the first and second degree,
and commanding the Priests to finish those Marriages which he had concluded
Lawful. Which things being known and not punished by the Dean, therefore they
desired, that for his negligence he might be suspended from his Employment.

The Bishop presently consented, and caused publication thereof to be made in
the usual place. The same misfortune befell two others. It Is true they Appealed;
but their Appeals were rejected.

Upon the 16. of June, being the same day that the Bishop was to attend the
Funerals of the preceding Bishops of Munster, by eight of the Clock in the
Morning came a Public Notary to him as he was just entered into the Church in
his Epicopal Habit, and ready to be attended up to the Quire by the body of the
Clergy, and put into his hand a writing from the Dean, to let him know, that
though neither in pursuance of his Oath, nor by virtue of any agreement, he was
obliged to take upon him the Order of Priesthood, of which there were several
Presidents to be produced, not only in the Diocese of Munster, but in several
other places; nevertheless that he had received the Order of Deacon the second
of July, and the Sunday following the Order of Priesthood; and consequently
before the publication of the Decree by which his vote was taken from him,
because he was no Priest; and this was confirmed by the Copies of two writings
annexed.

The Bishop took them without any appearance of being displeased at the
importunity of the Notary. But he remembered him for all that the same day, to
the end he might take it for a warning not to be sawey another time; telling
him withal that he should produce the Originals, because the Copies were not
sufficient. Two days after the Notary came more confidently than before with
his witnesses, and by an unusual way getting into the Antichamber, showed
himself to the Bishop, then just Habited in all his Formalities, and ready to
go to hear Divine Service, accompanied with his Chaplains, Canons and
Courtiers. He was so offended, that he gave the Notary a bloody rebuke,
commanding him from thence forward, not to come any more without leave before
Persons of his Quality; or if he had any thing to show him, to give it to his
Vicar General. The Notary obeyed, and gave the Originals to the Vicar General,
to prove that the Dean was both Deacon and Priest. But the Bishop still found
out something or other to cavil at. As that it was done by another Bishop, out
of season, without any necessity, etc. Beside that, he commanded him to prove
that he had observed all those things which the Church of Rome injoyns upon the
like occasions. Thus the Episcopal Narration. Others go further, accusing the
Bishop not to have done well by the Dean and other persons, and that by these
delays, and denyals to hear their justification, he only kept them in
suspense, till the Election were past, according to his desire.

We have told you, that the day of Election, was by one part of the Members
appointed to be the 19. of July. The 18. was the Feast of St. Maximus the
Martyr; whose Relics had been brought six years before into this City with a
great deal of Ceremony, as being given by the Pope to the Bishop, and were
showed in the Cathedral, where they were put for the defense of the Diocese, in
the place of those Relics which the Anabaptists had burnt a hundred years
before. But it is observable, that the Feast of the Relics was kept a day
before the Feast of St. Maximus. The second day, the Bishop would needs go to
Church, with all his Episcopal Ornaments. But because the day before, contrary
to the opinion of all men, there was but a small appearance of Canons to wait
on his Highness to the Quire, he was apprehensive that the same thing would
happen at this great Ceremony, to his shame and the scandal of the people, who
were wont to flock to that Procession. And of this he was the more jealous,
because contrary to his Orders, they had decreed a meeting of the Chapter upon
the Festival-day, at a time when they should be at Divine Service, and without
any necessity.

So then when he thought that the Canons were assembled in the Quire, he sent
his Lacquy to let them know, that he intended to come to Church. But contrary
to his Orders, they were got before into the Chapter House to debate about the
admission of the three new Canons. Thereupon the Lacquy went to the oldest
Beadle, to tell the Canons that the Bishop was prepairing to come to Church.
But though he were come very near it with all his Court, there was not one that
stirred forth to meet him. Thereupon the Beadle was sent a second time to tell
them the Bishop was at hand. A great part of the Chapter upon that seemed
willing to rise, but the Deans party over-persuaded them not to stir, desiring
not only the admission of the three new Canons, but also of another young
Canon, whom they had sent for with a French precipitation.

In the mean while the Bishop stayed at the Church door, to be conducted by the
Canons through the body of the Church to the Quire, and to receive the
Holy Water Pot from the chiefest of the train, but all to no purpose; not a man
stirred, but only one, who told the Bishop that the greatest part were ready to
obey him; but that the rest would not consent. For this cause he made a
protest, by his First Chaplain, and Apostolic Notary upon the contempt which
they had put upon him in the Face of the whole world; and withal sent word to
the Canons of the Chapter to come forth and do their duties, by giving him
those honors and respects which were due to him, being at the Church-door and
in his Episcopal Robes; or else that he would pronounce sentence of suspension
against them all for their disobedience. Upon which they put it to the vote,
and the major part carried it, that they should obey, and break up the Chapter
for that day. Though others were of opininion that they could not be
constrained by threats to attend upon the Bishop as he commanded them: but that
it was at the good will and pleasure of every one; and that therefore the
Assembly should not dissolve. Now when the Bishop had stayed a long time in
vain, he was fain to march by himself through the body of the Church, to the
Quire, madded at the very heart, and not a little to the astonishment of the
rest of the Clergy, Magistrates and people. After the offering of the
Sacrament, he assisted at the Caonnical Prayers for the Vicars and Canons and
after that, at the great Service of St. Maximus the Martyr. In all which time
not one person appeared, to the great scorn of his Highness, and scandal of the
Clergy, till at length the Chapter breaking up, the Canons came an hour after
and seated themselves by the Bishop who had performed Divine Service alone by
himself.

The Bishop was deeply concerned at this affront; and therefore he thought it
absolutely necessary to make an example of some, to the end he might reduce the
rest to submission and obedience. And therefore by virtue of his Episcopal
Authority he discharged four of the Members of the Chapter, till they should
make submission by a public satisfaction and recantation. This he gave them to
understand by the Popes Notary, before the Charge of the Holy Ghost. Among the
four, three were Archdeacons, and of them one was the Bishops Chaplain. That
very day had been appointed for the Election of a Coadjutor, and therefore the
Charge of the Holy Ghost was to be celebrated in all the Churches. The Bishop
also resolved to assist at that Mass, of which he gave the Canons notice, who
were met at six of the Clock in the morning; at what time one of the Canons
showed four Copies of the Metropolitan, in favor of the three new Canons,
which could not be admitted, as also of the other three whom the Bishop had
punished with suspension: signed the sixteenth of July.

One part of the Chapter which they say was the least, desired that the Copies
might be read, and that they should be submitted to before they saw the
Originals. But the major part were of opinion that they ought to receive the
Copies, as coming from the Metropolitan, with all respect, but that they should
forbear to read them, because they had had a second notice that the Bishop
stayed for them at the Church door. Thereupon the most part went to meet the
Bishop; Others protested against them, as if they had refused to read the
Metropolitans Letters, and submit to them; and stayed in the Chapter House.

The Bishop offended at their obstinacy, and their refusal to give him the
honor which was due to him, commanded them by a Notary to attend in the Quire
upon pain of suspension, but though he sent a second time, they took no notice
of it. After Service was ended, the major part again returned to the Chapter.
Whereupon the Vicar, Lord of Bucholts, caused a Protestation to be openly read
by the Secretary; and afterward made another Protest by word of mouth against
violence and oppression; adding also that he made his Appeal; which being
entered, he presently withdrew out of the Chapter, being followed by ten other
Canons.

The Bishops party made a Counter Protest. After that the Metropolitans Letters
were read; but because it was not mentioned whence they were written, they were
somewhat suspected. Thereupon they also Protested against the Letters, and
Appealed. In the mean time, the Bishop sent to the Chapter, to tell them, that
he had pardoned the four which he had Suspended, and that therefore they had
their liberty to take their places in the Chapter, and to give their votes
truly at the Election, as well as the rest. It Is thought that he had brought to
his bow those whom he had Suspended; lest otherwise, the choice, made by an
Assembly not complete, might be taken for illegal and of no force. Or,
according to the opinion of others; because he thought them to be so highly
offended, both they and their Favorites, that they would scorn to accept of so
small a favor, and that therefore he should thereby have a good occasion of an
excuse for excluding his opposers, as being their fault. And indeed instead of
appearing, they declared publicly that they could not be present at the
Election, nor consent to it because of their suspension; as also for that the
Metropolitans Orders were not obeyed, and that they had begun the Election
already.

Answer was made to this Protest, That there was no person hindered or excluded
out of the Chapter. That the suspension, of which themselves were the cause,
was taken off, so far as concerned the Election. That the Metropolitans
Originals had never been seen; That the Election was not concluded, and
therefore they had still their votes, and Liberty to speak freely.

Now after they had expected two hours the return of those that were sent,
there was but one of the whole number that returned to give their votes. And
therefore those that were present proceeded to the Election, and chose for
Coadjutor and Successor to the Bishopric of Munster, Ferdinand Bishop of
Paderborn, Prince of the Holy Empire, Count of Pyrmont, Canon of the Chapter of
this Province: who notwithstanding he was in possession of the Bishopric of
Paderborn, yet might be Elected Coadjutor and Successor to the Bishop of
Munster by virtue of an Indulgence from the Pope, which was shown. But some
concluded from hence, because they had seen the Indulgence before, that the
Bishop had laid his Plot with the Pope before hand, and then with the Canons
of his Faction.

We have handled this matter the more largely, to let the Reader see that as
our Christopher Sernard was advanced to the Episcopal Chair, by the quarrels
and dissentions of the Chapter, it was in the same manner that he chose to
himself a Coadjutor and Successor to his Bishopric. But trouble and turmoil
haunted his unquiet and restless spirit as the shadow follows the substance.

In the Year 1668. the King of France had again invaded the Low Countries,
under the Jurisdiction of the Spaniards, taking Cities one after another; and
for that reason the States General thought it necessary to arm themselves for
War, as well for their own preservation and security, as to put themselves into
a condition that might render them able to procure Peace between the two
Nations. To this end they treated with Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh for a
supply of 600 Horse, and 3600 Foot. This small Army had no way to get into the
Low Countries, but with great loss of time and many inconveniences. And
therefore the States sent the Sieur De Amerongen to the Bishop to acquaint him
with this affair, and to desire him, that those Forces might march the nearest
way through his Territories, promising that his Subjects should not receive the
least detriment thereby. The Envoy also from the Dukes of Brunswick and
Lunenburgh made him the same request.

The Bishops answer was, that in August last past, he had entered into an
Obligation with the Electors of Mayence, Cologn, and the Duke of Nieuburgh, not
to assist either of the two parties, as also not to permit the march of any
Troops through his Territories, and that therefore he could not consent to
their request, till he had sent notice thereof to his Allies before hand, to
know their minds; to whom he also offered to send an express for that purpose.
The Sieur De Amerongen remonstrated to him, that this permission of passage did
not enterfere with any thing that he had concluded with those Princes; because
the State, had not raised those Troops, but to be capable to make War, with an
intention to procure Peace, and that they had not the least design to make use
of these Forces against either of the two parties, unless constrained by utmost
necessity. But all those persuasions wrought nothing upon him: He spoke fair
enough, but he persever'd in his first answer, though by the first Article of
the Treaty which he had made with the States, he were obliged to permit their
Soldiers free passage through his Country.

At last upon the urgent importunity of the Sieur De Amerongen, he told him,
seeing that the Peace was already concluded between France and Spain at Aix La
Chapelle, that he thought he might give Liberty, at least he would not impede
the march of the said Troops of the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh through
his Country, provided they did no wrong to his Subjects, but paid for what they
had; which was promised him. At this Conference the Bishop twice assured the
Ambassador with great asseverations, of his good intentions to the States, and
that he had resolved to live by them in a good correspondence and as a friendly
Neighbor.

In the mean time he had violated the Treaty which he had concluded with the
States, as having already made considerable Levies. To one Footman he gave
eight, sometimes ten Crowns; and all the world knew, that it was not out of own
pocket; so that when they added to this his so long time refusing the free
passage of their Soldiers, they could not but of necessity suspect him. And
indeed the plot that lay concealed under these probabilities appeared
afterward. He was in truth Allied to France, and made his Levies with that
Kings money, to Attacque the United Provinces. Certain Counselors also of that
Bishop had already written into Holland, before that Monsieur De Amerongen was
arrived in the Territories of Munster, that it would be a difficult thing for
him to obtain Liberty for the States Soldiers to pass that way. Nor would he
have ever consented, had not the King of France, over-awed by the Triple
Alliance, made a Peace with Spain. For though the Bishop made use of the
foresaid excuse, he had secretly sent to the King of France to know how he
should behave himself upon such a ticklish point, and had obtained the Kings,
before he gave his own consent.

By this Peace the Bishop was no longer in a condition to assist France, nor to
execute the designs which he had projected against the Low Countries.

Now though that in the Treaty of Peace with the States General he had quitted
all his pretensions to the Signiory of Borculo; yet it was always his eager
desire to have that Territory united to the Bishopric of Munster. And as an
argument for it, the Munsterians everywhere discoursed, that their Bishopric
was the only Bulwark against any Enemy that had an intention to invade the
Provinces of Guelders, Friesland, Groningen and Embden; so if the Estates,
would but keep a good Correspondence with the Bishop, those Provinces need to
stand in fear of nothing. And therefore it would well be worth their while to
quit that stumbling block, and surrender Borculo to the Bishop. But because he
well knew that he should never obtain it by specious pretenses, he still made
it his business to lay hold upon all opportunities to get that Signiory into
his clutches by force; and as much more as he could. But the Peace had put a
conclusion to that affair: however that he might not be idle, he occasioned new
Trouble in Westphalia.

The Count of Benthem had renounced the Reformed Religion and had made public
profession of the Catholic in the City of Coesvelt. O this, people discoursed
variously, as their affections lead them; some thought that the Coun^ finding
his affection grown cool for his (...) Wife, was desirous to Marry another, and
t^ put the children which he had by the first into* Religious House. But there
was no probabilit^ of his doing this, so long as he professed the R^formed
Religion. But being turned Papist, the^ was a likelihood that the Pope would
easi^ permit him, who dispences with many things more heinous than that.

Others think that he was persuaded there (...) by the Bishop of Munster,
desirous to prejudi^ the Low Countries by the loss of so eminent^ person as the
Count.

However it were, so soon as the Count had changed his Religion, the Bishop
began to concern himself in his affairs. Presently, with a party of Horse and
Foot, and fourteen pieces of Canon, accompanied with the Count of Benthem he
claps down before the Castle of Benthem, believing that the Countess, who was
within it, would stand upon her defense; by reason that the place being built
upon a Rock, is so well Fortified by its situation, that it is impregnable, and
can only suffer by fire. But the Countess, having sent her four, others say six
children to the Hague, sent her Husband the Keys of the Castle, into which the
Bishop and the Count entered both together.

The Sunday following the Bells rung to Sermon as formerly; and the Gentlemen
and servants belonging to the Count, with other people assembled to Church, as
they were wont to do. But when the Minister came to perform his duty, they
would not let him come in, telling him that he had nothing now to do there.
This very much surpised those of the Reformed Religion, but there was no
remedy but patience. Immediately after that, the Fort was surrendered into the
Bishops hands to be kept by his Soldiers under the command of a Major, The
Catholic Religion was introduced and exercised therein, and the Jesuits had
an allowance of Lands and Goods bestowed upon them to build a College there.
The Countess was carried to Munster, and lodged in the House of the Sieur
Romer, a Burgomaster of the Town. From thence she wrote a Letter to some of her
intimate Friends, assuring them that her trust was only in God, and that for
all the world she would not alter her Religion.

In the mean time the Bishop of Munster told some of his Friends, that he
wished with all hi^ heart, and that he would give some thousands that the
States of the United Provinces would concern themselves in this business, that
h^ might but have an opportunity to march against them.

Nevertheless he sent to the States to assu^ them he had no ill intentions: and
that he would live by them like a Friendly Neighbor. That h^ had done no
injury to the Reformed Religion in regard it was freely allowed in the Town^
Benthem. But when they demanded of him t^ have this promise put in writing, he
refused i^ The Town of Steinfort, wherein the Count w^ lately deceased, was
kept by his Garrisons, und^ pretense that it was a Fief of his Diocese.
Nevertheless he let alone the nether County of Benthem, and also Schuttorp and
Nyenbuys being a Fief belonging to the Province of Over Yssel.

Certain it is that the Bishop had had a piqu^ at the Count of Benthem for many
years, an^ in the end you find how he brought his design^ about. He writes a
Letter to the States General upon this Subject, signed at Hostmer the 14. of
September, 1668. that the Soldiers who had been before the Fortress of
Benthem, were absolutely free from the Oaths of Fidelity which they had sworn
to him, and Cashiered out of his service; and that presently after they had
given their Oaths to his Imperial Majesty, to the Holy Empire, to the Circle of
Westphalia, and the Holy County of Benthem; which was testified by the Count
himself in a Letter dated from the Castle the 28. of August; and yet the Bishop
in the same Letter, immediately after the words already recited, says, We must
confess that we did assist the said Holy Count, for the security of his Castle
and Person.

Thus hitherto the Flames of War between the States of the United Provinces
seemed to be in some measure extinguished; and yet upon every slight occasion
you might perceive that the Embers were but covered up, to kindle the materials
of a new fire. This same Prince, altogether given to quarrel, never desisted
from making his Levies, either privately or publicly; which gave the States
General sufficient occasion, and that not without reason, to be jealous of his
proceedings. For they knew him too well, to be deluded by his fair words. In
the Year 1669. he augmented his Levies to a very considerable number. Yet no
person could dive into his intentions. He assembled the States of his Diocese:
and though by his last Wars they were very much impoverished, for he not only
shore his Sheep, but flayed off their skins, he demanded of them a considerable
sum of money; that is to say, that they should furnish him between the Feast of
the Purification and Easter, with a hundred seventy five thousand Crowns, and
as much more between Easter and Michaelmass.

The Estates would by no means agree to this, because the Bishop had not
dismissed certain Troops of Horse, and several Reformado Officers, without
which being done, they would not break up their Assembly; for they were
certainly assured that he was meditating some unnecessary War. The Bishop to
inveigle them, and the better to obtain his ends, dismissed the Lieutenant
General of his Artillery, a Major General, three Captains, six Lieutenants, and
four Ensigns: but the deceit of his heart was quickly discovered, by his soon
after Listing these very Cashiered Officers again into his service. And besides
this, he kept an exact correspondence at Paris; the French money was also very
plentiful at Munster; which bred no small mistrust among his Neighbors.

In the midst of these Transactions, the City of Hamborough began to taste of
his turbulent spirit. Some persons had persuaded him, that they could find a
quicker passage for the Post-Letters that passed and repassed through his
Countries, if they might be furnished at Haerburgh and not at Hamburgh. The
Bishop very inclinable to lay hold of this opportunity, ordered that all
Letters and Pacquets directed into Holland should be sent back; and stopped up
the Post-Road. This caused the Magistrates of Hamburgh to fix upon their Posts,
that no person should send any Letters to the Low Countries, but by the
Post-Masters of their City, and because the Bishop would admit no Posts but his
own to pass through his Territories, and still raised great Forces besides,
publicly giving out that no person should prescribe him Laws in his own
Country, there was some apprehension that this affair, first stirred by the
Trouble-world of Munster, would come to the decision of dry blows; the rather
because the Dukes of Brunswick were also concerned.

At that time the States General began to mistrust the King of France, fearing
that he would one day invade their Dominions, because that by their good
management, they had prevented him from making himself Master of all the
Low Countries, knowing he had no kindness for them ever since. As for the
Bishop, too many things were variously reported of him every day, that no body
knew what to believe. Fear and terror so possessed the Country of Guelders,
that many people retired into the strong Holds of Doesburgh and Arnheim; which
caused the like consternation in all places through which they passed, though
there were nothing certainly known which way the Episcopal Troops intended
their march. The Inhabitants of Grol were no less in fear, because that some of
the Bishop^ Troops were seen roaving about the Country every day: but their
dread increased upon the report that the Bishops design was upon Borculo,
Hoogheim, Holten or some other place.

The same thing was reported of Groningen^ but without any certainty. It was
also said that some other German Princes were in Confederacy with the Bishop,
and that when their forces were joined, they would make up a ve^ puissant and
numerous Army; but that fear ha^ no foundation at that time, in regard things
were not yet ripe for action. In the Year 1670 he picked a new quarrel with
Duke Radolph Augustus of Brunswick Wolfenbuttel, about the City of Hoxter, six
Leagues a this side Casse^ Ever since Martin Luther's time, and the Wa^ of
Smalcald, there had been great contesting about this place between the Duke of
Brnnswick, Lunenburgh, and the Abbot of Corvay, to whom this City belongs with
five or six Villages, the yearly Revenue whereof amounted to 5000 Crowns. But
at last this affair was determined, and the agreement approved at a Diet of the
Empire.

Thus it remained till the death of the last Abbot, after whose decease, the
Monks of that fair Abbey had chosen the Bishop of Munster to to supply his
place, though not by a unanimous consent. And now was it possible that he, who
was so little a lover of Peace, should let such an opportunity as this fall
asleep? There were at Hoxter two Protestant Churches, of which there was no use
made; and therefore he wrote to the Duke of Brunswick, Lunenburgh, to request
one of them for the Roman Catholics. But the Duke, as Protector of the City,
made him answer, that he would never consent that the Privileges of the Cities
should be taken from them, but that he would preserve them, according to the
abovementioned agreement, and the Peace made in the Year, 1649. And thus the
business rested till some differences arose about the privileges of Brewing;
So that the Duke for the preservation of a Protestant City, was forced to send
some Companies both of Horse and Foot to Guard it.

The Bishop of Munster was highly offended at the placing of this Garrison in
the Town, and as he was one that sought all occasions of contention and War, he
thought he had now found a smart opportunity. To this purpose he wrote
immediately to all the Electors and Catholic Princes, except the Duke of
Nieuburgh, complaining of the injury done him, and exclaiming against the Duke
of Brunswick, as a disturber of the Peace, who supported his Rebel Subjects
against him that was their lawful Sovereign, and hindered the exercise of his
Authority in his own Territories: desiring therefore the Catholic Princes to
send him their assistance for the recovery of his right, and for the reparation
of the damage and shame which he had undergone.

Besides all this, he published a Manifesto* wherein he endeavored to justify
his pretenses, laying all the wrong upon the Duke, making use of very sharp
expressions, and laying aside all thoughts of composure and accommodation,
saying that he was resolved to prosecut^ such a disturber of Christendom.

The said Duke having read the Letter, published a Counter Manifesto, wherein
he declared that the Bishop had not touched at all upon the most considerable
matter; and that he founded his right upon an ill grounded process touching the
Brewing of Hoxter. The Princes of the Circle of Lower Saxony, nay the King of
Sweden himself had written to the Bishop, advizing him to forbear such
oppressions, and to leave the City the full enjoyment of their Privileges: the
same thing did the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh* But the more they
requested Lenity, the more rigorous and tyrannical was he: so that the poor
people were almost ruined. He had taken from the Council of the City, their
Judicial power in Civils; so that they only retained the shadow of a Magistracy
without any Authority, and all this under pretense of their having Mortgaged
their Jurisdiction; which was false. Or granting that were true, yet could not
he be Judge in his own cause, nor assume to himself all the Jurisdiction as a
Judge; much less to Levy such unheard of and cruel Executions, which had hardly
left one Beast upon the Lands belonging to the City. Nay the Execution Cart had
been in every Street in Hoxter, where the Bishops Officers took away their very
Victuals, Bread, Meat, Bacon, their Linen and Beds from under them, etc. The
Officers of the Council of Hoxter were also imprisoned for executing the
Commands of the said Council, and new Prisons were made to shut up the
Burgesses of Hoxter themselves, as fast as they could catch them.

Now by the Peace of Munster and Osnaburgh in the Year 1649. the privilege of
the Brewing was particularly confirmed to the Town according to its Ancient
Rights. Though afterward they were somewhat disturbed in the enjoyment of their
Grant, because they would not suffer their Beer to be sold by the Province of
Corvay, which they had always wont to do formerly. On the other side the Bishop
had permitted the Secretary of Corvay, called Maule, who was neither Brewer nor
Citizen to exercise the Trade of Brewing in the City, whereby the Citizens were
deprived of their Livelyhoods, contrary to the express engagement made by those
of Corvay in the Year 1656. and 1649.

Four or five Citizens refusing to obey the privileges of the Magistrates in
the matter of Brewing, opposed themselves against the Magistrate, brake into
the Town House, and would have killed the Syndick, if the other Burgesses had
not prevented them. Beside that they made their complaints to the Regents of
Corvay, where the Bishops Counselors heard them very kindly, protected them,
and encouraged them to farther mischief against the Syndick and others. The
Council and Burgesses of the City perceiving what the others drove at,
publicly protested against their Illegal Actions, by a Notary and two
Witnesses. Moreover the Burgomasters and Council of the City wrote to the
Bishop of Munster, humbly laying before him the Illegal proceedings of the
Regents of Corvay, requesting him with all submission to provide a remedy
against them. Which evidently shows, that the Citizens of Hoxter had no design
to withdraw their obedience from their Sovereign, but only to remedy disorders
by way of Justice. Besides that, it was a dispute between Citizens and
Citizens; and therefore to be decided by the Council of the City.

But at length, after the Inhabitants of Corvay were resolved to proceed to
execution, and had taken away the Citizens Cattle, they began to put themselves
into a posture of Defense, finding also the Country people in Corvay in Arms;
so that they were afraid of being surpised, the Gates and Walls of their City
being almost ruined. It Is true, the Bishop vaunted in his Manifesto, that he had
used the City of Hoxter very kindly; and that he had exacted nothing from them
for the support of the common exigencies. They answered, that the world might
judge by his actions of the favors he had done them, and that therefore his
asseveration was not true. For so soon as he was entered upon the Regency, he
had laid new Impositions upon Cattle, which nevery an Abbot before had done.
Moreover when the Infantry and Cavalry of Munster returned from the War of
Hungary, the City of Hoxter had quartered them all, without the least
Contribution of the Province. They had always paid the Taxes of the Empire and
Circle. He had demanded a thousand Crowns of them for his Wars against the
Turks. He required them to pay their share in the Tax upon the whole Province,
though he had taken from them their Brewing Trade and removed it into the
Country, quite contrary to the old agreements between the Province and the
City; and instead of redressing, he had rejected their complaints, and more and
more oppressed them.

Therefore they made it out by the Peace of Munster, that the City might put
itself into a Posture of Defense against all Oppression, by the words of the
Article, which says, That if by neither of these two ways, (that is Composure,
or Law) the matter could be determined in three years, They who are interested
in the instrument of Peace, shall Unite their Forces, take Arms, and withstand
the oppressor. By which it appeared, that it was lawful for the Duke of
Brunswick to assist the Citizens, and the rather because he was their
Protector, and for that he had no other aim than to defend the privileges of
the City, and to guard them from oppression. The Bishop indeed had declared
that it was not for Subjects to seek for protection without the consent of
their Sovereign. But to that they answered by the express words of the Imperial
Agreement in the Year 1555. Provided that this shall be no pretense to hinder
them, who have been long in possession, from putting themselves under
protection.

The Bishop had also declared that the Protection of the City of Hoxter did not
belong to the Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh; But that was made out to the
contrary by the Letters of Protection of Otho and Magnus Dukes of Brunswick and
Lunenburgh in the Year 1332. by the Testimony of Timon, Abbot of Corvay; as
also by several examples in the Years 1416. 1434. 1450. 1500. 1517. 1553. 1633.
etc.

To which they added what was expressly concluded in the accord between the City
and the Province. That no Abbot shall be admitted to the Regency, unless he
shall engage and subscribe beforehand to observe the agreements made with the
City, and to maintain the Rights and Privileges thereof, which was done by the
Bishop of Munster as Administrator of Corvay: and consequently they had never
sworn fealty to him.

It was concluded therefore, because the Regent of the Province of Corvay had
robbed the Citizens of almost all their Cattle, to the number of above 450 head
of Cows and Oxen, besides Horses: because he had Armed the Country people;
because he had so many ways Tyrannically oppressed the City, and for that the
City had earnestly desired his protection, that therefore the said Duke could
not but put a Garrison into the City. Which he did not do till he had demanded
of the Regents of Corvay restitution of the Cattle, offering sufficient caution
withal, that they should have what they requir^d, in case the City were found
to be in the fault. To which they gave no other reply, but only that the affair
concerned him not at all, but only the Bishop of Munster.

All this while the Bishop of Osnaburgh meddled on neither side, only offered
his service toward an accommodation, testifying by his Envoy how much he was
troubled to hear these disputes. One would have thought the Bishop should have
thanked him for his hind proposal; but the Munsterian took it so ill, that he
held him for his Enemy, and threatened him with open War, if he would not
promise not to molest him in the retaking of Hoxter.

As to the complaints of the City of Hoxter put up to the Diet of Regensburgh,
against the Bishop of Munster, they were five in number, concerning
Ecclesiastical matters, and thirty two as to Civil affairs. That contrary to
the Peace in the Year 1649. by which the City was repossess'd of all their
Prerogatives both Spiritual and Secular, he had introduced the exercise of the
Roman Catholic Religion, and had by violence taken away from the Protestants
the Church of St. Nicolas, and given it to the Franciscans. That he had erected
a Tribunal of Spiritual Catholic Justice, as he called it, wherein he exacted
Fines, and punished those who had been already punished by the Council of the
City. That he cited before his Tribunal the Citizens, Counselors and Ministers
of the Protestant Religion, and condemned them in great Fines; which if they
refused to pay, his Officers seized upon their Houses. That he constrained the
Council under severe penalties to elect Popish Burgomasters. When they made
Holy Day for the Festival of St. Vit, at Corvay, he caused all the Country
people of the upper Villages of the Province with their wives, children and
servants, to march through the City Drumming and Singing and carrying about
their Images and Baubles, to the great scandal of the Protestants. If it
chanced that this Feast of St. Vit happened upon an Easter Day, he suffered the
same rabble to come to the Protestant Church-door and there to make such a
disturbance that the Minister was forced to leave his Pulpit.

In Civils, he had acted directly against the said Peace. He had taken from the
Magistrate all their Authority as well in Civils as Criminals which they had
enjoyed for many Ages. If the Burgomasters and Counselors offered to punish
any Malefactor according to their duty, he laid severe Fines upon them, and
levied them upon their Goods both within and without doors. He laid an
execution upon Burgomaster Wildenborer, because he had stood up for the
privileges of the City, above sixteen Years before, in the time of the
deceased Abbat. He had taken from them their Right of Brewing, by which it was
granted, that all the Beer, bought in the Town should be bought of the Citizens
only. He had refused them their ancient right of Imposts. That he had
constrained the ruined Citizens to quarter three whole Regiments of Horse and
Foot, and to provide them Fire, Salt, Meal, etc. with several other oppressions
and breaches of their privileges too long to recite.

In the mean while Colonel Bentink arrived at the Hague in the month of
November, 1670. to acquaint the States General of the cause of the Levies made
by the Bishop of Munster, that is to say, to punish the obstinacy of the City
of Hoxter in the Province of Corvay: adding withal that his Master,
notwithstanding all the reports to the contrary, had no other intention toward
the States, than to be their good Neighbor and Friend, his design being only
to maintain his own rights against the Dukes of Brunswick Wolfenbuttel and
Lunenburgh. After that, he departed from the Hague for Amsterdam and Vtrecht to
buy Arms for his Master. But the States of the latter Province understanding
his Errand, wrote immediately to the States General, desiring that the River
Yssel might be carefully guarded, more especially that the Garrison of
Doesburgh might be reinforced; because the Bishop of Munster had quartered
several of his Soldiers about Brevoort, which City was in the Road to the
Low Countries, and not to Hoxter. Thereupon it was resolved that the Citie^ of
Guelders, Zutphen, Trise, Over-Yssel, and Groningen should be strengthn'd with
an addition of 4000. Horse. In a short while after the Bishop sent a Letter, by
a Trumpeter, to the States General, wherein he wished them all prosperity for
the ensuing year, offering to send them some of his men, so soon as the
differences between him and the Dukes should be composed, in regard that the
States had been so kind as to offer their mediation in the quarrel.

In the mean time the King of France made great Levies both Horse and Foot.
Insomuch that the Spaniards were afraid that he would Quarter his Soldiers
upon them; but the King of France assured them of his sincere intentions to the
Queen of Spain. However the States of the United Provinces knew not what to
think. For the King bent his course toward the Conquered Cities of Flanders; in
May he arrived at Tournay; and in June, he turned again toward France. At last
all the world perceived that he had make all his Warlike preparations against
the Dukedom of Lorrain; for in a short time he made himself Master of all that
Country. Nevertheless he ceased not to raise new Forces continually, and at the
same time he made ready a certain number of Men of War. He was wonderfully
offended at the Prohibition against the importing of Wine and Brandy into the
Low Countries, though all the world perceived that he intended little good to
the Dutch. In opposition to this Placaert, he forbid his own subjects to lade
any Strongwater or Brandy in Dutch Vessels. He also laid an Imposition of
twenty four Livres Paris, upon every eight Tuns of Salt Herrings coming from
Holland, which afterward he augmented to thirty two Livers, and three months
after to forty. He laid thirty per cent. upon all sorts of Spices, beside the
former Impositions.

In April 1671. by the singular diligence of the Mediators, George William, and
John Frederick Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, the King of France, the
Archbishops of Mayence and Cologn, an agreement was concluded between Duke
Radolph Augustus and the Bishop of Munster upon the following conditions. That
the Duke of Lunenburgh should quit Hoxter to the Bishop. The Bishop promised
for his part not to injure the City, nor the privileges belonging to it, by
the Ancient Constitutions and the Peace of Munster and Osnaburgh; That the
Citizens might make their complaints where it was proper; or else to the Bishop
himself, who promised to hear their complaints by indifferent Judges. In case
the Citizens found themselves aggrieved by the sentence, they might Appeal to
another Judge, etc. Thus he promised much but did nothing.

It was accorded by this provisional agreemeent, that the Bishops Garrison,
which he should put into this City, should not consist of above sixty or
seventy men at most. But the Lunenburghers had no sooner quitted the City but
he sent thither above 250 persons, their Wives and Children being comprehended
in the number. Which caused an immediate grudg^ because they were a great
charge to the City.

The Citizens cried out, that they had capitulated only for a Garrison of sixty
or seventy men, and not for their Wive. and Children: whereby they saw that the
Bishop sought all the ways he could to ruin a Protestant Town: the Soldiers
being allowed to commit great disorders; beating the Burgesses, and spoiling
their goods, whereas the Lunenburghers paid to a farthing for what they called
for.

And now it appeared every day more and more, that the Bishop was hatching new
mischief against the States, which was verily thought, could not be long
concealed. Prince Maurice of Nassaw, being then at the City of Wesel wrote to
the States, that about 800 of the Bishops Horse were come to Quarter in the
Village of Dingen, which belonged indeed to the Territory of Munster, but was
not above a League and a half distant from the City of Wesel; and that for that
reason he had taken orders for the defense of that City. At the same time news
was brought of a Shepherd that had been taken sounding the depth of the Moats
about the City of Wesel.

In the mean while the Bishop had convened the States of Munster, who had
promised him 100000 Crowns, to be paid at four payments by equal Portions in
four months. About the same time also several Officers flockt to him, most of
which he took into his Service, and gave them Commissions to raise men in his
name.

This excessive Levying of men not only disturbed the States General, but also
all the Bishops Neighbors: and the report went, that Cologn should be first
attacked, our Bishop having an Army of above 32000 men. Besides he had caused
600 Chests to be made of Firr Wood, filled with the Bullrushes, every Chest six
foot square, and to be fastened together with Iron Hooks; so that in a little
time he could make a Bridge over any River, though never so wide. But while he
labored to inflame his Neighbors Territories with the fire of War, a fire of
another nature seized upon the City of Munster itself, to its considerable
damage. This fire began, in April, at a certain Covent in the City, which it
not only burnt down, but also consumed to ashes about three hundred sixty
Houses more.

In Autumn, the same year, the King of France sent a large sum of money into
Germany, of which the Bishop had his share. And now the States General thought
it time to look about them. England still stuck upon their skirts; and
therefore they resolved at length to raise a numerous Army, and fortify their
Strong Holds. But these Resolutions of theirs could not well be put in
execution, because they could not agree in the Election of their Captain
General. For some of the Provinces stood for the Prince of Orange, but others
would by no means consent to that Election.

In the Year 1672. the designs of the State began to manifest themselves more
clearly. And yet the Bishop of Munster who well knew to whom he had sold
himself, was so confident as publicly to assure the Sieur D'Amerongen of his
intentions inviolably to observe the Treaty last concluded between him and the
States* but however he could not in civility deny a free passage to the Forces
of his Allies. For all the while he suffered the French to crowd into his
Diocese, pretending streightness of Quarters, but in truth to be near the
places upon which they had their first Eye.

At length, in the month of April, what had so long time been with so much care
and policy concealed from all the world, disclosed it self to the view of all
men. The King of France had joined with the King of England, and both declared
War against the States General in one day. The King of England in his
Declaration, gave his reasons that induced him to it. But the King of France
gave none but his own humor and his discontent.

The Dutch being thus beset, the Duke of Luxemburgh accompanied with the Bishop
of Strasburgh takes a journey into Westphalia to the Bishop of Munster, there
to consult the best way to Master the Provinces of Over-Yssel, Guelders,
Vtrecht and consequently Holland. Toward the end of April 1672. the Bishop
rendevouz'd his Forces; and in May he published his Declaration against the
States, containing nothing but Accusations, which indeed were no more than
supposed and false pretenses. He accused the States for having dealt under hand
partly by promises, partly by offers of ready money with the Officers of his
Forts and Cities, to have fired his Magazines, to have stirred up his Subjects
to Rebellion, the more easily to make themselves Masters of his Towns and
Territories. That they had caused several attempts to be made upon his person.
That several fires had happened in his Towns, Signiories and Villages, not
without strong presumption that they were done by the States Emissaries. And
therefore because such Barbarous actions were detested by the very Turks
themselves, it behooved the Bishop to take care as well of his own Person as of
his Subjects. For which reason he commanded all his Officers and Governors to
have a vigilant eye upon all such kind of persons, and to apprehend them as
Spies, Boutefeus, and Traitors: and lastly he forbad all manner of Commerce
with the Inhabitants of the Low Countries, under penalty of Confiscation.

Thus we see this Grand Mercenary (for so he was generally called) now in a
readiness to invade the Territories of the States, contrary to his Oaths, his
Promises and Alliances.

In that month of May the King of France began to put his designs in Execution.
The first day of the month, the Towns of Rinborch, and Orsoy were invested
early in the morning by the King himself, Wesel by the Prince of Conde, and
Burich, by Monsieur de Turenne. Just at the the same time the Bishop quitted
the Country of Benthem, and marched into the Province of Tuent. He took,
without much resistance, the Cities of Enschede, Oldenzeel, Otmarsen, Almelo,
Borculo, Lochem, Deut^chem, and other small places. He also commanded the
Forces of the Elector of Cologn and besieged the City of Groll, which was well
Fortified, but was surrendered the ninth of the same month.

What relyance is there in those who have only the Title of Ecclesiastics?
When Charles the fifth passed through France and was Nobly Treated by Francis
the first, notwithstanding their past bloody Wars, the King of France was
highly applauded, for that he had so inviolably kept his word in reference to
the free passage of the Emperor. Upon which he gave this answer, that though
there were no such thing as Faith and Truth among men, yet that it was
absolutely necessary for Kings and Princes to acquit themselves of their
Promises. But we found it otherwise; for upon the 16. of April the Archbishop
of Cologn published a Placaert of Neutrality, which nevertheless, in six weeks
time he utterly broke by open Acts of Hostility. Yet there was this difference
to be observed between the Bishop of Munster, and the Elector of Cologn. For
the Bishop offered himself voluntarily to the King of France, and sold himself
to make War against the States General, but the other was with great difficulty
and reluctance persuaded to break the Neutrality.

After the taking of Groll, the Bishop of Munster made himself Master of
Brevoort. From thence he marched to Deventer, in which City they had forbid the
Trumpet, that keeps Watch upon the Tower, to found the Tune of the Song made in
praise of the Prince of Oranges Great Grandfather to the present Prince. They
had also forbid the Organist to Play, and the Ministers to Pray for the Prince.
They had also denied the Pulpit to one of the Ministers, because that in
numbering the sins of the people, he had made mention of their ingratitude to
the House of Orange. The Author of the Holland Mercury relates; that the
principal Persons of the Province of Over-Yssel, because, they were much in
debt, were frequently wont to say at their Meals; Come, all will go well enough
yet; I hope to make my Fortuncs as well under the power of the King of France,
as under the present Government. If this be true, we need not wonder, that by
the means of such Rulers this City and so many others surrendered so easily and
with so little resistance to the Enemy.

The 13. of June the Bishop encamped before Deventer, for the defense of which
place there was nothing wanting. The fourteenth he made an attempt to drive off
the Cattle which fed round about the City, but was repulsed. Upon the sixteenth
he opened his Trenches; and had the Townsmen had the sole power in their hands,
both Munster and Cologn would have sound work enough to have employed them a
far longer time; but what ever the reason were, it was surrendered the twenty
first. This put 1 250 Dutch Burgomasters, already much in debt, to a worse
plunge. For first they took away from them all that they had, and then
constrained them to pay for their ransom 65000 Livres. Those that were in
power had broken down the Bridge of Deventer, as they pretended, to prevent
unnecessary Sallies from being made upon the Enemy, though several gave their
advice to the contrary. However it pleased the Bishop extremely, who was heard
to say that time, Now I see that the Traitors have kept their words. See the
Holland Mercury, Part 23. p. 81. The same said the Engineers, after the taking
of the Town, which was surrendered after the midnight of the day before
mentioned, without any necessity at all, without any notice given to the
Council of War, and without the knowledge or consent of the major part, or as
others report, of any one of the Burgomasters. More than that, they very
ignobly forgot to make any provision for the Soldiers of the Garrison, so that
they all remained Prisoners of War.

The twenty second of the same month, the Bishops men sat down before the City
of Zwoll, wherein they carried their business after such a manner, that the
Enemy found no resistance at all. The Author of the Holland Mercury gives this
account of the Action. Part 2. p. 82. Colonel Vnico Ripperda relates, that
coming the 17. of June, with his Regiment to Zwoll, he found himself to be but
an unwelcome Guest, etc. The eighteenth the Command of the Troops of Over-Yssel
was conferred upon the Sieur W. V. Aylan, who in the presence of Colonel
Bampfield, and other Officers adviz'd the Inhabitants of Zwoll to fortify
their City. But they gave little heed to him and less to the Deputies of
Groningen, who would have had them have stopped the course of the River, called
the Black* Water, so to have drowned the Country round about. To which purpose
they brought money to carry on the work, but they talked to people that would
have no Ears. The twenty second the Bishops men entrenched before the Twon; at
what time a certain Burgomaster of Deventer. whose name was Le Espiere, with
another called Benting de Brokelingcamp and a Trumpet from the Bishop entered
the Town; and the said Le Espiere made a long Harangue in the Town House.
Thither went Colonel Bampfield to see how affairs were managed, but they looked
upon him with an evil Eye. They had, as it is reported, already in the morning
singed the agreement to surrender the Town, upon Deventer Conditions. To make
sure of Bampfield they desired him to march into the City with his Regiment,
which he did. And then he and Ripperda went to the Town House, and entering into
the Council Chamber, there they saw the Wine and Glasses upon the Table with
which they had treated Le Espiere, who upon their coming in, went out at
another door. The Burgers would have Treated them, but they refused it, telling
them that it was then no time to drink, but to defend the Town. Bampfield
proposed pulling down the Suburbs and making no agreement with the Enemy,
without advising with the Officers of the Garrison. Offering to lose his head
if they had not better Articles six weeks hence than then; desiring them not to
sell their Liberty and Religion. To which, it is said, that the Burgomaster
Crans made answer, What likelihood have we to defend ourselves with 1200
Soldiers and as many Townsmen, when the Town of Deventer, so well Fortified
and provided with all things could not hold out six days? As to the pulling
down the Suburbs, they said, they could give no answer without consulting the
Counselors of the Commonalty, whom they would call together to know their
Resolutions. The Colonels advised them to do it instantly, and to send for the
Captains of the City Trained Bands, but they refused it. Then they asked them
why they had sent back the Trumpeter? Answer was made, that Le Espiere had don
it. Bampfield asked them if they would send Commissioners to the Bishop? They
replied, If we send Commissioners the rest of the Troops will not march toward
the City. What then, said the other, must we be Prisoners of War? The answer
was, They that signed the Commission will be exempted. To which the Colonels
replied they would neither do that, nor be Prisoners of War neither, and so
they returned to the Trenches, saying that they would make another manner of
agreement. One of the Magistrates cried, If you return, you will lose the
benefit of the Capitulation. But Bampfield answered, it would be better to dye,
than make such an agreement. And so both the Colonels the next night left the
City and preserved their men. The Magistrates made their advantage of the
Colonels retreat, saying, that being abandoned by the Soldiery they were
sorc'd to surrender, as they excused themselves in their Printed Apology.

Whether sudden consternation or Treachery were the cause of these things is
only known to God. But most certain it is, that the Bishop, with little or no
hazard, made himself Master of the Cities of Deventer, Zwol, Campen, Hassels,
Swart-Sluys, Blochzyl, Steenwich Moppel, Fort de Ommen, and also of Kuynder in
the Country of Frize.

Thus in a few days he had subdued the whole Province of Over-Yssel being
assisted by the Archbishop of Cologn, who shared their Conquests after the
following manner. Deventer fell to the Elector of Cologn. The King of France
was to keep the Cities of Campen, and Elburgh during the War, which being
ended, he was to surrender them to the Bishop of Munster, who kept all the
rest, except Zwoll, which was to be Garrisoned by the French as well as by him.

On the other side the King of France had in a few days taken Doesburgh,
Zutphen, Arnheim, Wiick, Montfort, Oudewater, Yselsteine, Amersfoort, Vtrecht
and Woerden in Holland. Some people misinformed have very much blamed the City
of Vtrecht for surrendering, but all persons that have any knowledge of affairs,
will rather lament than blame them. Their ill-willers falsely reported, that
they would not admit the Prince of Orange into the City, for it is known that
they made it their request to him, and that he had granted their desire. They
sent great quantities of Bread, Beer, and Cheese to the Soldiers that
quartered about the City. They offered to receive as many men as he should
think necessary for the defense of the City, with whom they would hazard their
estates and lives to the uttermost penny and the last drop of blood. But the
Prince received Orders to retreat with the Army into Holland. They desired him
to leave the four Regiments that were paid by them; but he could not spare a
man because of the Orders he had received. All their powder in the Powder-Mills
was carried away by the Army. The States also, before these things happened,
had sent a considerable quantity of powder to Nimighen and other places; so
that they were destitute of necessaries, and abandoned by the Army, and cut off
from the other Provinces. But more than this, a considerable number of the
Townsmen were in Garrison at Nimighen and in the Forts upon the Yssel. He that
would see more of this, let him read the deduction of the States of Vtrecht,
Printed in the Year 1673.

To this we may add for another reason the great number of the Roman
Catholics, who being irreconcilable Enemies to the Reformed Religion, would
have risen and Massacred them, so soon as the King of France had appeared with
his Army.

They who will not credit the account which we give of things, may read the
Sieur Valkenie^ in his Europe Troubled, page 620. Many Roman Catholics, says
he, gave it out publicly in the streets, Let France live rather than Orange.
If Orange comes we will shut our doors against him, but we will open them to
the French, as soon as ever they arrive: being then at Utrecht, I often heard
them speak th^se words to my great grief Let them also read what the same
Author writes p. 621. etc. and there they shall see how undeservedly aspersions
have been cast upon this City. But to return to the Bishop.

After he had furnished the Cities of Over-Yssel with good Garrisons, and also
left a good strong party upon the Frontiers of Friseland, he marched toward
Coverden. But before we speak of the taking of that City, it behooves us to
mention something of the little Town of Haltem, not to deprive the courageous of
their due praises. Their Ramparts were very weak and defective, being decayed
by time. The Garrison did not consist of above 76 Soldiers, and 180 Burghers,
who had earnestly desired the Inhabitants of Zwoll and other Neighboring
places to send them assistance, but all in vain. Their Ammunition also was very
inconsiderable; nevertheless they resolved to hold out.

The nineteenth of June the Episcoparians showed themselves before this Town,
and the Bishop sent them his summons, threatening what he would do if they did
not forthwith submit themselves. He had very much affrighten'd great Towns by
his thundering hard words: but this little place answered him very courageously
contrary to his expectation, that they would remain faithful to their Country
till death. Their deeds were answerable to their words, for they made so stout
a resistance, and plied their small shot with that vigor, that the Bishops
whole Army that lay at Deventer, were forced to be sent for to lie before this
little place. At length being out of all hopes of relief, they were constrained
against their will to submit and give entrance to the Bishop, who was amazed at
the small number of the Garrison, knowing that he had lost in the Siege above
700 Soldiers besides a great number of stout Officers.

The Bishop, before he laid Seige to Coeverden, was marching toward Frise. But
upon his march, he received advice that the States of Friesland and Groningen
had put themselves into a posture of defense, and that they were resolved to
make use of all the strength they had. Upon that, in a great rage against the
Frisons. he cried out, The Devil take the Priests; meaning the Ministers of
Leeuwarden, in regard they showed their Zeal for their Religion and Liberty.
For which reason he altered his design and marched to Coeverden. He had the
good fortune to take in the Fort du Deel, the Old Fort the New Fort,
Wenschoter, Zyl, Wedd House and all the places round about. In the Fortres^
Bourtang was one Captain Prat. The Bishop labored to have had the place
betrayed to him by the contrivance of his Commissary at War, whose name was
Marsel; who offered the Captain 200000 Livres, or one of the fairest Castles in
Westphalia, and for the other Captains 50000 Livres a piece.

But the generous Captain desired Marsel but to bring the Bishop and his
followers to confer with him, and he would give him as many Bullets; as he
offered him Livres. And he behaved himself so well, that Marsel having laid
Siege to the place, was forced to raise it again in a short time.

In the mean time the Bishops whole Army arrived before Coeverden, which was as
it were, the Key of the Provinces of Friesland and Groningen. It was looked upon
formerly as impregnable, by reason of the Marshes, and Fens that surround it,
and which may be easily overflowed: so that there is no coming near the Town
but by three narrow passes, which were guarded by seven Bulwarks by the name of
the Seven Provinces, with seven Ravelins, seven half Moons, and besides that an
out-Wall, a high Counterscarp, deep double Motes, two Gates and a Castle
Fortified with five other Bulwarks, and a deep Moat next the City. This noble
Fortress after the Peace with Spain was fallen much to decay through neglect,
as were many other of the Fortresses belonging to the States; and beside that,
it was not over provided with Ammunition.

The 30. of June, the place was invested by 1100 French Horse, and six thousand
Foot, who most unmercifully pillaged and plundered the Inhabitants of the Flat
Country, some also they put to torture, and others they murdered. The seventh
the place was summoned; but the summons was rejected. The tenth it was summoned
again; whereupon the Governor sent out Commissioners and made an agreement.
The Enemy being entered the Town were amazed that they should take so strong
and so considerable a Fort in so short a time.

The Commissioners who were sent to capitulate with the Bishop were the
Captains Rosiers, Bachman and ^er H^eve. But here the Bishop, that thought
nothing in the world so Sacred, but that he could profane and sacrifise it to
his advantage and ambition, not only violated his word given by M. General St.
Paul, but also the Law of Nations. For he declared two of the forementioned
Captains to be Prisoners of War; suffering only the third to return to the
Town, to know whether they were inclined to surrender or no.

This was not all, for contrary to the Capitulation signed with his own hand,
he would no^ permit the Garrison to go to Harlington, according to the
Articles, but where his fancy thought most convenient. The two pieces of Canon^
which they were to take along with them, h^ would not permit to be stirred out
of the Town. Nor would he suffer the Garrison to march o^ with Drums beating
and Colors flying; and besides all this, several of the Soldiers were
plundered and constrained to take his party. The rest were conveyed to
Over-Yssel instead of Harlington, from whence they marched to Almel^ where the
Bishop gave peculiar command to the Inhabitants under pain of Confiscation of
their Goods and other Corporal penalties, not to supply the poor weary
Soldiers either with meat or drink though they should pay for it.

After the Enemy had taken Coeverden, they held a great Council of War, to
consult what was next to be done; whether they should march into Frise, and
besiege the City of Greninger, or whether they should Attack the Fortress of
Delf-zyl: But they were divided in opinion, some believing this, some that to
be more expedient. The Bishop would have followed their advice who were for the
Attacking the place last named, had not Schulenburgh, and Broersma, two
Traitors to their party, as most Writers call them, vigorously persuaded him to
besiege Groningen. While they were upon the debate the Elector of Cologn came
into the Council, who demanded smiling what they had agreed upon, and
perceiving that some were still for Attacking Delf-zyl: No, no, said he, we
must go to Groningen, that City will be ours in five days, I have my Confidents
there. But he failed in his assurance.

Till this time a favorable Gale had swelled the Sails of the Bishops hopes.
He had undertaken no enterprise wherein he had not prosperously succeeded. No
place was so strong or so well fortified but that he made his way through,
either through the Cowardice or Treachery of the defendants. His Master to whom
he had Mortgaged himself, had penetrated even to the very Center of Holland. So
that in forty days the Confederates had taken fourscore Cities, Forts and
Fortresses from the States General.

As for the Conquests of the Bishop of Munster, he thought himself sure enough
of his prey, not believing that the United Provinces would ever reunite again,
but that he should enjoy the places he had taken, and which still remained to
be taken. Now, said he, to one of his Counselors, their High and Mightinesses
may be called their Low and Lowlinesses. Thus the Heretics are to be dealt
with. The King of France is beholden to me, for without my Assistance he never
could have Conquered so fast nor so much. At his request, he obtained of the
Pope the Government and absolute Authority to conser all Ecclesiastical
Benefices in the Territories by him Conquered. He constrained the Gentry of
Over-Yssel to subscribe an agreement wherein they abjured the Union of the
United Provinces in these words, That they both in General and Particular,
being better instructed, do absolutely abjure the Union of the United
Provinces, and that they shall undertake for themselves and their Posterity to
be separated from them for ever. And that they do acknowledge the Bishop of
Munster for their Lawful Sovereign voluntarily and without any constraint; that
they will never revolt from him, but will hazard their lives and fortunes for
him and with him as their Lawful Sovereign. The King of France never imposed so
much upon the Province of Vtrecht, but on the contrary Capitulated with them,
that the said Province should be comprehended in such agreements as he should
make with the States General.

But the wheel of Fortune, if it be lawful for Christians to make use of the
Phrase, began to turn, so that from this time forward the Tide of the Bishops
prosperity began to Ebb. It pleased God that he followed the worst Counsel of
them that adviz'd to lay Siege to the City of Groningen; and to inspire the
Inhabitants of that City with courage and resolution, to repel the victorious
Bishop, and to force him to rise from before their Walls with loss and shame.
After which he never did any thing that brought him either profit or honor, but
all his enterprises proved destructive to him.

Groningen then was the place which he designed to besiege; for by the taking
of this City, which they imagined would have been an easy matter, they had
made themselves Masters of two Provinces, that and Friseland. The Place was
sufficiently strong, but the Garrison was too weak; not consisting, recruits
and all, of above one thousand and two hundred Soldiers. But the valor of the
Townsmen and Scholars supplied that defect, as also the Conduct of the
Commanders, among whom the Sieur Charles Rabenhapt was the chief. The Burgers
were divided into Eighteen Companies, besides Four Companies of them who had
been formerly excused. The Company of Scholars consisted of a hundred and fifty.

The 19. of July the Country people brought word that the Enemy appeared on
every side of the City. The 20. they showed themselves upon Helpen side. The
same day one of the Porters of the City was executed, being accused of
Treachery, because he had left open the Haven Gate a whole night together; as
also a Countryman of Old Ampt who had corresponded with the Bishop. The
eleventh they made their first shot at the City, but the seventeenth they began
to play furiously upon it, endamaging several houses: and after Dinner the same
day several of the Officers and Townsmen showed themselves upon the Ramparts
where they made merry and drank several Healths, the great Guns going off and
the Drums and Trumpets sounding at the conclusion of every one.

The Eighteenth the Bishop and Archbishop, for the Bishops of Munster and
Cologn, who did not very well agree before, had now joined their Forces, which
caused some to say that Herod and Pilate were reconciled, followed their
business very smartly: They shot their Bombs into the City which did much
mischief; some of them weighing three hundred, some four hundred pound. The
Shell was about three or four fingers thick filled within with Pitch, Rosin,
Saltpeter and Gunpowder. Their weight caused them to break through the Roofs
and Tilings of Houses, till they met with Combustible matter enough to set
whole Houses on fire. In the night time they shot great numbers of Granados
into the Town, which did very much damage in several parts and quarters of the
City. They were sluft with all sorts of Combustible Matter that easily took
fire, and they had within them little small things like small guns about a
fingers length which discharged several Musket-bullets against those that drew
near to quench them: They were very terrible at first, as having wounded
several people that came too near them; but let them alone till they had spent
their Bullets, and they were easily managed.

By this time the Bishop wondered very much, that the City did not send out
Commissioners to Treat of a Surrender, after he had thrown so many Bombs and
Fireballs among them. But they had too great a love for their Country and
their Religion, to think of any such thing. Nay sometimes they paid him with
his own Coin, which he had never met with before. Insomuch that the Soldiers
in the Trenches would cry one to another, They in the City make use of the same
Devils that we do.

The 20. they plied the City with their Bombs and Fireballs. The first of
which did much mischief; but the latter were easily stified.

The 22. both the Bishops summoned the City, but their answer was both resolute
and surly. The same day the Enemy made several Attacks upon the Auwerder. Zyl,
but were valiantly repulsed. The number of the slain is uncertain; but they
confessed that those Onsets lost them more men, than all their Conquests had
done.

Now though the Citizens beheld the ruin of their Habitations every day, yet
were they nothing dismayed for all that, but as they met one another in the
streets their usual questions were, How is your house? Mine is almost down to
the ground. So is mine. But let us pluck up a good heart; this Bishop of
Granados shall not have our City for all this.

The women were no less courageous than their Husbands. They were less troubled
to behold a Fire ball fall into their houses, than they were before to see a
Clown with dirty shoes come into their Dining-Rooms. A certain woman, who had
but one house, seeing a Bomb roll through it began to fill her Apron with some
trifles and a Silver Goblet, and retiring into the street, showed those that
came to help her, the Goblet, saying, Yet will I give this to his Excellency
Rabenhaupt, if he will but keep the City. Another Bomb entering into the ruins
of her House she cried to those that were with her, The beggarly Bishop shall
not get in this way I am resolved.

All this while the Bishop plagued the City with his B^mbs, while the besieged
plied him as warmly with their great and small shot. In some of his Fire-ball^
which they opened after they were quenched, they found a small viol full of a
white matter which was believed to be rank P^yson; an abominable way of making
war. The Episcoparians also shot powder that made no noise, and they made use
of Great Guns picked and culled for the purpose. It happened one time among the
rest, that the Citizens thought that they had perceived the Enemy preparing for
an Assault; whereupon the Scholars, Soldiers and Citizens showed themselves
upon the Ramparts; the women also prepar^d themselves to carry powder and
bullets to their Husbands, and because one among the rest, more timorous than
her Companions, talked of Surrendering the City, they beat her well favour'dly,
and sent her home.

The last of July, in some of the Bishops great Bombs they found a little plate
of Copper, one side whereof was full of Characters which could not be read;
from whence it is thought that he expected some Magical Effect: upon which a
certain Doctor in a discourse upon the Siege and raising of it made this
observation, That when the Bishop could not take the Town by the assistance of
Simon Peter, he endeavored to have it by the help of Simon Magus. For the
Roman Catholics have more than once made use of such abominable superstitions.
When the deceased Prince of Orange, Frederick Henry in the Year 1629. had
besieged the City Bois le Duc, after the Surrender of the place, several Papers
were found full of barbarous words and Conjurations; and in some places the
name of God and several Saints were inserted. It is thought that the Priests
had sold or given them to the Soldiers and Townsmen to preserve them from the
Swords and Bullets of their Heretic Enemies.

But all his Episcopal Magic did him no good: nay the more to fret him, the
Scholars who guarded the Out-wall, and behaved themselves very bravely, had
invented several nicknames for the Bishop, by some of which he heard himself
called, when he came into the Trenches, and bitterly stormed at his new Titles;
his Officers also laid the affronts of their Captain to heart, and vowed to be
revenged when once they got into the City, The 15. of August, the besiegers
shooting continually into the Town a Canon Bullet almost grazed upon a Hoggs
back, but did the creature no other harm, than only singe the Bristles;
whereupon the Scholars cried out from the Out-wall in the night to the
besiegers, that the Bishop began to shear his Hoggs now he had fleeced his
Sheep.

The day before the Bishop and sent a Trumpeter to the Town, requiring first
that they would let him ransom certain Officers which had been taken Prisoners
in a Salley, or that otherwise they would use them kindly. Secondly that they
would send some sweet meats for his money, to Treat certain Ladies of the County
of Hessen that were come to the Camp. As to the first demand answer was made
that it was not the custom to release Prisoners of Importance, when the Enemy
was before their Walls, and as for their usage they were sure, they had better
than any the Bishop allowed: and for his second request, they replied, that
being taken up with Powder and Bullet, they minded little of their Shops at
present.

Soon after the Bishop perceived that his Enterprise upon this place would not
have the same success as he had had in other places. The Elector of Cologn,
though he had adviz'd the Siege, began to look upon his Colleague with an evil
Eye; and they began to quarrel already about the expense of the Siege and the
wast of their Countries. Cologn upbraided Munster with his boasts he made of
his Soldiers, his Artificial Fires, and his Miners, and yet that after the
Moat of the Curtain was filled up with Fagots, he durst not venture the Onset;
for fear of losing his men.

In the mean while the Young Prince of Nassaw had written a letter in French
from the Camp before Groningen dated the 20. of August. N. S. and directed to
the Duke of Luxenburgh, to this purpose.

The Face of the Affairs of our Camp changes every day. Wednesday morning last
our C^non played so fortunately, that we ruined five Batteries and silenced all
the rest. Which gave us some hopes, by reason of the Consternation which we
observed in the City; and for that a certain Monk who had escaped out of the
City, reported to us, that the Catholic Burgers would desire to be excepted
from Plunder, if we took the City by Assault. M. de Munster is confident that
he shall say Mass in the City upon St. Lewis' s day, But my Faith is too weak
to believe those miracles, and I very much doubt our entry into the City till
his Prayers have silenced Eighty pieces of Canon that continually play upon us,
and have ruined his Strongest Battery of seven pieces, notwithstanding all that
we can do, because the Traverses of our Battery are so narrow that we can play
but upon one side.

The 17. A Forlorn of Gentlemen sallied out of the Town and found that the
Enemy had quitted their Approaches. Upon news whereof several of the besieged
went forth and found in the Enemies Trenches great store of Warlike Ammunition
as Bombs, Fireballs, Granados, Bullets, Hatchets, Shovels and the like, of
which every one took as much as they could carry away. Their Retreat was very
sudden, and the Infantry were in such a fright, that the Horse were commanded
to recure them from flying. All this while the Bishop lay behind the Gallows
Hill; but the 21. he fully and wholly quitted the place, which caused a
Universal joy among the Inhabitants of the Town.

This Bishop dislodged his Army for two principal reasons. The first was, for
that his great Guns were no longer serviceable, and his Morterpieces were most
of them spoiled. The second was because his Army was half in half wasted.

As to the first reason, his Artillery was almost all spoiled and broken, so
that he had not above ten or twelve Guns left, by reason of his continual
firing upon the Town. As for his Morter-pieces, he had not above five or six
left; For the Bishop impatient of the Protraction of of the Siege, ordered them
to be double charged, so that some of his Morter-peices broke, and others were
greatly indammag'd.

As to the second cause, it could never be certainly known what number of men
he brought to the Siege; but it is thought that they amounted to between twenty
and thirty thousand; and he did not march off with above thirteen thousand.
This was afterward confirmed by a Muster made by the Bishops Officers: by
which it appeared, that his Army when they first came before Groningen
consisted of above twenty four thousand men, but that he carried off no more
than twelve thousand nine hundred sixty eight. So that he had lost eleven
thousand two hundred thirty two.

To these two reasons that obliged the Bishop to quit the Siege, may be added
three more. 1. The coming of the Auxiliary Forces of the Emperor and the
Elector of Brandenburgh. 2. The want of Ammunition and Victuals. 3. The Rain
that fell at that time whereby his Approaches were quite overflowed with water.
However it were, the City was at liberty, and the Bishop was no more in a
condition to make any farther attempt.

We cannot here pass over in silence the most barbarous cruelty that was ever
exercised upon poor sick and wounded men, who were carried to Helpen into a
Barn, where they lay without straw, being looked after by six French
Chirurgions. The Bishop perceiving that their number every day increased, asked
the Surgeons which they thought to be curable and which not; and those that
were judged incurable were presently dispatched with a Bullet shot into their
heads to make room for others.

The besieged had not lost above fourscore persons, notwithstanding that vast
number of Bombs, Stinking-Pots, and Fireballs which were thrown into the City,
the number of which was said to have amounted to above four thousand: for as
for the Canon-shot it was not to be counted. And indeed the effects of Divine
Providence were most apparently to be seen, in reference to some persons,
considering the prodigious deliverance from eminent danger.

A Fire-ball, meeting with the Wall of a House, was beaten back, and falling
passed between a Mennonites Breeches below the Codpiece, without doing him any
other harm than only singing his Breeches.

One of the Sheriffs of the Town, whose name was Bothenius, being just risen
out of his Bed, a Fire-ball presently came and falling in his place burnt the
Coverlet, Mat, Bedstead and all.

The Widow of Anthony Van Essen being in Bed with her Daughter, a Fire-ball
passed between them, and being resisted by the Beds head, returned the same
way, without doing any more hurt than burning the Bed.

A woman sitting upon a bench before her own house, a Fire-ball flew between
her legs, and carried away a piece of her Coats both before and behind without
any farther mischief.

The same thing happened to one of the Proposers, who sitting in his Study; a
Fire-ball came and carried away the Seat from under him without any farther
damage.

A Servant of James Warnholts a Brewer was just drinking, but before he had
ended his draught, a Fire-ball came and struck the Glass out of his hand
without any other prejudice.

Another Bomb lighted into the Chamber of a certain person, who not liking his
Bedfellow, took it and flung it to the ground where it broke, and spoyld all
his goods, but did the man no harm.

A woman being a sleep in her Bed, by break of day was awakn'd by a Bomb that
fell through the Cieling just before her Bed. The woman ran out into the street
in her smock, and seeing her house a fire, cried out, Though my house be burnt,
the Bishop shall not have the City.

Another woman having a little child in her Arms* perceiving a Bomb to be
fallen into her House, all in a fright, threw her infant into the Ciste^n; when
the Bomb was broken and quite out, she found that her Neighbors had rescued
the Child out of the Cistern, from whom she took it again sound and safe.

But to return to the Bishop. The Frizous laying hold of the opportunity, made
an attempt with the assistance of the Men of War that guarded the Zuyder Zee,
upon the Fort of Block Zyl, seated upon the said Zuyder Zee, between
Wallenhaven, Kuynder and Steenwick, where are two sluices that give free passage
to the overflowings of Over-Yssel and Tuent into the Zuyder Zee in Holland.
This place was the first that was recovered by the assistance of the Burgers,
who kept private correspondence with some of the Frizon Soldiers. The
Commander for the Bishop mistrusting them, would have forced them to take an
Oath of Fidelity to his Master, which they refus^d to do. Thereupon he
threatened them hard; but they replied, They would suffer the utmost severity,
before they would take the Oath which he exacted from them. Although the
Frizons landed to the number of four hundred and fifty. The Commander made a
Sally upon them, was rudely repulsed; and he would have reenter'd the Fort, the
Burgers fired upon the Episcoparians, killed the Commander and opened the Gate
to the Frizons; and so the Fortress was reduced under the obedience of the
States.

At the same time a certain Mennonite put a fair cheat upon the Episcoparians;
For in regard he lived near the South gate, when he saw the terrified Soldiers
thronging out of the City, he offered some of them his house to secure
themselves; which offer of his was kindly accepted by sixty or seventy of them,
among which were two Lieutenants and a Priest, whom he afterward delivered up
all together as Prisoners of War.

Soon after the Fortress of Kuynder also fell into the hands of the Frizons:
from which time the Bishop proved very unfortunate, for he got nothing, but
lost a great deal.

In the Old Ampter-Mieden the Episcoparians committed several Insolences and
Rapines: and it was feared that they would have fired the Dams of Munterdam,
Veendam, and Wilvank, which would have occasioned very much mischief the Winter
ensuing: for prevention whereof several Soldiers were sent to Mieden. The
Countrymen glad to be so guarded were so liberal to the Soldiers that they
got drunk, at what time being surpised by the Munsterians, and not being able
to rally themselves into a posture of desence, they were forced to fly for
their lives. The Countrymen however made a stout resistance for some time, but
being overpowered, they were all defeated and killed, except some few that
saved themselves in the Marshes.

After that came several Troops of Horse and Foot under the Command of St.
German, Colonel of the Holland Regiment, which got into the City of Groningen
during the Siege. With these Forces he marched toward Winschoten, having a sight
of several parties of the Munsterians, by the way, who retreated upon their
approach and quitted not only Winschoten, but also the small Fort of
Winschoter-Zyl, Wedde-House, etc. and sheltered themselves under the Old-Fort,
and new Fort, where they thought themselves safe. And indeed it seemed a thing
impossible by force to Attack those two Forts, in regard all the Country round
was overflowed. However Colonel St. Jerman sent some of his men to the places
next adjoining to the Old Fort, otherwise called Bellingwolderskans, to block
it up at a distance. At the beginning little good was to be done, besides that
the Colonel was commanded back into Holland. Thereupon his Excellency
Rabenhaupt took the business in hand, ordering Colonel Eybergen upon the same
Enterpize, who being strengthened with a Reinforcement, laid Siege to the
place. About a thousand and four hundred Episcoparians came out of Westphalia
passing through New-Fort, to relieve the Old; but they were ruggedly repulsed
by two hundred and fifty Soldiers under the Command of Major Neylers, a brave
and experienced Soldier, who had so advantagiously posted his men, that the
Episcoparians having made a second attempt retreated to the New-Fort with the
loss of eight hundred men slain, after which the Old-Fort Surrendered: Of four
hundred Soldiers that quitted the place, not above a hundred arrived at
Coeverden, the rest deserting their Colors.

After the Old-Fort was taken, the New-Fort was blockt up; and upon the arrival
of the Auxiliaries of Curland, the Episcoparians quitted Dyler-Fort upon the
16. of November. For the preservation of which place the Fort of Bourtang sent
a hundred and twenty Musketeers under the Command of Captain Aitzema, who was a
very young man, and wrote to the States of Groningen, that if the Episcoparians
made any Attack upon him, they should find that place guarded by a courage not
ordinary. But when the Munsterians showed themselves near the Fort with three
thousand men, the Captain quitted his Hold, without so much as looking the
Enemy in the Face, who presently repossess'd themselves of Dyler-Fort, and from
hence relieved the New-Fort, insomuch that the Dutch were forced to raise the
Siege, the season being passed.

About the same time, two hundred Curlanders, having marched too far into
Westphalia to Plunder, were totally defeated, though the Episcoparians bought
their Victory with the loss of more men on theirs, than on the other side.

And now the time was come that Westphalia, sufficiently plagued and oppressed
by its own Bishop, must also taste the bitterness of a Foreign Enemy. For the
Elector of Brandenburgh having declared War against the Bishops of Munster and
Cologn, and the rest of the Neighboring Confederates, his Soldiers began to
overrun the Country, Plundering wherever they came, and putting the Inhabitants
under Contribution. They also took some Wagons laden with Cloth, Money,
Provision and Ammunition.

Thereupon the Bishop gathers his Forces together, withdraws his men out of his
new Conquests, and falls into the Countries of Bergue and La March, doing
great mischief. He also took Lunen, the City of Vnna, and the Castle of Beda.
Nevertheless he was soon after forced to quit Vnna, upon the approach of the
Brandenburgh Troops; and presently after that, all the rest of the Country.

The King of France, finding that the Bishop thrived so ill in the Province of
Groningen, was somewhat jealous lest he should change his side according to his
usual Custom, and therefore to oblige him to be Faithful, he promised him the
Abbey of St. Germans de Esperees, so that he kept firm to his Interests.

In the mean while the Bishops Garrisons of Steenwick and Coeverden, committed
several extortions and disorders in the Drenthe which those of Groningen were
not able to prevent; For though they sought every where to meet with them, they
could never light upon them, in regard the Episcoparians being still advertised
by their Spies, retreated in time to their Forts. Nor was there any way to
remedy these mischiefs, so long as the Cities of Steenwick and Coeverden were
in the hands of the Bishop.

Of the Fortifications of Coeverden we have already spoken, the strength
whereof was such, that in the Year 1594. Verdugo the Spanish General lay before
it one and thirty weeks, and at length was forced to raise his Siege. But no
sooner had the Bishop taken it by Treachery in four days, but he brought his
Magazines thither, and from thence perpetually infested the Frontires of
Friseland, Groningen, and Drenthe. And for the better preserving a Garrison so
Commodious, and of so great importance he not only repaired the Old
Fortifications but made an addition of New Works, to strengthen the former, yet
notwithstanding all this care and foresight, necessity compelled the Dutch to
seek to regain it.

This being resolved, luckily for them it fell out, that Maynard de Thynen a
good Ingeneer, and formerly Churchwarden of the Town, gave a hint to his
Excellency Rabenhaupt, that the Town might be surpised; in regard the Bishops
Garrison was very much wasted by sickness, and that they who were well,
confiding in the strength of the Fortifications, kept but very slender Watches.
Besides that he gave him a platform of the place, and of all the
Fortifications, showing him where he might get over the Marshes when they were
Frozen. His Excellency approving the proposal, the 16. of December 1672. caused
all the Gates of the City of Groningen to be shut at three of the Clock after
Dinner, he sent Orders for such and such parties to meet at a place appointed.
He chose out of every Company in the City thirty six men, giving the Command of
the whole party to Lieutenant Colonel Eyberghen, an experienced Officer. The
foot were Commanded by Major Wylers, the Horse by the Valiant Major John
Sickinga. All the night they spent in loading Wagons with Bridges made of
Rushes, Ice-Spurrs, and all other things requisite for an Onset.

The 17. about One of the Clock the Cavalry marched out at Steenwick Gate, and
three hours after the Foot followed out at Steenhil Gate, to the number of nine
hundred sixty eight, among which were several Volunteers of the Gentry,
Burgesses and Scholars. Advancing near the Gallows Mount, he observed a
Trumpeter coming out of the Town of Helpen, who seeing such a Force,
immediately galloped back taking the Road to Halrem. But Major Sickinga being
well mounted followed him, took him and sent him away to Groningen. This was
one of the Bishops Trumpetters, or as others say, belonging to the Prince of
Fustenburgh, who was in the Bishop of Cologns service, who was carrying Letter
to the Council of the said City. The Cavalry marched toward Gieten there to
stay in expectation of the Infantry. From Gieten they marched to Exfield, Emmen,
Sleen, Erren, Wachlen, and Dalen, taking all the care imaginable to prevent
being discovered, and yet three Dragoons made a shift to slip away and give the
Enemy notice of the whole design, which piece of Treachery was enough to have
spoiled all; but Providence was pleased to order it otherwise. For after that
the Garrison kept a constant watch day and and night, and were continually in
Arms, which hard duty so tired the Soldiers at length, that when the Asault
was given they were most of them asleep, thinking it had been but a false
Alarm.

Upon the 19. the word and signal of Attack being given; every Soldier having
a wisp of Straw in his Hat, Colonel Eyberghen Commanded six hundred men to
march directly toward Tellinckhuysen and from thence to Poppenhaer, carrying
with them twelve pieces to make a Bridge of Bullrushes and so to possess
themselves of the Counterscarp with as little noise as might be, and break down
the Pallisados. Eyberghen himself with three hundred Soldiers undertook the
Castle, a hundred and fifty of others were to assail the Guelders Bulwark, and
another hundred and fifty to force the Guard in the Citadel before the Gate of
the Castle. Major Wiliers with three hundred men was to undertake the Holland
Bulwark, and another Captain to force the Guard of that Bulwark. Two hundred
more were to assail the Holland and Zealand Bulwarks, fifty to seize upon
Benthem Gate; Major Sickinga was ordered to attack the Bulwark of Over-Yssel,
and take care of the management of the business in that quarter.

Which Orders being thus given, and a Council of War called between Eleven and
Twelve a Clock at night, about three a Clock in the Morning they got close to
the works. Eyberghen and Wylers, though good Soldiers found the execution of
the Enterprise very difficult; but Thynen, the Engineer, hearten'd them on, and
marched foremost to show them the way. By and by they heard the Sentinels
calling, Who is there? Thynen made no answer, which made them redouble the Who
is there, with a thousand Westphalia Oaths. At length the Onser began; and they
that marched first got upon the Counterscarp, beyond the first Moat to the very
Pallisadoes. The Enemy fired very furiously, but the Dutch advancing
courageously, cut down the Pallisadoes and opened a passage for themselves, and
so Eyberghen and Wylers mounted the Rampart, and at length made themselves
Masters of the Castle, John Moor who Commanded it, being killed at the
beginning of the Onset with a Musket shot. Major Sickinga aquitted himself with
no less Valor on the other side, and having won the Counterscarp, and got over
the Pallisadoes and Moat to the top of the Rampart, forced the Enemy to throw
down their Arms and cry Quarter.

Captain Clingh also by this time forced the Guard of Friseland Gate, which got
open by the assistance of one of the Burgesses, and so made way for the
Cavalry. A party of the Enemy made a stout resistance for a good while in the
Market place, but finding themselves overpowered, threw down their Arms, and
surrendering themselves Prisoners of War, were shut up in the Church. The Town
thus won, the Victors fell to Plundering and found good store of booty. It is
observable that some of the Townsmen, overjoyed to see themselves freed from
the Tyranny of an insulting Enemey, abandoned their own houses to the
Soldiers. Many of the Enemies had their Pockets full of money, their Coats
Embroidered, and the Hilts of their Swords of massy Silver.

The Enterprise being thus prosperously accomplished, the Officers soberly
considering the strength of the place, could not choose but look upon one
another with astonishment, crying one to another, How could this possibly be?
behold the band of God. When the news of this success arrived at Groningen, the
joy of the Inhabitants was not to be expressed. The next day was solemnized
with a public Thanksgiving in all the Churches. The Courrier that was sent
with the News to the States was laden with Letters; and yet all the way upon
the Road he was looked upon as a Reporter of falsities. At Le^uwarden he was
almost crowded to death by the throng of the people: and at Amsterdam it was
looked upon as a thing impossible and therefore incredible. A certain Person of
Quality in his answer to a Letter which gave an account of the News from
Groningen wrote these words, I am resolved never to give my money for a Letter
that contains such untruths. We have false reports enough in Holland, we have no
occasion of having them sent from Groningen. The Catholics laughed at the
stories of the beggarly Heretics, as they called us; but when they found the
news to be true, we could perceive that they were nothing pleased with it.

It is remarkable that whatever was thought would have proved an obstruction of
the design was that which chiefly promoted it. The Forces arrived later than
they were ordered: But that made the Enemy believe that the Dragoons had abused
them. The Onset should have been given at midnight, which was delayed till
three of the Clock in the morning. But thereby it happened, that the Soldiers
tired with watching were gone to sleep. There fell a great mist, so that Thynen
who was their guide lost his way. But that concealed them from the view of the
Enemy, so that they were not perceived, till it was too late. So that through
the continual noise of the Sentinels crying, Who goes there, and the others
answering the Round, the Assailants had the opportunity to cut the Pallisadoes
without being heard.

Now as the retaking of this Town inspired a Universal joy and courage into the
disheartened people of the Low Countries, so it bred a general consternation in
the other party.

The Garrisons of Nyenhuys and several other places in the County of Benthem
and the Province of Tuent quitted their Ports. In Zwoll, Deventer and other
Towns of Over-Yssel they were in a panick dread. So that had a small Army
appeared, those places might have been easily retaken.

But when the news of this loss came to the Bishop of Munster, he was all in a
fume against the person that brought it; as if he had gone about to make him
believe false reports and impossibilities. But when after a serious examination
of the circumstances he found the thing to be real, his thoughts were in a
strange confusion; I fear me, said he, I shall suddenly lose all that I have
got, since I have lost my little Candy. His rage and discontent was such, that
he looked with a surly Countenance upon all that came near him for some days
afterward, and cursed in the Devils name more than once. He called the
Officers of the Garrison Dogs, Rogues and Traitors, and those of Groningen,
damned Heretics: nay he could not refrain from lamenting his loss with Tears.
About a hundred and fifty of his men were slain outright, and four hundred
taken Prisoners, with six Captains, eleven Lieutenants, fourteen Ensigns, and
three Churchmen. In his Magazine were found sixty one great Guns, Brass and
Iron, twenty four Morter-peices, thirty Petards, nine hundred forty nine
Muskets, seven hundred and eighteen Pikes, five hundred and six Barrels of
Gun-powdur, one thousand two hundred seventy and seven Bombs ready made up, one
thousand seven hundred and sixty not finished, two thousand one hundred and
thirteen Stinking Pots, one thousand seven hundred seventy and two Grenades,
and twelve thousand eight hundred fifty and two Canon Bullets, great store of
Sulphur, Saltpeter, Rosin, Oil, Turpentine and Pitch; besides Cordage,
Carriages, Wagons, Hatchets, Saws, Spades, and the like.

But now the Emperor seeing that the Tempest which had poured it self upon the
Low Countries would not end there, but that it threatened also the Air of
Germany, thought himself obliged to provide against it in time, and to prevent
Holland from being ruined. Thereupon both he and the Elector of Brandenburgh
sent several Auxiliary Troops to assist the States to support them in their
Wars, as also to divert the War from their Frontiers; thereby to preserve the
Empire, which the French already had attackt at the same time that they
endeavored to lull it asleep, by pretending nothing but Neutrality,
Propagation of the Catholic Faith, Eversion of Heresy, and observation of the
Old Treaties. He was much displeased to see that so many Princes of the Empire
had engaged in the Interests of France, especially the Bishop of Munster whose
humor he well knew. He understood that for money he was become the slave of
France. That upon the first opportunity his Imperial Majesty, and the Empire
should find the Effects of his ill nature. That by his example, and at his
instigations, so many Princes of the Empire had taken part with the French; and
that perhaps many more would follow the same president. Thereupon he caused the
Electors of Brandenburgh and Cologn, as also the Bishop to be solemnly
summoned, and the question to be demanded of them, in case of a War between the
Empire and France, to which side they would adhere? threatening to ruin their
Countries if they did not resolve within fifteen days. But the Bishop of
Munster laughed at the Emperor his Masters summons, and at all his menaces and
threats.

Thereupon the Duke of Burnonville in the month of February 1673. by order of
his Imperial Majesty, caused a Paoclamation to be fixed upon the Posts,
commanding all Officers and Soldiers who were Subjects of the Empire and in
the service of the Bishops of Munster and Cologn to quit the service of those
Princes and to repair to the Colors of his Imperial Majesty upon pain of his
high displeasure, etc. Here the Bishop of Munster showed not only a particular
disobedience, but also an extraordinary Pride, accompanied with a cautious
arrogance, and his wonted wiles. For he published a Counter Proclamation,
wherein he declared that the Proclamation that went under the Emperors name was
none of his, but only a Stratagem of the Duke of Burnonvilles. That his
Soldiers were Imperialists and in the service of the Empire; and at length he
promised to save them harmless from breach of that Command.

He thought himself upon sure grounds: For now Turenne having joined his Forces
with those of the Bishops of Munster and Cologn, bent his march toward the City
of Ham, which the Elector of Brandenburgh had enforced with a Garrison of two
thousand men, but they not finding themselves sufficient to resist so great an
Army, quitted the place of themselves. There the French stopped; but the
Episcoparians advanced farther; as far as the City of Weser, demanding
contribution wherever they came.

At the same time certain Frisans and Groningers making up a party together,
took possession of the houses of Schuylenburgh and Rechteren, both seated upon
a little River that runs to Zwoll, not far from the Fort de Ommen. These are
two old Castles surrounded with thick Walls and deep Moats; by the seizing of
which they very much disturbed the Episcoparians, having thereby the
opportunity to keep them in continual Alarams.

Much about this time also there was great talk of a design which the son of
one Keete, a Captain of Horse, and Secretary for the County of Harragh, had
against the Bishop of Munster, which was to betray both him and the City of
Munster into the hands of the Emperor: but in the end it proved but a bare
report. Nevertheless, the French, taking an occasion from them, played the
Marquis of Grana, the Emperors Resident at Cologn but a scurvy trick, sending
him a counterfeit Letter, Sealed with the Seal of the Baron of Schwerin; the
contents whereof were, that the City of Munster was taken by the Elector of
Brandenburghs Soldiers. Now the Baron was the said Electors chief Minister of
State, from whom this Letter was so contrived as to relate all the
Circumstances of taking the Town; he that brought it also alleging himself to
be an express Messenger; so that the Marquis of Grana never dreamt of any
device put upon him, but immediately sent away the News to all the Courts of
his Masters Allies, and it was joyful news at first, till the Cheat came to be
discovered.

In the mean while the Friselanders and Groningers showed themselves very
vigilant, and did the Episcoparians much mischief.

The Garrison of Coeverden intercepted a Convoy coming from Zwoll, laden with
provisions to the Fort of Ommen, which they made bold to carry to their own
Garrison and there to share the booties, which were not all the Bishops losses
at that time. For the Fort of Bourtang met with a party of his men and killed
above two hundred upon the place; and which was worse the Elector of
Brandenburghs men, had met with two of his Regiments near Minden, which they so
absolutely defeated that very few escaped their hands, which was the loss also
of the City of Hoxter.

On the other side the Episcoparians took the City of Hervoort, leaving therein
eight hundred Soldiers who tormented the people after a most inhuman manner.
The same outrages they also committed in the Province of Minden, but they durst
not meddle with the City. But these were small refreshings to the Bishops; his
heart mourned still for Coeverden, and therefore he endeavored by all ways to
make himself Master of that City once more; to which purpose he tried all the
tricks of underhand dealing but all in vain. These failing he had some design
of Force; and therefore to make the ways passable for his Soldiers, he caused
the Countrymen under his jurisdiction to provide a great number of Hurdles
twelve foot long and six foot broad, made of Sparrs bound together with Osiers,
to lay where the Ways were deep and otherwise impassable; by means whereof he
caused a strong party of his men to march to Gransberghen, a house about two
Leagues from Coeverden, and guarded by a Lieutenant and fifty six Soldiers,
who bravely twice repulsed the Enemy, but being overpowered surrendered upon
Articles, contrary to which, and Faith given, they were made Prisoners of War.
Relief was sent by the Garrison of Coeverden, but it came too late for their
own, but too soon for the Bishops men; For the Dutch having laid an Ambush in
the way by which the Enemy was to retreat, they made a great Massacre of the
Episcoparians, and brought away their Prisoners.

It was an ill time to vex the Bishop after all these miscarriages, as one of
his Quarter Masters found by woeful experience, who coming to ask the Bishop for
money, put him into such a fury, that he commanded the Officer to be shot to
death, which was executed accordingly. An action which alienated from him, very
much, the hearts of his Soldiers insomuch that three whole Companies with
their Officers quitted his service, and marched to Groningen.

But his Excellency Rabenhaupt found himself other work to do than to murder
his own Soldiers. He had already for some time kept the New Fort blockt up at
a distance. But now taking along with him the Cavalry of Groningen, and a good
party of Foot out of Block-Zyll and other places, together with six pieces of
Canon, and having forced the Fort Aux Feres, to make his way through, he laid
close Siege to the Place. The Bishop well knowing the importance of the
Fortress prepared with all diligence to relieve it. And first he sent Colonel
Meynertshagen with a thousand Dragoons and Foot, to get into the Fort, but they
were beaten off. After that he endeavored with a small Army of five thousand
men under the Command of the Count of St. Paul, not only to have relieved, but
also to reinforce the Garrison. He furiously assailed Colonel Aquila's
Quarter, but he was so warmly received, that he was forced to retreat in the
night after a considerable loss. The next day he renewed his Attack, but with
the same success, leaving four hundred of his men behind him, slain and taken
Prisoners. Among the slain were Colonel Wedel and Calkar, Majors Swante and
Kesse. Eighteen Captains and two Lieutenant Colonels. Soon after the Victors,
having taken the Redoubt which lay above the Dike of Stocsterhorn, gained the
Fort, where he found good store of rich Pillage both in Gold and Silver, and
took the Commander, two Lieutenant Colonels, five Captains, and four hundred
Soldiers Prisoners.

The richness of the Plunder showed that Country was not very kindly dealt
with; but among all the Bishops Impositions, he had one that was particular,
which he only levied upon those of the Reformed Religion. They that made
profession thereof in the City of Otmarsum, were to pay a thousand Crowns, in
the City of Goor a thousand six hundred Crowns, and so proportionably in other
Towns and Cities; and besides this he took from them the use of their Churches.
The King of France nor his Governor the Duke of Luxemburgh were never so
severe to the Inhabitans of Vtrecht, though they were rigorous enough. Their
Impositions were grievous, yet they were equally laid as well upon the
Catholics as upon those of the Protestant Relipion, the Ecclesiastics not
being exempted: One of the most eminent of that order went to the Duke of
Luxemburgh, requesting him to spare the Catholics, and to burden only the
Heretics, as well in their Contributions and Quartering of Soldiers; but he
gave them a refusal in these words; As ye live, eat and drink together, so ye
must pay your Taxes every one a like. Upon the same errand also the new Bishop
of Vtrecht went to the King, but he found never the better reception. Nay some
observed, that the Roman Catholics were rather favored, than those of the
Roman Religion, which caused some of them to say, our Master seems to be a
thrice Christian Devil rather than a thrice Christian King.

It was now toward the Latter end of the Summer, when the Bishop thinking he
had been too idle all the year before, he randevouz'd his Forces between
Hasselt and Swoll to the number of seven thousand Horse and seventy Colors of
Foot, which joined with the Episcoparians at Roveen, immediately they took
their march toward Steenwich, wasting all the Country of Drenthe as they went;
which enforced the Garrison of Groningen to send forth nine Troops of Horse,
and two of Dragoons, for the security of the said Province. In the mean time
the Enemy was advanced as far as Schoten, with a design to make themselves
Masters of the Heeren Veen, and so to break that way into Friseland. Upon which
the States of Friseland Mustered together a little Army of about eight thousand
Foot, and a hundred Cornets of Horse, and sent them toward the Heeren-Veen to
oppose the Episcoparians who finding such provision made against them, and that
they could not force their passage, retreated, and marched with all their forces
toward Steenwick. There the Munsterians and the French parted; the latter
retiring into their Winter Quarters at Zutphen, Arnbeim, Doesburgh and other
places, having lost in all eight hundred men in this march.

Certain it is that the Bishop promised himself great matters, could he have
made his intended Incursion into Friseland; for the Elector of Brandenburgh,
being now entered into an Alliance with France, he had nothing to fear from
that side of the world; though by the care and diligence of the Friselanders*
he made no other advantage of it than the loss of eight hundred men already
mentioned.

The Emperor all this while observing the Alliances made with the King of
France by his own subjects and members of the Empire to the common prejudice,
thought it now but time to send a considerable force toward the Rhine; and for
the satisfaction of the world published his reasons for so doing, which
consisted of these heads. First, for that the King of France had marched his
Forces through the Territories of the Empire to Assail the Low Countries, and
taken many places in the same Territories contrary to the Peace of Munster.
Secondly, Because the said Soldiers still quartered upon the subjects of the
Empire at their own pleasure committed several Extortions and Rapines upon
them, and particularly had burnt the Bridge of Strasburgh. Thirdly, Because the
French had made themselves Masters of the Archbishopric of Treves, where they
did nothing but burn, plunder and spil. Fourthly, Because the Elector of Cologn
and the Bishop of Munster, contrary to the Peace concluded at Cleves in the
year 1666. had undertaken an Offensive War against the States of the United
Provinces, with the consent of the Emperorr and Empire, and rejecting the
Emperors commands to the contrary.

During these Paper Skirmishes, the French were got into the heart of the
United Provinces, though soon after the face of their success began to change.
The Inundations in Holland, had put a stop to their Conquests there. The Bishop
of Munster had been repulsed in the Provinces of Friseland and Groningen,
insomuch that he despaired of doing any good in those parts; though he did all
he could to regain Coeverden. To which purpose all the Summer long he had very
much distressed the said Garri^on by stoping the course of the River Vecht, so
that it was feared the place would have been ^orc'd to yield for want of water.
The Dam that carried off the water was wonderfully strong, two Leagues and a
half in length, and three or four Foot broad at the Bottom, and ^ight at the
top. Besides the Episcoparians had built two Forts to Guard it, and planted
above sixty pieces of Ordnance upon the Dam to prevent any coming near it. So
that when the Bishop understood how high the water was risen, Now, said he to
some of his Officers, the Devil cannot hinder me from taking Coeverden. But
upon the first of October arose such a terrible storm as destroyed all the
Labor and Travel of the Episcoparians, and made such a gap in the Dam, that
all the Art and Industry of the Enemy could never repair again. And after that,
the Tempest continuing brake down three gaps more, and drowned four or five
hundred Soldiers that were upon the Guard of the Dike; and carried away
Colonel Horstmans Coach, with several Ladies in it.

A little before this the Prince of Orange had taken Narden from the French,
which caused a great consternation at Vtrecht. But that which troubled them
more was, that the Prince began to bend his march toward Germany, where being
reinforced by the Imperial Troops he had besieged the City of Bon, which he
also took together with some other places; which made the French at Vtrecht
afraid lest by making farther Conquest he should cut off all Commerce and
Correspondence between them and the Enemy. And it appeared by the offer of
Neutrality which they made in behalf of the City and Province of Vtrecht, in
what a pannick dread they were, though the proffer would not be accepted. They
also offer the Bishop of Munster to change their Province with him for that of
Over-Yssel; nay they offered to give it him, provided he would join with the
Forces which were in Germany, but he did not accept their kindness, whether the
Bishop considered the turn of Affairs, or whither he had not time sufficient to
Consult and Treat. However it were, the King of France was constrained to quit
all the places which he had Conquered; of which Woerden was the first; and
after that the City of Vtrecht, though very much impoverished by the exactions
of her new Masters.

It Is thought that the main reasons which induced the King of France to quit his
new Conquests, were first the March of the Prince of Orange into Germany. 2.
The Alliance between the Emperor, the King of Spain and the States General. 3.
His despair of gaining any thing upon Holland, without which his other
Conquests were but a burden to him. 4. He considered that the King of England
was ill satisfied with his proceedings, and feared lest he should make a Peace
with the States General, as he did in the year 74. 5. He was afraid lest the
Bishops of Munster and Cologn should change their sides, ^^nding such a turn of
their good Fortune: which jealousy of his was not ill grounded, for they
perceiving the King not to be so victorious as he was, desired a reconciliation
with the Emperor, to avoid a total ruin: Though because they stood upon too
favorable Conditions, they were not listened to at that time; while the
Subjects of the Elector were punished on both sides for the miscarriage of
their Prince, For after they had been sufficiently tormented by the French, in
thundered the Hollanders, taking from them their Cities, and putting the whole
Diocese to pay Contribution. And it was but reason to think that the Hollanders
would carry the War into their Territories, who had opened their doo^s to let
in France both into Germany and the Low Countries. Soon after in the beginning
of the year 16^4. the Peace was concluded between the King of Great Britain,
and the States General, which was to them a great lightning of their burden in
regard they were freed from the charges of such a vast Navy.

All this while the Bishop had a longing desire to be Master of Groningen, not
that he was in hopes to gain the place; but that he had a design to Plunder the
Country, and to gratify his murmuring Soldiers with a good Booty, which was
all the Pay they received from him. To which purpose in February he Mustered
together 4000 Horse, and sent them toward the Province, but all the Gates were
so fast barred, and so well guarded, that there was no good to be done.

On the other side his Excellency Rabenhaupt marched with his Frizons through
the City of Coverden toward the County of Benthem. At his first arrival he took
the City of Northorn, wherein he left 16 Colors of Horse, and 6 of Foot. From
whence he advanced toward Nyenhuys, but receiving intelligence by the way, that
Episcoparians had again begirt the City of Northorn, and beat off the
Out-Guards, his Excellency marched back toward them, with seven Troops of Horse,
and five Regiments of Foot, and set upon them the fifth of April, but they
still Retreated, leaving behind them Sixty Slain and Fifty Prisoners, with the
loss only of three men. Two days after Rabenhaupt took the Castle of Nyenhuys
by force, and thereby opened his way into the Bishops own Territories.

Upon that the Bishop began to fear, lest he should be forsaken by the French,
who had already quitted the Province of Vtrecht and several other places in the
other Provinces, and so the flame of the War would blaze out in his own
Territories. For indeed the Imperialists had plundered several of his Towns;
and the Friselanders had fairly begun on their side. Upon these considerations
he began to forget the Alliance which he had made with France, from whence he
had received such considerable sums, and for all that the King promised him the
utmost of his Assistance. And therefore by his Envoys at Cologn, he sought to
be restored to the favor, and to be admitted into the Alliance of the Emperor;
which at length he obtained, and a Peace was concluded between him, the
Emperor, and the States General.

As for the Emperor he promised to submit to him, to renounce the Alliance with
France, and to be regulated according to the Resolutions taken at Regensburgh
for the defense of the Princes and Circles of the Empire.

The agreement made with the States General was to this effect. That there
should be a perpetual Peace between them; That there should be a reciprocal
Amnesty, and Act of Oblivion for all things past, since the Peace of Cleves,
unless for such as were guilty of Treason; That the Bishop immediately after
the Ratification, should restore all the Places, Towns, Cities and Villages,
without any exception, which he had Conquered or taken from the States; and
that he should restore to the Subjects of the States all their Lands,
Signiories, and Houses which he had detained from them during the War. That the
Peace of Cleves should be of full force and effect in all things not contrary
to this present Treaty. That the Count of Benthem, his servants, Vassals, and
Subjects should also be comprised in the General Amnesty. That the Emperor and
the King of Spain be desired to be Cautionaries for the observation of this
Treaty.

The French in their Conquer*d Cities having intelligence of this Peace, durst
not hazard themselves there any longer, though they extorted great sums of money
from the Inhabitants before they departed, from Woerden 16000 Livers, Bommel
36000, Vtrecht 45000, Campen 80000, Thuel 22000, Zutphen 70000 for
Contribution, and 70000 to save their Fortifications, Anberm 14000 for the
Governor, and 100000 for the King, Nimmeghen 55000, and the Upper and Lower
Betuwe the same sum. As for Wesel, Enmersch and Rees, the King of France had
given them to the Elector of Brandenburgh, so that he retained in his hands
nothing of his Conquests from the States, but Graef and Mastricht, the first of
which places was valiantly recovered by the Prince of Orange, and the latter
restored by the Peace.

At what time the French quitted their Conquests, the Elector of Cologn quitted
also the City of Deventer after he had made an agreement for 42000 Crowns, for
Contribution money. The Munsterians also in pursuance of the Treaty quitted the
Cities of Hasselts, Swartsluys, and Zwoll, after they had committed several
disorders in the Country.

This turn of the tide no way pleased the Roman Catholics. At Vtrecht and in
several other places, they were in hopes that the French would return; and that
then they should be put into possession of the Government of the Province; nay
they gave it out so in public. They were so obstinate at Otmarsum, that they
would not surrender their Churches to those of the Reformed Religion, which
caused some disorders at first, though they were quickly appeased.

But though the Peace between the Emperor, the States General, and the Bishop
of Cologn, were thus concluded; yet the Elector of Cologn did not so soon
forsake the French Interest, being still incensed by the Bishop of Strasburgh.
However his Imperial Majesty had prescribed him a time to declare himself which
was near expiration. One main obstacle was that he could not brook, that the
Emperor should keep a Garrison in the City of Bon. He also demanded of the
States, as the price of his Friendship, the County of Meurs, the City of
Rynbork, and forty thousand Crowns toward the expenses of the War. But the
States would allow him none of his Pretensions, only they were willing he
should put a Garrison into Rynborck, but that he should renounce all his claim
to the County of Meurs. He had also demanded free exercise of the Catholic
Religion in the Province of Over-Yssel, but the Emperors Ambassadors, well
knowing it would never be granted, declared to him that it was not a reasonable
request. For that the States General never permitted the exercise of the
Catholic Religion in any of their Territories. Thereupon seeing the Cloud
coming, he quitted all his pretensions, and upon that a Peace followed between
the Emperor and him, as also betwixt him and States General; the chief Articles
whereof were, That there should be a firm and lasting Peace; that after the
Ratification of the Treaty, the Elector should restore to the States all the
Places which he had taken from them during the War, in the same Condition as
they were before they were taken, without any wast or spoil, or any demand of
Contribution. That he should keep the sums already paid, but that he should
release the the Hostages which he detained for the payment of such sums as were
demanded. That all Lands and Signiories taken from the Subjects of the United
Provinces shall be restored them. On the other side that the State should quit
all their pretensions to the Town of Rynbork and the Fortifications thereof.
The County of Lingen should be restored to the Prince of Orange.

Certainly the two Bishops never dreamt that the Face of Affairs would have
altered after so strange a manner, and that they should be forced to beg for
Peace from the States. More especially the Bishop of Munster was deceived, who
in the month of July, before sent to the City of Embden to send their Deputies
to him, to Newfort, there to consult about such things as tended to their
repose and security. The Inhabitants of Embden had set themselves in an exact
Neutrality all the time of the War, however they send their Deputies to the
place appointed, with his demands, viz. That the Citizens of Embden, should
dismiss the States Garrison, and receive into the Town for their security two
thousand of the Bishops Soldiers. To which the Deputies making answer, that
they could not consent to any such proposal, till they had acquainted their
High and Mightinesses, How said the Bishops Commissioners, who are they? To
which one of the Deputies from Embden replying, That the States General were
sufficiently known to all the world. Yes, the other made answer, They were so
formerly, but now the world knows no such sort of men. Upon which reply the
Deputies from Embden took their leaves; and gave their Magistracy an account of
what had passed. But they had no such low and contemtible thoughts of the
States as the Bishop had, and therefore gave him an absolute denial to his
demand.

In the mean while the King of France was greatly offended at the two Bishops,
because they had made a Peace with the Emperor and the States. Munster excused
himself by his Agent, that he had been constrained to make a Peace with the
States, because that the next Spring, he should have otherwise been assailed
not only by the Imperialists, but also by the Elector of Brandenburgh, and Duke
of Lunenburgh. But the King was not at all satisfied with this excuse, and that
so much the less, because he had taken the other side, and sent all his men to
the Emperor, who being arrived in the parts about Cologn, began to mutiny,
being thereto incited by the French that were among them, who persuaded them
that if they would serve the King of France he would allow them thirty Crowns a
man. So that many of the Regiment of Colonel Nagel killed their Officers, and
deserted their Colors. But this Mutiny was soon appeased by hanging some of
the principal Ringleaders, and paying off the rest of the Soldiers. As for the
Bishop he had promised the Emperor by a Collateral agreement to supply him the
next Spring, in the year 167^. with a body of ten thousand men; but he found it
a difficult task to be as good as his word, in regard that the six thousand
that had wintered in Alsatia were reduced to two thousand ^orse and three
hundred Foot.

Thus the King of France lost two Friends but in the lieu of them, the King of
Sueden instead of being a Mediator, showed himself an Enemy to the Allies, and
though to his disadvantage, had in a Hostile manner assailed the Territories of
the Elector of Brandenburgh. Thereupon the States General assisted the said
Elector, being thereto obliged by their reciprocal Alliance, and their own
Interest. Which caused the King of Sueden in February, 1675. to send an
Ambassador to the Bishop of Munster, to desire him not to give passage to the
Forces which the States should send through his Territories to Bremen. In which
Affairs the Bishop carried himself fairly enough, for he made use of no flams
or delays either on the one side or the other, but gave this plain answer, that
he should be sorry there should be any War between the Crown of Sueden and the
States General or their Allies, but if any such thing should happen, that he
was bound to obey the Orders of his Imperial Majesty.

And the more to approve himself the Emperors servant, in June the same year,
he told the Sieur Fischer the Emperors Ambassador who gave him a visit at
Coesvelt, that M. Verjus the King of Frances Ambassador had earnestly
solicited him with promise of great matters to take his part, or at least to
observe an exact Neutrality; but that he was resolved not to lend an Ear to his
Enchantments. Some applauded him highly for it, and looked upon his refusal, as
a sign of his Fidelity to the Empire, and believed he would mend in his Old
Age. Though others were of opinion, that if his words were true, he spoke them
not so much from the reality of his Intentions, as out of fear of being utterly
ruined; for otherwise, said they, he would never have refused the Gold of
France, which he loved so dearly: for the money designed him was afterward
expended in Italy, Portugal and Switzerland for the raising of new men.

More than that in pursuit of his Alliance with the Emperor, he raised a body
of eight thousand men in the Counties of Rheeda and Rhitbergh, with an
intention to march with this little Army toward Bremen, and to have done the
Swedes what mischief he could. But in the interim he received Orders from his
Imperial Majesty to march toward the County of Lip, immediately he obeyed,
carrying along with him several great Guns, and put a Garrison into the City of
Blombergh. He also besieged Lemgou, for refusing him entrance, and took it
without any great trouble together with Waerentbolts; and when he had so done,
he made the County pay him a Contribution of twelve thousand Crowns. He also
did his utmost to draw the Duke of Hanover to his party, and to persuade him to
quit the French and Swedes, so that now he showed himself as passionate an
Enemy, as before he appeared a zealous Friend to the King of France.

His Enmity to the Swede proceeded from his unhandsome proceedings, in that he
had publicly taken part with the French, contrary to his promises of
Assistance, to which he was obliged by the Triple Alliance and other Treaties,
and contrary to the trst reposed in him, as having received several sums of
money to raise an Auxiliary Force. For these reasons he possessed himself of the
Territory of Wildeshuysen appeartaining to the Jurisdiction of Bremen; he
expelled the Swedes out of the Cities of Telgenbuysen and Verden, and being
assisted by the Forces of Denmark and Brandenburgh, he made himself Master of
Otterbergh and Buxtehude.

In the midst of these Transactions he had also made another Alliance with the
Crown of Spain, and the States General; wherein he had promised to supply them
with three thousand men for a certain sum of money, but that these Levies
should remain with the rest of the Munster-Troops to act with the Imperialists
against the French; or where absolute necessity should require their
assistance. Or if the States desired more men, the Bishop obliged himself to
furnish them with eight Thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse, provided that
they paid them in the same manner as they paid the three thousand already
raised. This Treaty was to last ten years after the expiration of the present
War. And in case that either of the three Confederates were invaded, that the
other two should assist him that was first assailed. That is to say, that the
King of Spain and the States should assist the Bishop with two thousand Horse,
and four thousand Foot, and that the Bishop should assist them with five
hundred Foot, and a thousand Horse.

But in regard that all which the Bishop acted afterward was in common with
the rest of the Allies, we shall forbear to speak of these things, which should
we undertake, we should be forced to make an entire History of the Wars in
Germany, Brandenburgh and Denmark, which would far exceed the purpose of this
short Relation.

Thus then we have given an account of the Birth of this Bishop, or at least we
have said as much as we could possibly learn concerning it. We have also given
the Reader an account of his Manners, his Humor and his Disposition, all which
have appeared sufficiently by his Actions. We have also made a Relation of the
Contentions and D^ssentions by which he was advanced to his D^gnity; as also of
the eff^cts of his Martial and quarrelsom humor, which displayed it self first
against his own Subjects, then against several Members of the Empire, and soon
after against the States General. We have showed the troubles and quarrels that
arose in the Election of his Coadjutor and successor. And lastly how he sold
himself to several Princes to satisfy his Avarice and Hatred, and how he
deserted them upon the change of their Fortune.

Most certainly he impoverished and ruined his Subjects by his continual Wars,
which were still voluntarily undertaken, and the occasions sought by himself;
in the maintaining of which he did more than ordinary mischief and damage to
his Neighbors. More especially he was the particular plague of Munster,
Drenthe, and Twente, of Groneng, and Over-Yssel.

Upon all these Transactions of his Dignified Life, some have made these
observations: 1. That the Bishop made so little advantage by all his Wars,
unless perhaps that he might hoard up some considerable Sums of ready money,
that he made no addition to his Territories, and by that at his latter end he
wan some few places from the Swedes in the Territories of Bremen, and Verdon;
which advantages, lost again soon after his death, could in no measure
recompense for the ruin of his own Subjects and Diocese, of which he himself
was the only occasion, nor be compared to the loss of so many thousands of men
slain, murdered plundered and undon by his means. 2. That though he were a
Prince of small Power, and the Master of but a slender Dominion, yet that still
be so ordered his affairs, as to oblige Potent Kings to take his part, and with
immense Sums to purchase his Friendship: but that so happened, by reason of the
situation of his Country, so commodiously seated among his Neighbors. 3. That
having so many and such Potent Adversaries, and having so often ran such
perilous hazards, he has still warded off the fatal blow by his dextrous and
seasonable Change of Parties. 4. That he should always have Soldiers at his
service, and several Volunteers, though he paid them so ill, and many times
gave them nothing at all. But the reason of that was plain, in regard he gave
them an uncontrolled Liberty to commit all manner of Enormities, Rapines, and
Spoils, even upon his very Allies, not excusing his own Subjects from the same
Oppression. 5. That though he lived in perpetual trouble, and spent his days in
the continual Toyls of War, yet that he should arrive at so fair an Age, never
molested with Diseases but still retaining an admirable vigor both of body and
mind.

To tell the Causes of his restless Activity will be easy; when we consider,
1. His unquiet and turbulent disposition, that would never suffer him to be in
Repose, and which was also heigh^^ned and inflamed by the instigations of
others. 2. The hatred and rancour which he bare the States General, arising
from some imaginary Wrong, or rather from his Religion, as being so embitter'd
against those of the Protestant Religion, that he could have killed them all
with his own hands. 3. His Ambition and Desire of rendering himself renowned by
his Wars. 4. His Avarice and Greediness to heap up great sums of ready money for
himself and his Heirs. 5. His vain expectations of being made Pope, in
consideration of his Wars against the Heretics, and his Zeal for the Catholic
Religion.

For he was wont to say, He is not worthy to be great who makes it not his
Endeavor to grow greater; wherein if the success do not answer the design,
however he shall gain the Reputation of having done great things. His
resolutions are in his own power, but the success is in the hands of Fortune,
which willingly assists the courageous.

As this was one of his chief Apophthegms, I find but few more that were
thought worthy the Record either of History or Tradition.

Being advised by one of his intimate friends not to undertake the first War
against Holland, who told him that he would in the end prove too weak for them,
that had so long withstood, and done so much mischief to the King of Spain for
fourscore years together. He made answer, Come, Come, Little Saints sometimes
work great Miracles.

In like manner, when a little after his being advanced to his dignity, He was
Counseled to deal gently with the City of Munster. No Prince, said he, can be
called powerful whose Power does not extend it self over his Subjects.

Being told, the first time that he made Peace with the States, That he had
lost more than he had got by the War, Princes, said he, that go to War, are
like Gamesters at Trick Track; for the Dice will not always run as they would
have them.

It is reported also that one time he said to one of his Generals, A little
pretense of Right will justify a whole War.

But as our Bishop had his Vices, certainly he was not without some Eminent
Virtues, though I must confess I never yet could be informed what they were,
and must therefore be forced to bury them in silence.

At length the Fatal hour came, which gave him to understand, that the Greatest
Princes are but vanity it self, and no more than the meanest among men.

He lamented very cordially that he had so much over burdened his Subjects,
and that his Government had been so cruel toward them; but he pleaded, That it
was out of necessity, and to resist his Enemies.

He was very much troubled about his debts; and a little before he expired he
ordered his Executors, among whom was the Sub Dean and Doctor Ham, to take
particular care to see them paid, telling them withal, that though he knew he
owed much, yet he was very well satisfied that there was sufficient to
discharge them all; which he left to their Consciences, as knowing where his
money lay.

He ordered the sum of twenty thousand Crowns for the expenses of his Funeral.
He caused four Silver Candlesticks to be made of the value of two thousand
Crowns apiece, to stand upon the Altar of the Chapel where he was interred,
for the Wax-Candles that were to be kept perpetually burning. He also appointed
the fourth of November to be the day of his Funeral, and that the same day a
Chapter should be called to introduce the new Bishop. He also caused a Siver
Ship to be made, in memory of a French Ship that he had taken upon the Coast of
Friesland; though others say 'twas only a small Barque made Use of for the
Unlading of Greater Vessels.

So soon as the breath was out of his body every one seized upon what they
could snatch; carrying away, not only his money, but also all the gold and
silver Movables in his Chamber; nay they stripped him of the meanest things that
were in the Chamber, leaving him alone as it were in a ransackt Room.

He had Governed the Diocese twenty eight years, though the account of his Age
is variously reported, some allowing him seventy one, others seventy two years.
In the year 1667. at the Election of his Successor, he acknowledged himself in
the sixtieth year of his Age* from which time to his death we reckon full
eleven years; which is the truest account we can give of his Age.

The present Bishop his Successor, soon after his Death, published a Pious
Exhortation to all his Subject, to betake themselves to their Devotions and
Prayers for the Soul of the decas'd, in these words.

Ferdinand by the Grace of God and the Apostolic See, Bishop of Munster and
Paderborn, Vicount of Strombergh, Prince of the Empire, Count of Pyemont and
Borkelo, etc.
To the Venerable Clergy and well beloved People of the City and Bishopric of
Munster, perpetual Greeting in our Lord.
IT has pleased him who takes away the Souls of Princes when he pleases, to
call from this life to a better, our dear Brother, Cousin and Predecessor, the
Sieur Christopher Bernard, Bishop of Munster, Administratour of Corvey, Lord of
Borkelo, after he had Governed the Diocese of Munster to his immortal praise,
with a care truly Paternal. And though we make no doubt, but that his Subjects,
who in his life time loved him as a Father, and reverenced him as their Prince,
will not be wanting in their Christian Duties and Prayers which they owe to the
Deceased: Nevertheless we have thought fit to admonish and ordain with the
advice of our Reverend Chapter, That all Priests, as well Secular as Regular,
depending upon the Diocese of Munster, in the daily Oblation of the Holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, and others in their daily Prayers, do, with all humility
recommend the Soul of this great Prince to the abound Mercy of our Lord, to the
end he may obtain Eternal Salvation among the Blessed Souls whom he had made
himself known upon Earth by his Virtues and Heroic Acts.

And whereas it has pleased the Omnipotent to lay the burden of the Succession
upon our shoulders, after a lawful Election approved by the Apostolic and
Imperial Authority: We knowing the importance thereof, and deeply sensible of
the present Troubles and Evils that threaten us on every side: earnestly desire
the Prayers and Charity of our devout Subjects, that our weakness, being
supported by the Power of God, may be able to support the Charge committed to
Us, through the Merits and Common Prayers of our people, etc.

Ferdinand, L. LS. Vr. Alpen. Vic. Genesis

Thus we have seen the death of the so much renowned Bishop of Munster the
Sieur Christopher Bernard; full of years, yet enjoying the vigor of his senses
to the last gasp. And as it was his chance to be advanced just after the Peace
made with the Emperor, France, Spain, Swedeland and the United Provinces; so he
also happened to dye presently after the Peace made between France, Spain, and
the States General.

His death restored both Quiet and Repose to all his Neighbors, who were still
afraid that so soon as the Emperor and France should be agreed, he would be
cutting out new Employment for himself; for he never failed of a pretense. But
Providence has better provided for them. For they may now assure themselves of
security, under the Government of his Successor the present Bishop, and his
Subjects may hope for an Age of Silver after that of Iron, as now passed off
with the precedeing Bishop. For it is affirmed that he is a Prince mild and
pacifick, an Enemy to all sorts of trouble, and one that abominates the
Desolations of War; and besides all this, a lover of Learning and Learned men:
and it is Generally observed that those Provinces are usually most happy, whose
Princes prefer Learning before War, and Books before Armies.

True it is that upon his Election to be Coadjutor and Successor, several
Quarrel* and Contentions arose between the Bishop deceased and a good part of
the Members of the Chapter; but we are assured that the present Bishop had
never any hand in those Disputes, nor ever afforded the least Fuel to foment
them. Neither was it a thing ever sought by him or desir^d of Christopher
Bernard, who carried on his Design altogether without his knowledge. So that
those disorders are no way to be imputed to the present Bishop.

An Authentic Letter touching the Birth of Christopher Bernard Bishop of
Munster.
Sir,
BEcause there are various Reports concerning the affair, of the truth whereof
you desire me to inform you; I thought my self obliged to give you the best
satisfaction I could: In order to which I have discoursed the most Ancient and
most knowing persons in these parts, who all agree that the Bishop of Munster
was conceived in Prison at Bevergeerde, but that he was born in his Fathers
Castle of Bispink. For it happened that the Father of the Bishop, whose name
was Gaten Bispink, had ^ad several Quarrels with Marshal Morien, Lord of
Noorkirk his Neighbor, about the privilege of Hunting. Which continuing, one
time among the rest, the Marshal seized Gatens Huntsmen and Dogs, and shut them
up so long, till they eat one another for want of food. Soon after they both
came to Munster, where Gaten meeting the Marshal, asked him when he would send
him his Huntsmen and his Dogs home? To which Morien replied, very suddenly; and
withal told Gaten that he had certain Papers about him that concerned the
business; but instead of showing the Papers, threw off his Cloak, and drew his
Sword. Gaten, though be had been Drinking hard, drew his Sword half out, and
parly'd a while, till necessity constrained him, and that his Servants call to
him to have a care of himself: at what time he drew his Sword quite out and
slew his Assaylant. The Fact being thus Committed, Gaten never absented
himself, and was therefore Imprisoned in the Castle of Bevergeerde; and when
his Judges allowed him to choose an Advocate, he refused to do it, but pleaded
his own Cause, and carried his business so well, that at length his Wife was
permitted to come and live with him; and so it came to pass that our Bishop was
Begot and Conceived in Prison. True it is that his Father was at length
acquitted, but he had vowed not to stir out of Prison till his Prosecutors had
paid him all the Costs of his Imprisonment and his Suit, which had lasted
thirteen years; so that his Wife being near her time, returned to Bispinck,
where she lay in. After the Father was dead, the Son was made a Canon of
Munster; and being much inclined to War, and well versed in Military Affairs,
he was made first Commissary at War; and at length, after the death of the last
Bishop, advanced to the Episcopal Dignity.


Another Letter to the same Effect.
Sir,
AFter I had Read your Letter, I made all the Enquiry I could to satisfy your
Curiosity; but because there are few alive that were living at that time, there
is very little of truth and reality to be reported. Certain it is that the said
Bishop was begot in Prison, to which his Father was Committed for Murder. But
Opinions are various touching the Right of the Occasion, whether it were on his
side or no. The Favorers of the deceased Bishop will have his Father to be
innocent, though others believe that no man durst say otherwise while ^e lived,
and that length of time has caused it to be granted for truth.

Most certain it is that there were desperate Quarrels between the Bishops
Father (who was called Gaten Bispink, from his Castle of Bispink) and the
Marshal Mo^i^n about their privileges of Hunting, whereby the former very much
prejudiced the latter, who because the other would take no warning seiz^d his
Dogs, and shut them up so long ^ill they were starved to death. A while after
they met at Munster, and Gaten being in drink, asked Morien for his Dogs in
very sharp and abusive terms, threatening the Marshal withal. B. Morien being a
person of Courage, and not able to brook such Language, laid his hand upon his
Sword and told Gaten that he was ready to answer him with his Sword in his
hand. Some say that Gaten declined the Combat, and that he was at length
compelled to fight in his own defense; others affirm that he immediately drew
and fell on. However it were, the Marshal was slain, and Gaten Imprisoned at
Bevergeerde, where he died in some few years after. It is reported that his
Judges had given him leave to go home, after they had examined the Fact: but he
refused to stir till the Kindred of the person slain should pay him all the
Charges of his Imprisonment; Though others believe that to be very improbable,
and an Invention only to free him from Scandal and Ignominy of a tedious
fourteen years Thraldom. After Gaten had been some time in Prison, his wife was
allow^d to go and live with him; and thus in happened that the Bishop was begot
and conceived in Prison; though his Mother lay in at her Castle of Bispink.
Thu^ in Generals all agree; though there may be some incertainty in the
Circumstances which aggravate or mitigate the Offense, of which people take the
Liberty to jud^ according to their affections for the Bishop. Which is not to
be wondered at in a Fact committed so long since; in regard we our selves have
frequent experience, that Murders are by some highly defended and pleaded for,
by others as much exclaimed against and condemned, which proceeds from the
various judgments that affection or hatred makes upon the Causes and
Circumstances of the Crime.


THE END.

