The Life and Death of Charles the First, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland: Containing an Account of his Sufferings; His TRIAL, SENTENCE, and
Dying Words on the Scaffold; and his sorrowful Farewell and Advice to his
Children, and the whole Nation in general.



London, Printed by J. Bradford, in Fetter-Lane.

The Life and Death of Charles the First, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland.
THIS Pious, though Unfortunate Prince Charles the first, King of Great Britain,
France and Ireland, was the Son of James the 6th, King of Scots, and Anne his
Wife, Daughter to the King of Denmark: He was born at Dunfermeling, one of the
Principal Towns of Fife in Scotland, on Novem. 19. Anno 1600. in so much
Weakness, that his Baptism was hastened without the usual Ceremonies;
Providence seeming to Consecrate him to Suffering from the very Womb. At 2
years of Age he was created Duke of Albany, Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Ross,
and Baron of Ardmanock. When he was 3 years Old, he was committed to the Care
and Governance of Sir Robert Cary's Lady, as a Reward for being the first
Messenger of Queen Elizabeth's Death. At 11 years of age he was made Knight of
the Garter, and the next Year his elder Brother Prince Henry dying, he
succeeded him in the Dukedom of Cornwall. When he was 16 years of Age he was
created Prince of Wales; Earl of Chester and Flint, the Revenues thereof being
assigned him for the Maintenance of his Court. At 22 years of Age, he was sent
by the King his Father into Spain, to contract a Marriage with the Iafanta, but
this was liker to turn into a War with the Spaniards, and a Marriage was sought
with Henrieta Maria the youngest Daughter of the French King. In the interim of
which King James died at Theobalds, Sunday March the 27th, 1625. And Prince
Charles was immediately proclaimed King at the Court Gate, and so throughout
the three Kingdoms, with infinite Rejoycings. His first Public Act was
celebrating his Father's Funeral, whereat himself was chief Mourner, contrary
to the Practice of all his Royal Predecessors: When he had paid that Debt, he
next provided for Posterity, and therefore hastened the coming over of his
Royal Consort, whom he received at Dover, and was Married on Trinity-Sunday at
Canterbury. Thus having dispatched the Affairs of his Family, he applied
himself to those of the Kingdom, in which he seemed not so much to ascend a
Throne, as to wrestle with all the Difficulties of a corrupted State, whose
long Peace had softened the Nobles into Court-Pleasures, and made the Commons
Insolent by a great Plenty. His First Parliament began June 18. At the Opening
of which the King acquainted them with the necessary Supplies for the War with
Spain, which they had importunatly through his Mediation engaged his Father in,
which after some Petitions and Delays, they answered but with two Subsidies,
too poor a stock to furnish an Army, yet was kindly received: in Expectation of
more at the next Sitting: For the Infection seizing upon London, the Parliament
was adjouru'd till August, when they were to meet at Oxford; and at that time
he passed some Acts that were presented to him. At the next Session, he gave a
Complying and Satisfactory Answer to all their Petitions, and expected a Return
in larger Subsidies, toward the Spanish War, but instead of these, there were
high and furious Debates; Grievances, Consultations to form and Publish
Remonstrances, Accasations against the Duke of Buckingham; which the King
esteeming Reproaches of his Government, Dissolves that Assembly, hoping to find
one of a less Choleric Complexion after his Coronation. This drew after it
another Mischief, the Miscarriage of the Designs upon Spain by rendering (for
want of Supplies) the Fleet incapable of attempting Cadiz. And now Feb. 2d. the
King performed the Ceremony of his Coronation, after which he began a 2d.
Parliament, wherein the Commons Voted him 4 Subsidies, but the Faction then
forming in the Kingdom, tacking it to other matters, as the Ruin of the Duke
of Buckingham, and Remonstrances against the Government: the King Dissolves the
Parliament ( June 18.) and the Bill for the Subsidies never passed. This
misunderstanding at Home, produced another War abroad, for the King of France
taking advantage of these Domestic Broils began open War and Seized upon the
English Merchants in the River of Bourdeaux. The next Year (1627) the King
quickened by the Petitions of the Rochellers; who sued for his Protection, as
well as by the Justice of his own Cause, sent the Duke of Buckingham to attack
the Isle of Rhee, which partly through the Duke's Conduct miscarried. This
occasioned the King to call another Parliament, which in the beginning proved
very shameful, but the Faction labor to form new Discontents and Jealousies,
and are again hammering out Remonstrances to Reproach him and his Government
which the King being unable to endure, he Adjourns the Parliament. June 26th.
till October. 20. soon after Peace was clapped up with France, and King Charles the
Second Born, all was in Peace and Quietness till 1632 when the King took a
journey into Scotland, to receive the Imperial Crown there, and was accordingly
Crowned at Edinburgh June 10th. and returned with great welcome again into
Eungland; But the Malcontents here defus'd their Poison; they complained of
Invasions on their Spiritual Liberttes, because the Bishops endeavored to
reduce the Ceremonies of the Church to their Primitive Observance, for which
both his Majesty and they were defamed with Popery: And now the Tax of
Ship Money appeared that was likewise pretended a Breach to their Civil
Liberties, and contrary to Law, because not laid by Parliament: Amidst all
these difficulties and Calumnies the King hitherto had Governed so, that sober
Men could not Pray for, nor Heaven grant in mercy to a People any greater
happiness; but for the Arts and Fury of some Wicked Men, who endeavored to
overwhelm every Part of the Kings Dominions with a Deluge of Blood. The first
storm arose from the North, where Disputes were managed about Church
Government; till at length the King Marches that way with a Gallant Army, and
Obliged the Scots to sue for an Accommodation; but they soon broke their Faith
as soon as the King had Disbanded his Army; which occasioned the King to
prepare for another Army, and in order thereto calls a Parliament in Ireland,
and another in England, which latter he was fain to Dissolve without any
Effect. The King however, Vigourously Prosecuted his Undertaking, and raised a
sufficient Army, but could not do it with equal speed to his Enemies, so that
he gave a Defeat to a Party of it, e're the Rear could be brought up, Commanded
by the Earl of Strafford: He was no sooner arrived at the Army himself, but
there followed him a Petition of some English Lords, Conformable to the Scotch
Remonstrance, which they called the Inventions of the Army; so that his Majesty
might justly fear some attempts in the South, while he was thus Defending
himself in the North. The King answered these Petitioners to their
Satisfaction, which was to Summon all the Peers to Consult what would be most
Conducive to the safety and Honor of the Nation* who accordingly met S. p. 24.
where it was determined that a Parliament should be called to meet Novem. 3^.
and in the mean time a Cessation should be made with the Scots Novem 3d. began
that fatal Parliament that Involved the Nation in a Sea of blood, ruined the
King, and betrayed all there own Privileges, and the Peoples Liberty into the
Power of a Phanatick and Perfidious Army. And though his Majesty could not hope
to find them Moderate, yet he endeavored to make them so, Committing himself
freely to the Direction of his English Subjects, promising to satisfy all
their just Grievances, but the Malignity of some few, and the Ignorance of
others Employed that Assembly to other matters, First in purging the House of
such as they thought would not comply with their Destructive Enterprises, then
they declared upon public Grievances, every way raising up Contumelies against
the present Power. Then they fell upon all the Chief Ministers of State,
Impeached the Earl of Strafford, the Archbishop of Canterbury and others, and
after five Months time, for so long they took to take up Evidence: the Earl of
Strafford is brought to his Trial; Condemned and Beheaded, when this was done,
the Parliament began to think of sending home the Scots, and his Majesty
follows them into Scotland, to settle the Kingdom, while the King was here,
broke out the Popish Rebellion in Ireland, which helped yet more to inflame
matters. The next thing after the Kings Return from Scotland, was to take away
the Votes of the Bishops in the House of Lords, and the Ceremonies in the
Church: And Twelve of the Bishops that Protested aganst this unwarrantable
Proceeding were Committed to the Tower. They spread a rumor, that they
intended to Impeach the Queen of High Treason, which necesitates the King to
send Her into France for her Security, and besides the attempts upon his
Honor; they endeavor another upon his Family, in Seizing upon the Prince, and
Duke of York, which the King hearing, he immediately removes with the two young
Princes to Theobalds, in order to his Journey to the North, where he intended
to settle his Abode till he saw what Issue this storm would have, and that the
King on his arrival there, should not make use of that Magazine at Hull, which
at his own Charges he had provided for the Scotch Expedition. The Parliament
send down Sir John Hotham, to Seize upon them, who when his Majesty approached
the Place, shut the Gates against him, aed denied him Entrance: And now began
to kindle the War, which soon took Fire on the whole Nation. The Parliament
having the Navy in their Hands: Some vain Proposals of Peace from the King,
hastened all they could to raise Horse and Foot: They seized also upon the
Revenues of the King, Queen, Prince, and Bishops: and plundered the Houses of
those Lords and Gentlemen, whom they Suspected to be Favorites of the Kings
Cause. His Majesty in the interim, moved from York to Nothingham, and thence to
Shrewsbury, gathering an Army greater than his Enemies imagined he could have
formed; with which he begins his March toward London, and in his way thither,
met with Essex's Army, and at Edgehill gave them Battle, and Routed them; took
Banbury, and entered Tryumphantly into Oxford; and having secured that Place,
he Advances toward London, and fell upon the remainder of Esse's Army, at
Brentford, sunk their Ordnance, and took Five hundred Prisoners and intended to
proceed to London, but that he had intelligence that the City was sending all
their Auxillaries to Reinforce Essex's Troops, wherefore he returned again to
Oxford. At the opening of the Spring 1643. the Queen comes back into England,
bringing with her considerable Supplies, and great successes followed it, for
he obtains an Advantage, at Edghill that Oxford, and is Marching toward London,
Successes followed it. This put the Parliament upon a direct Method to encrase
the Nations Miseries by calling in the Scotch to their assistance: The Winter
was spent on both sides in preparations, though the King wrote for Peace, but
they burnt his Letters by the Hand of the Common Hangman, The Parliament Forces
increased by the Scottish Succors, obtain several Advantages over the Kings
Party. His Majesty having once more provided for the safety of the Queen, by
sending her to Exeter, there to be brought to Bed, and from thence seek shelter
in France, taking his last farewell of her, left Oxford strengthened against the
Siege, and afterward falling upon Sir William Waller at Cropedy-Bridge,
obtained a Complete Victory, which would have been of more Consequence, but for
his Majesty's tenderness in shedding his Subjects Blood. But all these little
Advantages weighed little to what soon followed in the Irrepareable Blow to the
King's Interest, received at Marston-Moor under Prince Rupert, which was
seconded by the Surrender of York, and all the whole North was reduc*d to the
Obedience of the Parliament: The King had some small success in the West
against Fssex, yet in general the tide run against him, and his Forces grew
Weaker every day; Jan. 10th. the Archbishop Laud was Beheaded on Tower Hill:
The fatal Battle of Naseby followed soon after, upon which the Kings Garrisons
Surrendered by heaps, and his Affairs quite ruined in England, all his hopes
were now on Scotland, which Montross had Conqur'd almost from one end to the
other; but at last he was quite Vanquished: under these Distresses His Majesty
finding no Security for his Person, for the Parliament would not let him come
to London: wherefore having no other hopes, he put himself into the Power of
the Scots; then Besieging Newark; who instead of Protecting him, make a Bargain
and Sale of him to the Parliament, for 200000l. and 200000l. more when they had
delivered up Berwick and other English Garrisons they were Possessed of; so the
Scots return home, and the English having bought the King, confine him to
Holmby-House; a Seat of his own in Northamtonshire. And now the business, as
they thought being done, there was like to be more Disputes, for the next
Difference is between the Parliament and the Army; the latter Seize the King,
and oppose and give Laws to their Masters: So that now both the Army and the
Parliament Court his Majesty: The latter send him Conditions of Peace, and the
former offer to Settle him on his Throne, he rejected those Propositions. Nor
did they agree much better about his Person: The Parliament send Instructions
for his being resident at Richmond, but the Army cannot submit to his being so
near the Parliament; they Convey him first to Royston, thence to Hatfield, and
not long after to Causam, and at length to Hampton Court. And now the Mystery
of Iniquity begins to work; Cromwell being afraid that the King should aggree
with the Parliament, offered to stand by him with the Army, and considering
likewise that he could not accomplish his Designs while the King remained so
near the Parliament; sent privately to the King, that he was in no Safety
their, and that he would be more secure in the Isle of White: upon which the
poor King so deluded makes his Escape thither by Night: and there sent
Propositions to the Parliament; which they reject with Indignation: Because the
King would include the Scots Interest: Upon this the Scots Enter England,
Demanding that the King might be brought to London, the Army Disbanded, and a
lasting Peace settled between the two Kingdoms, and joining with Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, for the King, they rout Lambert at Appleby, and afterward March into
Lancashire, intending for London, but Cromwell and Lambert joining Armies, gave
them an Entire Overthrow: After which Cromwell Marched into Scotland, and was
Victorious there; and now the Army out Plotting the Parliament called loudly to
have the King brought to Justice: In the mean time His Majesty was Conveyed out
of the Isle of White, and carried Prisoner to Hurst-Castle: and the House being
New-Moulded by the Army; proceeded to restore the Vote of Non-Address: That no
Message be received from the King on pain of Treason, and that the Council of
State should draw up a Charge of Treason against him: December: 10th. the King
was brought from Hurst-Castle to Windsor, and from thence to St. James's, and
all things were preparing for his Dismal Tragedy, in which the Juncto
proceeded, notwithstanding the Dissent of the Lords and the Remonstrance of the
Parliament of Scotland against it; so that they appointed a New Tribunal,
called the High-Court of Justice, who were empowered to Hear, Try, Judge and
Execute Charles Stuart King of England: They Annulled his Title, ordered the
Great Seal of England to be Broken, and a New one to be made.

On Saturday Jan. 20th. This Wicked High-Court of Justice sat in
Westminster Hall; John Bradshaw was President of this Pretended Court; the
Counselors to draw up the Charge, were Dorislaus, Dr. of Civil Laws, John
Cook Solliciter, Danby Sergeant at Arms: With Clerks, Messengers and
Doorkeepers, etc.

The Court being thus sat, and called over, the King was brought to the Bar by
Colonel Hacker, Conducting him to a Chair within the Bar, And then Bradshaw
said to the King.

Charles Stuart: King of England, the Commons of England, being sensible of the
Calamity brought upon this Nation, and of the Innocent Blood shed, which are
Imputed to you as the Author: according to that Duty which they ow to God and
the Nation, and themselves; and according to that Power and Fundamental Trust
reposed in them by the People; have Constituted this High-Court of Justice,
before which you are now brought, and are to hear your Charge, upon which the
Court will proceed. Then the Solliciter accused him of High Treason, and the
Charge was ordered to be read, though the King desired first to be heard.

The King often smiled whilst the Charge was reading, especially at those
words: Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, etc. Then Spoke Bradshaw: Sir you have heard
your Charge, and you find in the close of it, that the Court is Prayed in
behalf of the Commons of England, that you answer to the Charge, which the
Court now expects. Then the King demanded by what Authority they had brought
him thither? To which Bradshaw told him, That he was not to dispute that, but
to answer his Charge; and the King still denying the Jurisdiction of the Court,
it was adjourned till Monday following; so the King was conducted back; several
factious Fellows and lewd Soldiers shouting out for Justice, thinking the rest
of the People would have hallowed to the same Tune; but instead thereof, they
almost all cried out, God bless the King. On Monday, Jan. 22d, the King was
brought again to his Trial, at what time the King with abundance of Eloquence
argued against their pretended High Court, and not being able to out-reason him
that Day neither, they adjourned their Court again till the next; which was
Tuesday, Jan. 23. the Court sat again, and seventy three Commissioners were
present.

The King being brought into Court, Solicitor Cook summed up what had been
already done in it, and complaining of the great delay of Justice, moved for a
speedy Judgment against the King.

Bradshaw. Sir, you have heard what is moved by the Council on behalf of the
Kingdom against you, and now the Court expects that you give in your possitive
and Final Answer in plain English, whether you are Guilty, or Not Guilty, of
these Treasons laid to your Charge.


King. When I was here yesterday, I did desire to speak for the Liberties of
the People of England; I was interrupted, I desire to know yet, whether I may
speak freely, or not.


Bradshaw. Sir, you have heard the Resolution of the Court upon the like
Question, and that you ought to acknowledge the Jurisdiction of it, and Answer
to your Charge, and when you have done that you shall be heard at large.


King. For the Charge I value not a Rush, it is the Liberty of the People of
England that I stand for; for me to acknowledge a new Court that I never heard
of before: I, that am your King, that should be an example to all the People of
England, to uphold Justice, to maintain the Old Laws, Indeed I do not know how
to do it. You spoke well one day of the Obligation that was laid upon me by God
to maintain the Liberties of my People; the same Obligation you speak of calls
upon me to defend, as much as in me lies, the ancient Laws of the Kingdom;
therefore till I know that this is not against the Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, I can put in no particular Answer: If you will give me time, I will
show you my Reasons, and this --


Here the King was again interrupted, but recovering himself went on, saying,

By your favor, you ought not to interrupt me: How I came hither I know not,
there is no Law to make your King your Prisoner. I was in a Treaty on the
public Faith of the Kingdom, made to me by the two Houses of Parliament, that
was the Representative of the Kingdom, and I had almost made an end of the
Treaty, when I was hurried away and brought hither, and therefore --


Bradshaw. Sir, you must know the pleasure of the Court.


King. By your favor, Sir, --


Here Bradshaw interrupted him.

Bradshaw. Nay, Sir, by your favor you may not be permitted to fall into those
Discourses; you appear as a Delinquent, you have not acknowledged the Authority
of the (...), the Court craves it not of you, but once more they command you to
give your positive Answer. Clerk, Do your Duty.


King. Duty, Sir!


Then the Clerk read: Charles Stuart, King of England, you are accused in
behalf of the Commons of England* of diverse Crimes and Treasons which Charge
has been read unto you; the Court now equires you to give your positive and
final Answer, by way of Confession, or Denial of the Charge.

King. I say again to you, so that I may give Satisfaction to the People of
England, of the clearness of my Proceedings, not by way of Answer, but to
satisfy them, that I have done nothing against that Trust that has been
committed to me, I would do it; but to Acknowledge a New Court against their
Privileges to alter the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: Sir, you must excuse
me.


Bradshaw. Sir, this is the third time that you have publicly disavowed this
Court, and put an Affront upon it; how far you have preserved the Privileges of
the People your Actions have spoken; but, truly, Sir, Men's intentions should
be known by their Actions, you have written your meaning in bloody Characters
throughout the whole Kingdom; but, Sir, you understand the Pleasure of the
Court. Clerk, Record the Default; you that took Charge of the Prisoner take him
back again. So the King went forth with his Guards, and his Court adjourned to
the Painted Chamber, the Crier, as at other times, said God bless the Kingdom
of England.


Saturday the 27th of Jan. 1648, the Court sat again in Westminster Hall,
Bradshaw was in Scarlet Robes, after him 67 Commissioners answered to their
Names, the King came in, in his wonted posture with his Hat on, a company of
Soldiers and seditious Persons were placed about the Court, to cry for Justice,
Judgment and Execution, the People not daring to cry God bless him, for fear of
being beaten again by the Soldiers.

Bradshaw. Gentlemen, it is well known to all here present, that the Prisoner
at the Bar has been several times convented, and brought before this Court, to
make Answer to a Charge of High Treason, and other Crimes exhibited against
him, in the Name of the people of England, to which Charge being required to
Answer, he has been so far from Obeying the Commands of the Court, by
submitting to their Justice, as he began to take upon him reasoning, and
debating unto the Authority of the Court, and to the Highest Court that
appointed them to Try and Judge him; but being Overruled in that, and required
to make his Answer, he still continued contumacious, and refused to submit to
an answer; hereupon the Court, that they may not be wanting to themselves, nor
the Trust reposed in them, nor that any Man's Wilfulness prevent Justice they
have considered of the Charge, and of the Contumacy, and of that confession
which, in Law, does arise on that Contumacy; they have also considered the
Notoriety of the Fact charged upon this Prisoner, and upon the whole matter,
they are resolved, and have agreed upon a Sentence to be pronounced against
him; but in respect he does desire to be heard before the Sentence be
pronounced against him, the Court does resolve to hear him; yet, Sir, this I
must tell you beforehand, which you have been minded of at our Courts, if that
which you have to say be to offer any Debate concerning the Jurisdiction, you
are not to be heard in it. You have offered it formerly, and you have struck as
the root, that is, the Power and Supreme Authority of the Commons of England,
which this Court will not admit a Debate of, and which indeed is an irrational
thing in them to do, being a Court that Acts upon Authority derived from them:
But, Sir, if you have any thing to say in defense of your self, concerning the
matter charged, the Court has given me in command to hear you.


King. Since I see that you will not hear any thing of Debate, concerning that
which, I confess, I thought most material for the Peace of the Kingdom, and for
the Liberty of the Subject, I shall wave it; but only I must tell you, that
this many a day all things have been taken away from me, but that that I call
dearer to me than my Life, which is my Conscience and my Honor, and if I had
respect to my Life, more than the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the
Subject, certainly I should have made a particular defense for my Life, for by
that at least wise, I might have delayed an Ugly Sentence, which I believe will
pass upon me, therefore certainly, Sir, as a Man that has some understanding,
some knowledge of the World, if that true Zeal to my Country had not over born
the Care that I have for my own preservation, I should have gone another way to
work than that I have done. Now, Sir, I conceive that a hasty Sentence once
passed, may sooner be repented of, than recalled, and truly the self same
desire that I have for the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Liberty of the
Subject, more than my own particular Ends, makes me now at last desire that I
may say something that concerns both. I desire that before Sentence be given,
that I may be heard in the Printed Chamber, before the Lords and Commons. This
delay cannot be prejudicial to you, whatsoever I say, if that I say be no
Reason, those that hear must be Judges. I cannot be Judge of that which I have
to say, if it be reason, and really for the welfare of the Kingdom, and the
Liberty of the Subject, I am sure it is very well worth the hearing; therefore
I do conjure you, as you love that which you pretend, I hope it is real, the
Liberty of the Subject and Peace of the Kingdom, that you will grant me this
hearing before any Sentence passes; but if I cannot get this Liberty, I do
protest that your fair shows of Liberty and Peace, are pure shows, and that you
will not hear your King.


Bradshaw said this was declining the Jurisdiction of the Court, and delay, yet
the Court withdrew for half an Hour, Advised upon it, and Sat again.

Bradshaw said to the King, that the Court had considered what he had moved,
and also their own Authority; the return from the Court, said he, is this, That
they have been too much delayed by you already, and are Judges appointed by the
highest Authority, and Judges are no more delay than to deny Justice, and
notwithstanding what you have Offered, they are resolved to proceed to Sentence
and to Judgment, that is their Unanimous Resolution.

The King pressed again, and again, that he might be heard by the Lords and
Commons in the Painted Chamber with great Earnestness, and was often denied by
Bradshaw, at last the King desired that this motion of his might be entered.

Bradshaw began in a long Speech to declare the Grounds of the Sentence, highly
aggravating the King*s pretended Offenses, and misapplying both Law and History
to his present purpose; and when Bradshaw had done speaking, Broughten the
Clerk, Read the Sentence drawn up in Parchment to this Effect.

That whereas the Commons of England had appointed them an High-Court of
Justice, for the Trial of Charles Stewart King of England, before whom he had
been three times Convened, and at the first time a Charge of High Treason and
other High Crimes and Misdemeanors, was read in the behalf of Kingdom of the
England, etc. which Charge being read unto him as aforesaid, he the said
Charles Stewart was required to give his Answer, but he refused so to do, and
so expressed the several passages at the Trial, in refusing to Answer, for all
which Treasons and Crimes, this Court does Adjudge, that he the said Charles
Stewart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and public Enemy, shall be put to
Death by Severing his Head from his Body.

After the Sentence was Read, Bradshaw said, This Sentence now Read and
published, is the Act, Sentence, Judgment and Resolution of the whole Court,
and then the whole Court stood up, as assenting to what Bradshaw said.

King. Will you hear me a Word, Sir?


Bradshaw. Sir, you are not to be heard after the Sentence.


King. No, Sir!


Bradshaw. No, Sir, by your favor, Sir. Guard, withdraw your Prisoner.


King. I am not suffered to Speak, expect what Justice other People will have.


This pretended Court, after Judgment given, went into the Painted Chamber, and
appointed, Sir, Hardress Waller, Ireton, Harrison, Dean and Okey, to consider
of the time and place for the Execution.

The King being not allowed to Reply, was taken by his Guards to Sir Robert
Cotton's House, and as he passed down Stairs, the Rude Soldiers Scoffed at him,
blew the Smoke of their Tobacco in his Face (a thing always very offensitive to
him) strewed pieces of Pipes in his way, and one more abominable insolent than
the rest, Spit in his Face, which his Majesty patiently wiped off, taking no
farther notice of it: And as he passed farther, hearing some of them by the
instigation of their Officers, cry out, Justice, Justice, and Execution, he
said, Alas poor Souls, for a Piece of Money, they would do as much for their
Commanders. Afterward the King hearing that his Execution was determined to be
the next day, before the Palace at White Hall, he sent an Officer in the Army
to desire them, that he might see his Children before his Death, and that
Doctor Juxon, Bishop of London, might be permitted to assist him in his private
Devotions, and receiving the Sacrament, both which were granted to him upon a
Motion to the Parliament.

The same day that the Warrant was Signed for his Execution, the Duke of
Gloucester, and the Lady Elizabeth, were brought to him, whom he received with
great Joy and Satisfaction, and giving his Blessing to the Princess, He bid her
remember to tell her Brother James, that he should no more look upon Charles as
his Elder Brother only, but as his Sovereign, and that they should Love one
another, and forgive their Fathers Enemies. Then taking the Duke of Gloucester
upon his Knee, said, Sweetheart, now they will cut off thy Father's Head (at
which Words the Child looked very wishfully upon him) Mark Child what I say,
they will cut off my Head, and perhaps make thee a King; but mark what I say,
you must not be a King so long as your Brothers. Charles and James are alive;
for they will cut off your Brothers Heads, as soon as they can catch them, and
cut thy Head off too at last, and therefore I charge you, do not be made a King
by them. At which the Child sighing said, I will be torn in pieces first --
which falling so unexpectedly from a Child so young, it made the King rejoice
exceedingly.

On the fatal day* being the 30th of January, the Bishop of London read Divine
Service in his presence, and the 27 of Matthew, the History of our Savior's
Passion being appointed by the Church for that Day; he gave the Bishop thanks
for his seasonable choice of the Lesson; but the Bishop acquainting him that it
was the Service of the Day, it comforted him exceedingly, and then he proceeded
to receive the Holy Sacrament. His Devotions being ended, he was brought from
St. James's to White Hall, by a Regiment of Foot, part before and part behind,
with a Private Guard of Partisans about him, the Bishop of London on the on the
one Hand, and Colonel Tomlinson who had the Charge of him on the other
Bareheaded. The Guards marching but a slow pace, the King bid them go faster,
saying; That he now went before them to strive for an Heavenly Crown, with less
solicitude than he had often encouraged his Soldiers to Fight for an Earthly
Diadem. Being come to the end of the Park, he went up the Stairs leading to the
Long Gallery in White Hall, where formerly he used to Lodge, and there finding
an expected delay, the Scaffold being not ready, he past most of that time in
Prayer. About twelve a Clock, Colonel Hacker, with other Officers and Soldiers,
brought the King with the Bishop and Colonel Tomlinson through the
Banqueting House, to the Scaffold, a Passage being made through a Window. A
strong Guard of several Regiments of Horse and Foot, were planted on all sides,
which hindered the near approach of his Mourning Subjects (who for discovering
their Sorrow were barbarously used) and the King from speaking to be heard, and
therefore being upon the Scaffold, he chiefly directed his Speech to the
Bishop, and Colonel Tomlinson to this purpose.

I shall be very little heard of any body else, I shall therefore speak a Word
to you here; indeed I could have held my Peace very well, if I did not think
that holding my Peace would make some Men think that I did submit to the Guilt,
as well as the Punishment; but I think it is my Duty to God first, and then to
my Country, to clear my self, both as an Honest Man, a Good King, and a Good
Christian. I shall first begin with my Innocence, and in Troth I think it not
very needful to insist long upon this, for all the World knows, that I did
never begin a War with the two Houses of Parliaments, and I call God to
Witness, unto whom I must shortly make an account, that I did never intend to
Encroach upon their Privileges, they began upon me, it is the Militia they
began upon, they confessed the Militia was mine, but they thought fit to have it
from me, and to be short, if any body will look to the Dates of Commissions, of
their Commissions, and mine, and likewise to the Declaration, he will see
clearly that they began these Troubles, and not I. So as for the Guilt of these
Enormous Crimes that are laid against me, I hope that God will clear me. I will
not, for I am in Charity, and God forbid I should lay it upon the two Houses of
Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope they are free of this
Guilt; but I believe that ill Instruments between them and me, have been the
cause of all this Bloodshed, so that as I find my self clear of this, I hope,
and pray God, that they may too: yet for all this, God forbid I should be so
ill a Christian, as not to say God's Judgments are just upon me, many times he
does pay Justice by an unjust Sentence, that is ordinary, I will say this, that
an unjust Sentence, that is ordinary, I will say this, that an unjust Sentence
that I suffered to take effect, is punished by an unjust Sentence upon me; so
far I have said, to show you that I am an Innocent Man. Now to show you that I
am a good Christian, I hope there is a good Man [ Pointing to the Bishop] that
will bear me witness, that I have forgiven all the World, and even those in
particular that have been the cause of Death; who they are God knows, I do not
desire to know, I pray God forgive them; but this not all, my Charity must go
farther, I wish that they may Repent, indeed they have committed a great sin in
that particular. I pray God with St. Stephen, that be not laid to their charge;
and withal, that they may take the way to the peace of the Kingdom, for my
Charity commands me not only to forgive particular men, but endeavor to the
last gasp, the peace of the Kingdom. So, Sirs, I do with all my Soul, ( I see
there are some here that will carry it farther) the peace of the Kingdom. Sirs,
I must show you how you are out of the way, and put you in the way; first you
are out of the way, for certaily all the ways you ever had yet, as far as ever
I could find by any thing: If in the way of Conquest, certainly this is an ill
way, for Conquest in my Opinion, is never just, except there be a good and just
Cause, either for matter of Wrong, or a just Title, and then if you go beyond
the first Quarrel, that makes that Unjust at the end that was Just at first;
for if there be only matter of Conquest then it is a Robbery, as a Pirate said
to Alexander, that he was a great Robber, himself was but a petty Robber; and
so, Sirs, I think for the way that you are in, you are much out of the way.
Now, Sirs, to put put you in the way, believe it, you shall never go right, nor
God will never prosper you, until you give God his Due, the King his Due, (that
is my Successor) and the People their Due: I am as much for them as any of you.
You must give God his Due, by regulating the Church (according to the
Scripture) which is now out of order; and to set you in a way particularly now
I cannot, but only this, A National Synod freely called, freely debating among
themselves must settle this: When every Opinion is freely heard: For the King
indeed I will not, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct you for that,
therefore because it concerns my own particular, I only give you a touch of it.
For the people truly I desire their Liberty and Freedom as much as any body
whosoever; but I must tell you that their Liberty and Freedom consists in
having Government under those Laws, by which their Lives and theirs may be most
their own. It is not in having a share in the Government, that is nothing
appertaining to them; a Subject and a Sovereign, are clear differing things,
and therefore until you do that, I mean, that you put the People into that
Liberty as I say, they will never enjoy themselves.

Sir, It was for this that now I am come hither, for if I would have given way
to an Arbitrary Course, to have all Laws changed according to the Power of the
Sword, I need not to have come here; and therefore I tell you (and I pray to
God it be not laid to your charge) that I am the Martyr of the People. In
troth, Sirs, I shall not hold you any longer, I will only say this to you, that
I could have desired some little time longer, because I would have a little
better digested this I have said, and therefore I hope you will excuse me; I
have delivered my Conscience, I pray God you take take Courses, that are the
best for the good of the Kingdom, and your own Salvation.

Bishop. Though your Majesty's affections may be very well known as to Religion,
yet it may be expected that you should say something thereof for the World's
Satisfaction.


King. I thank you heartily my Lord, for that I had almost forgotten it; in
Troth, Sirs, my Conscience in Religion I think is very well known to all the
World, and therefore I declare before you all, That I dye a Christian,
according to the Profession of the Church of England, as I found it left me by
my Father; and this honest Man I think will witness it. Then speaking to the
Executioner, he said, I shall say but very short Prayers, and when I thrust out
my hands, -- let that be your Sign.


Then he called to the Bishop for his Night Cap, and having put it on, he said
to the Executioner, Does my Hair trouble you; who desired him to put it all
under his Cap, which the King did accordingly, with the help of the Executioner
and the Bishop: Then turning to the Executioner, he said, I have a good Cause,
and a righteous God on my side.

Bishop. There is but one Stage more, this Stage is turbulent and full of
trouble, it is a short one; but you may consider, it will soon carry you a very
great way. It will carry you from Earth to Heaven; and there you will find a
great deal of Cordial Joy and Happiness.


King. I go from a Corruptible, to an Incorruptible Crown, where no disturbance
can be, no disturbance in the World.


Bishop. You are Exchanged from a Temporary, to an Eternal Crown, a good
Exchange.


Then the King said, is my Hair well? and took off his Cloak and his George,
giving his George to the Bishop, saying Remember. Then he put off his Dublet,
and being in his Wastecoat, he put on his Cloak again, then looking upon the
Block, he said to the Executioner, You must set it fast.

Executioner. It is fast Sir.


King. When I put out my Hands this way, stretching them out -- Then do your
Work;


after having said two or three Words to himself as he stood with Hands lift up
to Heaven, immediately stooping down, he laid his Neck upon the Block: And then
the Executioner again putting his Hair under his Cap, the King thinking he had
been going to strike, said, Stay for the Sign.

Executioner. Yes, I will, and't pleasure your Majesty.


Then after a little pause, the King stretching forth his Hands, the
Executioner at one blow severed his Head from his Body; which, with his Body,
was put into a Coffin covered with black Velvet, and carried into his Lodgings
at White Hall: From thence it was carried to his House at St. James's, where
his Body was Embalmed, and put into a Coffin of Lead, and there lay a Fortnight
to be seen of the People. On Wednesday seven-night after, his Corpse embalmed
and coffined in Lead, was delivered to the care of four of his Servants, viz.
Mr. Herbert, Captain Anthony Mildmay, Captain Preston and Mr. John Joyner, who,
with others in Mourning, accompanied the Hearse that night to Windsor, and
placed it in the Room which was formerly the King's Bedchamber: Whence it was
next day removed into the Dean's Hall, and from thence, by the Duke of
Richmond, the Marquess of Hertford, the Marquess of Dorchester, and the Earl of
Lindsey, conveyed to St. George's Chapel, and there Interred in the Vault, as
is supposed, of King Henry the Eighth and Queen Jane, with this Inscription
upon the Coffin.

CHARLES, King of England, MDCXLVIII. This Unfortunate Prince was of a
Majestic, Comply Presence, of a sweet, grave, but melancholy aspect; His Face
was regular, handsome, and well complexioned; his Body strong, healthy, and well
made, and though of a low Stature, was able to endure the greatest Fatigues. In
his temper he was Brave, Magnificent, Liberal and Constant, a great Lover, and
as great a Master of Manly Exercises, and yet no less accomplished in the
Graces, and Entertainments of a Court: Nor did he fall short of the bravest
Hero's in Personal Valor, having exposed his Person in every Battle he Fought,
and oftentimes Charging in the Head of his Squadrons. He had a good taste of
Learning, and a more than ordinary skill in the Liberal Arts, especially
Pai^^ing, Sculpture, Architecture and Medals; and being a generous Benefactor
to the most celebrated Masters in those Arts, (...) acquired the Noblest
Collection of any Prince in his time, and more than all the Kings of England
had done before him. In his Devotions he was Constant, Regular, and Intent, a
great Patron of the Clergy of the Church of England, and so Zealous for the
Doctrine and Discipline of that Church, that he sealed it with his Blood; and
when he could no longer support it with his Arms, he defended it by his Pen,
beyond all contraction. He was well read in all the essential Points of
Divinity, and was as great a Master in it as his Father, but without the allay
of Pedantry: Of this, among either things, the Papers that passed betwixt him,
and Henderson at New Castle, will be a lasting Monument. He was a lover of
Episcopacy, because he understood its Antiquity and Excellency in
Ecclesiastical Government, in opposition to all other new invented Models
whatsoever. His great Presence of Mind was Conspicuous, both in the Field and
on the Scaffold, and was not mistaken in himself, when he said before the High
Court of Justice, That he understood as much Law as any Private Gentleman in
England. He was a Passionate Lover of the Queen, who was a Beautiful Lady, and
in all things very accomplished: In short he was the Best of Husbands, the Best
of Fathers, the Best of Masters, and peradventure the Best of Men. He spoke
several Languages very well, and with a singular good Grace; tho now and then,
when he was warm in Discourse he was inclinable to stammer. He wrote a
tolerable good Hand for a King, but his Sense was strong, and his Style
Laconick, and yet he seldom writ in any Language but English.

Some of his Manifesto's, Declarations, and other Public Papers* he drew
himself, and most of them he Corrected. In comparing those, of the Kings with
the Parliaments, he must have lost his Understanding, that does not give the
Preference to the Kings, for strength of reasoning, and Force of expression.
There are several pieces of his own Handwriting yet to be seen, which for
Matter and Form, surpass those of his ablest Ministers, and come nothing short
of Strafford and Falkland, two most Celebrated Pens of that Time. What his
Opinion was about Subjects Defending their Religion and Liberties by Force of
Arms, appeared in the Business of Rochel. For though some would have persuaded
us of late, that Defensive Arms were inconsistent with the Principles of the
Church of England; I hope they will not deny, but this King understood the
Doctrine and Principles of the English Church, as well as any other Person can
pretend to know them; and yet it is certain that in his Practice and
Declarations, he approved of the Rochellerr Vindicating their Religion and
Liberties from the Encroachments made by their Sovereign, and that by Force of
Arms; and assisted them in so doing. No Prince was better Instructed in the
Principles of Government than he was, and his only unhappiness was, that he
sometimes trusted to other Men's Counsels, rather than to his own, and put so
much Power into his Enemies hands in hopes of gaining them, that he was no
longer in Power to defend himself. In effect, he was too good a Man to be a
happy Prince, and rather was destroyed by his own tenderness than by the Force
of his Enemies, as appears by the ill use which was made of it in several
Treaties, Councils and Battles. To conclude, the War it self was unjustifiable,
Rebellious and Barbarous; but the Formalities of proceeding against him by
Arraignment, Trial, Sentence and Execution, filled all Christendom with Horror
and Indignation; and it is to be feared that his Blood still cries aloud for
Vengeance, against the Contrivers and Instruments of that Execrable Murder,
which no sin can equal but the Justifying it; and though Indemnity has pardoned
it, no Oblivion can deface it.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Best and most Experienced Remedy for Sore or Weak Eyes, that ever yet was
made known to the World, being of that wonderful Efficacy, that it infallibly
dispels any Humor or Salt Rheum distilling from the Head; and takes all
Soreness, or Redness, or Swellings: It also strengthens weak Eyes (sometimes
occasioned by the Smallpox) and will disperse any Film or Cataract growing
over the Eye, whereby the Sight oftentimes becomes dim: In a few times using
this Excellent Remedy, to those that will be persuaded to use it often, it will
preserve the Sight to an incredible Age, and read the smallest of Prints. It
being a Secret acquired by a Gentleman in his long Study, whereby he has
wrought wonderful Cures among his Relations and Acquaintance; and now made
public for the Benefit of all People that will make trial of it.

For those that are really Poor they shall have it for nothing; to Others for 6
d. the Bottle* Only to be had at the Bible in Fetter-Lane, near Fleet Street.


