PAROCHIAL QUERIES In Order to A Geographical Dictionary, A Natural History,
etc. of Wales.
By the Undertaker E. L.
HAVING Published some Proposals toward a Survey of Wales, and met with
sufficient Encouragement from the Gentry of that Country, and several others,
Lovers of such Studies; to enable me (with God's Permission) to Undertake it: I
thought it necessary for the easier and more effectual Performance of so
tedious a Task, to Print the following Queries; having good Grounds to hope the
Gentry and Clergy (since they are pleased to afford me so Generous an Allowance
toward it) will also readily contribute their Assistance, as to Information;
and the Use of their Manuscripts, Coyns, and other Monuments of Antiquity: The
Design being so extraordinary difficult without such Helps, and so easily
improvable thereby. Nor would I have any imagine, that by Publishing these
Queries, I design to spare my self the least Labor of Traveling the Country,
but on the contrary be assured, I shall either come my self, or send one of my
Assistants into each Parish throughout Wales, and all those in Shropshire and
Herefordshire, where the Language and the Ancient Names of Places are still
retained: And that with all the Speed, so particular a Survey will admit of. My
Request therefore to such as are desirous of Promoting the Work, is, That after
each Query, they would please to write on the blank Paper, (or elsewhere if
room be wanting) their Reports; confining themselves, unless the Subject shall
require otherwise, to that Parish only where they inhabit; and distinguishing
always betwixt Matter of Fact, Conjecture, and Tradition. Nor will any, I hope,
omit such Informations as shall occur to their Thoughts, upon Presumption, they
can be of little use to the Undertaker, or the Public, or because they have
not leisure to write down their Observations so regularly as they desire:
Seeing that what we sometimes judge insignificant, may afterward upon some
Application unthought of, appear very useful; and that a regular and complete
Account of Things is not here so much expected, as short Memorials, and some
Directions in order to a further Enquiry.

Queries in order to the Geography, and Antiquities of the Country.
I. FIrst therefore Information is desired of the Name of the Parish; both
according to the Modern Pronunciation and the Oldest Records, (which would be
also very convenient as to all other Places whatever) and whence it is thought
to be derived. Also whether a Market Town, Town-Corporate, or Village.

II. In what Comot or Hundred Situate? How Bounded? Of what Extent, and what
Number of Houses and Inhabitants? To what Saint is the Church dedicated, and
whether a Parsonage, Vicarage, or both?

III. An Enumeration and brief Description of the Towns, Villages, Hamlets,
Castles, Forts, Monasteries, Chapels of Ease, Free-Schools, Hospitals,
Bridges, and all Public Buildings whatever within the Parish, whether Ruinous
or Entire; or whose Names only are preserved: When, and by whom Founded,
Endowed or Repaired?

IV. Sanctuaries or Places of Refuge; Places memorable for Battles, Births, or
Interment of Great Persons, Parliaments, Councils, Synods, etc.

V. Seats of the Gentry; with the Names and Quality of the present Proprietors,
and their Arms and Descent.

VI. A Catalogue of the Barrows, or those Artificial Mounts distinguished by
the several Names of Krigeu, Gorsedheu, Tommenydh, Beili, etc. as also of the
Camps and all old Entrenchments whatever.

VII. Roman Ways, Pavements, Stoves, or any Underground Works: Crosses,
Beacons, Stones pitched an end in a regualr Order; such as Meinibirion in
Caernarvonshire, Karn Lhechart in Glamorgan, and Buarth Arthur in the County of
Caermardhin: As also all those rude Stone-Monuments distinguished by the
several Names of Bedh, Gwely, Karnedh, Kromlech, Lhech yr ast, Lhech y Gowres,
Lhech y Wydhan, Koeten Arthur, Kissed vnen, Preseb y Vuwch Vrech, etc.

VIII. The Old Inscriptions in the Parish, whether in the Church, or elsewhere;
a Collection of all being intended to the Time of King Henry the Eighth.

IX. Old Arms, Urns, Lamps, Paterae, Fibulae, or any other Utensils; where, and
when discovered?

X. Coyns, Amulets, Chains, Bracelets, Rings, Seals, etc. where, and when
found; and in whose Possession at present?

XI. Manuscripts: Of what Subject and Language; In whose Hands; Whether Ancient
or Late Copies?

XII. The Names of the most Remarkable Mountains, Rocks, Parks, Woods, Commons,
Warrens, etc. together with such Names of any other Places not comprehended
under these Queries, as seem so obscure as to be scarce, if at all
Intelligible; with brief Descriptions of them, and Conjectures of their
Signification.

XIII. The Names of all the Rivers and Rivulets in the Parish; distinguishing
always betwixt those that rise, or are discharged in it, and such as pass
through it, or constitute its Bounds; together with their Remarkable
Catarracts, or Waterfalls, where they afford any.

XIV. Names of the Lakes and Remarkable Springs; and whether any thing be Noted
of them extraordinary.

XV. The Customs, and peculiar Games and Feasts amongst the Vulgar in the
Parish, Hundred, County, or any Part of Wales: Together with the Vulgar Errors
and Traditions; parallel with those treated of by the Learned and Judicious
Author of Pseudodoxia Epidemica.

XVI. What Words, Phrases, or Variation of Dialect in the Welsh, seems peculiar
to any Part of the Country? What Names of Men and Women uncommon? And wherein
does the English of the Vulgar, in Pembrokeshire and Gowerland, differ from
that in the Western Counties, etc. of England?

Queries toward the Natural History.
XVII. Whether the Parish be generally Corn-Ground or Pasture? Color of the
Soil? Very Fertile, Barren or Indifferent? Mountanous or Champion Ground? Woody,
Heathy, Rocky, Clay-Ground, Sundy, Gravelly, etc?

XVIII. The Sorts of Grain Sown in the Parish, and the Composts used; with any
Useful Observations in Husbandry; and a Computation of the Number of Cattle and
Horses it breeds; as also of the Sheep, Goats, Hogs, etc.

XIX. Of the State of Health: Whether the Parish, Hundred or Comot be subject
to any Peculiar Diseases? What Number of Ancient Men and Women; with their
Years? Whether they seem to differ at all in their Diet from those that live
elsewhere; and what Effects as to Health and Sickness, are ascribed to the Air
of the Place?

XX. Observations on the Stature and Complexion of the Inhabitants in general;
with such Exceptions as occur. Instances of the Strength or Activity of
particular Men well Attested, with all the Circumstances requisite. Antipathies
of some Persons to several Sorts of Meat, Drink, etc.

XXI. Observations relating to Cattle, Horses, Sheep, or other Animals; as to
their general Magnitude, Shape, Colors, good or bad Qualities: The Diseases
they are subject to, whether owing to Contagion, or the Unwholsomness of their
Pasture or Water? Also what Inconveniences they are liable to, the several
Seasons of the Year, at Snowdon, Cader Idris, Plyn Lhymmon, and the other High
Mountains.

XXII. A Register of the Weather, for the Space of One Year at least, kept by
one or two in each County, would be of considerable Use: With Observations on
the Figures of Snow and Hail: The Time it generally begins to Snow on our
highest Mountains, and when it desists; with any other Curious Remarks about
Meteors.

XXIII. Observations concerning Tides, Eddies, and Whirl-Pools; Form and
Consistence of the Shore or Maritim Land, and the Influence the Sea has upon
it. What Tokens of Woods or Buildings gained by the Sea? Particularly whether
Kaer Anrhod, Sarn Badric, and Sarn y Bwch (in North Wales) be presumed to be
Artificial or Natural; And if the former, what Evidence there is for it?

XXIV. An Account of the Subterraneous and Diving Rivers; and of such as are
totally absorbed, or no where distinguishable afterward; also of Sudden
Eruptions of Water, and Periodical Streams. A Computation of the Number of
Springs in the Parish. How near the Tops of Hills are the highest Running
Springs? Or are there any in very even Plains remote from Hills? Any Fountains
that ebb and flow? Waters that petrifie or incrustate Wood, Moss, Leaves, etc.
Medicinal Springs, or Waters of unusual Taste, Smell, or Color, or Remarkable
for their Weight, or tinging the Stone or Earth whence they proceed?

XXV. Particular Information of all Places where there are any Caves, Mines,
Coal-works, Quarries, Stone-Pits, Marl-Pits; or in short, where Laborers dig
upon any Occasion whatever.

XXVI. If such Places afford any uncommon Oars, Earths, or other Minerals;
Stones resembling Sea-Shells, Teeth, or other Bones of Fish; or Crabs-Claws,
Corals, and Leaves of Plumes; or in brief, any Stones, or other Bodies whatever
of a Remarkable Figure; the Workmen are desired to preserve them, till they are
called for by the Undertaker, or some of his Friends; in Consideration whereof,
they shall receive some Reward suitable to their Care and Pains.

XXVII. Such as have made the History of Plants any part of their Diversion,
are desired to communicate dried Specimens of those sorts they esteem Rarest,
or that are unknown to them; or to give Directions where they may be met with:
Also what Observations they have made by often repeated Experiments, concerning
the Healing, or Noxious Qualities of Plants.

XXVIII. Whether any have been Curious in observing the various sorts of
Sea-Shells, Sea-Eggs, Sea-Spiders; Stars, Buttons, Sponges; Urticae, Tethyae
Holothuria, etc. Or have made any Remarks extraordinary on Land-Insects?

XXIX. Information is desired from those who have been most conversant in
Fishing; what sorts of Fish their Waters afford, and of these which are the
Rarest, or haunt those Places most Seldom? What Variety of Colors and Shape
they have observed in the same Species? What Baits used for each, and when in
Season? What sorts are Solitary, and which keep together in Shoals? What they
have observed as to their Feeding, Spawning, and Change of Names according to
Age; and by what Tokens they know such, to be the same Species? Also the Iaws,
and some of the Vertebrae of the Rarest (for which some Gratuity shall be
allowed the Fishermen) are desired; in order to compare them with the Fossil
Bones abovementioned.

XXX. By what is proposed of Insects and Fish; the Reader will judge what sort
of Information will be acceptable, relating to Birds and Quadrupeds.

XXXI. Who in each Country is best skilled in the Welsh Names of Birds, Fish,
Insects, Plants, Stones; or any other Natural Bodies?

Having thus propounded what Queries occur to my Thoughts; nothing remains, but
that I own to the Public, that in case this Paper meets with a kind Reception
(as from this last Summer's Travels, I have great Hopes it may) if the
Undertaking be ill performed, 'twill be wholly my own Fault; the Gentry of the
Country having in all Respects done more than their Part, and afforded such an
Encouragement toward it, as might sufficiently requite the Labors of a Person
far better Qualified for such a Design: But of this, a particular Account (as
is necessary) shall be given hereafter. So I shall only add here; that as to
these Queries, besides Wales, I entreat the favorable Assistance of the Gentry
and Clergy in those other Countries mentioned in the former Proposals: And that
in all Places, they who are disposed to further the Design, would please to
communicate this Paper where they think fit, amongst their Neighbors;
interpreting some Queries to those of the Vulgar, whom they judge Men of
Veracity, and capable of giving any the least Information toward it, that may
be pertinent and instructive.

We judge Mr. Lhwyd Qualified for this Undertaking; and that he cannot want
proper Materials toward it, if (as an Addition to his own Industry) he
receives such Answers to those Queries, as can be conveniently returned from
each Parish.

JOHN WALLIS. EDWARD BERNARD. MARTIN LISTER. JOHN RAY.


ADVERTISEMENT.
The Subscribers may please to pay the Money, the time specified in the
Proposals, to any of my Corespondents in their Neighborhood; who are desired
to return it either to Mr. William at the Museum in Oxford, or to Mr. Walter
Thomas of Bernard's Inn, London; who will also safely convey to my Hands any
Letters, Papers, or Manuscripts they receive on this Occasion.


