A REPLY TO THE ANSWER Made upon the Three Royal PAPERS.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner, at the Lamb in High-Holborn. MDCLXXXVI.

THE PREFACE.
Entering upon the Answer to the Three Royal Papers, whereof the two first were
of CHARLES the Second of ever blessed memory; and the last of her Royal
Highness the Duchess of York; I met with a Gentleman of so frank a Temper,
that could his Will bribe his Understanding, and he believe as he pleased, he
tells us he had not failed of that Satisfaction in the KINGS first Paper, of
which for the want of Reason to convince him he was now disappointed. This
condescending Humor is a fair step made to the Inquest, by a second Examen of
those excellent Truths illustrated by the pregnant Pens and Sense of those
Royal Converts. Royal Papers I confess, as to their Value, may be examined, as
well as Royal Coin, even by a private Subject. But, as the Royal Stamp in Coin
may, under that fair Pretense, by a private Subject be counterfeited, clipped, or
otherwise disguised; so Royal Papers, especially of Controversy, are no less
obnoxious to the same Fate; and in this they only differ, that no such
Alteration in the KING'S Coin can be made by a private Subject, but he is
looked upon as an ill Man, and acting with an ill Design: Whereas in the KING'S
Controversial Papers the change either of Sense, or Word, may be made, and that
by a well-designing Person, from misunderstanding, inadvertency, or other
inculpable Surprise. Now as to this Gentleman to determine any thing, would be
a piece of Injustice, for I am ignorant both of his Merits and his Person. What
Mist has overcast his sight, I know not; but if he please to look back by a
new Survey, on the three Papers, he may still see in them Reason and Truth so
well fixed, that to any thing yet opposed, they stand unconcerned, and as they
bear in their Front the Royal Names and Superscription, so their Weight will
render them immovable.

THE FIRST Royal Paper VINDICATED.
FOrgers and Clippers of Royal Coin seek their safety in places of all the most
obscure; and Disguisers and Clippers of Royal Sense hide themselves in the
shades of Equivocation, the King availing himself in his first Paper upon this
supposed Concession, That Christ can have but one Church here upon Earth, makes
this other step, and I believe that it is as Visible as that Scripture is in
print, that none can be that Church, but that which is called the Roman
Catholic Church. Now if the King may be allowed to be the best expounder of his
own words, and if the whole and sole design of this first Paper be to evince
this truth, That all Controversial Points of Faith, either about holy
Scripture, or other subjects do fall under the judgment and decision of the
Church, as is manifest it is, then the import of the King's words must be thus,
that whatever motives render it visible that a Book in print is Scripture, that
is, the Word of God, the same, or other motives are as powerful to render this
other truth as visible; That none can be that Church, but that which is called
the Roman Catholic Church. This is the genuine Sense of the King, and to this
the Examinant of the Royal Papers gives this answer. If particular
Controversies about matters of Faith could be ended by a principle as visible
as that Scripture is in print, all Men of Sense would soon give over Disputing,
for none who dare believe what they see, can call that in question. Not to
contest with him about the impropriety of the phrase, to believe what one sees:
Luther was a bold Man, and yet in the phrase of this Gentleman did not dare to
believe what he saw, for the Epistle of St. James was in print before his Eyes,
he perused it, and yet cast it out of the Canon of Scripture; Catholics and
Protestants are both Men of Sense, they have the Books of Machabees and others
in print, they see them, they handle them; the Catholic gives them their place
in the Canon; the Protestants do not only question them, but seem resolved to
dispute that point to the end; clearly then this principle that the Scripture
is in print, is not so unquestionable or indisputable as the Gentleman
pretends: and his miscarriage rests in this, That the visibility which in the
sense of the King springs from the motives inducing to believe that such or
such a Book in print is the holy Scripture, he assigns to a bare print of the
Book.

But what if the Church whose Authority it is said, they must submit to, will
not allow them to believe what they see. My first reply is, That here is a
confusion of Notions, for belief is properly of things that are not seen, as
the Apostle describes it, argumentum non apparentium, and has Authority for
motive; whereas sight or seeing is an inspection into the thing seen, and
creates a knowledge of it. Secondly, not to recede from his mode of Speech, I
am a stranger to such a Church, and think it impossible to impose upon any Man
a command not to believe what he sees. For though it may and does often fall
out, that a Man believes what he sees not, yet in true Philosophy it can never
happen that a Man may not believe what he sees, and therefore such a command is
ranged amongst the impossibles. I well know where his scruple is, and what he
would be at; it is the Adorable Mystery of the conversion of Bread and Wine into
the Body and Blood of our Redeemer, where he hopes to evince this assertion;
but in vain, for what is seen are only the forms, shapes and figures of Bread
and Wine, and that we believe to be there; consequently the Church lays upon us
no command not to believe what we see. For instance, I will press upon him the
two noted passages of holy Scripture, the first is of two Angels appearing to
Lot, and conversing with him in the figure and shapes of Men, the second is of
the Holy Ghosts descent in the form of a Dove; with all, let us suppose that
God had revealed to Lot this truth, that what he did see were not Men but
Angels in Men's Shape, as he did to the Apostles, that what appeared was not a
Dove, but the Holy Ghost in the Shape of a Dove. I now put this question to
him, was this Revelation a Command upon Lot or the Apostles, not to believe
what they did see? I believe his Answer will be Negative, for if there were
neither Men, nor Dove, neither could be seen. If then God at any time should
reveal to us by his Church, that what is in the Holy Sacrament, is not Bread
nor Wine, but the Body and Blood of Christ, under those Shapes and Forms, why
must this revelation be deemed a Command not to believe what we see? or where
lies the Disparity? Evidently then there neither is, nor can be, any such
Command, and by consequence no Injury is offered to our Senses, no reproach to
the Church.

His next offer is, at a Clip to the Royal Stamp, and because he says it is with
Submission, I presume it to be unadvised; for whereas the Kings. Paper runs
thus, that none can be that Church, but that which is called the Roman-Catholic
Church, he snips off, I know not how, this word Catholic, and so restrains the
Kings meaning to the particular Church or Diocese of Rome, this must be
confessed not to be the best way of examining the King's Coin, for though by this
term Roman sometimes all Churches in Communion with the Church of Rome be
signified, yet by the Parallel made betwixt the whole and the part, he is
convinced not to have meant so. To requite then his Parallel, it is as visible
that the word Roman, is not Roman-Catholic, as that one word is not two, as to
the Corruption with which in general Terms, he aspersed the Roman Church, since
it is as invisible as the Proofs he brings to justify the Charge; I shall pass
it by.

After it was settled, That Christ can have but one Church upon Earth, and that
this is that Church we profess to believe in the two Creeds. He thus subsumes,
But if those who made those Creeds for our Direction, had intended the
Roman-Catholic Church, why was it not so expressed? how came it to pass that
such a Limitation of the Sense of Christ's Catholic Church to the Roman should
never be put to persons to be baptized in any Age of the Church?

My first Answer shall be, ad hominem, by retorfion: If the Apostles intended
we should believe that Christ was Consubstantial to his Father, or that
Heretics were not to be rebaptized, why did they not insert it into their
Creeds? If the Apostles and Nicene Fathers, after them intended we should
believe the duality of Wills, and unity of Persons in Christ, how did it escape
both their Creeds? I believe we shall jump upon the same Solution; which is,
that none of these Doctrines were questioned in those days, no Heretics had
opposed them, and therefore there was no need of decision, this being the
Province of General Councils in framing their Creeds. Let Us see if this will
square to my purpose. Catholic, and Roman-Catholic-Church in the Language of
Antiquity was one and the same thing, saving when the particular Church or
Diocese of Rome was expressed; which being so, and the point never called in
question in the first and best days of the Church when those Creeds were to be
published, what great surprise is it that the word Roman should not be
comprised in any of their Creeds? Or that it was not entered into the ancient
Formulary, or Ceremonies of Baptism, so venerable to after ages, and of which
they have ever been most tenacious? I have engaged Antiquity for the
Roman-Catholic side; let us see whether she will stand by me, and let Tertullian
lead the Van, who well understood the Language both of his own and the
foregoing Age. Speak then Tertullian what thou know of Marcion's pecunary
Oblation in Rome to the Roman Church. Marcion, says he, gave his money to the
Catholic Church, which was rejected when he fell into Heresy. Tertul. contra
Marcion lib. 4. cap. 4. See how easily it dropped from his Pen to style the Roman
Church the Catholic Church. What Is now the sense of St. Cyprian, the mouth of
the African Church, to Antonianus? You writ that I should send a Copy of the
Letters to Cornelius ( Bishop of Rome) to the end that he might understand that
you communicate with him, that is to say, with the Catholic Church, Cypr. lib.
4. epist. 2. And if it be the same to communicate with the Pope, as it is with
the Catholic Church, then clearly the Roman and Catholic Church are one and the
same. St. Ambrose in his Funeral Oration upon his Brother Satyrus, relates this
passage of Satyrus, that coming into a City polluted with Heresy, he demands
of the Bishop of the place whether he was in Communion with the Catholic
Bishop, that is, with the Church of Rome. St. Ambros. Orat. funeb. So that in
the phrase of that time, communion with the Catholic Church, and Church of Rome
nothing differed. John of Constantinople to Hormisda, Pope, writes thus, We
promise hereafter not to recite in the Sacred Mysteries the names of those who
have separated themselves from the Catholic Church, that is to say, who agree
not fully with the Sea Apostolic. Tom. 3. Council. Edit. Binii inter Epist.
Hormisdae. By this we may see the style of old times. Nay it was so familiar to
use promiscuously the word Roman for Catholic, that the very Arians, as the
Protestants now do, called the Catholics by the name of Romanists. Victor of
Utica brings in Jocundus an Arian, thus arguing with King Theodorick, If thou
put Armogastus to death, the Romanists will proclaim him a Martyr. Victor.
Utic. lib. 2. de persec. Vandal. And Gregory of Tours recounts of an Arian
King, who seeing a miracle wrought by a Catholic, concludes that this was a
device of the Romanists. Since therefore in the vulgar Speech and Records of
old days, Roman and Catholic are Synonima, the King had much reason to declare,
That none could be that Church, but that which is called the
Roman-Catholic-Church. And a rational account is given why the word Roman was
not expressed in the two Creeds, nor in the Ritual of Baptism.

From the Church of Rome's not denying the validity of Baptism to those who are
out of her Communion, he urges thus, From whence it is to me as visible as that
the Scripture is in print, that the Church of Rome it self does not believe
that she is the one Catholic Church mentioned in the Creeds. This is very
pleasant, it is a fixed principle that there is but one Church Catholic, and
the Church of Rome by a thousand Declarations takes it upon her self to be that
one Church; and yet it must be as Visible to this Gentleman, as that the
Scripture is in print, that the Church of Rome does not believe her self to be
that o^ne Catholic Church mentioned in the two Creeds, what can he offer to
justify so strange a Paradox? For then, says he, it must void all Baptism out
of its communion, which it has never yet done. But what greater necessity is
there for the Church of Rome to void Baptism given out of her Communion, then
for the Catholic Church? Or if the Catholic Church does not make it void, what
can oblige the Church of Rome to do it? The Reply is, That Baptism enters
persons into the Catholic Church, who though they be out of the Communion of
the Roman Church, yet having the true form of Baptism are Members of the
Catholic Church. But I beseech him if Baptism enters Men into the Catholic
Church, does not Heresy, Apostasy, or Insidelity cast them out of the Catholic
Church, as well as out of the Roman Church? Is it come to this, that
Marcionists, Ebionites, Arians, Nestorians, Eutichians, Donatists, Novatians,
and the scumm of Heretics, because rightly baptized, shall be reputed Members
of the Catholic Church? This had been great news in the days of St. Austin who
in his forty eighth Epistle makes this profession to Donatus, You are with us
in Baptism, in the Creed, in the rest of our Lord's, Sacraments, but in the
Catholic Church you are not. And St. Hierom against the Luciferans, No
Heretical Congregation can be called a Church of Christ. For though Baptism be
the Gate by which whoever enters the Church, must pass; yet there is no Man,
though baptized, if an Heretic, can remain there.

His next Paragraph is made up by comparing the Church in her Infancy with her
self in her fuller growth, and from that different State he would conclude that
in her beginnings 'twas easy to find out that one visible Church, by reason of
the strait union of the Faithful in the Bonds of Faith and Charity, when the
Multitude of them who believed were of one Heart and of one Soul, but not so in
after Ages, when the Concussion of the whole State of the Church by so many
fractions and divisions in her Communion, had so obscured her that they rendered
her difficult to be discerned. This is the sum of his discourse in gross, which
I answer by detail; after the ascension of Christ there was no time wherein
there was not divisions in the Church, for even in those good days of the
Apostles, there went out from them either by Schism, Heresy, or Apostasy, many
heads of Factions, who grew into Bodies, and drew after them considerable
Parties, such as the Ebionits, the Nicholaits, the Marcionists, and many more
whereof some had been Jewish, others had been Gentile Christians, but all of
them went out from the Body of the Church; so that notwithstanding the
Multitude of those who believed were of one Heart and Soul, yet there were many
who fell from their Belief. I shall now take leave to ask, whether the Church
in the throng of these Divisions was easily visible or no? He grants it was,
how then came it to pass that in after Ages she became so obscure, and as it
were invisible? He replies, by Divisions; but if in both States of the Church
there were divisions, how happens it, that the Cause remaining the same, should
not work the same Effect? Was there any Mark, Rule, or Standard, by which the
Church was known amidst her first Divisions, which afterward disappeared? If
not the Church may be equally visible in both her States, now if at the rise of
any Heresy, the Apostles, and after them the Apostolic Men, used all means to
suppress it, either by Preaching, Catechizing, writing against it, and meeting
in full Assemblies for the Comdemnation of it, by stigmatizing both the Heresy,
and its Author, cutting him off from the Body of the Church, if I say by these
means the infant Church was rendered as visible as a Town, situate on a
Mountain, or a Light upon a Candlestick, then the same Methods continuing in
the Church of after times, do evidently evince that she was, and now is as
visible as ever, and that there was a just Performance of this in every Age, is
made out by the records of all times: where the time, the place, the Origin,
the Author of every Heresy, the vigorous opposition that was made against it,
the Fathers that writ against it, the Pastors that Preached it down, the
Councils that condemned it, the Laws of Princes made against it, are all so
exactly noted, that all the actions and motions of the Church in every Age,
were as visible as those of the first and best of times.

As to the remarkable difference he mentions in the nature of Schisms, which
happened in the Church, and gave occasion of great misapplications, and sayings
of the Ancients about the one Catholic Church. I do not believe it material to
observe it, for let the Schism or Heresy be of what nature soever, since the
Church in a general Council is the last tribunal in all such Causes, whoever
separates, or goes out from her, is to be reputed as an Heathen, or a Publican,
but because his way of writing merits, that nothing be slighted. I shall march
with him through the following Passages. Some did so break off Communion with
other Parts of the Catholic Church, as to challenge that Title wholly to
themselves, as was evident in the case of the Novations and Donatists. If the
Novatians and Donatists did break off Communion with other parts only of the
Catholic Church, I desire to know where the whole Church was at that time? For
unless he ranges these Heretics in the Catholic Church, and so reputes them
parts of it, the breach was from the whole, not from parts, as a rotten Branch
is separated from the Trunck or the whole Tree. Well, how was the Breach? By
Challenging the Title of the Catholic Church wholly to themselves, as was
Evident, for they rebaptized all that embraced their Communion; not to insist
upon other Enormities of these Novatians and Donatists, by what means were
these Monsters crushed? were they not the same that were used in the first
Ages, did not the Pastors watch over their Flock to preserve it from the
contagion? did not St. Austin and other Fathers sharpen their Pens against
them? did not the Church by her Councils cut them off as rotten Limbs from her
Body? If nothing of this can be concealed, then clearly she was as visible as
ever.

The next instance is from the Bishops of Rome excommunicating the Bishops of
Asia for not keeping Easter when they did and the Bishops both of Asia, and
Africa for not allowing the Baptism of Heretics. This Breach I confess is of a
different Nature from the former, for here the whole Church was not by any of
her Councils yet engaged, but the contest was betwixt Parts, though some more
Eminent than others, and in which it is possible, some transports of Passion
might interyene. Irenaeus, it is true, expostulates with the Bishop of Rome, not
that he wanted Authority, but that he exercised it with too much Severity over
the Bishops of Asia; upon a Subject, he thought not to be of so great Moment.
The truth is, both these customs had long obtained, the one in the Western, and
the other in the Eastern Church, and nothing less then a general Council did
set a Period to the Dispute. A Council was called, the decision was made for
the Bishop of Rome, and Peace was restored to the whole Church: can any Man at
this time of day, say that the Church was not as visible as ever? the
controversy betwixt Cornelius, and Stephen, Bishops of Rome on the one side,
and St. Cyprian with the Affrican Bishops of the other was much of the same
Nature, nothing was yet defined by a general Council, Right stood for the
Bishops of Rome, the Council determined the point, and the whole Church came to
an acquiescence. Had this Gentleman been chosen advocate for the Catholic
Church, I know not how he could have rendered her more visible. He proceeds but
is it reasonable to suppose that upon these differences they shut out all those
holy Bishops, and Martyrs from the possibility of Salvation, by excluding them
from their Communion? How far the heat of these disputes might have carried the
Parties engaged, or whether either, or neither party was free from blame, I
shall not determine, but this is a certain Maxim both in Church and State,
that a submission either active or passive is due to all Lawful Powers, though
the command be unjust: and it is the known principle of St. Austin, with the
Ancients, that no cause can be given to separate from the whole Church, either
by Heresy or Schism, now in this contest here was no separation from the whole
Church by either of the Parties, but a perfect submission to her Decrees when
delivered by the mouth of her General Assembly, so that here was not different
Communions amongst Christians, but only different sentiments in matters as yet
undecided by the Church, with which it consisted that both parties were members
of the Catholic Church, and consequently no one member of the contesting
parties, as this Gentleman well observes, ought to assume to its self the Title
and Authority of the one Catholic Church. But when Sentence was passed by a
General Council, the dissenting party, if any remained, was cut off as a rotten
Member from the Body of the Catholic Church, and then the contest is no more
betwixt party and party, but betwixt a rebellious party and the whole Church,
to whom the style of that one Catholic Church is justly due, she being the
whole; as the Trunk of the Tree is the whole, compared to any Limb; and the
Novatians and Donatists her putrified Members.

Amongst other calamities which have sprung from original corruption it is not
the least, that being our selves Criminals, we have an itch to find out
confederates, as if their number rendered us Innocent. This assailant of the
Royal Papers to justify the late separation of the Protestants from the Roman
Catholic Church, brings upon the Stage the Eastern Churches, cut off and
separated from her Communion, And adds that the Bishops of Rome would hear of
no other terms of accommodation with the Eastern Church, but by an entire
submission as head of the Catholic Church, which all the Churches of the East
refused however different amongst themselves, and to this day look on the Popes
Supremacy as an innovation in the Church. How well skilled he is in the History
of the Eastern Churches I shall not dispute. But sure all is not Game that
rises, and I doubt the account given him is made up of false Musters. This is
certain the Eastern Churches were divided from the Roman-Catholic Church, that
is, from all Churches in Communion with the Church of Rome, by such Doctrines
as are inconsistent even with the Church of England, which professes to hold
whatever was decreed by the first four general Councils, and this breach of
union continues with their descendents to this day. The Egyptians, Ethiopians,
and Abissines are by Sect Eutichians, holding but one Nature, Will, and
Operation in Christ, and are condemned by the fourth general Council, that is
of Chalcedon, with these side part of the Armenians, the Jacobites, Georgians
and Cophties. The Christians under the Turk and Persians in Asia, are
Nestorians, branded by the General Council of Ephesus for maintaining two
persons in Christ. The Grecians with the Muscovites and Russians, by the
Athanasian Creed (so Sacred to the Church of England) are excluded, even from
Salvation, for refusing to believe the Holy Ghost to proceed from the Father
and the Son. As to the first division of the Greek Church, the true cause was
from the contest betwixt Ignatius true Patriarch of Constantinople, and Photius
the intruder, with the first stood the Pope, and the Emperor with the last; and
in the end, to make the breach the wider, the procession of the Holy Ghost from
Father and Son was denied, and so it rests till this day; now that the Pope's
Supremacy was and is looked on as an innovation by any of these Churches I
doubt is a story not so well grounded as this Gentleman could wish.

And if my Authors deceive me not, some of these, as the Egyptians and
Ethiopians, have often made overtures to the Pope for Peace and Communion,
owning him Supreme Head of the Church, provided only they might not be obliged
to renounce Eutiches and Dioscorus. After these fundamental Errors of Faith
against the Holy Ghost, and the person of Jesus Christ, he put this question,
how then came they to be excluded from being parts of the one Catholic and
Apostolic Church? Since in all those Churches the two Creeds are professed,
true Baptism administered, A Man would have thought that such blasphemies
against the Divinity and Humanity of Christ, had been cause enough to have
Unchurched any number of Men, but since he seems to opine that the denial of
the two first Creeds can do the work, why should not the refusal of a third
Creed (or if the emergencies of new started Doctrines made it necessary) a
fourth and fifth Creed be as prevalent? Is the power of the Church Catholic in
deciding Faith, less then it was in making the second Creed? Again, is it not
as possible for Men who profess a Creed to err even against that Creed, as it
is for Men professing a Rule to deviate from that Rule? Wherefore it being
evident that nothing of all this has been wanting to fill up the measure of
Heresy in those Eastern Churches, they cannot be reputed parts of the one
Catholic and Apostolic Church, consequently the Roman Church, and the Churches
in Communion with her must be that one Church, or there was, or is, none upon
Earth.

This principle then that the Roman Church is that one Catholic and Apostolic
Church being as visible as was asserted by the king to enter into the Ocean of
particular disputes, would be to enter into the maze of everlasting jarring:
Pregnant evidence of this truth is had from the pretended Reformation of this
last Age, where the innumerable Sects that have swarmed from the first
Reformers in the divided World, steering their course, as they fancy, by the
Compass of Holy Scripture (a president given them by their Leaders) have
improved controversy to that degree, that it is impossible by that method to
reclaim them, the Scholar still in that out-doing his Master. And whereas it is
believed by this Gentleman, That the Church of Rome has notoriously deviated
from this infallible rule (Scripture sensed by fancy, for neither he concerns
himself for Tradition nor Exposition of the Fathers) and therefore is not
willing to put her self upon that issue. I answer, that the Church of Rome
cannot deviate from a rule she never professed to follow. And if some of her
Champions out of mere condescension to Protestants have fought them with their
own weapons (in which way of combating the Church is not engaged) the judgment
of the victory must be from the arbitration not of any private Man, but of the
Learned World.

The king's next position is, That it is not left to every fantastical Man's
head to believe as he pleases, but to the Church. Beware here of counterfeit
Coin, 'twas out but he called it in again, and replies, The Church of England
cannot be liable to any imputation of this nature, for our Church receives the
three Creeds, embraces the four General Councils, and professes to hold nothing
contrary to any universal Tradition of the Church from the Apostles time. Had
he been pleased to have given in security for the Church of England, that
notwithstanding this glorious profession, she could never err against the
Creeds, nor the four Councils, nor universal Tradition, he had well merited of
that Church. For we do not charge her for not professing these things, at least
upon a pinch, but for erring against her own profession, and deserting that
Church to which all these Authorities bear testimony, and of which her
Progenitors, and first Reformers had been Members, and from whose hands she
received whatsoever she had, either of Scripture, Creeds, Councils, or
Tradition, consequently whose judgment she was bound to follow; for the Eastern
Churches even by the profession of Protestants being lapsed into Heresies,
there was then no visible Church in Being but such as was in Communion with the
Church of Rome, which never went out of any elder than her self, and out of
whom the Church of England sprang. It seems he would have the Controversy
betwixt us put upon this issue, that is, the three Creeds, four Councils, and
Tradition. But who shall be Umpire, the instructing, or instructed Party? This
discourse in the mouth of a Protestant against Presbyterian, Anabaptist, or
Quaker would be sound, though at the same time a self-condemnation in the
Church of England. The rest of this Paragraph is made up of voluntary
assumptions without proof, and which are already answered as to the main; only
I cannot let slip this concession, we do not deny that the Church has
Authority of declaring matters of Faith, but this must be the universal Church
in a General and free Council, as when the Nicene Creed was made, not when a
party in the Church, the most corrupt, takes upon it self to define many now
Doctrines. This plea, if it be good, justifies the Arians, and condemns the
Nicene Fathers, vindicates the Eutichians, Nestorians, and Donatists, and
confounds all General Councils, for there is nothing of this but was as fully
charged against them by the Heretics of those days. The following Paragraph is
adulterated Coin, for whereas the King by the inhabitants of a Country means
Subjects, instituting the comparison betwixt them and their Lawful Judges of
the same Country, he stretches those words to signify the People of one
Society, and Judges of another.

The King's discourse is home, and to the purpose, God would not leave us at
those uncertainties, as to give us a Rule to go by, and leave every Man to be
his own Judge. He answers, We cannot reasonably suppose God should give us a
Rule not capable of being understood by those to whom it was given to save
their Souls. As if there were no way to render a Man capable of understanding
Scripture, to the saving of his Soul, but to leave him to be his own Judge? Is
there no Church? No Pastors to instruct him? He that is blind or dim-sighted
and will not use a Guide, merits to fall. Not to be wilfully mistaken in
matters of Faith, and not to be damned is of one and the same consequence: The
knowledge of good and evil, truth and falsehood, I confess, in some sense, is to
Man's conscience of the same concern, but he that willingly shuns light, and
gropes for either of them in the dark is an Enemy to his Soul, and equally
culpable. There follows, We do not leave every Man to be his own Judge any
farther then concerns his own Salvation, which depends upon his particular care
and sincerity. But if the judgment of his own Salvation be in his own hands, I
think he is made his own Judge of the Rule: And notwithstanding all his care
and sincerity (though they should protect him from the Artifices of foreign
Seducers, which is not possible but by accident, without an inerrable Guide)
yet the corruption of his own heart may be his own most powerful Seducer, and
God, if he will, has provided a guide even against that. As to his refuge to
the Ancient Creeds, of how little concern it is, may appear by this, that if I
should allow they followed exactly what they pretend to embrace, (which I never
can) yet if he denies it to be in the power of the Church to make new decisions
of Faith, upon any new exigence of Heresy, or the like, the sequel will be
that every Man is left to be his own Judge.

To the question started by the King, Whether it be not the same thing to
follow our own fancy; or to interpret Scripture by it. His reply is, That if
we allowed no Creeds, no Fathers, no Councils, there might have been some
color for such a question. And is that color vanished? I believe not; for if
those Creeds, those Fathers and Councils have no infallible Authority to oblige
the Church of England, why should not the King's question be still in force?
For neither is that Church obliged to follow those Rights which may deceive it,
nor is there any rational Authority in the Church of England to force any of
her Members to embrace them. But the truth is, that Church neither stands to
Creeds, Fathers or Councils, otherwise she had never deserted her Mother
Church, who ever regarded those Authorities as Oracles infallible, and sent
from Heaven to direct us, and to whom she owes whatever is Sacred of that
nature. To his first question of the Church of Rome assuming to it self the
sole power of giving the sense of the Scripture. I answer, she gives no sense
but what she received from former Tradition of the foregoing Church, and
consequently makes not any Rule to her self, but follows that Apostolical
Tradition, which God has given her as the best interpreter of holy Scriptures.
To his second question the answer is the same. The third question stands upon a
false bottom, for it supposes the Pope to be the sole interpreter of Scripture,
whereas neither he nor the Church do pretend to any other way, but by
Tradition. The fourth question is also grounded upon Error, as if the public
disorders which happen in the Church were not to be reformed by General
Councils. The fifth question is also built upon Sand, for it pretends that the
Papal Authority is to be debated in Councils, whereas no General Council did
ever dispute it. The sixth question is as strange as any, for it confounds
Fancy, and Tradition, whereas the one is public to the whole World, and the
other is private.

His next Paragraph adulterates the Royal Coin, for when the King demands to
know where the power of deciding matters of Faith is given to every particular
person, the sense is clear, for the question cannot be meant otherwise than in
relation to himself. But he extends it so, as if every one was to give Laws to
another's Faith, and this without any ground is made the first Member of the
division. But he adds, If by deciding matters of Faith, no more be meant, but
every Man's being satisfied of the reasons why he believes one thing to be
true, and not another, that belongs to every Man, as he is bound to take care
of his Soul. So that by his reply every Man whose Soul is dear to him, may and
ought to discuss, and dispute every Article of his Faith, and bring it to the
Test of his own reason; and so the Omnipotence of a God revealing, and the
Authority of a Church declaring what is revealed, weighs not with him until
reason be satisfied, and the understanding becomes a measure of all revealed
Truths. Whereas, in truth, Authority is the correlative of Believing, and
Reason of Knowledge. And though we make use of our reason to find out that
Authority which ought to sway us, as a blind Man serves himself with his reason
to find out his Guide; yet after that, it is Authority, not Reason that moves
us, and the previous motives inducing us to embrace the Authority of the
Church, from whence we have Scriptures, and all other inscrutable Mysteries,
are much more visible and resplendent than for any other Article of our Faith.

The King goes on, Christ left power in his Church even to forgive sins, etc.
He replys, But where then was the Roman Catholic Church? Undoubtedly where now
it is, one and the same, from whence all other pretended Churches went out, she
never departing from any Church, that was elder than her self. If she had, I
doubt not but her Eagleey'd adversaries would long er'e this have brought to
light the Fathers, the Councils, or whatever else stood in opposition against
her, and since they never did, nor can, their plea against her is common to all
whoever opposed the true Church. In a good Sense therefore she alone remains
Heir general to the Apostles, as to those gifts which were not personal but
given by Christ for the necessary support and government of her self, which is
to continue until the consummation of Time. And though he seems surprised that
God should keep Man more from Error than from Sin. Yet if he recalls but to
mind that some of the Prophets were led into truths by the holy Spirit, and
were great Sinners at the same time, and that all the Prophets (though
infallible in delivering such truths as God put into their mouths) yet were
obnoxious to sin, the miraculous surprise will cease, and the reason why
infallibility is necessary, and not impeccability, is manifest, because without
the first the Church could not subsist, for if once she makes Shipwreck of her
Faith, she is no more a Church, an effect not so proper to sin. And whereas he
demands, Would any have believed the Apostles infallible, if they had known
them to have been persons of ill lives. I answer yes, for either by Miracles
wrought in confirmation of their Infallibility, or any other way they could
have an assurance of it. As to any concession that the Church may err in
deposing Princes, if he means she may err in the decision of Truth, or
definition of Faith about it, he is purely beholding to himself for that
concession, not to the King, or any else I know of, who only engage for her
inerrability in delivering what she received from Christ and his Apostles by an
uninterrupted Tradition, and in conformity to this Rule, the Church of Rome,
with all those in Communion with her, (the rest either by Heresy, or Apostasy
being divided from her) was judge even of the Scripture it self what was
Canonical, what not, or else it had been impossible for the Church of England
to have known any thing of Truth concerning that Point; there being no other
Church to inform her, but what had forfeited her Credit by manifest Heresy,
and that owned by the Church of England, this is a vindication of the King
against three of his Paragraphs.

The King having put the question, by what Authority Men separate themselves
from that Church? He replies that they have not separated themselves from the
Catholic and Apostolic Church, but are disjoined from the Roman Church; that
we may keep up the Stricter Union with the truly Catholic and Apostolic
Church. But if the English Church reputes it self a Member of the Chatholick
Church, because she professes to stand to the three Creeds, and four first
general Councils, then certainly the Arians, Nestorians, Eutichians, and the
Eastern Churches abovementioned, cannot be parts of the Catholic Apostolic
Church, because they hold not the Apostolic Doctrine contained in those
Creeds, and Councils. But besides those Churches, there were no other in Being
at the time of Separation, but those Churches, which were in communion with the
Church of Rome, consequently the Church of England going out from them,
separated her self from the Catholic, Apostolic Church, and therefore unless
he can prove the Church of Rome to have deserted any other elder Church than
her self by Usurpation or otherwise, his Story of an Usurper will be but a
Shift, and may authorize all Rebellion, either in Church or State.

The last Paragraph is, since Protestants do charge the Church of Rome with
Imposition of new Articles of Faith, the King desires to know who is to be judge
of that, whether the whole Church, the Succession whereof has continued to
this Day without Interruption; or particular Men who have raised Schisms to
their own Advantage. The Roman Church having been in Possession of all those
Truths (now questioned by the Men of the Church of England) nothing can be more
unreasonable than to divest her of her just Possession, and to require her to
fall a proving: whereas this ought to be the Province of those, who under the
Pretense of Innovation revolted from her. For either they must make good their
charge, or else by all Laws they stand condemned, and she remains justified.
Wherefore since at the time of separation, she owned the Papal Supremacy, and
other Articles to have descended to her by an universal Tradition, whoever
questions the Title, must convince her of that pretended Usurpation, and then
as it is well observed by the King, who shall be judge in that case? To have
answered the Royal Paper, this Method he should have minded, which in disputes
of another Nature, I doubt not but he would have Practiced. However after his
challenging the Church to prove her Possession, he proceeds to declare, that
the Protestants being now by falling from the Church of Rome (of whom they were
once a part) at Liberty, betook themselves to the Examination of the Popes
Supremacy, and other Articles of the Council of Trent, by Scriptures, Fathers,
and Councils, but could find nothing in any of them to make out that Supremacy,
or any Article now in dispute. But still the King's Questions pressed upon
them, who shall be Judge? Is not this a President for all Rebellion, either in
Church or State? They have neither Scripture, Tradition, Councils, nor Fathers,
but what they had from the Roman Church, and at the first Breach, they were in
number very Inconsiderable and yet by a strange Presumption they pretend to
have a clearer Sight into those Principles, than that Church, who gave them
their very Being in Christianity.

I believe, were this Gentleman to argue against those Sects that have spawned
from the Church of England, he would not suffer a pride so intolerable, as to
prefer their own sense in Scriptures, or the Rule of Faith before that Church
that gave them the Rule. Well, but having finished this inquiry, What did they
do? He goes on thus: Articles of Religion were drawn up, wherein the Sense of
our Church was delivered agreeable to Scripture and Antiquity, not the private
sense of particular Men. If they be Articles of Religion, then they are
Articles of Faith; if so, they must come by Divine Revelation, either by the
way of Holy Scripture, Tradition, or otherwise. Now I beseech him to declare in
which of these principles are all, or any of these negative Articles contained;
as no praying to Saints, no Purgatory, no reverencing of Images, no
Transubstantiation, and the like, with which the nine and thirty Articles are
stuffed? Clearly this is a new Creed, which neither the Eastern, nor Western
Churches did ever profess to hold: Nor will it avail to reply, that nothing of
praying to Saints, Purgatory, or the like is to be found in the Scriptures or
Antiquity (which notwithstanding is a manifest illusion) for if they be
Articles of Religion, or of Faith, he must bring positive Texts to assert them,
by which all persons should be obliged to believe them, and so to Sacrifice
their Lives for them, if occasion should be; otherwise the Creed-makers will be
looked upon as Cheats, and their new Creeds as the deluding Fancies of
particular Men. As to the advantages of the Clergy in the Church of Rome, I
must needs confess they are very considerable, and therefore not likely to be
lost by any Reformation in Religion, since if an Angel from Heaven should bring
it, they are cautioned not to receive him: But that the Clergy should be
against, and Princes for the Church of Rome, is as surprising as that a Clergy
may be byast, and a Prince unbyast, a Blessing so signally fallen from Heaven
upon the Prince who now reigns, and his blessed Brother, that no advantage
under Heaven can be thought so powerful as to have byast them in their Choice.

THE SECOND Royal Paper VINDICATED.
HIS late Majesty out of Paternal commiseration, and his Princely care for the
safety of this Nation breaks out into this complaint, It is a sad thing to
consider what a world of Heresies are crept into this Nation. And this
Assailant is much concerned that no distinction should be made, between the
Religion established by Law, and the Parties disowned by it, and dissenting
from it. As if an establishment of a Religion by Law, could protect it from
being an Heresy, or as if Error fixed by a Law were not more to be pityed,
than what is vagrant and unsettled. He need not trouble himself to vindicate
other Sects from Heresy, against the four or six General Councils, let him
defend his own and his work is done. But how comes the Church of England to
bear the blame of so many Heresies? The reason is obvious to any one who
reflects upon the breach she made from the Church of Rome, and by that example
opened a Gate for all Heresies to enter; nay the truth is, she is a fruitful
Womb of Heresies, of which, Time has and will still deliver her; for by
throwing the Rule of Obedience and Government overboard, the Presbyterians
revolted from her; from them the Anabaptists, the Quakers, and how many links
more there will, or may be, God alone can tell, since it is not in the power of
that Church, but by the Sword to suppress them, which if she should use against
them, nothing would be more unreasonable than to persecute them for adhering
too closely to a Rule, or Example which she first gave them. To his Question,
How came the Church of Rome to have this power of defining or declaring what is
Heresy? I answer, By the same way the Church had power in her General Councils
to make Creeds, and Anathmatize Heretics; and as the Church then did not make
any new Articles of Faith, when she defined that the Son was Consubstantial to
the Father, and that Christ had two Wills, and one Person; so the Church of
Rome in her definitions never pretends to make new Articles of Faith but to
declare the old ones.

When the King had pronounced, That every Man thinks himself as competent a
Judge of Scripture as the Apostles themselves. He answers by a Counter-questio
Does every one amongst us pretend to an infallible Spirit? Yes, for by this
Gentleman's Position, no Man of them will believe but what he sees or
understands in the Scriptures, and in what they see or understand, he conceives
they cannot be deceived, consequently their Spirit is infallible; To use a
Man's understanding about Scripture, is not to be Judge of Scripture. For a Man
that so uses his understanding as to submit it to the Tradition of the Church,
makes the Church the Judge, and not himself: And whoever uses his understanding
in opposition to the Churches Tradition, makes himself judge indeed, but not to
his Salvation. We, says he, own the Authority of Guides in the Church, and a
due submission to them. What Is this? Is that submission so due that Heaven will
be lost without it? If so, his Church is as competent a Judge as the Apostles,
for that is the only punishment due to those who hear not them, if otherwise
the submission is ad pompam, and in the sense of the King every Man thinks
himself as competent a Judge of Scripture, as the very Apostles themselves.

The King gives here a Reason for his foregoing Assertion, and the sum of it
is, that the Church of England dares not press her Authority upon other Sects
in giving the sense of Scriptures, for fear they should confound her, for
having cast off the Authority of that Church, of which she was once a Member,
and to whom she was equally bound to submit. To this he replys, That the Church
of England pretends to no Infallibility; but this is to disguise the Royal
Coin, for the King abstracts from all Infallibility, and his Argument is as
forceable without it, as with it; for if the Sectaries can with truth cast it
in the Teeth of the Church of England, that she disobeyed her Mother Church,
whether she were Infallible, or not, the Church of England can never justly
charge them with any disobedience to her. But some Heads of the Roman Church
have been not barely suspected of Heresy, for one of them stands condemned for
it in three General Councils. But what is this to the King's Reason? who in
neither of his Papers, as I can see, defends any Man from the possibility of
falling into Heresy.

Not to multiply Disputes, nor to recede from the King's Papers, I shall not
dive deeper into the Question, Whether the Church of England be a true Church
or no, since the King did not. Yet I could reply to this brisk Gentleman, as
St. Austin (by me already cited) did to the Donatists, That all that he has
raked together, if it should be allowed to be in the Church of England, yet
something would be wanting to make her a true Church. Well then, what is the
Church of England charged with? It Is thus, says the King, She would fain have
it thought that they are Judges in matters spiritual, yet dare not say
positively there is no Appeal from them. His Reply is from a Parity Betwixt
Inferior and Superior Courts, where both are truly Judges, yet there lies an
Appeal from an Inferior to a Superior Court, and he instances in Courts both
Spiritual and Temporal. But the Parity is very lame, for the Church of England
supposes her self nor inferior to any other Church, nor will she submit to any
others Dictamen, as things stand, consequently, as things stand, she is the
last Tribunal of Spiritual Doctrine. In the next Paragraph the King argues
thus, What Country can subsist in quiet where there is not a Supreme Judge,
from whence there can be no Appeal. From hence this Gentleman infers, that
every National Church ought to have the Supreme Power within its self. This is
no good Illation, unless it be in reference to the Church of England, which
will have no such Superior to it, for the King speaks of a Country over which
there is no Jurisdiction out of its self, consequently there must be in that
Country a Supreme Judge in all Temporal Causes, but one Church which is
subordinate to another Church, and owns her self but a Member of an universal
Church in Being, cannot be said to be the last Tribunal from whence there can
be no Appeal. The rest of this Paragraph is a running division upon certain
Abuses complained of by some Saints, which because they may happen in the best
of Ages, and to the best of Men without prejudice to the lawful Authority of
the Church, I pass them by, and shall make my Observation upon the next
Paragraph, that whereas the King's Expostulation is, We have had these Hundred
Years past, the sad Effects of denying to the Church that Power in matters
Spiritual, without Appeal. By which Expression, as also by the antecedent and
consequent Discourses, is meant an Appeal to the Universal Church, in matters
Spiritual; as Interpretation of Scripture, Delivery of Doctrine, Decisions of
Faith, etc. He applies the Context against Personal Appeals to the Pope; and
then declaims against abuses of those Appeals; of which, both our own and
neighbor Princes have complained, and have been forced for the preserving of
their own Dignity, to set Bounds and Limits to Appeal to Rome. But, admit the
king had intended Appeals to Rome, does not this Gentleman by this reply, That
Princes have limited or bounded these Appeals to Rome, own that Princes have
believed that Appeals do of Right belong to Rome, provided that Power be not
abused? And if the King himself was likely to suffer the most by them, the more
was his Integrity in preferring his Conscience before his Interest. This
Paragraph then is a Counterfeit of the Royal Stamp; and so is the next, by
which the king is also misrepresented; for which Reason I shall make no remark
upon it.

Here begins the Kings application of his former Discourse, by which this
Gentleman may see his Error. This is our Case here in England in matters
Spiritual, for the Protestants are not of the Church of England, as it is the
true Church from whence there can be no Appeal; but because the Discipline of
that Church is conformable at the present to their fancies, etc. He returns
thus, What Security can be greater than that of our Judgments? For he will not
have it to be Fancy. I Answer, That to submit our Judgments to that of the
Catholic Church, which God has appointed to direct us, is the greatest Security
we can have, and in competition with this all is but Fancy. And, since he
appeals to the whole World, whether we have not made it appear, that it is not
Fancy, but Judgment, which has made us firm to the Church of England, He is
already cast by as many Votes, as there are Men out of the Church of England.
Their adherence to the Crown, of which he speaks, is so principal a part of the
Church of England as it is established by Law, that without it that Church
cannot subsist; but, when the Fancy shall move to change that Religion into
Presbytery, or any thing else, Loyalty is out of Doors. Now against those of
the Church of Rome the Argument will not have that force, for they and their
Ancestors ever professing that Church to be their Infallible Mistress, and that
upon such Motives that nothing would be found more powerful; their Judgment is
fixed upon such a Basis, that for want of it all other Churches which own
themselves Fallible, that is, both apt to deceive and be deceived, are but in a
Tottering state. What follows in this Paragraph is a Recrimination barely
censuring, without proving, some Tenets of the Catholic Church, as pure Fancy.

The Thread of the king's Discourse being still the same, He concludes, So,
that according to this Doctrine there is no other Church nor Interpreter of
Scripture but which lies in every man's giddy Brain. By which he may be assured
the king calls that only a giddy. Brain, which stands in opposition to the
great Authority of the Church interpreting Scripture. But says the Answerer,
Let men's Brains be as giddy as they are said to be, they are the best Faculties
they can make use of for the understanding of Scriptures, or any thing else.
Undoubtedly they are with that Assistance of an infallible Church, which God
has given them, since many things, to be understood there, are out of the reach
of Man's private Reason, which he makes use of to find out his Guide, being as
visible as a City upon a Hill, or a Light on a Candlestick, and then submits to
her Interpretation of Scriptures; so that the infallible Church lies not in
every Man's giddy Brain, but is as visible as the Sun.

Upon the winding up of this Discourse, the king desires to know of every
Serious Considerer of these things whether the great work of our Salvation
ought to depend upon such a Sandy Foundation as this. Upon this Proposal of the
king's, he runs out into an airy Excursion against the Church of Rome, under a
pretense of a new Faith, hatched in the Council of Trent; which being an
assertion, as voluntary as it is Sandy, it leaves the Church unattack't, and
still standing upon a Rock. But I appeal says he, to any ingenious Man, whether
he does not as much build upon his own Judgment, who chooses the Church, as he
who chooses the Scripture for his Rule. The answer is easy; for certainly a
Man has more reason to rely upon his own Judgment in finding out the Church,
than the Scripture, since the one is a Noonday Light, and may be discovered by
every one, the other is in the dark, and so might continue, if not discovered
by the Light of the Church. He advances; for the Church can never be a Rule
without the Scriptures, but the Scriptures may without the Church. It seems
this Gentleman has forgot there was a Church before the Scriptures were
written, and consequently a Rule; nay, some Ages passed before a Collection of
the Books of Scripture was made, and owned by the Catholic Church (for
certainly the Apostles, and Apostolic Men did not, when they went to convert
the World by Preaching, bring about Wagons laden with Bibles to every Parish,
and even in St. Irenaeus his time there were many barbarous Nations Converted
that could neither Write nor Read) the Church then was the only Rule without
the Scripture; but without light from the Church, there could be no certainty
of Scripture, either as to the Book it self, or to the Copy, or the Translation
or Sense of it. He pushes farther, it is no such easy matter to find the
Churches Infallibillity in the Scripture.

I answer there is no absolute necessity of finding it in the Scripture, since
the Church was found out, before the new Testament was in Being, and if God's
special good Providence had not given us the Scriptures to our great Comfort,
yet the Church notwithstanding would have still been visible to the World's
End, and therefore when we cite those texts of Scripture about Christ's being
with his Church to the end of the World, about the Power to forgive Sins, about
God's Laborers, Husbandry and the like, it is only ad abundantiam, and to show
the advantages the Church has over her Enemies, even at their own Weapons.
But, in his opinion, these Texts of Scripture do as effectually prove the
infallibility of the Church of England as of the Church of Rome. But I beseech
him, how can a Church but of yesterday, and whose Negative Articles of Faith
were lately Coined, dure from Christ to the World's end.

The last thing the King charges upon those who resist the truth, and will not
submit to this Church, is that they draw their arguments from implications and
far fetched interpretation, at the same time that they deny plain and positive
words; which is so great a disingenuity that it is not almost to be thought,
that they can believe themselves. This I perceive touches to the quick, but
truth, though she cuts, must still be amiable. Is it, says the Answerer, to
deny truth, to argue from implications, and to deny plain and positive words of
Scripture, to say we must not worship Images, we must make God alone the Object
of holy Worship. I reply, it is, for nothing of this is to be found in
Scripture; and, if the word Image had been in the Commandments, as it is not
(the Original signifying a graven thing) yet it would be an implication, or
far-fetched interpretation, because it is singled out, and snatched from the
context, which gives life to the words, importing Divine Worship: Nor is it any
where expressed, That God alone is the Object of holy Worship: Though it may be
deduced thence, that worship to holy things is referred to God alone as the only
final Object of all such Worship. Again, to say that Christ's Institution of
the Eucharist in both kinds is a Command to the Lay People to receive it in
both kinds, is an implication confounding Institution with a Command, which are
very different. For Matrimony was Instituted by God, yet I know no Man by
virtue of the Institution commanded to Marry. Lastly, The discourse of St. Paul
touching the understanding of our Prayers meddles not with the public, or
settled Liturgy of the Church, as may be evinced from the Chapter it self. So
that for any of those Examples there is neither plain nor positive words of
Scripture on their side. Let us now change sides, and see how it squares with
the Catholic Party: They affirm Bread to be changed into the Body of Christ,
because of these plain and positive words, This is my Body; this is true,
because the words are so plain that they import no implication of
Impossibility, or Absurdity, (a Rule observed by the Fathers in the
understanding of Scriptures literally) but against this there lies an
Objection, That it is as plain and positive in Scripture, that God has Eyes,
Ears, Hands and Feet. My reply is, That there is an Implication of
Impossibility, which appears not in the plain Sense of these words, This is my
Body. He presses to know the difference betwixt these two Propositions, A Rock
is Christ, and This is my Body. I answer, That had it been thus, Bread is my
Body, there had been none, for then both Propositions would have implied an
Impossibility. But the words being This is my Body, the words are plain, as to
their Sense, that they infer neither Impossibility, nor Absurdity, since by
these omnipotent words the Bread is changed into the Body of Christ, which
neither is impossible to God, nor absurd to do; and therefore in those places
where Christ is said to be Bread, it is always with some Emphasis, as the Bread
of Life, this Bread, or the Bread, which clearly imports an Analogy.

The Conclusion of this Royal Paper, is, That if the Civil Magistrate pleases
he may turn the Protestant Church either to Presbytery, or Independency, or
indeed to what he pleases, for this was the way of our pretended Reformation in
England, and by the same Rule, etc. This he tells the King is an unkind
requital to the Church of England, for her Zeal in asserting his Majesty's
power against a foreign Jurisdiction. But Truth, methinks, when uttered with
design of public good, ought never to be taken unkindly, especially from the
Pen of a King; and if it seems an ill requital, I am sure it is a worse
complement to palliate one Error with another. The King's reason is to the
purpose; for, as our Princes lately, notwithstanding all Laws Divine and
Humane, did by their Regal Power cancel a Religion which came into this Nation
with Christianity, and was Established by more strong and forcing Laws, than
ever gave Being or Preservation to the Church of England: For besides a
thousand years Prescription, and the Immunities and great Privileges of the
Clergy, it was so Fenced with the great Charter of England, Magna Charta, that
nothing but the forcing of this, could ruin that: As, I say, some Princes have
by their power wrought a change from that Religion into another, how much more
is it in their hands to turn the Protestant Church into Presbytery or
Independency; since Protestancy is but of a fresh date, and has no other
Foundation, but what is common to Presbytery or Independency; all of them being
built on private interpretations of Scripture; saving a Being from the breath
of the Civil Magistrate, by an establishment in the Law; and, therefore, if the
Law be mutable, the Religion will be mutable. Nor does it avail him to say, The
Rule of our Religion is unalterable, being the Holy Scripture, but the Exercise
of it is under the Law. For Presbytery once established by Law, will speak both
Law and Scripture as loud as he. Thus ends the Vindication of the two Royal
Papers: Long may they dure in the hands and hearts of all those who love Truth.

THE THIRD Royal Paper VINDICATED.
IT cannot but be very surprising to behold a Gentleman pretending to no
ordinary Size in Learning, rallying all his Forces to encounter a Princess (now
in the midst of Laurels) whom whilst she Lived, the great Figure she made in
the Court, left no time to improve by Art those excellent Endowments with which
Nature had plentifully enriched her; and who, generously humble, consigned to
paper this Profession. I am not able, or if I were, would I enter into Disputes
with any Body, Her design was only the Satisfaction she owed to her Friends,
not any Engagement in the Quarrels of Disputes; and what she left behind her
was but a bare and candid Narrative of those great conflicts which she suffered
in her Soul, upon the only necessary work of her Conversion to God. And, why a
Paper so innocent, left by so great a Lady as a Legacy to her Friends, should
raise the Spleen of so great a Giant to that degree as to tear it in pieces,
and thus torn to disfigure it, and thus disfigured, to expose it, would have
been a subject of great wonder, were it not obvious to suspect the unhappy
Genius, that moved him. But since she has gained the point she aimed at, and so
well satisfied her Friends, even to the Conviction of many Adversaries, and to
the admiration of all. I shall so recollect the Sense of her Paper, by Design
and Artifice disjointed, that put together it will cement it self, and the
native Beauty will appear more resplendent by his Neighboring Shade.

The first attempt upon her Paper is from her own Concession which is thus, I
am not able, or if I were, woul'd I enter into Disputes with any Body: at this
he seems astonished, and hardly capable to understand, how any one could be
truly satisfied, as to the Grounds of leaving one Church, and going to the
other, without entering into matter of Dispute with any Body. Before I reply, I
cannot but observe a Coin newly Counterfeited; for the Duchess does not say,
she will not enter into the matter of Disputes, but only that she will not
enter into Disputes, which are Expressions of so different a Nature, that the
one may well be, and often is without the other. For the matter of Dispute may
be any thing, about which there may be no Dispute. To deliver him then, from
this astonishment, there are many ways to the Wood besides one, and God in the
Treasury of his all-seeing Providence can so temper second Causes, that even
without Miracle he can work a thousand Conversions of Souls from Error to
Truth, without any Dispute; but he urges farther, How could one, bred up in the
Church of England, and so well instructed in the Doctrines of it ever satisfy
herselfin forsaking the Communion of it, without inquiring into, and comparing
the Droctrines and Practices of both Churches? If this will give him Content, I
doubt not but all this may be, and is frequently performed without disputing
with any Body; for she being now so well knowing in the Doctrines and Practices
of the Church of England, she had no more to do, but to make Inquiry into the
Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, and so by comparing them
together, as in the collision of two Flints, might by her own Industry strike
out that Fire, and that Light, which might both comfort her Soul, and light it
to the secure Haven of Eternity. But this he adds, was not to be presumed of a
Person of her Condition, for many things must fall in her way, which she could
neither have leisure to examine, nor the Capacity to judge of without the
assistance of others. As to this I must crave his Pardon; for if I be not
misinformed by those who had the Honor to know her, she was a Princess of as
searching a Wit, and of as clear a Judgment as any of her time: Nor can it be
questioned but she had time and leisure enough; for she that professes to have
found no rest to her Soul Night nor Day, can never be presumed to want time to
hunt after that, which her Soul did so passionately Love, and if any difficulty
had fallen in her way, which by her self she could not Conquer, she had choice
of Learned Men of all Professions to consult, who might have so smoothed all
the Rubs that lay in her way, as to resolve her without any Dispute. Had she
not, says he, Divines of the Church of England about her to propose her
scruples to, yes, she had, and did so, and professes to have received such
satisfaction from them, as contributed much to her Conversion to the Catholic
Church; which Discourses she said, did but add more to her desire of being a
Catholic. Now if this be reputed a Dispute, then every one who advises with his
Divine or Lawyer in matters relating either to his Soul, or Estate; must be
styled a Disputant.

To evince that her Royal Highness did not make use of the ordinary means for
her own satisfaction, he brings for instance the Bishop of Winchester, who had
nearest Relation to her, as having bred her up in the Principles of the Church
of England, and was a Man both able and willing to have removed any doubts. As
to the ability or inclination this Bishop had to have served her, in removing
her doubts or Scruples, I shall not dispute them; but this is certain, that
notwithstanding all his care in her. Education in the Protestant Religion, she
was afterward out of Love with it, and who knows whether this very Bishop at
other times (at least accidentally) in his Discourses with her might not have
dropped something, which taken up by her, might give an advance to her
Conversion; as it fell out to the insinuated yielding Bishops? O, but she
endeavored to conceal her Scruples from him. Admit she did; and that, as the
Palate nauseats Meat which formerly it loved, so she, either out of some
disgust, or for reasons best known to her self, did not so well relish the
advice given her by the Bishop of Winchester. Had she no Body else to consult?
If she had, there is no reason to charge her with the not using ordinary means,
unless this Gentleman has a Revelation for it.

After this, he cites the following discourse of her Royal Highness, That she
spoke severally to two of the best Bishops we have in England, who both told
her there were many things in the Roman Church, which it were much to be wished
we had kept; as Confession, which was, no doubt, commanded of God: That,
praying for the dead was one of the ancient things in Christianity: That for
their parts they did it daily, though they would not own it. And afterward
pressing one of them very much, upon the other point, he told her that if he
had been breed up a Catholic, he would not change his Religion, but that being
of another Church, wherein be was sure were all things necessary to Salvation,
he thought it very ill, to give that Scandal, as to leave that Church wherein
he received his Baptism. Which discourse, she said, did but add more to the
desire she had to be a Catholic. By this long Text it is clear that her Royal
Highness had made many steps toward the Catholic Religion, and that the
Conference she had with these Bishops did but add fuel to the flame that was
within her, for such is the result of her last words, did but add more to the
desire she had to be a Catholic. This being so, her Highness, and the two
Bishops were now upon different terms, as Party and Party; she making advantage
of their Concessions, as of Truths coming out of the mouth of the Enemies to
the Religion she either actually professed, or was inclinable to; and they,
notwithstanding those Concessions, keeping their own ground: So that it was not
the Authority, or Example of these Bishops that prevailed with her, but Truth
forced from an Enemy; which for that reason convinced her the more. Since
therefore this Gentleman allows of the Concessions, it is unreasonable to put
this question, Why should not the last words have greater force to have kept
her in our Church, than the former to have drawn her from it? Because it is
easier for a Catholic to believe a Protestant speaking against himself in
matters of Religion, than for himself: Ex ore tuo te judico is an Argument
invincible against a Man's self. The Concessions then being admitted both by
the Catholic party, and these two Bishops, she had reason to believe them, as
to the Concessions; but not in that wherein the Catholics and they differed,
which was, That all things necessary to Salvation are certainly in the
Protestant Church, and that it was ill to leave it.

The next two Paragraphs concern not her Royal Highness: For, whether the two
Bishops did let fall words inconsistent with their own Religion, or not, her
work was done; she not being obliged to reconcile them to their own Religion.

But the late Bishop of Winchester instead of untying, has cut the knot a
sunder: For, says he, he first doubts, whether there ever were such Bishops who
made such answers; and then he affirms, That he believes there never was in
rerum natura such a discourse as is pretended. What pity it is the Bishop of
Winchester should be a person of so small a faith, as not to give credit to so
great a Lady in a concern wherein 'twas no advantage to her to tell a Lie; and,
if she had, was by all the Laws Divine and Humane bound to restitution for the
wrong she did them. Non dimittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. Or, if he
doubted whether there were ever any such Paper, we have now the Royal word of a
King for it, attesting it to be hers. Matters being thus, we do not charge upon
the Church of England the single Opinion of one, or two Bishops, but it is
reason to believe that a Lady thirsting after truth, might defer much to
persons of so eminent a rank in that Church.

This Gentleman I perceive is very studious, very industrious to find a Lady in
Error, and hopes she may contradict her self; thus then, She protests, in the
presence of Almighty God, that no person, Man or Woman, directly, or
indirectly, ever said any thing to her, (since she came into England) or used
the least endeavor to make her change her Religion, and that it is a blessing
she wholly owes to Almighty God. So that the Bishops are acquitted from having
any hand in it by her own words. But I beseech him, did she or any else charge
upon these Bishops, that they said any thing to her, or used any endeavors to
make her change her Religion? How often does it happen, that the speaker of words
may utter them for one design, and the hearer make use of them for another,
though then the Bishops did not say any thing to her with endeavor to make her
change her Religion, yet their words may have added much to the change of her
Religion. He proceeds, And as far as we can understand her meaning, she thought
her self Converted by immediate Divine Illumination. This construction of her
words, so tickled his fancy, that it made him sport upon the Church of Rome's
private Spirit for a long time: But for my part (if he has done laughing) I can
understand nothing of this immediate Divine Illumination from her words. For
God, who disposes of all things strongly and sweetly, has infinite methods to
convert Souls to himself without immediate Illumination, by so unexpected a
concourse of second Causes, so well tempered and knit together by his wisdom,
that a conversion of a Soul may and will follow thence, she not knowing how;
and consequently as it is the sole work of the Almighty, so that blessing she
wholly owes to him. What this Gentleman understands by a private Spirit I know
not; but, be it what it will, it is therefore vicious, because it is
inconsistent with those public Methods and Rules God has left to govern his
Church by; which whether the Protestants when they went out from the Roman
Church did not desert, by following an Ignis Fatuus of their own, in their
singular interpretation of holy Scripture, against the known Sense of their
Mother Church, is the subject of another dispute; or rather indeed it is put out
of all dispute that they then did, unless they can show that the constant
Tradition and Practice of the Primitive Church interpreted Scripture as they
then did, in all the Points they reformed in; which they know is impossible.

Her Royal Highness declares, that she would never have changed, if she thought
she could have saved her Soul otherwise, and he answers, if this were true she
had good reason for her change; if it were not true, she had none; as it is
most certain it was not. I cannot persuade my self that this Gentleman would
force his Modesty to such a Degree, as to give the Lie to a Lady of her
transcendent Quality; especially who had been so well bred up in the Principles
of the Church of England. I shall rather favor him with this Construction,
that though she thought what she said was true, yet in reality it was not.

But how came she to make this Declaration? she tells us, she never had any
scruple till the November before, and then they began upon reading Doctor
Heylin's History of the Reformation; which was commended to her, as a Book to
settle her; and there she found such abominable Sacrilege upon Henry the
Eighth's Divorce, King Edward's Minority, and Queen Elizabeth's Succession,
that she could not believe the Holy Ghost could ever be in such Councills. And,
because Doctor Heylin's History wrought her Conversion, he seems to be
displeased at the Author of that Advice; but I must needs dissent from him:
for, it being a History of the Reformation, it wasmore fit to put that into her
hands to settle her in her Religion, if the Reformation had been from God,
being within her Sphere, than any Book of Controversy; wherein she might have
been plunged into difficulties insuperable, the Objection oftentimes
out-weighing the Solution. And though in the History of Reformation he tells us,
there are two distinct parts. The one built on Scripture and Antiquity; the
other upon Maxims of State; yet the one being visible, and the other invisible,
had she been a Person of greater Understanding, than she was, how could she
possibly discern both? what he requires to have been the Subject of her
Consideration, was so far beyond her Reach, that more Speculative Persons, than
her Condition would permit her to be, come short of that Performance: and
therefore no better way could be, than to be conversant with such Objects, or
motives as were of her own size. One of which was that where the Foundations of
a Pretended Reformation were Sacrilege, Rapine, and Lust, She could not
believe the Holy Ghost could ever be in such Councills. He replies thus; were
not the Vices of Alexander the Sixth, and of many other Popes, as great at
least as those of Henry the Eighth? Be it so, and suppose them greater;
therefore neither she, nor any Body else in Prudence can believe that God ever
chose Alexander the Sixth, or such as he points at by vitiously acting to be
the Reformers of his Church, or to give Being to a Reformation.

As to the Invasion upon the Rights and Lands of the Church; he replies to by
Retaliation: Are there not Miscarriages of the like Nature in the Church of
Rome? It may be so, but if by such Miscarriages one should think to reform the
Church, I shall as freely declare with this great Lady, that I cannot believe,
the Holy Ghost can ever be in such Councils.

From her scruples which the reading of Dr. Heylin's History of the
Reformation, had put into her mind, she came to the Examen (of points in
difference) by the Holy Scriptures, where it seems, says he, contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, she found some things so easy, that she
wondered she had been so long without finding them out. That some things may
easily be met with in Holy Scripture, makes not against the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome; nay standing to the bare Letter, without the assistance of
Tradition, experience has made it manifest that her Champions have fought
against all sorts of Enemies, with that success, even at their own weapon, that
partiality it self cannot deny her the Victory. Nor is it any great wonder,
that a Lady of her great endowments, being but yet a seeker of Truth, and not
acquainted with the Catholic Rules of Expounding Scriptures, and having no
other interest, but her Soul's safety, should easily find what she did not
formerly, when she thought her self secure, and was not concerned, nay what
great Doctors do pass slightly over, when thousands of lesser Talents than she,
have done the like. What discoveries then has she made? First, of the Real
Presence, then of the Infallibility, of Confession, and praying for the Dead.

As to the Real Presence importing a Real and Substantial change of the
Elements into the Body and Blood of Christ. He demands, In what words of Christ
is it to be found? I answer in these, This is my Body: And whereas he adds,
That the wisest Persons of the Church of Rome have confessed, that the bare
words of our Savior can never prove it. I answer, It Is hard for him to
determine who are the wisest; but he knows well that they generally teach, that
those words cannot be verified, without that change. Confession of Sins, as
ever commanded, is no harder to meet withal, than confess your sins to one
another. And if the Apostles and in them their Successors, had power to forgive
and retain sins, there must be an Obligation in others to confess them,
otherwise that power had been useless. Praying for the Dead is also frequently
grounded upon Scripture, and though her Royal Highness seems to have been
somewhat confirmed in the belief of it, by the concession of the two Bishops,
yet she no where affirmed that to be the sole Motive to change her Religion,
but only that it added more to her desire of being a Catholic. The Places
usually cited for the Infallibility of the Church, he would persuade us may as
well be applied to other Churches, as to the Roman; but because I have already
proved the Roman to be that one Catholic Church, I shall supersede from any
further trouble at the present. From Christ's promise of being with the Church
to the end of the World (and she now believing no other Church, to be that
Church, but that which is called the Roman) she makes this inference, That our
Savior would not permit the Church to give the Laity the Communion in one
kind, if it were not lawful so to do. This Illation is evident; for otherwise,
he would not be with his Church to the end of the world.

From this excellentDiscourse of her Royal Highness, it is an invincible Truth,
that all the force of Sense and Reason do center in this conclusion, that she
did not think it possible to save her Soul, otherwise than in the Roman Church;
and by her Paper the world may see the pregnant Power of Truth, which forced
those two great Lights of England's Church to a private concession of what in
public they were unwilling to own. Magna est veritas and pr^valebit.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Sold by Matthew Turner at the Lamb in High-Holbourn.
ACTS of the Clergy of France: The second Edition: To which is added a
necessary advice how to read Books of Controversy Quarto.

A Discourse of the necessity of Church Guides, Quarto.

The Guide in Controversies. Four Parts. Quarto.

A True Narrative of the pretended Popish Plot, with Figures.

A Papist Misrepresented and Represented, Quarto.

Why are you a Catholic? And, Why are you a Protestant, Quarto.

Bishop Condom's Discourse of Universal History, Octavo.

Digitus Dei against Nullifidians, Octavo.

The MASS Triumphing, Octavo.

The MASS Vindicated, Octavo.

Veron's Rule of Faith, Octavo.

Bishop Condom's Exposition of Catholic Doctrine, Twelves.

-- His Treatise of Communion in both Species, Twelves.

The Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel, Twelves.

Turbervil's Manual of Controversies, Twelves.

-- Abridgment of Christian Doctrine, Eighteens.

Vane's Lost Sheep Returned home, Twelves.

Counsels of Wisdom, or the Maxims of Solomon, Twelves.

The Catechism of Penance, Eighteens.

Four Maxims of Eternity, Eighteens.

Christian Thoughts for every Day, Twentyfours.

St. Francis de Sales Introduction to a Devout Life, Twelves.

Thomas of Kempis Following of Christ. In Twelves and Twentyfours.

THE END.

