A SERMON PREACHED In the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH AT ELY. July the 24th, School. On
Occasion of His Majesty's Proclamation against Atheism, and Profaneness, etc.

By Charles Lidgould, late Fellow of Clare-Hall, and Reader at the
Charter House: Now Rector of Dunsby in Lincolnshire.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Wild, at the Elephant at Charing Cross, 1699.

A PREFACE.
THIS Discourse, had I been fond of its appearing in Print, had been more
seasonably Published, when it was first brought forth, which was soon after the
Issuing out His Majesty's Proclamation against Atheism and Profaneness. 'Tho
indeed, the suppression hereof being a new recommended by the King in his late
Speech to the farther Consideration of this present Parliament affords no unfit
Occasion even now to the Publishing a Discourse of this Nature. It was intruth
Calculated for the City, where, some business calling me thither last Year, I
had Friends, who I knew, would expect I should give them a Sermon: And I might
at the same time have prevailed with some to desire a Publication of it, that
so it might have come abroad with the Advantage of being Published at their
Request and Importunity. But waving this, I brought it safe off to Ely, where I
had an opportunity (and that but very accidental) of Preaching it again. All
which I thought proper to be here mentioned, that nothing of it might appear to
be levelled principally against any of that Auditory, wherein it had the Honor
to be delivered, the Lord Bishop of Ely himself heing present. Whose Memory (to
which I thought fit to appeal by submitting it to his Lordship's view before I
would commit it to the Press) is both able and ready to justify me, that there
was nothing then Preached that is not here Printed, nor any thing here Printed
(bating what you may find in the Margin) that was not then Preached. From whom
if it had the good fortune to gain any Approbation, I am not much concerned how
many it displeased beside: The good Opinion of so great and worthy a Person
being sufficient to clear it, among all that are indifferent and unbiased,
from any unseemly or indiscreet Glances. Though for the sake of several to whom I
owe a very just respect, I could heartily wish it had appeared as inoffensive
as it was really innocent. And, to say truth, one Reason, that now brings it to
open View, is the hope that it may upon Re-examination be acquitted of any
unhandsome Reflections; to which Charge the first hearing did it seems, expose
it. How justly, I now leave to those, who then heard it, and all others, who
shall be at the pains of reading it, to judge. For my own part, I know nothing
herein mentioned that gave any Offense, which the History, I am engaged in, did
not so plainly suggest, that without it, I had been unjust to my Subject and
left the Parallel imperfect.

Whether it may prove any otherwise serviceable or not, I humbly leave to God
Almighty's Blessing: Whom I at the same time call to Witness that the first
Motive to the forming this Discourse was the concern I had upon me to see and
hear how Atheism and Blasphemy have diffused and spread themselves throughout
the Nation; and the chearing hopes I had conceived from His Majesty's Pious
Proclamation, that such a Discountenancing all that are that way Guilty, which
he himself has most graciously promised, would be the most effectual Means to
restrain its Course. and put a stop to the Malignity of its Influence: Which
that it may, I beseech God, may be not only the earnest desire but hearty
endeavor of all that would not undergo the suspicion of having an evil Will to
this our Sion.

A SERMON Preached In the Cathedral Church at Ely. Jer. Vii. 17. See thou not
what they do in the Cities of Judah, and in the Streets of Jerusalem?


WHEN Solomon says that the Light of the Eyes rejoices the heart, Pro. 15.30.
it can only be understood, where the Object is delightful: For such a Prospect
as Jeremiah had, when he saw the Desolation of Jerusalem, the Young and the Old
lie on the ground in the streets, the Virgins and young Men fallen by the
Sword; when he saw the Children faint for hunger in the top of every street,
all that had been swadled and brought up, consumed by the Enemy; when the Lord
slew them in the Day of his Anger, when he killed and pitied not, none escaped
nor remained; as we find it Pathetically described, Lam. 2. Lam. 2.19,21,22.
Surely such a Prospect as this could not but have so affected his heart, as
even to make him cry out in the Language of the same Prophet, wherefore came I
forth out of the Womb to see labor and sorrow? Jer. 20.18.


All which, if it were so afflicting to the Eye in the event, must needs be
abundantly more so to see it likewise in its Cause, viz. The height of
wickedness they were arrived at, that provoked God to this; the shameless and
abominable Sins they were guilty of, as you see in the 9th and 10th Verses of
this Chapter, that could Steal, Murder, commit Adultery, Swear falsely and the
like, and yet come and stand before him in his House, whereupon his Name is
called, and say, we are delivered to do all these Abominations. Such a careless
and stupid security, that could from God's forbearance presume upon peace and
safety, notwithstanding all the terrible examples of Vengeance that befell
their Forefathers; which they are put in mind of in the next Verse but one, to
rowse them, if it be possible, out of their deadly Lethargy, this dangerous
Insensibility. Go ye now, says he, unto my Place, that was in Shiloh, and
behold what I did to that for the wickedness of my People, ver. 12. And can
these hope to escape their punishment, who are as deeply guilty of all their
Sins? So many, that it were an endless thing to go about to enumerate or
particularize them; so great that they are beyond all expression; so evident
and apparent, that it were but lost labor to offer at any Proof of them: And
therefore has God thought it enough in all reason to call upon the Prophets, or
indeed any ones Eyes to be Witnesses thereof. See not thou what they do in
the Cities of Judah, and in the Streets of Jerusalem? An aggravation far above
any Description that could have been given of their doings.

For the handling of which words so as may be most suitable to my Design in
choosing them, I need but remove the Scene from Jerusalem and the Cities of
Judah to this Nation whereunto we belong, and imagine the Lord calling to us,
as he did to his Prophet, to take a view of all the Wickedness and Profaneness
the Debauchery and Immorality, the Atheism and Irreligion, that abound among us.

And this Call have I for my own part the more readily hearkened to at present,
since it has pleased Almighty God to put it into the heart of our pious
Sovereign to consider, that the Reformation of our manners is the best return
we can make for the happy and honorable Peace we are lately blessed with: And
that the vindicating of God's Honor from the many blasphemous Aspersions,
wherewith the Atheism of this Age has endeavored to sully it, is the most
seasonable Testimony of Gratitude for so signal a Mercy. Whose active Zeal in
setting upon so noble an Undertaking has likewise stirred up an holy Emulation
in his Parliament to join their helping hand, by contriving means to stem this
Tide, and put a stop to that Inundation of Profaneness that has been a long
time pouring in upon us. Which may, I hope, engage your Ears to entertain a
Discourse of this Nature with the more Attentiveness: All especially among you,
that have any regard for Religion, or indeed for the Public safety, that
mightily depends upon the Success of their endeavors to hinder the spreading
of this Contagion, which will otherwise most certainly bring down some heavy
Judgment on our Heads. That no Assistance therefore may be wanting to the
furtherance of so glorious a Work, it is likewise highly deserving the Care, of
not only You, who by your Stations have any Authority, but of You, also, who by
the winning obligingness of your Carriage and Conversation have any. Influence,
over others: That so those, who sit in the Seat of the Scornful, and call all
Religion only, Priestcraft, a Trade whereby We get our Living: That regard the
Holy Scriptures but as a well lard Romance, and the great Articles of
Christianity as nothing else but so many Fables: That look upon our Preaching
to be mere Cant, our Doctrine of Heaven and Hell, of a Resurrection and a
Judgment to come to be only a Trick to debar them the pleasure of Indulging
their natural Appetites, and a bare Design to put a check upon their sensual
desires and inclinations, which are very impatient of any control: That even
those, I say, that entertain such invincible Prejudices against Our Admonitions
and Reproofs, may yet be wrought on by You, whom they are not so ready to
suspect of any By designs upon them, to enter into parley with themselves, and
consider and see what it is they are doing. And that you may be the better
animated to curb the growth of these pernicious Impieties, that tend to the
utter Ruin and Subversion of all Religion among us, thereby to prevent, what
you can, the dreadful consequence hereof, even the Destruction and Overthrow
of your Native Country (a Judgment God never fails to bring on a Land, when
all his milder Methods are not able to reform it) I beseech you now, that you
would enter with me into a serious Meditation on the words of my Text in these
three following Particulars.

First, I desire that you would take a view with me of the wickedness the
Prophet is here called upon to observe in the Cities of Judah and in the
Streets of Jerusalem, and compare with that the abominable Principles and
Practices, that at this day reign among us.

Secondly, That you would from the dreadful Effects of this their Wickedness
consider, what we may justly expect should befall us, if we persist with our no
less heinous Provocations to incense the Majesty of Heaven against us.

And Thirdly, How much it therefore concerns us both by our own Repentance and
our best endeavors to reclaim others, to prevent those Judgments, which will
otherwise most certainly overtake us.

To the First of These the very words of the Text directly lead us. The Second
and Third do naturally arise from a due Consideration, whither those Doings, we
are called upon to take notice of, most apparently tend.

And, First, Let us take a view of the Wickedness the Prophet is here called
upon to observe in the Cities of Judah and in the Streets of Jerusalem, and
compare with the same the abominable Principles and Practices, that at this day
abound among us.

Their crying Sin, and that for which They had been often threatened with an
utter Excision, was Idolatry. A Sin they were so strangely bewitched with, that
notwithstanding God's continual Warnings against it, notwithstanding their
miraculous Victories over the Nations God delivered into their hands on the
account of this very Sin, they could not, upon being left never so little to
themselves, forbear, ever since their amazing Deliverance out of the Land of
Egypt. For which though God often plagued them, and Sold them into the hands of
their Enemies, Judge. 2.14.
till they were duly humbled under a sense of it, yet were they seldom long
settled in a State of prosperity, but they had forgot him who had done so great
things for them; Ps. 106.21.
they could not grow fat, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
but they must kick, become wanton and and go a Whoring after other Gods. Judge.
2.17.
All which God had as yet looked upon but as so many startings aside, and so by
some short Affliction, some sudden Judgment giving them a check, he soon
reduced them into the right Path. Ps. 78.58. Old Trans.
But now they are quite gone out of the way, they are altogether become
abominable, there is none that does good, no, not one. Ps. 14.4. Old Trans.
You may see their present Condition described by two Prophets Jeremiah and
Ezekiel, sent on purpose to warn them what they must expect upon their
continuance in such daring and provoking Impieties.

For what the First of these discovers upon a furvey of them, we need go no
farther than this Chapter of my Text. Idolatry.
They burn Incense to Baal, v. 9.
make Cakes to the Queen of Heaven, pour out Drink Offerings unto their Gods,
v. 18.
build the High Places of Tophet to burn their Sons and their Daughters in the
Fire; v. 31.
Profaneness.
set their abominations in the House, whereupon God's Name is called, to
pollute it. v. 30.
All this is a sufficient manifestation of their Idolatry and Profaneness.
Immorality.
And to show you, how excessively corrupted they were in their Morals as well as
their Worship, you may read in this same Chapter likewise, that Truth is
perished and cut off from their Mouth; v. 28.
they Steal, Murder, commit Adultery, Swear falsely, v. 9.
as you heard before. Incorrigibleness.
Nay, that which rendered their Condition the most desperate, was, that they
rejected all the means God made use of to amend them. When he encouraged them
to walk in all the ways which he commanded, that it might be well with them; v.
23.
they would not harken nor incline their Ear, but walked in the Counsels and in
the Imaginations of their evil hearts. v. 24.
When he sent unto them his Servants, the Prophets, daily rising up early and
sending them; v. 25.
Yet hearkened they not unto him, nor inclined their Ear, but hardened their neck
and did worse than their Fathers. v. 26.


Come we now to the Prophet Ezekiel, and we shall find God bespeaking him much
after the same manner, as he does the Prophet Jeremy in my Text. See thou
what they do, even the great abominations that the House of Israel committed
here? chapter 8. v. 6. Their Idolatry in the first place. Idolatay.
None cast away the abominations of their Eyes, neither did they forsake the
Idols of Egypt, chapter 20.8. They made their Sons to pass through the Fire, v. 31.
and said we will be as the Heathen to serve Wood and Stone. v. 32.
Their Profaneness next. Profaneness.
Thou have despised mine Holy Things, chapter 22.8. Her Priests have violated my
Law, and have profaned my Holy Things, they have put no difference between the
Holy and Profane, v. 26. By which and what we find in other places of the same
Prophet we may likewise discern the corruption of their manners. Immorality.
They have changed my Judgments into Wickedness more than the Nations, they
have refused my Judgments and my Statutes, they have not walked in them, chapter
5.6. Again, chapter 22.7. They have dealt by Oppression with the Stranger, have
vexed the Fatherless and Widow; have greedily gained of their Neighbors by
extortion, v. 12. and v. before, One has committed Abomination with his
Neighbor's Wife; another has lewdly defiled his Daughter-in-Law, another has
humbled his Sister, his Father's Daughter. And to show you, in a word, out of
this Prophet also, how little hope there was of their being reclaimed, we find
the Lord telling him, chapter 3.7. Incorrigibleness.
The House of Israel will not hearken unto Thee, for they will not harken unto
Me; For all the House Israel are impudent and hard hearted. Thus have we out of
the Mouth of these two Witnesses the truth of all that is urged against them
sufficiently established, and their guilt notoriously apparent.

Add now, that we may see how God, when once a People have filled up the
measure of their Iniquities, and are ripe for Destruction, gives them over to a
Spirit of Infatuation, suffering them to take such Counsels and pursue such
Methods as must necessarily bring inevitable Ruin upon them: Let us look upon
the fatal and immediate Cause of their Desolation and Captivity; and we shall
find this to be Zedekiah's rebelling against the King of Babylon contrary to
his Oath. Perjury.
Though he had sworn Allegiance to Nebuchadnezzer, and particularly, that he would
upon no account side with the Egyptians, yet in a little time trusting in their
Ability to support him, he enters into League with them; which brought the King
of Babylon with a great Army against Jerusalem. And, being still flattered by
those about him, that his Allies the Egyptians would not only raise the Seige,
but also give them such a Defeat, that they should not be able to come down any
more against him; he was prevailed with to depend on these hopes, and to trust
in the shadow of Egpyt, which Isaiah had formerly prophesied, should be their
Confusion; being but a broken Reed, whereon if a Man lean, it will go into his
hand, and pierce it; Chapter 30.3. 36.6.
rather than he would hearken to Jeremiah or Ezekiel, who had now foretold,
that it would prove no better.

To bring him to this insensibility of his danger, perhaps he might be wrought
upon by the same Evil Counselors to believe, their Prophecies were
inconsistent one with another, and therefore, since both could not be true,
there was little regard to be had to either: The one having Prophesied, that
his Eyes should behold the Eyes of the King of Babylon, and that he should
speak with him Mouth to Mouth, and should go into Babylon, Jer. 34.3. and the
other, that he should not see it, Ezekiel. 12.13. This we find Josephus gives for
the main reason of his slighting what they said. Ant. Jud. Lib. 10. c. 9.
And indeed had the later Prophet said no more than this, both were completely
verified in the Event; he being in his flight overtaken near Jerico, and
brought before the King of Babylon. who, after he had accused him of
perfidiousness, and upbraided him with Ingratitude in rebelling against him,
who had advanced him, ordered his Sons to be slain before his Eyes; and then,
that nothing might ever divert them after the horror of that dismal sight, or
rather, that by a strange kind of Contradiction he might have it perpetually
before his Eyes (the last Object we saw usually continuing more lively on the
Imagination till something new offer it self to our view) he caused those very
Eyes to be forthwith plucked out, and thus led him away Captive into Babylon:
By which means the words of the Prophecy were exactly fulfilled, that he should
never see it. Though I believe rather, they might possibly persuade him, that
Ezekiel was inconsistent with himself to talk of his dying in Babylon without
living first to see it: Since it is plain he is express enough, that Zedekiah
should be carried into Babylon, and dye there: As may be seen by the words
immediately following in that Verse above cited, and other places of the same
Prophet. However, we find, what reason so ever induced him to it, he was swayed
more by Hananiah, of whom we have an Account, Jer. 28. and others about him,
than by any thing these two Prophets offered to the contrary. Whereupon God
absolutely resolves and confirms it with an Oath, that this very thing should
prove his overthrow. As I live says the Lord God, surely in the Place, where
the King dwells, that made him King, whose Oath he despised, and whose
Covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall dye, Ezekiel.
17.16. and again, v. 20. I will bring him to Babylon and will plead with him
there for his trespass which he has trespassed against me. By all which it
appears, that, when a People or Nation persist to provoke Almighty God by their
continually repeated Transgressions, in Opposition to all the gracious Methods
made use of by him to reclaim them, he at length gives them over to strong
Delusions, that they should believe a lie, because they received not Truth in
the love of it; but, because they desired, did therefore believe 2 Thessalonians.
2.10.11.
(for quod volumus, facile credimus) the contrary to be true rather than it.
The love of the Truth, that they might be saved. To whom as unto Children, that
have not the use of Reason, he sends a Judgment to mock them, that they, who
would not be reformed by the Correction, wherein he dallied with them, might
feel a Judgment worthy of God. Wisd. 12.25.26.


And so I come to see in the next Place how far we have Copied after this
Original, and to compare, with what is here discovered of them, the abominable
Principles and Practices that at this day reign among us.

Wicked Principles and Opinions.
And here alas! We shall find Men, whose very Principles give encouragement to
all manner of Wickedness and Impiety by resolving the Whole of a Christian into
a strong Faith: So that, if they can but believe themselvrs to be of the Number
of those, that are delivered from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
all the Abominations they can be guilty of, shall be no Bar to their Entrance
into the Kingdom of God, whereby they do in ^ffect say with the Jews, in the
10th v. of this chapter We are delivered to do (or tho we have done) all these
Abominations. These are Presumptions with a witness. But there is still another
sort of hardened Sinners, that also shamefully abound, who do even deny the Lord
that bought them. 2 Pet. 2.1.
Who, though they pretend to worship one God, yet own him not in that manner
wherein he has discovered himself, denying indeed all Revelation, and
consequently the whole Economy of our Redemption: To whom all the Sacred
Mysteries of Religion, as Revealed in Scripture, are mere Nonsense, and the
Doctrine of three Persons and one God, a Subject sit only for Mirth and
Ridicule. Good God! that we should live to see the whole Platform of our future
Happiness, wherein those adorable Attributes, thy Power, thy Wisdom, thy
Justice, thy Mercy are so visibly displayed, so contemptuously trampled on and
exposed.

The first Charge I mentioned against the Israelites was their heinous Sin of
Idolatry: which possibly I may run the hazard of being judged a false Accuser,
should I go about to fix on this Nation, whose withdrawing its self from the
Romish Communion was chiefly upon account of its Idolatrous Practices; a Sin
not universally and directly charged on them neither; though their Doctrines and
their Doings that way tending are so scandalous and suspicious, that we could
not think ourselves safe or secure enough without fleeing from the very
Appearance of it. And therefore perhaps it may look very strange to charge
Idolatry upon any of that People, who have showed themselves so zealous against
it.

Idolatry.
And yet, after all, if setting up a God of our own framing be Idolatry, we need
not mention the resting in mere outward Observances and Shadows of Religion,
the placing it in hearing Sermons without practice, the not worshipping God
after a due manner, not yielding a just Veneration to Sacred Persons and
Places, making Religion serve to evil Purposes, loving the Pomps and Vanities
of this wicked World; though all these are no less than several Degrees of it;
yet, I say, we need not mention any such to prove the guilt of this Sin among
us: Since we have alas! To many, that will not be content with any God but of
their own making. And therefore, if we tell them of a God that will one day
call them to an Account for the Wickedness of their Lives, and that for these
short moments of Pleasure, there is an Eternity of Misery awaits them
hereafter, they shall but laugh at us for our pains, and allege that it is
inconsistent with not only the Mercy but the Justice also of an Infinite Being,
in whom we own both those Attributes to be in the highest Perfection, to deal
thus with his Creatures.

First, they look upon it as irreconcilable with his Mercy, since they cannot
believe that an All-merciful God would make any thing to damn it. Never
considering that the very Superiority of our Nature above others consists in
having the Liberty of Choice and the Use of Reason, that by comparing one thing
with another, we may know how to refuse the Evil and choose the Good, Is. 7.15.
which plainly makes Damnation our own Act, not God's: Nor so much as giving
any Credit to what follows; namely, that, when, by making a wrong Choice, we
had abandoned ourselves over to the Power of him, who deluded us into it, yet
God notwithstanding contrived such excellent means to recover us out of his
Snare, and supplied us with such gracious Assistances to regain the Ground we
had lost, that nothing, but our own Wilfulness and Obstinacy still, can make us
miserable: Which is the farthest that Infinite Mercy joined with Infinite
Wisdom can extend.

But then, Secondly, they hold it likewise inconsistent with his Justice to
punish Temporal Sins with Eternal Torments. Wherein they as little consider,
that those, whom God so punishes, have sinned as long as they are able, and
that they Sin not to Eternity is wholly owing to the condition of their nature,
since, if that were Infinite, so would their Sins be likewise. And yet, that
these are the only Sinners that are eternally Damned, is plain, because at what
time soever the Wicked turns from all the Sins that he has committed Ezekiel.
18.27.
(though even at the latest hour of his Life) by such steady resolutions of
forsaking them, as, should God renew him a Lease of it, he could never be
wilfully betrayed into the Breach of them again, he shall save his Soul alive.
Doubtless this is never the subject either of their Consideration or Belief:
For, if it were, it must needs be likewise abundantly sufficient to clear
Almighty God from the least Imputation of Injustice.

But, if to frame a God with Attributes only suitable to their own Notions of
Mercy and Justice, such as may consist with a Liberty to live as they list, and
to wallow in such Brutish sensuality, as did generally accompany the
Heathenish Idolatry, which is the reason that the Apostle, according to Dr.
Hammond's Notion of the word (...) gives it that Name: Col. 3.5. See Ham. on
Romans 1.29. 1 Cor. 5.10.
If such an Idea of God, as will suffer them to indulge themselves in the
foulest and most beastial Sins, upon an Opinion that it is inconsistent with
his Mercy and Justice to punish them eternally for it: If this, I say, be
Idolatry, as I think we have but too just reason to account it; then we may
conclude that we want not those, who are as notoriously Guilty, as the Jews of
Old: Since it is at least as gross and absurd to make a God, that can quietly
behold all manner of Sin without punishing it, which is in effect to approve,
at least not to disapprove of it, as it is to form a God of Wood or Stone, that
cannot punish it by reason it neither sees it, nor is sensible of it.

Atheism.
And now, if we are as bad as they already, what shall we be, when we have
discovered others, that believe no God at all, that will own no such Thing as
an Immaterial Being, that deny therefore that there is any thing within us of a
different Nature from this Corporeal Fabric. And yet, that there are such,
appears by one, who, on his "usual calling on God to damn him in his common
Discourse, being asked whether he were in earnest or not, when he used those
words, answered that Jest or Earnest was all one, since he did not believe
there was any thing in his Composition, that was capable of it:" As we have it
attested by a very Ingenious Person in his Physico-Theological Letters. But let
us beseech Thee, O Lord, to enlighten the Eyes of all such Miscreants in this
Life, that they may see their wretched mistake, time enough to prevent a too
sad and terrible Coviction of it in the next.

Tho. Cases Model of Spiritual Thankfulness before the House of Commons, Feb.
19. 1645. p. 24.
One of the Assembly of Divines speaking of the Superstition, Heresy, and
Profaneness, they had Covenanted to extirpate, takes notice of no less than 180
Heresies, that were at that time propagated in this Nation (whereof, if there
were so many, I doubt we may even thank those of his own Stamp for being the
occasion, by so miserably rending this poor Church in pieces as they did.)
Among which he mentions the Divinity of Christ and the Holy Ghost questioned by
some, denied by others; and that there wanted not such as asserted the
Mortality of the Soul. Of the former of these 'twere to be wished there were
not too many in our days. And of the latter History of A. B. Laud's Troubles
and Trial, Published by Mr. Wharton. Though this is but an old Heresy revived:
For Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 6. c. 37. tells us of some in Arabia -- (...).
Who said that the Soul of Man at the very instant of his departure dies and
perishes together with the Body, and shall hereafter return to Life with it
again at the day of Resurrection.
A. Bp. Laud in his Answer to the Lord Says Speech gives this Account; "there
were some then Living, who, though they durst not speak it out in all companies,
did yet cunningly insinuate that at Death the Soul and Body were extinct
together, but rise again at the Resurrection." It seems such monstrous Errors
did not then appear barefaced: though he might possibly see this made public
afterward, it appearing in Print The Mortality of the Soul by R. O. Printed in
the Year, 1644.
a little before his Death. But even those were more rational than our Modern
Moralists (if I may be allowed to use that Term) their Opinion supposing an
after Compensation of Deeds whether Good or Evil, that meet not with their
Reward here: Whereas these remove every thing out of their way, that may curb
or restrein them from committing the vilest enormities in this World, by
expecting never to be called to an Account for them in another.

Wickedness and Immorality.
So that where we find such Principles, we need not be to seek for Practices
answerable to them, or indeed for any of that black Catalogue of Sins, which we
drew out of the two Prophets against the Jews. For, alas! what should hinder
such from stealing, from using any sinister ways of defrauding their
Neighbors, from Extortion, from downright Violence, where they are powerful
enough, or some false pretense of Right, where they are not; from seeking to
attain Honor or Riches by any unlawful means, etc. What should restrain them
from gratifying their sensual Lusts, from height'ning them by pampering their
Bodies, from inslaming them by Intemperance and Excess? What indeed can
withhold them from any kind of Sin whatsoever, that they are in the least
tempted to, either by Profit or Pleasure, or even an Itch of boasting and
glorying in their Wickedness, that we may see what Men of Courage and Bravery
they are, how they can bid defiance to all manner of Fear or Danger of any
after-reckoning.

Hence proceed those daring Sins of Profaning God's Holy Name by Blasphemy,
common Swearing, despising his Holy Word, and those he has set apart for the
Dispensing of it, flighting all we can urge to Reform them, and endeavor to
put Goodness and Piety out of countenance by Scoffing at all that is Sacred. By
which means, I am afraid, it happens, that we find a great many, who have some
secret Veneration for Virtue, and make Profession of the same Religion with us,
from the contagious Influence of such sad Examples, most scandalously
blaspheming God by their wicked Lives.

Indeed how many are there, who come to Church, and vouchsafe us the Hearing,
while we are reproving Vice, that can yet be guilty of many of the Sins
abovementioned, not scrupling to pass over any thing, that stands in the way of
their Coveteousness or Ambition. If they can but get Wealth or Honor, no matter
by what means, whether by lying or Arts of Deceit in buying or selling; by
exacting on the Necessities of others; by giving or taking of Bribes, by
ruining their Neighbors Reputation, or endeavoring to supplant him by any
underhand dealing or even Perjury it self. The very naming whereof, brings me
to the last Sin I mentioned that hastened God's Vengeance on Jerusalem Perjury.
(for it is more than time I should have done with this Head, which I could
heartily wish I had not too much reason to be so large upon) and may put us
upon considering whether we have not likewise too many Zedekiah's among us,
that bear but little regard to the Oath they have taken to the King, under
whose Government we are now (blessed be God) fully settled in a safe, and, we
hope, a Lasting Peace. Now if we are no less guilty of their abominable
Impieties, and have that Sin withal lurking among us, that was the immediate
Cause of bringing that Captivity upon them; then it is high time for us to
consider in the next place,

From the dreadful Effects of their Wickedness, what may we justly expect
should befall us, if we persist with our no less heinous Provocations to
incense the Majesty of Heaven against us? Which was the Second thing I desired
might be considered.

Suppose ye, says our Savior, that those Galileans, whose blood Pilate
mingled with their Sacrifices, were Sinners above all the Galileans, because
they suffered such things: or that those eighteen, on whom the Tower of Siloam
fell and slew them, were Sinners above all that dwell in Jerusalem? I tell you
nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, Luke 13. the first 5
Verses. So, when the Apostle warns his Corinthians of what happened to the
Israelites in their Passage out of Egypt into Canaan for their disobedience, he
tells them, that with many of them God was not well pleased, for they were
overthrown in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.5. naming likewise in the Verses
following several other Judgments, that befell them for several Sins: and to
let them know that such Sins might justly expect the like Vengeance, he adds v.
11. that all these things happened to them for Ensamples, and they are written
for our Admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come.

I think I have made it appear that our Sins are so far from coming short of
theirs, that they seem in many respects to exceed them. All our hopes are, that
we are not so universally wicked, that there are some Phineas's still left,
that may hinder the Progress of this Profaneness and Immorality so rise among
us; nay, that, God bethanked, we have a Moses to stand in the Gap; a Prince,
whose endeavor to put a stop to this torrent of Wickedness ready to overwhelm
us, will, we hope, meet with its desired success; and the Zeal, he shows for
God's Honor, prevail with Heaven to avert those Judgments, we have otherwise
all the reason in the World to expect, because we have so justly deserved them.

Which all among you, who have any regard for the Glory and Service of Almighty
God, and observe how both of them are slighted and despised, cannot but be
sufficiently sensible of: And that therefore, if God should in Anger remove
those, who for the present stay his destroying Arm, nothing could be expected
but unavoidable ruin and destruction.

How much therefore do all, that are duly apprehensive of these things, stand
engaged to add themselves to their number, that there may never sail a
Generation of Men, that by their Zeal to suppress Wickedness, and the powerful
Oratory of their Prayers and Tears may intercept the Calamities that would
otherwise befall us. Which brings me to

The third and last Thing I proposed to your Consideration, namely, how much it
concerns us, both by our own Repentance and our best endeavor to reclaim
others, to prevent those Judgments, that will otherwise most certainly overtake
us.

Reformation.
Which happy End, if Claudian's Regis ad exemplum be true, there was never a
clearer Prospect of attaining, than at this present. We have already lived to
see what Influence a Prince's Life can have on his Subjects. I wish the Effects
thereof were not still too visible. But the being convinced of this by our own
Experience gives us still the fairer hopes, that we may once again see the
Power and Efficacy of so great an Example to nobler Purposes: That instead of
that Luxury and Voluptuousness, that has of late Years infected the Land, we
may begin to be seasoned with better Principles from an Imitation of our
present King: Whose Example does not only show it feasible, and will, we hope,
render it fashionable, but his Resolutions likewise to Countenance Piety and
Virtue, and Discourage Wickedness and Vice, make it still more eligible' to be
good and virtuous upon the score of Men's Interest in this World, which is but
too generally pursued with the greatest eagerness.

And that I may show you what farther encouragement we have for the setting our
hands to this desirable Reformation, let me observe to you another Cause of the
Looseness and Immorality of the Age: Namely, the Principles of some late
Philosophers, greedily imbibed by several, who thought it an Accomplishment to
have so much smattering that way, that they might be able to chatter in
Philosophical Terms; and the falling in of these Principles with the
Gratification of their Lusts gave them still the greater Relish. To which though
we cannot but own the mighty Interest of Atheism and Irreligion: Yet, we see,
Almighty God, that he might not leave himself without any Witness among the
Inquirers into Nature, and that our Horizon might not be quite darkened by such
a black cloud as was overspreading the Face of it, has raised some bright
Luminaries, that have not only set Nature in a clearer Light, and made her
glorify and proclaim her Author; but some of them, as if they were desirous to
retreive the Credit of their Profession, and make amends for the Dishonor, God
and Religion have suffered by several, that were eminent in it, have likewise
vindicated the Cause of Revealed Religion, not enduring to see the Holy
Scriptures become the sport and May Game of such as would endeavor with their
little Wit and Raillery to make them guilty of Nonsense and Contradiction. So
that now, God be thanked, we find even the Physician's Religion, to be true and
Orthodox, and that there are those now among them, to whom the Doctrine of a
Crucified Savior does not appear, as of old to the Greeks, and of late to too
many among us, Foolishness; 1 Cor. 1.23.
but as it is to those, who are Christians indeed, the Power and Wisdom of God.

Let us all resolve unanimously to become Champions in this Cause. The Defense
whereof must begin in the Reforming ourselves, and taking care that no body be
able to charge us with any thing that may discredit it. For there is certainly
nothing that weakens the Cause of Religion more, or gives greater occasion to
the Adversaries thereof to contemn and blaspheme it, than to see such, as would
seem its most zealous Assertors, let their Practice run directly counter to the
Precepts it enjoins: Hor. de Art. Poet.
Nam dicentis erunt si factis absona dicta, If our Actions give our Tongnes the
lie, Romani tollent Equites Peditesque cachinnum. We shall be so far from
convincing any of the Reality of what we Profess, that we shall but make
ourselves the subject of their scorn and laughter. Whereas, if they see the
force and Power of our Arguments in our Lives, and that we do not offer with
the Pharisees to lay such Burdens on them, that we will not touch ourselves,
they will then judge us to be in earnest, and look upon us as persons, that
believe what we affirm. Then may we boldly venture on that great Work of
reforming others, and hope to gain Authority to what we say. Then would
Wickedness not appear so barefaced, nor Profaneness dare to support it self by
that, which has of late usurped the Reputation of Wit, Namely, the scoffing and
deriding all that is Virtuous and Sacred.

If there be Men of good Natural Endowments, that employ their Parts this way,
if there be such, as are really witty and ingenious, that are withal very lewd
and Atheistical, the more's the Pity. But, blessed be God, there are likewise
such Gentlemen among us, that are every way, at least, as accomplished as they,
wanting no Wit to recommend them to Conversation, who are also at the same time
Friends to Religion, and highly concerned to see any endeavor to droll it out
of countenance.

It Is true, there is, for the most part, an innate Modesty, that attends
Goodness, which as this decays, usually wears off, so that Lewdness is
generally stocked with Confidence enough, which, in the way of Raillery often
passing for Wit, clearly t^iumphs over the other: And by this means the Modest
Man is frequently discouraged from venturing on the vindication of Goodness
against so much Confidence and Assurance; especially when perhaps there may be
none else in Company to to side with him therein.

Now, I dare say, would such Men of Parts, as have withal a due Sense of
Religion, labor to overcome this Discouragement, by plucking up a good Spirit,
and jointly agreeing among themselves to make Atheism and Profaneness so far
the subject of their Mirth, as where ever they meet with it, to ridicule and
expose it: Which, I doubt not but there those that can do, with as much
facetiousness and pleasantry, as they pretend to, who employ it against God and
Religion: If this, I say, were but done as often as opportunities offer
themselves, it might soon be jeered into corners and made ashamed to show its
head, and so by degrees in a little time be quite laughed out of the World.

We find there are few, if any, of these Atheistical Scoffers, that so often
wound our Ears with their Profane Jests, that, when they come to dye, can
forbear crying out Lord be merciful: Who yet would look upon us as very
barbarous and severe, should we then sarcastically bespeak them in the Language
of Elijah to Baal's Priests: Cry aloud, for he is a God. Peradventure he
sleeps and must be awaked. 1 Kin. 18.27.
And yet it would be no more than what they justly deserve, who have all their
Life time so abused him, as if they thought he were indeed a-sleep and heard
them not; or rather as if they did not believe there were any such Being at all.

If we could by this or any other means suppress the growth of such monstrous
Wickedness, we should hope we were in a fair way to appease the Wrath of a
provoked God. but if something more were not yet done, we should not be
altogether without fear, that his Anger is not quite turned away, but his hand
is stretched out still. Is. 9.12.


I have already told you, that the immediate occasion of the Jews Overthrow was
Zedekiah's breaking the Oath he had taken to the King of Babylon. Perjury.
And, unless several among us, that have Sworn Allegiance to his present
Majesty, who has hitherto so signally protected them, even in spite of their
teeth, and their ungrateful endeavors to ruin his Designs, forbear to trifle
any longer with so Sacred a Thing as an Oath; we have cause to expect, that God
may enter into Judgment with this Nation, even for that crying Sin. For
Sedition and Treachery do naturally tend to the Ruin of the Innocent as well as
of the Guilty; and so long as such turbulent and unquiet Spirits reign among
us, we can never be secure. How far the Innocent may suffer with the Guilty, is
not easy to foresee. However I wish they, who are this way Guilty, could
prevail with themselves to consider what a dreadful hazard they run, and how
certain a Judgment they are drawing on their own heads, from the Example of
God's terrible Vengeance on Zedekiah, whereof I have before given an Account;
and whose Violation of his Oath God Almighty did esteem as a breach of Covenant
against himself. Seeing he despised the Oath by breaking the Covenant, when lo!
he had given his Hand, and has done all these things, he shall not escape.
Therefore thus says the Lord God, as I live, surely my Oath that he has
despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon
his own head, Ezekiel. 17. 18. 19.

Disobedience.
And as for those who still refuse to take an Oath to our gracious Sovereign,
though he has been so long established in a quiet Possession of the Throne; I
shall only direct them to the Advice of those that were in Captivity to their
Brethren that were left behind at Jerusalem, Baruch 1.11.12. Pray for the lise
of Nebuchadonosar King of Babylon, and for the life of Balthazar his Son, that
their days may be upon the Earth as the days of Heaven. And the Lord give us
strength and lighten our Eyes, and we shall live under the shadow of
Nebuchadonosor King of Babylon, and under the shadow of Balthazar, his Son, and
we shall serve them many days, and find favor in their sight. Now, if they
should not only serve that King. but think themselves obliged to pray for his
long Life too, we have no Reason to imagine that they made the least scruple of
plighting their Faith to him, even though they could not look upon him as their
Rightful King in these Men's Notion of that World.

I shall add no more with respect to the many other Sins I mentioned, whereby
we have incurred the Wrath of Almighty God: but shall beseech him to enlighen
all our Eyes that we may see in this our day the Things that belong to our
Peace: Luke 19.42.
And consider, that, if ever we hope to become a flourishing People, it must be
by fearing the Lord and the King, and not meddling with those, that are given to
change: Pro. 4.21.
By not swearing deceitfully: Ps. 24.4.
By being zealous for the Honor of God, and of the Son of God our Savior;
promoting the Interest and Power of Religion in our several Stations, by our
Example, by our Authority, by our friendly Advice and Admonition, and sweetly
insinuating it into the Minds of others in the most engaging and winning manner
we can think of.

In a word, it must be by endeavoring with joint hands and heart to advance
the Honor and Welfare of our Nation, by working Righteousness and following
after Peace; which the Lord has promised by his Prophet shall be the Product
thereof. The Work of Righteousness, says he, shall be Peace; and the effect of
Righteousness Quietness and Assurance for ever. Is. 32.17.
It is indeed this alone that can exalt a Nation; but Sin, as it is the
Reproach, Prove. 14.34.
so it will be the Ruin of any People.

FINIS.

