THE LIFE OF William Fuller, THE Late Pretended EVIDENCE Now a Prisoner in the
King's Bench.

Who was Declared by the Honorable House of Commons, Nemine Contradicente, to
be a Notorious Impostor, a Cheat, and a False Accuser of Persons of Honor and
Quality. With all his Pranks and Villainies, etc. to this Present First of
March.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, near Temple Bar. 1692.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
Gentlemen,
NOT to Flourish in the Matter, for that is not the Book-seller's Talent, in
this short History I give you the Life of our New Plot Evidence, in which,
considering the Person, a Young Fellow, Two Years within his Apprenticeship,
his Age not above Twenty Two, of such low Extract and Education, take all these
together, perhaps, upon your Reading throughout, you will acknowledge you have
met with a Rarety beyond a Guzman, a Clancy, a Morrel, a German Princess, or
any of our most Famous Impostors. I have this farther Recommendation to make
you, That I have made it my Business to get the whole Contents from the
Original Parties concerned, there being but one Story in the whole Book, viz.
That of Major General K-'s, that I have not at first Hand, and that, though at
second Hand, I received from very Credible Authority. I have not done (as it is
customary) built a great deal of Fiction upon a small Foundation of Truth. For
either from his Master, the Merchants, Tradesmen or others, all Cheated by him,
I have gathered my Intelligence all from their own Mouths, and dare confidently
averr, there never was a Book of this kind, that the Contents more faithfully
adhered to Truth than this. I have likewise inquired into all Affairs in the
Gaol, have taken out his Copy of Actions, and received all my Relations in the
King's- Bench, from the most certain Information. One thing is much to be
admired, He is naturally one of the greatest Cowards living, and how so
Low-Spirited a Cheat should attempt such Perilous Impostures in several
Nations exposed to so many manifest Hazards and Dangers attending, is somewhat
unaccountable. As to the List of the 28 Lords and 15 Commoners Accused by him,
though I have had a True Copy of 'em, which I keep by me, I durst not presume
to put such Honorable Names in Print, though God knows the vile Breath of such
an Accuser has rather done them Honor, than otherwise. So bidding you welcome
to what Entertainment you will find, I am

Your Humble Servant A. R.

THE LIFE OF William Fuller, etc.
TO begin with the Birth of our great Plot-maker, He was the Son of William
Fuller, of Milton, near Sitingburne in Kent, by occupation a Butcher. His
Father, now many years ago deceased, had the misfortune to break, and dye a
Prisoner in the King's Bench; his Calamities in a high measure imputed to his
Wife (our Evidences Mother) who perhaps, to say all, was too gay a Dame for a
Butchers Wife.

The Son, under such unhappy circumstances, through the Fathers Decease, and
his Mothers second Marriage, being left in a manner friendless, was bound
Prentice to Mr. James Hartley, Citizen and Skinner of London, a Coney wool
cutter in Shooe-lane, on the 4th of Jan. 1686.

His Introduction to this Master was by Cornelius Harfleet, Gent. (some time
since one of the Evidences against Captain Crone) who was a person very
intimate all along, and for some years before our young Coney wool cutter was
born, with both his Father and Mother.

Our Youngster, though bound, (yet not strong enough tied) to a Trade, had a
roving Head, and all along thought a mechanic employment too inferior for his
more aspiring Ambition; and therefore, with a great restraint upon his nature,
made but a hard shift to continue under the command of a Master.

He had not been a year and a half in his Apprenticeship before his Mother
dyed: Now it happening that his Mother, possibly not altogether so obedient a
Wife, as her second Husband expected, had therefore now and then received a
little corporal Correction from his hard Hand, and sometimes from his harder
Foot; more particularly not long before her Death she had been a little
disciplined by a Cudgel, or some such Family Instrument. The Son therefore upon
the news of his Mothers departure, and remembering the Castigation she had often
received from his Father-in-law, desires his Masters leave to go down into Kent
to inquire into the death of his Mother, alleging that the Blow she had
received from her Husband had been the cause of her Death; and that he designed
this Journey only to prosecute his Father-in-law for her Murder.

The Confidence he expressed in this matter half persuaded his Master to give him
a little credit, and to fancy there might be something in it; and truly in so
reasonable a request he could not refuse him the favor desired. Our Youngster
resolving to bring his Evidence hand in betimes, being an early Affidavit-man,
moves to Kent with no less Indignation upon the Anvil, than bringing in
Daddy-in-law to the Bar for his Life.

Down therefore to the Country he goes; and truly makes bold to say some hard
words to his Father, in relation to his Mother; which the Father, as an honest
man, was very able to answer, having really done nothing but what he could
justify, his correction to his undutiful Wife being no more than she was able
to bear, and less than she deserved. The Son, to do him justice in this matter,
was not so over zealous for his Mothers death (that being the least of his
concern) as designing to fright his Daddy out of a sum of Money to tie up his
Tongue (Evidencing being indeed a Trade, and Money the grand design of
Swearing.) And therefore all his loud Clamor and the formidable proofs he
threatened to bring against him, on the account of his Mother, really designed
more vengeance against his Purse than his Life. If that bled but heartily the
other might escape whole. But, alas, he found his project in vain, for the
honest Yeoman being hardy enough to stand out the storm, and defying whatever
Justice or Judge could do to hurt him, was so far from being over-reacht that
way, that truly the whole expectation was defeated; our Threatner so far short
of gaining his point, that he was forced to quit his Cudgels; and after a
fortnights staying, come pennyless to Town; his Daddys Reputation and Innocence
standing both too well fortified against all Attacques of this kind.

Returning home to his Master, with much ado he continued with him till the
10th of June, 88. the memorable Jubilee day for the birth of the Young Royal
Hopes, the Prince of W. But whether over transported with the joys of that
mighty Festival, or too much elevated with Bonefire making to bring his hand
back to any poorer mechanic drudgery, he took occasion to walk off, or as some
call it, run away from his Master.

Thus scamper'd, out young Coney-skin cutter could not be heard of by his
Master, till he found his diminutive Renegade a Page to the Right Honorable,
and in those days Right Mighty, Earl of Melfort. And truly to qualify him for
that dignified post, he had taken the then fashionable Test, viz. turned Romish
Convert; a young but passionate Zealot (as far as the little use he had for
Religion required) for the Popish persuasion. In this gay Livery, and in this
Honorable Family, being asked by some friends from his Master why he deserted
his service, he made answer in these very words, That truly he could not serve
his great God in a Protestant Family, which was all the reason he had to leave
his Master.

With this Noble Peer he continued till the days of Abdication: but then the
greater Buntings all taking wing, this young unfledged Squab was left behind;
and whether too shame-fac'd (if I wrong him not in laying shame to his charge)
to return to his Master; or for what other reasons his volatile Mercury
prompted, he footed it down to his late Kentish Daddies, though truly not with
his late terrible countenance he made his last visit there, having more use at
present of a suppliant face; for his stock low, and wages and gay Livery both
spent, he had occasion of sheltering under his Roof, and creeping to his Table,
as a much humbler Guest.

But, alas, his Reception here proved not so favorable as wished. His Father in
Law having made a second venture, and married again, here was a Mother in Law
two degrees removed, to be pleased: And though the good forgiving man had
forgotten his last rough Treatment, and consequently his House and Table were
free for him; however the new Major Domo, the Mother, had not an overfond
affection for him; and having unluckily heard of his Romish Conversion, through
her aversion to Popery, she would by no means suffer him to live in the House.
The Son, to remove all Obstacles of that kind, was ready immediately for
Recantation, Renunciation, Abjuration, and what not. He expressed all the sorrow
in the world for his being misled, and so shaking off his Romish Superstition,
as easily as he could shift his Linen, declared himself a penitent Re-convert,
and desired nothing more than his Readmission to the Bosom of his abandoned
Protestant Mother Church. But his forsaking his Husks, could not bring him to
the fatted Calf. His Infidel Mother-in-law would by no means be satisfied with
the reality either of Protestations or Tears, nothing belike would convince her
of his Re-conversion: So that, in short, here was no home to be had, not so
much as a Cockloft for him to roost in.

Under these melancholy circumstances, his Pride somewhat lowered, he
condescends to think of returning to his Master; and therefore to smooth his
way home again, (for his affairs stood not very well there neither, as with
good Reason being not at present in his masters very good graces) he writes him
a great many pityful Letters, earnestly imploring of him to receive him again,
and making wonderful protestations of Amendment, together with his utterly
abjuring his Romish Delusion, and his promises of entire Reconciliation to the
Church of England.

His Master being not over easily softened, as having but too just Occasion of
Resentment, he writes several Letters full of the same promises to Mr.
Harfleet, and beseeches his Mediation to his Master, Mr. Harfleet having a most
natural Affection for him, (for truly the Boy was extreme like him, so like him
that you should rarely see a Son like a Father) was not wanting in all the good
Offices he could do on this occasion, and in a short time made a perfect
Reconciliation, and so called home the Fugitive.

The Wanderer being returned, Mr. Harfleet promised very lavishly for his
Reformation, and often would visit his Master on the Young man's account. In
several discourses with the Master and Patron, between jest and earnest, the
Patron was often taxed for being perhaps a little nearer than ordinary related
to the Youngster, and therefore his Zeal in obliging him, looked like a natural
Affection toward him. The Patron, not to belie him, would not plainly own
himself his Father, but has several times (swore not to use the plain Language
he spoke it in) that he had kissed his Mother a hundred and a hundred times. And
truly if you will take the word of an Evidence in his own Cause, it is much to be
imagined our Minor Evidence is a Gentleman's Graft upon a Butchers Crabstock.

But to return to our History; as large as the promises have been, and as
humble and dutyful a Servant as he intends to be, in a short time he grew a
perfect Reprobate; would use little shifts out of his Masters small dealings to
miscount his Money; kept a private book to enter Wares trusted, and if his
Master mist 'em hot, demanded and received the Money for himself. He had not
kept home this last time above 3 months, when, about Michaelmas 89, Mr.
Harfleet came to borrow him of his Master for 3 or 4 days service to Major
Kidgell (afterward another Witness against Mr. Crone;) the Master kindly
complied and lent him, but Mr. Harfleet when he had borrowed him, took care
never to see him paid again; for in six or eight months after his Master never
set eye of him: Insomuch that he called Mr. Harfleet to account about it, and
receiving no satisfactory Answer, threatened him with no less than prosecuting
him for Spiriting away his Servant: Mr. Harfleet at last gave him the
satisfaction of showing him his man again about six months after, about April,
90, at Joes Coffee-house in Salisbury-Court, in a Rich Coat and all
Accoutrements answerable, two Footmen at his heels, and the Secretary's
Protection in his pocket, and in fine, much too great for a Coney wool cutter
to grapple with.

In this five months past he had been in France, as we suppose, and 'twas here
that he picked up his Plot, the vengeance whereof sell first upon Mr. Crone,
when though Senior Mr. Harfleet and the Junior William Fuller, with Major
Kidgwell, were the Triumvirate Testimony against him.

In this advancement he made an extraordinary bluster about Town; and soon
after past for a Major of a Regiment, particularly to one Dr. P -- n, a
Physician in Kent, and formerly his acquaintance: upon an accidental meeting
between em, with a very magisterial behavior, and a great many Bravadoes, he
talked of prodigious Interest he had at Court, and professing great friendship
for the Doctor, he proffered him any service he pleased to command him there.
Would the Doctor be the Queens Physician, if he pleased to accept of that
preferment, 'twas in his power to give it him; with Promises as large, as ever
Wickham made Legacies; therefore desiring him not to be modest, but ask and
have, he assured him he should not be three days without it. The Doctor who
gave little credit to such Mountain promises, yet nevertheless being better
bred than rudely to contradict so vain a Boaster, gave him the favorable
hearing, and courteously replied, that he was by no means qualified for that
Dignity, and whatever favor the Major was able to do him in it, however his
own want of merit would not give him leave to aspire so high. The Major swore a
great many Oaths, that 'twas his own fault if the Doctor did not accept of his
kindness; for with a very hearty Oath, he told him he could do it with a wet
Finger, nothing more easy. The Doctor still modestly refusing, the Major then
pressed him to accept of a lower post, a Doctor to a Regiment. The Doctor, though
really giving little credit to any thing he said, yet seemingly satisfied with
his last kind proffer, he thanked him for his great goodness, and if the Major
would do him the Honor to let him know where he might wait upon him, or write
to him, possibly he would make bold to embrace his Favor in somewhat of this
kind, and acknowledge his Friendship for so signal an Obligation. The Major
hereupon tells him that he would not fail in serving him in this, or a greater
matter; and as his affairs called him to his command in Ireland, whether in
some few days he was upon setting forwards, he called for a Pen and Ink and
left this Direction for the Docter to write to him, viz. Direct your Letter for
the Honorable Major William Fuller, in the Right Honorable the Lord Sidneys
Regiment.

This direction did the Doctor keep by him, and has several times produced it
in company, all of Fullers own hand writing, to laugh at the Impudence of so
much Pride and Vanity; in a Fellow, that knew the Doctor was no stranger to his
birth, as a Butchers Son his sometime Neighbor in Kent, and yet thus
arrogantly to write himself Honorable.

This Summer he took a Ramble to Ireland, where he staid but a short time,
however he lived well there, for he never wanted some bubble or other to bear
his traveling charges in what Country soever; he had either Bills or Shams, or
something, in all places that brought him in a comfortable Subsistence.

From Ireland he returned, and lived about Town in a pretty splendid Equipage,
for he had not only so many fair words at pleasure, but likewise that innocent
Face, that it was hard to suspect him a counterfeit. Here by his several
wheadles he run into a great many Tradesmens, and others Debts (witness the
large Sums that now lie upon him in the Kings bench) for his resolution, young
as he was, was to live apace; for instance, he got 50 l. into a Mercer in
Covent-garden's books. From a pastry Cooks near St. James, pretending himself a
persecuted Romanist, with shams and storys, in money and otherwise, he hooked
out 80 l.

But the neatest sham was put upon one Coll. C -- an old Cavalier and Loyal
Officer to King Charles I, living not far from Westminster Abbey. Spying a Bill
upon this Gentleman's door, he comes one day thither in a Chair attended by his
man, where desiring to speak with Madam C -- the Lady of the House, and
pretending himself a Country Gentleman newly come out of the Country, and that
he had brought his Sister up with him to see the Town, he wanted a Lodging for
her, and none could please him like her house, for he understood 'twas a sober
Family, and 'twould be a great happiness to his Sister to have the Conversation
of the two young Ladies Madam C -- Daughters, and truly on that consideration
he would give her any content, and not stand with her for price. Upon this they
strike up a bargain, and in 2 days he brings his Sister in her Country attire.
When she had been there a while, he desired she might go to the dancing School
along with the two young Ladies, being very desirous to have her take her
education, in all things, from two such fair Examples; but first he so far
insinuates with the good Colonel and his Lady, as to buy for his Sister such
new Clothes and other necessaries, as might dress her up a suitable Companion
to two such gentile young Ladies, promising to repay all very speedily with
gratifications, etc. The kind persuaded old Lady accordingly takes her out and
new rigs her from top to bottom, gives her all the breeding of her own
Daughters, supplys her with every thing, a good Table, fair Lodgings, and what
not. This continued above half a year, without one penny payment from the
Country Gentleman, the Brother; though continual fair words and promises were
never wanting, and several very extravagant Letters came on that occasion, some
whereof are as follows.

The first Letter.
March 7. 1691 Madam,
I Am almost half distracted that I have thus been forced to disappoint you;
Which I am most heartily ashamed of: My Banker to whom I committed the care of
receiving two hundred Pounds, on Tuesday last, I fear is gone off, I have been
every day this week to meet him but can never find him within: He sent me word
he would be with me this morning, but is not come, nor is he at his own house,
which grieves me much; for I have not only disappointed you but others; but I
am resolved if possible to find him, but whether I do or not, at the beginning
of the next week I shall receive two hundred Pounds more, and then you shall
command what you please of me, and now if your necessities are great, I am
contented to pawn some things for you: for I do protest I have not by me twenty
Shillings, by reason I thought my Money safe in that fellows hands; but if it
is not much to your prejudice, I shall bear my loss the more contented, for I
am ashamed to see you till I bring your Money.

Your humble Servant, W. Fuller.


This Letter though dated 91, was last March 90. But you have it from the
original verbatim, as he penned it.

The Second Letter
Monday March 30, 1691 Madam,
THE great Obligations you have laid on me, by your care of my dear Sister, and
your kindness to my self in this time of want, justly compels me to acknowledge
the Favor; and though it is so great, I will shortly if possible find out some
way partly to requite it. neither will I cease there, but always whilst I live
will study to be grateful to you The Queen has this morning passed an order for
all my Moneys to be paid me, and to morrow morning I hope it will pass the
great Seal, the Sum is near two Thousand Pounds, which I am certain of in a few
days, I am just now going by her Majesty's Command to a grand Consultation of
Chief Officers, so that I cannot possibly wait on you; but will on the first
opportutunity, and will not fail shortly to oblige you with what Money you
desire. My humble Service to all, I am

Madam, Yours, W. Fuller.


This second Letter, besides the Rhodomontades in the Contents, I must make one
farther remark upon. When our great Courtier was soliciting at Court for the
broad Seal for 2000 l. due from the Queen that very day March 30.91. he was in
a Spunging House, a prisoner for debt, in an Action charged 39 l. 17 s. And
another of 20 li From whence the 1st of April following, he was by Habeas
Corpus removed to the King's Bench.

But he staid not there long, for he made hard shift (his credit being not
quite cracked) to get bail soon after.

The Third Letter
May 5. 1691. Madam,
I Hope once more of your wonted goodness, you will pardon me for not waiting
on you since yesterday.

I could by no means get an opportunity of speaking to the Queen, by reason her
Majesty went to visit the Countess of Suffolk; I am now going to wait for an
opportunity, but something unfit by reason I had the misfortune yesterday to
rinch my Foot; if I do not succeed this day, to morrow by Gods leave, I will go
to the A. Bp. of Canterbury's: nor will I miss of any occasion to forward my my
business, that I may make both you and my self easy, and my Sister happy. Who
am, Madam,

Your ever Obliged and Faithful Servant, W. Fuller.


You see Reader, by what management our young Arts-Master put upon the world.
For indeed 'twas much at this high sort of Romance that he gained so much
credit, and run into these numerous debts, in so few exttavagant Years.
(neither Kings, Queens, Princes nor Prelates, no names too sacred for him) He Is
an Officer, a Courtier, a Statesman, a Politician; our beardless Privy
Counselor called to Consultations, and what not: Has Broad Seals and Royal
thousands all at command: Every thing and any thing to look great.

But to return to our gay Boarding Sister, you see that Cheating and Imposture
may run in a Blood; this young Country Damsel, with the same taint in her
Veins, a tang of her Brothers Pride, could hold her false countenance with no
less assurance, than his own hardened front; and pass for a Country Lady, eat,
drink, and sleep, with Women of in her false trappings of Honor, her
unpaid-for Gallantry, their Friend, their Companion and Equal; run on Tick to
support her Vanity, and put her Romantic Brother to the expense of so many
impudent Forgeries, such lying Epistles, and all to gratify a natural
Ambition, the itch of a little Prodigality, the Family's frailty.

But to pursue our History; the Colonel and his confiding Lady have not only
lodged, fed, and rigged this Lady Errant, but schooled, pampered and danced her
too, and all to the Tune of Patience. Our young All-plot having talked all, but
done nothing, banter'd and shuffled so beyond all humane sufferance, that
goodness itself can bear no more; at length they come to this prudent result,
to attach the gay Rigging in their own hands, the rich garniture they had
bought her, and so forgiving her her Boarding, Lodging, Schooling and Dancing,
they fairly turned out the poor Spinster in her own proper Accoutrements, the
Country weeds she came in, to shift in the wide world, and exercise her own and
her Brothers wheadling faculty for a new Lodging at another Landlord and
Landladys as kind as they had been.

But this current of Felicity was not always to run on unstopt; for as a small
check to his career, on the fifth of June he was snapt, and committed once more
to the King's Bench.

Now this second time with his Stone-Doublet on, being a little faster noos'd
than before, he was soon loaded with 3 or 4 hundred pound Actions, and our
Spark too well known to be Bailed: However, to keep up his port and character,
he still carries the Title of a Colonel, and Grandee-like, keeps a man to wait
upon him in prison.

One Comical passage during his confinement is worth the Readers hearing. It
happened that one Major Collingwood, sometime a Brigadeer of the Guards, was
then his fellow Collegiate; with whom contracting an Acquaintance, and having
one Sunday invited the Major to Dinner, after a good Treat, and the Bottle
going briskly round, (for our Colonel lived nobly) the Major, amongst other
chat, asked him very frankly, how so young a man as he, (being then not above
22) came to be made a Colonel? Our young Commander immediately replied, For
his Services at the Boyne: And thereupon he makes a most heroic relation of
Exploits he performed there, as a Volunteer, of that extravagant Gallantry
equal to Captain Braggs Bell-clapper feats at Buda) that he told him King
William took particular notice of him, and in the very heat of the Battle
clapping him upon the shoulder, Well Fuller (says the King) thou art the
bravest young lad in all my Army, and immediately upon the spot gave him a
Colonels Commission. The Brigadier, who was prepared to swallow the Jest, made
answer, that no Honor could be so great as what was gotten in the Field; and
truly he much wondered the King did not dub him a Knight Bannoret. But pray
noble Colonel, continues the Major, were you a Colonel of Horse or of Foot?
Our young Field-Officer having not his memory about him, could not readily
answer to that point, but upon second thoughts fancying the Major pincht upon
him, Why Sir (recollecting himself) do you think (says he) that I tell you a
lie? If you will not believe me, ask my man here, he was there with me, and saw
the King give me my Colonels Commission. You Sirrah (turning to his man) did
not I do so and so, etc. (repeating all over again) and for my Courage and
Services at that famous Battle did you not see the King seal me a Coll's
Commission? No, by G -- d, replys the man. How Rogue, Dog, Rascal! cries Master)
and flings a Glass of Claret in his Face: The fellow, a sturdy Lad, his Eyes
somewhat smarting, and his Indignation a little provoked, returns his Masters
civility by fairly knocking him down. For though neither Fire nor Steel,
Halbert nor Pole-axe could fell him at the Boyne, a box of the Ear was a little
too heavy here; so rising up again (for the Fall was not mortal) the Colonel
in heat of blood somewhat forgetful of his honor, to match his Prowess with
varlets, nevertheless enters into single Combat at Loggerheads with his man. In
short, a most terrible fray ensued between 'em, sometimes one uppermost and
sometimes the other; till the Major at last, to make a Battle Royal of it, comes
in for the third; for having a small walking Crab-tree utensil in the Room,
which he called Marjery, he makes bold to lay on. And though he seemingly let
fly only at the Squire, he let some chance drubs fall upon the Knights
Shoulders, till master and man, to shield from this new Assailant, drew off at
some distance, and stood at bay. The Major, as if his whole vengeance was
intended only for the impudent Varlets back, began to swear as hard now, as he
thresh'd before. Sirrah, Villain, Scoundrel, (cries the Major) G -- D -- mn you
for a Son of a Whore, what does your Master give you wages for, but to lie for
his Credit? if your Master had said he had been a Major General, were you so
impudent a Rascal as to deny it. D -- him, let me cut the Rogues Throat. The
fellow pretty well satisfied with the Cudgelling already received, would not
stay for any further engagement, but fairly facing to the right about, marches
off with some Precipitation, and the Master after him, crying very vehemently
to the Turn-key, Stop the Rogue, and by no means to let him go out. The
Turn-key made answer, He was no Prisoner, and 'twas more than he could justify
to stay him. Ay but (replies the Colonel, with his Nose a little dripping) do
you see what the Rascal has done, he is a Dog and a Villain, and has abused me.
Nay, for that matter (quoth Turn-key) I am neither Constable nor Justice of
Peace, and so opening him the door he gives him the compliment of [Run Rascal]
and so troops off Valet de Chamber; and never found the way back again.

Our Colonel though loaded with so many hundred Pounds (as I told you) nay and
though so formidable a Hero at the Boyne, nevertheless found that favor from
the House as now and then to be trusted abroad with a single keeper,
particularly on the fifteenth of July following, he prevailed with one of the
Turnkeys to take him abroad to Westminster. The Turn-keys wife who had been
often promised a small token of Love from the Colonel, for her Husbands former
civilities to him, was pleased to be very high both with the Colonel and
Husband for Nonperformance of Articles. Well, what would she have? Why truly he
should present her with a Topknot and a Commode. Very well, the Colonel upon
honor would not fail equipping her at one of the Milliners in
Westminster Hall. No, troth that will not do, for either she wanted faith, being
so long promised before, or else would not trust to the Colonels fancy; she
had rather have one of her own choosing. Then Madam, replies the Courtier,
there is a Guinea, please your self.

So all parties well satisfied, her Spouse and his Martial charge the Colonel,
move immediately to Standgate, and there take Oars for Westminster Bridge. At
their landing the Turnkey trips out of the Boat first, and turning back to look
for his Prisoner, he found him stepped over into a Galley, a boat with 4 Oars,
that lay ready for him, and pushing off with all might and main toward
Whitehall.

The Turnkey immediately bellows at no small rate, in the Kings name, and what
not to stop him. To take Boat and follow him was in vain, for the Galley was
too nimble for any common Oars, besides the Watermen were of the Col. party. In
short he has no way but to leap into the Thames, which at that time at the very
shore was near middle deep. So full cry he flounces in, with all the Expedition
he could make after him; but all in vain, the Coll. was got to Whitehall stairs
before him; where the Watermen made a fair open Lane for him, whilst the
dripping water-rat came too late to catch him. Some small Hubbub was made at
the stairs on this occasion, but all to no purpose, our new Courtier was in his
own Element, and our Collonel-Hunter snapt too short to reach him: and the Jest
of this pleasant Adventure went so far, that the Queen, inquiring into the
occasion of the Huzzas and Hollows at her watergate, was informed that only a
young Bloodhound, had slipped his Collar an Eivdence of hers was got loose.

The poor Turnkey, possibly what with his great Heat within, and his cooling
fresh water pickle without, together with his dolorous Affliction for his lost
Prisoner, soon fell sick, and dyed before the end of the month.

After this nimble conveyance out of his enchanted Castle, he began in prudence
to consider, that London, and indeed little England might soon grow too hot for
him, and therefore he resolves for a Ramble for Flanders: but before we show
you his Adventures there, we shall relate some particulars of his Irish
Frolicks, which were unhappily forgotten, in his forementioned Irish Expedition.

In Ireland by the Title of Squire Fuller, his Abode was at Dublin, he lodged
at a Barbers in College Green, where he lived at that extravagant Expense,
that notwithstanding he wheedled one Capt. Vaud -- a Dutch Officer out of 100
l. and some other people of considerable Sums by drawing of Bills upon an
eminent Merchant in Woodstreet (for to countenance his shams he made use of no
little names for his Correspondents) he run in his Landlords and some others
debts near 100 l. more, who having occasion for their money, and (as with good
Reason) pressing a little hard for it, to get his heels loose to return for
England, he wheedled in an honest man to be bound for it, with Oaths and large
promises of returning it as soon as he came to England. But about 6 months
after came a most miserable Letter from his kind Bondsman, directed for him to
a House near Cheapside (whether he used to direct his own Letters) deploring
his sad condition, himself in Dublin Goal, for the Debts he stood engaged for
him, which he was utterly incapable of satisfying; and that unless he returned
the Money according to his promise, he must perish in Prison, and his Wife and
Children starve. This Letter lying long in their hands, and none of our
Wandering Spark at that time to be found, they made bold to open it, and found
these lamentable contents in it. Had the Letter not been lost you had had it at
length.

At his first coming back from Ireland, at a Tradesmans in London, he talked of
most Stupendous Wonder he had performed there, that he was a Colonel of
Horse, had been at the Siege of Lymrick; That the Lords, Justices had resolved
to make him a Lord Commissioner, and as an Earnest of their Favor, had already
given him the Lord Clanoarties House, (what he meant by this unaccountable
Gibberish I understand not) that he was to have Twelve Sub-Commissioners under
him, the worst of their places worth 50 l. and the best 100 l. per Annum. But
these over and above Extravagant Vapors he only made use of, where he thought
High Words and Small Sense would pass Current.

But let us return to our Flanders Voyage.

Accordingly himself, with his Man to attend him, and Entitled Colonel Fuller,
he went down to Gravesend to take Shiping for Holland: Meeting with Honest Capt
C -- that carried the King over, the Colonel struck up with him for 10 Guineas
(a Sum bid like a Chapman) to waft him over, saying, He was a Colonel and was
going to his Command: The Captain paid him a more than ordinary Respect, and
gave him the best Treatment his Vessel could afford. When he came cross the
Water, the Colonel had not Money enough to pay the Sum contracted, but writes
a Bill for the Captain to receive 10 Guineas in Amsterdam, which at present
very well satisfied the Captain: But when he came to get his Bill accepted, he
received an unexpected Answer, That they knew no such Colonel, nor had any
such Sum so payable. This Disappointment put the Captain into no good Opinion
of his Colonel; however, he resolved to say nothing, because he found himself
bubbled. But his good Fortune in about a Fortnights time after, made him
accidentally meet his unlooked for dear Colonel at Rotterdam. The Captain
makes up to him, and catching him fast by the Hand, made bold to tell him, that
his Bill was not worth a Farthing. No, replied Fuller, with a look like a Dead
Man, (being not a little surprised) Captain, says he, I am heartily sorry for
it, and beg your pardon, here are four Pistoles for you, Swearing a great Oath,
'twas all he had; and so in haste took his Leave, whilst the Captain was very
glad to get so hand^^me a Composition for a Debt so desperate.

However this cross Adventure did not baulk our Knight Errant, and pretending
to be a Man of great Quality, no less than a Nephew to the Lord S --, he
carried on the Disguise so artfully, and insinuated himself into the Favor of
Major General K --, whom he saw at Brussels, that he struck up his Heels for
200 Guineas, and was so intimate with him as to ride in his Coach with him, the
Major General thinking no favor too great for a Person so nearly Related to
his Lordship, and one that behaved himself so much like a Person of Quality.
Till one Day meeting his Lordship, he could not forbear telling him how hopeful
a Young Gentleman he had for his Nephew, whom he had the particular Honor to
be Acquainted with, not a little priding himself in his Friendship and
Conversation, and giving his Lordship a very extraordinary Character of him. My
Lord was much surpised, and utterly disowned any Relation of that Name, and
being showed the Person, and asking him what Country he was of, and which way
his Relation to my Lord came in, he said he was of the Fullers of Kent, that
truly he had the Happiness to be somewhat Related, though not so near as a
Nephew, to his Lordship, it is true as he much feared, it was his Misfortune to
be at present unknown to his Lordship, however he hoped his Lordship would
pardon his Boldness, in laying claim to so high an Honor, it being impossible
for him to do less than pride himself, though in the most distant Affinity to a
Family of that Worth and Glory as his Lordships. My Lord not altogether
satisfied with this Complement, was pleased to signify his Pleasure, that he
desired him to forbear laying farther claim to his Kindred, for if he did, he
would have a Paper pined to his ^^ck, and have him Bumbasted by his Footmen
through the Camp, that it might be known how little Respect he had for his
Nephew. This terrible Answer put our Spark into some Mortifying Consternations,
and the Major General into some small surprise, which timely warned our Rebuked
Gallant to walk off to shelter from his Lordship's Indignation, or rather in
prudence to retire from a more formidable danger; some hard Questions that
possibly might arise about his 200 Guineas, raised upon so Insolvent a Pawn as
the Credit of his Lordships Kindred. And therefore modestly withdrawing before
the Major General was prepared to make any such Motion, he left the Room, and
in less than half an hour after, the Town.

Here at Brussels he had all along kept a Coach and Four Horses, to drive
backward and forward to the Camp, etc. at Six Crowns a day Expense; though
truly his Man Kent (for that was his Name) had often in several Companies,
reproved his Masters Extravagance in not bringing over his own Coach and
Horses, and so have saved all this needless Charge.

But having occasion at present to move off incognito, his Coach and Four
Steeds were no further useful, the Man and Master making the best of their way
from this dangerous Town, with all the Privacy Requisite.

From hence his Pocket pretty well lined he gets to the Hague. Here he did not
think the bare Title of Coll. which at highest amounted but to Honorable,
sufficient for the Figure he intended there, and therefore to Tagg his Point
with Right Honorable, he mounts a little step higher, and Dubs himself a Lord
by the Title of Baron Fuller; for it was observable, in all his shapes; he was
very unwilling to part with his Surname, for whither Major, Colonel, Sir
William, or Lord in the Front, still Fuller brought up the Rear. Here he drove
at a high Rate, till Fortune one day unhappily played a Sly J^des Trick; for
when several of the Highest Nobility one Night were at a public Gaming, our
Baron not to stand out put in for one of the Fair Gamesters, where 'twas his
misfortune to loose all his Money; and his last stake being gone, he pulled out
a small Bill of Exchange of 30 l, charged by Mr. John S^ainsburough,
Hop-Merchant in Thamesstreet, London, upon Mine Here Van Wyke Merchant in
Amsterdam payable to William Baron Fuller, or his Order, without any further
Advice. This Stake went current in play, no body doubting a person of his
Honor, and consequently the Bill as substantial as ready Money. But his Bill,
in short followed his Gold; our Gamster lost all he played for. But when the
Bill was tendered to Mine Here, here was no Advice (as the Bill mentioned)
wanting, for at the first sight he owned it a Counterfeit, but this not fully
satisfying the Person that tendered it, it happened that an English Gentleman
being by, made bold to tell him, that he was afraid the Lord was as Covnterfeit
as the Bill, for to his certain knowledge, there was no English Nobleman of
that Name, and to confirm what he said, he sent for the Present State of
England, offering to lay twice the 30 pound, that no such Title could be found
in the whole Catalogue of the English Nobility.

In this Flanders Ramble his Bank somewhat sunk, he happens into Company with
one Mr. M. -- a Native of Holland, and one of the Kings Messengers. His
Occasions wanting a new supply, and some new Arts to raise it, he thought fit
to strike in and try his Fortune with this Gentleman. The Discourse between
'em, discovering that the Messenger scarce ever lay still, that he had been
upon several Expeditions with Expresses, etc. to several Courts on his
Majesty's Account, and consequently imagining that the Messenger whose Business
lay so wide, and himself so always upon Motion, was undoubtedly an Absolute
Stranger to the Name of, Fuller either as Coll. Major, Esquire; Sir William or
Baron, or any of his Pranks under any of those Titles, and in all likelihood
like to continue so; with this consideration he resolves to pass now for Sir
William Fuller, an English Baronet newly come to his Estate, his Father Sir
William not two Years dead, himself newly arrived in Flanders, but just come on
shore, his whole Business here being to spend a little Money, see a few
Fashions, and so return home to his Family and Tennants, with all the
Privileges of a Traveller, viz. To be able to tell Wonders to the homebred
Country Gentlemen his Neighbors, that scarce ever Traveled beyond their own
Grounds; to give the two young Ladies his Maiden Sisters a Character of a Dutch
Froe, and describe 'em the Difference between a Flandrian and an English
Gallant; And likewise to see a little of a Warlike Campaign abroad, that he
might talk Miracles to his Peaceful Brother Militia Captains at Home, and see
some other Foreign Novelties, as might furnish out a modish Gentleman's
Conversation at his return: And this truly was all the design he had in this
Quarter of the World. The Messenger much delighted with the Gayety of his
Humor, expressed his ready Inclination to do him any service in his Power. Our
Sir William returning the Complyment, told him he would take him at his word,
and the Favor he would beg of him should be this, to be some part of a Guide
to him in a Country where he was so much a Stranger, desiring his Directions in
his intended Ramble and Travels. The Messenger proud of oblidging him in that
Civil Courtesy, told him he should want no Instuctions of that kind, and
indeed 'twould be no little pride to him, could himself be his Companion in his
Travells; that is, if his own troublesome Employ would permit: But as that
rendered him incapable of receiving that happiness, however nothing in his part
should be wanting to gratify so worthy a Gentlemen in so poor a service, and
if he pleased to honor him by visiting an Uncle of his at Rotterdam, a Brugher
of some small Fashion there, he would by a Letter do him that Justice to his
Uncle, that his Uncles best services should be ready to oblidge him in a higher
measure then his own weaker Abilities could do. This Generous Engagement from
Mr. M -- you may imagine, occasioned a Courtly Complimental Answer.

But to shorten the Flourishing part of our History, the Messenger and the
Baronet grew intimate, and a Recommendatory Epistle was prepared for him to his
Uncle; and Rotterdam is the next place that our Traveller must visit But before
our new Sworn Friends part, the Baronet being in a strange place, and and all
his Traveling Treasure in Bills, and those unfortunately drawn upon Merchants
in Amsterdam, he has a present occasion for a small spill of about 200 Guelders
to supply his pocket till his Receipts from Amsterdam, and therefore he makes
bold to trouble his Friend for that Diminitive Sum, to be repayed upon Demand
with Thanks. The 200 Guelders without the least scruple were instantly
furnished; and our Baronet thus Equipped sets forward to Rotterdam.

Here he is no sooner Arrived but the Uncle is kind above Imagination, Treats
him most Sumptuously, pays him all the Addresses suitable to the Quality of his
Honorable Guest, brings him into the Conversation of several Rich Merchants,
who all of 'em grew extremely fond of his Company, being indeed a Darling among
'em. During his stay here he strikes in with the Uncle for much about the same
Sum he had before borrowed from his Nephew the Messenger, and does it with that
ala mode de negligence, that truly 'twas impossible to deny him any thing, his
pretensions for borrowing, being only occasioned by their own over kindness to
him, for he is so highly caressed by the Uncle and his worthy Friends, that he
cannot get loose from their Embraces to go to Amsterdam, to receive his own
Bills. Amongst the several Rotterdam Acquaintance, he grew mightily Intimate
with a Scotch Merchant who more passionately Doated upon him then any of 'em
all; with him he grows so bold, that having a bill of 300 l. English Money to
receive at Amsterdam, he gets him to lend him 150 l. of the Money, all under
the old pretense, that he cannot stir yet from his overkind Friends.

Having thus neatly trumpt upon the doting Sir Credulous, he is not content
with this pretty handsome Squeeze, but in some few days after, privately
understanding that some Affairs called our Scotch Adventurer very speedily to
Amsterdam, he resolved to pass the Slur upon him once more. Sir, says our
Baronet, I am so tied by the Leg, that I despair of ever getting free from the
daily Importunities of my good Friends here, and could heartily wish you would
take the trouble off my hands, of getting me one of my Amsterdam Bills
received. Noble Sir; replied the kind Scot, I have some Occasions in some few
Days thither my self. The Knight seemingly transported at that good Fortune,
made Answer. Nay then Sir, I Will be so bold as to make use of my worthy Friend,
without seeking any farther, if you will please to favor me with 50 l. more, to
the Sum you have already pleasured me with: Pray take this 300 l. Bill, and
receive the Money, and then pay me the Remainder at your Return.

To make even Money on it, the Scotch-man deposites the Additional 50 l. without
the least scruple, and takes the Paper Pledge for his Security. Upon this 200
l. out of one Pocket, and so slender a Mortgage for it, our serious Sir William
begins to consider that his Affairs are now upon their Critical Point, and
therefore so orders matters, that that Morning our Scotchman moves toward
Amsterdam, Our Baronet has extraordinary Occasions to meet some Friends newly
Landed from England at Helvetsluys, and to palliate the Business, he received
Letters the very Night before, which laid an Indispensible Obligation upon him
of meeting them there, one of the Company being of no meaner a quality than an
Earl, to whom he had the Honor by his Mother side to be Nephew. The Duty
therefore that lay upon him on this Occasion, superseded all other Obligations,
and he must be forced to borrow himself for some few Days from his kind Friend
his Landlord, but faithfully promising his Return, and withal, not doubting but
to bring my Lord his Honorable Relation to Rotterdam, whom he was sensible
would be highly thankful to him for the great Favors he had heaped upon his
Nephew, he formally takes his Leave.

No sooner came he to Helvetsluys, but by an accursed Caprice of Fortune, who
should he meet but a particular Friend of Major General K -- 's, who privately
takes our Sir William aside, and tells him, there were 200 Guineas long owing
to the Major General, and which must be paid upon sight: Our Sir William was
almost Thunderstruck at this Accident, and began a softening kind of a Speech
to him; but the Gentleman who had no leisure for talking, cut him short in this
manner. Look you Sir, (says he) the 200 Guineas were borrowed by fine Words,
and Sweet Looks, but hark you, Sir Knight, they must not be so paid. In short,
I give you this Choice, either pay down the utmost Doit of the Money, or look
to be Jayl'd for a Cheat and a Rascal. I confess if thou were a Gentleman, I
would give thee a third Choice; that is, to go into the Field with me, and
there give me the pleasure of cutting thy Throat for thy Villainy to my
Honorable Friend the Major General; but as thou art a Scoundrel, that is an
Honor too great for thee. And so, as I told thee before, of the two take thy
choice. The poor Sir William at this last blow, almost knocked down like one of
his Fathers Heifers, for some few Minutes stood Speechless; but at last
recovering Soul enough to breathe and speak once more, he told the Gentleman he
would give him the utmost Satisfaction he was able; that truly he was ashamed
of his Ingartitude to the Major General, but whatever he had deserved from his
hands, he hoped both he and his Friends were Men of such Goodness and Worth,
that if he strained hard to pay him 200 Guineas, they would graciously please
upon his humble Supplication, which he would make upon his Knees, to seek no
farther Satisfaction nor punishment for his faults. That therefore he hoped the
Gentleman would be so kind as to be silent in the matter, least the exposing of
him might be his utter ruin, which alas would be a poor Trophy for so noble a
Gentleman as the Major General. Nay, says the Gentleman, pay but the Money, you
owe my Friend, and cheat all the World besides in the Devil's Name. For my my
own part, I Will be so far from exposing thee, that I Will rather push on the Jest
than baulk it.

Upon this small Comfort, and some farther Assurances from the Gentleman on the
same Account, he made hard shift, from the 200 l. from the kind Scot (which, as
good Fortune would have it, was yet untouched,) and the addition of a Gold
Watch, to satisfy the whole sum demanded. The Gentleman seeing the Moveable'
viz. the Watch in too, to help up the sum, began to have some Commiseration
upon him. Well, poor Rascal (says he) I will not undo thee quite, there is five
Gueneas back again for thee for working Tools, till thou make the next Bite
for more; and so, true to his Promise, without words o^ noise he takes his
leave.

Our poor simple Travellor reduced to this small stake of five Guineas, is not
a little disconsolate at his Calamity; however considering his Credit's above
Deck, though his Pocket is a little under Hatches, it is some Mitigation to his
grief; and resolving to trust Fortune once more, he plucks up a Spirit; puts on
a good Face, and looks out sharp for new Game.

He has no sooner shook off all Care, and banished all Sorrow, but he happens
to meet with two or three English Merchants waiting for a passage to Harwich,
he soon makes one with 'em; where bearing up the Port of an English Barronet,
in an hours Conversation he begins to be a familiar Acquaintance, talks much of
his Travels, that he was a great Man at Court, formerly the late Queens Page,
but since he came to Age, and his Estate, a Gentleman of Their now Majesty's
Bedchamber; that he was returning for England, and expected a King's Yatch for
his Passage, to which these English Gentlemen should be welcome, and that he
had by Letters ordered his Coach and six Horses from his Seat at Cobhamhall, to
attend him at Harwich.

This Account from our Bed-Chamberman, procured him a great many Legs and
Scrapes from the Merchants, who in Duty bound, returned his Honor a kind
Acknowledgment for the Favor of his Yatch, they having designed their Passage
by the Packet Boat. No, by no means, he must beg that Favor of 'em; and not
only so, but to take a part of his Coach from Harwich to London. He had at
present only one Servant attending him, and the Diversion of good Company,
would be an Obligation of the highest value.

The Merchants were in no small Confusion at this Extravagant Generosity from a
Stranger, and a Person of his Rank. But waiting for our Royal Yatcht, our
Expectants were all disappointed, Wind, Tide, or some other cross Accident was
in fault, for no Yatcht came: insomuch that instead of a Kings Cabin, our
Grandee was forced to make one with the Merchants in the homely Packet-Boat.
Our short Voyage quick Dispatched, no sooner were we all safe at Port, but
Inquiry at the Inns in Harwich was made for a Coach and Six Horses that waited
for Sir William Fuller, to which being answered in the Negative, that no such
Coach was or had been there; He fell into a great Passion, called his Steward a
great many Rogues and Villains for this impudent neglect of his Commands, that
his Letter that ordered his Coach, he was certain he must have received; that
there was no Wind or Tide could hinder his Coach from Traveling, whatever they
had done to disapoint him of his Yatcht; that the Negligence of his Servants
was unpardonable, and when he saw 'em he should reward 'em accordingly. Now one
thing I should have told you, he had Struck in with one of these Merchants for
Ten Guineas; for a Person of his Quality, to want so poor a Sum, was only through
his Distance from home, and the long stay abroad, that had lickt him up some
considerable Hundreds more than he Expected. Thereupon being defeated of his
Coach and Six Horses, and thereby not only unable at present to repay the Ten
Guineas, but what grieved him more, that he could not obliege his worthy
Friends as Engaged, he begged a Thousand Pardons of 'em.

One little Escape I had almost Omitted. In the Packet-Boat he met with one who
very intimately knew him, viz. when he was my Lady Melforts Page. This Person
at present under some Cloud, being a Noblemans Discarded Servant, made bold to
borrow of his old Croney a Crown; and upon this Encouragement, once or twice
more requested a further Favor of two or three Half Pieces of him, which our
prudent Sir William to stop ta^ling pretty willingly lent him; but at last
hearing his Fellow Traveller; the gay Baronet, talk at that Prodigious Rate to
his Mates the English Merchants, he whispered him once more and desired to be
pleasured with a Brace of Guineas. Our Knights Fund at this time none of the
strongest, and good Nature somewhat tired with so troublesome a Petitioner, he
was pleased to refuse this importunate Suppliant. Upon which his humble
Addressor changing his Note, began to talk hard words, that if he denied him
this Favor, he should take the boldness to cackle, and make some not
overgrateful Illustrations to his Merchant Friends, upon the true Birth and
Pedigree of their Honorable Friend Sir William, etc. Our Sir William a little
nettled, but not out braved with all these threatenings, wisely runs to his
Friends, and cries Whore first; tells 'em that an impudent fellow in the Boat
whom he never saw before, and on whom he had bestowed some Charity, had the
Insolence to ask to borrow two Guineas of him; which being denied him, the
ungrateful Villain with that forehead of Brass, that he had never met with in
his whole Life, pretended to asperse him with a parcel of Lies and Forgeries,
such as he almost trembled to hear; that the Rogue would come and tell his
worthy Friends forsooth, that he was a Cheat, some pittyful Scoundrel like
himself, and other such impudent Stuff that made his Hair stand on End but to
Repeat. The Merchants were much concerned at this hideous Affront to their
Honorable Friend: And in short the Matter came to a Trial of Skill; For the
whole Life and Pedigree of this pretended Knight was reaped up before 'em, in
which the Knight so out braved all the poor Accuser could say, that he clearly
carried the Cause; insomuch that at last it came to a Challenge between the
Knight and the Impeacher, in which the two Merchants on the Knights side, and
two other Passengers for the other Principal, were to have been their Seconds;
But the Quarrelling Part before they came a Shore was hushed; and though this
Accuser took the Merchant (that had lent him the Ten Guineas) aside, and bid
him have a care of the Impostor, engaging to make out the Truth of all he had
said; Nevertheless, our Sir William held that entire Ascendant that he would
not believe one Syllable against him.

But to return to Harwich. The Coach and Six Horses being wanting, the Knight
and his Companions came in a hired Coach to London; and there taking leave, he
Invited 'em to meet him at Dinner at a Tavern in Queens-Street near Cheapside
on Thursday sevenight following, against which time he would have a fat Buck
from his Park at Cobham Hall to entertain 'em, and then pay the Ten Guineas
borrowed. The Merchants accordingly with some Friends (one whereof an Oil Man
in Aldersgate Street) met at the Tavern on the day, but to their Suprise found
neither Dinner, Venison, nor Knight provided. This Defeat strangely exasperated
the Merchant that lent him the Ten Guineas, that more out of revenge than value
of the Money, he made it his Business to hunt him through the whole Town, till
at last he fixed him at a House over against the Charterhouse: here he found it
cursed hard to get at him, for he lived upon the Sculk, came in Late, and went
out Early; however, resolved to Snapp him, he came with his Officers at 11 one
Night, resolving to keep 'em upon the watch all Night, himself, and his
Oyle-man Friend with him. The Spark was then going to Bed, but his man
discovering some Persons at the Door, which he fancied waited for his Master,
he slipped to the Constable and Watch, and told 'em there were Thieves designed
to break open such a House; the Constable and his Mirmidons thus Alarmed, came
to do their Duty; when seeing their Substantial Neighbor the Oyle-man, out of
the Gange of Thieves, upon Examination they found out the whole Roguery: And
instead of Apprehending joined with them, and so far prevailed with the
Landlord as to open his Door, and let in the Officers; who Arrested him in his
Chamber, and hurried him to a Spunging-House, from whence on the 18th of
November last he was by Hab Cor. removed to the King's Bench.

It seems now that all his old Arreers are to be paid at once, for on the 18th
of November last, he was brought over to the Kings Bench by Habeas Corpus, and
Lodged at one of the Tipstaffs Houses, under careful Tuition. The Marshal was
pretty well pleased that they had retrieved their Fugitive, and giving him a
visit, he asked him the Reason why he made so ungrateful a Return, for his
Keepers kindness in July last, in making that former Escape: To which he
impudently made Answer, he did it by the Queens Special Order.

In these Melancholy Circumstances, his Projecting Head, about the end of
December, put him upon Addressing to the House of Commons, concerning his new
Discovery; The Credit he thought he had gained in Mr. Crones Diminitive Cause,
made him presume upon the Foundation of the Inconsiderable Truths delivered
^hen, to raise Airy Castles and Mountain Prodigies now. Accordingly, he writes
two Letters to the Speaker, whereupon, January the first, he was Ordered by the
Marshal of the Kings Bench, to Attend the House on the Monday following.

According to that Order, he appeared before the House the 4th. of January and
had a Hearing before 'em, upon which was resolved, that an humble Application
should be made to His Majesty, that he would please to Grant to Mr. Fuller a
Blank Pass for two persons, for their safe coming from beyond Sea, or any other
place hither to give their Evidence, and for their safe Protection while they
are here, and their safe return if desired.

On the 22d, of February, the House being acquainted by the Marshal of the
Kings Bench, that Mr. Fuller was very ill, and not able to attend the House
according to Order, several Members were appointed to repair to him, and take
his Examinations and Information upon Oath, to secure his Papers, and Examine
him who his Witnesses were, where they lived, and where to be found. And the
House being farther acquainted by one of the Members, where the said Witnesses
would be that Morning, the said Member was ordered to go to the place and bring
'em to the House.

On the 23d of February, one of the Members of Parliament (according to the
order of the day) Reported, that the Members appointed, had repaired to Mr.
Fuller, Had taken his Examination and Information upon Oath, and secured his
Papers, and Examined who his Witnesses were, and where to be found. Which
Papers and Examinations were delivered at the Table Sealed, and there opened
and Read by the whole House. Mr. James Hayes, and Coll. Tho. Dalavell, being
mentioned by Fuller, to be the two Witnesses, and he having directed where they
Lodged, and described 'em to the Member that had repaired to him; several
Members of the House were Ordered to bring the said Persons with them: and
accordingly the Members appointed went, and Returned with this Report to the
House, that they had been at the place directed by Fuller, but upon Inquiry
there, both of the said Persons Names and the Descriptions of their Persons,
they could not hear of any such Persons to have Lodged either at that place, or
the adjacent Houses, the Persons who owned the said Houses, being all ignorant
of any such Persons Whereupon the House ordered that Mr. Fuller should procure
his said Two Witnesses to attend the House to Morrow Morning at Ten a Clock
peremptorily.

But that Morrow being a Day quite out of his Almanac, and the whole Juggle
and Shuffle now plainly appearing, it was declared by the whole House, February
24. Nemine contradicente, that the said Fuller was a notorious Impostor, a
Cheat, and a false Accuser; that he had scandalized Their Majesty's and their
Government, abused the House, and accused several persons of Honor and
Quality; and that an humble Address should be presented to his Majesty, to
command his Attorney General, to prosecute him accordingly.

After this just Brand set upon him, and the prospect of a condign punishment,
now speedily to attend him, I shall only inform the Reader, that when his
swearing Hand was in, he accused no less than 28 Lords, Spiritual and Temporal,
and 15 Commoners, most of which of no mean Quality.

I shall only add a little Account of his Deportment in his Confinement; first,
he affected his old Title of Colonel still; nay, suffers himself to be called
Colonel to this very day. Upon the Credit he thought he should get by his
Plot, he bore himself with a very high strut and big look to the Tipstaff his
Landlords Son, and others; he offered 'em places in his Gift at the
Custom House, or where they pleased, of near 200 l. a Year. One day he had the
Impudence to write a Letter to the Arch Bishop, who smiling at the Confidence
of the Man; a Gentleman then attending his Grace, for the Humor sake, came to
visit him at the Tipstaffs, which happening at Noon-time, he was at Dinner with
2 Fowls in a Dish, and two young Women at Table with him. The Gentleman told
him, that he understood he had written a Letter to the Archbishop. Yes Sir,
replied our Coll. and I have good Reason to write; here am I serving the King
and the Church, and the Nation, by discovering the Plots and Designs of their
Enemies, and whilst I am doing 'em all this service, I am kept here and
Starved. How (replied the Gentleman) two Fowls, and two Mistresses, and
complain of Starving! Troth, Sir, I think one Fowl, and one Mistress at a time,
would make shift to keep you from that Danger.

In his Sickness, which disabled his Attendance upon the House, he slily
endeavored to insinuate a Belief that he was poisoned, imagining (as it is to
be supposed) that such a Suggestion might have credited his Evidence, by being
thought some design of the Plotters, to stifle his Discovery. A Day or two
after this last Vote of the House of Commons, his pretended Indisposition
continuing, perhaps in earnest, that mortifying Vote being sufficient to make
him sick indeed, Mr. Th -- an Eminent prisoner, a person that had given a
little too fond an Ear to our Plot Witness (though at present somewhat ashamed
of his over-Credulity) at his own Charge sent a Physician to him. And at almost
Midnight after, the Lecturer of the Parish was called to him, and desired to
pray by him, who told him plainly, That if he would first deserve his Prayers,
he should have 'em, viz. if instead of the pretended Poison he was sick of, he
would disgorge the true Poisons he had poisoned the Nation withal, and own the
Motives and Causes why he Accused so many Innocent Persons of Honor, then he
should have the Heartiest Prayers he could make for him. But till then he must
excuse him, and so left him.

The next Morning the Curate was sent for, to entreat him to do that Christian
Office, which the Lecturer had refused him, which the Curate readily consented
to. And after some very Hearty Prayers suitable to the Sick Conscience he
prayed for, he modestly pressed it home to him, concerning the many Persons of
Honor he had Accused, till at last he frankly confessed he had done 'em a great
deal of wrong, For all he had Sworn was not of his own Knowledge, but only from
Hear say.

He wheadled Dr. Oats out of Fifteen Pound (but upon what pretense our
Examinants are not informed) and amongst other Actions lies charged at his
suite for 30 l.

It happned that two of the Waiters either in the Spirit of Ale, or Spirit of
Prophecy, were one day so overhardy, as to talk little of our great Evidence;
that they believed he would prove a second Dangerfeild, and his highest
Preferment end in a Pillory or Carts-Taile. This coming to his Ears, he fell
into that Mortal Dudgeon against 'em, that the Marshal was forced to turn them
both out of their places, and glad he could come off so cheap; though it is
true, since the last House of Commons Vote, he has Restored them again.

But above all, one thing is strangely Remarkable, that notwithstanding, he lay
charged with so many Actions; one of 'em particularly of a 1000 l. at the
Marshals Suite for his last Escape; and as slippery a Prank as he had played 'em
before; Nevertheless he had that strange Influence on the Tipsstaff that had
him in Custody, to be several days trusted abroad without a Keeper. For
instance within Six Weeks last, he made three Several Visits to an old Friend
in Wood-Street (where the whole Family will Attest it for Truth) without any
Waiter Attending him. Now certainly he must either have some mighty Hopes of
doing Wonders by his Plot; or else must lie under some strange Infatuation;
that he did not run away from such a Lord of Debts; that it is impossible he can
look for less than starving under 'em. For I dare Swear for him, 'twas not out
of pure Honor, to be true to his Parole that made him slip so many Occasions
of Escaping.

FINIS.

