To all the Affectors and Approvers in England, of the London Petition of the
eleventh of September, 1648. but especially to the owners of it, by their
subscriptions, either to it, or any other Petition in the behalf of it; and
particularly to the first promoters of it, my true Friends, the Citizens of
London, etc. (continuing unshaken in their principles, by Offices, Places, or
other base bribes or rewards) usually meeting at the Whalbone in Lothbury,
behind the Royal Exchange, commonly (but most unjustly) styled Levellers.
Gentlemen, and worthy Friends,
IT is the saying of the Spirit of God, Prove. 17.17. That a friend loves at
all times, and a brother is born for adversity. And Prove. 18.24. There is a
friend that sticks closer then a brother; the last of which sayings, I am
able by experience to seal to the truth of; and even amongst you, I have found
some, that in the burning heat of the day of my Adversity, have stuck closer to
me, then my brother; which was not only largely manifested by your Petitioning
for me, when I was prisoner in Newgate, about four years ago, and by your
effectual Petitioning for me last year, which was the instrumental means of my
deliverance out of an almost three years captivity; But also your late
unwearied pains taken for me, etc. in diverse Petitions of a hazardous nature at
the beginning of my present captivity; which though fruitless in themselves, as
to my liberty, yet are strong demonstrations of the continuance of your zealous
affections to me in particular, and to the Liberties of the Land of your
nativity; for which I suffer, and am in bonds.

But hearing that you had some thoughts of new motions for me, and my
fellow prisoners, I judge it a fit opportunity for me, to visit you with a few
lines, and to acquaint you how things at present stand with me. I believe the
most of you have seen, if not read my late Book of the eight of June, 1649.
Entitled, The legal fundamental Liberties of the people of England, revived,
asserted, and vindicated, in which, from the 43. page to the 59. page. I have
fully, both by Law and Reason, undeniably, and unanswerably proved, That the
present Juncto sitting at Westminster, are no Parliament at all, in any sense,
either upon the principles of Law, or Reason, but are a company of usurping
Tyrants, and destroyers of your Laws, Liberties, Freedoms, and Properties,
sitting by virtue of the power, and conquest of the Sword; from whom, if we
will believe their Oracle Mr. John Cook, we may, and ought, if we can, to
deliver our selves. His words in the Kings Case stated page 10. are, That all
people that live at the beck, and nod of Tyrannical men, may and ought to free
themselves from that Tyranny, if, and when they can; for such Tyrants, that so
domineer with a rod of Iron, do not govern by Gods permissive hand of
approbation or benediction, but by the permissive hand of his providence,
suffering them to scourge the people, for ends best known unto himself, until
he open a way for the people to work out their own infranchisements.

And in page 22. (says he) Conquest only makes title amongst Wolves, and
Bears, but not amongst men: And in page 8. That a man ruling by Lust, and not
by Law, is a Creature that was never of Gods making, nor of Gods approbation,
but his permission; and though such men are said to be gods on Earth, its in no
other sense, th^n the Devil is called, the god of this world.

The same Note also the great men of the Army sing, in their late Remonstrance
from Saint Albans, November. 16. 1648. p. 48. 67. and in page 22. they say That
when a Magistrate entrusted with a power to protect and preserve the peoples
R^ghts and Liberties, shall rise to the assuming hurtful powers, which he never
had committed to him, and indeed, to take away all those foundations of Right
and Liberty, and of redress, or remedy too, which the people have reserved from
him, and to swallow up all into his own absolute will and power, to impose or
take away, yea, to destroy at pleasure; and declaring all appeal herein, to the
established equal Judgment, or to any other Judgment of men at all, shall fly
to the way of Fame, upon the trusting people (which both Cromwell and Ireton,
etc. have already, a^ really done, as ever the King did,) and by it attempt to
uphold and establish himself in that absolute tyrannical power, so assumed over
them; and in the exercise thereof at pleasure, such a person in so doing, does
forfeit all that trust and power he had, and absolve the people thereby, from
the Bonds and Covenant of Peace betwixt him and them; does set them free to
take their best advantage, and (if he fall within their power) to proceed in
judgment against him, even for that alone if there were no more; of all which,
in the evil part of it, in the highest, the chief Authors of that Remonstrance
are guilty: Therefore out of thy own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked
servant, says Christ, Luke 19.22. And says Paul to his, One of themselves,
even a Prophet of their own said; The Cretians are always liers, evil Beasts,
slow Bellies: this witness is true; therefore -- etc.

Now I say, considering that which is before declared, I cannot upon any terms
in the world, either with safety, justice or conscience, as things stand with
me at present, give my consent, but hinder as much as I am able, all addresses
from you or any others for me, that shall own those usurping Tyrants as a
Parliament, especially by Petition Which was a course (says the pretended
Parliament Solicitor against the King, in his Case stated, page 24.) which Gods
people did not take with Rehoboam, for they never Petitioned him (although he
was their lawful and supreme Magistrate) but advised him; he refusing their
counsel, and hearkened to young and wicked Counselors, and they cry out, To
thy Tents O Israel, and made quick and short work of it.

But I shall rather desire and advise you; by Letter like your selves, address
your selves to the Lord Fairfax; by the sword of whom and his Soldiers, I am
now in prison for my honesty and innocence, and nothing else, and demand my
liberty of him; if he refuse, print it, and do as God, and Reason shall direct
you; for it was his and his Soldiers force that fetched me out of my Bed, the
28 of March, 1649. without all shadow of Law or Justice, and against the tenor
of all their own Declarations; the particular pages of which, you may read in
my following Letter to Mr. Holland, page 5. And by force of Arms, carried me to
whitehal, and then to Derby house, before a company of men, that in Law had no
more power to commit my body to prison, then so many thieves and robbers upon
Suitors Hill have; who by the Rules of their own wills (as in the second
Edition of the Picture of them, I have fully declared) sent me by force of Arms
to the Tower; for all my short eternity in this world.

But I entreat you seriously to consider that I cannot advise you to make
address to him, as the General of the Nations forces, for he is no such thing;
but is merely a great Tyrant, standing by the power of his own will, and a
strong sword, born by his vassals, slaves and creatures having no commission to
be General, either from Law, the Parliament, or from the prime Laws of Nature
and Reason.

For First, when he was first made General by both Houses of Parliament, it was
expressly against ^he letter of the Law, which action cannot be justified,
either before God or man, but in case of extreme necessity; and for the
accomplishment of a universal righteous end, viz. The redeeming, settling, and
securing the peoples rational and just Rights and Freedoms, and not in the
least, for setting up any particular selvish or factious interest.

But secondly, in refusing to disband, etc he has rebelled against his
Parliament commission, and thereby destroyed and annihilated it; And at
New Market Heath, the fifth of June 1647 betook himself to the prime Laws of
Nature, and by common consent of his Officers and Soldiers became their
General, and entered into a solemn and mutual engagement before God, and one
another, for the accomplishment of those righteous ends therein contained, for
the good of the Kingdom and themselves, by subscribing his name, or at least
expressly assenting thereunto, and approving thereof with solemn engagement, as
is at large Printed in the Armies Book of Declarations, p. 23, 24, 25, 26. by
the very letter of which, he, nor his Officers could not govern the Army
jointly or severally, by the former Rules or Articles of Martial Law, no nor
so much as make an Officer of the meanest quality, nor put forth any public
Declaration, nor treat with, nor conclude with any in reference to the Army,
but by the joint advice and approbation of their new erected and established
council of Adjutators, which for order and methods sake, the General was
betrusted to convene and call together, as the King formerly was Parliaments,
or the Lord Mayor of London Common Councels; and yet notwithstanding he and his
Officers, like a generation of most perfidious, false, and faithless men, broke
all this engagement to pieces, within less then twenty days after it was made,
and so annihilated and destroyed his power, authority, or commission, flowing
from the consent of the Soldiers, before he had really accomplished any one
thing, he, or they engaged for, and has since two several times, put a
nullity, or force, upon his original Creators, Lords and Masters, the
Parliament.

And that he and his Officers broke their forementioned solemn engagements in
so short a time; I prove fully out of their own book of Declarations, in which
page 36. to 46 I find a Declaration, dated the 14. of June, 1647. made and
published by his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, with the Officers and Soldiers
of his Army; (mark it well) for in the very words of it, it is, in Excellency
worth all the Declarations that ever the Army made since: and in page 47. to
50. I find a general charge against the eleven Members, with a paper
delivered with it to the Parliaments Commissioners at St. Albans, the 17. June
1647 by the appointment of his Excellency Sir T. Fairfax, and the Soldiers of
the Army under his command; but in the following pages, viz page 51, 52, 53,
54. I find that the 21, 22, 25. of June, 1647. his Excellency, and his Council
of War alone, without the Council of Adjutators, representing the Soldiers,
according to their engagement, writ letters to, and entered into a Treaty with
the Lord Mayor and Common Counsel of London, which was a base, perfidious,
treacherous act, and an absolute breach of their solemn engagement; yea in page
57. June 23. 1647. The General, and twenty eight Grandee, and creature
Officers, publish a Remonstrance to the Kingdom, and that in the name of the
Army; in which base and abominable apostacy they continued, without ever
wiping their mouths, or recanting what they had so unjustly done, as ^he whole
tenor of their Book of Declarations does declare; yea when the particular
charge against the eleven Members comes from them, it comes only in the name
of the General and his Council of War, page 94. yea, and all this, with ten
times more (as I believe the world will shortly and fully see) was done in
despite of the Adjutators, or consent of the R^giments, Troops, or Companies;
for all those two grand and lying Apostates ( Corn^t Den. and Parson John Can,
a late cheat at Amsterdam) confident affirmations to the contrary in their late
Printed lying books, entitled the Levellers Design page 4. 5. and the second
part of the Discoverer, page. 5 6. where they av^r, That the council of
Adjutators, esta^^^shed by the Armies solemn engagement, was d^ssolved and made
null by the some power by which they had their constitution; and that it was
done by a Petition to the General from most of the Regiments, etc. But
although I judge the two forementioned lying base Apost^tes, to be so abominably
vile, that I judge not my excrements mean enough upon equal terms to balance
against them; yet knowing the affairs of the Army then so extrraordinarily well
as I do, I will balance life against life, that neither they, nor any man
breathing can produce a Petition so much as from one single Troop or Company,
much less from a Regiment, and therefore much less from the greatest part of
the Regiments, both of Horse and Foot, for calling home their Adjutators,
before the Genesis and his Officers had, as is before mentioned broke in pieces
the solemn engagement again and again (and Invasion of Rights and Privileges
was the true declared ground and cause of all the late wars with the late
beheaded King, and is really the original ground of most (if not all) the
cruel wars in the world) But if the Soldiers had made such a Petition (which
they never did) it were not much material I think, for they engaged something
to and for the Kingdom, in reference to the setlement of their Liberties and
Freedoms, whith I am sure they in no one title ever accomplished or performed,
and therefore till that be done, they can not rationally or justly absolve
themselves from the true intent or meaning of that engagement.

But I wish those Champions for lies and Apostasy, would instance the place
where, the time when, and the Regiments that subscribed and delivered such a
Petition, and deal ingeniously with the world, whether it were a free act, or a
compulsive one, wrought underhand, by all the snares, pol^cies, tricks, gins,
and slights, that possible the Officers could invent, without or b^low a
visible and compulsive force, which can never of right unty that knot; Sure I
am, diverse of the Adiutators, etc. sent several complaints to me, etc. to the
Tower from St. Albans; immediately after the solemn engagement was made,
complaining that Cromwell, Ireton, etc. (one of which two penned this engagement)
would needs (...) by force and frowns totally break and dissolve it; of which
baseness (though then we we^e not visibly fallen out) I told Cromwell very freely
and plainly of, as appears by my Letters to him of the 22 of June, 1647 and the
1 of July 1647. and in my Advise to the Adiutators of the 16 of July, 1647. All
which I caused immediately after to be Printed in my Book, called Jonahs cries
out of the ^hales belly, and the like in my little Book, called the Jugl^rs
Discovered; and I am sure it was August following, when the Armies Head
quarters were at Kingston, where Cromwell b^gun to be afraid of the Adiutators
apprehending his underhand and night Juglings with the King, to make himself
able, like cardinal Woolsey, to say, I and my King; which he was afraid the
Adiutators should take too much notice of, although long before their power and
authority was destroyed; and therefore was not willing they should at all
remain or lodge at the Headquarters, although Crumwel had weeks, and some
months before designedly, and of set purpose, with all his power and interest,
walked in a continual breaking and trampling the engagement under his feet, and
therefore about that time he and his agents set that Petition a foot, to rid
the Head quarters of the Adiutators, that they might not so much as see his
baseness but alas, that Petition could not null and destroy that that was
broken, nuld in efficacy and power, annihilated long before, but yet I could
not for all this ever hear that Petition was one tenth part so formal as they
report it to be.

But from what has been already said, (and in time will speedily be declared)
it is evident that the General and the Officers at St. Albans broke their
solemn engagement with their Soldiers and the Kingdom, immediately after it was
mad^, and tyrannical, and treacherously invaded their Rights and Freedoms,
which bred heart-burnings, and those divisions which the public enemy (so
called) took the advantage of, and so came on the wars; God ever after their
abominable and villainous appostacy, filling their hands with troubles and
confusions, besides loss of reputation and good name, upon whose score alone
lies the true guilt of all the bloodshed in the last years war, and of all the
miseries that since have befaln Ireland Which they might easily have relieved,
if they had pleased, with those forces they disbanded in several places of the
Nation, immediately after the making the foresaid Engagement; or with those
twenty they the last Spring disbanded, out of every Troop and Company: Part of
which, in discontent at their base using of them, run to La^ghorn and Poyer,
and others; to Goring, Cavel, and others, to Sir Marmaduke La^gdale, and the
Scots: but Cromwell it seems was resolved then, That no forces should go to
relieve Ireland, till he went with them, with an absolute Commission to be King
of Ireland: Which Commission, though he has got, yet he may fail of his
expected Town, both there and elsewhere.
and this year again is likely, by foreign invasions of strange Nations, and
by intestine broils to befall England; and therefore if you love the Lord
Fairfax, tell him, that though people at the present deal by him and Cromwell,
etc. as the Parliament used to do with the King, laying all the evil of his
actions upon his evil Counselors, yet he and his Officers in their
Remonstrance from St Albons, 16. of November 1648. say That the King himself is
the real Fountain, and true original, from whom principally all that mischief
has issued, that of late in his Reign has befaln the Kingdom being himself
the principal Author, and causer of the first and second War, and thereby
guilty of all the innocent blood spilt therein, and of all the evils happening
thereby, page 17. 19. 23. 24. 61. 62, 64. whose one example, in doing Justice
upon, to future Generations, would be of more terror and avail, then the
execution of his whole party,; page 47. 48. It being (as they say) a most
unjust and unconscionable thing to punish inferior Ministers, the accessories,
and let the King, the principal, go free, page 50.

Even so, though most men now lay the blame of all the Armies apostasy,
baseness, perfidiousness and treachery upon Cromwell and Ireton, as the Generals
evil Counselors; yet they (his Screen betwixt him and the peoples wrath) being
gone from him toward Ireland, he will now appear nakedly and singly, to be as
he is in himself, and let him take heed, lest from his bypast constant,
signing, assenting to, approving of, and acting in all their perfidiousness,
treachery and baseness, with his present carriage, now he stands, as it were a
Noun Substantive, upon his own legs, and may now most gloriously act honestly
and justly if he please, without their control or any others (and so regain
his lost credit and reputation) if wickedness and baseness be not as largely
inherent in his heart, as it is in either Cromwels, or Iretons: I say, let him
take heed from all his actings, the knowing and seeing people do not justly
conclude him to be the principal Author and causer of all their miseries,
distresses and woes; and so in time serve him, as he has served the King. and
only put Cromwell, Ireton, Ha^^^rig, Bradshaw, Harrison, etc. in Hambletons,
Hollands, Capels, Gorings, and Owens places, as but accessories or dependants
upon Fairfax the principal.

But my true friends, I shall hear take upon me the boldness (in regard of the
great distractions of the present times) to give a little further advice to
you, from whose company or society (or from some of them) has begun, and
issued out the most transcendent, cl^ar, rational and just things for the
peoples Liberties and Freedoms, that I have seen or read in this Nation as your
notable and excellent Petition of May 20 1647. burnt by the hands of the common
Hangman, Recorded in my Book, called Rash Oaths unwarrantable, page 29 30, 31,
32, 33, 34 35. with diverse others Petitions of that nature; and the Petition of
the 19 of Jan. 1647. Recorded in the following discourse, page 45, 46, 47, 48,
etc. and the masculine Petition of the 11. of Sept: 1648. so much owned by
Petitions out of several Counties, yea, and by the Officers of the Armies
large Remonstrance from St Albans of the 16. November. 1648. page 67 68, 69. The
substance of all which, I conceive is contained in the Printed sheet of paper
signed by my fellow prisoners, Mr. Will. Walwin, Mr. Tho, Prince, Mr. Rich.
Ov^rton, and my self, dated the 1. of May. 1649. and entitled An Agreement of
the free people of England, etc. The principles of which I hope and desire you
will make the final Center, and unwavering Standard of all your desires,
hazards and endeavors, as to the future settlement of the peace and government
of this distracted, wasted, and divided Nation; the firm establishing of the
principles therein contained, b^ing that only, which will really and in good
earnest marry and knit that interest, what ever it be, that dwells upon them,
unto the distressed, and oppressed Commons, or people of this Nation; yea, the
settling of which principles, is that, that will thereby make it evident and
apparent unto all rational and understanding people in the world, that the
real and hearty good and welfare, of the people of this Nation, has
cordially, and in good earnest been that, that their souls have hunted for, and
thirsted after in all the late bloody civil wars, and contests: All the
Contests of the Kings party for his will and Prerogative, being merely Selvish,
and so none of the peoples interest; and the contest of the Presbyterians for
their mak^-bate, dividing, and hypocritical Covenant, no better in the least;
and the present contest of the present dissembling interest of Independents for
the peoples Liberties in general, (read the following Discourse, page 27, 28,
29.) merely no more but Self in the highest and to set up the false saint, and
most desperate Apostate murderer and traitor, Oliver Cromwell, by a pretended
election of his mercinary soldiers, under the false name of the godly
Interest, to be King of England, etc. (that being now too too apparently; all
the intended them by his Will and ^leasure, and so destroy and envassalize
their lives and properties to his lusts, which is the highest treason that ever
was committed or acted in this Nation, in any sense or kind; either first, in
the eye of the Law, or secondly, in the eye of the ancient (but yet too much
arbitrary) proceedings of Parliament, or thirdly, in the eye of their own late
declared principles of reason; by pretense of which (and by no rules of Law in
the least) they took away the late Kings head, and life, which if there were
any Law or Justice in England to be had, or any Magistrates left to execute it,
(as in the least there is not) I durst undertake upon my life, plainly
evidently; and undeniably, to make good the foresaid unparalleld treasons
against the foresaid Ol. Cromwell, upon, and against all the three forementioned
principles, viz. Law, Parliament, and Reason; yea, and to frame against him
such an Impeachment, or Indictment (which way of Indictments is the true,
legal, and only just way of England to be tried at the Common Law, higher and
greater then all the charges, against the forty four Judges) hanged for false
and illegal Judgments, by King Alfred before the conquest; which with their
crimes, are recorded in the Law Book, called The mirror of Justice, Printed in
English, for Matthew Walbank at Grayes Inn gate, 1646. page 239. 240. 241. 242.
243. 244. 245. See also page 196. 197. 207. ibid.

Or then the impeachment or accusation Of the Lord chief Justice Wayland, and
the rest of his brother Judges and Lawyers, tormented in Edward the first his
time, and mentioned in Speeds Chronicle, fol. 635.

Or then the impeachment in Parliament, against Judge Thorp, who for taking
small bribes against his oath, was condemned to die in Edward the third his
time; of whom, you may read in the 3. part. Cooks Institut. fol. 155, 156, and
in Mr. Pyms Speech against the Earl of Strafford, in the Book called Speeches
and Passages of Parliament, page 9.

Or then the impeachment or a charge of the dethroned King Edward the second,
in full Parliament, the manner of whose dethroning you may notably read in
Speeds Chronicle, fol. 665.

Or then the many Articles of impeachment, of the dethroned King Richard the
second, in full Parliament, recorded at large in the Chronicles, or History of
Will. Martin, fol 156. 157. 158 159. the 8. 10. 12. 15. 21. Articles of which,
I conceive most remarkable, as to the people, which are extraordinary well
worth the reading; for in them the King himself, in those dark days of Popery,
is charged To have perverted the due course of the Law, or Justice, and Right;
and that he destroyed men by information, without legal examination, or trial;
and that he had declared the Laws of the Kingdom, were in his own Breast, (just
the same thing do Mr. Peter's and other mercenary Agents of the Grandees of the
Army, now constantly declare of them) and that by himself, and his own
authority (just Cromwell and Ireton like, only much short of them) he had
displaced diverse Burgesses of the Parliament, and had placed such other in
their rooms, as would better fit and serve his own turn.

Or then the impeachment of the Lord chief Justice Tris^ian (who had the
worship or honor in Richard the second his time, in full Parliament, to be
apprehended in the forenoon, and hanged at Tiburn in the afternoon) with his
brother Judges, viz. Ful^horp, Be^knap, Care, Hot, Burge, and Lockton; or their
associates, Sir Nicholas Bramble, Lord Mayor of London, Sir Simon Burley, Sir
William Elinham, Sir John Salisbury, Sir Thomas Trevit, Sir James Bernis, and
Sir Nicholas Dodgworth; some of whom were destroyed and hanged, for setting
their hands to Judgments, in subversion of the Law, in advancing the Kings will
above Law; yea, and one of them banished therefore, although a dagger was held
to his breast to compel him thereunto.

Or then the indictment, of those two grand and notorious, traitorly subvertors
of the Laws and Liberties of England, Empson, and Dudley, Privy Counselors to
Henry the seventh recorded in Cooks 4. part. Institut. fol. 198. 199. read also
fol 41. ibid. and 2. part. Instit. fol. 51.

Or then the impeachment of that notorious, wicked, and traitorous man,
Cardinal Woolsey, by King Henry the eight his Privy Council, recorded in the 4.
part. Cooks Instit. fol. 89. 90. 91. 92. 93. 94. 95. Read especially Artic. 17.
20. 21. 23. 25. 26. 30. 31. 33. 35. 38. 42. in all which, he is charged with
Arbitrariness, and subversion of the Law.

Or then the impeachment of the Shipmoney Judges, who in one judgment did as
much as in them lay, destroy all the Properties of all the men in England; read
the notable Speeches against them, in Speeches, and Passages.

Or then the impeachment of the Bishop of Canterbury, in the late Parliament.

Or then the impeachment, of the Lord Keeper Finch, Earl of Strafford,
Secretary Windebank, Sir Richard Bolton, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John Lord
Bishop of Derry, Sir Gerrard Lowther, Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Common
Pleas in Ireland, and Sir George Ratcliff, all whose impeachments are recorded
in a Book, entitled, Speeches and Passages of Parliament, from November, 1640.
10 June, 1641. Page 76. 77. to 83. and 117. 118. to 143. and 174. and 256. 257.
258.

Or then the Articles or charge against the two Sir John Hothams; the elder of
which, kept the King out of Hull, the beginning of these Wars, when the House
of Commons durst not command him positively to do it, although they were
effectually put upon it, by a motion from the younger, then sitting in the
House; and yet they were both beheaded as Traitors, for but endevoring to
betray Hull to the King.

Or then the late impeachment of Sir Philip Stapleton, Master Denzil Hollis,
and the rest of the eleven Members, whose impeachment of high Treason, is
recorded in the Armies Book of Declarations, page 47. to 50. and page 94 95.
96. etc. And yet the same things, that some of them, in a capital manner, were
impeached for as Traitors, their impeachers acted, and did at the very
self-same time, as is clearly declared in the following discourse, page 31. 32.
to 39. and page 53. to 62.

Yea, or then the impeachment of King Charles, whom Cromwell and Ireton
principally ( Bradshaw being but their hired mercinary slave) have beheaded for
a Tyrant and Traitor; whose impeachment is recorded in the following discourse,
page 65. 66. 67.

But the principles of the foresaid Agreement, being so detestable and
abominable to the present ruling men, as that which they know will put a full
end to their tyranny and usurpation, and really ease and free the people from
oppression and bondage; that it is something dangerous to those that go about
the promotion of it; yet I shall advise and exhort you vigorously, to lay all
fear aside, and to set on foot the promotion of it, in the same method we took
for the promotion of the foresaid Petition of the 19 of January, 1647. laid
down in the following discourse, page 23. 24. 25. And write to your friends in
every Country of England to choose out from amongst themselves, and send up some
Agents to you (two at least, from each County, with money in their pockets to
bear their charges) to consider with your culd and chosen Agents, of some
effectual course speedily to be taken, for the settling the principles thereof
(as that only within an earthly Government, can make you happy) or at least,
to know one another minds, in owning and approving the principles thereof;
that so it may become to you, and all your friends, your Center, Standard, and
Banner, to ^^ock together to, in the time of those foreign invasions, and
domestic insurrections, that are like speedily to bring miseries enough upon
this poor and d^stressed Nation, and unanimously resolve and engage one to
another, neither to side with, or fight for the Cam^^oes, fooleries, and pride
of the present men in power, nor for the Prince his will, or any other base
interest whatseover (the which, if you should fight for, it would be but an
absolute murdering of your Brethren and Countrymen, you know not wherefore)
unless he, or they will come up to those just, righteous, and equitable
principles therein contained, and give rational, and good security, for the
constant adhering thereunto; and upon such terms, I do not see, but you may
justifiably, before God or man, Join with the Prince himself (yea, I am sure a
thousand times more justly, then the present ruling men (upon a large and
serious debate) joined with Owen Roe O^eal; the grand bloody rebel in Ireland)
who if we must have a King, I for my part had rather have the Prince, then any
man in the world, because of his large pretense of Right, which if he come not
in by Conquest, by the hands of Forraigners (the bare attempting of which may
apparently hazard him the loss of all at once, by gluing together the now
divided people to join as one man against him) but by the hands of Englishmen,
by contract, upon the principles aforesaid (which is easy to be done) the
people will easily see that presently thereupon, they will enjoy this
transcendent benefit (he being at peace with all foreign Nations, and having
no regal pretended Competitor) viz. the immediate disbanding of all Armies,
and Garrisons, saving the old Cinque Ports, and so those three grand plagues of
the people will cease, viz. Free Quarter, Taxations, and Excise, by means of
which, the people may once again really say, they enjoy something they can in
good earnest call their own; whereas, for the present Army to set up the
pretended false Saint Oliver (or any other) as their elected King, there will
be nothing thereby from the beginning of the Chapter to the end thereof, but
Wars, and the cutting of throats year after year; yea, and the absolute keeping
up of a perpetual and everlasting Army under which the people are absolute and
perfect slaves, and vassals, as by woeful and lamentable experience they now
see, they perfectly are, which slavery and absolute bondage is like daily to
increase, under the present tyrannical and arbritrary new erected robbing
Government; And therefore rouse up your spirits before it be too late, to a
vigorous promotion, and settling of the principles of the foresaid Agreement, as
the only absolute and perfect means to cure you of all your maladies and
distempers: So with my hearty and true love presented to all that remain
upright amongst you (without being perverted to Apostasy by the pretended
Council of States places or bribes) I commit you to the safe tuition and
protection of the most high, the Lord Jehovah, and Almighty, and re^t,

Gentlemen, Yours and the Nations faithful, hearty, resolved friend, and
servant in the midst of all adversity, afflictions, trials, and sorrows (that
never more in all my life encompassed me round about then now) till death, JOHN
LILBURN.
From my unjust and illegal (though contented) captivity, for my honesty and
innocence, and nothing else (as to man) in close imprisonment, in the Tower of
London, without any legal and just allowance of maintenance, this present 17.
of July, 1649.
^
