ENGLAND's Fair Warning TO A Speedy Repentance: BEING An Earnest Exhortation to
a Holy Life: Or, The only Deliverer from Eternal Death and Destruction.

Wherein is plainly laid down

The great Duty of Speedy Repentance; with the Wretched State of a Sinner, and
the Blessed State of a Saint: Showing how the one (after Death) will be cast
for ever into the dreadful Flames of Hellfire: And the other will be received
up into Heaven, to celebrate Eternal Halelujah's to the Lord of Lords, who
(sitting at the Right Hand of his Father) will shortly come to Judge the World.

Likewise, Some Pithy Arguments to persuade Men to close with Christ.

Preached by R. Liford, B. D. since the dreadful Earthquakes that have lately
happen^^; particularly that in Cicily, near Mount Etna, where Seventy Six
Thousand Six Hundred and Eighty Persons were destroyed: And now published, to
awaken drowsy Sinners, who still lie in Security, whilst God's Judgments are
of the Earth.

2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his pro^^ (as some men count
slackness;) but is long-suffering ^us-ward: not willing that any should perish,
but (...) should come to repentance. LONDON, Printed for J. Blare, at the
Looking-glass on London Bridge, 1693.

England's Fair Warning to Repentance, etc.
LUKE 13.5. I tell you nay; but except ye repent; ye shall all likewise perish.


IN the first Verse of this Chapter, you have the sad piece of this News, that
was told Jesus, concerning the Galileans, whose Blood Pilate had mingled with
their Sacrifices. ^er. 2. you have our blessed Savior's Answer to his News:
says he unto them; Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners, above all the
Galileans, because ^hey suffer such things? I tell you, nay: but except ^e
Repent ye shall all likewise perish. And yet further, ^er. 4. Or those
eighteen, upon whom the Tower of Siloe ^ell, and slew them; think you, that
they were sinners, ^bove all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you, ^ay: but
except ye repent, ye shall all likewise ^erish. This former part of the Chapter
con^ains the Sermon of Repentance, that was ^reached by our blessed Savior.

Repentance is a pure Gospel Grace; it comes (...) by Jesus Christ; he has
purchased by his blood, that repenting Sinners shall be saved.

The Doctrine I shall raise from these Words, is, That it is a great Duty
incumbent upon Christians, to Repent, and turn to the Lord: Or It does highly
concern a People whom the Lord visits with his Judgments, to strive to turn
(...) him, by Repentance, and Faith in Jesus Christ.

Repentance and Conversion, is the only way to Salvation I need not stay to
open the Text to you, and to prove it by Scripture: For if thou be a Man or
Woman, that do believe the Word of God, then thou believe, that without
Repentance, none can be saved, as the Text has it: But I say unto you, Except
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Well then, What say thou Sinner?
Do thou believe, or no? Thou must either confess, that this is true; or say
plainly, that you will not believe the Word of God: and if once you are come to
that pass, there is but small hopes of you: Look to your selves as well as you
can; for it is like you will not be long out of Hell You would be ready to fly
in the face of him that give you the Lie; and dare you give the Lie to God? If
you will not believe the words of our blessed Savior, whose will you? And does
not he say, That except ye repent; ye shall perish? He does not say you may
perish, but you shall: Nay, there is no doubt of it; let God be True, and every
Man a Liar: Christ has spoken it, Luke 10.12. I say unto you, It shall be more
tolerable for Sodom, at the day of of judgment, than it shall be for that
people o^ Nation, that believe not these words of our Savior.

Use 1. Is this a truth, That Repentance is the only way to prevent the
Judgments of God, that hang over our Heads, because of our Sin; then, first of
all, I would entreat you, observe the cursed nature of this cursed thing called
Sin: you see, Sin must be repented of, or we shall all perish, or we shall all
be damned: Sin will utterly destroy both our Bodies and Souls. I think it is
one of the hardest things that is, to understand the deadly Poison that is in
Sin: Sin is that which the Lord hates. The soul that sins, shall surely die:
This was the Old Law. But the Gospel of Christ says, Repent and forsake your
sins: Or, Repent and believe, and you shall be saved.

Use 2. Is Repentance the way and means to prevent a People or Nation from
perishing? Then from hence you may learn the Excellency and the Usefulness of
that Grace of Repentance. Oh! What an Omnipotent Grace is this! It is a Grace
that can do any thing with God: This Grace of Repentance can redeem our
mortgaged Blessings; it can make us a happy People, Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. I have
surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke: Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned; for thou art my Lord my God. Surely, after I was turned, I repented,
and after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed; yea, even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Is Ephraim, my dear
Son, is he a pleasant Child; for since I speak against him, I do earnestly
remember him still; therefore my bowels are turned for him I will surely have
mercy upon him, says the Lord. From hence you may observe, That Repenting
Sinners are exceeding precious in the sight of the Lord; his heart is turned
toward them: Oh! What an excellent Privilege has penitent heart with God! My
Beloved, How can you live without such a Grace? your Soul^ want it; your
Families want it; and the Nation stands in need of it: The greatest Want thi^
day in England, is a broken Heart.

Use 3. Is Repentance the only way to prevent Judgments? Then from hence
gather, That when God either has his Plagues upon a People, or continues
threatening his Judgments toward them, it is a sign that those People are very
guilty of Impenitency. If God threatens thee, O England, to give thee up to
hardness of heart, and blindness of mind: Does God do it at this day? They say
(O England!) thou art an impenitent People at this day. O England this is my
Charge against thee, You have been a stiff-necked People. O London! London! How
long shall the Lord wait upon thee, before thou will repent! What can you
expect, but that God will yet visit England with his Judgment, till we be
humbled, and heartily repent us of our Sins: It Is for Sin, that the Nation
mourns. Oh, the Swearing, Whoring, and Sabbath-breaking, Schism, and
Disobedience to Magistrates, is this day in London! O you sinful Generation, is
this your requiting of God for all his Mercies? Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite
the Lord, O ye foolish and unwise! What say ye? Will you repent, or not? This
is my Question, which ^ have to ask you this day: Will you Repent? Do not
flatter your selves about Matters of so great concernment, as your Immortal
Souls. Con^ider this (O Sinners) if you will repent, then you may live happy in
the Land of your Nativity, and go to your Deathbeds in peace: But if you will
not Repent of your Sins; then, I say, you must (instead of Blessings) expect
nothing but Curses.

It is plain, that God is angry with you; for God would never have sent so many
Judgments after one another. Once more: Will you repent, or will you not? If
you will not, your sins lie at your own doors. Do not think it is a hard
Question, when I ask you to Repent; but consider, there are two places where
there is no repenting; the one is in the Grave, the other in Hell. It were a
vain thing for me, to go to the Gates of Hell, and cry to them, Repent; for the
Day of Grace is past, and their Doom is passed upon them. I do verily think,
that there is more sorrowing in Hell for sin, than there is this Day in
England; but their sorrow is not a sanctified sorrow: If the Damned in Hell
were delivered out of Hell, they would sin again; if they lived eternally, they
would sin eternally. But I am not a speaking to Men in Hell, but to you Sinners
in England.

1. I say unto you, Repent: Because Jesus Christ has commanded you under great
Penalties, if you do not. Consider a little (O Sinner) who it is that calls for
Repentance: it is not I but the great God; it is Jesus Christ: and doubtless
Christ could never have pressed you to this work, if it were not necessary. He
says unto you, Repent: and says unto you, If you do not your sins shall not
be blotted out. Woe be unto that Man or Woman that repents not; better i^ were
that he had never been born, that he had never seen the Light: the Parents that
bar^ thee, they may repent that ever thou were been It would grieve your
Parents, to see you carried to the Gallows to be hanged; and will i^ not much
more grieve them, to see you cast Body and Soul, into everlasting Burnings?
ther^ to be tormented with the Devil and his Angels for ever.

2. Repent; for Christ has encouraged yo^ with many precious Promises: he will
heal a^ your backsliding, and love you freely; thoug^ your Sins be as
Mountains, he will make ther^ as Mole-hills; though as Red as Scarlet, he wi^
make them as White as Milk.

But some will Object, and say, This is a ha^ Work. What! shall we always go
with Tear^ in our Eyes? What will God give us for our Reward?

Ah! poor Sinner! fear not; do not question your Reward: for as sure as God is
true, so sur^ thou shall have Christ, Heaven and Glory, and be happy for ever.
Sinners, methinks it should make you to quake, to think how God will deal with
you at the great and dreadful Day of Judgment, when he shall say, Take him
Devils, bind him hand and foot, and fling him into everlasting burning; where
shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Oh! it is a dreadful
Sentence, to be adjudged to Everlasting Fire; and look for it, Sinner, if thou will not repent, these are the words that thou shall hear Christ pronounce
against thee, Depart from me, I know you not. And thou may be sure (O
Sinner) if thou art not with Christ, thou must be with the Devil, thou must be
either in Heaven or Hell.

3. Repent, because the Lord has long waited upon you: How long has God stood
at the Doors of your Hearts, wooing and beseeching you to repent? How long (O
thou proud Man or Woman!) has God called unto thee? How often has he knocked
at your hard Hearts? but you would not let him in. Oh, thou grey-headed Sinner!
God has long waited on thee, it may be, ever since thou wast Fifteen or
Sixteen Years of age, to see if thou would repent, Romans 2.4. Or despisest
thou the Righteous of his Goodness, and Forbearance, and Long-suffering, not
knowing that the Goodness of God ^endeth thee to Repentance? There is not a
Blessing that thou have from God, but it has this writ upon it, Repent of thy
Sins. Will thou think of this? When God puts the Bread into ^hy Hands, he says
unto thee, Sinner, Take this Bread, Eat, and Repent: And when God puts the Cup
of Beer into thy Hands, he says unto the Sinner, Take this Cup of Beer, and
Repent: When thou risest in the Morning, he faith unto thee, Sinner, Take this
Suit of Clothes, put it on, and Repent: Every Mercy that thou receivest from
God, calls to thee for Repentance.

4. If you will Repent, and leave your Sins, God will not be angry with you. My
Beloved, you have heard the Parable of the Prodigal Son, who when he had spent
all, he returned home to his Father's House: so, my Beloved, God is your
Father, but you are Prodigals: all the Sin you have committed against him, is
Prodigality. But let me tell you, If you are willing to come to God's Feet, he
will take you about the Neck: If you are willing to forsake your sins, God is
willing and ready to pardon your sins, though you have been a wicked,
rebellious, and sinful People; yet if you will turn to the Lord, he will turn
to you.

5. Repent; because the Lord sends his Messengers unto you, for to entreat
you to Repent. Woe be unto you, therefore, if you neglect this great Salvation.
You know, that it was one main Reason, why God took away his Prophets and
Ministers from Jerusalem, because they would not hearken to their Messengers:
as you may read, Mat. 23.37, 38, 39. O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! thou that killest
the Prophets, and stonest them that were sent unto thee: How often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not? Behold, your houses are left unto you desolate. For I
say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord. I may very well apply this to London: Oh!
how often would the Lord have gathered you, even as a Hen gathers her
Chickens? but ye would not. What say you now, England? O London! will you
Repent? or will you not? Will not all this that has been said, prevail with
you? Alas, I am heartily sorry, to see that nothing will prevail with you, but
the Flames of Hell! Oh, then you would say, Oh! if we had but hearkened unto
the Voice of God's Messengers, that were sent unto us, to call us to Repentance.

6. O England! Repent to day, and turn to the Lord. O! delay not an hour
longer; Time is, a precious Jewel, more worth than the whole World; and if Time
be once lost, there is no regaining of it. O fall down upon your Knees, and
bless God that you have yet the Light of the Gospel, and that you have Time
left to secure your Souls, and get an Interest in Jesus Christ.

First, Consider how dreadful it will be to you, when you come to die, if you
do not Repent and turn to the Lord, while you are in health. O how will you cry
out, when your Hour of Death approaches, when you shall see all the things of
the Earth fail you, and take their leaves of you for ever. All your outward
Enjoyments, Parts, Parentage, Birth, Breeding, Wealth, Crowns, Kingdoms,
Pearls, Diamonds, Houses, Lands, Wife, Children and Friends, when once your
Breath is gone, all these are gone, Prove. 27.24. Hear now this, you that are
given to Pleasure, that feast your selves in doing evil; you that put far from
you the Day of the Lord; you that say, It is time enough to Repent, when we
come to die. Ah, Fools, how do you know whether God will give you Repentance
then, or no.

Sirs, I beseech you, Repent, while it is called to Day; for you know not
whether you shall live till to morrow.

O consider, with a trembling heart, how much depends upon this Repenting, and
turning to God; namely, the gaining or losing thy dear and precious Soul;
gaining or losing of God's Favor, the Fruition of God, the Joys of Heaven, or
the Torments or Sorrows of Hell depend upon it. Poor Souls, I pity you with my
very heart, to see how ignorant you are of so great Concernments: you Eat and
Drink, Sleep, Lie, Sell, and get Gain in the World; but little do you mind to
accumulate heavenly Treasure, to get your sinking Souls safe ashore. You
consider not the evil day: woe be unto him that is alone in Life, and alone in
Death, that has no Christ to befriend him, or stand by him in that day; that
comes to lie down in his Grave, without Peace or Pardon, without hearty
Contrition, without Repenting of his Sins: and shall Rise again, and stand at
the Bar of God's Justice, without an Advocate to plead for him.

7. And Lastly, Try your Repentance by the Word of God; see whether it be true
Repentance, or no; for the Devil has many Cheats: search your own Hearts, to
see whether those Sins you formerly loved, be now hated and shunned by you.

Make ready for the other World; think upon the other World, think upon Death
and Judgment: Death, that King of Ter^ors, will, e're long, terminate your
Days, and then all your Opportunities will be gone for ever. Let me ask you, as
in the Presence of the Great Judge of Quick and Dead, at whose Tribunal you
must all shortly stand, and giving an Account of your Deeds) be either Received
up into Heaven, or plunged into Hell. I have some Queries to ask you:

First, Are not they in a very happy Condition, that (Repenting) turns to the
Lord with their whole Hearts; living a Life of Grace, and truly preparing for
Death, for fear of ^osing their own Souls, being in a hazard of ^osing Heaven?
Romans 8.7. Psalm. 37.37.

Secondly Do you believe that Death will come, and that Sin, that cursed thing,
will sting; and that the Case of all impenitent Sinners, at the hour of Death
will be sad and terrible, and desperate? Let me say to all such, there is not a
Night you lie down on your Beds, but you run a very great hazard, if Death
should call, and you not ready, you must go, though you are ruined to all
Eternity, though you be damned for ever, Mat. 25.10, 11, 12, 13.

Thirdly, Can you cheerfully entertain the thoughts of Death, and Judgments,
all you hard hearted Sinners, that have not Repented? Suppose the dreadful
Judge should at this instant send Death with the Names of Five, or Six of you
in a Writ, or Forehead, and Death should say, You, and you, this Man, and that
Woman, must go along with me; I have received a Command from the great terrible
God, who has the Power of Death and Hell, to bring you this Day, or Night,
before the Judgment Seat: I have often warned you by sending my Deputies this
Ten or Twenty years. Every Grave, and Coffin you have seen, was so many
Intimations of my coming: Now, says Death, I am come, see my Dart, this Dart
must kill thy Body, and send thy Soul into Eternity, I command you this moment,
to bid adieu to this World, Luke 12.19, 20. How can you think of your dying,
and the Worlds burning, the Trumpets sounding, the Dead Corpse raising, and
standing at the Bar of God's Justice, and not fear and tremble you that have
not Repented: you, Sons and Daughters of Pleasure, did you consider what horror
and astonishment dogs you at the Heels, which will inevitably come upon you,
as Travel on a Woman with Child, you would not say unto God, depart.

Fourthly, And lastly, Oh! what a killing and amasing sight will Christ's
coming in the Clouds, be to all that either deny his com^ng, or will not
prepare for it by speedy Repentance: His Incarnation was terrible, Mat. 2.3.
His Crucifixion was more terrible, Luke 23.44, 45.46, 47, 48. But his Judging
the World at the Great Day, will be most terrible, then shall the Tribes of the
Earth mourn Mat. 24.30. And men shall cry to the Rocks to fall on them, Rev.
6.15, 16. When they shall see so many Thousands, and Millions of Men and Women
dragged down to that burning Lake of Fire, and Brimstone, there to be tormented
for ever: How will they then cry, Oh that we had Repented! they will howl for
vexation of Spirit, and in the bitterness of their Souls wish that they had
never heard of a Christ, that they had been born among Heathens, or never had a
Being, or enjoyed a Life of Pleasure upon Earth. How will the wretched Sinner
beat his Breast, pluck off his Hair, tear his Bowels, crying when he is past
Hopes, Oh that I had now no Soul, or that this immortal Soul were mortal, that
I might not be tormented in these dreadful Faines for ever

(...)
