THE Duty and Office OF HIGH-CONSTABLES OF HUNDREDS, Petty-Constables,
Tythingmen, and such inferior Ministers of the Peace.

WITH The several Duties and Offices of Churchwardens, Overseers and Collectors
for the Poor, of Surveyors for amending the Highwayes, and Distributors of the
provision for the Destruction of noysom Fowl and Vermin.

First collected by William Lambard, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth; AND Now
Enlarged with many useful Additions, according to the succeeding Statutes:

By R. TURNER, Gent.

LONDON: Printed by Ioh. Streater, Hen. Twyford, and Eliz. Flesher, the Assigns
of R. Atkins and E. Atkins Esquires. 1671.

Cum gratia and privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

To the READERS.
THe foundation of this little Structure was first laid by Mr. Lambard a long
while since, in the Year 1579. and first made public in 1581. and afterward
revised, and the second Edition published in the year 1587. but in so long time
since the succeeding Age growing worse and worse, ut Crescit in orb dolus, our
Lawmakers have been forced to make Additional Laws for prevention of Offenses
and punishment of Offenders; so that the Duties of these inferior Officers of
the Peace have still increased as several Statutes daily enacted do impose new
Duties upon them: So that I have revised this Treatise, with such necessary
additions and enlargements, as any ways may concern the Offices of Constables,
Headboroughs, etc. Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of Highwayes
and Bridges; or as they are enjoined by any Laws since Mr. Lambard, to observe
and perform in their several offices; and indeed, this small Tract will be as
useful to every person, whether Officer or not Officer, as a pocket-Almanack;
to him that is in office, it is a Pilot to steer him in his right course,
whereby he may avoid those Rocks and Sands of Over-doing or Vnder-doing; some
through neglect in not performing their duties are culpable by the superior
Magistrate, and others either ignorantly or wilfully running beyond their
Authority, are dashed against the Rock of the Law. Those that are in likelihood
to bear any of these Offices, may by studying this Book be perfectly instructed
in the performance of their Duty when they come to it: And such as are not
likely to serve any Office, may herein learn to escape punishment by fearing to
offend. I have set down the High-Constables Oath at large, which partly
comprehends the whole duty of his Office; and such Articles as he is to present
to the Justices of peace at their Sessions and monthly Meetings in their
Divisions; and likewise that Statute which institutes the office of the
Distributors of the provision for the Destruction of noysom Fowl and Vermin;
that is, what Reward shall be given to those that destroy them; which some
vulgarly and erroneously talk of, others have affirmed there is no such Law;
but they will hereby be convinced of the truth, and instructed in the
substance: So that I hope this will prove to your acceptance, which is the
desire of

R. T.

THE TABLE
CHAP. I. THE original Office and Jurisdiction of High-Constables,
Petty-Constables, Headboroughs, Borsholders and Tythingmen, Page 1. Chap. idem.
The form of the High-Constables Oath, Page 5. Idem. The Oath of a
Petty-Constable or Tythingman. Page 8.

CHAP. II. The duty of Constables and Headboroughs, etc. in executing Warrants
directed to them from the Justices of Peace. Page 14.
CHAP. III. Articles which the High-Constables are to return to the Justices at
their Sessions or monthly Meetings, etc. Page 19.
CHAP. IV. The duty of Constables, etc. touching Watching, Warding, Vagabonds,
Hue and Cry, carrying Prisoners to the Gaol, Servants and Laborers, Page 22.
CHAP. V. The form of a Testimonial for conveying a Rogue or Vagabond, Page 26.
Idem. A Testimonial for a Servant. Page 38.

CHAP. VI. The duty of Constables about Affrayes, Riots, Routs, Arms, Militia,
Escapes, Forcible Entries, the Peace, Hedge-breakers, Setting-dogs. Page 40.
CHAP. VII. The Constables office touching Clothiers, Maultsters, Alehouses,
Drunkenness, Weights and Measures, Purveyances, Highwayes. Page 56.
CHAP. VIII. The Constables office about foreign Bonelaces, etc. Chimney-money,
Customs, Excise, Fish. Page 71.
CHAP. IX. Concerning disturbing of Ministers, Swearing, Recusants,
Conventicles. Page 77.
CHAP. X. The Churchwardens office, Page 86. Idem. The Subscription of the
Vestrymen, Page 91. Idem. The form of the Articles given to the Churchwardens
to make their Presentiments upon. Page 101.

CHAP. XI. The office of the Overseers of the Poor, Page 110. Idem. The form of
an Indenture for a poor Child put out by the Parish. Page 117.

CHAP. XII. The office of the Surveyors of the Highwayes and Bridges, Page 122.
Idem. Statutes for repairing particular Highwayes, Page 134. Idem. Statutes for
particular Bridges. Page 135.

CHAP. XIII. The office of the Distributors of the provision for the
Destruction of noysom Fowl and Vermin. Page 141.
THE DUTY OF CONSTABLES, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Original, Office, and Jurisdiction of High-Constables,
Petty-Constables, Headboroughs, Borsholders, and Tythingmen.
THE Saxon Christian King Alfred, King of England, for the more peaceable
Government and ease of his Subjects, divided this whole Realm of England first
into Shires; then caused those Shires to be subdivided into Hundreds, Rapes,
Ridings, Wapentakes; and divided these also into Tythings, Leets or Boroughs,
and in all these Divisions were appointed Officers for the better preservation
of the Peace, such are High-Constables, Petty-Constables, Headboroughs,
Borsholders and Tythingmen; the office of all these latter is one and the same,
only different in Title, according to the custom of the Country; in
Middlesex, besides the High-Constables of the Hundreds, they have
Petty-Constables and Headboroughs in the respective Parishes, and they are in
number more or less, according to the greatness or smalness of the Parish; in
Kent these petty Officers of the Parishes are called Borsholders; but in
Hampshire and all the Western parts Tythingmen, and their divisions of Parishes
Tythings; in Sussex the Hundreds are called Rapes; and in the North, Ridings
and Wapentakes.

There was anciently in England a great Officer called the High Constable of
England, and he kept an Office (which is supposed to come hither with William
the Conqueror out of Normandy) or Court, called the Constables Court, or the
Court of the High-Constable, wherein he had authority to hear and determine
Contracts touching deeds of Arms out of the Realm, and to determine all things
concerning War within the Realm; as Combats, Blazon, Armory, etc. but not to
deal with Battle in appeals, that belonging to the Common Law of the Land.

Amongst the rest of the Conquerours Laws this is one, That if a Frenchman do
appeal an Englishman of Perjury or Murder, the Frenchman may defend himself
by Battle, which in English was then called Earnest, which word we yet retain;
and the Officer to see this performed was the High-Constable: but this Officer,
Court and practice is long since dissolved.

The Etymology of this word Constable proceeds from the old word Conning or
Cyng, and Staple or Stable; the word Conning or Cyng, signifies a King, and
Stable, a Stay or Prop; which is as much as to say, the stay or prop of the
King; that great Officer the Constable of England, having that Title given by
reason of the great Authority that he had, was a principal Prop of Stay unto
the Kings government; from whence is this Title and Office of this Lower
Constableship derived and continued, (though with lesser Authority, unto this
hour) and is a branch of that Original.

By the Statute of Winchester, made in the time of King Edward the First, these
Constables of Hundreds were appointed to keep Watching and Warding, for the
better keeping of the Peace, and prevention of Thieveries and Robberies, and
apprehensions of Felons and Rogues, etc. and that the High-Constables in every
Hundred and Franchise, should take the view of Armor, etc.

Hereby it appears, that the name of a Constable in an Hundred or Franchise, is
an Officer to assist and support the Kings Majesty in the maintenance and
preservation of his Peace within his Hundred or Franchise, and he is called the
High-Constable, in respect of the Constables or Petty-Constables, and
Headboroughs or Tythingmen, which be in the respective Towns, Villages,
Parishes, or Precincts within his Hundred or Franchise under his Jurisdiction;
and it is also the part and duty of these inferior Officers, to execute the
High-Constables office in his absence, in maintaining and keeping the peace in
their several Tythings and Limits, and in the High-Constables presence, to be
aiding and assisting unto him.

The High-Constables of every Hundred or Rape, or Riding, are chosen by the
Justices in each County, most usually at their general Quarter Sessions, or in
their several divisions; from the Justices they receive their Authority, and
are by them again discharged of their office as they shall see cause. At the
entrance into their office they take an Oath, the usual form whereof follows.

The High-Constables Oath.
YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the
King in the office of a Constable; you shall see and cause his Majesty's peace
to be well and truly kept and preserved according to your power; you shall
arrest all such persons as in your sight and presence shall ride or go Armed
offensively, or shall commit or make any Riot, Affray, or other breach of his
Majesty's peace: you shall do your best eudeavor (upon complaint to you made)
to apprehend all Felons, Barretors, and Rioters, or persons Riotously
assembled; and if any such Offenders shall make resistance (with force,) you
shall levy Hue and Cry, and shall pursue them until they be taken; you shall do
your best endeavor, that the Watch in and about your Hundred be duly kept, for
the apprehending of Rogues, Vagabonds, Nightwalkers, Evesdroppers, Scouts, and
other suspected persons, and of such as go Armed, and the like; and that Hue
and Cry be duly raised and pursued according to the Statute of Winchester,
against Murderers, Thieves, and other Felons; and that the Statutes made for
the punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and such other idle persons as come
within your bounds and limits be duly put in execution: you shall have a
watchful eye to such persons as shall maintain or keep any Common house or
place, where any unlawful Game is or shall be used; as also to such as shall
frequent or use such places, or shall use or exercise any unlawful Games there
or elsewhere, contrary to the Statutes. At your Assizes, Sessions of the peace,
or Leet, you shall present all and every the offenses done contrary to the
Statutes made (1 Jacobi, 4 Jacobi, and 21 Jacobi regis,) to restrain the
inordinate haunting and tippling in Innes, Alehouses, and other Victualling
houses, and for repressing of Drunkenness; you shall there likewise true
Presentment make of all Blood sheddings, Affrayes, Outcryes, Rescous, and other
offenses committed or done against the Kings Majesty's peace within your
Limits: you shall once every year during your office Present at the Quarter
Sessions all Popish Recusants within your Liberty, and their Children above 9.
and their Servants, ( sc. their Monthly absence from the Church) 3 Jac. 4. you
shall well and duly execute all Precepts and Warrants to you directed, from the
Justices of the peace of this County, or higher Officers; you shall be ayding
to your Neighbors against unlawful Purveyances: in time of Hay or Cora
harvest, upon request, you shall cause all persons meet to Serve by the day for
the Mowing, Reaping or getting in of Corn or Hay; you shall in Easter-week
cause your Parishioners to choose Surveyors for the mending of the Highways in
your Parish or Liberty; and you shall well and duly according to your
knowledge, power and ability, do and execute all other things belonging to the
office of a Constable, so long as you continue in the said Office.

So help you God.
In this Oath is briefly comprehended the whole Duty of a Constable, and the
principal matters of his Office at large.

I shall now set forth every particular branch of the Constables office, and of
the Tythingmen, Headboroughs, Borsholders; their Duties are the same in effect,
and their Authority: yet the latter are inferiors to the former.

The Form of the Petty-Constable or Tything-mans, etc. Oath is thus.
YOu shall Swear, That you shall well and truly Execute the Office of a
Tythingman of the Tything of H. (or Headborough, etc.) His Majesty's Peace in
your own person you shall keep, and see it kept in all others, as much as in
you lies. In the presence of the High-Constable you shall be ayding and
assisting unto him, and in his absence you shall execute his Office, and do all
other thing; belonging to your Office, according to your knowledge and power,
until another be chosen in your room, or you be legally discharged thereof.

So help you God.
There are in several Counties of this Realm other Officers; that is, by other
Titles, but not much inferior to our Constables, as in Warwickshire a
Thirdborough, and in other places a Boroughead, in others a Chief-pledge.

The Authority of these (as I said) is much like that of the Constables, but
yet the Office of the Constable is distinct, and of greater authority and
respect than these.

Lambert, page 51. etc. Duty of Constables, says, that these Tythingmen,
Borsholders, etc. cannot meddle in a Town or Parish where a Constable is,
because (in comparison of them) the Constables be Headoffiers, and that the
Tythingmen, etc. are but Assistants, where the Constable is present; but in his
absence they are to perform the service, and that there are many things which a
Constable may do, wherewith the Tythingman and the rest cannot meddle at all.

1 Jac. cap. 7. Lambert, Off. del Constable. 4, 6, 9. In Towns where there be no
Constables, and that the only Officers for the Peace there be, Headboroughs,
Thirdboroughs, Borsholders, or such other, and in such cases where their power
and authority is declared to be equal with the Constable; in all such things
their office is all one in a manner, and diverse Statutes do appoint Offenders
to be punished by the Constable or other inferior officers, which much needs be
the Tythingmen, etc.

12 H. 7. f. 8. The High-Constables of Hundreds are Conservators of the Peace
within their several Hundreds and Franchises at the Common Law.

Brook. Peace, 13. Fitz. 127. All petty Constables by virtue of their office
within their several Liberties of their several Towns are Conservators of the
Peace at the Common Law.

Crompton, 6.222. 12 H. 7. f. 18. These Petty-Constables may do what they can
to keep the Peace, and Ex Officio, they may cause such as in their presence are
about to make an Affray, to find Sureties to keep the peace, and that as well
before the affray as after.

3 H. 4.9, 10. If a man Assault another in the Constables presence, or in his
presence shall threaten to kill or beat another, or shall be ready to break the
peace, the Constables or Tythingmen may in such cases commit the offenders to
the Stocks, or other safe custody, and after carry them before a Justice of the
peace, or to Gaol until they find security for the Peace; which Surety the
Constables themselves may take to the use of the King.

Term, Trin. 35 El. r. 1458. Karret versus Haumer. The Plaintiff brought an
Action of False imprisonment against the Defendant for arresting and
imprisoning him, etc. the Defendant pleaded that he was High-Constable of the
Hundred of, etc. in the Couuty of S. and that the Plaintiff made an assault in
the said Hundred upon one H. W. who presently came to the Defendant and told
him thereof, and swore he was in fear of his life of the other; whereupon the
Defendant came to the Plaintiff and arrested and imprisoned him, until he had
found sufficient security for the peace; to this the Plaintiff demurred, and it
was adjudged that the Defendants plea was insufficient, 1. because he was not
present at the Assault and Affray made; 2. for that he was High-Constable of
the Hundred, and not Constable of the Town.

Anderson Chief Justice held (in this case) that Constables were conservators
of the peace at the Common Law, and still are so, and that they ought to
preserve the peace as much as in them lies; but that was by parting them who
he should see breaking of the peace, and carrying them before a Justice to find
sureties to keep the peace, but not to take sureties himself; and if the
Constable could take sureties, what surety should it be? for he (being no
Officer of Record) cannot take Recognizance nor Bayl. But Walmesley, Owen, and
Beaumont, three other Judges, held that a Constable might take Sureties by an
obligation, according to the Book of 10 Edw. 4. and that the peace was so
preserved by the Constables before Justices of peace were; and that the Statute
which ordained Justices, did not take away the authority of the Constables.

Bacon, Use of the Law, 5, 6. In ancient time High-Constables of Hundreds, and
Petty-Constables in every Town were yearly appointed by the Sheriff in his
Turn, and were there sworn.

Direct. Judges, 29. Constables lawfully chosen, if they shall refuse to be
sworn, the Justices of the peace may bind them over to the Assizes or Sessions
of the Peace, and for such his contempt he is there to be Indicted, fined and
imprisoned.

Coke 8.43. Every person that is chosen to be a Constable, ought to be idoneus
homo, a man apt and fit for the Execution of the said Office: And to be idoneus
homo the Law requires in him three qualifications, viz.

1. Honesty; to Execute his Office truly, without malice, affection, or
partiality.

2. Knowledge; to understand his Duty, what he ought to do.

3. Ability; as well in Estate as in Body, that so he may attend, and execute
his Office diligently, and not neglect the same, through want or impotency.

For such as are chosen out of the meaner sort, are either ignorant what to do,
or stand in awe of the greater; so that they dare not do what they ought, or
else are not able to spare time; Therefore they ought to be chosen out of the
better sort of Parishioners, and not either by the House, or other Custom.

If a man be chosen Constable, not able and qualified as aforesaid, he may be
discharged of his said Office by Law, and another fit man appointed in his
place.

Co. 8.42. If Leets choose unable or unfit Petty-Constables, it is cause of
forfeiture of the Leet, and such choice is void.

14 Car. 2. cap. 12. Two Justices of the peace may appoint, and swear new
Constables, Headboroughs, etc. in case of death or removal of such Officers out
of the parish; And, if in default of holding Court-Leets they continue above
the year, they may be discharged at the Sessions, and others put in.

Idem Stat. Constables, Headboroughs and Tythingmen which are out of purse for
their charges, they may with the Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor and
other officers of the Parish, make Rates upon all occupiers of Lands and
inhabitants, and all others chargeable to the Poor, by the Stat. 42 El. which
being confirmed under the Hands and Seals of two Justices of the peace, may by
their Warrants be levied by distress and sale of the Goods of such as refuse to
pay the same.

CHAP. II. The duty of Constables and Headberoughs, etc. in Executing of
Warrants directed to them from the Justices of the peace, etc.
THe Constable or other sworn Officer to whom any Warrant shall be directed and
delivered, ought with all speed and secrecy, to seek and find out the party,
and then to Execute his said Warrant.

Br. Faux, impris. 23. A known sworn Officer (be he Sheriff, Undersheriff,
Bailiff, or Constable, etc.) needs not to show his Warrant to a man when he
comes to serve it upon him, though he demands it; but if the Justice will
direct his Warrant to his servant, or to another (who is no sworn Officer) to
serve it, they must show their Warrant to the party if he demand it, or
otherwise the party may make resistance, and needs not to obey it.

Co. 6.54. and 9.68. A sworn and known Officer, if he will not show his
Warrant, yet he ought to declare to the party the Contents thereof upon serving
it.

Co. 9.69. An Officer gives sufficient notice what he is when he says to the
party, I Arrest you in the Kings name, etc. and in such case the party at his
peril ought to obey him, though he knows him not to be an Officer; and if he
have no lawful Warrant the party grieved may have his Action of False
imprisonment against him.

Dyer, 244. Stat. 43. El. cap. 6. If a Constable or other officer do Arrest a
man for the Peace, or the like, before he has any Warrant, and then afterward
does procure a Warrant (or a Warrant comes after to him) to Arrest the party
for the same cause, the first arrest was unlawful, and the Officer is liable to
an Action of False Imprisonment.

10 E. 4. fol. 12. Br. False Impris. 38. Where a Warrant is granted against I.
H. the son of T. H. and the Officer thereupon arresteth I. H. the son of W. H.
although in truth he be the same person that offended, and against whom the
complaint was made, yet this Arrest is wrongful, and the Officer is subject to
an Action of False Imprisonment.

Cromp. 214. a. and 148. Crook 144.53. If a Constable, or any other person
has arrested a man by virtue of his Warrant, which he has from a Justice of
the peace, and then takes his word that he will come to him again, at another
time, to go with him to the Justice according to his Warrant, (and so lets
the party go) who comes not again at the time appointed, it seems the Officer
cannot afterward arrest or take him again by force of his former warrant,
because this was done by the consent of the Officer; But if the party arrested
had escaped (of his own wrong) without the consent of the Officer, the Officer
may take him again and again upon fresh suit, so often as he escapes, although
he be out of view, or that he fly into another Town or County.

When an Officer has received a warrant, he is bound to observe and pursue the
effect of his Warrant in every behalf and particular; or otherwise his warrant
will not excuse him of that which he has done.

21 H. 7.39. If a Constable or other officer having a lawful warrant to Arrest
another, and he shall be resisted or assaulted by the party, or by any other
person, then may that Officer justify the beating or hurting of such persons,
and others (upon his request) may, and ought to aid him.

14 H. 8.16. Br. Faux Imp. 8. Lamb. 67.94. Co. 10.76. Cromp. 74. If a Justice
of peace shall issue out any Warrant for a matter wherein he has Jurisdiction,
although it be beyond his Authority, yet it is not disputable by the Constable
or other such officer, but must be obeyed and executed by the Constable or
other officer to whom it is brought: As if a Justice of peace shall send forth
his Warrant to arrest one for the peace or good behavior, without cause, the
officer that serves this warrant shall not be punished for the executing
thereof; but if a Justice of peace shall make his warrant to do a thing out of
his jurisdiction, or in a cause wherein the Justice of peace is no Judge, if
the Officer shall serve such a Warrant, here he is punishable; for the Officer
is not bound to obey him who is not Judge of the Cause, no more than a mere
stranger, for the Officer is bound to take notice of the authority and
jurisdiction of the Judge.

But if any Justice sends his warrant to a Constable or any other officer to
bring him to answer all such matters as shall be objected against him, and does
not specify the cause in his Warrant wherefore he issued forth the same, this
Warrant is unlawful, and the Officer is liable to an Action of False
imprisonment, if he executes it.

So, if a Justice of peace send a Warrant to take one for Cozenage, to take and
bring to a Justice or to Gaol, one that another does suspect for Felony, where
the matter is small, or the suspicion slight, or to license a petty Chapman to
sell from house to house, to send a poor body to a place otherwise than the Law
directs, etc. such kind of Warrants are not warrantable.

Cook, Iustit. part 4. tit. De frangent. Prison'. All Warrants not specifying
the Cause, are utterly against Law.

Except for Treason, or Warrants from the Council, Secretaries of State, or
Lord Chief Justice; these need not set forth the Cause for reasons of State.

Cromp. 149. If any man shall contemn or abuse the Justice of peace his
Warrant, as by casting it into the dirt, or treading it under his feet, etc.
such offender may be bound to his good behavior for it, and be Indicted and
Fined; it being a contempt against the Kings process.

CHAP. III. Articles which the High-Constables are to return unto the Justices
at their Sessions or monthly meetings of their Divisions, and to cause their
Petty-Constables, Headboroughs, and Tythingmen in their several Liberties to
make Return thereof unto them.
1. THey are to return the Names, Sirnames, additions of names and qualities of
all Popish Recusants (as well housekeepers as lodgers) dwelling or residing in
any of their said Parishes, Liberties, or Precincts.

2. Such persons as shall continue drinking or tippling in any Innes or
Alehouses at any time, and more especially upon the Lords day, or Holidayes,
and such persons as they shall find drunk, and all such Innkeepers and
Alehouse-keepers as shall entertain them.

3. Item, The names of such as shall profanely Swear or Curse, with the number
of their Oaths, immediately after the committing such offense, inform the next
Justice thereof.

4. Item, They are to Return such Victualers or Alehouse-keepers as use
victualing or selling of Beer and Ale without License.

5. Item, Such persons as suffer any unlawful Games to be suffered in their
houses, backsides, or gardens; and also the Names of such as shall play at any
of the said Games.

6. Item, Such persons as refuse or neglect to do their duty of Watching and
Warding.

7. Item, Such persons as divide their houses into several Tenements, and such
as do entertain Inmates who may be an annoyance to their neighbors, or likely
to bring charge upon the Parish.

8. Item, The defaults of Petty-Constables and Tythingmen, etc. for not causing
rogues, vagabonds and beggars to be duly apprehended, punished, and passed
according to the Statute.

9. Item, All Masterless men and women living at their own hands, such as are
idle and will not labor, and can give no good Account how they get their
living, all Suspicious persons, Whores, Noctivagants or Night-walkers, and
Mothers of Bastards, which may be chargeable to the Parish.

10. Item, The names of such persons as refuse to take Apprentices poor
Parish-children to Husbandry, and other callings according to Law.

11. Item, All such as neglect to make due Rates and Collections for the relief
of the Poor in every parish, and that cannot, or do not give a just Account of
the employment of the Rent and Stock of the Poor.

12. Item, Of the defects in the Highwayes and Bridges, with the names of such
as should repair them, and have neglected or refused to do their duty herein.

13. Item, Such Scavengers as neglect to do their office in cleansing the
Streets, to be kept clean within their Liberties; and the names of such persons
as commit common Annoyances, by laying of dung, soil, dirt, or ashes in the
Street.

14. Item, The names of all such persons as refuse to Pave the Streets before
their houses, where the said streets have usually been paved formerly.

15. Item, The names of all such persons as keep any Hogs (to the common
Annoyance of his Majesty's subjects) in or about such Liberties, places, and
precincts where Hogs ought not to be kept.

16. Item, All such Bakers as put light Bread to sale, and the weight thereof;
and such Brewers as sell Beer or Ale to unlicensed Alehouse-keepers; all
Forestallers, Regrators, and ingrossers of any Corn, Grain, Butter, Cheese,
Bacon, or any other kind of dead Victuals whatsoever.

17. Lastly, All such persons as can prove or testify any of the said
Offenses, are to be warned to appear before the said Justices at their Sessions
or meetings aforesaid, to testify their knowledge of such Offenses of which
they can give Information.

CHAP. IV. The duty of Constables, etc. touching Watching, Warding, Rogues,
Vagabonds, Hue and Cry, carrying Prisoners to the Gaol, Servants and Laborers.
13 EDu. 1. cap. 4. Dalt. chapter 60. f. 140. Poul. Watch. 1. A Watch is to be kept
in every Town, Parish, Village, and Tything, every night from Ascension till
Michaelmas, from Sunset to Sunrise, which the Constables, etc. must
constantly cause to be set, and that by two or four men, according to the
greatness of the place.

1. Dalton, chapter 60. fol. 140. 5 Ed. 3.14. 5 H. 7.5. These Watchmen are to
apprehend and examine all strangers that pass by them in the night, and if they
find cause of suspicion in them, then they may secure them till the morning;
and if the parties refuse to obey the Watchmen, they may levy Hue and Cry to
take them, and upon their resistance the Watchmen may justify the beating of
them, and set them in the Stocks or Cage till morning; and then if no suspicion
be found in the parties, they may let them go. But if there be found suspicion
in them, then the Watchmen may deliver them to the Constable, or Tythingman,
etc. who is to convey them before a Justice of peace, who after Examination of
them, may bind them over, commit or acquit them as he shall see cause. These
Watchmen are also to apprehend all such as ride or go armed, and all Rogues,
Vagabonds, Noctivagants, Nightwalkers, Evesdroppers, Scouts, and such like.

Dalt. J. P. chap. 60. fol. 141. These three particulars following have been
held for Law concerning Watches, viz.

1. The Watchmen must be men of body, well and sufficiently armed, (not with a
Prong, as the Country fashion is) and no man is compellable to Watch, unless
he be an inhabitant within the same Town or Parish, where he is required to
Watch. 2. Such as are Inhabitants within the Town are not compellable to Watch
at the will of the Constable, but only when their turn comes, according to the
use and custom of the place; which is most commonly by Turn or House. 3.
Dalton, Ibid. It has been held by some, That if a man who is compellable to
Watch, shall contemptuously refuse to Watch upon command of the Constable, that
in such case the Constable might (ex Officio) set the party in the Stocks for
his contempt.
But the safest way is, for the Constable to present such person for his
default at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace, or else to complain of him to
a Justice of the peace, who may bind the offender to the good behavior, and so
over to the next Quarter Sessions, there to answer, etc.

2. 39 Eliz. chapter 4. Wingat's Stat. tit. Vagabonds. Resolu. Judges, sect. 717.
Bolstr. 2. part. Rep. f. 258. The Constable, Tythingman, or Headborough,
assisted by the Minister and one other of the Parish, is to see (or do it
himself) Rogues and Vagabonds, which shall be taken begging, stripped naked,
from the middle upwards, and openly whipped till their body be bloody, and then
forthwith to be sent away from parish to parish, or tything to tything, the
next straight way to the place of their birth; and if that cannot be known,
then to the place where they last dwelt by the space of one whole year, before
such punishment; and if that cannot be known, then to the Town through which
they last passed unpunished; and when they come there, if it cannot be
discovered where they were born, or last dwelt as aforesaid, then are they by
that Constable to be conveyed to the House of correction or common Gaol of that
County, to be employed in work, or placed in some service, and so to continue
by the space of one year; or in case they be not able in body, that Town is to
keep them, till they may be placed in some Almshouse within the same County.

Dalton, f. 129. After such punishment, the Vagabond is to have a Testimonial
under the hand and seal of the Constable, Tythingman, etc. and the Minister of
the place, testifying the day and place of his punishment, the place to which
he is to be conveyed, and the time limited for his passage thither; which time
if by his own default he Exceeds, he shall incurr the like punishment from time
to time, till he arrive at the place limited. The substance of the Testimonial
is to be entered by the Minister in a Register-book, which he is to keep for
that purpose, on pain of 5. shillings.

The form of a Testimonial for Conveying a Rogue, or Vagabond.
W.W. A sturdy vagrant Beggar (aged about 40 years) tall of stature, red
haired, and long lean visaged, and squinteyed, was this 24 day of A. in the 22
year of the Reign of our gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, etc.
openly whipped at T. in the County of G. according to the Law for a wandering
Rogue, and is assigned to pass forthwith from parish to parish, by the Officers
thereof the next straight way to W. in the County of B. where he confesses he
was born; and he is limited to be at W. aforesaid, within twelve days now next
ensuing, at his peril.

Given under the hands and seals of C. W. Minister of T. aforesaid, and of J.
G. Constable there, the day and year aforesaid.
A Justice of peace alone may under his hand and seal make such Testimonial.
Lambert, 206.

39 Eliz. cap. 4. Dalt. chapter 47. fol. 128. Resolu. Judges, sect. 13, 14. If any
Constable, Tythingman, or Headborough be found negligent in the due Execution
of the Act of the 39. of Eliz. aforesaid, he forfeits ten Shillings for every
default: And such persons as shall hinder the execution of the Law upon Rogues,
forfeit five Pounds, and are to be bound to the good behavior; and if a
Constable refuse to receive a Rogue, and to convey him or her to the next, or
if he do receive him and not convey him to the next Constable, he forfeits five
Pounds, and may be bound to the good behavior.

1 Jac. chapter 7. Dalt. chapter 47. fol. 128. Resolu. Judge. sect. 13, 14. Every person
shall apprehend or cause to be apprehended such Rogues as he shall see or know
to resort to his house to beg, or receive any alms, and him or them shall
carry, or cause to be carried to the next Constable; or else shall forfeit, for
every such default ten Shillings; and the Constable is to whip and convey such
Rogues as before is directed on pain of twenty Shillings.

39 Eliz. cap. 4. Dalt. chapter 47. fol. 149. 1 Jac. chapter 7. Two Justices of peace,
(one of the Quorum) by Warrant under their hands and seals may cause to be
levied, by distress and sale of the Offenders goods, all the Fines and
forfeitures aforesaid after conviction of the party; which must be either by
Confession of the party, or proof of two Witnesses before the said Justices.

7 Jac. chap. 4. Constables or Tythingmen neglecting to search for Rogues upon
the Justices warrant, or to appear at their meeting to give an account what
Rogues have been punished, or sent to the House of Correction; or if they
neglect to convey such to the House of Correction as by Warrant are to be sent
thither, they are liable to such Fine as the Justices please, not exceeding
forty Shillings.

1 Jac. 7.14. Car. 2. chapter 12. Any Justice of the peace may reward any person or
persons who shall apprehend, and bring before him any Rogue, Vagabond, or
sturdy Beggar, by granting to such person a Warrant under his hand and seal, to
the Constable or Tythingman of the place through which the Rogue did pass
un-apprehended; ordering the said Constable, etc. to give such person two
shillings for every Rogue so taken: And if the Constable, etc. refuse to pay
it, the Justices of the peace may proceed against such Officers according to
the Stat. 1 Jac. 7. and compel him to pay his Forfeiture by the said Statute,
and to allow the said two shillings out of the said Forfeiture to such person,
with such further allowance for loss of time, as the Justice shall think fit.

14 Car. 2. chapter 12. If any person shall apprehend any Rogue at the confines of
any County, which passed through any Parish of another County un-apprehended,
then the person so apprehending such Rogue must carry him to some Justice of
peace of the County through which he passed un-apprehended, who (upon a
Certificate under the hand of some Justice of peace of the County where such
Rogue was apprehended) is to grant his Warrant to the Constable, etc. to pay
two shillings as aforesaid; which if he refuse or neglect, then the Justice is
to proceed against the Constable, etc. and cause him to pay ten Shillings to
the party, or so much thereof for loss of time as the Justice shall think fit.

14 Car. 2. cap. 12. It is Enacted, That whereas Constables, Tythingmen, etc.
are at great charges in Relieving, carrying with Passes, and conveying Rogues,
etc. all Constables, Tythingmen, etc. so out of purse, with the Churchwardens
and Overseers of the Poor, and other inhabitants of the Parish may make a Rate,
and tax all the Inhabitants of the Parish which are Chargeable by the 43. of
Eliz. which Rate must be confirmed under the hands and seals of two Justices of
the peace: And if any person refuse to pay his Rate, then the Constable by
warrant from two Justices of peace, may levy the same upon the Goods of the
party refusing, rendering them the Overplus, if any remain thereof.

39 Eliz. cap. 4. and 17. 43 Eliz. cap. 2. 1 Jacobi, cap. 7. 21 Jac. cap. 28. 7
Jac. cap. 24. 5 Elizab. cap. 4. Dalt. cap. 47. fol. 123, 124, 125. All these
persons hereafter named are accounted and adjudged Rogues, Vagabonds, and
sturdy Beggars: That is to say, all such persons above the age of seven years,
Man or Woman, sole or covert, that wander from their usual place of abode,
abroad, every where begging; or if they do not beg, yet if they wander and
loyter about without a lawful Pasport, and give no good account for their
travel, are accounted Rogues.

All Scholars, and Seafaring men which beg, Wandering persons that use unlawful
Games, subtle craft, or Plays, or pretending themselves to have skill in
Physiognomie, Palmestrie, or the like; or to be Fortunetellers, or
Figure-casters.

All Proctors, Patent-gatherers (except for Fire) Collectors for Gaols,
Prisoners, or Hospitals, wandering abroad; Fencers, Bearwards, (those are Rogues
in grain) common Players of Interludes, and Fiddlers or Minstrels wandering
abroad.

All Juglers ( Hocus pocus, and Slight-of-hand Artists,) Tinkers, Pedlars, and
Petry-Chapmen, and Glass men wandering abroad, especially if they be not well
known, or have not a sufficient Testimonial; all counterfeit Egyptians, not
being Felons; all persons delivered out of Gaols, which beg for their fees, or
otherwise do travel begging; such as go to or from the Bathes and do not pursue
their License, Soldiers and Mariners that beg, and counterfeit a Certificate
of their Commanders.

All Laborers which wander abroad out of the Parish, and refuse to work for
wages reasonably taxed, having no living otherwise to maintain themselves; and
such as go with a General pasport which is not directed from parish to parish.

All these are accounted Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars.

All Servants that depart out of their service, ( viz. out of one City, Town,
or Parish to another, or out of one Hundred or County to serve in another)
without a Testimonial, or with a false one; and such persons as are sick of the
Plague, and wilfully go abroad in company against the command of Officers, are
to be punished as Vagabonds; but none are to be sent to the place of birth or
last habitation, but wandering Rogues; those which beg in their own Parish, or
in the Highways (without the appointment of the Overseers) are to be sent to
the House of Correction.

39 Eliz. cap. 4. Dalt. J. P. chapter 47. fol. 135. Resolu, Judges, sect. 4, 5. A
Wife and Children under seven years of age being vagrant, must be placed with
the Husband; and if the Husband be dead, then with the Wife where she was born
or last dwelt; and vagrant Children above seven years of age must be sent to
the place of their birth; and if the vagrant Parents with their Children, under
seven years of age, be placed at the place of birth of the Parents, or at the
last place of dwelling; if afterward the Parents or either of them dye, or run
away, yet the Children once settled, must remain there still, and may not be
sent to the place of their birth, though afterward they attain to the age of
seven years.

The Wife being but a vagrant Rogue, ought to be sent to her Husband, though he
be but a servant in another Town or Parish; and the Rogue, whose place or
dwelling cannot be known, having Wife or Children under seven years of age,
they must go with the Husband to the place where they were last suffered to
pass through unpunished; where the Children must be relieved with the work of
their Parents, though their Parents be committed to the House of Correction.

3. Hue and Cry. Dalton J. P. chapter 28. fol. 75. The Constables, or Tythingmen of
every Town, Parish, or Village, to whom Hue and Cry shall come, ought to search
in all suspected houses and places within their Liberties, and as well be
Officers, as all other persons which shall pursue the Hue and Cry, may take and
stay all such persons, as in their search and pursuit they shall find to be
suspicious, and shall carry them before some Justice of the County where they
are taken to be Examined, where they were at the time of the Felony committed;
and if any default be in the Officers, they may be fined by the Justices for
their neglect.

27 Elizab. cap. 13. Dalt. J. P. chapter 48. fol. 132. Where a Hundred is sued for
a Robbery, and damages are recovered against one or some few inhabitants of the
Hundred, and the rest refuse to contribute thereunto; in such case two Justices
of the peace (one of the Quorum) dwelling within or near the Hundred, may for
the levying thereof set a Tax upon every Parish within that Hundred; according
to which the Constables, or Tythingmen of every parish must Tax the particular
Inhabitants within their Liberties, and then levy the money upon such as refuse
by distress and sale of their Goods, restoring the overplus if any be, and
after the Money is gathered, they are to restore the same to the Justices, or
some of them that made the Rate within ten days.

27 Eliz. cap. 13. That Hundred where fresh Suit shall cease, shall answer half
the damages to the Hundred where the Felony was committed, to be recovered in
any Court at Westminster, in the name of the Clerk of the Peace of the County
where the Felony was committed; in which case the death or change of the Clerk
of the Peace shall not abate the Suit: And this Recovery is to be taxed and
levied as the former.

Bract. lib. 3. f. 121. Dalt. J. P. f. 133. Where any one of the Robbers is
apprehended, or where the Action is not prosecuted within one year after the
Robbery committed, the Hundred is not chargeable for the Robbery; Observe
likewise, that the Hue and Cry shall not be judged legal, unless the pursuit be
both by horse and foot.

Westminster. 1. chapter 9. Co. 2. part Inst. f. 172. He that goes not at the command of
the Sheriff or Constable at the Cry of the County, that is, upon Hue and Cry,
to arrest Felons after Attainder, shall be grievously fined and imprisoned.

4. Carrying Prisoners to the Gaol. 3 Jac. chapter 10. Dalt. chap. 43. f. 104. An
offendorwhich is to be conveyed to Gaol, must bear all charges both of himself
and of those that guard him, if he be able; and if he refuse to pay the
charges, or shall not at the time of the commitment discharge the same, then
upon a Warrant from a Justice of peace, the Constable of the Liberty or Town
where the offender has any Goods (being within the same County) may sell so
many of the parties Goods, as in the discretion of the Justice shall be thought
sufficient to satisfy the said Charges, the Apprizement to be made by four
Inhabitants of the parish where such Goods be, and the overplus to be returned
to the owner.

1 Jac. chapter 10. And if the offender have no goods to defray the charges, then
the charge must be born by the Town or Parish where the offender was taken;
which must be done by Tax, made by the Constable, Churchwardens, and two or
three other Inhabitants; and where there are no such officers, then four of the
principal Inhabitants of the parish must make the Rate, which being allowed
under the hand of a Justice of peace, every Inhabitant must pay their
proportion, according to the said Rate; and if any refuse to pay, the
Constable, Tythingman, or other officer by Warrant from a Justice of the peace,
may levy the same by distress, (and after appraisement by four of the
Inhabitants) may sell the same; rendering to the party refusing the overplus, if
any be.

And if the Constable or other officer that makes such distress be sued, he may
plead Justification, and upon a verdict for the defendant, or Nonsuit of the
plaintiff, he shall recover treble damages, besides Costs of suit.

5. Servants and Laborers, 5 Eliz. c. 14. The Constable in the time of Hay and
Corn harvest, upon request to him made, by any man that wants Laborers, to get
in his Harvest to prevent loss thereof, may cause all such Artificers as he
shall see meet to labor, to serve by the day for mowing, reaping, or
otherwise, for the getting in of Corn or Hay abroad, according as they seem fit
and able to perform. And if such persons shall refuse to work, after they are
requested thereunto, the Constable may set them in the Stocks by the space of
two days and one night; and if the Constable neglect to perform his office
herein, he forfeits Forty shillings.

5 Eliz. chap. 4. No person retained in Husbandry, or in any Arts appointed by
that Statute, shall depart after the time of such reteiner expired, out of the
City, Town, or Parish where he last served, to serve in another without a
Testimonial, ( viz. in a Town-corporate under the hands and seals of the
Magistrate, and two householders there; and in the Country under the hands and
seals of the Constable (or other officers,) and two householders of the Town or
Parish where he last served,) which Testimonial is to be registered by the
Minister, for which he is to have Two pence, and then to be delivered to the
party.

The form of a Testimonial for a Servant.
MEmorandum, That J.S. servant to J.D. of Bramsil in the County of Southampton
yeoman, is licensed to depart from his said Master, and is at liberty to serve
elsewhere; according to the Statute in that case made and provided. In witness
whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals this 25 day of August, in the
22 year of the reign of our gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second
1670.

Ri. Turner, Constable of Bramsil. R. C. J. D. Householders there.


If it be one that lives with a Woman, then say ( is licensed to depart from
his Mistress or Dame, as she is;) if the Master be not a Yeoman or Husbandman,
but an handycrafts-man, as Tailor, Smith, etc. then name him so in the
Testimonial.

5 Eliz. chapter 4. Dalt. J. P. chapter 31. fo. 63. The Master that reteins a Servant
without such a Testimonial, forfeits Five pounds, being thereof convicted by
Indictment taken in the Sessions of the Peace; and every Servant which shows
not such a Testimonial to the chief Officer in a Corporation, or to the
Constable or other officer, Minister or Churchwarden of the place where he is
to dwell, may be imprisoned until he procure one, and if he produce not one
within one and twenty days next after the first day of his Imprisonment, or if
he shall show a false or counterfeit one, then he is to be whipped, and used as
a Vagabond.

This Statute, as to this particular of Testimonials, is now grown in a manner
quite obsolete, so seldom used, that it is scarce known, although the penalty in
the same be strict and severe, yet it is of good use; and so are a great many
penal Statutes more very beneficial to the Commonwealth, if they were duly put
in Execution, especially those enacted to punish the daily offenses of Brewers,
Bakers, Alehouses; all such as use Weights or Measures, Millers, Forestallers,
Ingrossers, Regrators, cum multis aliis, etc. these are the Caterpillars of the
Kingdom.

CHAP. V. The duty of Constables, etc. about Affrayes, Riots, Routs, Arms,
Militia, Escapes, Forcible entries, the Peace, Hedge breakers, Settingdogs.
1. AFfrayes, Riots, Routs. 3 H. 4.9, and 10. Bacon's Use of the Law, fol. 5.
Dalton, J. P. chapter 1. fol. 4, 5. If one makes an Affray or Assault upon another
in a Constables presence, or in his presence shall threaten to kill, beat, or
hurt another, or shall be in a fury, ready to break the peace; In these cases
the Constable may commit the offenders to the stocks, or to some other safe
custody for the present, until such time as he can carry them before some
Justice of the peace, or to the Gaol, until they find Sureties for the peace:
The Constable may take security for the peace by Obligation to be sealed and
delivered to the Kings use, which Bond the Constable was to send to the
Exchequer or Chancery, from whence the process should issue to levy the debt to
the Kings use if the peace were broken. This was the opinion of three of the
Judges of the Common Pleas, in Skirret's Case: Trin. 35 Eliz. com. ban. Rot.
1458. But Anderson Chief Justice said, That the Constable ought to carry the
party that he should see breaking of the peace, before a Justice to find
sureties for the peace, which is the usual practice at this day.

Dalt. J. P. chapter 8. fol. 33. The Constable where he sees an affray made, or
such as are about to make an affray, ought to command the Affrayers in the
Kings name to surcease and depart on pain of Imprisonment; and if a Constable
being present at an affray, does not his best endeavor to part them, it being
presented by the Jury at the Sessions of the Peace, such Constable may be fined
for it.

3 H. 7.1. 3 H. 7.20. Lambert, 136. 38 E. 3.8. Dalt. J. P. chapter 8. fol. 33. If
any one be dangerously hurt in an Affray, the Constable or any other may stay
the offender, and carry him to a Justice of peace, who is either to bayl him
till the next Jail-deliver; or to commit him to the Gaol, until it be known
whether the party will live or dye thereof.

Lambert, 135. 1 H. 7.7. 3 H. 7.10. If Affrayers will not depart, but do draw
weapons, or give any blow, the Constable may command assistance of others to
cease the Affray; and if they make resistance, may justify the beating and
wounding of them: and if the Constable or any of his assistants be killed, it
is murder in the Affrayers.

Lambert, 135. 7 E. 3.19. Where there is a great and dangerous Affray, the
Constable may make proclamation in the Kings name, that the Affrayers shall
keep the Kings peace, and depart: and if the Affray be in a house, the
Constable may break into the house (if the doors be shut) to see the Peace
kept, though none of the parties have taken any hurt; and if the Affrayers fly
into another man's house, the Constable upon fresh pursuit, may break into such
house and apprehend them.

Dalt. chapter 8. fo. 34. and chapter 118. fol. 340. Crompt. 146. b. and 172. b. Where
the Affrayers fly into another County, the Constable seeing it may freshly
pursue, or cause them to be pursued and taken there: and then the Constable may
carry them before some Justice of the peace of the County where they are taken,
to find sureties for the Peace.

And if they fly into a Franchise only within the same County where the Affray
was, the Constable (seeing this) may freshly pursue them and take them out
thence.

Dalt. J. P. chapter 8. f. 34. 38 H. 8. After the Affray is over, the Constable
cannot arrest the Affrayers without a Warrant. Except some person has received
such hurt there that he is in danger of death; but before the Affray begun, and
at the time thereof he may arrest them without a Warrant.

Dalton, ibid. It is not properly an Affray unless some blow be given or
offered to be given; for hot Words is no Affray, neither can the Constable
apprehend them for words, unless they threaten to kill, beat, or hurt one
another, in such case the Constable may take such persons and carry them before
a Justice, to find sureties for the Peace, and yet such Threatening is no Affray.

Dalt. chapter 8. fo. 35. 5 H. 7.6. If an Affray or an Assault be made upon the
Constable himself, he may not only defend himself, but may also put the parties
offending in the stocks, till such time as he can carry them to a Justice of
the peace, or to the Gaol; and if he be not able to Arrest them himself, he may
call others to his assistance, who may justify to Arrest the offenders.

27 R. 2. chapter 8. Sheriffs, Constables, and all other the Kings officers, shall
suppress Riots, and Imprison them, and all other offenders against the Peace.

Lambert, 179, 181. Bro. tit. Riot, 4, 5. Co. 3 part Instit. fol. 176. Dalt. J.
P. chapter 85. fol. 217. Where three persons or more shall come and Assemble
themselves together, to the intent to do any Unlawful act with force or
violence against the person of another, his possessions or goods, as to kill,
beat, or otherwise to hurt, or to imprison a a man; to pull down a house, wall,
pale, hedge, or ditch; wrongfully to enter upon or into another man's
possession, house, or lands, etc. or wrongfully to cut or take away corn,
grass, wood, or other goods; or to hunt unlawfully in any Park or Warren, or to
do any other unlawful act, (with force or violence) against the peace, or to
the manifest terror of the people; if they only meet to such a purpose or
intent, although they shall after depart of their own accord, without acting
any thing, yet this is an unlawful Assembly, because of their intention at
first.

And if after such meeting they shall ride, move or go forward, toward the
execution of such Act, whether they put their intended purpose in execution or
not, this is a Rout. And if they do act any such thing indeed, then it is a
Riot.

2. Arms, Militia. 2 E. 3. chapter 3.7 R. 2.13. Co. 3 part Institutes, fol. 162.
Dalt. J. P. chapter 9. f. 35. and 159. If any person shall ride or go Armed
offensively before the Kings Justices, or before any other the Kings officers
or ministers during their office, or in Fairs, or Markets, or elsewhere by
night or by day, in Affray of the Kings people and breach of the peace; or wear
or carry any Guns, Daggers, or Pistols charged, in such case the Constable upon
sight hereof may seize and take away their Armor and other Weapons, and cause
them to be apprized, and answered to the King as forfeited; and carry the
parties before a Justice of peace to find Sureties for the peace.

2 E. 3. chapter 3. But the Kings servants in His presence, Sheriffs and their
officers, and other the Kings ministers, and such as be in their companies
assisting them in their office, and all others pursuing Hue and Cry where any
Felony or other offenses against the peace be committed, may lawfully bear
Armor or Weapons.

14 Car. 2. chap. 3. All High-Constables, Petty-Constables and other officers,
within their several Parishes, are to be ayding and assisting to such persons
as shall have Warrants from the Lord Lievtenants or any two of their Deputies,
under their hands and seals, to search for and seize all Arms in the custody
and possession of any person or persons whom the said Lievtenants or their
Deputies shall judge to be dangerous to the peace of the Kingdom, and to secure
the same, and give account thereof to the said Officers; but such search is to
be made in the day time only, between Sunrise and Sunset, and not otherwise;
unless it be in Cities and their suburbs, Towns-corporate and Market Towns, or
Houses within the Bills of mortality; in which places search may be in the
night, if the Warrant so direct.

No dwelling house of any Peer of the Realm is to be searched, unless the
Warrant be from the Kings Majesty, under his Sign manual; or in the presence of
the Lieutenant, or one of the Deputy-Lievtenants of the said County or Riding:
And in all places and houses aforesaid where search is made, in case of
Resistance to enter with Force; and such Arms so seized, where the Lievtenants
or their Deputies, or any two of them think fit, may be restored to the owners
again.

14 Car. 2. cap. 3. and 15. Car. 2. cap. 4. The Constables by Warrant under the
hand and seal of the Lord Lieutenant, or any three or more of the Deputy
Lievtenants, are to levy such sums, forfeitures, penalties, and payments, as
shall be charged upon any person or persons within their several Liberties, for
the furnishing of Arms, horse or foot, or payment of Soldiers.

Ibid. And where sufficient distress cannot be had, then the Lord-Lievtenants
and their Deputies by like warrant to the Constable may commit such offender to
prison, until he shall make satisfaction, according to the said forfeiture,
payment, or penalty.

3. Escapes. Dalton, J.P. chapter 106. f. 272. Bro. coron. 112.224.316.454. and
Bro. Escape, 31. Stamford, fo. 32. If a Constable or any other officer which
has a prisoner in custody for Felony or suspicion thereof, voluntarily lets
or suffers the prisoner to go where he will at liberty, (though this be
breaking of prison) yet it is Felony in the Jailer, Constable, or him that
lets such prisoner escape, but it is no Felony in the prisoner: but if such
a prisoner shall escape by the negligence of his keeper, and against his will
and knowledge, then it is Felony in the prisoner, because a breach of Prison,
and the Jailer or Constable, etc. shall be fined by the Judges or Justices for
such Escape.

Dalt. cap. 106. fol. 272. If a Constable or other officer shall voluntarily
suffer a Thief, being in his custody, to go into the water and drown himself,
this escape is Felony in the Constable, and the Thief is Felo de se; but if the
Thief shall suddenly (without the assent of the Constable) kill, hang, or drown
himself, this is then but a negligent escape in the Constable, and fineable as
aforesaid.

Dalt. ibid. The voluntary letting a Felon escape before he be arrested for the
Felony, is no Felony in him that suffers him to escape; but if the Constable
suffer one to escape whom he knows has committed a Felony, is finable, if it
do not make him accessory.

Cromp. 40.44. Dalt. J. P. chapter 106. fo. 275. Where a Felony is committed and
one is arrested for the same, or suspicion thereof, though the Constable etc.
shall after have certain intelligence and knowledge, that the party arrested is
not guilty of the offense, yet they may not set the party at liberty; for he
must not be delivered but by due course of Law.

Dalt. J. P. chapter 118. fo. 340. If a Constable convey a Feion to the Gaol, and
the Jailer will not receive him, then the Constable must bring him back to the
Town where he was taken, and that Town shall be charged with the keeping of him
until the next Jail-deliver, and in such case the Jailer shall be punished by
the Justices.

Ibid. The Constable or other officer that shall imprison any Felon in the
stocks, may lock the stocks, and if need be, may also put Irons on the
prisoner; and when he conveyeth him to the Gaol, or to the Justice, he may
pinion him, or otherwise make him sure so that he cannot escape.

4. Forcible Entries. 15 R. 2. chap. 2. Dalt. chapter 22. f. 57. If a Constable, or
any other private person of the same County do refuse to attend and assist the
Justices of the peace, upon request to remove a Force, or to convey the parties
to the Gaol, he may be imprisoned for his neglect, and make Fine to the King.

6. The Peace. H. 7. fo. 18. A. Cromp. 6.12. The Constable ought to do what he
can to keep the Peace, but he cannot take surety of the Peace at the request of
any man.

Dalt. chapter 3.9. The Constable or other officer before he arrest the party upon
a Warrant for the Peace, ought first to acquaint the party therewith, and
charge him in the Kings name to go along with him to the Justice to put in
sureties, according to the Warrant; and if the party refuse so to do, then the
Officer ought forthwith to take and convey him to the Gaol, without carrying
him to any Justice at all, there to remain till he does find Sureties; and then
at the next Sessions of the peace the Officer ought to deliver in his Warrant,
and certify what he has done therein.

Dalt. 69. f. 166. If the party yield to go, and find Sureties, then the
Officer may not absolutely arrest him, yet he is not bound to go up and down
with him till he can get Sureties, but he may keep him till he can get Sureties
to come unto him; and if the party make resistance, or offer to go away
afterward, the Officer may carry him to the Gaol, or set him in the Stocks
till he can get aid to carry him to the Gaol.

Lambert, 101. Dalt J. P. chapter 69. f. 168. If an officer having a Warrant from a
Justice of peace against a man to find sureties for the Peace, and do
afterward receive a Supersedeas out of the Chancery, or Kings Bench, or from
another Justice of peace of the same County to discharge the same Surety of the
peace; and yet nevertheless the Officer will cause the party to find sureties
by virtue of the Warrant, the party may refuse to give it; and if he be
arrested or imprisoned for such refusal, he may have his Action of False
imprisonment against such Officer; for the Supersedeas is a discharge of the
former Warrant.

13 H. 7.10. Dalt. J. P. chapter 75. f. 189. I. a Constable be informed, that a man
and woman be in Adultery or Fornication together, or, that a man and woman of
evil report are gone to a suspected house together in the night, the Constable
may take company with him, and if he find them so, he may carry them before a
Justice of the peace to find Sureties for their good behavior.

Fitz. Bar. 207. Cromp. 135. If any shall abuse a Constable in the execution
of his office, the Constable may have him bound to his good behavior for it.

Dalt. chapter 3. f. 9. Any injurious force or violence used against the person of
another, his goods, lands, or other possessions, whether it be by threatening
words, or furious gestures, or force of the body, or any other force used in
Terrorem, is said to be a breach of the Peace.

6. Hedge-breakers, Roblers of Orchards, etc. 43 Eliz. chapter 7. Such as are
convicted before a Justice of the peace, for cutting and taking away of Corn
growing, robbing of Orchards, breaking Hedges, and their procurers and
receivers knowing the same, are to give the party grieved such satisfaction as
a Justice of peace shall think fit; and if they cannot give such satisfaction,
then the Justice may commit the offenders to the Constable to be whipped for
the first offense, and the like pain for the second offense; and if the
Constable or other officer do not by himself or some other see the same done
accordingly, then the Justice may commit such officer to the Gaol, there to
remain without Bayl until he procure the offender to be whipped as aforesaid.

15 Car. 2. chapter 2. The Constables, Headboroughs or other person, in every
County, City, Town-corporate or other place where they shall be officers and
inhabitants, have power to apprehend or cause to be apprehended such persons as
they suspect, for having, carrying or conveying any burden, or bundles of any
kind of Wood, Underwood, Poles, or young Trees, or Bark of any trees, or Gates,
Styles, Posts, Rayls, Pales, Hedge-wood, Broom, or Furze; and any Constable or
Headborough, etc. by warrant under the hand and seal of one Justice, may enter
into the houses, outhouses, yards, gardens, or other places belonging to the
houses of such persons as they shall suspect, etc. and where they shall find
any, to apprehend the parties suspected for cutting the same, and those in
whose custody, etc. any such Wood or Underwood shall be found, and carry them
before a Justice of the peace, and if the party cannot give a good account to
the Justice how he came by the said Wood, etc. by the consent of the Owner, or
shall not, within the time the Justice shall appoint, prove who he bought it
of, then such person shall be deemed convicted of the cutting and spoiling of
Wood, within the Statute of 43 Eliz. and for the first offense shall give such
satisfaction to the owner within such time as the Justice shall appoint, and
pay over and above presently to the use of the Poor where the offense is
committed, so much money as the Justice shall appoint, not exceeding Ten
shillings: And for default of performance hereof, the Justice may commit the
offender to the house of Correction so long time as he shall think fit, not
exceeding one Month; or otherwise to be whipped by the Constable or other
officer: And for the second offense the offender is to be sent to the house of
Correction for one Month, and there held to hard labor; and if he be convicted
the third time, then to be punished as an incorrigible Rogue.

Stat. ibid. If any person buy any burdens of Wood, Underwood, Sticks, etc. of
any who may justly be suspected to have come by the same unlawfully, upon
complaint to a Justice, Head-officer, etc. and if upon examination upon Oath it
appears, That the same were bought of such person as aforesaid, the Justice may
order the buyer to pay the treble value thereof to him from whom they were
stolen; and for non-payment the Justice may grant his Warrant to the
Constable, to levy the same by distress and sale of the offenders goods,
rendering to the owner the overplus; and for want of such distress, then to
commit the party to the Gaol, at his own charge, there to remain one Month
without bayl.

None is to be punished by this Statute, that has been punished for any former
Law for the same offense, and all offenders within this Statute must be
prosecuted within six Weeks after the offense committed.

Setting-dogs. Stat. 7. Jac. chapter 11. Dalton, J. P. chapter 37. fol. 90. The
Constable, Tythingman, or Headborough of any place (upon a Warrant under the
hands and seals of two or more Justices of the Peace) has power to search the
Houses of any persons suspected to keep Setting-dogs, or Nets, for the taking
of Pheasants or Partridges, and the Dogs and Nets there found, to take, carry
away, detain, kill, destroy, and cut in pieces.

Stat. idem. Dalt. ibid. But they cannot search the houses of any who have free
Warren, or any Lords of any Manor, or such as have 40. Pounds per ann. or more
in Freehold, or some Estate of Inheritance, or 80. Pounds per annum for Life,
or be worth in personal Estate 400. Pounds; These may keep Nets and Dogs, to
take Pheasants or Partridges in their own ground.

CHAP. VII. The Constables office touching Clothiers, Maultslers, Alehouses,
Drunkenness, Weights and Measures, Purveyances, Highways.
1. CLothiers. 14 Car. 2. chapter 5. Constables and other officers upon request,
are to aid and assist the Wardens and Assistants, for regulating the Trade of
Worsteds and other Stuffs called Norwich-Stuffs, made in Norwich and the County
of Norwich.

They ought to be very vigilant in this business, for there never was such
slight and unserviceable Stuffs made as now are; to the great damage of his
Majesty's subjects.

14 Car. 2. chapter 5. In the West Riding of the County of York, the Constables are
likewise by warrant from the Justices of the peace, Masters and Wardens of the
Corporation, or any thirteen of them, to levy such Fines, Penalties and
Forfeitures as shall grow due from any Clothier by virtue of the Statute
abovesaid, by distress and sale of the offenders goods, rendering the overplus
to the owner upon demand.

4 E. 3. chapter 1. Fitz. J. P. 103. Clothiers must pay their Spinners and other
work-folks their Wages in ready Money, and not in Wares; and shall deliver
their Wool in due weight, on pain to forfeit Six pence for every default. And
the Carders, Spinners, Weavers, and other work-folks are to do their work
faithfully on pain to forfeit double damages to the party grieved.

Stat. idem. The Master, or Head-officer in a Corporation where there is no
Master, and out of a Corporation, every Justice of peace, High-Constable, and
Stewards of Court-Leets shall hear and determine the complaints, as well for
non-payment of the Work-folks wages, as the damages aforesaid (by examining the
parties,) for which damages they have power to commit the offenders to the Gaol
until the party grieved be satisfied.

39 Eliz. chapter 20. The Justices of peace and High-Constables may search any
house or other place for Tenters, Ropes, Rings, Head-wrinches, or other Engines
for stretching of Cloth, and if they find any to deface them; and if the Owners
use them again, these Officers may take them away and sell them, and give the
money to the Poor.

Mault-making. 2 E. 6. chapter 10.21 Jac. chapter 28. 3 Car. 1. chapter 4. The Constables
and Bailiffs of any Town ought from time to time to view and search all such
Malt as shall be made, or put to sale within any of their Liberties, and if
they find any being evil made, or mingled with evil Malt, then the Constable
or Bailiff, with advice of one Justice of peace, may fell the same to such
persons at such a rate as the Justice shall think sitting.

Stat. 2. E. 6. chapter 10. There are three sorts of evil and deceitful Malt, viz.

1. Where Barley and Malt has not in the making thereof, in the Fatt, Floor,
steeping and drying thereof, (three Weeks at the least;) Except it be in June,
July and August, and in those Months it must have 17. Days: and under such
time it cannot be made wholesome. 2. They ought to take out of every Quarter of
Malt half a peck or more of Dust, by treading, rubbing and fanning the same,
before they put the same to sale, or else they forfeit 20. Pence for every
Quarter otherwise sold, to be divided between the King and the Informer. 3. If
any Malt shall be put to sale not well made, according to the limited time, or
made of mow-burnt or spired Barley, or mixed good and bad together, they
forfeit Two shillings for every Quarter, to be divided as aforesaid.
This Act extends not to such as make Malt for their own provision only; and
the Forfeitures aforesaid must be prosecuted within one Year.

Alehouses. Drunkenness. 3 Car. 1. chapter 3. Dalt. J.P. chapter 7. fol. 31, 32. If any
one keepr an Alehouse, or sell Beer or Ale without License, he forfeits 20.
Shillings to the use of the Poor; to be levied by distress and sale of the
offenders goods, by the Constable and Churchwardens by warrant from a Justice
of peace before whom the offense is proved; which Goods are to be sold within
three days after the Distress taken, and the overplus to be returned, if any
be: And in default of Distress, the delinquent is to be openly Whipped by the
Constable; If the Constable refuse or neglect to execute his Warrant, he
forfeits 40. Shillings to the Poor; and the Justice may commit the Constable to
the Gaol, until he causes the offender to be whipped, or pays the 40.
Shillings to the use of the Poor.

Co. 9. lib. Rep. fol. 87. b. 10 H. 7.8. Dalt. J. P. chapter 7. f. 28. If a common
Innkeeper or Alehouse-keeper refuses to lodge a Travelle, he proffering to
pay ready money for his victuals, etc. the Constable may cause such an
Innkeeper or Alehouse-keeper to be indicted at the Sessions or Assizes, where
he may be fined and imprisoned; or the party grieved may have his Action of the
Case against the Innkeeper or Alehouse-keeper. But they are not bound to
lodge, or find victuals without ready money first paid, if it be required.

In the Condition of the Recognizance, which every Alehouse-keeper enters into
that is licensed to sell drink, it is one Clause, That he shall keep one or
more spare Beds for lodging of strangers. Were this well looked into in and
about London, abundance of forfeited Recognizances would be found; and a great
many lazy knaves that live at their ease by selling Drink, might be set to work
for their livings.

They are bound likewise not to suffer any Gaming in their houses or backsides,
which now is the main prop of most of them; and there they draw in Apprentices
and Servants to their ruin: were they punished according to the Statute for
this, these Caterpillars would not swarm so thick as they do.

1 Jac. chapter 9. 1 Car. 1. chapter 4. If any Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, or
Victualer do sell less than a full Ale-Quart of the best Ale or Beer, or two
Quarts of the Small for one Penny, he forfeits 20. Shillings for every offense.
If he suffers Townsmen or others to sit tippling in his house, he forfeits 10.
Shillings; for which the Constables and Churchwardens upon a Warrant from a
Justice of peace ought to distrein and levy the Forfeitures, according to the
Statute; and if there be no distress to be found, or if the Officers neglect
within twenty days to certify the same Default to the Justices, the Officers
forfeit 40. Shillings to the use of the Poor, to be levied by distress on their
Goods by Warrant made to any indifferent person, from any one or more Justices
of the peace under their hand and seal: and for want of distress, the Justice
may commit the offenders to the Gaol, there to remain till they have paid the
said Forfeitures. In all these cases the Distresses are to be kept six days,
and if the parties do not pay the Forfeitures within that time, then the
Distress is to be apprized and sold, and the overplus returned to the owners if
any be.

21 Jac. chapter 7. Dalt. J. P. chapter 7. f. 28. If the Constable or other officer of
the Parish neglect to serve the Justices Warrant against Townsmen, or others
for tippling in any Inn, Alehouse, or Victualing-house; or against men for being
drunk, viz. for Tippling 3. s. 4d. and for being Drunk 5. s. to be levied by
distress on the Offenders goods, and sale thereof after six days default of
payment, rendering the overplus to the Owner; And for want of distress, or not
able to pay, the Tipler is to sit in the Stocks four hours, and the Drunkard
six hours. And if in any of these cases the Constable neglect to do his duty,
he forfeits Ten shillings, to be levied by distress and sale of his goods to
the use of the Poor. These Offenses are to be enquired after within Six months
after they are committed, and the Constables and other officers of the Parish
may be charged upon their Oaths to present them.

Weights and Measures. 8 H. 6. chapter 5. All Cities, Boroughs, and Market Towns in
England ought to keep common Weights and Measures sealed, at which the
Inhabitants may weigh freely; and all Foreiners must pay for every draught
under forty Pounds, one Farthing; for a draught between forty and an hundred,
an Halspeny; and for a draught between an hundred and a thousand, one Penny;
wherewith the Weights are to be maintained: and the Officers which attend that
service are to be rewarded at the discretion of the Inhabitants.

8 H. 6. chapter 5. 11 H. 7. chapter 4. Every City which wants such Weights and
Measures forfeits ten Pounds to the King, every Borough five Pounds, and every
Market Town forty Shillings: And the chief Officers of such places (upon
request to them made) are to Mark and Seal such Weights and Measures to any of
the Kings subjects; taking for the marking of every Bushel one Penny: and none
ought to sell with any other Weights and Measures but such as are marked or
sealed.

11 H. 7. chapter 4. The Mayors, and chief officers in Cities, etc. are once every
year at least to view all Measures and Weights in their Jurisdictions, and to
break or burn such as they find defective; and to punish the offenders for the
first offense 6. Shillings eight pence, for the second 13. Shillings four
pence, and for the third offense 20. Shillings; and besides may adjudge the
offenders to the Pillory.

Purveyance. 13 Car. 2. chapter 8. The Clerk or chief officer of the Kings
Carriages, shall three days before His Majesty's arrival, by warrant from the
Green-cloth, give notice in writing to two Justices of the peace adjoining to
the place where His Majesty is to come, to provide such a number of Carts and
Carriages as the said Offcer shall need for that work; and to express the time
and place where the said Carts and Carriages are to attend, and then these
Justices are to require the Country to provide the number of Carts and
carriages of four able Horses, or four Oxen and two Horses a piece; at six
pence a mile for every mile they go laden, to be paid them in hand at the place
of Lading; and no Carriage to be enforced to travel above One days journey
from the place where they receive their lading; and if any refuse, or shall not
be ready at the time and place, and having not good cause to the contrary, the
Justices upon proof thereof by two witnesses, or the oath of the Constable or
other officer may (by their warrant) cause to be levied by distress and sale of
the offenders goods 40. Shillings.

13 Car. 2. chap. 8. If any Justice of peace or officer take any gist to spare
any person from making such Carriage, or shall press more Carriages than is
directed from the Green-cloth, the offender forfeits Ten pounds, to be
recovered by any person by Action of Debt in any Court of Record.

12 Car. 2. chapter 24.13 Car. 2. chapter 8. No pre-emption shall be allowed to the
King, His heirs or successors, nor to the Queen or any of the Children of the
Royal Family, in market or out of market; but all subjects may dispose of their
goods as they please: And if any person shall make any Purveyance, or impress
any Carriages (otherwise than is appointed by 13 Car. 2. chapter 8. by order from
the Green-cloth) or other things by color of any authority of Purveyance for
the King, etc. contrary to the Act 12 Car. 2. chapter 24. then two or one Justice
of the peace next adjoining, and the Constable of the place where such offense
is committed, upon complaint of the party grieved may send the offender to the
Gaol, until the next Sessions, there to be indicted for the same: And the party
grieved may have his Action against the offender, and therein shall recover
treble Damages and treble Costs.

14 Car. 2. chapter 20. Two or more Justices of the peace by Warrant from the Lord
High-Admiral of England, or two or more of the principal Officers, or
Commissioners of the Navy, or the Master of his Majesty's Ordnance, or the
Lieutenant of His Ordnance, are to provide Carriages with horses and oxen out
of the Country, not being above twelve miles distant from the place of Lading;
the owners of which Carriages or their servants are to receive Twelve pence a
Mile for every Load of Timber, and Eight pence a Mile for every Tun of other
commodities. And such persons as neglect or refuse to make their appearance,
upon oath thereof made before the Justices by the Constable or two witnesses,
the person refusing or neglecting forfeits Twenty shillings, to be levied by
distress and sale of his Goods by warrant from the said Justices, Mayor or
other chief Officer, or from the principal Officers or Commissioners of His
Majesty's Navy, or Master or Lieutenant of His Majesty's Ordnance; rendering to
the owner the overplus if any be, first deducting the charge of Distreining.

Stat. ibid. No Horses, etc. or Land-carriage shall be forced to travel more
dayes-journey from the place where they receive their lading, nor be compelled
to continue longer in the employment than the said Justices shall appoint; and
that ready money be paid to the parties in hand at the place of Lading,
according to the Rates aforesaid.

The Act of 14 Car. chapter 20. and 13. cap. 8. are to continue until the end of
the first Session of the next Parliament.

Highways. 14 Car. 2. chapter 6. The Churchwardens, Constables, or Tythingmen of
every parish, are upon Monday or Tuesday in Easter-week (after notice given
publicly in the Church the Sunday before) after Morning prayer ended, with the
advice and consent of the major part of the Parish then present, to choose two
or more sufficient Inhabitants of the place to be Surveyors for the Highways
for the Year following; and give notice thereof to the parties chosen in
writing, under pain of Five pounds.

This Act is to continue until the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament.

2, 3 P. and M. chapter 8. The Churchwardens and Constables, etc. offending herein,
may be punished by Fine or Amerciament at the Quarter Sessions, by the
discretion of the Justices.

Stat. ibid. P. and M. and 5 Eliz. chapter 13. The Constables and Churchwardens are
then also to appoint six days between that and the four and twentieth day of
June, for the Amendment of the Highways, and to give public notice thereof
in the Church the next Sunday after.

Stat. idem. Stewards in Leets have power to inquire after the breach of this
Statute about Highways, and to set Fines upon such as make default at their
discretion; and shall within six weeks after Michaelmas deliver indented
Estreats thereof under their hands and seals, viz. one part to the Bailiff or
High-Constable of the Liberty, and the other to the Constable and Churchwardens
where the default was made.

Stat. idem. In default of presentment thereof in Leets, the Justices of peace
may inquire thereof in their Sessions, and set such Fines as they or any two of
them (whereof one must be of the Quorum) shall think fit, whereof the Clerk of
the peace shall deliver indented Estreats in manner as is aforesaid.

Stat. idem. Dalton, J. P. chapter 76. fol. 71. These Estreats of Stewards of Leets
or Clerk of the peace shall be a sufficient Warrant for the Bailiff or chief
Constable to levy the said Fines by way of distress; and if no distress can be
found, or the party do not pay the Fine within twenty days after demand
thereof, he or they shall forfeit double so much; All which Fines and
forfeitures shall be bestowed on the Highways in the same Parish, by the
Constable and Churchwardens there.

Stat. idem. Dalt. J. P. chapter 26. fol. 70. The Bailiff or High-Constable is
yearly between the first of March and last of April, to render unto the
Constable and Churchwardens, to whom the other part of the Estreat was
delivered, a true Account of the Moneys received by them, in pain of forty
Shillings. And the said Constables and Churchwardens have power to call the
Bailiff or High-Constable before two Justices (one of the Quorum) to pass the
Account, who have power to commit such Bailiff or High-Constable, until they
have satisfied all the Arrerages by them received.

Stat. idem. Upon passing their Account every Bailiff or High-Constable shall
be allowed Eight pence for every Pound collected, and Twelve pence for the fee
of the Estreat delivered.

Stat. idem. Dalt. chapter 26. f. 21. Any two Justices of peace upon complaint to
them made by the succeeding Constables and Churchwardens may call before them
the precedent Constables and Churchwardens, and compel them to pay in all
Arrerages in their hands.

18 Eliz. chapter 10. The Surveyors by warrant from two Justices of the peace, are
to levy by distress and sale of goods, the Forfeitures of all such persons as
offend in not scowring their Ditches, etc. and if they neglect to levy the
Forfeiture for the space of a year after the offense committed, then the
Justices may send to the Constable and Churchwardens to levy the same.

14 Car. 2. chapter 2. Constables or other officers by warrant from any of His
Majesty's Justices of either Bench, Barons of the Exchequer, or Justices of the
peace to them directed, are to levy by distress and sale of the offenders
goods, all such penalties as shall be forfeited by the said Act touching
repairing the Highways and Sewers, and for paving and keeping clean the
Streets in and about the Cities of London and Westminster; and for default of
distress, or nonpayment of the said Penalties within six days after demand
thereof, or notice in writing left at the house or dwelling place of the
offender by the said Constable or other officer; the said offender (not being a
Peer of the Realm) may be committed to the common Gaol of the said County or
City, by warrant of any such Justice under his hand and seal, there to remain
without bayl or mainprize until payment thereof be made.

CHAP. VIII. The Constables office about Foreign Bonelaces, etc. Chimney-money,
Customs, Excise, Fish.
1. Foreign Bone-laces, etc. Constables upon Warrant to them directed from the
Justices of peace, or chief officers of Cities and Corporate-Towns, etc. are to
search in their several Counties, Cities, Towns and Liberties, in the Shops
being open Warehouses, and dwelling house of such person or persons who shall
be suspected to have any Foreign Bone-laces, Cut-works, Embroideries, Fringes,
Band-strings, Buttons, or Needle-works, made of Thread, Silk; or any or either
of them made in the parts beyond the Seas, and where they find any such to
seize the same.

2. Chimney-money. 16 Car. 2. chapter 3. All Justices of the peace, chief
Magistrates, Treasurers and Under-Treasurers, Constables, and other His
Majesty's officers, are within their several Liberties and Jurisdictions to aid
and assist His Majesty's officers appointed for the collecting of the Duty of
Hearth-money.

Stat. idem. The Officers appointed by His Majesty for the Chimney-money, once
every year, being accompanied with the Constable or Tythingman, Treasurer or
Under-Treasurer, or other public officer of the Peace; and in all Parishes and
places where there are no Constables, Tythingmen or other public officers as
aforesaid, there without any such assistance may enter in the day time into any
dwelling or other House, Edifice, Lodging, and Chambers in any of the Inns of
Court or Chancery, Colleges and other Societies, to search and examine whether
there be any more Fire-hearths and Stoves in the same than were formerly
Returned or certified, and what are increased or decreased since the last
Certificate; And if they find any variance in the Number returned, both the
Officer and Officers appointed by His Majesty, and the Constable or Tythingman,
or other Officer aforesaid are to certify the same under his or their hands to
the Clerk of the peace.

Stat. idem. If the party after demand made by His Majesty's officers, or their
deputies at the house, chamber, or place where the duty shall grow due, make
default or refuse to pay, by the space of one hour after such demand, then the
officer or his deputy, with the assistance of the Constable or Tythingman, or
other Officer, may at any time in the day levy the said duty and all the
Arrears thereof, by distress and sale of the goods of the parties making
default, rendering the overplus to the owners; deducting necessary charges for
taking the distress: which charges are not to exceed one moiety of the Duty and
Arrears.

16 Car. 2. cap. 3. No arrears of Hearthmoney are to be distreined for, after
the space of two years next after such duty becomes due. And if any violence,
opposition, or injury be done by any person or persons to any of His Majesty's
officers or their deputies, in the due execution of their office, Oath being
made there of before any one Justice of the peace or chief Magistrate, etc.
such Justice or the Magistrate, if they think fit, may commit the offender to
the common Gaol, for any time not exceeding one Month.

Stat. idem. The Constables are to have two pence in the pound, paid them by
the Collector to whom they pay the Chimney-money, by them collected; and are to
pay nothing to the Collectors for their Acquittances.

3. Customs. 12 Car. 2. chapter 19. Any person having a Warrant from the Lord
Treasurer or any of the Barons of the Exchequer, or chief Magistrate of a Port,
for the search of Uncustomed goods, may with the assistance of a Sheriff,
Justice of the peace, or Constable, (who are to be aiding and assisting upon
request) may enter into any House in the day time where such goods are
suspected to be concealed; and in case of resistance, may break open such House
and seize and secure such goods.

Stat. idem. No House is to be entered, unless it be within one Month after the
offense supposed to be committed; and if the Information whereupon the House
shall come to be searched do prove false, the party injured shall recover full
Costs and damages against the Informer by Action of Trespass.

14 Car. 2. chapter 11. Such persons as are authorized by Writ of Assistance out of
the Exchequer, are to take a Constable, Headborough or other officer inhabiting
near the place, and in the day time to enter into any house, shop, cellar,
warehouse, room, or other place; and in case of resistance break open the
doors, chests, trunks, and other package there to seize, and from thence to
bring any kind of goods or Merchandise whatsoever prohibited and uncustomed,
and to put and secure the same in His Majesty's Storehouse in the Port next to
such place where the seizure shall be made.

Idem. All Officers belonging to the Admiralty, Chaplains and Commanders of
Ships, Forts, Castles, and Blockhouses; and all Justices of peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Constables and Headboroughs, and other the Kings officers and
subjects whatsoever whom it may concern, are to be aiding and assisting to all
and every person and persons which are or shall be appointed by His Majesty to
manage his Customs; and if the Officers of the Customs, or any acting in aid of
them, shall be sued, indicted, prosecuted or molested; such persons, their
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators may plead the general issue, and give the
several Acts relating to the Customs, or any of them in evidence.

4. Excise. 12 Car. 2. chapter 23, 24. Gagers employed by the Commissioners of
Excise, are to take the Constable with them when they enter by night into any
house, to Gage their Coppers, Fatts or vessels; or to take an account of their
Liquors made, brewed, or distilled in their Houses.

Idem. Such persons as shall be convicted before the Justices of peace, or
Commissioners of Excise, of any offense and forfeiture within the Acts of
Excise; the Constables by warrant from the Justices of peace are to levy the
Penalties upon the goods of the offenders by distress and sale thereof,
(rendering the overplus;) and for want of distress, they are to convey the
offenders to the Gaol, there to remain until satisfaction be made.

And the Constables upon warrant are to summon Alehouse-keepers, etc. to appear
before the Commissioners at such places and times as shall be appointed in the
Warrants.

CHAP. IX. Concerning disturbing of Ministers, Swearing, Recusants,
Conventicles.
1. Disturbing of Ministers. 1 Mar. Sess. 3. chapter 3. Wingate's Stat. tit.
Sacraments. Dalt. J. P. chapter 41. fol. 103. If any person purposely without
Authority, disturb a Preacher lawfully Licensed, in preaching, praying, or
administration of the Sacraments, either by talking, laughing, humming or the
like; any Constable or Churchwarden of the place ought presently to apprehend
the party, and carry him before a Justice of the peace of the same County, who
may commit him to safe custody; and within six days after, with another
Justice of the peace they may examine the matter: And if they find it true by
two Witnesses, they must commit him to the common Gaol, there to remain for
three Months, and from thence to the next Quarter Sessions; at which upon the
parties reconciliation, and entering into security for one whole Year, he may be
released; (at the discretion of the Justices) but if he continue still in his
obstinacy, he must continue in Prison without bayl till he be penitent.

Idem. He that Rescues an offender in this kind, shall suffer like
Imprisonment, and forfeit Five pounds; and the Inhabitants that suffer such an
offender to escape, being presented before the Justices at their Sessions of
the County or Corporation where the offense was made, do also forfeit Five
pounds.

2. Profane Swearing. 21 Jac. chapter 20. 3 Car. 1. chapter 4. If any person shall
profanely Curse or Swear, they forfeit Twelve pence for every time so
offending; the offense must be presented within Twenty days, and proved by two
Witnesses, or confession of the party before a Justice of peace or Head-officer
of a City or Town-corporate, who may thereupon issue out their Warrant to the
Constables, Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor of the Parish where the
offense was committed, to levy the Forfeitures by distress and sale of the
offenders Goods, rendering the overplus to the owner, if any be.

Idem. Where no Distress can be found, the offender (if above Twelve years of
age) shall by warrant from a Justice, etc. be set in the Stocks three whole
Hours. But if the offender be under Twelve years of age, and do not forthwith
pay the forfeiture of Twelve pence per Oath, then must such offender be whipped
by the Constable, or by the Parent or Master in the presence of the Constable.

3. Recusants. 3 Jac. chapter 4. The Constables and Churchwardens of every Parish
or one of them, or High-Constable of the Hundred are once a year to present at
the Sessions of the Peace, the Monthly absence from the Church of all Recusants
and their Children above Nine years old, and their Servants; on pain to forfeit
for every such default respectively Twenty shillings: which Presentment the
Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk is to Enroll without fee, on pain of Forty
shillings.

7 Jac. 6. If the Minister, Churchwardens or Constable of any parish, or any
two of them shall complain to any Justice of the peace, of any person suspected
for Recusancy, then any such Justice may tender the Oath of Supremacy to the
person suspected; and if he refuse to take it, the Justice may commit the party
to the Gaol, there to remain until the next Assizes or Sessions of the Peace:
And then if the party refuse again, he is in Praemunire; but if it be a
Femecovert she shall only be imprisoned, there to remain without Bayl until she
will take the said Oath.

4. Conventicles. 16 Car. 2. chapter 4. If any Constable, Headborough, or
Tythingman neglect to execute the Warrants to them directed for Sequestring,
distraining, and selling the Estate or goods of any seditious Conventicler to
be transported; or neglect to distrain and sell the goods and chattels of such
offender for the levying of such sums of money as shall be imposed upon them
for the first and second offense; in such cases the officer so offending for
his neglect shall forfeit Five pounds, the one moiety to the King, the other
moiety to him that will sue for the same in any of His Majesty's Courts of
Record.

16 Car. 2. cap. 4. If any person be at any time sued for putting in execution
any of the powers in the Act against seditious Conventicles, such person shall
and may plead the general issue, and give the special matter in evidence; and
if the Plaintiff be nonsuit, or a verdict pass for the Defendant, or if the
Plaintiff discontinue his Action, or if upon demurrer Judgment be given for
the Defendant, every such Defendant shall have his or their treble Costs.

22 Car. 2. chapter If any person of the age of Sixteen years and upwards, being a
subject of this Realm, after the Tenth of May 1670. shall be present at any
Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under color of Religion, in other manner
than according to the Liturgy of the Church of England in England, Wales, or
Berwick upon Tweed: at which Conventicle there shall be Five persons or more
over and besides those of the same Household, if in a house where a Family is
residing, or if in a House, Field or place where no Family inhabits, then where
Five persons or more are so Assembled, one or more Justices of the peace of the
County, limit or division, etc. or the Chief Magistrate of the place where the
offense is committed, are required upon proof to him or them made by Confession
of the party, or Oath of two Witnesses, or by notorious evidence and
circumstance of the fact, to make a Record of every such offense; And thereupon
the said Justice, etc. shall impose upon every such offender so convict, a fine
of Five shillings for such offense, which Record to be certified to the next
Quarter Sessions of the peace.

2. And if the said person so convicted shall again commit the like offense, he
shall for every such offense incurr the penalty of Ten shillings, the said
fines to be levied by distress and sale of the offenders goods and chattels,
and in case of poverty, on the goods and chattels of any persons then convicted
for the same offense at the same Conventicle, at the discretion of the
Justices, etc. so as the sum to be levied upon one in case of poverty, of
others exceed not Ten pounds upon occasion of one Meeting. And every Constable,
Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor, are required
to levy the same accordingly, having first a Warrant, and forthwith to deliver
the said moneys to the Justices, etc. of which one Third to be to the King,
another Third to the Poor of the parish where the offense was committed, and
the other Third to the Informers and such persons as shall be diligent in the
discovery, dispersing and punishing of the said Conventicles.

3. Every person that shall take upon him to Teach or Preach in any such
Meeting, etc. and shall be convicted as aforesaid, shall forfeit for the first
offense Twenty pounds, to be levied as aforesaid: And if he be a stranger, and
his name and habitation not known, or is fled and cannot be found, or in the
judgment of the Justices, etc. shall be thought unable to pay the same, the
said Justices, etc. are required to levy the same by warrant upon the goods and
chattels of any person present at the same Conventicle, the money so levied to
be disposed as aforesaid; and for the second offense shall incurr the penalty
of Forty pounds, to be levied and disposed as aforesaid.

4. Every person that shall suffer any such Conventicle or Meeting, etc. to be
held in his or her House, Out-house, Barn, Yard, or Backside, and convicted
thereof, shall forfeit Twenty pounds, to be levied as aforesaid; and in case of
his or her Poverty, upon the goods of any convicted of being present at the
same Conventicle.

5. Provided no person shall pay above Ten pounds in any one Meeting, in regard
of the Poverty of any other.

6. Any offender aggrieved, may within one week after the penalty paid or
levied, appeal in writing to the next Quarter Sessions, to whom the Justices,
etc. that convicted the offender, are to return the money, and certify the
evidence upon which the conviction past, whereupon such offender may plead and
have his Trial by a Jury. And if such Appellant shall not be acquitted, he
shall pay treble Costs; and no Court but the Quarter Sessions shall meddle with
Causes of Appeal upon this Act.

7. Upon the delivery of such Appeal, the Appellant shall enter into a
Recognizance to prosecute with effect, or else the Appeal to be void.

8. The Justice, Justices of the peace, etc. or the Constables by warrant, may
with what aid or force they shall think fit, after refusal, break open and
enter into any house or place where such Conventicle shall be held, and take
into custody the persons there unlawfully Assembled; and the Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, or any Commissioned Officer of the Militia or other His
Majesty's Forces with horse and foot, and also the Sheriffs and other
Magistrates and Ministers of Justice upon Certificate to them made of such
unlawful meeting, are required to repair to the place where they are so held,
and dissolve or prevent the same, and take into their custody such persons so
assembled as they shall think meet.

9. The dwelling house of a Peer, where his Wife is resident shall not be
searched, but by immediate Warrant from the King, or in the presence of the
Lieutenant, Deputy-Lieutenant, or Two Justices, of which one of the Quorum.

10. If any Constable, Headborough, Tythingman, Churchwarden, or Overseer of
the Poor shall know or be informed of any such Meetings or Conventicles within
his precincts, parish, etc. and shall not inform some Justice of peace or chief
Magistrate, but omit the performance of his duty in the execution of this Act,
and thereof be convicted, shall forfeit Five pounds; and every Justice of peace
or chief Magistrate so offending shall forfeit an Hundred pounds, the one
moiety to the Informer.

11. If any person be sued for putting this Act in execution, otherwise than by
Appeal as aforesaid, he may plead the general Issue, and upon a Nonsuit or
Verdict past for him, recover treble Costs.

12. This Act and all clauses therein shall be construed most largely and
beneficially for the suppressing of Conventicles, and justification of all
persons employed in the execution of this Act.

13. Provided every offense against this Act must be prosecuted within three
Months, and no person punished by this shall be punished by any other Law.

14. Aldermen of London have the same power as Justices, and liable to the same
penalties for neglect of their duties.

15. A Feme-Covert offending, and cohabiting with her Husband, the penalties of
Five and Ten shillings shall be levied upon the goods of the Husband.

16. No Peer shall be attached, or imprisoned by virtue or force of this Act.

17. This Act shall not invalidate His Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
affairs.

CHAP. X. The Churchwardens Office.
THe antiquity of the Office of a Churchwarden, when first they received that
title is very uncertain; but so Ancient it is, that some are of opinion, that
87. years after Britain had received the Christian Faith, which most Historians
do agree was planted here in the Reign of King Lucius, in the year of CHRIST
180. who is hitherto styled the first Christian King of this Isle; and that
Dionysius in the year 267. did divide both in Rome and other places to Bishops
their Diocesses, and Parishes, Churches and Churchyards to Priests, Vicars and
Curates; but whether at that time, or how long after Churchwardens were
instituted, is not certainly known.

But all Authors do agree that they are very ancient Officers, and Mr. Lambert
says in this Duty of Churchwardens, page 46. That these Churchwardens of
Parishes are at the Common Law taken in the manner of a Corporation, 12 H. 7.
ult. that is to say, Churchwardens at the Common Law are persons enabled by
that name, to take moveable goods or chattels, and to sue or be sued at the Law
concerning such goods for the use and profit of their Parish.

Lib. Intrat. fol. 576. A man may in his life time give, or in his last Will
bequeath, money or other moveable things to the Churchwardens or Parishioners,
either for the repairing of their Parish Church, or for the buying of Books,
Communion-Cups, or linen Clothes, or other decent Ornaments or Furniture for
the Church; and it is not needful in such a Gift for a man to use express words
or writing.

11 H. 4.12. 8 H. 7.12. If a man buy a Bell and hang it up in the Steeple, or
do make a Pew and set it up in the Church, and do neither make any word or
writing thereof, yet by this is the Bell or Pew dedicated or given to the
Church.

37 H. 6.30, and 34. 11 H. 4.12. The Churchwardens have no Action at the Common
Law to recover a Legacy, nor any thing which they never had; but if any goods
or ornaments of the Church be once in their possession and custody, they may
maintain an Appeal of Robbery against him that steals them, and an Action of
Trespass against him that shall wrongfully take them away, although it be the
Vicar or Parson himself; and the damages that shall be recovered thereby shall
be to the use of the Parish, and not to their own use.

Fitz. Not. Br. 91. K. But if those Churchwardens (from whom the Goods were so
taken) shall happen to dye before any Action by them brought for the Goods, the
succeeding Churchwardens shall have an Action for the same Goods.

Canon. Ecclesiastic. 89, 90. In the Book of Constitutions and Canons
Ecclesiastical, agreed upon in the Synod begun at London anno Dom. 1603. and in
the first year of King James, it is appointed that Churchwardens, Quest-men,
Sidemen, or Assistants in every Parish, shall be chosen by the joynt-consent
of the Minister and the Parishioners if it may be; but if they cannot agree
upon such a Choice, then the Minister shall choose one, and the Parishioners
another: and without such a joint or several Choice none shall take upon them
to be Churchwardens; neither shall they continue any longer than one Year in
that Office, except they be chosen again in like manner: and they are to be
yearly Chosen in Easter-week.

But notwithstanding this Canon, where there is an ancient Custom in any Parish
for the choice of Church vardens contrary to the Canon, in such case the Custom
is to be observed before the Canon; as shall be instanced in several Cases. viz.

The Parishioner Case of Rovenden in Kent. Rolls Cases, part 2. fo. 287. P. 5
Jac. B.R. If the parishioners of a Parish have used time out of mind, etc. to
choose one Churchwarden, and the Parson or Vicar another, and afterward a
Canon is made, that the Vicar shall elect two, and he do so accordingly; and
the Parishioners elect one, according to their custom, and the Ordinary
disallows him, and confirms the other two chosen by the Vicar, in this case a
Prohibition shall be granted.

Tr. 7 Car. 1. B. R. betw. Shirley and Brown, Rot. 1391. Rolls 2 part, fol.
287. A Prohibition was granted against a Churchwarden chosen by the Parson of
St. Magnus by London Bridge by force of a Canon, upon a surmise that the Parish
had a custom to choose two Churchwardens.

Warner's Case, B. R. P. 17 Jac. The like was granted against a Churchwarden
chosen by the Parson of St. Alhallows, London.

P. 5 Jac. Cro. 2. part Rep. The Case of the Parishioners of Walbrook, London.

P. 15 Car. 1. B. R. The like against a Churchwarden chosen by the Parson of
St. Thomas in London, Cro. 3. part, Evelyn's Case.

Pasc. 4. ca. 1. B. R. rot. 420. Rolls Cases, 2. part, fo. 287. The like
granted between Draper and Stone, for Abchurch in London.

An Attorney cannot be made a Churchwarden; but if he be put in, and refuse,
and be sued in the Spiritual Court, he may have a Prohibition. Wilson's Case,
P. 14 Car. 1. B. R. and Baker's Case, Tr. 15 Car. 1. B.R. Rolls Cases, 2. part,
so. 272.

15 Car. 2. cap. 5. All Vestrey-men or members of any Vestrey within any parish
in London, Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and Bills of Mortality; and in
all other Cities, Boroughs, and Towns-corporate in England, where select
Vestries are used, are within one Month after their Election, before the
respective Archbishop, Bishop, Ordinary, Vicar General, or Chancellor of the
Diocese, to make and subscribe as follows, viz.

I A. B. do declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to
take up Arms against His Majesty, and that I do abhor that Traiterous position
of taking Arms by His Majesty's authority against His Person, or against those
that are Commissionated by him: And that I will Conform to the Liturgy of
England, as it is now established: And I do declare, That I hold there lies no
obligation on me, or on any other person, from the Oath commonly called, The
Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of Government
either in Church or State: And that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath,
and imposed upon the subjects of this Realm against the known Laws and
Liberties of this Kingdom.

Stat. idem. He that refuses to make this Subscription within the said time, is
ipso facto deprived of his place of Vestry-man, and a new one is to be chosen
in his stead; and if such new one also refuse to subscribe, or if such person
who shall have right of Election, shall not Elect within one Month after the
vacancy, the Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocese, may under his hand
and seal Elect a discreet person of the Parish, who after such Subscription is
to stand. This Act is to continue till the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament.

Canon 90.5 Ed. 6. chapter 1. The Churchwardens are diligently to see that all the
Parishioners duly resort to their Parish Church on Sundays and Holydays, and
there continue the whole time of Divine Service; and none to walk, or stand
idle, or talking in the Church, Churchyard, or Church Porch during that time;
and all such as shall be found slack or negligent in resorting to the Church,
(having no great or urgent cause of absence) they shall earnestly call upon
them; and if they amend not after due Admonition, they must present their names
to the Ordinary of the place.

1. El. chapter 1. Hobart's Rep. fo. 97. If the Churchwardens find any person
absent from the Church upon Sundays or Holidayes in the time of Divine
Service, Preaching or other Holy exercise, such person is to pay Twelve pence
to the use of the poor. And this extends as well to all Women Covert, as to
other persons; or the Churchwardens may present such offenders in the
Ecclesiastical Court; but they must not pay Twelve pence, and be Presented too.

The same Forfeiture is against all such as open their Shops, or work on
Holidays; which if it were duly put in execution, the poor might be better
provided for, but I doubt too many Officers are guilty thereof themselves.

4 Jac. chapter 5. If the Officers find any tippling in any Inn or Alehouse in the
time of Divine Service, then they forfeit 3. s. 4. d. more for Tippling, besides
the Twelve pence for being absent from the Church: And the Master of the house
that suffers them to drink forfeits Ten shillings, which forfeitures are to the
use of the Poor.

Can. 88. The Churchwardens or Quest-men and then Assistants shall suffer no
Plays, Feasts, Banquets, Suppers, Church Ales, Drinkings, Temporal Courts or
Leets, Lay-Juries, Masters or any other Profane usage to be kept in the
Church, Chapel or Churchyard; neither the Bells to be rung superstitiously
upon Holidays or Eves abrogated by the Book of Common Prayer, nor at any other
times without good cause to be allowed by the Minister of the place and by
themselves.

Canon 50.85. Neither the Minister, Churchwardens, nor any other Officer of the
Church shall suffer any man to Preach within their Churches nor Chapels, but
such as by showing their License to Preach, shall appear unto them to be
sufficiently authorized thereunto.

And the Churchwardens and Quest-men are also to see that in every meeting of
the Congregation the peace be well kept; and that all persons Excommunicated
and so denounced, be kept out of the Church.

Finch, lib. 2. chapter 17. page 179. Rolls Cases, 1. part, fo. 393. Although, as I
have said before, the Law does make Churchwardens a kind of Corporation, and
enables them by that name to take moveable Goods and chattels, and to sue and
be sued at Law concerning such Goods for the use and benefit of their Parish;
yet they cannot take an Estate of Lands to them by name of Churchwardens; for
if a Feoffment be made to the use of the Churchwardens of H. this use is void,
for they have no capacity to take such purchase.

Neither can Churchwardens prescribe to have Lands to them and their
successors, for they are no Corporation to have Lands, but for Goods of the
Church only.

If a Bell be broken, the Churchwardens may have an Action against him that
brake it, and shall recover damages, which shall be to the use of the Parish,
and not to their own use.

The Churchwardens have no such property in the Goods of the Church, as thereby
to have power to give, sell, release, hurt or impair them, without the assent
of the Sidemen or Vestry.

Finch. lib. 2. chapter 17. page 179. If the Churchwardens shall give, or impair
the goods of the Church in their custody, the Parishioners may choose new ones,
who may have an Account against their predecessors.

Trin. 21 Jac. Ban. Regis. Rolls Cases, 1. part, fol. 393. If the Organs be
taken out of the Church, the Churchwardens may bring an Action of Trespass for
the same; for the Organs belong to the Parishioners, and not to the Parson: and
therefore the Parson cannot sue the party in the Ecclesiastical Court that took
them.

10 H. 4 fol. 9.8 H. 6. fol. 9. If the Walls, Windows or Doors of the Church be
broken down, or the Trees in the Churchyard be cut down, or the Grass thereof
be eaten up, in this case the Parson or Vicar, and not the Churchwardens, shall
have an Action for it. A Parson may bring his Action for breaking and entering
into his house and close, when it is the Church and Churchyard.

Mich. 16 Jac. Com. B. Rot. 716. Smith and Pannel's Case. If the Churchwardens
present in the Ecclesiastical Court, That one A. B. one of their Parishioners
is a Railer, and sower of Discord amongst his Neighbors, in such case there
lies a Prohibition; for this belongs to the Leet, and not to the Spiritual
Court, unless such Railing were in the Church or Churchyard.

If the Churchwardens sue in the Ecclesiastical Court for a Church Way which
they claim to belong to all the Parishioners by prescription, a Prohibition
lies, for this is a Temporal cause.

If the Churchwardens of H. sue R. A. in the Ecclesiastical Court, for that he
and all those whose Estate he has in such an House, etc. at the Perambulation
or Procession of the Parishioners of the Parish, did use to provide a
Refreshing for them, with Bread, Cakes, Cheese, and Ale, etc. and suffer them
to rest there; in this case a Prohibition will be granted, for that they claim
it in the nature of a Corrody.

A Corrody was a reasonable allowance of meat, drink, bread, money, clothing,
lodging, and such like sustenance; which every Founder of Abbeys, Priories,
Nunneries and other Houses of Religion had in the same Houses when they were
standing; for his Father, Brother, Cousin or other man that he would appoint
should take it, if it were a house of Monks; and if he were a Founder of a
house of Nunns or Women, then the same for his Mother, Sister, Cousin or other
woman that he would direct thither:

And always this was provided for, that he that had a Corrody in a house of
Monks, might not send a Woman to receive it; nor where a Corrody was due in a
Nunnery, there it was not lawful to send a Man to receive it; for in both cases
such Presentation was to be rejected.

The Churchwardens are to look to the repair of the Seats in the Church, but
the disposing of the Seats in the Body of the Church belongs of common right to
the Ordinary of the Diocese, so that he may place and displace whom he pleases,
except in some cases.

For, the Ordinary has nothing to do with the Seats in the Chapels belonging
to the houses of Noble men.

And if a man and his Ancestors, and all those whose Estate he has in a
certain Message, have used time out of mind to repair an Isle of the Church,
and to sit there, and none else; in such case the Ordinary cannot displace him,
because he has it by Prescription, for a reasonable consideration.

If a man prescribe that he and his Ancestors, and all those whose Estate they
had in a certain Message, did use to sit in a certain Seat in the body of the
Church time out of mind, in consideration that he and they have used time out
of mind to repair the said Seat, if the Ordinary remove him from such Seat, a
Prohibition may be brought; for the Ordinary has no power to dispose of it:
for it is a good Prescription, and by intendment a good consideration for the
same.

But if a man prescribe to have a Seat in the body of the Church generally,
without consideration to repair the same, in such case the Ordinary may
displace him.

37 H. 6.30. 11 H. 7.27. Canon 20, 70, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85. The
Churchwardens are to see that the Church and Churchyard be well repaired and
kept clean; and they are to provide Books of Common Prayer, Books of Homilies,
a Parchment-Book for Registring of Christnings, Weddings and Burials in; Fonts,
Pulpits, Tables, Chests for Alms, Communion-Cups, Ornaments and other
Furniture, and a Chest with three Locks and Keys for putting the same in: And
they are to provide Bread and Wine for the Sacrament, according to the number
of the Communicants.

And they may Rate the Parish for money to defray their Charges.

Their Rates are to be done by the Churchwardens with the assent of the greater
part of the Parishioners, and upon a general warning given before they meet for
that purpose; And the Ecclesiastical Court has cognizance of the reparation of
the Body of the Church.

Co. 5. Rep. fo. 67. If a man dwell in one Parish, and have Lands in another
Parish which he occupies there, he may be charged for such Lands for the
Reparation of the Church of the Parish where the Lands lie.

Co. ibid. If an Inhabitant of one Parish lease out his Lands which he has in
another Parish, reserving Rent, then he shall not be charged in the Parish
where the Lands lie, because there is a parishioner and inhabitant who may be
charged.

If a man live in one Parish and occupy Lands in another Parish, he shall not
be charged in that Parish where the Lands lie for the Ornaments of the Church
according to his Land; for the Inhabitants only ought to be Rated for them.

Neither can a man be charged in the Parish where he does inhabit, for the
Lands which he occupies in another Parish, toward the Reparation of the
Church in the Parish where he lives; because then he might be twice charged,
for he may be charged in the Parish where the Land lies.

M. 13 Jac. C. B. If there be a Chapel of Ease within a Parish, and one part
of the Parish have used time out of mind to repair the Chapel themselves
without the rest of the parishioners, and there to hear Service and Marry, and
all other things, but only that they Bury at the Mother Church; notwithstanding
they must contribute to the reparation of the Mother Church.

If some parishioners be Rated and others are not, and those who are rated are
sued in the Ecclesiastical Court, they must plead this matter in this Court,
for they cannot have a Prohibition.

Where there are five Bells in a Church, and the major part of the parishioners
agree that there shall be made a sixth Bell, which is made accordingly, and
they make a Rate for the payment of it, this shall bind the remainder of the
parishioners though they did not agree unto it; otherwise any obstinate persons
might hinder any thing intended, and what is fit for the Ornament of the
Church. Heckfield and Mattingly, etc.

Every man ought to be rated according to his personal Estate, and not
according to his Lands for the Goods and Ornaments of the Church; and by a
Land-rate for Church-reparations, though the occupier of the Lands live in
another Parish.

These things are accounted Church-reparations, and are to be performed by a
Land-rate, viz.

The Walls of the Church and Steeple, the Churchyard Walls or Rails; the
Windows and Bars of Iron, and Glass, the Roof of Timber, with Laths, Nails,
Prigs, Dogs and Bolts of Iron, the covering of Lead, Tyle, Slates or Shingles,
the Floor with Stone or Paving-Tyle, the Doors with Locks, Keys, ridges, Hooks
and Nails; the furniture of the Steeple, with Stairs, Floors, Bells, Wheels and
Ropes; the Pulpit, and the Pews and Seats not made by private men.

These following are to be rated on the Inhabitants of the Parish, and not upon
out-dwellers, viz.

The Communion Table and coverings thereof, the Communion-cups, the Bread and
Wine for the Communicants, the Bible and other Books appointed to be in
Churches, the Washing of the Communion-clothes, Candles for Lecture-dayes, the
Surplice, Pulpit-cloth and Cushion, the Clerk and Sextons wages, and expenses
of the Churchwardens and Sides-men about the Parish-business.

The Churchwardens are to join with the Constables in making of Rates for the
Relief of the poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners, and for conveying Prisoners
to the Gaol, and to execute Warrants for the same.

14 Car. 2. chapter 2. The Churchwardens are to join with the Constables in the
choosing of Surveyors for the Highways, and in the setting down of days for
the work, and in the oversight of the High-Constables Account for the money
they do receive upon any Forfeitures about the Highwayes; And they may with the
aid of two Justices (one of the Quorum) force High-Constables to account for
and pay in what money they have received forfeited for default of Highwayes;
And to execute the Justices warrants for the penalties and forfeitures about
cleansing the Street and repairing the Highwayes.

18 Car. 2. chapter 4. The Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor are to execute
the Justices Warrant for levying the penalty of Five pounds upon the parties
Goods that is not Buried in Woollen, which penalty is to be employed to the use
of the Poor.

14 Cor. 2. chapter 2. the Churchwardens in London, Westminster, and Borough of
South-wark, etc. upon every Tuesday or Wednesday in Easter-week, together with
the Constable, Overseers of the poor, and Surveyors of Highwayes in every
Parish respectively, or the greater number of them; giving notice, or calling
together such other inhabitants of their Parishes as have formerly born the
like Offices, they or the greater number of them are to make choice of, and
shall nominate and appoint two or more able persons that are Tradesmen of their
parish to be Scvengers for the Streets, Lanes, and other open passages of each
Ward or division within the said Parish for the Year next following, and until
others be chosen and settled in their places.

Canon 89. The Churchwardens at the end of their Year, or within one Month
after at the most, are before the Minister and Parishioners to give up a just
Account of their Receipts and Disbursements; and at their going out of their
Office they are to deliver up to the Parishioners what Money or other things of
right belonging unto the Church which they have remaining in their hands, that
it may be delivered over by them unto the next Churchwardens by Bill indented.

If the Churchwardens refuse to do this, they may be presented at the next
Visitation-Court for it, or the succeeding Churchwardens may bring their Action
of Account against them at the Common Law, and compel them to it; and in this
account they shall be allowed their needful Disbursements and Expenses about
the Parish business.

Canon 116. The Churchwardens, Questmen or Sides-men shall not be bound to
exhibit their Presentiments about once a Year where it has been no oftener used,
nor above twice a year in any Diocese whatsoever, except it be at the Bishops
Visitation; for the which Presentiments of every parish Church or Chapel, the
Register of the Court where they are to be exhibited shall not receive above
Four pence in one Year, under pain of Suspension from the execution of his
Office, the space of one Month for every offense toties quoties; But the
Churchwardens may voluntarily present oftener if they please.

Canon 117. No Churchwardens, Questmen or Sides-men shall be called or cited
but only at the time or times before limited, to appear before any
Ecclesiastical Judge whatsoever, for refusing at other times to present any
faults committed in their Parishes, and punishable by Ecclesiastical Laws;
neither shall they or any of them, after their Presentiments exhibited, at any
of those times be any farther troubled for the same. Except it evidently appear
that they did willingly and wittingly omit to present some public crime or
crimes as they knew to have been committed, or could not be ignorant that there
was then a public fame of them; or unless there be very just cause to call
them to explain their former Presentiments: And in case of wilful omission,
their Ordinaries shall proceed against them in such sort, as in causes of
wilful Perjury in a Court Ecclesiastical, it is already by Law provided.

Canon 113, 118. One of the two times of Presentiments is always to be about a
week or fortnight after Easter, at which time also the old Churchwardens are to
leave their office, and new ones are to come in; but the new ones are not to be
Sworn till the old ones have given in their Presentiments; and every Parson or
Vicar, or their Curates in their absence, are to join in the presentment with
the Churchwardens, etc. and if the Churchwardens refuse to present, then every
such Parson and Vicar, or in their absence their Curates may themselves present
to their Ordinaries at all such times, and when else they shall think fit.

The sum of the Articles usually given to the Churchwardens to make their
Presentiments upon are these, viz.
1. Whether their Church and Chancel, Bells and Ropes be in good repair, and
the Ten Commandments, Lords Prayer and Creed drawn out in fair Letters, the
Kings Arms set up, Assessments made for the Repair of the Church, and who
refuses to pay?

If they have a Font, Communion Table, Carpet, Table-cloth, Flagons with Cups
and Cover for Bread and Wine, a Reading-Desk, a Pulpit with a Cushion and
Covering for it, a fit Common Prayer Book of the largest volume, the Bible in
folio of the last Translation, with a Book of Homilies, and Book of Canons, and
a Surplice?

If the Tombs, Monuments and Grave-stones be safely kept from removing and
breaking?

A Book of Parchment for Registring Christnings, weddings, and Burials, etc. a
Chest with three locks to put the same and the Church-Ornaments in, with a Box
for Alms, and a Table of degrees Prohibiting Marriage hung up in the Church?

If the Parsonage-house and Outhouses be in good Repair, and the Churchyard
well fenced to keep out Swine? etc.

2. Whether the Parson, Vicas, or Curate read the Common Prayer at Morning and
Evening Service, wear his Surplice, bid days, Preach every Sunday, or read an
Homily, Catechize, observe the Fifth of November, Thirtyeth of January,
Twentyty-ninth of May, and Second of September; and observe Perambulations, or
going the Bounds in Rogation-week, preach sound Doctrine, and vent no Sedition
against the King or Government; celebrate the Lords Supper three times every
Year at least, whereof at Easter for one; Baptize Infants with Godfathers and
Godmothers, visit the Sick and pray with them, Bury the dead according to the
Book of Common Prayer, Marry none clandestinely, Preach in his Gown, be a man
of a sober and chaste life, a Peacemaker amongst his Neighbors, and one that
takes care to reduce Sectaries. Recusants, Separatists and Refractory Parsons
to the obedience and doctrine of the Church, and reads the book of Canons to
the people at least once every Year, and the 39. Articles Twice every year?

3. Whether all their Parishioners of due age resort to the Church to Divine
Service, behave themselves reverently there, kneel, stand up, and make Answer
to the Rubric of the Common Prayer book? whether any work, or sell wares on
Sundays or Holydays, or whether Vintners, Victualers, Innkeepers or others to
receive any to drink in their houses in the time of Divine Service?

Whether any Marry within the Degrees forbidden, or be Adulterers, Swearers,
Blasphemers, Drunkards?

If any above Sixteen years of age do not receive the Lords Supper three times
a year, whereof Easter to be one?

If any keep their Children Unchristned, Women that come not to be Churched, or
any bring not their dead to be Buried after the Service of the Church? Or if
any be Married without Banes or License at unlawful hours?

4. Whether their Parish-Clerk and Sexton (if they have any) be duly chosen,
can write and read, be of an honest life, and make the Responses to the Hymns
and other Suffrages?

And if the Schoolmaster, Physician, Surgeon, and Midwife (if they have
any) Teach or Preach without License? If the Churchwardens be duly chosen
according to the Canon and Custom? etc.

CHAP. XI. The Office of the Overseers of the Poor.
ST at. 43 Eliz. chapter 2. 21 Jac. chap. 28. The Overseers of the Poor are to be
chosen yearly and joined with the Churchwardens of the Parish, in the oversight
and ordering of the Poor of the Parish; They are to be chosen by two or more
Justices of the peace, (one whereof to be of the Quorum) who are yearly under
their hands and seals, at Easter or within one Month after, to appoint four,
three, or two substantial Householders, according to the greatness of the
Parish, to be joined with the Churchwardens to look to the Poor of the Parish.

Stat. 43 Eliz. chapter 2. The major part of these Officers without the rest may do
any thing belonging to their office, but they are to have the allowance and
consent of two Justices of peace (one of the Quorum) to every thing they do
about their office. And these Officers, or such of them as are not hindered by
just excuse, (to be allowed by two Justices) are to meet monthly in the Church
on Sunday after Evening Prayer, to consider of matters concerning their office,
and to use all possible diligence in their office, on pain of Twenty shillings
for every such default.

Dalt. J. P. chapter 40. so. 98. The Parents that are able to work, and may have
work, are to find their Children by their labor, and not the Parish; but if
they be overcharged with Children, the Overseers are to help them, by putting
out some of their Children Apprentices.

Stat. 43 Eliz. chap. 3. Resolu. Judges, 16, 17. The Father, Grandfather, and
the Children and Grandchildren of every poor impotent person not able to work,
(being of sufficient ability) shall relieve such poor persons in such manner as
the Justices of the peace of that County where such sufficient person dwells,
at their general Quarter Sessions shall Assess. And if such party refuse to
abide the Order, they forfeit Twenty shillings for every Month to the Poor of
the Parish; which forfeiture is to be levied by the Churchwardens and
Overseers, or one of them, by Warrant from two Justices (one of the Quorum) by
distress and sale of the offenders goods; and for want of Distress two such
Justices may commit the offender to prison, there to remain till the said
Forfeiture be paid.

But if a man marry a Grandmother that has no Estate, the Grandfather-in-Law
is not chargeable; but if she have an Estate caused without such Marriage, or
that comes after Marriage by descent or otherwise to her, here he may be
charged; but he can be charged in no case longer than his Wife lives.

Bastard-children are not within this Law, neither can the Justices do any
thing herein against a man that lives out of their County.

Resol. Judges, 15. No Poor may beg but in their own Parish, and there by
License of the Overseers of the poor; and they may not license them to beg in
the Highwayes there.

1 Jac. 7. No inhabitants may serve any Poor at their door but those of their
own Parish, that have License from the Overseers of the poor to Beg, on pain of
Ten shillings for every default.

Stat. 43 Eliz. 2. The Overseers to make provision for a poor man that wants a
house, (but not for a common Herdsman or Shepherd) with consent of the Lord of
the Manor by writing under his hand and seal, either by themselves or with a
Sessions order, may erect a Cottage upon any part of the Waste of the Manor,
and lodge inmates therein, notwithstanding the Statute of 31 El. 7. but such
Cottage must not be any otherwise employed.

Stat. 4.3 El. chapter 2. All such persons married or unmarried, having no means to
maintain them, use no ordinary and daily Trade to get their living by, and such
persons as can get no work, are to be set on work by the Overseers; and any one
Justice of peace may send to the House of Correction or common Gaol such as
shall not employ themselves to work, being appointed thereto by the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor.

Stat. 3 Car. 1. chapter 4. The Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor, with the
consent of two or more Justices of the peace (one of the Quorum) may set up and
use any Trade, Mystery or Occupation, for the setting on Work and better relief
of the Poor of the Parish, Town or place where they are Overseers.

14 Car. 2. chap. 12. If a stranger come into a Parish, into any house under
the yearly Rent of Ten pounds per annum, the Overseers may require sufficient
security of him for the discharge of the Parish; and if he refuse, they may
complain to the Justices of the peace within forty days after the parties
coming to the Parish, and they may order him to give security, or otherwise
remove him.

Dalt. J. P. chap. 40. fol. 94, 95. The Overseers are to take and put out
Apprentices, such poor men's children as are brought up idly and loosely, or
such as are a burden and charge to their Parish: and they must have regad to
put them to such Masters as are of ability and honesty, that shall not provoke
their Apprentices to run away by hard usage; nor suffer them to consume their
time without learning their Trade. And they are to put out their Children
Apprentices while they are young and tractable, (so they be above seven years
of age) for else by reason of their idle and base bringing up, they will hardly
keep their service, or employ themselves to work.

7 Jac. chapter 3. These Apprentices are to be chosen out of the poorest sort of
Children whose parents are least able to maintain them, and they must be above
Seven, and under Fifteen years of age when they are first bound.

43 Eliz. chap. 2. Dalt. chapter 31. fol. 83. The Overseers are to have the consent
of two Justices of the peace in the putting out of such Apprentices, and they
may bind the Man-child till 24. years of age, and the Woman-child till 21. or
till she be married, which shall first happen: And these Apprentices may be
bound to Weavers, Masons, Dyers, Fullers, or any other Trade as well as to
Husbandry or Houswifery.

Resol. Judges, 1633. Quest. 1. The Apprentices may be put to any man whom the
Overseers and Justices shall think fit within the same Parish, or elsewhere in
other Parishes within the same Hundred, either with or without money; But if
the Child be young, and the party to whom they place it not very able, then
they may give money if they please, as the party and they can agree.

Resol. Judges, Q. 4. All men that have or may have use for Servants, as
Knights, Clergymen, Gentlemen, and Yeomen, as well as Tradesmen are bound to
take Apprentices; yea, though wealthy men Table themselves, or live so
privately that they have no use for a Servant, yet they may be compelled to
take them; or else to pay a sum of money for putting them Apprenprentices
elsewhere; and if they refuse to pay the sum imposed upon them, two Justices
of the peace may make their Warrant to leavy the same by distress and sale of
the offenders goods.

Or the refuers to take Apprentices may be presented and indicted for the same,
upon the Statute of 43 Eliz. chapter 2.

Resol. Judges, Quest. 2. An Apprentice put to a man in respect of his Farm,
when his Lease expireth the Apprentice shall go still with the Farm, if the
first Master be so pleased; otherwise it is where an Apprentice is put to a man
in respect of his abilities, or for other respects. And where any diffeences
are between the Officers and the man that is to receive an Apprentice, about
money, and what money shall be given, or otherwise; the Justices thereabouts,
or in their defaults the Sessions must determine it.

Dalt. J. P. chapter 40, and 31. fo. 96, and 78. If the parents of poor Children
shall refuse to let their Children be put out Apprentices (without good cause
showed) such Parents may be bound over by the Justices, to answer their said
default; And if the Children shall refuse, the Justices may send them to the
House of Correction, there to remain till they be content to be Bound and serve.

Dalt. J. P. chapter 31. fo. 82. These Apprentices must be bound by Indenture, and
not by any verbal Agreement; and the Indenture must be either between the
Justices, Churchwardens, and Overseers or some of them, and the Apprentice on
the one part, and him that takes the Apprentice on the other part. And he must
be named by the name of an Apprentice expressly, or else he is no Apprentice,
though he be bound.

The form of an Indenture for a poor Child put out by the Parish.
THis Indenture made the 25th. day of M. etc. Witnesses, That R. H. and R. W.
Overseers for the Poor in the Parish of H. in the County of S. and H.T.
Churchwarden of the same parish; by and with the consent of A. H. Knight and
Baronet, and F. T. Esquire; two of His Majesty's Justices of the peace of the same
County, have by these presents placed and bound J. G. (being a poor fatherless
child) as an Apprentice with E. B. of H. aforesaid widow, and as an Apprentice
with her the said E. B. to dwell from the day of the date of these presents,
until she the said J. G. shall come to the age of 21. years, or be married,
which shall first happen, according to the Statute in that case made and
provided; by and during all such time and term the said J. G. shall the said E.
B. her Dame well and faithfully serve in all such lawful business as the said
E. B. shall put her the said J. G. unto, according to her power, wit and
ability, and honestly and obediently in all things shall be have her self
toward her said Dame and children and all the rest of the Family of the said
E. B. And the said E. B. for her part, promises, covenanteth and agrees, That
she the said E. B. the said J. G. in the Art and skill of Huswifry, the best
manner that she can or may shall teach and inform, or cause to be taught and
informed as much as thereunto belongs, and she the said E. B. knows; And
also during all the said term to find and allow unto her said Apprentice meat,
drink, linen, woollen, hose, shoes, washing, lodgeing, and all other things
fitting or meet for an Apprentice.

In witness whereof, etc.

Stat. 1. Jac. chapter 25. 21 Jac. chap. 28. This Binding is as effectual to all
purpoposes as if the Children were of full age, and did bind themselves by
Indentures and Covenants; and all such as are bound by the Overseers as
abovesaid may safely be received and kept as Apprentices by their Masters.

Stat. 7 Jac. chap. 3. Such money as is given to put out poor Children
Apprentices, is to be employed in Corporate-Towns by the Corporations and in
other places by the Parson and Vicar, with the Constables, Churchwardens or
Overseers of the Poor, or the most part of them; who shall employ the same
accordingly on pain or forfeit 5. Marks each of th em so making default, to be
divided betwixt the Poor of the parish and the Prosecutor.

Stat. idem. The party taking any money with such Apprentice shall give good
security by Obligation to repay it again at the end of seven years next ensuing
the date of the said Obligation, or within three Months next after the end of
the said seven Years; and if such Apprentice shall dye within 7. years, then
within one Year after his or her death; and if the Master, Mistress, or Dame
happen to dye within 7. Years, then within one Year after their death; so as
the money may be employed in placing the Apprentice with some other of the same
Trade to serve out his time.

Stat. idem. Money so given shall be employed within three Months after the
Receipt thereof; And if there shall not be apt persons found in the places
where it is given, to be Apprentices, it shall then be employed in the Parishes
next adjoining by the parties that are trusted with it in the place where it
was so given, and there also Bond shall be taken.

Resol. Judges. If a Woman unmarried be hired weekly, monthly, half-yearly or
yearly in one Parish, and there be begotten with Child, and then goes into
another Parish, and there is settled in service or otherwise for two or three
Months, and then she is discovered to be with Child; in this case she and her
Child shall be settled in the Parish where she then is, and must not be sent to
the Parish from whence she came.

Resol. Judges. If a Woman be delivered of a Bastard child in one Parish, and
then go into another Parish with her Child, in this case the Child after it is
nursed is to be sent to and settled in the place where it was born, and not to
remain with the Mother.

Stat. 43 Eliz. chapter 2. These Officers or the greater part of them (for
performing their office) may raise weekly or otherwise by Taxation of every
Parson, Vicar, and other occupier of Land, House, or Tithes; Coal-mines or
saleable Underwoods within the Parish, Town, etc. such a sum as they shall
think fit. And this Rate they must have allowed and confirmed undr the hands of
two Justices (one of the Quorum;) and by warrant from them or any two Justices
they may levy the said Tax by distress and sale of the goods of the party
refusing to pay, rendering the overplus to the owners; and in default of
distress, two such Justices may commit the party to prison, there to remain
without Bayl till he pay it.

These Rates ought to be well and truly made according to men's visible Estates,
real and personal, within the place only, and not for any Estate elsewhere.

These Rates must be set upon the Tenants and occupiers of Lands, and not upon
the Landlords, living within or without the Parish; for the Tenant only is
chargeable for the Land.

Resol. Judges. The Parson having a full Tenth part of the profits of the
place, may be rated to a Tenth part.

The Rate or stock for Goods is thought reasonable to be set after the
proportion of Lands, (viz.) an 100 Pound in stock to be rated after 5 or 6
Pounds a year in Lands.

If any persons find themselves aggrieved in any Tax or other act done by the
Overseers, or by the Justices of peace, they are to seek for relief at the
Quarter Sessions.

CHAP. XII. The office of the Surveyors of Highwayes and Bridges.
14 CAR. 2. chapter 6. The Churchwardens, Constables or Tythingmen of every Parish,
Town or Hamlett for the time being, are upon Monday or Tuesday in Easter-week,
with the advice of the major part of the Inhabitants, to choose two or more
inhabitants of the Parish, Town or Hamlett to be Surveyors of the Highways
for the Year following, and they are to give notice thereof in writing to the
persons chosen next Sunday after; and for default of such Choice, the
Constables, Churchwardens, and inhabitants of every Parish, Town or Hamlett
shall forfeit and lose Five pounds.

After choice made of these Surveyors and notice given them, they are forthwith
to take the Office upon them, on pain to forfeit Twenty shillings.

14 Car. 2. chapter 6. Highways must be sufficiently amended at the charge of the
whole Town; and it is not enough for the Inhabitants to do their full six days
work yearly, except their Ways be all well and sufficiently repaired thereby;
for if all their said Ways be not sufficiently amened, the whole Town may be
indicted for it; and if six days work in the year will not serve to amend
them, the Surveyors must appoint more days.

The owner of Lands, if he be not the occupier thereof, ought not to be charged
toward the repair of the common Highwayes; but the Tenant who occupies the
Land is to be charged therewith.

Dalt. J.P. chapter 26. fol. 68. The Surveyors are to see that the parishioners do
their work on the days appointed, and that they observe these Rules, (viz.)
every person having in his own occupation a Plough-Land in Tillage or in
Pasture in the same Parish, or keeping there a Plough or Draught, shall find
and send on every day to the place appointed by the Surveyors, one Wayn or Cart
after the fashion of the Country provided with Horses, etc. fit for the
Carriage, and with necessary Tools fit for the work; and with two able men, who
are there to do such work with their Wayns, etc. as they shall be appointed (by
the Surveyors) by the space of eight Hours every of the said six days, on pain
of Ten shillings every day default is made.

Stat. 2 and 3 P. and M. chapter 8. Every other Householder, Cottager and Labourer
of the Parish, Town, etc. (able to labor, and being no hired servant by the
year) must by himself or some other able man, be then and there ready to work
every of the said six days, by the space of eight hours as aforesaid; where
they shall be appointed by the Surveyors, on pain to forfeit Twelve pence for
every day they make default.

18 Eliz. chapter 9. All persons being chargeable but as Cottagers by the 2 and 3
P. and M. yet if they be in Subsidy 5 Pounds in Goods, or 40 Shillings in
Lands, or above, they must find two able men to work every of the said six
days.

2 and 3 P. and M. chapter 8. If any of the Carriages shall not be thought needful
by the said Surveyors upon any of the said days, they may appoi nt in stead of
a Team two able men to work as aforesaid, who shall not fail in pain that the
party who should send them shall forfeit Twelve pence for every day that either
of them makes default.

18 Eliz. chapter 9. He that shall occupy a Plough-Land in tillage or in pasture,
lying in several Parishes, shall be chargeable only in the Parish where he
dwells, and he that occupies several Plough Lands in several Parishes shall
be charged in each Town or Parish where such Land lies, (viz.) to find in each
Town or Parish, one Cart furnished as aforesaid, though he be no inhabitant
there.

Co. on Lit. fo. 69. It is said that a Plough-Land is not always of one
content, but ordinarily it is so much as one Plough may plough in on eyear;
which is on some Countries more, and in some less, according to the heaviness
of the soil.

Co. 4. Rep. fo. 37. b. and 9 Rep. fo. 124. A Plough-Land or Carve-Land may
contain House, Meadow, Pasture and Wood; and if one have so much of this as
will keep a Plough, and yield Tillage for it, if part of it were eared, in this
case it seems he is to send his Plough.

Dalt. J. P. chap. 26. fo. 72. He that keeps a Plough or Draught for
carriage, although he occupy little or no Land, but carries or plougheth for
other men, yet it seems he is to send his Cart to the Highways; and if a may
keep only two Horses and a Cart for his own business, he is to come with his
Cart and two Horses, with a Man to drive them.

14 Car. 2. chapter 6. If six days will not serve for repairing of the Highwayes,
the Surveyors may appoint more, and charge all persons within their limits who
are chargeable by the Law to come to the work; but the Surveyors are to pay
them for their work for all the days above six days, according to the Rates
of the Country; and if they cannot agree, the next Justice of the peace living
out of the Parish is to determine the business between them.

5 Eliz. chapter 13. The Surveyors, if they see cause, for the amendment of the
Highways, may take and carry away so much of the rubbish and smallest broken
stones of any man's Quarray lying within the same Parish without leave of the
owner, as they shall think needful; or gather the loo se stones lying dispersed
in any man's grounds: But they may not without license dig in any man's Quarrey
for new stones, nor take the great stones already dug; and if there be no
such rubbish to be found in any man's Quarrey within the said Parish, then they
may enter into any man's several ground within the said Parish, lying near the
place where the Ways are decayed, and there (if they see any hopes of finding
materals fit for the reparation thereof) without leave of the owner they may
dig for Sand, Stones, Gravel, etc. so that it be not in the Houses, Orchards,
Gardens or Meadows of any man; they are not to come there without license of
the owner. And in such place where they may dig without leave, they are not to
make a pit above ten yards in breadth or length; and they are to take care that
the place be filled up again at the charge of the Parish within one Month
after, upon pain to forfeit five Marks to the owner of the ground, to be
recovered by Action of Debt.

14 Car. 2. chapter 6. The same power is granted to Surveyors to dig for Gravel,
Chalk, Sand, Stones, etc. in any man's ground in the parish next adjoining to
the place where the Ways are in decay, if there be not sufficient in the same
parish: Provided it be not in the House, Garden, Orchard, Court, Yard, Park
with Deer in it, or in the Meadow of such party, without paying any thing for
the same Gravel, etc. only damages to the party for the carrying the same over
his grass, etc. filling up the pits as is before mentioned, (5 Eliz.) within
the same time, and under the same penalty.

Stat. 5 Eliz. chap. 13.8 Eliz. chap. 10. If the owners of the grounds next
adjoining to the Highwayes do not keep their Hedges low, and cut down their
Trees and Bushes growing on the same Ways, they forfeit Ten shillings.

And he that scowrs not his Ditches in the ground next adjoining to the ground
that is next the Highway, that the water may pass the better out of the
Highway, shall forfeit 12 d. for every Rod so left unscowred.

Stat. 18 Eliz. chap. 10. If any scowr his Ditch by the HIghways side, and
throw the soil thereof into the highway, and suffer it to lie there six Months,
he forfeits for every Load thereof 12 d. And the Surveyors are to make Sluices
where such Banks have been heretofore made, for carrying away the water out of
the Highway.

Dalt. J.P. chapter 26. fo. 70. Every Survey or may cause any Watercourse or
Spring of water being in the Highway (within their parish) to be turned into
another man's several ditch or ground next adjoining to the said Way, in such
manner as by the discretion of the Surveyors shall be thought meet.

Stat. 18 Eliz. chapter 10. Wingate Abr. Stat. Tit. Highwayes. The forfeitures of
the Act of 18 Eliz. 10. must be levied by the Surveyors for the time being (by
warrant from the Justices before whom the party shall be convict) by distress
and sale of goods; which forfeitures are to be employed toward the amendment
of the Highwayes: and if the Surveyors neglect to do it within one year after
the offense committed, then the Constables and Churchwardens by like Warrant
may do it.

Dalt. J.P. chapter 26. fo. 70. Stat. 5 Eliz. chapter 13. The Surveyors or one of them
are to preent to the next Justice of peace every default upon the 2d and 3d of
P. and M. chapter 8. and 5 Eliz. chapter 13. within one Month after it shall be made,
on pain of 40 s. and the Justice is in pain of 5 l. to certify the same at the
next Quarter Sessions; where the Justices are to enquire of the default, and
set such Fine upon the offenders as they or two of them (one of the Quorum)
shall think fit.

5 Eliz. 13. Rastall 199. The presentment of a Justice of peace in Sessions
upon his own knowledge shall be a good conviction; upon which the Justices in
Sessions or two of them (one of the Quorum) may assess a Fine as well upon a
Verdict, but the offender shall be admitted to his Traverse.

Stat. 2 and 3. P. and M. chapter 8.5 Eliz. chapter 13.18 Eliz. chapter 10. The offenses
upon these Statutes are inquirable by Justices of the peace-in their Sessions,
and Stewards in Leets; either of which have power to assess Fines at their
discretions upon defaulters, (of which Fines, indented Estreats in the Sessions
under the hand and seal of the Clerk of the Peace, in the Leet under the hand
and seal of the Steward) shall be delivered within six Weeks after Michaelmas;
one part of the Estreats to the Bailiff or High-Constable of the Liberty, and
the other part to the Constables and Churchwardens of the Parish where the
offenders live.

Stat. 2 and 3 P. and M. chap. 8. These Estreats shall be a sufficient Warrant
for the Bailiff or chief Constable of the Liberty to levy the said Fines by way
of distress; and if no distress can be found, or the party do not pay the fine
within Twenty days after the lawful demand thereof, he or they shall forfeit
double so much; All which Fines and Forseitures are to be employed toward the
mending of the Highwayes in the Parish where the offenses are committed.

Stat. 2 and 3 P. and M. chapter 8. The High-Constable or Bailiff shall between the
First of March and Last of April yearly give an account to the Constables and
Churchwardens, who have the other part of the Estreats of the Fines, of what
Money they have received on pain of Forty shillings; and the Constables and
Churchwardens have power to call the High-Constable or Bailiff before two or
more Justices of the peace (one whereof to be of the Quorum) to give up his
Account; who have power to commit him until he have satisfied all the Arrerages
by him received, save Eight pence in the Pound for his own Fee, and Twelve
pence in the Pound for the Clerk of the Peace, or Steward of the Leet. And the
Contables and Churchwardens have the same power successively as their
predecessors.

14 Car. 2. chapter 6. Every Survey or of the Highwayes shall within one Month
after his Year is expired, yield up to the INhabitants of the Parish, Town or
Hamlett at some public meeting appointed by the inhabitants a perfect Account
of all Moneys he has received and paid within the Year by reason of his said
Office, and of whom; what sum to whom he has paid the same, what Moneys are
in Arrear for Fines, Forfeitures, Penalties, etc. and if any overplus be in his
hands, he shall render the same to the next Surveyor for the use of the Parish,
Town or Hamlett, to be disbursed in and about the Highwayes the year following.
And if the Surveyor shall not make such an Account and payment, then two
Justices near the Parish upon complaint may examine the business upon Oath, and
upon default found in the Surveyor they may commit him to the Gaol of the
County, City, etc. there to remain until he have made a true Account and
payment.

Stat. idem. All Justices of Assize, Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of peace
are empowered to hear and determine all matters concerning charitable Gifts for
the amending and ekeping in repair any common HIghwayes, Pavements, Streets,
etc. within their Commission; and to make Orders for the due employment of such
Gifts, (except the Gift be made to the use of any College, Hall, Free School
or Hospital, who have proper Visitors of their own) and to determine all
offenses and defects in Surveyors concerning the same; and in ease any person
be aggrieved by such Order, he may Appeal to the Court of Chancery as in case
of a Decree made upon the Statute of Charitable uses.

Stat. idem. No traveling Wayn, Wagon, Cart or Carriage, wherein any Goods,
Burdens or Wares shall be carried or drawn for hire, (other than such Carts
and Carriages as are employed about Husbandry and managing of Lands, and in
carrying of Hay, Straw, Corn unthreshed, Coal, Chalk, Timber for shipping,
materials for Building, Stones of all sorts, or such Ammunition or Artillery as
shall be for His Majesty's service) shall at any one time travle, be drawn or
go in any public or common Highway with above seven Beasts, whereof six shall
draw in pairs; nor with above eight Oxen, or six Oxen and two Horses: nor shall
at any time carry above 2000. weight between the First of October and the First
of May, (except such paticulars as abovesaid) nor above 3000. weight between
the First of May and the First of October; nor above five Quarters of Wheat,
Meal, Mesline, Rye, Pease, Beans, Tares; nor above eight Quarters of Barley,
Malt or Oats; nor shall any Wagon, Wayn or Carriage be employed for the said
uses, the Wheels whereof are less in breadth than four Inches in the Tire, upon
pain every owner of such Wagon, Wayn or Carriage, Horse, Beasts or Oxen, shall
for every of the said offenses forfeit 40. Shillings, to be divided into three
equal parts; one to the Surveyors of the Highwayes where any of the offenses
shall be committed, toward the repairing of the highwayes of the Parish there;
the other part to the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish where the offense is
committed, for the relief of the poor there; and one other part to him that
shall discover and prosecute for the said offenses.

These Penalties are to be levied by distress of all or any the Horses, Beasts
or Oxen, and to be distributed as aforesaid by the Constables, Surveyors of the
Highwayes, and Overseers of the Poor of the parish where the offense is
committed; and in case the Penalties be not paid within three days after
distress, then the same to be sold, rendering the overplus, the charges of
keeping and selling first deducted.

Statutes for repairing particular Highwayes, viz.
Stat. 39 El. chapter 19. For repairing the Highwayes in the Wild of Sussex, Surrey
and Kent.

Stat. 37 H. 8. chap. 3. For Huntington-Lane near to Chester.

Stat. 14 H. 8. chapter 6. and 26 H. 8. chapter 7. For laying out new Highwayes in the
Wild of Kent and Sussex.

Stat. 1 M. par. 2. chapter 5. For the Cawsey between Dorchester and Sherborn.

Stat. 18 Eliz. chapter 10. For the Kings Ferry in Kent.

Statutes for particular Bridges.
Stat. 18 H. 6. chap. 28. For making of Burford and Culhamford Bridge.

Stat. 18 Eliz. chapter 17. and 27 H. 7. chapter 25. For the maintenance of Rochester
Bridge.

Stat. 18 Eliz. chapter 20. For the repair of the Bridges within a mile of Oxford.

Stat. 23 Eliz. chap. 11. For the maintenance of the Bridges over Toffe in
Wales.

Stat. 39 Eliz. chap. 23. For making and repairing of Newport and Carleon
Bridges over the River Usek.

Stat. 39 Eliz. chapter 24. For building and maintenance of a Bridge at Wilton upon
Wye, near Ross in Herefordshire.

Stat. 3. Jac. chap. 23. For making and repairing Chepstow Bridge.

Stat. 14 Car. 2. chapter 6. For building and repairing Laycock and Rey Bridges in
Wiltshire, and Stratford Bridge in Middlesex.

By the same Act it is provided, That all Bridges shall have sufficient Walls
or Posts, and Rails on each side thereof, four Foot high at the least; adn that
the same be from time to time sufficiently kept and repaired.

Pasch. 10 E. 3.28, 29. Coke 2 Part of the Institutes, fol. 701. Bridges are to
be repaired by the whole County by common. Right, if it be not known who ought
to do the same otherwise.

Rolls Cases, 1. part, f. 368. If a man erect a Mill for his own particular
profit, and cut a new Course for the Water to come to it, and makes a new
Bridge over the same, and the Kings subjects use to ride over the same as over
a common Bridge, such Bridge ought to be repaired by him who has the Mill, and
not by the County; because he erected it for his own profit.

Coke 2. part Instit. so. 700. If man which holds an 100 Acres of Land ought
to repair a Bridge by tenure of the same, do alien 20 Acres thereof to one man,
and 10. Acres to another man; in such case every owner or occupier of such
Lands must be charged proportionably for their said Lands.

22 H. 8. chap. 5. Coke 2. part Instit. fo. 702, Dalt. J.P. chap. 13. fo. 41.
If any. Bridge be wholly in a City or other Town-Corporate, the inhabitants of
the same City or Town Corporate must repair it: And where such Bridge lies out
of such City or Corporate-Town, the same must be made by the inhabitants of the
Shire or Riding within which the same Shire shall be. And if part of a Bridge
be in one Shire or Riding, City or Corporate-Town, and one part in another,
then every of them shall be charged to make and repair such part as shall lie
and be within their own limits.

Crompt. 186. b. 43. Ass. Dalt. J. P. chapter 13. fo. 42. Such as are chargeable to
repair a Bridge may enter upon any other man's land or soil adjoining, and lay
their Stone, Lime, Timber or other things necessary there for the repairing and
amending thereof, and the owner of the Lands shall have no Action therefore;
for it is for the common profit. And the party that is chargeable to repair a
Bridge, must also maintain the way at each end thereof, (although the soil be
to another;) and if the ends be broken by the Watercourse, he must follow the
Watercourse and mend the way.

Stat. 22 H. 8. chapter 5. Dalt. J. P. chapter 13. fo. 4. Where a common Bridge in the
Kings HIghway is in decay, and that it cannot be proved or known, who, nor what
Lands are chargeable to the repairing thereof, four Justices of the peace (one
of the Quorum) within the Shire or Riding wherein such decayed Bridges be; and
if they be in a City or Town-corporate, then four such Justices of peace there
may within the limits of their several Commissions call before them the
Constables, or two of the most honest Inhabitants of every Town and Parish
within the Shire, Riding, City or Town-corporate wherein such Bridge or any
parcel thereof shall happen to be; and the Justices (upon the appearance of the
Constables or other inhabitants, and with their assents) may tax every
inhabitant in any such City, Town or Parish within their limits, to such
reasonable sum of Money as by their discretions they shall think convenient,
as well for the repairing of such Bridge as also for the making and repairing
of the Highwayes, by the space of 300. Foot next adjoining to the ends of any
such Bridge.

Coke 2. part Instit. fo. 704. This Taxation ought not to be made by the
Justices without the consent of the Constables or inhabitants, nor by them
without the Justices; and this Tax ought to be upon every inhabitant in
particular, and not to be set upon the Hundred, Parish, Town, etc. for then one
or few might be distrained upon the whole.

Stat. 22 H. 8. chapter 5. Dalt. J. P. chapter 13. fo. 40. Coke 2. part Instit. fol.
701, 702. Where a Franchise, City or Borough is a County of it self, and has
not four or more Justices of the peace, (whereof one or more are of the Quorum)
in this case no other Justices of the peace of any Shire or County have any
power to meddle there by this Act; but such decay must be amended by the Common
Law, by such remedies as they were anciently before the Statute of 22 H. 8.
supra.

Coke 2. part Instit. fo. 704. Dalt. J. P. chapter 18. fo. 40. The Justices of
peace after the Taxation is made, shall cause the names and sums of every
particular person so Taxed, to be written in a Roll indented in Parchment, for
every Hundred, and sealed with their Seals.

Coke part idem, fo. 705. Dalt. J.P. chapter and fol. idem. 22 H. 8. chapter 5. The
Justices may make two Collectors of every Hundred to gather the Money so taxed;
which said Collectors having received one part of the Roll thereof indented,
have power to gather all the Money therein mentioned; and if refusal be made
upon demand, then to distrain and sell such distress, rendering the overplus to
the owner, if any be.

Stat. 22 H. 8. chapter idem. Dalt. chapter and fo. ead. The Justices are likewise to
appoint two Surveyors, who (from time to time as often as need shall require)
shall see such decayed Bridges and Ways repaired and amended, to whose hands
the Collectors must pay the money by them received.

Stat. idem. Dalt. idem. The Collectors and Surveyors, and their Executors and
Administrators and every of them shall from time to time make a true Account to
the said Justices of peace, of the Receipts, Payments and Expenses of the said
sums of Money; and if any of them refuse so to do, then the said Justices of
peace from time to time at their discretions may make out Process against the
said Collectors and Surveyors, their Executors and Administrators by
Attachment, Precept or Warrant under their hands and seals, returnable at their
general Sessions of the Peace; and the said Justices may allow such reasonable
Costs and charges to the said Surveyors and Collectors upon their account, as
to them shall seem meet.

CHAP. XIII. The Office of the Distributors of the Provision for the
destruction of noysom Fowl and Vermin.
STat. 8 Eliz. chapter 15. and 14 Eliz. chapter 11. In every Parish the Churchwardens
with six other parishioners (to be required by the Churchwardens) shall yearly
in one of the Holydays in Easter-week, and at every other time when it shall be
needful, tax and assess every person having the possession of any Lands or
Tithes within that Parish, to pay such sums of money as they shall think meet,
according to the quantity of such their Lands or Tithes; and if any person do
deny to pay the same, or do not pay the same within fourteen days after
request made by the Churchwardens or one of them, then such person shall
forfeit for every time Five shillings; which (together with the sum assessed)
shall be levied by distress of the goods and chattels of such person, to be
taken by the Churchwardens or one of them; the same distress to be ordered and
used as distresses taken for Amerciaments in any Leet. And as well the said
sums as pepalties (if any of them be so levied) shall be yearly by the said
Churchwardens or one of them for the time being, delivered by Bills indented to
two honest and substantial persons of the said Parish, which shall be elected
and appointed by the Churchwardens, and shall be named, The Distributors of the
Provision for the destruction of noysom Fowl and Vermin.

And if the said Churchwardens, six persons or Distributors, or any of them
shall refuse or make default in the execution of any part of this Act, contrary
to the form thereof, then such offender shall forfeit for every default Five
pounds; the one moiety to the King, the other to him or them (using Tillage
yearly within the same Shire) that will sue for the same in any Court of Record.

The Reward of those who destroy the said noysom Fowl and Vermin, viz.
These Distributors being so chosen, and having money, shall give and pay of
the same money so to them delivered to every person that shall bring to them
any Heads of old Crows, Pyes, or Rooks taken within the several Parishes, for
the Heads of every three of them, One penny.

For the heads of every six young Crows, Choughs, Pyes, or Rooks, One penny.

For every six Eggs of any of them, One penny.

For every 12. Stares heads, One penny.

For every head of Merton, Hawks, Fursekite, Mold-kite, Buzzard, Schagge,
Cormorant, or Ringtayl, Two pence.

And for every two Eggs of them, One penny.

For every Iron or Osprayes head, Four pence.

For the head of every Woodwal, Pie, Jay, Raven or Kite, One penny.

For the head of every bird called the Kings-fisher, One penny.

For the head of every Bulfinch or other bird that devoureth the Bud of
Fruit Trees, One penny.

For the head of every Fox or Gray, Twelve pence.

For the head of every Fitchew, Polcat, Weasel, Stoat, Fair, Badge or Wildcat,
One penny.

For the head of every Otter or Hedgehog, Two pence.

For the heads of every three Rats, or twelve Mice, One penny.

For the heads of every Moldwarp or Want, an Half penny.

For the heads of every which Birds and Vermin the said Distributors shall give
and pay to the bringer of them as before is limited.

And if upon any Account to be made in the end and determination of the office
of any such Distributors, any money be remaining in their hands, it shall be by
Bill indented delivered to those that shall succeed them in the said Office, to
be by them distributed in manner aforesaid.

This gives no Authority to use any Engine for the destruction of the
beforementioned Birds or Vermin, which shall disturb or destroy the building
or breeding of Hawks, Herons, or Swans; or to the hurt of any Doves, or Deer,
or Coney-warren; neither shall any thing be given to any person for the Head of
any such Vermin or Fowl taken in any Park or Warren, nor for Stares taken in
Dove-houses, nor to the killing or bringing of the Head of any Kite or Raven
killed in any City or Town-corporate, or within two Miles of the same.

FINIS.

