A CIRCULAR LETTER to the Clergy of Essex, To stir them up to Double-diligence
for the Choice of Members of Their Party for the ensuing Parliament.
With some QUERIES Offered to the Consideration of the Honest FREEHOLDERS.
The LETTER*
SIR,
THere is a Trial of Skill to be, it seems, between Coll Mildmay's Interest and
the Church Party in Essex: How much is behooves you at this time to use your
utmost endeavor to send good Men to the Parliament, you cannot but be very
sensible; let me therefore entreat you, earnestly to persuade the Clergy of
your Deanery, to use their utmost endeavors to bring in as many Voices as they
can for Sir Anthony Abdy and Sir Eliab Harvey, and not to fail b^ing themselves
at the Election* if their health will permit. I pray give my hearty Service to
them, and let them know it is* I who most earnestly entreat this at their
hands, who am Theirs, and,

SIR, Your most assured Friend and Brother, H. L.


The Attestation to this Letter by a Conformable Minister, who was willing to
have it communicated for the Edification of the Laity.

SIR,
I Do assure you the above-written is a true Copy, which I my self took from
the Original. It was superscribed to no particular Person, but put into the
hand of a Neighboring Minister, with a Direction, That the Apparitor for the
Archdeaconry of Essex should carry it to the Habitation of every Minister in
his Jurisdiction.

Besides this from the B. I have seen another from the E. of N. written to an
infamous Bailiff of an Hundred* ordering him to endeavor to prevail with the
Freeholders of that Hundred* to appear for Sir Anthony and Sir Eliab.


So far the honest Clergy man, who it seems is not to be compelled to a Choice
against his Judgment, by the threats or artifice of any Apparitor or Bailiff.
Spiritual or Temporal Bum.

^ 1. Whether the shiling the weight (...)ir of choosing Members to sit in
Parliament [(...) Manual of Skill]* suits not better, with the air of a
Soldier, than with the gravity of a B(...)?

2. Whether if soliciting for the Choice of Members to sit in Parliament, be
part of the Priestly Function, or within the things lawful and honest, in which
they (...)Obedience, (...) was not great condescension in the B. earnestly to
entreat in such humble terms?

3 Whether the Office of a Soll^citor, or that of an Informer upon Penal Laws
in default of Churchwardens, be the greater Ecclesiastical Dignity or
Prom^ti^n?

4. Whether whoever he was that wrote the Letter to the Clergy* he does not lay
himself Vid. the case of the Ld. Mohun in Mr. P Miscel. Parl.
open to a Complaint in Parliament* not only for the (...)ness of his Letter to
those who are under him, hardly consistent with that freedom of Elections which
the Law is tender of* but for his following the late Observator* in dividing
Protestants into Parties, and censu^i^g, as opposite to the Church-Party, all
those of the Nobility and Gentry, and the Body of the Freeholders of Essex, who
have for several years looked upon the Colonel as the fi^test person to
represent them in Parliament, for his Experience, Prudence, Courage, and
unshaken Fidelity to his Country, and to the Crown too, where it has not
carried on a Separate Interest?

5. If by the Church-Party is not meant a Faction engaged in an Interest
divided from the Protestant Interest at home and abroad, why is not the present
Lord Lieut* the E. of Oxford, who is for the Colonel, as well to be thought of
the Church-Party, as the D. of Albemarl was, except that He cannot drink so
much for it as the Other did? And why should not the Circular Letters now press
the Clergy to be for them whom the now Ld. Lieut, and the Gentry with him,
think fittest to serve their Country, as formerly, by an implicit Faith,
without knowledge of the Persons, they did for such as the then Ld. Lieut. and
his Gentry should recommend?

6. Whether the bustle now made by them who call themselves the Church-Party,
does not naturally revive the memory of a Great Man's Ministry* when Money was
received from France for a Peace, advantageous only to the Factors, and them
that bought it, though at the same time the Parliament had paid much more
largely for actual War: and when the Popish Plot was stifled, and they who
inquired too far into it, were made Plotters themselves?

7. Whether the effect of a like Circular Letter, in the beginning of the late
King's Reign, when the Colonel was set aside (how fairly is not now to be
inquired into) does not show that the Church-Party which then prevailed, may
well be thought of an Interest divided from all other Protestants? Can it
otherwise be believed, that when they knew that King to be a Papist, they, for
the sake of a few good words to the Church, would have trusted him with the
Revenue for life, when they had it in their hands, and need not have parted
with it, till full provision had been made for the safety of the Religion, and
Laws of their Country?

8. Whether seeing those who were for the Regency, that is, for having James
still King, and this King but a Minister of State, or General under him, list
themselves with the Church-Party, and the Papists; that Party are not to be
thought to be for King James? while the Earl of Oxford, suitable to his
Character, and all Coll. Mildmay's Interest, to a man, are for our present King
and Queen, that is, for Protestancy against Popery, England against France.

9. Whether the B of L. who is personated in this Letter, can be thought to
have written it himself, having appeared in Arms for this King, before the
other withdrew, and being past possibility of making his peace with the late
King, unless he turn mere Layman, and accept of the Regency, and
administration of Affairs under him in a Lay capacity; being already become
irregular according to the Doctrine not only of Papists, but of the
Church-Party here; who, notwithstanding all his Solicitations for them, will
no more dispense with his Irregularity, than they did with good Archbishop
Abbot's in the time of King Charles the First

10. Whether the Laymen, who are wheedled into the separate Church-Party, ought
not to consider, that if they believe as the Church believes, they are bound to
think that not only they who joined in inviting over our Great Deliverer, and
appeared with or for him in Arms before the late King withdrew, but all who
were under that King's Allegiance, and swear to this, are, or have been,
neither good Subjects nor good Christians, at least not good
Church-of-England-men? for the Church has these Passages, among many others of
the like nature, in its Homilies, to which, God be thanked, Homilies* The six^h
(...) against w^llful Rebellion, last Edit. f. 383.
none but Clergymen have given any solemn or unfeigned assent and consent.

Had Englishmen at that time known their Duty to their Prince, set forth in
God's Holy Word, would English Subject^ have sent for, and received the Dauphin
of France, with a great Army of French men, into the Realm of England? Would
they have sworn Fidelity to the Dauphin of France, breaking their Oath of
Fidelity to their natural Lord, the King of England? and have stood under the
Dauphin's Banner Displayed against the King of England?

This King it must be known, was King John* one of the worst of Men, who not
only had violated the Original Contract between him and his People; but had
voluntarily Abdicated, in giving the Kingdom, as much as in him lay, to be held
as the Pope's Fee.

And yet you see what the Church holds, of inviting and joining with a Foreign
Prince, even in such a Case.

11. Whether Clergymen are to be thought ignorant of the Contents of the
Homilies? Whether therefore all Laymen concerned for the support of this
Government, and of the Protestant Religion ought not to be very jealous of
those for whom they are solicited by the Clergy? especially considering that
their Representatives, when they were pressed by the Bps. to thank His present
Majesty for rescuing them from Popery and Slavery, were not for meddling with
any thing, but what concerned the Church of England* as if its concerns lay
another way: And the generality of them were against all manner of alterations,
being, it seems, fond of those passages in the Homilies* which condemn all that
adhere to this Government.

12. Whether, tho the Bp. of L's late Action, wherein he forsook his Church-
Party is justly popular, yet he, who was advanced in ill times, and complied so
far with K. James, as to desire Dr. Sharp to discontinue Preaching; and so far
submitted to the High Commission-Court, as not to insist upon a Legal Plea to
its Jurisdiction; deserves to be trusted by the People of Essex, more than
Coll. Mildmay, who stood up for them undauntedly in the worst of Times, to his
great Expense and Hazard: and yet behaved himself with such Moderation and
Prudence, that the Managers then, so eager to make Plots, could frame no
pretense against him?

The Freeholders of Essex have used to see for themselves, without
Ecclesiastical Spectacles: Nor have they more than once since the
Pensioner-Parliament, been Hectored or Wheedled by the Church-Party from their
own true Interest. They cannot but remember what they suffered under their
insolences formerly; nor is it likely that they will again put themselves
under that uneasy yoke. They cannot so soon forget the Fines, Imprisonments,
and Dancings of Attendance from Sessions to Sessions, merely for Voting for
such Parliamentmen as they could trust. It is not therefore to be thought, that
they will contribute toward setting that Party again in the Saddle.

LONDON: Printed in the Year. M DCXC.


