THE LIBERTY OF HUMAN NATURE, Discussed, Stated, and Limited, IN A SERMON.
PREACHED

By J. LAMB M. A. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1684.

1 COR. CHAP. VI. The latter part of the 12th. Verse. All things are lawful for
me, but I will not be brought under the Power of any. The whole Verse runs
thus. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient, All
things, etc.


THE Doctrine of Fate, or the necessity of Human Actions destroys Religion,
Society, Reason, or the very Being of Rational Nature. For if Man were a mere
Machine, moved and acted by irresistible Springs and Weights without himself,
there could be no such thing as Reason or Deliberation, Judgment or Discretion,
Wisdom or Folly, Virtue or Vice, Rewards or Punishments, which necessarily
suppose a Power of Election, of judging, choosing and refusing. No Action of him
that moves against his Will is his own, and therefore is not subject to any
Character or Imputation. Indeed he cannot with any propriety be said to act at
all, but to be acted upon, or to suffer the Impressions of irresistible causes.
Nor is the opinion of Necessity more pernicious in its consequences, than it is
absurd and impossible in it self. It is confuted by common Sense, for we feel a
Vital Principle within our selves, a perfect Liberty of choice, an absolute
Authority over our own Actions; we perceive how readily our Will submits to our
Understanding, and all our Nerves and Instruments of Action, in an instant obey
the Motions of our Will: and we find our Station is suitable to our Powers, in
a world of various Contingencies, in the midst of different Objects, of several
amabilities, for the exercise of our Reason and Discourse. If this be false, it
is impossible we should be sure that any thing is true; because it is matter of
Sense, we perceive and feel it every moment in every Action of our Lives.

But it is not in vain to vindicate the Liberty, which is also the Dignity and
essential Difference of human Nature, whilst we our selves, who cannot but be
delighted with this Divine Prerogative in the Notion or Idea, are yet so
willing to mistake, or part with the thing it self; whilst we who enjoy a
perfect freedom in all our capacities of Intellection, Reason and Choice,
should nevertheless, as if we preferred Necessity, voluntarily subject our
selves to Opinions, and irrational Appetites: whilst we who are apt to assert
our Liberty with Heat and Zeal where it is not concerned, should patiently
decline it in the greatest and most proper Instances, where it ought to be
exercised.

Like the Corinthian Christians, whom all the Reason in the world, no not the
honor of Christianity it self, could dissuade from impleading one another,
before the Heathen Magistrates, because, forsooth! the Courts were as open to
them as to others, and they would not be abridg'd of their Liberty; Verse 1.
whilst as St. Paul observes, these very men, that would not so much as forbear
an indifferent practice, tho but for a season, and for the Honor of the Gospel,
and at the instance of the Apostle himself, were yet so much mistaken in their
Apprehensions of Liberty, that at the same time they were the basest and most
contented servile Slaves, to the worst of Masters, to brutish Passions and
unnatural Desires.

And in the words of my Text, he confutes their vain Conceit, discovers their
Folly, and reproves their Petulance and Inequality by this universal undoubted
Rule of Wisdom, Verse 12
All things, etc. The Text then is a Confutation of the false and absurd
Reasonings of the Corinthian Converts. And the Case was this:

The Apostle accuses them of two very heinous Crimes, the one of a litigious
Disposition dishonorable to Religion, and vexatious to one another, v. 7. the
other of Intemperance, with those lascivious practices which generally attend
it, v. 9. Now the answer of the Corinthians to the Apostle's Accusation is
briefly this, viz. All things are lawful for us. The Courts of Justice are open
to all, nor does any Law of God forbid the defense of our Property by Suits at
Law: and the distinction of meats is now abolished, we are now allowed to eat
of all, and as for the wanton consequences of such a Liberty, we are taught
that they are necessary, Dr. Ham. in Loc.
and therefore ought not to be charged upon us as a Crime.

And these indeed were the loose and extravagant Doctrines of the place, which
they imbibed by Education: for the Corinthians were the greatest Libertines in
the World. Who shall control us? All things are lawful for us, and it is a
manly Virtue to use our Liberty, were some of their received Sayings, or
perverted Aphorisms of Wisdom.

Wherefore in the Text, St. Paul considers strictly this their deceitful and
pernicious Reasoning; and to clear his way, allows the general Proposition, All
things are lawful for me, but shows the absurdity of their construction of it,
and practice upon it in two particulars.

First, Suppose it be granted that Man is a voluntary Agent, Master of himself
and of all Creatures, yet this Liberty of human Nature must not be understood
of a belluine power of doing what we list, but only of a freedom from the Force
and Impulse of external Causes. Our Liberty is indeed our greatest Glory, yet
altogether subject to Reason and Discretion. So that amongst indifferent
things, as going to Law, about which we are simply free, if Reason, Prudence,
or the Honor of the Gospel incline to the one part, there we are obliged and
bound. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient.

Again, the Apostle repeats their Argument, All things are lawful for me, which
in the learned Authors, is the most Elegant Form of Replication, and shows that
they so ignorantly mistake their own Principle, that their Practices upon it
are a direct Contradiction to it.

Your excuse for Luxury and Contention is your Liberty, but are ye not ashamed
by an appearance of Liberty, to be so easily trepanned and deluded into real
Slavery? Are ye such Children to be caught by a word, and decoyed so foolishly
into Nets and Snares? Do ye not know that the Liberty of Man is such an
Authority over his Will and Actions, that he may always be indifferent to
things indifferent; that it is a power of considering every thing in its proper
place, and one thing with Respect to another; of gratifying every Appetite and
Faculty, without the prejudice or destruction of any, of believing, loving and
desiring according to the weight and nature of the thing, and the decision of
right Reason.

But you, because it is simply lawful to go to Law, will therefore indulge
intemperate heats, and suffer your selves to be so overcome of Passion, that
the strongest Reasons, no not the Credit of Religion it self are sufficient to
divert you; and because no sorts of meat are forbidden, common or unclean, you
will therefore inslave your selves to the Appetites of the Belly. So foolish
are you, that in those very actions wherein you think you assert your Liberty,
you really destroy it; you sacrifice your Reason to those Rebellious Tyrannous
Desires which, of right, are subject, and might have been kept in due
Obedience. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the
power of any. As if he had said, If you would preserve your Liberty, you must
preserve the Authority of your Understanding; and entirely submit your
Opinions, Appetites, and Actions thereunto. Since you are endowed with such a
Principle, you must resolve that all things shall be indifferent to you, till
they have passed the scrutiny of your Judgment, that your Will and Affections,
shall always wait the Resolution of your Reason.

Thus having given you a short Account of the occasion of the Words, it is not
necessary to insist any farther upon their particular respect and application
to the Case of the Corinthians, but I shall consider them, independent of the
Text, as a noble Resolution of St. Paul, or as an universal Rule of Wisdom to
all Men, in the Government of their Lives, I will not be brought, etc.

The Terms of the Problem are easily understood, and require but little
Explication. I have a power in all things, (...) of Judging, Choosing and Acting
according to right Reason.

Propositions of Truth, Objects of Desire, and Methods of Practice are infinite
and innumerable, and about these the Reason and Judgment of Man is exercised;
and he has such an absolute power over his own Opinion and Practice, that he is
not determined by any Fate, Necessity, or irresistible Cause without himself,
but by certain innate Principles, rational Powers, and the Divine Assistance,
he is enabled to judge of Truth and Goodness, and only so far obliged to choose
and act as shall appear conductive to his Happiness, or agreeable to his Reason.

And having thus explained the Principle, the Sense of the Apostles Resolution
or practical Comment thereupon is evident, I will not be brought under the
power of any thing; I will so use this Liberty of Judging and Choosing for my
self, that my Opinion, Will and Actions shall always remain, as they naturally
are, the servants of my Understanding. I will not be deluded by false
Appearances to believe Absurdities, to love what is hateful or do what is evil.
The words being thus explained may be resolved into this easy Proposition, viz.
That to preserve the Authority of our Reason and the Liberty of our Will, from
the Usurpations of Prejudice, sensual Appetites and Passions, is the Wisdom and
Felicity of a Man. I will not be brought under the power of any thing.

The Text may seem at the first view to countenance Republican Principles and
Opinions, but we shall find, upon a more exact inspection, that it was never
designed by the Apostle, to serve the Interest of Faction or Sedition, to
dissolve or loosen Government, or subject the Laws of Princes to the Reason and
Judgment of the People. This is so perverse, so malicious an Explication of the
Words, that those who make it, cannot themselves believe it, because it is so
direct a Contradiction to those positive Declarations and express Precepts of
exactest Loyalty, which we find in St. Paul's Epistles.

And I humbly hope ill sounding Words will not offend, when the design of using
them, is to direct them to their proper places, to right Objects, and deliver
them from those gross Abuses which have been super-induc'd upon them.

It is true, for fear of Misconstruction, I might have excepted the Laws of God
and our Country as Sacred Things, about which, generally speaking, we have no
Deliberation, Liberty or Election, and therefore fall not under the
Consideration of the Proposition, or the Rule of the Apostle, which only
respect such things as are wholly in our Power. And yet there would still have
been sufficient Scope for the exercise of our Reason, Discretion and Choice.

For the Laws of Princes chiefly Respect the Public Interest, or the
Government of the external Actions of Men, as they are Members of the
Commonwealth: but all Opinions of indifferent Nature, all ingenious
Speculation, Philosophy, Wisdom, Moral Habits, inward Affections, together with
almost the whole Economy of Private Life, are left to the discretion of every
man.

And most of the Laws of God are general, only the great Lines and Heads of
Duties, but the application of Particulars, the Proportion of one thing to
another, the Relation, Affections, and Circumstances of Duties are left to the
decision of Human Reason.

This I might have done, but it is wholly needless to make such Limitation or
Exception, for the Proposition is universally true, viz. That to preserve the
Authority of our Reason, and the Liberty of our Will, from the Usurpations of
Prejudice, sensual Appetites and Passions, is the Wisdom and Felicity of a Man.
Indeed, one of the very first, and most obvious Principles of Right Reason is,
the most entire Resignation of our selves to be governed by the Laws of God and
our Country. And no Man that does not basely desert his Reason, and depart from
this incomparable Rule of the Apostle, can ever wilfully Sin against God, or
Rebel against his Prince.

This premised, I shall now proceed to consider the truth of the Proposition
with Respect to things Intellectual, Moral, Civil and Religious, and show that
in all these (which comprehend whatsoever the Judgment of Man is conversant
about) to preserve the Authority of our Reason, and the Liberty of our Will,
from the Usurpation of Prejudice, and the Briberies of Interest, sensual
Appetites and Passions, is the Wisdom and Felicity of a Man.

And first, With Respect to things intellectual, or in the Study of useful
Knowledge, and the Government of our Opinon.

Every perfect Man is born with inherent Topics of right Reason, with a
sufficient System of natural Logic; his Mind is impressed with Standing
Principles, and eternal Verities to direct him in the search of Truth, and
furnished with rational Powers of comparing one thing with another, of judging
Effects by Causes, and drawing innumerable and certain Inferences from those
undoubted Premises.

This then is the Liberty and Glory of Human Nature, that it is indifferent and
free to every doubtful Opinion and disputable Proposition, that those who have
sufficient opportunity of improving their Faculties, are enabled to judge for
themselves, and not obliged to assent without sufficient Reason; that there is
no force upon their Minds from within or without themselves; but as the
sensitive Faculties do freely judge of Sweet and Bitter, or the qualities of
their proper Objects by the Test of Sense, so the Rational conclude of True and
False, of Good and Evil, by such demonstrations as the Nature of the thing
requires.

It is therefore the highest point of Wisdom in the world, to defend this
Liberty of Reasoning, this Jewel of inestimable Value, from the Usurpations of
Prejudice and Passion to suspend our Assent till we shall be sufficiently
convinced; to search for Truth impartially, to pursue it greedily, to love it
for it self, and embrace it readily wheresoever we find it: So shall we
preserve the Beauty of our Nature, and the perfection of our Being. So shall we
discharge our Trust, and preserve that Authority in our little world which God
has invested us withal.

Not like the Skeptic who resolves to suspend his Judgment, and remain
indifferent howsoever clear and full the Evidence may be; this is to prevent
the diseases of the Eyes by pulling them out. It is true, he cannot be deceived
or imposed upon by particular Propositions, but the thing it self, or the
resolution of believing nothing, is the greatest Delusion and Imposition of the
Mind that can be; for the Mind is greedy of Knowledge, our Faculties are
disposed to seek it, and the Divine Nature, and all the appearances in the
world are intended for our Speculation; and Soul enjoys a Truth with the
greatest delight imaginable: so that whilst the Skeptic pretends to secure, he
really destroys the Liberty of his Mind, he debars it by violence and force
from the kind enjoyment of its proper Objects.

But Firm, Well-grounded, Rational Assent proceeding from a cautious search,
from an impartial preparation to believe upon sufficient Evidence, upon
universal Principles, regular Deductions, and credible Testimony, is the true
and proper Liberty of human Nature, the highest Command and Authority over ones
self.

These are the Men who alone are accomplished for the Study of Knowledge, who
see with their own Eyes, understand by their own Judgment, discover Truth,
improve Learning and are highly useful in the Commonwealth.

But the Sceptick is ignorant and useless. And a Man, on the other hand, of a
passive Spirit, fond of every Opinion, tenacious of his first Impressions, of
ancient Errors, of popular Opinions: judging by Interest, Prejudice, Affection,
Sense, or any thing but impartial Reason, is a very slave to innumerable,
inconstant, giddy Masters; to every hypocritical designing Countenance, to
every conceited Emperick, bold Assertor, false Historian, uncertain Proverb,
and to all who by cunning Arts and Devices go about to deceive. Oh homines ad
servitutem nati! as Seneca speaks upon the like occasion, Oh Men! destined, cut
out for Slaves, how monstrous is it that you should desire to have all things
free, your Bodies, your Goods, your Members, and not your Spirit, which yet
alone is born to Liberty? It is therefore a wise and happy Rule, I will not be
brought under the Power of any thing in Speculation or the search of Truth.

And as in Speculation, so secondly in the Government of our Life and Actions,
to preserve the Authority of our Reason and the Liberty of our Will, from the
Usurpations of Prejudice, sensual Appetites and Passions, is the Wisdom and
Felicity of a Man: I will not be brought under the power of any thing in
Matters Moral.

The just and true design of Speculation or the study of Truth and Falsehood is,
that we may the better be enabled to judge of Good and Evil. For the ultimate
End or highest Perfection of Man is a steady, constant course of laudable
Actions, such a rational procedure as shall Improve our Faculties, advance our
Interest and satisfy the true Dispositions and Inclinations of our Nature. To
this are all the Faculties of the Soul intended to administer, and into this
they finally resolve; we discourse, compare, judge and determine for this end
that we may act according to right Reason.

All the Kinds of Being in the world, excepting Man, are simple and entire. The
Angels now, are Pure and Perfect in their Will and Appetites, immoveably
determined to that which is good, they act freely and from a vital Principle,
but yet their Knowledge is so distinct and clear, that it is supposed
impossible they should direct their choice amiss: Beasts are altogether
sensual, moved by certain instincts, and impressions, which direct them to the
proper satisfactions of their several desires. But the nature of Man is mixed,
he partakes of the Perfections, Quality and Inclinations of all other Kinds of
Being whatsoever. He is so far Divine and Spiritual, as he moves and acts from
himself freely, and for the sake of ends, and is endowed with Principles of
Goodness, Wisdom, Knowledge and Reflection. And so far also sensitive and
animal, as his Mind is lodged in an earthly Body, endowed with Organs of the
quickest Sense, and sent into a world that is furnished with all the
satisfactions of the animal Life.

And tho this condition, neither purely spiritual, nor purely animal be
imperfect, yet it is the most honorable that can be on earth; it is the
noblest nature that could be framed with an earthly body. For tho the inferior
Powers, the sensitive Appetites are very quick, and the same in us as Brutes;
yet every Man is Master of himself, capable of understanding his whole
Capacity, of preserving the Beauty, Harmony and Order of his frame; of watching
the motions of his Will and Affections: of subduing the Predominancy of
irregular desires, and directing them to their proper Objects: finally, by the
Grace of God, of preserving his peculiar Form Entire and Perfect.

This is that Liberty, that Authority of Man over his Desires and Actions. His
province indeed is very difficult, viz. to improve and satisfy the several and
contrary Dispositions of his nature to keep his Passions equal, and his
sensitive Appetites in their proper inferior place and order: to prevent
Diseases and Sickness, Jars and Clashing, in so fine and curious a Composition,
but his natural Power, assisted by the Grace of God, is every way
proportionable. He is able to judge, by inward Impressions, by his natural
Necessities, and by the Divine Revelation, what is fit and reasonable to do or
to forbear, and to act accordingly.

It is not therefore a brutish Licentiousness or Liberty of doing what we
please, of gratifying the present Appetite, of proceeding without the
consideration of the effects and consequence of Actions: suck a Liberty is
utterly incompetent, indeed a contradiction to rational Nature. For the
essential difference of Man is Consciousness, or the Knowledge of himself with
a power of directing his Actions according to Reason, that is, with respect to
his real Interest, estimated and measured by the Capacities of his Nature. That
therefore cannot be challenged as a Right, or desired as a Privilege which
directly destroys our very Species.

Even God himself, who certainly enjoys the most perfect Freedom as well as all
other Excellencies, has yet no Liberty to Evil. There is a rule or manner of
operation employed in the Divine Nature; all his Attributes are exercised with
respect and safety to each other; there is an Agreement or Harmony in the
Divine Perfections which is justly styled the Eternal Immutable Law of God.
Thus also the Liberty of Man in the management of his Life, is not a Liberty of
living loosly, without all Respects, Bounds and Laws: but of Choosing, Loving
and Acting with relation to his Real Interest, to the true Dispositions,
Inclinations and Capacities of his Nature. And Actions thus proceeding are the
only genuine, free and easy Actions of our Lives.

And notwithstanding these seeming Limitations, this is the most honorable, the
most perfect state of Ingenuity and Liberty that can be imagined. For it is the
liberty of God himself. It is this that gives us the Denomination of rational
Agents. It is this that enables us to live a happy Life, to improve, indulge
and gratify, as, well our sensitive as intellectual Powers. For he only who is
loose from sensual Pleasures truly enjoys them. For as Seneca well observes,
they that are under the power of bodily Pleasures, cannot be said to have
pleasure, but pleasure has them, we cannot be said to possess enjoy what is not
under our Command.

This then is the Glory, the noblest Prerogative of Human Nature; and therefore
to preserve the Authority of our Reason, from the Usurpations of sensual
Appetites and Passion, must surely be the Wisdom and Felicity of a Man. For
where the Will is directed by due consideration, by a well weighed Judgment,
there is Health, Ease and Satisfaction. Our Lives will be conformable to God,
our Knowledge will be clearer and more copious, our Appetites indifferent and
obsequious, our Affections equal, proportioned to the value of the Object, our
Passions calm and regular. Seneca says of such a Man that he is Immovable as
God, compelled of nothing, attempting nothing in vain, never disappointed,
always safe, unhurt and free.

It is this that is true Nobility, true Generosity of Soul, and Greatness of
Mind; these are the most perfect of Men, and therefore the most beautiful and
honored in the sight of all: their Minds are free, their Faculties improved,
their Judgment ready, apt for Council, Trust, Managery, without Hypocrisy,
Design or private Interest. And those things which flow from a Man's self are
his real Honor.

But as for those who break the Order of this inward Government, who choose and
pursue according to the first appearance, and love without deliberation; who by
reason of their constant Conversation with sensual Objects, look no farther,
but understand, esteem Judge and love with Respect to these alone; they are
under a force and coaction of Soul: their natural power over their Desires and
Actions to direct them according to Reason and Interest, is usurped upon by
those rebellious Passions which of right are subject and ought to wait the
Resolution of deliberate Judgment.

And when once this Order is broken, what tumult, what contest must it
necessarily raise in the Minds of Men? How insatiable are inordinate Desires,
how inconsistent, and yet how importunate to be gratified? Whilst Ambition
prompts to that which Envy disallows, Pride commands what Covetousness forbids.

Vrget enim mentem Dominus non lenis, and acres Subjectat lasso stimulos. Or as
St. Paul expresses it, They are holden prisoners of Satan at his Will, 2 Timothy 2
26.

And as in Speculation, and in the general institution of Life: So thirdly, in
the particular management of ones self, as a Member of Society. To preserve the
Authority of our Reason, from the impositions of false Opinion, Prejudice and
Passion, is the Wisdom and Felicity of a Man. I will not be brought under the
power of of any thing in matters Civil.

The Authority of Princes cannot be more highly asserted, nor the Obedience of
Subjects more strictly enjoined by than St. Paul in many passages of his
Epistles. And yet in my Text the same St Paul may seem a great Bigot of
Liberty, and upon the question peremptorily resolve, that He would not be
brought under the power of any, the word is (...) and may be interpreted of
Persons as well as things.

Wherefore since a contradiction in the Apostle is abhorrent to conceive, we
may, be sure there is a fair Accommodation, and entire Obedience according to
the firm injunction of the Apostle, may be reconciled and proper Liberty of a
man with the just, asserted in the Text.

And indeed, as has been already noted, and cannot be too well considered, the
Liberty of Man in any matter whatsoever, is not an exorbitant power of acting
as he pleases, but of doing what is most rational in its nature and conducive
to his happiness. And this very notion of Liberty were it thoroughly imbibed,
would be a sufficient Antidote against the Delusions of Hypocrites and the
Impositions of the Seditious.

Government is the defense and safety of the weak, the foundation of Property
the encouragement of Civility, Arts, Learning and Religion. Without this the
Human Nature would be the most savage in the world; Reason would degenerate
into Craft and Malice, and be but an addition of Strength to vex, molest and
prey upon one another. Wherefore one of the first and most obvious resolutions
of Reason, is, that we are subject naturally and of right.

And amongst the many Kingdoms and Societies of the world, common Sense will
teach us to account our selves the undoubted Subjects of that particular Polity
in which we are Born, and under whose Protection and Influence we live.

And because the very Form and Essence as well as the Beauty and Strength of
any Government, is final determination or absolute Authority, therefore Reason
peremptorily commands the most cheerful Observation of whatsoever Laws
concerning any matters that are not plainly determined by the Laws of God, to
whom we are primarily obliged. Wherefore then, the most patient resignation of
our selves, our private Will and Interest to the Will and Authority of the
Government we live under, is therefore our truest Liberty because it is the
evident Resolution of Right Reason.

For any Government by how much the more entire, positive and absolute it is,
by so much the better it is enabled to support it self. It is fitted for
defense, secret in Councils, in deliberation Wise and Bold, without Hypocrisy
or Fear, in execution Potent, where the Interest is but one, the subjects will
be as easy as they are secure, and the Neighbors just and awful.

But all Reservations of positive or real Power in the People, all Exemptions
in the Modes or external Celebrations of Religion, or in any other indifferent
matter, from the Jurisdiction of the Government, are pernicious to Societies;
they nourish a continual Ferment, support and continue diverse Interests,
engender Emulation, Stirs, Heats, Rebellion, and Civil Wars, intoxicate the
common People, and fill their Minds with Curiosity, Conceit and Pride; furnish
Envy and Ambition, Faction and Discontent with plausible disguises and colors
for their Malice and Iniquity. In a word, they clog and prejudice the
Government, but it is impossible in the nature of the thing, that they should
secure or serve the Real Interest of any people in the world.

For the Authority of the people is indeed a mere Chymera, a word of Art to
conciliate poor deluded Slaves to the oppressions, and tyrannies of the Senate,
and in Fact and Practice, the Subjects of Commonwealths are as severely
governed as those of any Monarchy we know. Wherefore then, the true Liberty of
Man in his politic Capacity, as in all things else, is to act as Reason, that
is, the Interest of human Nature, or the necessities of Society require, namely
with the most obsequious Submission: To lay aside the airy Dream of original
imaginary Power in him (that cursed Spring of Mischief and Confusion!) to
consider his Incompetency, to judge his Governors, or their proceedings, to be
always apt to believe the best, and ready to assert the Authority (which is the
Cement) of the established Government, with Vigor and hearty Zeal, in his place
and station.

And this is a Notion as easy to be understood as it is just, secure and safe
in practice. But to take the Liberty of the Subject for any Latent, Direct or
Positive Authority residing in them is foolish to Absurdity, because it
destroys the very Reason, or Principle upon which the Opinion it self is
founded, namely, the safety of the People. For if we could suppose, what can
never be made to appear by any Example, a people perfectly free, and at their
own dispose that which never was by general content, did appoint and constitute
a Prince, or Governors, enduing him or them with such degrees of Power as they
thought fit, reserving to themselves the Sovereignty; such a Government, I say,
would prove in a little time, impracticable and vain.

For where all have Authority, none have. Through corruption of human Nature,
the Generality of Men hate their Superiors; had they therefore any share in the
Government; or any real power, it would beget such an haughty opinion of
themselves, raise such extravagant Passions, as must necessarily put the
Government into frequent danger of Dissolution.

It is therefore the Wisdom and Felicity of a man, to preserve the Authority of
his Reason, from the Impositions of popular opinions, prejudice and passion in
these things. To consider his Station, and never suffer the plausible Pretenses
of designing Malcontents to debauch his reason, or shock his Loyalty: so shall
he contribute to the preservation of the Government, and in that to his own
happiness, to the free enjoyment of the liberty of his mind and will in all
those other things wherein it may be justly exercised.

How agreeable would this Disposition under the People to their Prince and to
one another? what a Confidence would it raise? what delight, what free and
cheerful Intercourse? how would all Suspicion and Hypocrisy, Fears, Jealousies
and odious Characters be banished human Conversation?

And it is this, this Humility and Modesty in the Subject, that is the best
security in the world of real Privileges, of public Interest, and steady
Government. There is in Man such a natural Condescension, such Civility, such
sense of Love and Duty observed, that it is an affront to the Ingenuity of
Human Nature to suppose a Prince should be severe upon a willing and obedient
people.

But those who mistake the Liberty of the Subject for sovereign Power, as the
Republican, or for a freedom from all Coertion, Laws and Government, as the
Enthusiast, or for a Liberty of capricious Censure, of controlling Princes, of
reducing them to Reason by force, of improving and practicing upon Fears and
Possibilities, as the factious Monarchist, these, I say, whilst they would seem
so great Asserters of their Liberty, are, in truth, as very Slaves as any in
the world. They are always busied with mighty Earnestness, about such matters
as are above their Comprehension, but there cannot be a greater misery than hot
and fiery Spirits acting upon false Appearances, upon crude and indistinct
Notions and Apprehensions of things. How is such a person galled and agitated
from himself, from the confusion of his own Mind? and how fitly is he prepared
for every cunning Patriot and designing Malecontent to act upon? They are
bewitched with the word Liberty as with a Charm, live in perpetual passion, in
ignorant and imprudent Zeal, they govern themselves by inconstant Principles,
are distracted by multiplicity of new Designs, neglect their Business, destroy
their Virtue, expose their Fortunes, and center often in an ignominious Death.
And thus the Proposition is undoubtedly true in our Relation to the Government:
that to preserve, etc. I will not be brought under the power of any thing in
Matters Civil.

4. The time will not permit me to illustrate the Apostles Rule as I proposed
in the last place, with Relation to Religion, or in Matters Divine and
Spiritual.

And here I intended to show that Man by natural instinct found himself obliged
to worship God.

That he is endued with sufficient Abilities if he carefully employ them, and
have opportunity of improving them, to judge of such a demeanor or habit of
life, as is likely to be accepted of him.

That every man whose Education and Opportunities will permit him, is obliged
to assert and exercise this Liberty of proving all things, that at length, when
he has found the best, he may hold it fast, 1 These. 5.21. 1 John 4.1. of
determining his Faith and Practice according as his Reason, after the most
diligent search and faithful use of all the means of Knowledge, shall direct him

That Reason will prompt him, to consult the Law of Nature, the common Sense of
mankind, the divine Revelation, the consent of the universal Church, the
Authority of the Church he lives in.

That whosoever judges of true Religion by these rules, (which are the
Principles in the study of Religion, wherein alone the Mind can rest, and
satisfy it self) acts most rationally, and therefore most freely. That the
difficulties in the study of Religion are such, that true Ingenuity of mind
will dispose, and oblige to a modest acquiescence in the definition of the
Church.

That therefore Christian Liberty is not a liberty of serving God, according to
the suggestions of private fancy without any farther Respect, that this is the
unhappy fountain of most of the Heresies, Schisms, wild and extravagant
Opinions which infest and vex the Church.

That therefore also, it is not an exemption from Laws Ecclesiastical, or
restraints in the outward Celebration of Religion, upon such pains as the
Church and State shall find necessary; that if the Theory and Practice of
Religion were at the Will and Choice of every Subject, it would be impossible
for the Prince to preserve his people in Peace and Godliness.

That therefore, lastly, it is not an indifference to all Religion; but a
readiness of mind to embrace whatsoever, either from the nature of the thing,
or from the authority with which it comes attested, shall appear to be True or
Good.

That thus to study, and to inform our selves, according to our opportunities,
in the nature and truth of Religion, with due submission to Authority, gives a
man a steady Confidence and Security in his Mind, a sober judgment, assurance
in his Practice. He knows how to behave himself under all the different modes
and fashions of Religious Worship, he cannot easily be drawn into Superstition
and Idolatry on the one hand, nor into Schism, by Scrupulosity or Ignorance on
the other. He easily distinguishes Graviora Legis from the Condientia virtutis,
as Origin styles them; finally, the Religion of such a man is his own, his
deliberate act, God is his Choice, and will therefore be his Reward.

But whosoever takes the Measures of his Religion from the constitution of his
body, from vulgar opinions of Sanctity, from the sense of such particular
Persons as he shall happen to esteem, or from any other Principle than that of
his own Reason directed soberly and with all submission and deference to the
Church universal, and that in particular whereof he is a Member (which is
highly and strictly rational) is under the greatest slavery that it is possible
to fall into. For if he be a man of any understanding, he will always be
perplexed in his Mind, and diffident in himself, always uncertain, and
therefore always liable to be troubled and confounded, because the Principles
upon which he proceeds, viz. bodily temper, vulgar opinion, the sense of
particular Persons, and the like, are mutable and apt to vary every day.

And thus, as briefly as I could, I have illustrated the Apostles rule, or the
Wisdom of preserving the authority of our Reason and the Liberty of our Will
from the usurpations of Prejudice, sensual Appetites, and Passions. I will not
be brought under the power of any thing.

What therefore now remains, but that we resolve to govern our Opinions and
Practice by this Wise and Noble Rule of that Apostle?

How can we conceive a man more perfect than one whose understanding is free,
fitted to judge, and always ready to receive the Impressions of Truth and
Goodness: whose Principles are Eternal, his Opinion deliberate, in Morals wise
and upright, in his Conversation steady, easy and indifferent, whose Religion
is firm, and his Loyalty immovable?

Others may have the Shape, these only have the Form, these only live the life
of Men. Pulcherrimum victoriae genus est seipsum vincere. It is the most
glorious of Victories, the highest Attainment thus to command our selves.

External Acquisitions may give us power and opportunities of licentious
living, but perfect freedom is within our selves, when Prejudice and Passion,
Pride and Ambition, Envy and Avarice, and all the Legion of contracted
Prejudices and Immovable Habits shall be subdued; when the Son of God by the
Illuminations of his Spirit, and the Operations of his Grace shall make us
free, then shall we be free indeed (2 Cor. 3.17.) To whom with the Father, and
the Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Honor, Praise and Obedience now and for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.

