SOME Genuine Remains Of the Late Pious and Learned John Lightfoot, D. D.
Consisting of Three Tracts; VIZ. I. Rules for a Student of the Holy Scriptures.
II. Meditations upon some Abstruser Points of Divinity, and Explanations of
diverse Difficult Places of Scripture. III. An Exposition of Two Select Articles
of the Apostles Creed.


TOGETHER With a large Preface concerning the Author; His Learned Debates in
the Assembly of Divines, His Peculiar Opinions, His Christian Piety; and the
Faithful Discharge of His Ministry.

LONDON: Printed by R. J. for J. Robinson, at the Golden-Lion; and J. Wyat, at
the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCC.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in God, JOHN, L. Bishop of Norwich.
My Lord,
I Present this Book to Your Lordship in this Public and Solemn manner, moved
thereto by good Reasons: Knowing with what Respect and Honor You are wont to
treat the Memory of the Reverend and Pious Man, the Author, and the great
Esteem You express to have of his Studies. To whom therefore the Sight of these
Tracts, some Genuine Remains of that excellent Divine, will not, I know, be
unacceptable.

I was willing also this way to express my Sense of Your Lordship's obliging
Favors toward me, which You have been pleased to show, not only upon Account
of our ancient Acquaintance, and equal Standing in the University, but chiefly
in respect of those Studies I have of late addicted my self to; which You (a
known Patron and Furtherer of all good Learning) have been always ready to
assist and promote. You have, my Lord, afforded me the free Use of Your
singular Library, stored with so many and so choice Manuscripts, together with
such Antique, and to the present Generation scarce heard of, Books and
Treatises, when Printing was but, as it were, in its Infancy. And besides, You
have got me the sight of other valuable Manuscripts. Whereby I must gratefully
acknowledge the considerable Improvements I have made in my Searches into the
Historical Affairs of this Church, when it first began to reform Abuses, and to
vindicate it self from Rome, and as it happily proceeded under our two first
Protestant Princes. Which must be more amply owned, in case any of my Studies
of this Nature hereafter see the Light.

I beseech Your Lordship therefore to take in good part this my Presumption,
and to accept of the humble Respects of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obliged Servant, John Stryp.

THE PREFACE, Relating to the AUTHOR.
SINCE these Genuine Pieces of Dr. LIGHTFOOT might be of good use to such as
are Studious of Divine Learning, I was unwilling they should lie any longer
within private Walls. For as he was one of the deepliest Studied Men in the
Learning of the Jews, whether you regard their Language, Phrases, Customs,
Laws, Times, Worship, Temple, or Land, so he made it his main Bent and Business
to render all that Knowledge he had therein useful; to contribute Light to the
Sacred History, and to open the Inspired Writings of the Old and New Testament.
In the doing whereof he had a happy Faculty, by his dextrous Application of his
said Learning; whereby many Knots in Scripture have been untyed, many
Difficulties explained, many abstruse Questions satisfactorily discussed, many
Dislocations restored to their right Places, and the Chronicle and Method of
the Books laid in their due and proper Order.

This Learned Man's usefulness this way has been so well known abroad, that
there have been two or three Impressions of his Works there, since his Death.
In the last whereof finished at Franeker, Anno School. are added diverse Tracts of
his Remains. Which several of the Learned there, and particularly Remfertus the
Professor, had earnestly desired of me, in order to the publishing of them,
that no Notions of so great a Man might be lost. By which Encouragement I have
since at my leisure looked up together these further Remainders, that now
appear. Which having carefully reviewed and considered, and finding them
according to my poor Judgment not less serviceable to the good Ends the
Reverend Author designed in what he published himself, I resolved to prepare
and give to the Press also. These Tracts are three. Concerning each of which I
shall say something for the Readers satisfaction.

I. The First, viz. The Rules for a Student of Holy Scripture, was written
complete and fair by the Author's own Hand. And surely it is one of the
pithiest and plainest Discourses that ever I met with of this Nature; in so
narrow a compass, and in so familiar a way, framed to instruct any ordinary
Reader that comes with an honest Mind to read the Scriptures; whereby he may
arrive not to some superficial Knowledge in them, but be admitted even into the
Depths and Mysteries thereof. It was composed by him for the Use of some
Person, who intending to read the Word of God with Profit, had desired his
Counsel in his Access thereto. Who this Person was I cannot assign, but
conjecture it might be his Son John, who was Chaplain to Dr. Bryan Walton, late
Bishop of Chester, the great and chief Undertaker of the Polyglott Bible; or
Anastasius his Second Son, who was a pious Minister in Hertfordshire. Or for
whomsoever else it was writ, the Author designed it for some, that desired to
be good Textuists: As in Truth all that take upon them Holy Orders, and to
preach and teach Religion, ought to be: The Holy Scriptures being the
infallible Ground of all Divine Truth; whence all sound Doctrine is to
befetched. And therefore if they be not first well, or at least tollerably,
understood by the Preacher, he is likely both to deceive himself and those that
hear him; and to teach Falsehood and Error: Whereof has sprung a great part of
those Schisms and wild Opinions, that have created so much Disturbance in the
Church. And for the foresaid purpose the Writer of this Tract does these
things. First, He directs to reduce the Books of the Bible into a continued
Chronicle. Secondly, He sets down many cursory Notes for the Explanation of
Things and Phrases not so obvious. Thirdly, He shows a Method and Course for a
distinct reading of the Scripture, according the Historical Order of Time,
(which is not always observed by the Sacred Writers for special Reasons;
whereby it comes to pass that many Chapters are dislocated) that so those Holy
Books may be the more clearly apprehended and understood, and read with more
Profit and Benefit. And all laid down in a most plain and easy manner, as
Instruction to Learners and Beginners ought to be.

This Discourse seems indeed to have been the Ground-plot of that Piece of the
Author's Printed among his Works, entitled, A Chronicle of the Times of the Old
Testament; and of those other Pieces of the Harmony and Chronicle of the New.
But as they are larger, so this is more succinct, and may be used as a
convenient Manuduction into the other: Having also much in it, whereof the
others are silent. So that they may serve all very well to illustrate and
amplify one another. And I am confident, that were this Method of reading the
Scripture pointed to in this Tract, and recommended by the Author, but
practiced diligently with due application of Mind, the Sense of Scripture would
shine out more clearly, and the Remembrance of it be more firmly implanted in
Men's Minds. Let the Pious Student of Scripture make the Trial. And this I find
is the Judgment of other Learned Men. And particularly his, whose Letter is
lately Printed at the end of Bishop Barlow's Directions for the Choice of Books
in the Study of Divinity: Where he says, That he thinks Dr. Lightfoot has
prescribed the best Method of reading the Scriptures, by digesting the
Historical and Prophetical Books into the Order of Time. And I add, this will
prove a better and more expedite way to come to the understanding of those Holy
Pages, than all that pains he recommends afterward, viz. Reading the Text
several times over, and observing the Difficulties, trying the Construction and
Signification of the Words, to see what can be made of it, and consulting
Expositors: unless marking the Order of Time, and making use of Jewish Learning
accompany.

II. The next Tract consists of Meditations on some Points of Divinity, and
Explanations of certain difficult Places of Scripture. And these are nothing
else but faithful Collections out of a great number of his Manuscript Sermons,
never yet Printed. In these Discourses no small number of Places of Scripture
are explained by our Author, offering such Elucidations as are out of the
common Road, and scarce before heard of, to the pleasing Surprise, as well as
Instruction of the Reader. I remember, once waiting upon the most Reverend
Father in God, Archbishop Sancroft at Lambeth, he took occasion to talk with me
about Dr. Lightfoot; for whose Studies and Learning he expressed a very great
Esteem; and enquiring after the Papers he had left behind him, he told me it
were pity but his Remains should see the Light. And when I had hinted to him
the Jewish or other good Learning, and the excellent Light let into many Texts
of Scripture, which might be found in his Sermon-Notes, he expressed a great
concern that they should not be lost: And for the preserving of them, he
advised and encouraged me to extract out of the same Notes all such Pieces of
Learning and Expositions of Holy Writ; and where the Sermons ran upon any
Learned Argument, to abreviate them, taking the Pith and Sum thereof, and
disposing them in some such Method as was used toward Mr. Medes Discourses: Or
to digest his Interpretations of any part of God's Word in some such Method, as
the Annotations of Cameron were published in his Prelections upon some Select
Places of Scripture, and in his Myrothecium Evangelicum, or such like. I often
afterward thought on this Advice; and at length, as leisure served,
endeavored to attempt something that way in the Method that I now recommend it
to the Readers. Which I have digested into three Decads. To which many other
Discourses of that Nature might be joined. Let it be added, that these
Diatribae were some of the Author's last Thoughts, and the Meditations of his
Maturest Age; being the substance of what he Preached but a few Years before
his Death.

III. The Third Part of this Book consists of two Discourses upon as many
Select Articles of the Apostles Creed. And great Pity it is, his Exercitations
upon all the rest of the Articles cannot be retrieved: Which by these two, and
one more, viz. That of Christ's Descent into Hell, printed among his Works, we
may conclude to have been replenisht with very good Learning, and might have
been of use to the World, and have imparted diverse Notions peculiar to the
Author's Learning. I have been Inquisitive after these, but cannot recover
them. I conjecture they were embezzelled at Ely, where he Died.

AS for the Author himself, how well he merited of the Learned Christian World,
is well known. And his Figure has been drawn in part in his Life, set before
his Works. To which more might be added; not a few Things remaining, worthy to
be registered to the Memory of so Good and so Learned a Man. Let me detain the
Reader a little longer, while I take this occasion to revive the remembrance of
him in some Particulars. Dr. Lightfoot was a Scholar and a Divine, and (which
is to be preferred before both) he was a solid good Christian. We shall
consider him a little,

I, As a Scholar and a Divine. Of whose Scholarship and Judgment in diverse
Points of Divinity, I shall hereafter give some Instances, as they have
occurred to me.

He was a Member of that noted Assembly called together by the Parliament Anno
1643. to consult about Religion: Whereby he had opportunity offered of showing
his great Abilities. I have seen his own Journal diligently kept, of the
various Debates among the Learned in that Assembly; where he put down as well
his own Disputations as other Men's. Whence I am enabled to give several
Specimina both of his Learning and of his Opinions. And indeed he was of great
use in this Assembly in regard of his Eminent Skill in the Jewish and Oriental
Learning. For these Divines in their Enquiries into the Primitive Constitution
of the Christian Church, and Government thereof in the Apostles Days, built
much upon the Scheme of the Jewish Church; which the first Christians being
Jews, and bred up in that Church, no question conformed themselves much to: And
therefore these levelled at settling the like Government in the English Church.
Lightfoot very often spoke, and to good purpose, when things of that Nature
were under Deliberation; and not seldom by this Learning rectified Mistakes
among them, explained their Difficulties, and sometimes put to silence great
Confidence. He spoke likewise commonly, when Places of Scripture were produced
to stand for Proof of such Points of Doctrine or Discipline as were under
Decision; our Divine being very thoroughly Studied in the Scriptures; whereby
he often gave Excellent Interpretations of Controverted Places, sometimes
misunderstood by most of the Assembly, who had propounded them to prove things,
which in truth intended no such Matter.

But I proceed to some particular Instances of these things.

1. When some in the Assembly were for Gathered Churches, which must consist
only of Saints, and produced a place for that purpose taken out of the
Revelations, Chap. xv.3. Thou King of Saints; ((...),) Dr. Seaman well objected
against it; because the reading was doubtful, some Copies reading (...) instead
of (...), i. e. Thou King of Ages, or Everlasting. And Lightfoot backed him, by
showing, that the Syrian and Arabic read to the same import (...) and (...)
King of the World, or Ages.

2. When a Debate happened about the Persons that should read the Scripture in
Public; and some were for the Pastors doing it themselves; Gouge and Marshall
seemed to be for some expert sober Persons of the Laity: But our Divine proved
at large, that none in the Synagogue read the Law and the Prophets, but public
Officers, and of the Levitical Order. And that by these Arguments. First, By
their multitude of Universities for the Education of the Levites for such
Purposes, viz. Forty Eight. Secondly, By their Curiosity, that not a Tittle of
the Law should be mistaken by those that Read it. But Mr. Reyner urged, that
the Levites were not Types of the Pastors, but the Priests were. To this he
answered, that the Levites in the Temple were one thing, and in the Synagogues
another. For that though these at the Temple were Servants to the Priests, yet
in their Synagogues they were their Pastors.

3. He seemed not to allow of the Ordination by Presbyters only, disputing
about that Place that was urged chiefly in behalf of it, viz. 1 Timothy iv.14.
With the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery. For after some had spoken
dubiously of the Place, as Mr. Herrick, who questioned whether it spoke of
Ordination; and whether these Presbyters were Preaching Presbyters, or
Presbyters, or Elders of the Laity; and Mr. Sympson, who said that laying on of
Hands was used in other things; Lightfoot, 1. Declared himself to be of
Selden's Mind, saying his Interpretation must needs be right, and that it means
(...) i. e. Admission to be an Elder. 2. That it would be hard to find a
Presbytery that might lay their Hands upon Timothy. This Text cost a great deal
of Debate but at last being put to the Question, it was voted to pass. But our
Divine, and some others with him, gave their Negative. Yet,

4. To show his Judgment in extraordinary Cases: When the Bishops, (whose
Office was to Ordain) were voted out of the House, and their Jurisdiction laid
aside; the Assembly brought in this Position concerning Ordination, That in
extraordinary Cases, some things extraordinary may be done, until a settled
order may be had. Diverse spoke largely upon this Pro and Con. Lightfoot was of
this mind, showing, that even some Posi^ive Laws of God gave place not only to
Necessity, but even to Convenience: As the steps to Solomon's Altar; and many
Candlesticks and Tables in the Temple. But when as a proof of it, that place
was produced, 2 Chronicles. xxix.34. The Priests were too few, that they could not
slay all the Burnt-Offerings, wherefore their Brethren the Levites did help
them: And Bathurst spoke to this place to prove it pregnant; and likewise out
of Numb. xviii.4, 5, 6. and Levit. i. would prove that the Levites had nothing
to do to slay the Sacrifices; Lightfoot gave Answer to him, and so did Coleman
and Seldom, two others well skilled in Jewish Learning; who showed the
contrary. But being put to the Vote, it was carried for a pregnant place. But
Lightfoot here gave his Negative.

5. Some in the Assembly called in Question Matthias his Equality with the rest
of the Apostles; and that he was rather a Degree below them; because chosen by
Lot, and not immediately called by Christ: So one Gibson. To this our Divine
gave this Answer, That the Lot did argue his immediate Call. Because the
Apostles could not ordain him for an Apostle by Imposition of their Hands, but
sought to the immediate Imposition of Christ's Hands by a Lot.

6. When the Assembly came to examine, whether there were anciently in the
Church Ruling Elders, (and they, as it seems, of the Laity) which some had
labored for the confirming of by certain Places of Scripture; one of the
Assembly, named Baily, began to speak; professing seriously, that till the last
year he had lived convinced by Bishop Bilson of the Jus Divinum of Bishops;
till confering with a Gentlewoman, who said to him that it was a wonder he
could not see ground for Presbyterial Government, which all the Reformed
Churches have; it struck him so, that he fell to study the Reformed Writers,
Calvin, Beza, etc. and by them was convinced. And then after this Preface, (as
though he had been thoroughly studied in this matter, he fell upon the places of
Scripture, and that with some vehemiency and smartness, and would prove a
Ruling Elder. And Mr. Rutherford, one of the Scotch Commissioners, backed him,
to make way to bring in the Scotch Discipline into the English Church.
Gillaspe, another Scotch Commissioner, said in behalf of his Ruling Elder, that
this Practice of the Reformed Churches arose from a sure Light. But this found
considerable Opposition in the Assembly; and that by the Learnedest Men, as
Vines, Gataker, and our Divine, who began first; and after Rutherford had done,
spoke to this import: 1. That as for that place in 1 Timothy v.17. Let the
Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double Honor, especially those who
labor in the Word, etc. The Apostle it is true meant hereby two sorts of
Officers; but that those were Pastor and Deacon; which he had spoken of before,
as sufficient for the Church, in 1 Timothy, iii. 2. That (...), (the word in
another place urged for Ruling Elders) both in the LXX Translators, and in the
Syriac, are Praesidentes, and Praecedentes, though not in Government. 3. That
(...), Helps, and (...), Governments, 1 Cor. xii.28. would enforce Deaconry and
Ruling Elders. Which Words when it was Debated, whether they signified Officers
or Gifts; and Ny and Newcomen averred that (...) signified only the Act of
Government; Lightfoot stood up, and showed how the Word was taken by the LXX:
Who used it in Prove. i.5. and xi.14. and diverse other Places in that Book, to
translate (...) which imported not the Act, but the Ability and Gifts fit to
Govern. And that the other Word, Helps, meant nothing else, but Helps to
interpret the Language and Sense of those that spoke with Tongues: As he showed
might be collected by Ballancing the two Verses in the Place in Hand together,
viz, the 28 th, and 29 th. Then spoke Mr. Vines upon the said Place, viz. 1
Cor. xii.28. Where he showed, that the Apostle spoke there of several things;
and that those things were for the Benefit of the Church; and that they related
to Persons; for he had before spoke of (...), Gifts: That it spoke of several
Gifts in several Persons: That (...) differed from (...): That (...), signified
without doubt a Prefecture. Yet grant all this, it was very questionable
whether this Place proved a Ruling Elder. For that he conceived the Government
was in the Hands of the Preaching Elder. And then he fell to the backing of
Lightfoot's Interpretation; which he did fully.

Another Day they fell again upon the same Debate about Ruling Elders; when Mr.
Lightfoot was again concerned. Wilkinson began thus, If the Place alleged hold
out so clear. a ground for the Ruling Elder; how comes it to pass it was never
seen before Calvin? And for this he alleged Dr. Sutcliff; and related that Mr.
Calvin having been expelled Geneva, and recalled, he desired four Helvetian
Churches to assist him; which they did: Yet they themselves retained not this
Government. Mr. Callamy who was for these Ruling Elders, spoke to it after this
manner, viz. That there were Elders of the People joined to the Priests and
Levites, 2 Chronicles. xix.8. Acts. iv.5. He said, the Jews had two sorts of
Consistories in every City; one in the Gate, and another in the Synagogue. And
that their Synagogues were appointed for correction of Manners, as well as for
Prayers. And that they had Ecclesiastical Censures in them, John. ix.22. That
the word Cut off meant Separation from the Congregation, Exodus xii.15, 19. And
that they had their Rulers of the People in the Synagogue, he went about to
prove, 1. Because the inferior Judicatories were conformed to the greater. 2.
Because they had their (...), Rulers of the Synagogue, Act. xiii.15. After Mr.
Calamy had done, others labored to confirm his Discourse. For this being a
Prime Point, great pains were taken to carry it. But Lightfoot then stood up to
confute the former Arguments, by showing that the two Sanhedrins, and the two
Consistories in every City, were not owned by the Jewish Authors. And for that
he^ alleged Maimonides at large; and proved* three Courts in Jerusalem; and
yet no difference of one Ecclesiastical, and the other Civil. And by his skill
in Jewish History made it out, that there was but one Court or Consistory in
every City else. He granted indeed that there were Elders in the Sanhedrin,
that were not Priests or Levites, but withal they were Civil Magistrates, as it
is in our Parliament. Of this last Saying Rotherford took hold, and answered,
That the Parliament, if they had intended to judge Ecclesiastical things in an
Ecclesiastical Way, would not have convened this Assembly. To which Lightfoot
replied diverse things; and there happened passages Pro and Contra. At length it
was moved that they might come to draw up in what they agreed. And Dr. Burges
tendered a Proposition, which cost some Exceptions and Debates, viz. That the
Constitution and Practice of the Jewish Church, as a Church, and not as Jewish,
was to have some Elders of the People joined with the Priests, to judge in
Ecclesiastical Matters. To which Lightfoot again objected, that it was too
large. And that he could produce diverse Ecclesiastical Matters in which they
did not judge; and that it would be hard to find, that they judged in any
thing, but only about false Doctrine.

At last it was put to the Question, and our Divine stood up and desired that
the Vote might not be lost because of the scruple. And therefore prayed that
the Proposition might pass agreeable to the last they made, viz. That in the
Church of the Jews there were Elders of the People joined to the Priests and
Levites in the Government of the Church. Which middling way was very well
liked: And so it was put to the Question, and Voted Nemine contradicente. And
Lightfoot by his Prudent and Learned Management of this Point pleased all,
unless it were perhaps the Scotch Commissioners.

But this Controversy came not so to a Conclusion, For when some had held,
that the Civil Elders in the Sanhedrin judged in all things, Lightfoot
answered, that this was impossible in the Point of Leprosy. For that it was
infectious for all Israel, but only the Priests. And as for that place, Deuteronomy.
xvii.8. a place proposed to prove the Proposition fixed upon, (upon our said
Divine's Motion, as was showed before,) Viz. That there were Elders of the
People joined with the Priests and Levites in the Government of the Church, he
showed them his Judgment, that that place spoke not of Appeals, but of
Advisings; and not of Judicature, but of Direction. For that the Judges of
inferior Cities were to go thither to inform themselves, if they stuck in any
thing.

Gillaspe, the Scotch Man, labored to prove two Courts from Deuteronomy. xvii.12.
about one going up from one Court to another; that is, for Appeals, as he urged
from hence, The Man that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the
Priests, that stands to Minister before the Lord, or unto the Judge; even
that Man shall Die: Making the Priest to hold one Court and the Judge another.
But Seldom, Gibson, and Lightfoot were against it. And thus Seldom, The Vulgar
Latin, till within this Forty Years, read this Place, Qui non obediverit
sacerdoti, ex decreto Judicis morietur. i. e. He that shall not obey the
Priest, shall Die by the Decree of the Judge. And if that reading be right,
here is no shadow of two Courts. This place, he said, included all Cases. And
if in any one of the inferior Courts, the Judges were at a stand, and those
Judges went to Jerusalem, and were resolved of the Scruple, and went down again
and would not Judge according to their Resolution they were to Die. And this
was he which the Jewish Writers call The Rebelious Elder. Gibbon proved, they (
i. e. the Judges of the Inferior Courts) handled Ecclesiastical Matters. And
that because, 1. They had all Matters. 2. All Laws. 3. They handled the Matter
of Jealousy. And for this he produced Maimony at large. Lightfoot then
signified that he had yesterday hinted the Sense which Mr. Seldom now gave. And
that it was not in Appeals, but in point of Consultation, that the Judge was to
go up. To which Herle gave only this Answer, I should be sorry if we should
lose Appeals in this Place. But our Divine besought the Assembly, that they
might Examine the Text before they fixed a Sense upon it; and that it might be
taken into Consideration, whether this Place spoke of Appeals or no: And
affirmed that it little afforded two Sanhedrins: For that the Party was to
consult with Judge or Priest, as the Case required; and they two sitting
together in the Court. Which was urged in Opposition to Dr. Hoyl, that
endeavored to prove two Sanhedrins, because the Priest and Judge were named
apart, and the Priest first.

This Debate held very long; and yet nothing was concluded: When at last
Lightfoot proposed that they might hasten the Material Things that tended to
Settlement; and to let these Speculations alone till leisure, and fall to
Action. Which seasonable Admonition was hearkened to, and followed.

7. It became a doubt among some in the Assembly, Whether those Deacons, Acts
vi. were the same with those spoken of in 1 Timothy iii. And when Mr. Vines had
smartly said, that some denied those in the Acts to be Deacons, because they
measured these by the Deacons of their own Times, and had been willing rather
to deny these than their own: Lightfoot spoke substantially to this place; 1.
That these were Ministers, because it is said they were (...), i. e. Full of
the Holy Ghost, before they had Imposition of Hands. He added, 2. That these
Seven were appointed for the Seven Nations of the Western Dispersion; and we
find none here for the Eastern. 3. That the Multitude of the Church in that
place were all from home. This he said to prove, that this was not a proper
Copy for future Times. To which he subjoyned, 4. That the Collections and the
Deacons mentioned in the Epistles were for the Relief of the Church at
Jerusalem. [And so no set Officers appointed to be in every Church.] Colman
said, that that place in Timothy showed the Qualifications of a D^acon, but not
the Perpetuity. And of the same Judgment Lightfoot declared himself to be. But
when the Place came to be voted, it was voted affirmatively. But my Mind, as he
Writes in his Journal, was not with it.

8. A Question arose in the Assembly upon Excommunication; Whether it were to
be done in a Presbytery, or in the Presence of the whole Church. And so the
Independents would have had it, proving it from 1 Cor. v.4. (...). When ye are
gathered together, etc. Lightfoot answered this Place thus, That the Synaxis,
i. e. The Gathering together, here, was in regard that there were
Heart-burnings among them: And so they Triumphed one against another in this
very Act of the Incestuous. Ergo, he commands them that they should convene in
Affection and in Place: And being so met, they should do it. And after two or
three Debates upon this Case of the Incestuous Person, Lightfoot again, That
this Case of the Corinthians was such as cannot be among us. For they were
hedged in with the Heathen; and the Apostle plainly tells, that there was an
Iniquity among them more than Heathenish, ver. 1. (...), Such as is not among
the Heathen. Therefore if he would have the whole Church to come together, and
cast out this Member, for the Vindication of the whole Church, it is a singular
Example, and cannot be paralleled among us.

Still this Text of St. Paul diverse Days after was canvasing. Then our Divine
again, 1. That the Phrase here used (...), differing from that cited, 1 Cor.
xi.20. (...), when ye come together; and xiv.26. (...) When ye are come
together (the Words being different) gives cause to susp^ct, that he means a
difference in them. 2. That (...) i. e. From the midst of you, is used of all
the Jewish Courts for taking away a Wicked Man, Deuteronomy. xiii. etc. Yet all the
People might not need to be present at the Censure. 3. That Paul writ indeed to
all the Church in Corinth; but every one must take out the Lesson, as it
concerned him. As the King of Syria Writes to the King of Israel to heal
Naaman; whereas Elisha was to have and take his share in the Letter that
concerned him.

9. Further, several in the Assembly offered that Place, 1 Cor. v.2. for
Excommunication, and for excluding from the Communion; where that Incestuous
Person is directed by St. Paul to be taken away from among them. But this
Place, Lightfoot's Judgment was, concerned not at all Excommunication. Of whose
mind also was Whitaker: Who showed that the Place did not prove a Cutting off
from the Eucharist; and that (...), i. e. The Destruction of the Flesh, was not
taken for Excommunication: And that Traditio Satanae, i. e. Delivering over to
Satan, seemed to be extraordinary. And that sorrow which this bred in the
Person guilty, and in the whole Church, was most extraordinary. Many of the
Greeks thought it Pain. This gave occasion to a Dispute that held all the Day.
But notwithstanding, that Place was carried for a Proof of Excommunication. But
Lightfoot gave his Denial.

Neither did he like the other Place brought for Excommunication, viz. Mat.
xviii.17. If he shall neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a
Heathen Man and a Publican. Which after Colman (a Man that was against all
Manner of Excommunication) had opposed; and Gataker spoke against the Propriety
of this Place, Lightfoot conceived the Place, 1. To speak of Offense given from
a Member to his Pastor. For from Mark ix.35. (which place by comparing both
carefully, appears to fall in with this of Matthew) it was plain this Speech of
Christ was only spoken to the Twelve. 2. That it spoke of Shaming an Offender,
and not of Censuring. For that the Two or Three ( Take with thee Two or Three,
ver, 16.) not the Church, had to do about the Offender. 3. That the Heathen and
Publicans had Access Ad Sacra. But the Jews abhorred their Civil Society. And
this was to be as an Heathen Man and a Publican, to have no Society with such:
But to be as a Publican included not Excommunication. Again, after Herle and
Reinolds had spoke for this Place to prove Excommunication; our Divine answered
them, 1. With this Question, Are the Two or Three here named Witnesses, as they
would have them? For it is plain, these must be Admonishers. 2. He showed that
that Text and Speech of our Savior was upon Occasion of the Disciples
Quarrelling. Now how improper is it, when he is speaking of Offense between
Brother and Brother, to conclude what such an one shall be to the Church, and
not to the Party off^nded. For so, says he, you understand, Let him be to
THEE, that is, to the CHURCH. But notwithstanding this Place was carried for
Excommunication.

10. When the Dispute came on between the Independents and the other Party
about Congregations, whether there were more than one in a City? And the great
Enquiry was, What that Church was, that was at Jerusalem? Whether one
Congregation only, or more: And Dr. Temple doubted whether there were many
fixed Co^gregations in that City, and it seemed to him there were not;
Lightfoot answered in many particulars. 1. That such a multitude of Pastors as
were there at Jerusalem could not suit with one Congregation. 2. That there
were diverse Languages, that understood not one another. Therefore there could
not be but diverse Congregations. 3. That one part of the Church had Deacons,
the other not. Vid. Sect. 7. Therefore we must distinguish of their
Congregations. 4. In the Twelfth of the Acts there were (...), i. e. Many
gathered together, ver. 12. And yet James and the Brethren were not there.

Buroughs and Lightfoot had a Controversy about the Five Thousand added to
the Church, Acts iv. Whether they were new Converts, which our Divine averred,
and Buroughs denied. And when Lightfoot had done, Palmer backed him in it.
Buroughs again questioned whether these Five Thousand or the other were of the
Church of Jerusalem? Palmer answered, they were Dwellers in Jerusalem, Acts
ii.5. (...). Lightfoot answered, they came Unbelievers thither, and being
there, they sold their Lands. Goodwin said from Mr. Mede, that they were not
Dwellers at Jerusalem for that (...), Genesis xxvii. is abiding only for a few
Days. Vines held that they were afterward abiding, having come up to the
Feast, Lightfoot answered, that they came not to the Feast, but because they
looked that the Kingdom of God should shortly appear, Luke xix. therefore the
Ground was false. Goodwin said, this Phrase (...) being joined with (...), i.
e. With one accord, imports the same place, Acts ii.1. Lightfoot answered, 1.
That grant (...) to signify as he would have it, yet he must understand
Secundum Analogiam Fidei and rationis: As all the Men of Sodom met at Lot 's
Door. This could not be. The Ark rested on the Mountains of Ararat. That could
not be. Jephtha was buried in the Cities of Gilead. That could not be.
Therefore these and such like Places must be expounded Secundum Rationem, i. e.
according to Reason. 2. That the Lord's Supper was strange among the Jews, but
Baptism was not; [For Goodwin had said, they had the Sacraments in the Temple:
And what did the Apostles care for affronting the Ceremonies in the Temple?] 3.
That Peter, Acts ii. Preached not alone, and the rest stood by: Nor did he
Preach alone, Acts iii.

Shall I be allowed to go on in my Narration of this Controversy, which was
one of the tightest that happened in the Assembly; and wherein our Divine bore
a great part? Perhaps it may not be unacceptable to hear their Learning Pro and
Con. Seldom (and any Remainders of that great Name are worthy preserving
wheresoever we meet with them) first excepted at the Expression [of the
Presbyterians] that they could not meet [they were so numerous] in one place;
but that they did not meet, he said, were proper. But that they met together in
Christian Worship [in the Temple, as the Independents had said] it was not to
be made good. For whereas it was said that they were (...), i. e. Continuing in
the Temple, this cannot be understood, they were there as Christians. For as
yet it was not condescended to by the Jews, that the Gentiles should come in,
otherwise than as they came in to be Jews. They [ Jews] had now diverse Sects,
Scribes and Pharisees; and so were Christians now looked upon, [ i. e. as a Sect
of Jews]. And they may very well be understood by the Essaeans. Now the Jews at
Jerusalem, that became Christians, did believe; that, concerning the Jews in
Judea, they must observe Moses Law and Customs. And then it is no wonder if
they came constantly into the Temple. And here he justified Lightfoot, saying,
that Baptism was long before John. Now that they had particular Congregations,
he was very confident. For if they would keep up Moses's Law, (as they checked
Paul, Acts xxi. for dissuading Men to walk in Moses's Law,) then would they do
as the Jews did. Now in Megil. Fol. 73. it is said, there were 480 Synagogues
in Jerusalem; and wheresoever were Ten Households, any one whereof was not a
Piece of a Synagogue, they were to be cast into a Synagogue, or Congregation,
Maimon in (...) And then it is most probable that these Jewish Christians would
cast themselves into several Congregations. And this, he added, seemed to be
hinted at, Acts ii. Their going to the Temple was Jewish; their breaking Bread
(...), i. e. From House to House, was Christian. In the Syriac Testament
Breaking of Bread is expressly the Eucharist; and (...) may mean Beth Cineseth,
i. e. the House of the Synagogue; and imported some House prepared for the
purpose. Thus the Learned Seldom.

The same Controversy came on again another Day: Then Lightfoot showed that
the foresaid Phrase of Breaking Bread from House to House, was not, as some to
evade the Argument had asserted, meant of Common-Meals. Which Seldom backed:
And excepted against our Translation of (...), and clearly understood it of
(...), i. e. Some Synagogues or Meeting Places. All things he said, were now
common among the Christians at Jerusalem, both (...) and (...), i. e. Mobilia
and Immobilia. And then what was it to be at home? For none had an House. But
the meaning is, that they met at the same time in Public Places.

Callamy enforced this further from Acts xii.5. Where Prayers are said to be
made of the whole Church for Peter: But the whole Church was not met in one
place: Therefore the Church is not one Congregation. Lightfoot seconded him,
urging that all the Churches of Judea, in the places alleged, are called one
Church. For now it was Easter, ver. 4. and all the Churches of Judea were here
met; and yet called one Church.

At length for the Proof of this, it was moved in the Assembly to consider
Lightfoot's Argument that he had propounded some Days before about the
Diversity of Languages. And the Assembly agreed to it. This Pinched the
Independents. For Bridge would not have it fallen upon, unless the Assembly
voted so to do: Which it did accordingly. Diverse spoke to it, and there was a
long Debate upon it. Dr. Temple said, that those that spoke with several
Tongues were only Jews, and so understood the same Language. Woodcock urged
there must needs be but one Language of all these People met together, Acts ii.
For Peter Preached but in one Language to all the Three Thousand that were
Converted, Acts ii.41. and to the Five Thousand that heard them and believed,
Acts iv.4. Also Vines questioned whether all the various Nations that were now
come up to Jerusalem, Pa^^^ians, Medes and Elamites, etc. understood not one
Language, and that the Hebrew. Here Lightfoot answered them both, to this
Tenor: 1. That the (...), i. e. the Eleven stood forth as well as Peter, And
the Story fixed more especially upon Peter because he was Minister of the
Circumcision. 2. That Acts iii. Peter's Speech is set down, and yet Acts iv.1.
it is said, (...). They speak unto the People. 3. That though some of these
Nations, and the Asian Jews understood the Hebrew Tongue, yet it was not so
with others mentioned Acts ii. For the Asian Jews were the next Door to
Jerusalem in comparison, and some others there mentioned; and so might come
every Year to Jerusalem; but the others could not.

Seldom also spoke in answer to those that asserted there was one common
Language that all understood. He said, there was not one Language that was
understood among them. As for their Sacra, it was not in much use of Language.
They might use their Benedictions at the Temple in any Language that the People
present understood; some things only excepted: as the Words to the tried Wife,
and the Blessing of the Priests, Numb. vi. must be in Hebrew. 2. Again, the
Hellenists, be they where they would, they in the Dispersion used no doubt the
Greek. It may be supposed Philo himself did not understand Hebrew, as is
observed by Drusius. 3. No Judge might be admitted into the great Sanhedrin
unless he had Seventy Tongues, that is, many Languages. 4. The Synagogae
Libertinorum, Cyreniorum, etc. Acts vi. show Diversity of Nations. And there is
as little doubt of Diversity of Languages. 5. That in Acts vi. there is a plain
and evident Distinction of the Hellenists and Hebrews living asunder and
severally, even in the Time of having all things common.

11. Again, a great Controversy the Assembly had with the Congregational Men
about Paul and Barnabas, their coming from the Church at Antioch to the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, Acts xv. to know what was to be done with the
Believing Gentiles; since certain that came down from Judea thither had taught,
that it was needful to circumcise the Brethren, and to keep Moses's Law in
point of Salvation. Now by this Application of Paul and Barnabas about this
Question to the Apostles and Elders here, in the Name of the Church at Antioch;
an Argument was raised, that that Church submitted it self to be ordered and
directed by the Church and Ministers thus met at Jerusalem. But to evade this,
Goodwin, in behalf of the Congregational or Independent Party, moved to prove,
that this Meeting was for the Government of Jerusalem only. For that there were
some of the Sect of the Pharisees there, that were of the same Mind, v. 5. To
him Lightfoot answered, that these Churches would never have sent for
Determination in point of Government for them, had they not known the
Presbytery constantly sitting at Jerusalem for Acts of Government of their own
Church. Bridge to this answered, that then it was no Synod: And that they met
for Acts of Government finally, to find out the Truth, but not formally to
exercise the Acts of Government. To this our Divine Replied, That the
Consequence did not hold, it was a Presbytery before, Ergo, no Synod now. 2.
That their meeting about those Pharisees in Jerusalem, ver. 5. that were of the
same mind with them at Antioch, as Goodwin had said, did make this Consequence,
that then they met for the Government of their own Church. 3. That this did
infer their Act of Government formally, that Paul and Barnabas, Ministers of
the Uncircumcision, came to Jerusalem to question about a Business which
concerned the Converted Gentiles. Now if it had been only to find out the
Truth, Peter and James, Ministers of the Circumcision, had been most proper for
to have determined this Point with them. Why then should they convent the
Elders, if not for an Act of Government?

12. When the Assembly was drawing up the Order for the Administration of the
Lord's Supper, there were these Words used, The Bread and Wine being set before
him [the Minister] in PLATTERS, the Word Platter was thought to be improper;
and so it was altered, The Bread in comely and convenient Vessels. But
Lightfoot liked not this Expression, but opposed it. And when they had used the
Word Sanctification of Elements, (because they avoided the using of the Word
Consecrate,) Lightfoot scrupled at that Word SANCTIFY, as an Hebraism, as
Consecrate was accounted a Romanism: And therefore he offered the Word Set
apart, as a Medium. Hence arose a Debate: But after a long time it was expressed,
He shall begin the Act with Sanctifying and Blessing the Elements.

13. When Lightfoot had Discoursed Learnedly about the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, and for General Admission to it; and explained the institution of it
from the Passover; and that therefore in Luke there is mention made of two
Cups, as there was in the Passover; Rotherford, the Scots Commissioner, that
liked not our Divine (who in truth spared not often to thwart the Scots
laboring in this Assembly to bring in their Discipline into this Church of
England) took upon him to prove against him, that there were not two Cups meant
by that Evangelist, Chap. xxii. but that it was an Hysterosis: And that there
was no mention of a Cup in the Institution of a Passover, and no news of that
but in the Rabbis; speaking contemptibly, as it seemed, of that sort of
Learning. But Lightfoot answered, 1. That in all the Evangelists, there is
hardly an Hysterosis in any one of them in so small a Compass. And that it is
hard to find any Hysterosis in Luke at all, unless it be in one or two Places.
2. That it is true that Wine was not mentioned in the Institution of the
Passover: For Israel was not in the Land of Wine. But when they came into the
Land of Wine, why might they not take Wine to the Passover, as well as lay down
some things that were circumstantial under the Institution: Adding, that there
were diverse things in the New Testament which we must be beholden to the
Rabbis for the understanding of them, or else we should not know what to make
of them.

14. When the matter of a Synod lay before the Assembly, diverse would have the
Members of a Synod to consist of Lai^y as well as the Spiritualty. The
Proposition ran, Pastors and Teachers lawfully called, and (it was added by
some) OTHER FITTING PERSONS, are constituent Members of a Synod, The Scots
opposed this Addition exceedingly, and so did Palmer, Seaman, and our Divine.
Those that were for it were Marshal, Vines, Herle, and the Independents, who
grounded themselves upon, Acts xv.7, 13. where Peter and James calls the
Council, Men and Brethren; and ver. 22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders,
with the whole Church, to send Chosen Men, etc. The Apostles and Elders,
pointing out the Clergy; and the whole Church, the Laity. Where Lightfoot gave
this Construction of the Words (...) and (...): Viz. by (...), i. e. Brethren
was meant the Uncircumcised Converts, as at ver. 1. and 23, they are
understood. Now it is most like that the Uncircumcised Churches would send
their Ministers, and not Laymen. And by (...) is not meant the Church, but that
Meeting of the Council. Seaman took at Lightfoot, and followed largely. Herle
applauded the Interpretation, but refused it, and gave some Reasons why, viz.
Because (...), ver. 4. is taken properly for the Church. And the Men that
brought the Letters to the Churches, could not be said to Send Greeting, ver.
23. The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren, send Greeting unto the Brethren
which are of the Gentiles. To this Lightfoot answered, That the Interpretation
of Scripture, is from the scope of the Place, as in the Hebrew word [that
(...), Translates] it is apparent. Vines denied his Interpretation of (...):
For that James and Peter called all the Company (...), i. e. Men and Brethren.
But Lightfoot showed that that was a common Hebraism: As in Genesis xiii.8. (...)
We are MEN BRETHREN.

In fine, so well did our Divine acquit himself in this Assembly, and such was
the General Opinion of his Learning and Integrity, that when Much Munden in
Hertfordshire was under Sequestration, and Mr. Sedgwick moved that some one of
the Assembly might be recommended to that Place; Lightfoot was Nominated, and
it was ordered with Universal Consent, that he should be recommended to the
Committee for that purpose; which happened in Jan. 1643.

It Is true, this Learned Man was noted for certain peculiar Opinions, differing
therein from such as were commonly received and believed; and thereupon was
disliked by some: Nor will I deny it; but yet I must add, that they were such
Notions as were innocent, and did no harm; such as had no bad influence upon
Religion, nor tended in the least to the Breach of the Churches Peace, (which
he ever held very sacred); nor lastly, Such as abated the necessity of a
Virtuous and good Life. And for evidence hereof I will mention some (if not the
chief) of them.

First, That the Jews shall not be called, but are utterly rejected. And that
the Time of their Rejection happened before the Times of Christ; and that it so
happened to them for their fond and impious Traditions; rather than, as it is
commonly asserted, after Christ, for their Wickedness in Murdering their
Messiah, and persecuting the Gospel, how grievous a Crime soever that was. And
that their last and only Calling was in the Times of Christ and his Apostles;
when some few of them, viz. A Remnant, were brought in to the Faith of Christ.
But that neither then there was, nor ever shall be, any Universal Calling of
them. And that that p^ace in the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. xi.5. At this
present time there is a Remnant, etc. was very unfit to prove this Calling of
the Jews to be either Universal, or after a great many Ages.

Secondly, His mean Opinion of the Greek Translation of the Bible by the
Seventy; that it was hammered out by the Jews with more Caution than
Conscience, more Craft than Sincerity; and that it was done out of Political
Ends to themselves. As that the Bible might be represented after that manner to
the Heathen, among whom the Jews dwelt, that they might have no occasion from
any Passages therein to revile, or cavil with them; and that the Jewish Nation
might live the more securely; concealing in the mean time, as much as they
could, the Mysteries and Truths contained therein.

Thirdly, His Opinion concerning the Keys, that they were given to Peter alone:
And this he openly h^ld in the Assembly of Divines: When a long Debate
happenning, whether the Keys were given to all the Church, or to the Apostles
only; our Divine stood up, and granted, that in all Ages the Learned h^ld, that
the Keys meant the Government of the Church; but that for his part, he held
that the Keys were only given to Peter, according as Christ spoke only to him;
To THEE will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: [But mark in what sense
he meant it]: That is, to open the Gospel to the Gentiles; which was meant, he
said, by the Kingdom of Heaven. And that it was to this purpose Peter spoke,
Acts xv.7. in an Assembly of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem; Ye know, how
that a good while ago, God made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my Mouth
should hear, etc. (...), that is, from this Promise of Christ given to him. And,

Fourthly, He did not allow that Binding and Loosing related to Discipline, but
to Doctrine. And that because the Phrases, to Bind and to Loose were Jewish,
and most frequent in their Writers; and that it belonged only to the Teachers
among the Jews, to Bind and to Loose. And that when the Jews set any apart to
be a Preacher, they used these Words, Take thou Liberty to Teach, what is
Bound, and what is? Loose. To which I might add,

Fifthly, His peculiar Interpretation of those Words of God to Cain, If thou
do not well Sin lies at the Door. SIN, that is not Punishment, to take hold
of thee, but a Sin-offering, to make Atonement for thee; and that that was the
common Acceptance of (...) i. e, Sin, in the Books of Moses. And that God did
not intend to terrify Cain by those Words, but rather to keep him from Despair.

These, and perhaps other Notions and Expositions of Scripture, however Novel
they seemed to be; yet as they were not without probability, so they never made
any Assaults upon Fundamental Doctrines, or true Christian Holiness and Peace.
And thus we have seen somewhat of his Learning and Divinity. But that which
made it the more valuable, was his Integrity and Goodness. Which opens to us a
second Scene of the Man, and brings us to the Consideration of him,

II. As a Good Christian. And for the the better evidencing of this, I shall
use the same Method for the most part, as I have done before to show his
Learning; Namely, by looking into his Behavior, while he sat a Member of the
Assembly of Divines.

1. He was an earnest Promoter of the Peace of the Church. And because the
breaking of the Communion of Christians by Schisms and Separations, and
withdrawing from the National Church into distinct Churches, did effectually
tend to kindle the Fire of Contention and Uncharitableness, and to beget
Estrangements in the Family of Christ, where Love ought to be the great Badge;
therefore he always set himself to oppose those Practices. And for this purpose
he would often urge how our great Master and Lord kept up constant Communion
with the Jewish Church, whereof he was Born a Member, and came up duly to the
Temple at the Set Feasts, and observed the Churches Rites and Customs, however
corrupt they were in many respects, and the Officers and Prime Professors of it
very Degenerate and Hypocritical. Which Argument he has managed well in his
Discourse upon the Widow's Mite in this Book, as well as in other Places of his
Printed Sermons, extant in his Works. To which I might add, that when in his
Discourse upon one of the Select Articles of the Creed, now published, he had
occasionally said, that it might so happen that a Man might be excommunicate
out of a true Protestant Church, and yet it were hard to doom such an one to
Perdition; he presently put in this Caution, That he spoke not this to animate
any to separate or withdraw from the visible Church wherein we live: Adding
withal his Grief at the Separations among us, That for such Divisions of Reuben
there were great Thoughts of Heart. And it is remarkable, that when once in the
Assembly some began to move, whether the Church of England were a true Church,
and the Ministry of the Church of England a true Ministry; some would have
waved it, lest it might have brought on the Business of Subscription to the
Orders of the Church, which a great many of them had refused. But Lightfoot
honestly said, that this was the Question betwixt our Savior and the Woman of
Samaria. And if she had directly asked him, whether the Church of the Jews were
the true Church, he would doubtless directly have answered, it was. For
otherwise God had no Church in the World. And yet was the Church of the Jews at
that time in a worse Condition than any of them could think the Church of
England then was.

2. He was no Innovator. He sat indeed in the Assembly of Divines called
together by the Parliament, to consult upon Matters of Religion; and he came
thither in the simplicity of his Heart, contributing his Service toward the
Correcting of supposed Abuses in Religion. But still he had a respect to the
good Laws of the Church; and disliked and declared against many Propositions
brought in for Reformation, and opposed several things attempted to be
introduced, not only by Independents and Antinomians, but such as were for
transcribing the Model of the Scotch and Geneva Discipline. In their settling a
Set Form for Religious Worship (the Parliament having laid aside the
Common Prayer Book) Lightfoot had an Eye to former Rubricks and Canons. To give
one Instance hereof: When in the Directory for Baptism, the giving Ministers
warning, when any Children were to be Baptized, was omitted, he moved that that
might be taken order for; seeing that in our old Rubric, said he, it is
enjoined, that warning should be given the Night before. And now he showed,
there was more need, since the Minister by the Directory, was to make an
Exhortation, and to give some Instructions concerning Baptism. Whereupon this
Clause was added, Warning being given to the Ministers the Day before. Again,
he utterly disliked the bringing in a Rank of Women for Officers in the Church,
viz. Widows. Which some had urged, grounding themselves upon that of the
Apostle, Let not a Widow be taken into the number under Sixty Years old. Where
Lightfoot showed, that for that very thing he could not be of that Opinion: For
that it was contrary to the Old Testament, where the Officers of the Temple
were to be dismissed at Fifty Years Old. And when Goodwin answered, that the
Priests indeed were discharged of their Service at those Years, because of the
Burden of their Service: As particularly, carrying of the Ark, and the Labor
of Sacrificing: Lightfoot replied, that the Ark was fixed after Solomon's time:
So that there was no more Occasion to carry that. Neither were the Sacrifices
any such Burden; the Courses of the Priests were so full, as that no less than
Eighty opposed Vzziah. And he showed it from Josephus; and that there were Five
Thousand apiece at least in each Course; and that their Service was but one
Week in half a Year: And therefore they could not be overladen with Work.
Nevertheless when after much Debate it was brought to the Vote, whether Widows
were Church Officers; it was voted in the affirmative: Yet only by one Voice,
Lightfoot being then absent; which he calls in his Journal, His Misfortune; and
adds, that the Proposition was utterly against his Mind, and far different from
his Judgment.

3. He set himself especially against such as made use of Religion to supersede
the Duties of Morality; and who upon pretense of higher Seize in
Christianity, overlookt Truth, Honestly and Righteousness. He could not bear
such as made Religion a Pander to Sin. And such Sects there were that showed
their Faces in his Time. There were some that had refined Religion to that
Degree, that they went all upon Illuminations, Revelations, and Spiritual
Raptures, and talked of nothing but of their being acted by the Spirit of God,
and doing all by some mighty Influences of that Spirit: Poring so much upon
these Fancies, that they measured their own and others Religion, according as
they were endued with these Enthusiastical Flights: In the mean time made
little or no account of Moral Duties; and were much addicted to
Unpeaceableness, Covetousness, Fraud, Lying, Deceiving, Slandering, and such
like.

There was one considerable Sect that then appeared, and got much ground, which
was known and distinguished by this Doctrine, That Christians were not obliged
by the Moral Law. Against this Party great complaints were at length brought
into the Assembly of Divines; many of whom, (among which was our Divine) saw
well to what a Decay all true Religion would soon come, if Men of this Opinion
were tolerated. For, (to show them a little to the present Age) these were
Doctrines contained in the Books or Speeches of three of them, collected by Dr.
Temple and offered to the Assembly, as I find them in Lightfoot's Journal.

1. That the Moral Law is of no use at all to Believers: No Rule to walk by,
nor to examine their Lives by. And that Believers are freed from the Mandatory
Power of it.

2. That it is as possible for Christ to Sin, as for a Child of God.

3. That a Child of God needs not, nay, ought not, to ask Pardon for Sin; and
that it is no less than Blasphemy to ask Pardon for our Sin. And one of them
being told, that David asked Forgiveness of Sins, it was answered, it was his
Weakness.

4. That God does not chastise any of his for Sin. Let Believers Sin as fast as
they can, there is a Fountain open for them to wash in. That not for the Sin of
God's People, but for Swearers and Drunkards the Land is punished.

5. That there ought to be no Fasting Days under the Gospel; and Men ought not
to afflict their Souls; no, not in a Day of Humiliation. And it being asked one
of them, whether he Fasted in obedience to the Civil Command, he answered, That
were to be the Servants of Men.

6. That this Doctrine is false, If you Fast and Pray and Humble your selves
unto God, then God will turn away his Judgments. Yea, if you Pray by the
Spirit, you are not hereupon to expect deliverance from Judgments.

7. That when Abraham in outward appearance seemed to Lie; in his Distrust,
Lying, Dissembling, and Equivocating, even then truly all his Thoughts, Words
and Deeds, were perfectly Holy and Righteous from all Spot of Sin in the sight
of God.

8. That if a Man by the Spirit know himself to be in a State of Grace, though
he commit Murder or Drunkenness, yet God does see no Sin in him.

Lightfoot, with diverse others of the soberer sort in the Assembly, were hugely
concerned at these Men and their Doctrines: Because they well saw, and urged to
the rest, how these Opinions opened a Gap to all manner of Licentiousness;
struck at the very obedience due to the Civil Magistrate; horribly scandalized
all the Doctrine of Free Grace and Justification; endeavored to blast all
Faithful Ministers, calling them Legal Preachers: And that this Sect was the
more dangerous, because their Preachers crept into the Favor of the Soldiers.
And it was observable, that when the Definition of Justification lay before the
Divines (having under their Hand the Consideration of the Homily of
Justification) Palmer moved, that to meet with the Antinomians Repentance might
go into the Definition of Justification; but it would not pass. But a Clause in
the Homily was thought good to be inserted, Viz. Which though it do not exclude
Repentance and Conversion to God, etc. Yet does it not include them as Parts of
the Works of Justification. And this Clause was voted affirmatively: But
Lightfoot, thinking it not sufficient, showed, that the Phrase Does not exclude
Repentance, did not reach to meet with the Antinomians, and Profane ones who
abused this Doctrine. And therefore he tendered the Word, Required; and that it
should run, though it do REQUIRE Repentance and Conversion, etc. But it was
feared that word might be doubtful, and therefore they rather inclined to the
former Phrase, Not excluding.

And as he showed his Zeal against this Sect in the Assembly, so his Doctrine
in his Sermons was to the same Import. These words he spoke in one of them with
much earnestness; I have observed, and cannot but observe again to you, how
much is laid in Scripture upon our discharging of our Duty toward our
Neighbor, upon dealing in Truth, in Righteousness, in Charity, and Integrity
with Men; as if this were the very ALL we had to do. The Jews say, that all the
Six Hundred and Thirteen Commands of the Law are summed up in those Eleven,
Psalm. xv. Reckon up those Eleven, and how many of them refer to our upright and
righteous dealing with our Neighbor? Who shall abide in the Lord's Tabernacle?
Who shall dwell in his Holy Hill? He that works Righteousness, and speaks Truth
to his Neighbor; that takes not up a Reproach against his Neighbor; that
keeps his Oath, though to his own Hurt; that takes not Usury; that takes not
Reward against the Innocent. He that does these things shall never be moved.
One would think, said he, the Answer to this Question, Who shall abide in the
Lord's Tabernacle? should have been such an one as this, He that is Devout and
Constant in Prayer: He that is a constant Hearer, and much in Meditation of the
Word of God: He that is careful to keep the Sabbath, and so to relate to the
Duties of the First Table. But ye see here, all referrs to our dealing Fairly,
Truly, Uprightly with our Neighbor. And so Mat. xix.18. If thou will enter
into Life, keep the Commandments. He says unto him, Which? Jesus says, Thou
shall do no Murder. Thou shall not commit Adultery. Thou shall not Steal. Thou
shall not bear false Witness, etc. So that if you ask the Way to Sion: If you
enquire which Way shall I go to the Lord's Tabernable, to dwell in his Holy
Hill? Why, Friend, you must begin at a perfect and good Heart toward Men; an so
go along to a perfect and good Heart toward God; and so to Sion. God calls for
such Duties toward our Neighbor, as it were to set us to our ABC, and Primer,
to learn the first Elements and Lessons of Religion.

Thus would he sometimes meet with the Antinomian, and pull down the
high-flying Religionists, that were above these low Dispensations of Morality,
Truth, Justice, and upright Dealing with Men. These Doctrines therefore and
such like, broached by Men of unquiet Spirits, he liked not; and especially
when they led Men away from that true Heavenly-mindedness, Meekness and
Humility, which are the great Laws of the Gospel. This was one Reason made him
no Friend to the Millenary Opinion; which taught Men to look for an Earthly
Paradise and Reward in this World: For these that dreamt of Christ's Personal
Monarchy here on Earth, imagined themselves also to be some of those that must
reign with him, and had the Best Right to the Possessions of this World: Which
was a Doctrine that opened a Door to Violence, Rapine, and all kind of
Injustice; to the high Disparagement also of Christ's Holy Religion. On that
account also he was no Friend to it; but as he had occasion confuted it. Those
that embraced this Opinion, concluded that place in the Revelations, Chap.
xxi.2. I John saw the Holy City, the New Jerusalem coming down from God out of
Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned, etc. for a Description of the Times when
Christ should come and reign on Earth. But our Divine showed no more to be
meant by it, but the State under the Gospel. And that the New Jerusalem there
meant nothing, but the Christian Church, as might be showed at large. When the
Old Jerusalem in Canaan, (at he spoke in one of his Sermons) is destroyed, John
sees a New Jerusalem: When the Old Church of the Jews is cast away, he sees a
New Church. And this Church is said to come down from Heaven. A Saint is
Heaven-born, and is Heavenly while he is here upon Earth: From Heaven he comes,
and to Heaven he must return: He is born from above: Adorned and Dressed from
Heaven, and in a Heavenly Dress: And he is Dressed for Heaven. The Millenaries
made use also of that Expression of the Apostle in the Acts, Chap. iii.21. That
the Heavens must retain Christ, till the Restitution of all Things. Against
whom thus he Armed his Auditors. This encourages the Millenary to Dream of
Christ's Reigning here on Earth a Thousand Years before the Final End of the
World; and Swords must be then beaten into Plowshares, and Spears into
Pruning Hooks: Then an Universal Peace, Concord and Tranquillity, is to be
restored to the Church, and all the Glorious Things the Prophets have spoken
of, to come to pass, and be settled. But as to that Place the Doctor showed,
there were two manners of restoring things, viz. to their old Estate, or to a
new and better. The Millenary himself dreamt not of restoring to any former
Estate: And if it be meant of restoring to a new and better, that is done
already, when Elias came, and restored all things, Mat. xvii.11. And our Divine
showed, that this Restoration, or Restitution, signified no more but that all
things in the Prophets should be made good, or accomplished. This is learnedly
treated of in the last Discourse of the Third Decad. To which I refer the
Reader.

The Perfectionists that pretended to live without Sin, he saw wanted that
Humility and Modesty, and constant dependence upon God's Grace, that was
necessary to the Christian State; and therefore by no means approved of them
neither: And endeavored to Arm his People against that Doctrine. And what his
Thoughts were of it may be seen in the first Discourse of the Third Decad.
Where to pull down the Plumes of this Vainglorious Generation, he showed, that
a Saint of God in his imperfect Condition, did exceed Adam himself in his
unsinning Condition in diverse respects.

4. He was in fine one that had a mighty Concern for the Honor of God and
Religion: That God might be served in Spirit and Truth. Which was the true
Cause that he was so serious, earnest and diligent in the Assembly of those
Divines that he was called to sit with. For, whatever By-ends they were
convented for, and diverse of them perhaps drove at; yet his Designs were only
what that Assembly was given out to be called for; Viz. The reforming of
Religion. And he never one Day failed of being present at the Assembly from the
first Session thereof, but ever showed himself there to discharge this Trust of
Religion, till Jan. 22. 1643. (that is, about Five Months) that being the first
time he went down to Munden, to enter upon his Living. It was from this
Principle that he was extremely concerned once, when certain blasphemous
Persons were brought before the Judges, who sent to the Assembly to know their
Judgments in a Point of Blasphemy: Which was, That one Jane Stretton had said,
that Christ was a Bastard. And one John Heart, a Soldier, said commonly, Who
made you? My Lord of Essex. Who redeemed you? Sir William Waller. Who
sanctified and preserved you? My Lord of Warwick. The Answer the Assembly
returned was, That they had horribly blasphemed, and desired exemplary
Punishment might be showed upon them. And besides, Lightfoot and one or two
more moved, that such an Occasion being offered, they should present a Request
to the two Houses, that strict Laws and Penalties should be published against
Blasphemy, which did increase. And a Committee was chosen for that Purpose. And
it was but a little after, that the Lord Pembrook, Lord Admiral, came into the
Assembly, being sent from the House of Lords, to hasten them in settling the
Government of the Church, for that Opinions grew very many and blasphemous.

I might also add, That Mr. Chambers, one of the Assembly, related to them some
Blasphemies of one. As on Genesis vi.6. he said, that it was untrue, that God
repented he made Man: That the Soul dies with the Body; and all things shall
come to an end but God: That Christ came to live Two and Thirty Years, and
nothing else that he knew: That God loves any Creature as well as Man: That we
are not to be saved by that Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, but by a Christ
formed in us, etc. Whereupon it was ordered presently, that this should be
brought to the Lords, and they desired to send to apprehend them.

It sprang from the same Principle of his awful Apprehension of God's Honor,
that when the Assembly had finished the Directory, and read it over, in order
to the last Hand, Lightfoot observing, that the singing of the Psalms was quite
left out, he moved again and again, that it might be put in, and that such a
material Part of Divine Worship should not be omitted. And at length it was
done accordingly.

He had a great Concern at the Atheisticalness of the Age, when Men began to
shake the very Principles of Religion, and strove to make themselves and others
believe no Existence of Spirits, nor any Being after Death; the great Curb to
restrain the wicked Excesses of evil Men. To this I attribute the Pains he took
to transcribe with his own Hand a notable Relation of a Spirit appearing in
Driffield, in Yorkshire, that was sent to Mr. (after Dr.) Ezekiah Burton, then
Fellow of Magdalen College in Cambridge, by Mr. Moore, formerly Fellow of the
said College; and Mr. Blackwell, another Minister (as it seems) who took the
Relation from the Woman's own Mouth, to whom the Spirit often appeared. And
seeing our Divine took the Pains to transcribe it for his own use, I may be
pardoned, if I offer it here to the Public from his Manuscript.

I suppose you have heard the News of a Spirit appearing to a Woman [named
Isabel Billinger] at Driffield, in this County [of York.] I had this Relation,
be it true of false, from the Woman her self. It is too long to write it to
you, as I did it from her, but the chief things are these. That she says, A
Spirit did appear to her at several times, in several Likenesses. After some of
the first Appearances she found in a low room, as she swept it out, a piece of
a Stake; which she pulled up, and dug there, and found some Teeth, Collar
Bones, and a Skull broken. After this the Spirit, upon her demanding if it
would have any thing, spoke to her, and said, Fourteen Years have I wandered in
this Place, suffering Wrong three times: Seven Years I have to wander: One and
Twenty Years is my time. Another time it appeared to her, and said, My Life was
taken from me in the Chamber of this House by three Women, Mary Burton, Alice
Colson, and Anne Harrison, because of 23 l. which I lent to Mary Burton Three
Years before, and 23 s. which they took out of my Pocket, and three Rings, two
of Gold, and one of Silver, and other Writings and Bonds of the Money; two of
the Rings were my Grandmother's, and the Silver one my own Mother's. They took
my Life betwixt Eight and Nine a Clock at Night, and I received my Grave
betwixt Twelve and One.

It tells many Particulars, she says, (which I have writ) about the Place where
it did live; its Father's Name, and Mother's, and other Kindred. She said, It
bade her make a Fire, where she took up the Stake, and let Mary Burton be
there, who came of her self to the making of it. (She only of the three Women
is alive.) The Woman says, she sat by the Fire, till the People in the Street
said her Child cried in the other Room. But when she went, the Child was
asleep, and the Spirit was standing within the Door where the Child was; and
said, Blessed be the time, when this Fire was made, and blessed be they that
gave Consent to the Fire-making. For the Stake begins to be as warm at the
Root, as the Heart of me was when the Stake was struck through it. Another time
it said, Send Mary Burton to the Goal, and I will be with her there. She says,
she asked it how it should do for Witness when she came before the Judge of the
Assize; and it said, Thou shall never want Witness, as long as I can get either
Mile or Miles. She says, it desired her to go to Mr. Crompton's, one of the
Justices, and desire him to send to the Churches to pray for a wandering Soul,
and pray for Prosperity of a Spirit, that will discover the Murder of it self
the next Assize; which was done Fourteen Years ago, passing a Week before
Midsummer last. [She accordingly did this Message to the said Justice, and
related her Story to him.] She says, Mr. Crompton desired to see it in the
Daytime; but it said, he was not so good as his Word, to send to the Churches
to get them to pray for a wandering Soul, and so it would not be seen by him in
the Day, unless the Dark were no Danger to him. She says, when she would have
touched it, it said, Thou need not take hold of me, for I am not evil. She
says, they bade her ask it, Where it had been all this while, and what it lived
on: It said, I remain in the Air, and the Quarters and Minutes are set down how
long it stays on the Earth at a time, when it appears. And said moreover, I am
sent from the Lord, to discover and disclose: And also said, I in my Likeness
will appear to diverse, but have no Power to speak to any, but to thee. She
says, it says that it shall enjoy the happy Eternal; and that it had no Power
to speak, till the Stake was taken up. She says, it appeared to her the Night
before I was with her. There is a great deal more of the Story; whereof some I
heard there of her, and some since by others. To this is subjoyned

The Relation of Mr. Thomas Blackwel.
Containing almost all that was in Mr. Moor's, Word for Word, and these
Particulars besides.
ABout Lammas last 1662. it appeared twice like a Child of Two Years old in
White; the third time like a young Man of Eighteen Years old. The Saturday
following it appeared in green Breeches, Doublet and Coat, barefooted and
bare-headed, with long Flaxen Hair, the upper part of the Doublet unbuttoned as
she thought. She asked, What art thou? What want thou? What would thou
have? Then it came nearer. She said, If thou would have ought, speak. It
answered, Fourteen Years have I wandered in this Place, etc. (as in the other
Letter) and vanished, and appeared again within a quarter of an Hour, and said,
Be not thou afraid; I will never hurt thee; thou shall never want [ Witness,
perhaps to be supply'd] and vanished. About Eight or Nine a Clock the said
Saturday it appeared in White, and said nothing, but moved to and fro, and went
into the Room where the Bones were, and rattled them, and vanished. Tuesday,
about Eight or Nine at Night, it appeared again, and said, My Life was taken
from me betwixt Eight and Nine, etc. (as in the other Le^ter.) After these
things Isabel Billinger, to whom it appeared, went to the Justice, and related
the Story to him. He wished her, when it appeared again, to ask its Name, and
Father's, etc. and at the next appearing it answered, That its Name was Robert
Elliot; his Father's Name Jacob, his Mother's Rebecca, his Sisters Jane and
Katharine. That he lived at West-Ham, Three Miles from London: And at another
time it told further concerning his Relations to this Tenor; my Father was born
at Chester, an Upholster by Trade, and came in his latter Days to keep a
Hackney Coach in London. And that his Sisters were both alive in London; the
one at the Black Nags-Head in Southwark, and the other at the Horse-Shooe; that
his Mother's Name first was Mrs. Rebecca Hutchinson, and they might find it in
St. John's Church Register-Book in London.

The Justice bade Isabel ask him, how he came to Mary Burton's House. The
Spirit answered, that he came to Nusterton; and not finding her there, came to
Driffield, and meeting with her, desired Lodging at her House; and she being
unwilling, he said, he thought he might have craved such a common Favor from
her for the Money he had lent her. She said, her House was unprovided of
Victuals. He called for some Ale, and drank, and told her he came for his
Money. She said, she had it not to give him. He said, he would either have it
to morrow, or send for the Bailiff, and distrain. Upon that she uttered some
vain Oaths and idle Words; and he called her Bloody Queen. Then she swore she
could find in her Heart to drink as freely of his Blood, as she did of that Cup
of Ale, and drank it immediately. The next time it appeared, it told further,
that Mary Burton took the Writings with her, and went to West-Ham, and demanded
a Rug, and a Tankard worth about -- That his Sister Katharine being unwilling
to deliver them, said, she had already given him more than came to his Part.
That Mary Burton said, she had got Writings under his own Hand, and that he had
gotten a House for his Life, and that now she was become a Friend of his. That
thereupon his Sister delivered the Rug and Tankard to M. Burton; and that she
sold them at London. And having discovered this, he vanished.

The next time she asked what she should do for Witness; and it answered, as in
Mr. Moor's Letter; and moreover bade Isabel desire the Justice to take no Bail
of M. Burton, but send her to Goal, and it would be there.

Isabel asked what the Fire should be made of, it said a bright Fire of Coals;
and so vanished. Isabel said, that M. Burton came that Saturday to her House,
with the Wife of Roger Baker of Driffield: And upon her Entrance said to
Isabel, Good Woman, we are come to trouble your House. For I hear there is a
great Accident befell, and that a Spirit appeared to you, and said, it was
wounded here. And she desired Isabel to tell whom it accused. Isabel not
knowing that it was M. Burton, said, It accused one M. Burton, and Alice
Colson, and Anne Harrison. Then M. Burton asked where it said it was put to
Death? Isabel said, in the Chamber of this House. Then Mary said her Name was
M. Burton; and that there was a Bed in that Chamber, but none ever lay in it,
but only the Maid. And clapping her Hands together, said, she never dipped her
Hands in any Man's Blood. The Spirit said, that she knocked him on the Head,
and no Blood appeared. Mary Burton stayed in the Town all Night. The next Day
being Sunday, the Fire was made, etc. as in the former Letter. M. Burton
desired to see the Spirit, but it said to Isabel, M. Burton my great Enemy
shall not see me till her last Day. Isabel told Mary what the Spirit said; who
said she would sit no longer there to prate.

Isabel was first examined before Sir Tho. Remington and Mr. Crompton, and
afterward her Examination was taken again by Mr. Crompton. Afterward it
desired her to go to Two other Justices, that they might take the Examination,
and pointed with its Hand Eastward. Isabel told Mr. Crompton what it said: Who
told her, that it mattered not for her going; for he would acquaint Sir Tho.
Bointon and Mr. Pierson with her Examination. When she returned from Mr.
Crompton, the Spirit was standing on the further side of the Bed where the
Child lay, and said to her, Thou shall go to the two Justices. Which when she
told Mr. Crompton, he advised her to go; and she was examined before them.

On the 11th or 12th. of September it appeared and spoke of other things;
showing of some Plot for betraying of King Charles: And of the time, viz.
before Candlemas, unless the Country, Magistrates, and his loving Friends, writ
to him in secret. Also the Person's Name that should betray him. Upon which Mr.
Crompton bade Isabel ask the Spirit certain Questions relating thereto.

Sept. 28. It appeared at Sunrise, and said, Thou told'st Mr. Crompton the
Town where Anne Harrison lived was Redstone, but I told thee Barnstone.

Sept. 29. At Eight a Clock it appeared, and the Woman said, In the Name of the
Father, etc. How came thou to be so long down, and not to appear? It
answered, she said certain Prayers over me when they struck down the Stake,
that I could not appear.

Upon Thursday, about Sunrise, it appeared. Isabel asked what became of his
Horse? It answered, My Horse was sold on Midsummer-day at Beverly to one Mr.
Weldbread, that lives in the South, for 5 l.

October. 4. It appeared to several of the Town of Driffield. But Isabel was not
at home, and did not see it.

It appeared in White all the time, like one of Eighteen Years old.

Some Gentlemen bade Isabel ask it, where he should abide after Seven Years
were expired? It said, I must enjoy the happy Eternity; and in the mean time
the Lord is my Governor.

Signed, Thomas Blackwell.


It is pity the Relation went no further: For one would have been glad to have
known to what Issue this Business came; and whether this Woman, accused by the
Spirit, ever came to her Trial. The Credit of this Story depended not upon
Isabel alone; for it appears the Spectre was seen also by others, and the
Circumstances were such as did mightily confirm Evidence of her, to whom it
chiefly revealed it self and its Cause. And it appears that Crompton the
Justice, a Person, as it seems, of Sobriety and good Judgment, slighted her
not, but advised her to put diverse material Demands to it. And the Story seems
also to have found good Credit with our Divine, as well as others, in that he
thought fit to transcribe the whole Relation, which I have here exemplified.
And so I leave it.

I have one Demonstration more of his Piety to God; that he continued as long
as he lived, constant and painful in the Word and Doctrine. And as he was an
assiduous and excellent Preacher, so his Sermons ran very much upon a Strain of
urging Holiness, and a pure and good Life upon his Auditors; in a plain, but
nervous Style, teaching them substantial Virtue and Goodness; seldom meddling
with Controversies, unless they were such as tended to obstruct the Necessity
of a Holy Life, or to undermine the Purity and Humility required in the Gospel,
or enticed to a Revolt from the Protestant Religion.

Thus he showed them, that it was no such easy Matter to be a Christian, but
that it required long Pains and Diligence. A Change from Sin to God is a
continued Act, and requires Space and Time to accomplish it. Our Fall was in a
Moment; that Change from our Happiness to our Sinfulness and Misery, was in an
Instant; but our changing back again requires time. A Man may fall off from an
high Tower in a Moment, but to recover his Bruise, and to climb up thither
again, is not so soon done. And because many were apt to defer their Repentance
by the Example of the good Thief, hoping to have their great Work done in an
Instant, and to find such Success as he did; therefore Dr. Lightfoot added;
That in all the Bible we have but one Example of a short Change, and that was
the Thief on the Cross, who had his Work of renewing done in an Hour, or
thereabouts. But it was at such a time as never was before, and never will be
again. When the Son of God was undergoing his great CHANGE from Life to Death,
and was purchasing the CHANGE of his People from Death to Life. If thou can
light on such a nick of Time, which is impossible, then thou might expect it
possible that this Change should be wrought suddenly: Otherwise expect it will
take up no little time. We must distinguish of the first working of Grace, and
of the Growth and Increasing from thenceforward. That first Work of Grace does
indeed translate the Person from one Condition to another; but Succession of
Time, and Growing in Grace, is required to transform him thoroughly from one
Temper to another. Again, the first Work of Grace does indeed make a Man
capable of Heaven, but more is required to make him fit for Heaven.

He puzzled not his People with propounding to them nice and critical Signs, to
know whether they were in a State of Grace, but showed the plain way to be
satisfied therein. Who is there, but if he will well examine himself, may
easily tell whether he be in the Ways of God or no? Let him but try his Heart
and Actions, whether God in his Word has commanded, or allowed, such an Heart,
and such Actions, as he carries and acts; or whether he has forbade, and cried
out against them. Who, but his own Heart, will easily tell him, that God never
commanded or allowed him to Lie and Deceive, to be Cross and Contentious, to be
Proud and Scornful, to be Wanton and Luxurious, to be Envious and Revengeful,
to be Worldly and Covetous? And therefore if he carry such an Heart, and if he
practice such Practices as these, he must needs conclude, that he is under
God's Blaming and Complaint.

He checked those, that though they were none of the best, yet entertained a
Confidence that they should do well, and bolstered out themselves with good
Hopes of their own Condition; using these Words to such, That Man that has
ever gone in a sinful worldly Way, never minding any thing, but to satisfy his
own Mind and Lust, and yet will not be driven out of Hope, that he shall be
saved as well as the best; This is not Hope, but Drunkenness. As you may
persuade a drunken Man to very strange Hopes. This is Raving rather than solid
Hoping. For true and right Hope, wheresoever it comes, creeps out of Fear, as
poor Israel did out of their Caves and Dens, when the Fear and Danger of the
Enemy was past and over. And again, Hope never comes, but where Fear has been
before. As the still Voice to Elias came not, but after Fire, Earthquake and
Tempest. The Soul that will breed and bring forth a lively Hope, must, like
Rebecca, bring forth the rough, rugged Esau of Fear, before it bring forth the
smooth Jacob of Hope. There is first the Spirit of Bondage unto Fear, before
there comes the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father. A Conscience
that was never troubled, startled, or molested, but blithe, debonair and
fearless, is not Peace of Conscience, the Gift of God, but Deadness and
Stupidity of Conscience, the Spirit of Slumber.

He gave Men this wholesome Admonition concerning the Exercises of Religious
Worship: Prayer, confessing of Sin, attending upon God's Service, these are
Sacrifices that God requires; and they are Sacrifices with which God is well
pleased, if they be well done. But there is one thing more that God requires,
and without which these are nothing, and that is, that which the Apostle speaks
of, Romans xii. at the beginning; for a Man to offer himself a living Sacrifice,
acceptable to God, which is his reasonable Service. In other things a Man may
deceive himself: He may think he prays well enough, when it may be his Prayers
are Sin: That he confesses his Sins well enough, when it may be he adds to his
Sin by his Slightness of Confession. But in offering a Man's self to God, there
can be no Deceit, if he do but do it. In the other he may offer but Words; let
him offer himself, and there is Substance. This is the Sacrifice that God
requires, Psalm. xl.6. Burnt-Offering and Sin-Offering have thou not required.
Then said I, Lo, I come to do thy Will. Do but observe the Apostle's Allegation
of this Scripture, Heb. x.5. Sacrifice and Offering thou would not, but a
Body have thou prepared me. That is the Sacrifice thou requirest; viz. My Body,
my self to be offered to thee to do thy Will.

He frequently urged the Obligation of keeping God's Commandments against the
Antinomians and others; and that from the apparent Agreeableness of so doing to
our Reason; and that since we are reasonable Creatures, we should live as such.
The very Equity and Justice of the Duties of the Moral Law is not only a Bond
upon us to keep them, but an apparent and plain Reason, why they were given.
What more reasonable thing in the World, t^an that we should love God and our
Neighbor; that we should do Mercy, Justice, Piety, Honesty, and the like? Do
not these things of themselves speak all the Equity and Reason in the World? Is
it not most agreeable to Reason, that reasonable Creatures should live after
another manner than unreasonable brute Beasts do? God has made us Men; and
must there be no Distinction 'twixt us and Beasts? What is that that must
difference us? What? merely this, that we have Reason, and Understanding, and
Speech, which Beasts have not? The Scripture, you know, calls Men, that have
these, by the Names of Beasts however. Herod is a Fox, in the terming of our
Savior; and Nebuchadnezzar a Lion, in the Speech of Jeremy. False Teachers are
Wolves in the Language of the Apostle, and the Scribes and Pharisees Serpents,
and a Generation of Vipers, in the Denomination of our Savior and the Baptist.
These Men had Reason, and Understanding, and Speech, and Knowledge, as well as
other Men; and they would have scorned to have been thought short of other Men
in these things. But it is living like reasonable Creatures, and not like
unreasonable brute Beasts, that must distinguish us from brute Beasts. If a Man
live like a Dog, a Swine, a Fox, a Wolf, though he can talk never so much Sense
and Reason, does his having the use of Reason do him any Good, when he is
neither good toward God, nor himself, nor other Men, but lives and dies, as
the Apostle speaks, As natural brute Beasts, made to be taken and destroyed? 2
Pet. ii.12.

He would at other times press upon Men Sobriety and Obedience to God's Laws,
out of Interest to themselves, as tending to their own real Safety and Welfare
so to do; and excellent Argument to persuade, if well managed. To this Purpose
he spoke once; God's Laws are the Cords of a Man, and his Commands are the
Bonds of Love, laid upon Men by God for their own Good, and without which it
could not be well with them. Let me ask any one that desires to be lawless this
Question; Would thou that God should have nothing at all to do with thee?
That God should leave thee in this Wilderness, thou art walking in, to thy
self, and say, I know thee not, I will have nothing to do with thee? Nay, leave
not all Care of me, would thou say: Withdraw not all Providence from me. For
then I shall have neither Food nor Raiment; I shall have neither Comfort nor
Support. I shall have neither Health, nor Life; if God disclaim me, and
Providence will have nothing to do with me. Why, Friend, I may say, in some
Sense his Commandments are his Providence, in which, and under which only thou
may have Prosperity and Safety. As Solomon once to Shimei, Stay in
Jerusalem, and thou shall be well; but know, that if ever thou go over the
Brook Kidron, thou art but a dead Man. Sinner, keep within the Bounds of God's
Commandments, and it will be well with thee, and God will be with thee. But
transgress those Bounds, and thou art got where good Providence dwells not. God
and his good Providence dwell, as I may say, within the Verge and Compass of
his Commandments. As in Rev. iv.3. He and his Throne are encompassed with a
Rainbow, the Sign of his Covenant. Keep thou within the Bounds and Compass of
his Commandments, and and thou art where God is, where Mercy is, where good
Providence is. But get out of these Bounds, transgress his Commandments, thou
art then where God is not, and where good Providence and Mercy have no
Habitation. Shimei is gone over the Brook Kidron, and he is under Solomon's
Protection no more, but under the Doom of Death and Danger.

He mightily preached up a Conformity to the Will of God, showing how this
fitted, qualified and disposed to the highest Perfection of Man's Nature. Thus
speaking once of the Saints in Glory, he turned his Speech to them after this
manner: O happy Souls, you have attained now to that Perfection, for which God
created reasonable Creatures; viz. To be resolved wholly into the Likeness of
God, by having your Wills resolved into his. And could this ever be done,
unless the Work were begun here. These blessed Souls, while here, made it their
Work to do the Will of God, and still were striving that their Will might be
agreeable to his Will. And now they find, that what they did was worth all
their Labor. And the more they did of his Will, the more they were s^^ting for
this happy Condition. For do but consider, how keeping the Commandments, and
doing the Will of God, does dress and prepare for the Enjoyment of God. I might
observe here, how the more a Man keeps the Commandments of God, the less Guilt
he contracts to himself, and the less Bar there is between him and Heaven. I
might observe, that the more he keeps the Commandments, the more Comfort of
Conscience he gets to himself, and the more Hope of Reward in Glory. Every good
thing he does in doing the Will of God, lays on a Brick toward the building up
his own Hope and Comfort of a blessed Reward. But consider we only the thing.
under this Notion, that the more a Man keeps the Commandments, the more he
purifies himself, refines and fits himself for the Embraces of God, and his
Enjoyment. No gross, corrupt, muddy, fleshly thing can unite to God. Flesh and
Blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. For that is too gross and muddy,
to come into that Place of Purity and Holiness. No unclean thing must come into
the New Jerusalem, but what is refined, purified and holy.

He taught what Troops of Evil attended Obstinacy and Wilfulness, and how it
was a fatal Impediment to all Virtue, and ended in Destruction. And thus he
thought fit to express himself concerning it. The Will rebels against the Law
of God, against the Laws of Men; it rebels against Conscience, and against
Reason; it rebels against God's Providence, and against Man's own Good. Ephraim
is an untamed Heifer, not used to the Yoke; nor indeed will be. O how woeful a
Changling is that Soul, where Reason is changed into Self-will, and Self-Will
is all the Reason that is there? As, God knows, it is the Case of the greatest
part of Souls in the World. Men are eager to have their own Wills; and that
breeds the great Blustering and Confusion in the World; and finally the
Confusion of themselves. Self-will was the Plague that destroyed the Angels,
and is proved catching, and has infected all Mankind. And that is the very
Engine whereby the Devil works his end for Man's Ruin. Let him bring the
Disease to boil up to this height, I will have mine own Will. (And who almost
in the World is otherwise minded?) and his Turn is served sufficiently. Has
Ignorance killed her Thousands? Wilfulness has her Ten Thousands. Has Weakness
undone any? Wilfulness even undoes all.

A close, base, selfish Humor, and an Unconcernedness how it fared with
others, he set forth by th^se Pathetical Expressions: It is a cursed Malady,
that has utterly banished all Humanity, and Respect to others, as the Devil
has done. And if so be the Wretch serve his own turn, all Care is banished how
it speed with others; the very Temper of the Devil, that will please himself in
his Mischief, and cares not what others suffer by his Humor: A cursed Malady,
that has eaten out that Royal Law, What ye would others should do to you, do
ye also to them, and no otherwise. And instead thereof, has written there, Do
any thing that may serve your own Turn, and no matter how it speeds with others.

He showed whence substantial Comfort must be fetched for a Soul, seeking Peace
to it self. As the Rains from the Clouds that water the Earth, proceed from the
Earth by their Evaporation and Attraction by the Sun; so the Comfort that must
refresh and water any Man's Conscience, must proceed from the Conscience it
self, that bearing Witness, that the Man does his Duty the best that is in him.
And now, how many can answer my Question? What can thy Conscience tell thee
thou have done, and do, that can any ways commend thee to God for his Favor?
Thy Wealth, thy Strength, thy Parts, O Man, will not do it. Thy Beauty, thy
Comeliness, thy Dress, O Woman, will not do it. What have thou else to show to
God for Acceptance? Good Works, and a good Heart; these are the things that
must recommend us to God. And what Stock can we show of these? What can our
Hearts say to us in this Case? Will it not be with the most upon Examination,
as with them in the Book of Job, That in the Heat and Desert come to look for
Water to refresh, and there is none, and they return ashamed, because there is
none. It is very well worth our Consideration, deeply and daily, whether our
Actions commend us, or condemn us to God: Whether they speak Good for us, or
Evil. For if these commend us not to God, we have nothing else will do it, be
our outward Privileges never so great.

He was for a great and awful Distance, and profound Rev^rence to be observed
by Men toward God; and by no means liked that bold and free way that some used
with him. The least sinful, the least guilty Men ever have born the greatest
Reverence and Humbleness before God; because they were most apprehensive of his
Gloriousness. How low did Abraham lie before God, when he was praying for
Sodom; as low as Dust and Ashes. And could he lie lower? Genesis xviii.27. Behold,
I have taken upon me to speak unto my Lord, who am but Dust and Ashes. And, Let
not my Lord be angry, if I speak. In the 4th. and 5th. of the Revelations, the
Four and Twenty Elders that are nigh unto God, and do encircle his Throne, They
cast down their Crowns at his Feet, as he sits upon his Throne, and fall
themselves upon their Faces, to adore him. And can they fall lower? Nay, in
Esaias vi. the Scraphims, the Angels that attend him, as with their Wings they
cover their Feet, so with their Wings they cover their Faces, as not assuming
Boldness to look upon him. As Moses, when God proclaimed his Name out of the
burning Bush, hid his Face in his Mantle, and durst not behold. And again, God
requires to be sanctified of those that draw near to him; and that they should
come before him, and walk before him in Sense and Apprehension, what a glorious
and dreadful God he is. The danger is, lest Men should be too saucy with God.
We are too ready to be too bold and daring against him. And therefore we can
never have too high and dreading Apprehensions of God, to keep down that proud
Flesh. Let it be our Work, when we come to worship God in his Appointments in
public, or at home, to work our Hearts to as reverential and awful
Apprehensions of God, as we can. It will better our Services, and no way hurt
them. For Men may come with Holy Boldness to him, for all such Apprehensions of
him. For they may remember his Promise of Grace, though they apprehend the
Dreadfulness of his Glory.

He warned Parents about the Education of their Children, by propounding to
them the Consideration of the poor Children that were offered up to be scorched
to Death in the Arms of Moloch. Look upon those Parents that could deliver up a
poor Child, their own Child, to such horrid and exquisite Torments. Do you
count this a cruel thing in those Parents? What come they short of this, that
either for want of good Education, or by evil Education, do make their Children
the Children of Hell? Those Parents that either by Carelessness to educate their
Children in the Fear of God, or by giving them evil Example by their own wicked
Courses, do accustom them to evil Ways; how little do these come short of
offering their Children up to Satan, as those wicked Wretches did theirs to
Moloch? Parents, either Father or Mother, that by Swearing or Cursing, or
Lying, teach their Children to do the like; that by breaking the Sabbath, and
neglecting to attend the Public Ministry, do give Example to their Children to
do so too; that by deceiving, base and unconscionable Dealing, set a Copy for
their Children to write after. Or if they see them follow such Courses as
these, and do not labor to teach and train them better; do not these, as much
as in them lies, devote their Children to Satan, as those did to Moloch? Are
these any more merciful to their Children's Souls, than those were to their
Children's Bodies? For he that trains not up his Child to God, for whom does he
train him up, but the Devil? For is there any Mean between? What Complaint God
takes up against Israel about their giving up their Children to Moloch, may he
not take up against Thousands in the World upon this Account, Thou have taken
my Children, and delivered them up, to make them pass through the Fire. That
is, the Children which I have given thee, and which should have been mine.

He warned Men against Lying and False-speaking by the Example of Ananians and
Sapphira, that were struck dead for it. Which he called a fearful Judgment set
up, as a Pillar of Salt, at the very entrance of the Gospel into the World;
that Men might see, and hear, and fear, and not dare to Lie under the Gospel of
Truth; especially, not to the Spirit of Truth. And if you look upon Ananias his
doing, you see him Deceiving and Lying; and if you observe Peter's Words, you
may see he referrs his Lying and Deceiving to their proper Original; Viz. That
they both are the Work of the Devil. Why has SATAN filled thy Heart to lie;
and filled thy Heart to deceive, and keep back part of the Price of the Land.
That if you will trace his Wickedness to the Springhead, his Intent to deceive
made him lie, and his base Covetousness made him deceive; and the Devil caused
all.

He gave this Rule concerning Apparel, and for the avoiding Pride in what Men
put on. God allows Men to wear good Cloths according to their Quality and
Degree; but if Pride be there, it is beside his Allowance. God allows us Cloths
to keep us warm: He allows us Cloths to adorn our Rank and Quality; but if we
lace and trim our Wear with Pride, there is a Leprosy got into the Warp and
Woof, that rots all. God appointed the Jews to wear Fringes upon their
Garments, to make them still to be remembering the Law: I am afraid the Fringing
and Finery of two many have a clean contrary Effect: It does but puff them up,
and make them proud. And again; If any should ask, What Cloths, and Hair, and
Garb, may I wear, this may be a very direct and satisfactory Answer: Wear what
you think good, so it be without Pride. And this I believe will shut out of
Doors, 1. Wearing a Garb above one's Rank and Degree: For I question whether
one can wear a Garb above his Rank without Pride. And, 2. Affecting foreign,
and strange, and few fangled Fashions. For though it may be possible for a Person
to be in the Fashion without Pride, because he would not be hooted at for
Singularity; yet certainly it is hardly possible to affect new fangled Fashions
without Pride. It is one thing to put on the Fashion to avoid Reproach, and
another thing to dote upon Fashions, and to make them Bravery. He that makes
his Cloths his Bravery, it is very suspicious he makes them his Vainglory: and
he that dotes on the Fashion, it is to be doubted he dotes on the Pride of the
Fashion.

THESE Instances are enough to show what a plain but fruitful Method of
Teaching and Preaching Dr. Lightfoot took. But he also took care of his
People's Principles, to preserve them from warping from the National Church,
(as has been taken notice of before) and from the Church, considered as
Protestant. Of which I shall proceed to a few Instances.

To arm his Auditors against Popery, thus he taught them. Our Histories tell
us, That when Austin the Monk came hither into Britain from the Pope, as to
settle Religion; and when some of the British Christians consulted with a grave
prudent Man, whether they should close with him, and submit to his Rules: Yes
(says he) if he be humble, do. But if he be proud, he is not of God. Would you
take a Measure of true Religion, no surer Token than these two, Humility and
Charity. They talk, they will prove the Truth of their Religion by Antiquity,
Universality, and I know not what. Let them show it by the Humility and
Mercifulness of it; and we shall desire no more. But I doubt that Religion that
teaches the Merits of a Man's Works is too proud against God to be the true
Religion; and that that teaches, that the Pope is above all Princes, is too
proud against Men. And I doubt that Religion that stirs up M^n to murder
Princes, Nobles, People, that will not be of that Religion, is not the true
Religion. I am sure Christ and his Apostles were never either of such Pride or
Cruelty; but further from these Principles of Rome, than it is 'twixt Rome and
Jerusalem.

And as he warned them against Popery in general, so particularly, Against a
blind Zeal, Zeal without Knowledge, or Zeal in a wrong Way. It is good always
to be zealous in a good Matter; but mischievous to be zealous in a bad. There
was a great deal of Religious Zeal, for those Parents to offer their Children
to Moloch, to be burnt alive in his Arms, in Devotion to that God of theirs.
But it was blind Zeal, mad Religion, distracted Devotion. Their God was the
Devil. St. Paul in one Place says, That in Zeal he persecuted the Church: But
in another Place he says, He was exceeding mad against the Church. That Zeal
of his was mere Madness. It was blind and mad, cared not whither it went, nor
what it did. Romans x. The Jew has Zeal, but without Knowledge, and that made
him so to set himself against the Truth. You remember that, They that kill you
shall think they do God Service. It was great Zeal, but as blind as a Beetle.
It runs upon it cares not what, as a blind Man runs upon every Post, and falls
into every Pit.

And against Cruelty. The Papists plead stoutly, that theirs, and none but
theirs, is the true Religion. If that should be tried by this very Touchstone,
Is that, can that be true Religion, that makes it Religion to murder Men? None
of you, but have heard of the bloody Days of Queen Mary, and how many poor,
innocent, holy Men were then put to the Fire, and there ended their Lives. And
this forsooth done by the Papists, out of Zeal for Religion. Just such a
Religion as they were spurred by, that offered their Children to Moloch. For
compare the things together, and what can be liker? Those Wretches out of that
Devotion and Religion as they took on them, made their poor innocent Children
pass through the Fire, a Sacrifice to Moloch. These Wretches, out of that
Devotion and Religion as they took on them, made these poor innocent Souls pass
through the Fire, a Sacrifice to the Pope. The Cruelty much alike; the Manner
of the Death they put them to, much alike. And were they not Religious, think
you, much alike? Such a Sacrifice to their Moloch would they have offered of
innocent ones, when they would have sent away our Parliament out of the World
in Fire and Gunpowder; and this forsooth out of Zeal to Religion. And so they
maintain it is lawful to Excommunicate, Depose, Murder Princes, out of Zeal to
Religion. And so they made it lawful, nay, laudable, to murder so many innocent
Souls in that Massacre in France.

Against Transubstantiation. I hope every one laughs at the Doctrine of
Transubstantion, that will fetch Christ from Heaven at every Sacrament: The
Masterpiece of Delusion. Satan shows here how much Delusion he can practice in
the greatest Ignorance. For a Man against Sense and Reason, Philosophy and
Divinity, to believe a Priest can cal^ Christ out of Heaven, and turn a piece
of Bread into his very Body. The strangest Madness in the World! I see it, feel
it Bread, and yet must believe it Flesh. I know it was made yesterday by the
Baker, yet now I must believe it turned into my Creator. I know Christ is in
Heaven, and yet must believe that he is here on Earth. The Heathen were never
more blind.

And against the immoral Doctrine of Equivocation. Whereof he thus vehemently
expressed himself. I cannot but admire the Impudency, as well as abhor the
Wickedness of the Jesuits Doctrine of Equivocation: A Doctrine that has put on
a Whore's Forehead, a brazen Face, and the Devil's Impudency it self before
Men, as well as it has clothed it self with horrid Abominableness before God.
It is a Doctrine that teaches Men to Lie, and yet will maintain they Lie not.
And by their Doctrine there can be no Lying, Forswearing or Deceiving in the
World, though they Lie, Forswear, and Deceive never so deeply. A Trick beyond
the Devils: He turns Truth into a Lie: These can turn a Lie into Truth. A
Popish Priest or Jesuit is brought before a Protestant Magistrate. He puts him
to his Oath; Are you a Popish Priest or a Jesuit? They will Swear NO roundly,
and make no Bones of it; having this Reserve in their Mind, I am not a Priest
to you, or, I am not a Priest of the English Church; or, I am not a Jesuit to
tell you, or be your Confessor; or some such lurking reserved Thought in his
Mind. This Man has not told a Lie, though he speaks not a Word true: He has not
taken a False Oath, though he has Sworn Falsely. As the Devil changes himself
into an Angel of Light, so these a Lie into a Truth. But as he is a Liar still,
and is most dangerous, when he seems a good Angel, so is their Lie, when they
thus Cloth it with the pretense of Truth. Into their secret let not my Soul
come; and with their Counsil, my Glory, be not thou united.

Finally, He showed them the Preference of the Protestant Religion, before that
of the Papists. This is the Reason, says he, that so many Protestants turn
Papists, [This he spoke in the Year 1674.] Because Popery opens an easier way
to Heaven, a Thousand fold, than the Protestant does. Add to this, the
Viciousness of the Times. And the more Viciousness abounds, the more will such
Apostasy abound according to the intimation of our Savior, Matthew. xxiv.
Because Iniquity shall abound, the Love of many (to God and his Truth) shall
wax cold. Men would fain enjoy their Pleasures here, and yet go to Heaven too:
They would fain have their Paradise here, and have Paradise hereafter. This
Popery helps them too, almost with a wet Finger. Has a Man committed Whoredom,
Adultery, been Guilty of Deceit, Luxury, Uncharitableness, let him go and
Confess himself to a Priest, and the Priest absolves him; and those Sins are
gone, and there is no more danger of them. Or, Oh! For how many Thousand Sins,
for how many Thousand Years, can the Pope Pardon him? How may Pilgrimage to
such a Saint fetch him off? How may so many Fastings, so many Ave Mary's, so
often lying in Haircloth, so many Masses make all well, and out of Danger? That
it is as easy almost with them to get to Heaven, as for a Man to do his
ordinary Days Work.

But the Protestant Doctrine makes obtaining Salvation a harder Task, according
to the Truth of the Scripture. John vi. you read of diverse that went away from
Christ, because they thought his Doctrine a Hard Saying. So does the poor
Protestant Religion lose Followers upon the same account. None is of poor
Michaiah's side, because he speaks Truth and Home. But let Ahab have the Four
Hundred false Prophets, for they will be sure to make all well for him, let him
do what he will. There are Four Hundred and Four Hundred false Prophets in the
Popish Cause that will warrant the veriest Ahab, that ever was, Heaven: If he
have but Money to fee them well, will Pray him to Heaven, Sing him to Heaven,
Pardon him to Heaven; and he shall never see Hell, and it may be, not
Purgatory. It is easy to see by this Comparison which is the truer and better
Religion of the Two.

By these, and such like sound and sober Discourses, he built up his People
committed to his Charge in Truth and Godliness. So that it is reported he had
not a Dissenter in his Parish. The People of his Flock Honest, Quiet and
Industrious; his Church constantly and conscientiously repaired to, every
Lord's Day with due Devotion.

And thus I have at length dispatched what I had to say, both of our Author,
and these Remains of his which are now made Public. And I, who have once more
revived the Memory of this great Ornament of Literature, and of our Church of
England, shall I hope not only be Pardoned, but merit some Thanks from the
Piously Learned, and Sober-Minded Rank of Men.

I had some inclination to have added a Fourth Tract of this Author's, Namely,
A Chronicle of Events and Occurrences in the World under the Kings of France
and the Ottoman Emperor, made by one Joseph a Priest who lived about the Times
of Henry VIII. Being a Fair Translation out of Hebrew into English done by the
Doctor's own Hand. Which he seemed to have taken all this pains about, because
the History is interspersed with what befell Jerusalem after the Destruction of
it by Titus the Emperor, and with the Wars waged by diverse Kings and Princes
for the Gaining and Possession of that Place, once so famous for being the Spot
of all the Earth appointed for God's Holy Temple to be built on; and for the
Son of God to Converse, and Die, and Redeem the World in. And also because here
is set forth by the Pen of a Jew himself the State and Condition of the Jews in
the latter Times, and particularly, the sad Persecutions and Calamities that
befell them, by the just Judgment of God, in these Western Parts of the World,
as well as in other Parts, by the German and French Nations. Whereby might be
seen some History of that Desolate, Forsaken People, and of the Scourge of God
upon them in successive Generations, ever since they Rejected and Crucified
their Messiah, and took the Guilt of his Blood upon themselves and their
Children. The State of which People from Age to Age, since the Ruin of their
Commonwealth, our Doctor was very Inquisitive after, and wished some Learned Pen
would give the World a fair Account of. But to prevent the swelling of this
Volume, it was thought convenient to omit this Piece.

However for a Taste, I cannot but remark to the Reader, how that Jewish Author
sets forth the Calamities and Unmerciful Destructions that befell that People in
the Year 1096. That Year, he writes, was a Year of Affliction of Jacob. For
they were oppressed in the Lands of the Christians in all Places, whither they
were scattered. For great and evil Afflictions found them out, even such are
Written in the Law of Moses, and such as are not written in the Book. For
against them arose up these abominable People, the Germans and French Men, a
Nation strong of Face, which respects not Persons, nor spares Old nor Young.
Let us, say they, avenge the Cause of our Christ upon the Jews that are among
us, and cut them off from being a People; neither let the Name of Israel be
remembered any more. Or let them Change their Glory, and become like to us. When
the Synagogues which were in Germany heard this headlong Rumor, their Heart
melted and became as Water. Fear took hold of them, sorrow as a Woman in
Travail. They lift up their Hearts to the Rocks: They appointed Fastings: They
put Dust upon their Heads, and Girded with Sackcloth. And they cried unto the
Lord in their Affliction, but he covered himself with a Cloud, that their
Prayers should not pass. Then he proceeded to show the Massacres and Spoils
committed upon the Jews in all or most of the Cities and Places where they had
Synagogues; as at Spires, Worms, Mentz, Colen, Wabzlak, Meir, Trevir, Metz,
Prague, and many other Towns. And how their Flights from Place to Place, and
some^imes to the Bishop's House, for their safety, could not secure them, but
were pursued and slain with Fire and Sword. Whereupon he makes this Conclusion.
Thus whithersoever they fled, the Stone out of the Wall cried after them to
confound and destroy them: For God had given Liberty to the Destroyers to
Destroy in those evil Days.

And one Circumstance in these Miseries of the Jews deserves to be more
particularly observed, which methinks is a singular Evidence of the Judgment of
God upon that People, (who once called for Christ's Blood upon them and theirs)
that they were not only slaughtered by their Enemies, but that no small Numbers
unnaturally perished by laying Violent Hands upon themselves, and their nearest
Relations: And this either to avoid being slain with the Sword of their
Enemies, or to expiate with their own Blood any Compliances they had
constrainedly made. Thus at Spires he mentions a Woman who took a Knife and
slew her self, refusing to be defiled, that is, to become a Christian. At Worms
(where Eight Hundred Souls were Massacred in two Days) many slew themselves,
and each one his Brother, and Friend, and Son, and Daughter, Bridegrooms, and
Brides: Nay, the tender Women slew their Children with all their Hearts, (says
the Author) and all their Souls; and the Children said, (...) i. e. Hear, O
Israel, [Which was the beginning of one of their Prayers] when their Soul
poured it self into their Mothers Bosom. The like was done at Mentz: and at
Rincona two Men escaped who were forceably defiled, one Named Vri, and the
other Isaac, the Son of David Parnes; and his Two Daughters were with him, but
they returned unto the Lord. And Isaac slew his Daughters on the Even of the
Feast of Weeks. His House also he set on Fire. And thus says this Jew, he
offered a Burnt Offering unto the Lord. And he and Vri went into the
Congregation of the Lord [ i. e. the Synagogue set on fire it seems by the
Enemy] before the Ark, and Died there before the Lord, as the Fire ascended. At
Wabzlag they slew every one his Fellow, lest the Christians should abuse them
in the Pools of Water which were round about the City. And one Named Rabbenu
Samuel, who had one only Son, this Young Man bared his Neck, and the Old Man
took a Knife, and blessed over the Slaughter, and slew him: And the Young Man
Answered Amen. And all they that stood by Answered and said, Hear, O Israel.
Much more to this purpose is related there of the deplorable state of that
People at this time, which he says, he transcribed partly out of the
Commentaries of Rabbi Eliezer.

I have but one thing more to add, (and so shall conclude this tedious Preface)
which possibly may not be unacceptable to the Lovers of Dr. Lightfoot, and his
Studies, to be informed of. That besides these Tracts now offered to the
Public, the last Year several other Posthumous Pieces of his were Printed in
Holland in Latin; b^ing a new Addition to his other Works; as was hinted in the
beginning. These were to the Number of XXI. Consisting of, Some Learned
Thoughts of the Greek Translation of the Bible by the Seventy; An Inlet into
the Talmud, and a Summary of the remarkable Matters contained in it by way of
Index: Some Remarks of the Places and Towns of the Holy Land: A Tract of the
Spirit of Prophecy, as it was among the Jews, and afterward ceased: Some
memorable Matters under Ezra, and that which was styled the Great Synagogue: An
History of the Jewish University at Japhne, that is, Joppa: Short Talmudical
Notes upon Genesis, Exodus, Numbers, and Joshua: Some Annotations to be
inserted into his Horae Hebraicae and Talmudicae, in their proper Places. A
Sermon in Latin Preached at Ely at an Episcopal Visitation before Bishop Lany
in the Year 1674. that is, the last Year but one of the Doctor's Life: Some of
his Exercises at the Commencement Anno 1655. when he was Vice Chancellor of
Cambridge. All these were writ by him in Latin. The Pieces following were in
English, but Translated into Latin, viz. A short Tract of the Creation* The
Motions and Stations of Israel through the Wilderness toward the Land of
Canaan: A short and plain Exposition of some of the first Chapters of Hosea: A
Dissertation, whether the Supper in which Judas received the Sop, were the
Passover Supper: Another Discourse, whether the Revelation was wrote by the
Apostle St. John, or some other John: An Enumeration of the Promises of God,
collected out of the Old Prophets, to be fulfilled to the Jews in the latter
Days: An Enquiry into St. James's Liturgy: Some Fragments of Roman and
Christian History for the first Four Centuries. Lastly, A Collection of Letters
of Learned Men, and upon Learned Subjects, to Dr. Lightfoot; among which is a
Letter of the Learned John Buxtorph from Basil to Dr. Lightfoot, and another
from the Doctor to him.

And thus beseeching God to increase the Number of such useful and good Men, as
this Reverend Divine was, I commend the Reader and my self to God.

I. S.
It is fit the Reader be Advertised, that whereas there be two References,
noted by these two Marks and at page 7. the former referrs to p. 47. the latter
to p 87.



THE CONTENTS OF THE Rules for a Student of the Holy Scriptures.
SECTION I. THE Language of Scripture one help for the explaining of it. page 3
To lay the Books and Chapters in their due Order, another. 4 The Way to come to
this Skill is to cast the Bible into a continued Chronicle. Ib. The Benefit of
it. Ib. Eight Literal Observations for this Purpose. 5
SECT. II. The Number of the Canonical Books. 11 The Apocrypha, the Work of
some Jews. Ib. Some Observations thereon. 12
SECT. III. The Old Testament. The Method of reading the whole Book of GENESIS,
with Explanations and Cursory Observations upon each Chapter; beginning at p.
12 The Order of reading JOB. 28
SECT. IV. The Method of reading the Book of EXODUS, with Explanations and
Cursory Observations throughout the whole Book; beginning at p. 29 The
Departure of Israel out of Egypt, laid Kalendar-wise. 31, etc. The Tabernacle
and Types of it. 37, etc. The giving of the Law. 40
SECT. V. The Method of reading the Book of LEVITICUS; with some useful
Instructions concerning the Ceremonies enjoined therein. The Laws of Leprosy,
what they imported. 48, 49 SECT. VI. Notes and Explanations upon each Chapter
of the Book of NUMBERS. 49 A Summary of the Book of DEUTERONOMY. 52
SECT. VIII. A Declaration of the Matters contained in the Book of JOSHUA,
Chapter by Chapter. 53, 54 The Story of Caleb's taking of Kiri^ath Sepher,
Chap. xv. why rehearsed in Judge. i. 54
SECT. IX. The true Order for reading of the Book of JUDGES, with Explanations.
55, etc. The Book of RUTH to be read near the beginning of this Book. 58
SECT. X. Directions for the Methodical reading of the Books of SAMUEL, KINGS
and CHRONICLES, with Cursory Ob^^^vations. Instructions where the PSALMS,
PROVERBS, CANTICLES, ECCLESIASTES and JONAH fall in to be read. Some special
Notes concerning the Book of PSALMS. 59, etc. SECT. XI. The Prophetical Books.
A Rule where and how to lay them, as to Order of Time: And as to the Precedence
of the Prophets living under the same Reign. How to read the Prophets unto the
Captivity. The Captivity-Books to be cast into a Chronicle. Scripture
Chronology will direct to find what is not possible to express: And
particularly the beginning of the Seventy Years Captivity. 65, 66 SECT. XII.
The New Testament. The Spirit and Glory of the Old Testament light upon the
New. 66 Two things of singular Use in reading of the New Testament. 1. In the
Evangelists, to search out the true and exact Order. 2. In reading the New
Testament, never to take the Eye off the Old. 67
SECT. XIII. Evangelium Mosaico-Propheticum. The Gospel and History of Christ
to be traced in Moses and the Prophets. 68 SECT. XIV. The Order of the
Evangelists. The Four Evangelists laid in an entire continued Story, till
within a Twelvemonth of Christ's Death. A Note concerning the Supper in the
Nineteenth Chapter of S. John. 72, 73 The rest of the Tract in Forty-four
Sections, show orderly and distinctly how each Evangelist is to be read,
according to the Order of Time; together with Notes and Observations to prove
the Order.

RULES FOR A STUDENT OF THE Holy Scriptures.
With Directions how to read the History of the Bible Methodically according to
the true Order of Time; and consequently for the better Understanding, and more
Profit.

RULES FOR A STUDENT OF THE Holy Scriptures.
SECT. I.
THAT the Scripture is the best Expositor of its self, none ever denied, but
they that would not have the Scriptures expounded. The helps that it affords
for explaining of its self, are various.

The first to be looked after is the Language: The Spirit of God, upon the same
Occasions, using the same Words in the Original. This observed, (which in
Translations cannot be so well expressed) gives Light to Things, which
otherwise were obscure. The Groundwork of the Two Testaments is Hebrew and
Greek, but upon Occasion flourisht with Chaldee, Arabic, Syrian, Latin, etc.
The Holy Spirit seldom or never using these, but intimating something of Note,
if our Eyes be but serious. So in Hos. V. 5. speaking of Israel's seeking God
in Affliction, he uses the Chaldee Form; to teach where that Affliction and
Seeking must be. So Psalm. cxvi.12. the Benefits of God there spoken of are in
Chaldee Form for the same reason. To spare more, the very Language, wherein the
Doom of Babel is written on the Wall, Mean, Tekel, Upharsin, (the fullest Piece
that ever the World saw in so few Words) imports a great deal of Divine Wisdom.
But every one that desires to read the Bible with Profit, cannot see this.

The first thing then for them, that only read Translations, to be looked after
in reading the Scriptures, is to lay the Books and Chapters in their true
Order. The Holy Spirit has, in diverse Places, purposely and divinely laid
Stories and Passages out of their proper Places for special Ends: The
Evangelists especially witness this. Here the Skill of the Reader is, first to
reduce each thing to his own Place: And secondly, to seek the Divine Reason,
why it is misplaced.

The only way to come to this Skill, is by casting the Story of the Bible into
a continued Chronicle. Which, as the Spirit has given undoubted Helps to draw*
so being drawn, it is the most Satisfactory, Delightsome, and Confirmative of
the Understanding* Mind and Memory, that may be. This settles Histories in your
Mind: This brings the things, as i^ done, before your Eyes: This makes you mark
what else you would not; and this suffers you not to slip over the least Tittle
of a Word: And sometimes in things of Doubt and Scruple, this Strikes all out
of Question. The great Doubts in the Primitive Church about Methuselah's living
in the Year of the Flood, and of Sem's being Melchisedek, as they grew from
this Course, so from this Course (had it been truly followed) they had been
soon resolved. I will not anticipate your Study; else could I show in Hab.
iii.2. Joh. xiii. and other Places, Doubts to be raised, not to be answered,
but b^ Skill in Scripture Chronicle, and being so answered, of great Weight and
Sweetness. Two or Three Hours Oral Instructions from one that has gone this
way, would give more Readiness in Scripture-text, than whole Days before. For
the present take these literal Observations with you, which may something ease,
and further you in your Entry upon this Course.

I. Observe, That the Scripture of the Old Testament has in gross Sums chained
the Times together, from the beginning of the World, to the Death of Christ.
These are easy to find; and, upon the finding, it is no hard Task to find out
the several or special manner of reckoning of every Link. As between the
Creation and Flood, the Years are reckoned complete. In the paralleling of
Judah's and Israel's Kingdom, most commonly current, but sometimes otherwise.

II. The Jewish Year consisted of Twelve Lunary Months. That is, one Month
full, and another wanting; or one of Nine and Twenty Days, and another of
Thirty. Which Account came short of a Solary Year Eleven Days. Which Eleven
Days in Three Years made a Month of Three and Thirty Days. So that Year had
Thirteen Months; and the Emb^limean* or Intercalary Month, they set last, and
called it Ve^dar. See how he Holy Ghost reckons the Year of the Flood,
answering this Account; but makes it a complete Solar Year.

III. Their Year had a double beginning, Viz. From Tisri, from the Creation to
the Departure out of Egypt: And from this Month the World and the Year of the
Flood began. At their coming from Egypt, their Year began from the first New
Moon, after the Vernal Solstice. And from this beginning they reckoned all
their Ecclesiastic Accounts and Feasts, but one, Viz. the beginning of the
great Jubilee; which was from Tisri, for special Type of good things to come.

IV. These are the common Names of their Months.

Days. Nisan, containing 30 Tisri, containing 30 Jiar, 29 Marheshvan, 29 Sivan,
30 Cis^eu, 30 Tammuz, 29 Tebeth, 29 Ab, 30 Shebet, 30 Elul, 29 Adar, 29

Some of them have other Names; as Zin, Abib, Bull, Ethanim. But where you find
these, you will find to what Month to lay them. Their Agreement with our Months
was thus.

Nisan, March. April.
Jiar, Zin. April. May.
Sivan, May. June.
Tammuz, June. July.
Ab, July. Aug.
Elul, Aug. Sept.
Tisri, Ethanim. Sept. October.
Marchesvan, October. Novem.
Cisleu, Novem. December.
Tebeth, December. Jan.
Shebet, Jan. Febr.
Adar, Febr. March.

V. Their Festivals appointed by the Law Yearly were but Four, (their New
Moons, Beginnings of their Year, and Sabbath excepted) Viz. The Passover,
Pentecost, or the Feast of Weeks, the Feast of Expiation, and the Feast of
Tabernacles. The two latter were fixed Feasts, always upon the same Days. As
the Expiation Day was Tisri the Tenth, the Feast of Tabernacles the Fifteenth
of the same Month, the reason see after at this mark.

The other Two Feasts, the Passover and Pentecost, were movable; and the
latter was moved by the first. The Passover was at the first Full Moon after
the Vernal Equinox. This considered, shows the Eclipse at Christ's Death to be
supernatural. And it was indifferently upon any Day of the Week, but constantly
upon the Fourteenth of the Month. The Fifteenth Day was a solemn Day; and for
that called a Sabbath, Lev. xxiii.11. that is, a solemn Festival Day; as the
Chaldee Translation of ^^kel^s, and the Chaldee Paraphrase of Jonathan Ben
^zziel render it well. The Day after in the Morning betime they offered the
Sheaf of first Fruits: And thenceforward was all the Corn of the Land as
sanctified to them, and they might eat it. This Day is called the Day after the
Sabbath, Lev. xxiii.11. that is, after the first Day in the Passover Week, as
Aben Ezra, R. Solomon, R. Mena^em, etc. do truly take it, And this was on the
Sixteenth Day of the Month in the Morning. Compare this with Christ. On the
Passover Day he suffered, the next Day he lay in the Grave, which was a
Sabbath indeed. And on the third Morning he rose again, The first Fruits of
those that slept, as S. Paul from this Type calls him, 1 Cor. xv.20.

From this Day of the First Fruits Offering they began their Seven Sabbaths to
Pentecost. The first Sabbath was called (...) that is, the first Sabbath after
the second Day, Viz. in the Passover Week, Luke vi.1. The next Sabbath was
called (...) the third (...), etc. and so to Pentecost. See at this mark.

VI. Their Harvest was half a Year long. Barley Harvest began in Nisan, and
Wheat Harvest ended in Tisri, or before it. These and other like things, which
seem but small, yet in reading the Bible presly indeed, will prove of singular
Use upon Occasion. The smallest thing is not to be neglected, that will give
Instruction.

VII. Things of greater weight will show themselves. Such are the Computations
of times from a date, but the date uncertain. Such is Absalom's, 2 Samuel xv.7 of
forty years. The beginning of which must be fetched from the time of Israel's
desiring a King, 1 Samuel viii. Which Sin is here punished upon Israel, in the
Rebellion of Absalom. Such an one is that, 2 Chronicles. xxii.2. of two and forty
years; taking date from the first of Omri: In whose Line Joram, Ahaziah's
Father, married. And therefore his Son's Reign is reckoned from the beginning
of that wicked House. Such is that, Esaias vii.8. of threescore and five years,
which is to be counted backward, and will be found to begin from Esay's
prophesying at the first. Such an one is that, Ezekiel. i.1. of thirty years,
beginning from Josiah's Passover, and Helkiah's finding the Book of the Law;
which put them in mind of Captivity, which is now accomplished. Here must your
Circumspection settle you.

VIII. In casting up the times of the Collateral Kingdoms of Judah and Israel,
your only way is to lay them in Two Columns, one justly paralleling the other;
and to run them both by Years, as the Text directs you. But here is Nicety
indeed, not to see how strangely they be reckoned, sometimes inclusive,
sometimes otherwise, (for this you will easily find) but to find a reason, why
they be so reckoned. Some of them I will here present to you, thereby to
explain my self.

JUDAH. ISRAEL. Rehoboam made King. He reigns Seventeen Years, 1 Kin. xiv.21.
1 1 Jerob^am made King. He reigns Two and Twenty Years, 1 Kin. xiv.20. 2 2 3
3 4 4 5 5 6 6 7 7 8 8 9 9 10 10 11 11 12 12 13 13 14 14 15 15 16 16 17 17
Abijam reigns Three Years, 1 Kin. xv.1. Asa reigns One and Forty Years, 1 Kin.
xv.9. 1 18 2 19 3 20 2 21 Nadab reigns Two Years, 1 Kin. xv.25. 3 22 4 5 6 7
8 etc

Here in this Computation, which the Text lays just thus, you may see these
things to be observed. First, That Rehoboam's Seventeen Years are counted
complete. Secondly, That Abijam's Years are current. Thirdly, That whereas it
is said, that Jeroboam reigned two and twenty years, and his Son Nadab two
years, you find by this reckoning, that Nadab's Two Years fall within the Sum
of his Father's Two and Twenty. This may seem strange; but the Resolution is
sweet and easy from 2 Chronicles. xiii.20. The Lord smote Jeroboam with some ill
Disease, that he could not administer, or rule the Kingdom. So that he was
forced to substitute his Son Nadab in his Lifetime. And in one and the same
Year both Father and Son dye.

Diverse such Passages, as these, you will find in this Story of the Kings, if
you will but cast it into Annals after this manner, as be these. Ahaziah Two
Years older than his Father, 2 Chronicles. xxii.2. Baasha fighting Nineteen Years
after he is dead, 2 Chronicles. xvi.1. Jotham reigning Four Years after he is
buried, 2 King. xv.30. Joram crowned King in the Seventeenth Year of
Jehoshaphat, 2 King. i.17. compared with 1 King. xxii.51. And in the Two and
Twentieth Year of Jehoshaphat, 2 King. viii.16. And after Jehoshaphat's Death,
2 Chronicles. xxi.1. Variety of such strange things are to be found by taking this
course, which otherwise you can never see, nor doubt of. For Resolution of such
Ambiguities, when you have found them, the Text will do it, if it be well
searched. Conference with some Man or other, learned and practiced in this way,
will soon resolve and remove all Scruples. One Month or two spent thus with a
living Guide, will profit more than Seven Years Study spent according to the
common way of reading the Bible. This way attained to will guide you it self in
what else is agreeable to profitable reading. As in marking those things that
seem to be Contradictions in the Text, or Slips of the Holy Ghost; (in which
always is admirable Wisdom) Parallels of Times, Places and Persons, etc. Which,
if you once fix sadly to make a Scripture-Chronicle, you cannot slip unmarked;
and it will be enough to me to see you Doubt. I know your Doubting will not
rest, till resolved.

I have here briefly run before you the Order of Scripture, as I conceive the
Continuance of the History requires it to lie. If you will but settle to make a
Scripture Chronicle, this is needless; for that will search out the Order for
you: So that you may spare your Labor of reading this that I have written; and
then I need not to excuse my Confusedness in it for haste. Yet if you do read
it, it may show you the Necessity of that, that I so instantly urge, viz. Skill
in the Chronicle. For if there be whole Chapters and Books laid out of their
Places, and the reason thereof commonly most sweet, what may we expect in
smaller Bulk of things, as Genealogies, Names, Speeches, Years, Quotations,
etc. but strange Variations, yet always Divine?

Admirable it is to see, how the Holy Spirit of God in Discords has showed the
sweetest Music. But few Men mark this, because few ^ake a right course in
reading of Scripture. Hence, when Men are brought to see flat Contradictions,
(as unreconciled there be many in it,) they are at amaze, and ready to deny
their Bible. A little Pains right spent will soon amend this wavering, and
settle Men upon the Rock; whereon to be built is to be sure.

SECT. II.
THE Canonical Books of the Bible are Seventy, (if the Psalms be parted into
Five) like the Seventy Souls, that built up the House of Israel.

The Apocrypha speaks for it self, that it is not the Finger of God, but the
Work of some Jews. Which got it so much Authority among Christians; because it
came from them, from whom the lively Oracles of God indeed came also. But the
Talmud may be read to as good Advantage, and as much Profit, and far more.

Leviathan reserved to be eaten, 2 Esdra vi.52. is Judaism* in Targ. Jonath. in
Genesis R. Sol. Elias (...) of all tastes in Wisd. xvi.20, 21. is Jewish, R. Sol.
in Number. xi. Paradise created before the World is Judaism, in Targ. Jonath. in
Genesis ii. Pirke R. Eliezer, R. Nephtali. Bell and the Dragon is a Jewish Parable
from Jer. li.44. And I will punish Bell in Babylon, and I will bring forth out
of his Mouth, that which he has swallowed up* etc.

(...) blessing Simeon, for the Slaughter of (...), is worse than Jewish* Jud.
ix.2. etc. flat against Jacob, who curses the Fact; and against Moses* who for
it leaves him out of his Blessings, Deuteronomy. xxxiii.

Tobit's Chronology is worse than Heathenish, Tob. xiv.4, and 15. making the
Ruin of Nineveh by Nebuchadnezzar, to depend upon Jonah's Prophecy: Whereas
since Jonah's Prophecy that City had been de^^royed by Arbaces and Belosus,
and built again, and stood the Succession of Seven or Eight Kings, and near
about Two Hundred Years before it was taken by Nebuchadnezzar. So might one
censure the rest; but Verbum Sapienti. Believe not every Spirit.

SECT. III. GENESIS.
CHAP. I. THE Law begins with the Creation; because by the Creature is our
first Step to the Knowledge of God, Romans i.20. Ps. xix. It teaches the end
from the beginning, the Resurrection from the Creation: For if God made Man of
D^st, he can raise him; our Spiritual Union with God in Glory, even in our
Body, by the Union of our Spirit and Body in Creation.

God not named Jehovah, till the Creation be perfect, for special Reason.

The second Days Work not approved, but the third twice.

Heaven and Earth created in one and the same instant, as Center and
Circumference.

The First Day.
The Heavens are made perfect, and move as soon as ever they are made, and with
them are created the Angels. But the Earth is unformed and vast, all covered
over with Water. And the Spirit of God, by the Motion of the Heavens,
cherishes the inferior Creature of Earth and Waters.

Twelve Hours did the Heavens move in Darkness; and then by God's Appointment
Light appeared in that Hemisphere, in which God had decreed, that the Light of
Religion should first shine. And there it gave Luster for Twelve Hours more,
declining by degrees with the Motion of the Heavens to the other Hemisphere;
where it also shone Twelve Hours. So that the first Day to that part of the
World, was So long was Joshuah's Day, when the Sun stood still; and so long was
Christ under Death.
Six and Thirty Hours long.

The Second Day.
As soon as ever the Light was gone off from this upper Horizon, God commanded,
that (instead of that Vacuity, which was between the Waters, that covered the
Earth, and the Clouds, which were created full of Water in the same instant
with the Heavens,) the Air should be spread abroad throughout the Universe. And
in Four and Twenty Hours the Command is accomplished.

The Third Day.
The Waters, that cover the Earth, at God's Command recoil Westward into those
Channels, which God had appointed them. And still as they go away, and dry Land
appears, Herbs, Plants and Trees, with their ripe Seed and Fruit upon them,
grow instantly out of the Earth. This Day God plants the pleasant Garden of The
Story of Eden, Genesis 11. ver. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. in proper Order should lie
between ver. 12, and 13. of this Chapter. But Moses has reserved the History
of that to be handled at Adam's being placed in it. Because he would dispatch
his Treatise of Generals before he come to Particulars.
Eden.

The Fourth Day.
The Sun, Moon and Stars created. The inferior Hemisphere first sees the Sun:
Or else the Moon was made before the Sun.

The Fifth Day.
Fowl and Fish made. The Whale particularly named, to show, that even the
greatest Creature could not make it self.

The Sixth Day.
Beasts and Cattle created; and Man, Lord of the Creatures on Earth: Who come
to acknowledge their Homage to Man, when they come for their Names. Which Adam
gives them, GENESIS II. Begin to read this Chapter at ver. 4. This Chapter is a
particularizing upon some Generals of the Chapter preceding.
at their first Sight, according to their Natures. He sees not amongst them
all a Mate for himself. God provides one for him of his own Flesh, marries them
together, puts them into the Garden, gives them the Moral Law in few Words; and
to show to them their entire Dominion, as well over themselves, as over the
Creature, he leaves them to their own free Will, with Power either to stand or
fall. He gives his Angels charge over them, to be ministering Spirits for their
Good. Some Angels despise this Office, and for that Pride are cast from their
first Estate of Happiness, and are reserved in the Chains of God's Providence,
under the Darkness of his Displeasure, unto the Judgment of the great Day.

No Comfort they have left them, but to have Company of the same Misery, and to
bring Man into the same Perdition. GENESIS III.
This they soon enterprise; and having first obtained Leave of God, they assail
the Woman by three Temptations, to the Lust of the Flesh, Lust of the Eye, and
Pride of Life, as 1 John ii.16. she being overcome brings the Man into the
same Transgression. About Three Hours after their Fall, God comes to censure
them, but first he promises Christ, a Redeemer. Which Promise Adam lays hold
on; and for that calls his Wife's Name Eve, or Life.

God sees his Faith, and teaches him to Sacrifice clean Beasts, as a Seal of
his Faith in him, who should be sacrificed for him. With the Skins of which
Beasts he cloatheth Adam and his Wife, and drives them out of Eden, even on
the Day of their Creation.

The Seventh Day.
After the end of Genesis iii. take in the three first Verses of Chap. ii.

That Adam fell on the day of his Creation, were there no other Evidence, Genesis
v. 2. were sufficient.


The next Day God, by his own Example ordains as a Day of Rest, for Adam and
his Posterity to meditate upon these things.

Evil Concupiscence, generated in Adam by his Fall, does readily forward Adam
upon the present Necessity of Generation of Children. GENESIS IV.
He has two born at a Birth: First, that which was Natural, and after him that
which was Spiritual. Their Mother, upon the Birth of the first of them, shows
her Apprehension of the Promise, and calls his Name Cain, a Possession or
Purchase: The Original Words may well, if not best, bear this Sense.
For, says ^he, I have obtained the Lord, to become Man. But the Purchase or
Possession of the Propagation of Original Sin, did most show it self in the
Nature of Cain. Because his Brother's bloody Sacrifice, which properly
signified that of Christ was visibly fired from Heaven, and his dry Sheaves of
Corn, the likelier Materials to burn, are not, he falls into a desperate
Discontent; which, though God himself from Heaven would remove with The common
Gloss upon ver. 7. Sin lies at the Door: That is, the Punishment for Sin is
ready to seize on thee, is that, contrary to the Sense of the Verse going
before, and the latter end of that Verse. God comes not there to deject, but
comfort him. The Word (...) translated Sin, signifies the Sacrifice for Sin,
all along Leviticus, which was brought to the Tabernacle Door.
comfortable Words, yet sticks it fast, even to the Death of his Brother. For
which he is made a Runnagate, and hedged in that he cannot die, as Job iii.21.
though he begged of the Lord, Let any one, that finds me, kill me. God gives
him a Token, that no one should kill him. Upon which he grows resolutely
wicked, as appears in the Discipline of his Children. One of which Lamech, the
seventh from Adam in this Line, is notoriously wicked, and brings in height
of Wickedness by his double Marriage. This Chapter undertaking to set down the
Wickedness of Cain's Brood, runs on with the holy Line, till it stop at Enosh.
In whose time that Wickedness began to be notorious. See 2 Pet. ii.5.
Which Enoch, the seventh from Adam in the other Line, prophesies against,
Jud. ver. 12. Yet Lamech boasts in his Villainy, and even undervalues his
great Grand^ire Cain. His Children give their Minds to Trades, that may further
Luxury and Vanity; as fatting Cattle, Imagery, and Music. Thus is Cain's
Generation scattered, and shall be utterly rooted out by the Flood.

But these are the Generations of Adam, that should hold out, and not fail.
GENESIS V. This Chapter is a a Chronicle of 1656 Years, from the Creation to
Methuselah's Death. This time is called, Early in the M^^ning, or the dawning
of the Day, Mat. xx.1. This Chapter, cast into a Chronological Table, gives
much Light to what went before, to what follows, and to it self.
In the Day that God made Adam, he created him in his own Image; even both the
Male and Female he made in this Image; and blessed them with Power of begetting
Children, in the same Image also; but they fell on the Day of their Creation;
so that God names them Earthly Adam, the Day that they were created.

And when Adam was an Hundred and Thirty Years old complete, he begat a Son in
his own Image, sinful like himself, and called his Name Seth. And all the Days
of Adam were Nine Hundred and Thirty Years; a Thousand within Seventy: But now
Seventy Years are a Man's whole Age, Psalm. xc.10* In this long time Adam saw
his Children's Children to the Ninth Generation. Enoch, the Seventh from Adam,
is dedicated to God, as the Seventh Day, and God took him away, that he should
not see Death, when he had lived as many Years as be Days in a Year. Enoch,
before he was translated, prophesied against the Wickedness of the World, and
foretold of the Flood. Which those that feared God believed; and therefore kept
themselves long unmarried, because they would not beget many Children for the
Waters. For Methuselah lived an Hundred Eighty-seven Years, and begat Lamech,
and Lamech lived an Hundred Eighty-two, and begat a Son, and foresaw that to
him should be given Liberty for all the World to eat Flesh; whereby they should
be much eased of the Toil which they endured in Tillage of the Ground; when
hitherto they ate nothing but the Fruits thereof; and he called his Name Noah.
And when Noah was Five Hundred Years old, That Sem was Noah's second Son,
collect from Genesis v.32. and vii.11. and xi.10.
he begat Japhet, and Two Years after he begat Sem, and afterward he begat Ham.

GENESIS VI. To Noah God determines the Date of the old World an Hundred and
Twenty Years; and then should all perish, but himself, and Family. Who should
be preserved in a large and spacious Ark; which Noah and his Sons make, and
enter into in the Year of the World MDCLVI, GENESIS VII.
on the Seventeenth Day of Marheshwan, or the Second Month; having newly buried
his Grandfather Methuselah dies at the most not above Forty Days before the
Rains begin. This Enoch foresaw, when he named him so. Methushelah, He dies,
and it is sent.
Methuselah. With him he takes of Birds, Beasts and Cattle; some for
Preservation of the kind; of unclean Creatures only a Couple, but of clean
three Couple for Breed, and an odd one to sacrifice upon his Delivery. The
Rains begin, and within Forty Days the Earth is as it was at the Creation, all
covered with Waters. When the Wicked see Destruction begin, it is too late to
pray. For when they would not make their Prayer to God in a time, when he might
be found, in the Flood of Waters they could not make their Prayers to come nigh
him, Psalm. xxxii.6. They are soon wiped away with Waters. Job xxii.15, 16. Have
thou marked the old way, which wicked Men have trodden? Which were cut down out
of time; whose Foundation was overflown with a Flood. And their Spirits are now
in Prison. 1 Pet. iii.19. The Waters grow Fifteen Cubits above the highest
Mountain. The Ark draws Water Eleven Cubits.

On the First of Sivan the Waters ebb, and but a Cubit in Four Days for Two
Months together; but faster, GENESIS VIII.
being got within the Compass of the Mountains. After Noah had been a complete
Solar Year in the Ark, he comes out, GENESIS IX.
and sacrifices, and receives a Blessing, and The Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is against this Law of Nature and Nations.
Liberty of eating Flesh, but without the Blood. The Rainbow, that before was
only Natural, is now also The Rainbow the likeliest Sacrament to be of
Accidents, that ever was, yet are they in a subject. Transubstantiation
teaches strange Philosophy.
Sacramental. Man's Age is halfed. Noah many Years after the Flood is overtaken
with Wine, and discovered. Sem and Japhet joined in Religion. Cain cursed in
his Son Canaan.

As before the Flood, so after, the Multitude grows wicked. The Children of
Noah's Three Sons jointly go about to build a Rendezvous for Idolatry. GENESIS X,
XI. These two Chapters may seem to lie wrong, in that the Dispersion of Nations
is told, Chap. x. before the Cause of it; which was the building of Babel,
Chap. xi. But the reason of reckoning thus is, to show first, that the Sons of
Sem, Ham and Japhet, were alike accessory to that Rebellion; and that when he
had related the Story of Babel, and the Dispersion, he might follow the Story
of Heber, and that Family that held to the first Tongue.
Which Work God disannulleth, by confounding their Hebrew Tongue into diverse
Idioms. Our Father Japhet's Sons have every one a several Tongue, which Sem's
and Ham's have not. This makes their calling home again to God to be the
longer, by how much they are the further severed from that Tongue, in which
only God was truly professed. At Babel began Heathenism, and Men, as before the
Flood, to be the Sons of Men, Genesis xi.5. And so are to continue, till Christ
give Privilege to them to be called the Sons of God, Joh. i.12. The Means must
be by the Gift of Tongues, Acts ii. At Babel Ages are again halfed. Peleg dies
the youngest Man mentioned, since the Creation. The Ages of these Fathers,
before the Tower, are summed up, because there is no m^re to be said of them.
Cast this Chapter into a Chronological Table, and you shall find Eber alive
after A^raham is dead. In all this Chapter it is not said, (...), as Genesis v.
till it come to Terah, and Terah died in (...). In Genesis v. it is said of those
Fathers, that they Died; to (...)* that they were not swept away with the
Flood. (...), with whom this Genealogy begins, is alive, and (...) the Name of
Melchizedek, Genesis xiv. (...) the rest are not mentioned, till Terah; (...), to
show, that Abram left (...) Terah's Age at Abram's Birth (...). 4. Genesis xi.3.
His Father Heber holds the Language and Religion of the Holy Fathers from the
beginning: But his Children swerve, especially Terah, who is Idolatrous in Ur
of Chaldea: And when he is an Hundred and Thirty Years old, begets Abram, whom
he traineth up in Idolatry also.

Christ is promised to Abram in a Heathen Town, which Promise in time was to
concern the Heathens. GENESIS XII.
Terah and Abram both leave their Idolatry, and Country, and embrace the
Promise. They go for the Land, which was promised, as an earnest of a greater
Mercy. Terah dies by the way. Abram goes into Canaan, and builds two Altars
Compare Deuteronomy. xxvii. and Josh. viii. with this.
, one upon Gerizim, and the other upon Ebal, by Faith taking Possession of that
Land. Afterward by his own Sufferings he shows what they should suffer, that
should inherit that Land, before they come there. For Famine drives him into
Egypt; where, when Canaan wants Corn through want of Rain, the River Nilus
supplies that Defect, and affords Sustenance. His Wife Sarai, a white Woman, is
soon espied by the Blackamoors of Egypt, and commended, and taken to the King;
but restored upon the plaguing of Pharaoh; a Type of Things to come.

Upon his return to Canaan, Let at Mount Ebal, the Hill of Cursing, does
wilfully alienate himself, and His, GENESIS XIII.
from the Communion of Abram, and the Church in his House.

For which he is justly punished with Captivity, with the Sons and Curse of
Canaan, and becomes a Prisoner to Chedorlaomer, a Son of Elam, the Son of Sem;
GENESIS XIV.
but is released by Abram; who by Promise was Lord of that Land, and suffers
not the Spoil to go out of the Land, but at Dan, upon the Frontiers of Canaan,
gets it again. In his return he pays Tithes of the Spoil to Melchizedek, or
Sem. Who having seen the two fearful Plagues of the World, the Flood, and the
Confusion of Tongues, had out of a Godly Fear and Zeal given himself up totally
to the Service of God, and voluntarily was become a Priest. He now refreshes
Abram's weary Company with Bread and Wine, and him with a Blessing.

Which Blessing God secondeth with Promise of Children numerous, like the The
Tribes are Stars in Joseph's Dream, Genesis xxxvii.
Stars, GENESIS XV.
and a new Promise of the Land of Canaan, with an evident Assurance by Vision,
God himself passing in a Flame of Fire between the Parts of divided Beasts, as
the Custom was in making Covenants, Jer. xxxiv.18. But withal shows
Affliction by Egypt, before his Seed shall enjoy the Land. GENESIS XVI.
Which soon begins by Egyptian Hagar, that gendreth to Bondage. GENESIS XVII.
But the Son of the Freewoman must inherit the Promise. Which thing Abram
believes, and Circumcision is given him, a Seal of his Righteousness by Faith.
And for the more Assurance From this, that Abram has a new Name given him,
when the Command of Circumcision is given him, aftertimes used to give Names
to their Children at their Circumcision, Luke i.59. and ii.21. as Christians do
now at Baptism.
his and Sarai's Names are changed.

The Trinity in visible Form appears to Abraham, GENESIS XVIII.
and determines the time of the Birth of the promised Seed.

Cham's Derision of his Father's Nakedness, shows it self in the filthy
Nakedness of his Sons of Sodom; GENESIS XIX.
whose Flames of Lust are punished with Flames of Fire, and even their Hell
comes down from Heaven. Lot is delivered from the Ruin, but not from the
Corruption of the City. God, that can bring Good out of Evil, brings a Mother
of Christ according to the Flesh out of the Incest of Lot, viz. Ruth the
Moabitess.

Isaac in his Mother's Womb taken by Abimelech, as Christ in Mary's Womb taxed
by Caesar. GENESIS XX.
To this Story of Sarah's being taken and kept, and released by the Plagues of
a Philistin, compare the Case of the Ark in the Land of the Philistines, 1 Samuel
v.6.

Isaac born. In his being born above the Course of Nature, Abraham sees the
Day of Christ, and rejoices; GENESIS XXI.
and in token calls his Son's Name Isaac, Laughter. At Isaac's Fifth Year
Ishmael mocketh: Then begin the Four Hundred Years Affliction exactly.

Isaac and the Ram, a true Type of Christ's two Natures; the one only
Suffering, and the other not; GENESIS XXII.
yet that that suffered not, giving Validity and Value to that that suffered.

Sarah dies, the only Woman whose Age is recorded in Scripture. Abraham has
not a Foot of Land of his own in Canaan, but only a Burial Place. GENESIS XXIII.
In the last Chapter you have Tidings of Rebecca, before the Death of Sarah;
that one Sun may be ready to rise, before another set.

Isaac, having grieved Three Years for the Loss of his Mother, is comforted at
last with Rebecca his Wife. GENESIS XXIV.


Who of Necessity must be barren, that the Seed may be of Promise, and not of
Nature. GENESIS XXV.
This Barrenness of Sarah and Rebecca, and others; and yet having Children at
last, was as an Harbinger, to provide room for the Belief of Christ's
Supernatural Birth. See Luke i.36. Jacob and Esau quarrel before they be born.
Esau loses his Interest in God in the sale of his Birthright.

The Genealogy of Abraham and Ishmael, their Age and Death, are set down here,
because there is no more to be said of them. Howbeit, Abraham lived till Jacob
was Fifteen Years old, and Ishmael till he was Sixty three.

At Abraham's Death, when Isaac is now just Seventy-five Years old, the same
Blessing is given to him, GENESIS XXVI.
that was given to Abraham, when he was Seventy-five.

At the same Age (probably) Jacob also gets it from his Father, by taking on
him to be Esau, GENESIS XXVII.
when he was Jacob. And by this means obtains the Blessing of his Father.

Which Blessing God seconds, giving him the same Promise, as he goes to Haran,
GENESIS XXVIII.
that he gave Abraham, to bring him thence.

But his unlawful Means of compassing his Father's Blessing God punishes in
the same kind. GENESIS XXIX.
So that after Seven Years Service he embraces Leah instead of Rachel, as he
had pretended Esau, instead of Jacob. He serves for this a Week in earnest,
that he will serve Seven Years more for Rachel, and at the Weeks end he obtains
her.

In Seven Years hard Affliction he begets many Children. God takes Care of
Payment of his Wages: GENESIS XXX.
Types of what should happen to his Posterity. His Riches endanger him both to
Laban, XXXI.
who sees with him the Fruit of his Flock; and to Esau, XXXII.
who now sees the Effect of the Blessing gotten from him, XXXIII.
and the Benefit of the Birthright, which he had sold. But Jacob is Israel, A
Prevailer with God, before he meets with Esau, and he cannot choose then, but
prevail with him.

Jacob's Remisness in the Discipline of his Family causes the Rape of Dinah.
Here Leah's tender Eyes have Cause to weep for her Daughter. GENESIS XXXIV.
Till now Jacob had hardly held touch with God in the Performance of his Vow,
The Lord shall be my God.

And no wonder, if his Children miscarry. But at Bethel, where his Vow was
made, GENESIS XXXV.
he purges his House from Idols; and there he again receives a Blessing, and
is called an Israelite indeed now without Guile. Hos. xii.4. He found him in
Bethel, and there he spoke with us: That is, at this time, at Bethel, he calls
him Israel, in Behalf of his Posterity: Who, while they should be, as his
Family is here, purged from Iniquity, they should be Israel, powerful with God.
Upon the naming of him Israel, which should concern all his Tribes, his Tribes
are reckoned, upon the Birth of Benjamin, when they be now full.

Now the Story is to fall only upon Jacob, and his Children. Esau's Genealogy
is reckoned; GENESIS XXXVI.
for no more is now to be said of him. Eight Kings of Edom before Israel had
any; answerably Eight Kings of Israel kept the Kingdom of Edom.

Joseph sold by Judah to Midianites, Medanites and Ishmaelites. For which Fact
Judah is justly punished in the Death of his Children, GENESIS XXXVII, XXXVIII.
and his own Shame. Seek earnestly in this Story, and you shall find Judah to
have Children at the most at Twelve Years old, if not before.

Joseph sold into Egypt, is near ravishing by his black Mistress. His Coat is
again showed to color the Wickedness of this Woman, GENESIS XXXIX.
as his bloody Coat was to color that of his Brethren.

As for telling of Dreams he is sold, so by interpreting of Dreams he rises to
honor; when he sees and tells, GENESIS XL.
how Plenty and Famine over Egypt should be caused by Nilus. XLI.
And the Famine, he knew, came as a just Judgment upon Egypt, for keeping his
Innocence so long in Prison. XLII.
The same Justice is showed upon Canaan, from whence he was sold. Which makes
his Brethren to bow to him for Corn, as their Corn-Sheaves did to his in his
Dream. XLIII.
His Brother Benjamin, who had no Hand in his Sale, yet is brought also to
crouch to him, XLIV.
to fulfill his Dream of his Mother bowing to him; for Benjamin cost her her
Life. XLV.
When all things, according to the fore signification, are fulfilled, XLVI.
Joseph reveals himself to his Brethren, and sends for his Father; who comes
for Egypt. And then of his Generation, or that come out of his Loins, were
Sixty-nine in number, and himself makes the Seventieth.

He is presented before Pharaoh, who never saw so old a Man in all his Life. As
he had nourished Joseph Seventeen Years before he was sold, GENESIS XLVII.
so Joseph nourishes him in Egypt Seventeen Years before he dies. XLVIII.
Before his Death he swears Joseph to interr him in Canaan, XLIX.
blesses his two Sons particularly, and himself with the rest of his Brethren.
He dies an Hundred Forty-seven Years old. Joseph Fifty-three Years after dies
himself, L.
and is cossined up in Egypt, to be carried to the Land of Promise, when Israel
shall be delivered.

Before Joseph's Death Israel grows numerous in Egypt, if not before Jacob's,
Genesis xlvii.27. And God chooses them for his visible Church, Ezekiel. xx.5. And to
his new chosen Church he appointed Levi to be Priest, to teach Israel the Ways
of God, when their great Instructor, Jacob, is dead, 1 Samuel ii.27. His
Repentance upon his Father's Curse, Genesis xlix.6, 7. obtains Pardon; and his
Dividing in Jacob, and Scattering in Israel, becomes a Blessing. But after
Joseph, Levi, and that Generation be dead, they forget God; as Judge. ii.7. They
follow the Idols of Egypt, Ezekiel. xx.8. Jos. xxiv.14. They reject the Covenant
of God, and Circumcision the Sign of it, they utterly neglect; so that they are
uncircumcised like the Egyptians. Jos. v.9. Exodus iv.24, 25. They make mixed
Marriages with the Egyptians, among whom they live; as Lev. xxiv.10. And
following the Customs of Egypt, they make prohibited Matches among themselves,
as Exodus ii.1. Lev. xviii.3, and 12.

Thus when his Church grows thus degenerate in Egypt, God has ready a Church
to show among the Heathen, JOB. After Genesis, in order of time, lies the
Story, and Book of Job. Which to read here, before you begin with Exodus, will
breed Interruption of a continued Story. But when you do read Job, remember his
time; and withal examine and mark, how he and his Friends speak closely of
foregoing Stories. As of the Creation, Chap. xxxviii, xxxix, etc. The Fall of
Angels and Men, Chap. iv. latter end, Chap. v.2. Cain's Case, who was hid from
God's Favor, yet hedged in that he could not die, Chap. iii.21. The Fl^^d and
old World, Chap. xxii.6. Babel's Builders, Chap. iii.13. etc. V. 13. These and
other such things you may find closely couched in their Speeches; which they
came to know partly by Tradition, partly by living so near Israel, partly by
Revelation; as Chap. iv.12. and Chap. xxxviii.1.
(thereby to provoke Israel to Jealousy) even in the House of Job in Arabia.
Whose like Israel had not, Job i.8. after the Death of Levi, and the Birth of
Moses. God also chastises them by hard Affliction an Hundred and Twenty Years
together, according to the time of the old World, Genesis vi.

SECT. IV. EXODUS.
THE Book of Exodus by the ancient Jews was called The Book of Redemption.
Abarb. in Preface to Exodus. So the Work of Redemption is called Exodus, Luke
ix.31.

Israel's Sin causes hard Affliction: From which no Tribe is exempted; even the
Royal one of Judah groans heavily under this Burden, EXODUS CHAP. I. To this
first of Exodus, treating of the sore Affliction of Israel in Egypt, read P^.
lxxxviii, and lxxxix. which were made by two Men, Heman and Ethan, who then
lived and felt that Affliction. These were Ezrahites, or immediate Sons of
Zerah, 1 Chronicles. ii.6. And Zerah was one of those Seventy, that went down to
Egypt, Genesis xlvi.12. So that those two Psalms are the oldest piece of Writing
the World has to show.


with the rest of his Brethren.

In these hard times is Moses born, a goodly Child, though his Mother were by
Nature past the Course of Child bearing. EXODUS II.
He is hid at his Birth, lest he should be slain; as he was also after his
Death, lest he should be worshipped. His Mother is paid for nursing her own
Child. EXODUS III.
He lives Forty Years a Courtier; other Forty a Shepherd, spending his time in
Divine Contemplation. In one of which Thoughts of God, God appears to him
indeed, gives him Charge of the Delivery of his People, and withal gives him
the Power of Miracles.

His Shepherd's Staff is turned into a Serpent for the Terror of Egypt, and
Israel, if they rebel; EXODUS IV.
but into a Rod again for Israel's Conduct, if they obey. His Hand is Leprous,
to teach both them and himself, that not that impure Hand, but a greater, did
those Miracles. Armed with these Powers he goes for Egypt. The first Night he
had like to have lost his Son, for want of Circumcision. Which when he had
received, he is unfit for a Journey; and so he and his Mother and Brother are
left behind.

Pharaoh upon Moses Message adds Affliction. But God will approve himself
Jehovah, EXODUS V, VI.
faithful in Promise. The Genealogy of Israel undertaken to be reckoned, but
stops at Levi: Which Tribe was shortly to be taken for all Israel.

Pharaoh plagued five times, and hardens his Heart, when he is punished for Sin.
EXODUS VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII.
Therefore God hardens his Heart five times more: So that he sins for a
Punishment. At last Israel is delivered by the Blood of a Lamb. All Egyptian
Firstborn slain: For which Israel's Firstborn is due to God. Egyptian Gods
are overthrown, and their Dogs struck dumb. From their coming out of Egypt to
the end of Exodus, the Text has so pointed out the Months and Days, that being
laid Kalendar-wise to view, they yield more Facility and Delight.

Year of the World MMDXIII. Days of the M. Nisan or Abib, the First Month. 1
Some of the Plagues were at the beginning of this Month; at the least the Hail
was. And Flax and Barley are now ripe. So is Rahab's Flax ripe in the same
Month Forty Years after; and laid upon her flat-roofed House to wither, Jos.
ii.6. 2 3 4 5 6 Rome is Egypt in Rev. xvi. and is plagued with Hail, for
overthrowing Fundamental Points of Religion: Every Stone a Talent weight, ver.
21. answerable to the several Silver Bases for the Foundation of the
Tabernacle. 7 8 9 10 The Paschal Lamb is taken up. 11 EXODUS X. 12 Darkness.
Three Days 13 Darkness. Darkness over Egypt, while Israel gathers to Raamses.
Remember the Three Hours Darkness upon the Jews at Christ's Death. EXODUS,
XI.XII. 14 Darkness over Egypt all Day. The Passover kept at Night. 15 Israel
comes out of Egypt. A Day of Unleavened Bread. EXODUS XIII. 16 They come to
Etham. EXODUS XIV. 17 They come to Pihahiroth. 18 Pharaoh arms after them. 19
Pursues them. 20 Overtakes them. EXODUS XV. 21 This Morning they sing
Deliverance. 22 From hence after three Days March they come to Marah. From
hence to the Fifteenth of the next Month they remove but twice. 23 24 25 In all
their Journeys the Cloud of Glory leads them. When they pitched, if sat down
upon Moses's Tent. When the Tabernacle was built, it flitted from Moses's Tent,
and rested upon that. For Christ was first to be Glorious in the Tabernacle of
Moses, the Law, but more in the Gospel. 26 27 28 29 30 Year of the World
MMDXIII. Days of the M. Jiar. 1 In the Institution of the Passover they are
enjoined to eat Unleavened Bread, till the One and Twentieth Day. For till that
Day they are not quite free from the Danger of Egypt. Therefore till then they
are to eat the Bread of Affliction. 2 3 4 5 In the Three Days Darkness they are
Circumcised, being then secure of Egypt. And so both their Sacraments come
together; as they did when they came into Canaan. 6 7 8 After the first Year,
or second, spent in the Wilderness, the Passover is neglected, because
Circumcision was also. 9 Both which taught by this their own end. 10 Israel's
Camp, when they enter Canaan, is for the most part uncircumcised; yet of
Israel, though they wanted the visible Sign of Admission. This pleads against
Jewish holding Perpetuity of Circumcision, and Popish Visibility of the Church.
11 12 13 14 EXODUS XVI. 15 They come to the Wilderness of Sin. 16 They murmur.
Quails are given at Even. 17 Manna falls in the Morning. 18 They stay at Sin.
19 They stay at Sin. 20 They stay at Sin. 21 They stay at Sin. 22 They stay at
Sin. 23 They stay at Sin. By this their Stay at Sin, a serious Eye may go very
near to find the Sabbath. 24 They remove to Dophkah, Number. xxxiii.12. 25 They
march to Alush, Number. xxxiii.13. EXODUS XVII. 26 They come to Rephidim, Number.
xxxiii.14. 27 Water is given out of Horeb.

Here may you understand a place of S. Paul, 1 Cor. x. They drank of the R^^k
that followed them. Horeb and Sinai were at one Mountain. For the Law given in
Sinai, Exodus xix.20. is said to be given in Horeb, Mal. iv.4. yet Exodus xvii.
Israel is in Horeb, or under it, drinking Water: And Exodus xix.1. they go from
Horeb to Sinai. Yet these two were the same Hill. The Hill had two Names; one
side of it was called Horeb (Drought,) because it wanted Water, till this
Miracle; the other side was called Sinai, (Bushy,) because of the Brambles
there. In one of these did God appear in Fire. So that Israel's marching from
Horeb to Sinai, Exodus xix.1. is no more but this, they had lien Four Days under
the Hill Sinai, on the South-west side of it: Which side is called Horeb, from
the want of Water there; but Moses smote the Rock, and Water came out, and the
People drank their Fill. Then they removed thence, to the East side of the
Hill, marching about the Foot of it. And the Brook of Water, that issued out of
the South side, ran about the Skirts of the Hill, even to the place where they
pitched on the other side, called Sinai.

This Rock was Christ, even as the Bread is his Body. Not really, for then
Moses had had his Doom here of not entering Canaan, for striking of Christ
really; and he had been as bad as the Roman Soldiers, that opened his Side.

Year of the World MMDXIII. Days of the M. Jiar. 28 Amalek comes against them.
29 Amalek is overthrown. Amalek for this first assailing Israel, when they came
from Egypt; and again in Haman, is cursed to Eternal Destruction, Number. xxiv.

The next Chapter, viz. Exodus xviii. is misplaced. Therefore when you have read
the Seventeenth Chapter, go to the Nineteenth. For the proper Place of the
Eighteenth is to come in between the Tenth and Eleventh Verses of Number. x. For
this Election of Judges by the Counsel of Jethro was not till they were ready
to depart from Sinai, Deuteronomy. i.6, 7, 8, 9, etc. Now the reason why the Story of
Jethro is laid here, is this; Amalek is cursed, Exodus xvii.14. Among the
Amalekites lived Jethro, 1 Samuel xv.6. Now to show that Jethro found Favor both
with God and Israel, immediately after the Curse of Amalek, it was fit that
Jethro's coming to Israel should be set down, to show that he fell not under
that Curse.

Year of the World MMDXIII. Days of the M. Sivan. EXODUS XIX. 1 Israel comes to
Sinai. 2 Moses goes into the Mount, and returns. 3 He goes up again to relate
the Peoples Words. 4 He sanctifies the People. 5 The People still sanctified.
EXODUS XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII. 6 This Morning the Moral Law is given; and before
Night those Ceremonials that have nearest Relation. EXODUS XXIV. 7 The People
enter into Covenant in the Morning, and before Night Moses goes into the
Mount, and stays there Forty Days and Forty Nights fasting. Moses his first
Fast of Forty Days. 8 EXODUS XXV, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX. XXX, XXXI. 9 God
shows him a Glorious Tabernacle pitched in Mount Sinai, to be a Pattern of his,
as his was to be of a better. Upon the making of his the other vanishes, as
his was to do, when a better came. 10 11 12 The Tabernacle was a Figure of
Christ's Body; so was the Temple, John ii.19. For this, they that were absent
from Jerusalem looked always that way in their Devotions. 13 14 The Tabernacle
was the Fountain of their Religion: From which they were taught the Favor of
God to Men through Christ; that Religion is the Heart of a State; the Easiness
and Perspicuity of the Fundamentals of Religion; the Seven Bonds of the Church;
the Ministration of Angels; the Mediation of Christ, and even every particular
concerning his Nature and Function. 15 16 17 The Fabric and Ceremonies of the
Tabernacle, as they be hard to find; so being found, they give great Delight
and Information. A serious Student may see the Fabric and Service of it almost
as plain in the Text, as Moses did in the Mount. Take these Observations to
help to facilitate. 18 19 1. The Cubits, by which the Tabernacle is measured,
are but half Yards. 2. Those that are translated Boards, are Planks of a great
Thickness. 20 3. The Tabernacle was Fifteen Yards long. 4. The most Holy Place
Five Yards square every way. 21 5. The Five and Five rich Curtains were looped
together just over the Partition by the Vail. Here Geneva Notes fail. 22 6. The
Silver Foundations lay open to view. 7. The Cherubins were Pictures of Children
winged and bowing forward. 23 8. The Pillars both in the East Entrance, and in
the Division of the Sanctum, and Sanctum Sanctorum, bore out the two Vails to
view. In this Sense the Church is the Pillar of Truth. 24 25 9. The Roof of the
Sanctuary had four Covers: The Sides, till within three quarters of a Yard of
the Ground, had two, half a Yard below that but one; and the Silver Foundation
none at all. Such are Mysteries in Scripture; the Fundamentals of Religion
plain: Other things veiled under one Cover, others under two, and some Counsels
of God past finding out. 26 27 28 10. The Fabric and Service of the Tabernacle,
the Fountain of Ceremonies, well looked into, will show the Romanist most
foolishly ceremonious; and his Doctrine concerning the outward Worship of God,
impious. 29 30

Fifty Days after Israel's Departure out of Egypt, they receive the Fire of a
Law at Sinai, the Sixth Day of Sivan in the Morning. In the Afternoon he goes
up to the Mount, and receives Fifty-seven Ceremonial and Judicial Laws of
nearest Relation to the Moral. That Night he writes them in a Book, here is a
piece of Writing older by Forty Days, than the two Tables. The next Day Morning
he causes an Altar to be built* to represent God, and twelve Pillars, to
represent the twelve Tribes. He commands the First born of Israel to offer
Sacrifice, and Peace Offerings. With the Blood he sprinkles the Altar, and the
twelve Pillars. Which Here is a Figurative Speech in the first Covenant: So the
Bread is Christ's Body in the second.
because they represented the People, they are called the People. And thus
Israel enters into Covenant. Which when they were, their Elders draw near to
God; which while they were out of Covenant, they might not do without Danger.
Then did they eat a solemn Holy Dinner, eating those Parts of the
Peace Offerings before the Lord, which were left at the making of the Covenant.
And in the Strength of this Meat Moses was in the Mount Forty Days, and Forty
Nights, and ate nothing, but lived by the Words that proceeded out of the Mouth
of God. In Divine Contemplation he se^th Christ, as he was to be showed to the
Jews, till the time of Reformation should come, under the Figures of a
Tabernacle, and a Priest. The sight of which taught him Christ to the full, in
his Natures and Off^ces.

In the Tabernacle were three Crowns, answerable to his three Offices; Viz. the
Crown of the Law, the Crown of the Priesthood, and the Crown of the Kingdom.

The Crown of the Law was the Ark, a Chest gilded with Gold within and without,
as Christ was pure from Sin both in Thought and Action. The Cover, a piece of
massy Gold, called, The Mercy-Seat, because it hid the Law, and because God
from it spoke favorably to Men, from between Cherubins, which once were
Instruments of his Indignation, Genesis iii. ult.

The Crown of the Priesthood was on (...) of Incense: Which stood between (...)
stick and Shewbread, and sanctified them both by Prayer.

The Crown of the Kingdom was on the Table of Shewbread; where a several
Golden Dish, applied to every Loaf, showed God's special Care of every Tribe in
particular. The Measure of Meal, viz. Two Omers, put into every Cake, and the
Cakes set before the Lord on the Sabbath Day, put Israel in mind of their
Sustinence in the Wilderness: When their Stint on the Sabbath was two Omers,
Exodus xvi. For this, they might justly rely upon him for their Daily Bread.

Year of the World MMDXIII. Days of the M. Tammuz. 1 Consider these few things.
2 I. The Angels in the Tabernacle-Curtains taught only their Attendance upon
the Church, not any Action of theirs in the Work of Mediation For they were
only silent Spectators, while the Priest did mediate. 3 II. The best and
holiest of Israel's Men, (at least, that should have been so) the Priests; and
the best Actions of the Priests, viz. Sacrificing, were not Holy in themselves,
but had their Sanctity from other. The Priest from his Garments; the Sacrifice
from the Altar; that Merits might be excluded, and inherent Righteousness only
attributed to Christ. 4 5 III. The Priest never went to offer Incense, till he
had offered Sacrifice. Teaching, that he only that sacrificed himself for Man,
is to be his Mediator. 6 IV. There was no Sacrifice without Blood. Incruentum
Sacrificium is a Stranger to Moses, and to Holy Language. 7 V. Moses is still
above Aaron in Dignity, though he were the younger Brother. This might teach
Rome, Subjection to the Prince. 8 VI. God's answering David by the Ephod
without the Ark, teaches, that God is not bound to the Means himself, though he
bind us. On the contrary, God, not answering Saul by the Ark without the Ephod,
taught him to remember his Fact of slaying the Priests, which should have worn
it. 9 10 11 The Stones in Aaron's Ephod rightly understood, and readily
remembered, give Light in many Places. As Revel. xxi. The Jasper is the first
Foundation in the new Jerusalem. This Stone was Benjamin's in the Ephod. This
pleads for Paul of Benjamin, and not for Peter of Zebulon, to have
Pre-eminence in building o^ the Church of Gentiles. The Rainbow about God's
Throne, Rev. iv. is of Smaragd Color. The Rainbow is the Sign of a Covenant,
Genesis ix. The Smaragd in the Ephod was for Levi, the Priesthood. So here is the
true Sign of the Church, the Rainbow of Smaragd, the true Preaching of the
Covenant by the Priesthood. 12 13 14 15 16 EXODUS XXXII. 17 Moses comes from
the Mount, and finds the Golden Calf newly made. Moses Second Fast of Forty
Days. 18 He goes up again; and is there Forty Days more to beg Israel's
Pardon, Deuteronomy. ix.18. He wishes to be Anathema for his Kindred according to the
Flesh. He obtains Respite of Punishment for the present, but cannot obtain, but
that in time it shall fall upon them. 19 20 EXODUS XXXIII. 12 The Angel of the
Covenant is threatened to be withdrawn from them; and their Conduct to be
committed to a created Angel. 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 Year of the World
MMDXIII. Days of the M. Ab. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 He comes down from the Mount again. Moses his Third
Fast of Forty Days and Nights. 29 He goes up with two Tables ready made again,
and stays 40 Days and Nights more; even all the next Month Elul, which
consists of Twenty-nine Days. EXODUS XXXIV. to the end of the Book. 30

And on the Tenth of Tisri,
Moses comes down from his third Fast. And now God is reconciled to Israel,
and the Case is well with them. He brings down two new Tables; has Commission
to begin with the making of the Tabernacle. The Cloud of Glory is restored to
the Camp again.

And because all these good Tidings came to Israel upon the Tenth of the Month
Tisri, for this that Day is set apart to be observed every Year, for the Feast
of Expiation: When the High Priest entered into the most Holy Place with Blood;
an exquisite Type of Christ, if it be searched to the Quick.

Because Moses had told Israel, at his coming down from the Mountain, of the
making of the Sanctuary; by which they conclude it will be long before their
Removal from Sinai; therefore on the Fifteenth of Tisri they begin to make
themselves Mansions, and Booths to lodge in, till their Removal. For this, that
Day is appointed for the Feast of Tabernacles to Posterity.

And now they begin to fall in Hand with the Work, in the same Month that the
World began. And in it are Six special Works, like those of the Creation.

All the Men, from Twenty Years old and upward, contribute each one half a
Shekel for the Silver Foundation. Some gave something else. And the Women
bestow their Pains of spinning and sewing, and their Looking Glasses.

These Six Months current are they busy. Against the first Month of the next
Year all is ready. So on the First of Nisan, Anno Mundi MMDXIV. they begin to
set the Tabernacle up: Which was Six Days in doing. When it is finished, the
Cloud descends on it.

Thus ends Exodus in a Cloud; under which we are to look for a more perfect
Tabernacle, not made with Hands: In which the Godhead should dwell bodily, as
the Cloud here.

SECT. V. LEVITICUS.
OUT of the Tabernacle newly erected God gives Ordinances for the Service of
it in Sacrifice of all Kinds, the Office of the Priest, etc. CHAP. I, II, III,
IV, etc. even all the Book. For these things were delivered to Moses in the
beginning of the Month Nisan. On the Fourteenth Day they keep the Passover.
Therefore read next Numb. Chapter ix. all the Chapter; and Chapter x. to ver. 11.
Which his Sons missing in, dye by Fire; as also Shelomith's Son by Stones.

These Ceremonies of Moses, some were Doctrines of Faith, some of Manners, and
some of both. Study them presly; for they are of infinite Sweetness, and
Satisfaction. Measure the rest by the one Law of Clean and Unclean. Which,
among other things, ground us in these Doctrines.

I. That nothing is unclean to be touched, while it is alive, but Man. See Mat.
xv.11.

II. There are degrees of Uncleanness; Leprosy the greatest.

III. Every one that came to be judged of by the Priest, was unclean, though not
Leprous.

IV. The Priests could not make, but only pronounce clean and unclean. The
Power of the Keys is spoken of from this Place, and in this Phrase.

V. Every Priest had this Privilege, as well as the High Priest. Hence must we
understand, that Peter's Power of the Keys was not singular.

VI. He that was Leprous all over was to be pronounced clean. For it appeared
that all the Poison was come forth. But he that had any live Flesh, that showed
not Leprous, was unclean. A Doctrine against Merit, and the Power of Man to
Good.

VII. No final Excommunication, but for Leprosy.

VIII. The Priests, that were to be Judges of Leprosy, could not be tainted
with it. Hence when Aaron and Miriam are both in the same fault, of murmuring
against Moses, Miriam is struck with Leprosy, but Aaron is not. So when King
Uzziah would be meddling with the Priests Office, God uses no other way to
chastize him, and to show him his Error, than by striking him with Leprosy,
with which the true Priests could not be tainted.

SECT. VI. NUMBERS.
IN the beginning of the last Month the Sanctuary was pitched: CHAP. I, II,
III, IV.
And so is their Camp in the beginning of this second Month.

All Israel numbered* from Twenty Yea^^ old, and upward. None of this number are
to enter Canaan. Levi was exempt from this Curse; and therefore they are
numbered by themselves.

Their Camp is pitched. The Sanctuary in the middle; for Religion is the Heart
of a State. The Levites at a distanc^ pitch next it in a Quadrangular Body,
clean about it. At a greater distance, even about them, Two Thousand Cubits
from the Tabernacle, pitcheth the Body of the Army in the same Form: Every side
of the Square carrying its several Colors. Judah the Picture of a Lion:
Ephraim a Bullock; Reuben a Man; Dan an Eagle. Compare this with God's dwelling
in the Church of the Christians, Rev. iv.

The Law concerning the Unclean, and the suspected Wife; that their new pitched
Camp might be pure. NUMBER. V, VI.
And of Nazarites, the only Votaries of the Laity.

The Prince's Offer to the Sanctuary. More Ordinances about it. About this time
comes Jethro to Moses. NUMBER. VII, VIII.
His long Absence had been because of Distaste he took at Moses, Then should
you go to Chap. x. ver. 11. But take in Exodus xviii. before. Then read Number. x.
from ver. 11. to the end of the Chapter.
for sending Zipporah back, when he went for Egypt.

Israel removes from Sinai, having pitched there a whole Year within some few
Days.

The Peoples murmuring causes a Plague. Aaron's and Miriam's murmuring against
Moses his Heathenish Wife, NUMBER. XI, XII.
which was but newly come among them.

The Decree of their wandering in the Wilderness Eight and Thirty Years longer,
NUMBER. XIII, XIV.
and that all that were numbered at Sinai should not enter Canaan, Read here
Psalm. xc. which was made upon this Decree.
comes forth irrevocable.

Some Laws given to those, NUMBER. XV.
that should enter the Land.

Korah, Dathan and Abiram, murmur against the Function of Moses, and the
Priesthood of Aaron. NUMBER. XVI.
They are punished alike in kind, but not in degree. Korah's Sin was not
altogether so heavy, as the other. He was of the Priestly Tribe Levi; therefore
for him to affect the Priesthood was not so heinous, as for Dathan and Abiram,
who were merely Laymen. Answerably Korah's Punishment was not so heavy as
theirs: For all their Children were swallowed up with them, but Korah's were
not. Samuel came of Korah, and some Psalmists, that made diverse Psalms.

Aaron's Priesthood is justified, by the budding of his withered Rod; as a
Priesthood should bud, NUMBER. XVII.
when Aaron's was withered.

Upon this Approval, special Services for the Priests are appointed. Miriam
dies in their last wandering Year. NUMBER. XVIII, XIX, XX.
Moses and Aaron excluded out of Canaan, for being more angry at Israel than
God himself. This showed, that the Promise aimed at better things, than the
Land of Canaan; out of which even the Holiest among them they see excluded.

Sihon and Og overcome. It is Six and Twenty Generations since the Creation.
Answerably Psalm. cxxxvi. does Six and Twenty times extol the Mercy of God, His
Mercy endures for ever: NUMBER. XXI.
Beginning the Psalm from the Creation, and ending it in the Overthrow of Sihon
and Og. By which Israel first took Possession of the Land promised.

Balaam is hired to curse Israel, but cannot. He curses Rome for Crucifying
Christ. NUMBER. XXII, XXIII, XXIV.
Chap. xxiv.24. This is the Groundwork of the Revelation.

Balaam, when he cannot curse, lays a Stumbling Block in Israel's way, by
bringing Midianitish Women among them. NUMBER. XXV.
By whom they fall to Lewdness; which procures a Plague among them, that sweeps
away those that were yet left of the Account at Sinai.

When the old Stock is gone, they that must enter Canaan are numbered. NUMBER. XXVI.
Thus as they were delivered Moses by number, From hence to the end of the
Book, all things are facil, and in order.
by number he delivers them up.

SECT. VII. DEUTERONOMY.
MOses, in the Eleventh Month of the last Year of their wandering, rehearses
and explaineth precedent Laws and Stories. He blesses all the Tribes, but only
Simeon; gives Judah Priority of Levi; dies, and is buried by Christ; who was
to bury his Ceremonies. The Cloud of Glory departs upon Moses's Death.

SECT. VIII. JOSHUA.
JOshua of Joseph succeeds him, to bring them into Canaan, as Joseph had
brought them into Egypt.

This Book contains a Story of Seventeen Years, beginning from Nisan the Sixth,
Anno M^ndi MMDLIII. The first Seven Years are spent in Wars; and then have they
Peace, and set up the Tabernacle in Ephraim, and call the Town Shiloh, i. e.
Peaceable.

God gives Joshua Authority, and even puts the Law into his Hands, as that was
the manner of crowning their Kings, IOS. I.
2 Chronicles. xxiii.11. This was the Sixth of Nisan; that Day he makes Proclamation
of Removal after three Days complete; and withal, that Day sends two Men to spy
Jericho; IOS. II.
who take up their Lodging in a Victualler's House, called Rahab, an honest
Woman, though of a scandalous Profession. But they come out again that Night. The
Seventh Day they lie in the Mountains; the Eighth Day they return.

The Ninth Day the People march along upon Jordan's Banks down, till they come
over against Jericho. IOS. III.
The Ark leads the Van.

They pass Jordan on the Tenth; the Waters being divided four Thousand Cubits,
besides where the Body of the Army marched in two Parts. IOS. IV


The Eleventh, Twelfth, Thirteenth Days, they are busy about Circumcision. On
the Fourteenth they keep the Passover; IOS. V, VI.
and so are sensible of both their Sacraments at once. Till the Twenty-first at
Even is their Passover Week. From thence they strangely besiege Jericho,
compassing it Seven Days, according to the Seven Generations, since the Land
was promised. The Spoil of this Town must deservedly be, as the first Fruits of
Canaan, due to the Lord.

Which Achan meddling with, makes Israel abominable. In the Valley of Achor,
which is here the beginning of their Trouble, IOS. VII.
must be the beginning of their Hope, Hos. ii.15. Joh. iv.

Ai taken, and the Spoil given to the Soldiers. And here they begin to take
Possession of Canaan. IOS. VIII.
Then Joshua builds an Altar, just where Abraham had done, when he took
Possession of the Land by Faith, Genesis xii.

IOS. IX.
The Gibeonites deceive by color of Antiquity.

A miraculous Day of Thirty-six Hours long. A humane History, Sepher Jasher,
cited, X, etc.
as Paul cites Heathen Poets, and Talmudic Doctors.

From hence to the end of the Book is a Survey of the Land, and some few
Histories interlaced; of no Scruple for Order: Only the Story of Caleb's taking
of Kiriah Sepher, Chap. xv.14. is rehearsed Judge. i.12. as if it were after
Joshua's Death; but in this Book it is in the proper Place. It is rehearsed in
Judges, because there speaking, how Judah was appointed Captain by God, it
relates this Story, to show why Othniel was looked after rather than any other
of Judah, because of his Valor tried before in this Action.

SECT. IX. JUDGES.
GOD, to make easier way for Israel's Possession of the Land of the Amorites,
uses the Amorites for their Furtherance. So Sihon and Vahob, King of Moab,
CHAP. I.
fall to Wars; and Sihon takes Land from Moab, that Israel might take it from
him, that was an Amorite; for with a Moabite they might not meddle. So
Adonibezek, and his Neighbor Kings, fall to civil Wars, and he conquers
Seventy of them ready to Israel's Hand. So that when they have conquered him,
they have conquered so many. They cut off his Thumbs and great Toes, and bring
him to the great Town of the Kingdom, Jerusalem, and there for Terror to others
do publicly kill him.

The things next related after the Overthrow of Adonibezek, as the taking of
Jerusalem, Hebron, and Kiriath Sepher, were done in Joshua's time: But they
are rehearsed for this reason, that we might see, that Judah was chosen General
after Joshua's Death by God. That Israel might war under one, to whom they were
used and acquainted. For Judah was made General by Joshua, even in his
Lifetime. And this Matter of Othniel named here, to show why he is made Judge
afterward.

In the rest of the Chapter the Order is proper; only whereas some things are
mentioned here, which are mentioned in Joshua's Book, as ver. 27, 29. about
Israel's not expelling the Canaanites; it is to show, that as it was not done
before Joshua's Death, so neither was it done after.

For which they have heavy tidings from God. Joshua's Age and Death mentioned
again, IVDG. II. to v. 11. then read CHAPP. XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, of this
Book.
to show, that in his time, all was well with them. After the Tenth Verse of
this Chapter take in the XVII, XVIII* XIX, XX, XXI. Chapters of this Book; for
hereabout is their Order. For howsoever these these Stories be laid in the end
of the Book, yet were the things, there mentioned, done before any Judge arose
in Israel. For the evidencing of which, consider First the Connection of the
Passages there mentioned one to another. I.


Micah of Ephraim set up an Idol, as Jeroboam of the same Tribe did afterward.
The Danites take it away, JUDGE. XVII, XVIII.
even in Micah's Life time, and set it up publicly in Dan, as Jeroboam also
did afterward. And Jonathan, a Grandchild of Moses, is the first public
Idolatrous Priest. This Moses had for marrying in an Idolatrous Line. Dan for
Idolatry first set up in his Tribe is not sealed, Rev. vii. among Israel. Upon
Toleration of Idolatry all Iniquity follows; JUDGE. XIX, XX.
so that a City of Israel becomes Sodom. Against this City all Israel goes by
God's Permission to War; and yet Forty Thousand are slain by a most wicked
Tribe. Thus did God avenge his own cause, when none of Israel would be zealous
for him against the Idolatry newly set up; and yet all of them could be so
sensible, and vindicative of Injury done to a Whore.

When God has used Benjamin to execute his Wrath against Israel, for not
punishing Dan's and Micha's Idolatry; JUDGE. XXI.
he uses Israel to punish Benjamin, for not delivering up Gibeah to Justice
for her Villainy, Thus is the Story knit to it self.

Secondly, Consider, that the beginning of this Book is the proper place for
these Histories, though they be laid in the latter end. For, II.


1. The Israelites follow Idols after the Death of the Elders, Judges iii.
Micah is the first that sets it up.

2. There is no King in Israel then; that is, before any Judge rose.

3. The Danites are not yet settled; that could not be long after Joshua's
Death.

4. Phinehas is yet alive, Chap. xx.28 So that we must needs cast things into
the Thirty-second Year, ascribed to Othniel's Judgeship, before Cushan afflict
them.

Thirdly, Consider the Reason, why the Stories are so mislay'd. It is, III.
that the Eleven Hundred Pieces of Silver, that made Dan's public Idol, Chap.
xvii.2. and the Eleven Hundred Pieces of Silver from every Philistin Prince,
Chap. xvi.5. that brought Sampson of Dan to his End untimely, might be laid
together for secret Instruction to the Reader.

Then return to Chap. ii. ver. 11. and from thence to the end of the Sixteenth
Chapter, IVDG. II. ver. 11. to the end of Chap. xvi. and to the end of the
Book. But the Book of Ruth to be taken in near the beginning.
there is no Scruple for Order. Only the Book of Ruth is to come in about the
beginning of this Book; but the exact place where is not easy to find. RUTH.
Thus near you may go. Salmon begat Boaz of Rahab, Mat. i.5. and Boaz married
Ruth. Ruth, Chapter ult. Salmon came with Joshua into Canaan, and Boaz was in the
next Generation. Allow Rahab to live two Years in Israel, before she had a
Child by Salmon; and withal allow Boaz to be Seventy or Eighty Years old,
before he marry Ruth; yet is Ruth's Story then about Thirty Years before Ehud's
Death. Their going to sojourn in Moab, Ruth i. is likely to be many Years
before Moab be Israel's open Enemy ^^dges iii.12.

In casting the Years of the Judges, observe that the times of the Afflicters
are to be included in the times of the Judges. As Chap. iii. Cusham Rishathaim
oppressed Seven Years; and Othniel judged Forty. These Seven Years must be
included in the Forty, and not be counted as Forty-seven. St. Paul reckons
them at extent, Acts xiii.20. He gave them Judges about the space of Four
Hundred and Fifty Years.

SECT. X. I. SAMUEL, etc.
THE Seventeen first Chapters of 1 Samuel lie without scruple of Interposition or
Transposition. CHAP. I. From the beginning of the Book to Chap. xvii.
From the Seventeenth Chapter forward, the Psalms, Proverbs, etc. fall in in
their time and order.

As for the PSALMS, it is above the Reach of Man to bring all those to the Time
and Occasion, Touching the Book of PSALMS.
wherein and whereupon they were made. Sometime the Title resolves us, sometime
the Phrase gives strong Presumption; in some we have no Light at all for these
things. Those that are titled to Resolution you may easily lay in their Places.
For the other, and for the whole Book of Psalms, take these Observations.

1. The Psalms are divided into Five Books, according to the Five Books of
Moses: Where a Psalm ends with Amen, is the end of a Book: Compare them with
Moses his Five Books, and you will see how sweetly they agree.

2. The Jews have this Rule for the Authors of such or such Psalms. Those
Psalms which have not a Title to express who made them, are to be referred to
the next Author that is named before. So Psalms xci, xcii, xciii, xciv, xcv,
xcvi, xcvii, xcviii, xcix, c. by their Rule were made by Moses, the Author next
named before, in Psalm. xc. in tit. The Subject indeed may enforce no less, the
Psalms treating concerning things done in Moses's time; as the Tabernacle, the
Sabbath, the Temptation in the Wilderness, etc. But Samuel is named in Psalm.
xcix. 6. but it is as David is in Psalm. lxxxix.

3. There be Psalms, which have no Title, yet the Subject and Phrase, in diverse
of them, give strong Presumption upon the Occasion. As Psalm. i. upon the Fall
of Man, by the Counsel of the Ungodly, etc. And this shows his Reparation by
the contrary. So when Israel and Judah are parted, because of Rehoboam's heavy
Yoke, 1 Chronicles. xii. Christ, that must join them again, Hos. i. works it by the
contrary, Take on you my Yoke, which is easy, and Burden light. Psalm. ii. upon
the Fall of Israel from David's House, whom God had appointed King in Sion. And
thus the Fall of Adam and Israel are handled together. Psalm. cxxxii. upon the
bringing of the Ark to Jerusalem: Which when it was captived from Ephrata, or
Shiloh in Ephraim, and stayed afterward 20 Years in Kiriathjearim, the City of
the Wood, David provides it an Habitation in Jerusalem, etc. So in diverse
others, the occasion of it self shows it self: But I will not forestall your
own finding of them.

4. Diverse Psalms in the Original are Alphabetical; but few of them have the
Alphabet true, for some reason or other admirably Divine: So one Letter in
Jeremy's Alphabetic Lamentations is altered constantly, for secret and sweet
Reason.

5. For the Order of the Psalms, why they be so laid, in many of them the
Reason shows it self, at the first sight; in others it requires a narrower
Scrutiny.

The first and second Psalms made upon Occasions so far distant in time, yet
laid together for special reason, as was touched before.

The Fiftieth Psalm, in ver. 8, and 14, 15. refuses all Sacrifice, but Prayer.
That the Fifty-first Psalm offers, ver. 16, 17. and easily shows, why these two
be laid together.

Psalm cxxxvi. the Mercy of God brings them to Possession of the Land of
Promise. Psalm cxxxvii. brings them into Captivity; and shows, that their
living in the Land of Canaan was so sinful, that it was not to be mentioned.

These, and other Observations may be gathered out of this exquisite Book of
the Psalms, conducing to further the Understanding in reading it. But your Eyes
be their own Observers and Judges.

1 SAMUEL xvii. Here take in Psalm ix. made upon Goliah's Death.

1 SAMUEL xviii, xix. at ver. 12. take in Psalm lix.

1 SAMUEL xx, xxi. at ver. 12. take in Psalm lvi. and at the end of the Chapter,
Psalm xxxiv.

1 SAMUEL xxii. here take Psalm lii.

1 SAMUEL xxiii. about ver. 24. comes in Psalm live.

1 SAMUEL xxiv. at ver. 4. read Psalm lvii.

1 SAMUEL xxv, xxvi. at ver. 9. where David bids Abishai, Destroy not Saul, may
seem to give Occasion of Psalm lxxv. as the same Words in the Cave did of Psalm
lvii. which bears the same Title.

1 SAMUEL xxvii. between ver. 7, and 8. comes in the 1 Chronicles. xii. from the
beginning, to ver. 23. Then return to ver. 8. and from thence to the end of the
Book, is no Interposition; only with the last Chapter read 1 Chronicles. x.

2 SAMUEL i, ii. to the three first Verses, read 1 Chronicles. xi.1, 2, 3.

2 SAMUEL ii, iv, and v. to ver. 4. there take in 1 Chronicles. xii. from ver. 23, to
the end. Then return to

2 SAMUEL v. 4. to the end of ver. 10. and with it read 1 Chronicles. xi. from ver. 4,
to the end of ver. 5. Then read 2 SAMUEL v. from ver. 11. to the end; and with it
read 1 Chronicles. xiv.

2 SAMUEL vi. 1 Chronicles. xiii, xv, xvi.

2 SAMUEL vii. 1 Chronicles. xvii.

2 SAMUEL viii. 1 Chronicles. xviii. and at ver. 12. take in Psalm lx.

2 SAMUEL ix, x. 1 Chronicles. xix.

2 SAMUEL xi, xii. and 1 Chronicles. xx. 1, 2, 3.

2 SAMUEL xiii, xiv, xv, xvi, xvii, xviii, xix, xx, xxi. to ver. 18.

2 SAMUEL xxi. at ver. 18. and forward, take in 1 Chronicles. xx. from ver. 4. to the
end.

2 SAMUEL xxii. Psalm xviii.

2 SAMUEL xxiv. 1 Chronicles. xxi.

1 CHRONICLES. xxii. to the end of Chap. xxvii.

2 SAMUEL xxiii. 1 Chronicles. xi. from ver. 10, to the end.

1 KING. i.

1 CHRONICLES. xxviii, xxix, to ver. 26.

1 KING. ii. to ver. 10, 11. read 1 Chronicles. xxix. ver. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

1 KING. iii. 2 Chronicles. i.

1 KING. iv. at the end of which come in the PROVERBS. PROVERBS.


1 KING. v. 2 Chronicles. ii.

1 KING. vi. 2 Chronicles. iii. to ver. 15.

1 KING. vii. from ver. 13, to the end. 2 Chronicles. iii. ver. 15, 16, 17. and 2 Chronicles. iv.

1 KING. viii. 2 Chronicles. v, vi, vii.

1 KING. vii. from the beginning, to ver. 13.

1 KING. ix. 2 Chronicles. viii.

1 KING. x. 2 Chronicles. ix. to ver. 29. Hereabout the Book of CANTICLES falls
in. CANTICLES.
For it was made after the House of Lebanon was built, Cant. vii.4.

1 KING. xi. to ver. 41. ECCLESIASTES.
Here take in ECCLESIASTES, which was Solomon's Repentance after his grievous
Fall.

1 KING. xi. ver. 41, 42, 43. 2 Chronicles. xi. ver. 29, 30, 31.

1 KING. xii. to ver. 25. 2 Chronicles. x, xi, to v. 5.

1 KING xiii, xiv. to ver. 21.

2 CHRONICLES. xi. from ver. 5. to the end of Chap. xii. And with it read 1 King.
xiv. from v. 21. to the end.

2 CHRONICLES. xiii. 1 King. xv. to ver. 9.

2 CHRONICLES. xiv, xv, xvi. 1 King. xv. from ver. 9, to ver. 25.

1 KING. xv. from ver. 25. to the end.

1 CHRONICLES. Chap. xvii.

1 KING. xvi, xvii, xviii, xix, xx, xxi.

1 KING. xxii. 2 Chronicles. xviii.

2 CHRONICLES. xix, xx.

2 KING. i, ii, iii.

2 CHRONICLES. xxi.

2 KING. iv.v, vi, vii, viii, to ver. 25.

2 KING. viii. from ver. 25, to the end of Chap. x. And withal read 2 Chronicles.
xxii. to ver. 10.

2 KING. xi. 2 Chronicles. xxii. from ver. 10. to the end of Chap. xxiii.

2 KING. xii. 2 CHRONICLES. xxiv.

2 KING. xiii. Hereabout comes in the Book of JONAH. JONAH.


From hence to the end of these Books, the Story of the Collateral Kingdoms,
while they both stand, and of Judah's alone, when the other is fallen, are laid
so orderly, that it is mere Transcription, and no more, to lay them here. And
so indeed has it been hitherto; but I was willing to lead them thus, so far as
they kept within their own two Channels. But now they branch themselves into
more Heads, ( viz. the Books of the Prophets,) their Order, which the Text has
entire, without misplacing in these two Books, needs not to be looked at so
much in it self, as these other to be brought to it.

SECT. XI. The Prophetical Books.
IN some Places the Titles of the Prophesies tell where to lay them; others,
that are silent in that kind, the Jews have the like general Rule for, that
they had for the Psalms: That an undated Prophecy is to be laid in the same
time, that the next dated before is. As Joel to be contemporary with Hosea.
Obadiah and Jonah with Amoz, etc.

Their Rule holds well for the general, but for particular Computation of the
Precedence of Prophets, that lived under the same Kings Reigns, you must go
into further Enquiry. As Jonah lived in the times of Amoz, according to their
Rule it is true. But whether Jonah or Amoz prophesied first, is the Query. Upon
Examination you will find Jonah before Hosea himself; who is said, Chap. i.2.
to have had the Word of the Lord first come to him. Of such things you may be
your own Judge.

Those Prophesies, that be dated by the Reign of Kings, apply to the time;
those that be not, apply to those Dates, and thus may you come to the
Captivity. Jeremy especially is punctual in pointing out his Chapters by such
and such Years, till the Seventy of the Captivity begin, whereof he prophesied.
The Captivity Books do the like for then time, but cannot be so well, nor to
Satisfaction relished, as by casting into a Chronicle, which I do much urge,
and desire of you.

By this you your self will find what is not possible to express to you;
especially the Sweetness of that obscure place, Hab. iii.2. Revive thy Work in
the midst of Years. Which, if you grow a Scripture Chronologer, will be so
far from Obscurity, and from requiring Light from other things, that it will
give Light to them; especially to the settling of the beginning of the Seventy
Years Captivity. Which when you have found, you have a Thread, whereupon to
weave the most part of Daniel and Ezekiel. Then resolve what is meant by Cyrus
his first Year, Ezra i.1. and where to begin your Seventy-sevens in Dan. ix.
which must end in Christ's Death, and you have a Thread to lead you through Ezra,
Nehemiah, Haggai, Zachary, and Malachi, till you come to the New Testament.

SECT. XII. The New Testament.
WHEN Haggai, Zachary, and Malachi were dead, the Talmud it self confesses,
that the Spirit of God departed from Israel, and went up. They in Acts xix.2.
knew this Talmudic Speech, when they say, They knew not whether the Holy Ghost
were descended again. This Spirit was restored in the various Gifts of Tongues
and Prophecy, Acts ii. As the Cloud of Glory, that went up at Moses Death, was
at the Transfiguration of Christ, Luke ix.32, 33, etc. So that the Spirit and
Glory of the Old Testament is light upon the New* and so it has a double
Glory. And as the Cloudiness of the Old, so the Brightness of this, requires a
good Eyesight of the Mind and Understanding.

In the reading of the New Testament I find two things especially of singular
use.

I. In the Evangelists, as in the Old Testament, to search out the true and
exact Order, which the Continuation of the History requires. The Evangelists,
being Four in number, and being all to write one and the same Story, must
either not write the same things; or if they did, must not write them in the
same Style and Order. Otherwise, had the Uniformity of their Story and Phrase
been but Repetition, if not Confusion. But while they either vary in Matter or
Phrase, or in Order, this breeds the best Consort. Their difference of Matter
and Phrase is easily seen, and easily reconciled. But their Change of Method
and Order requires some Skill to tune to an Unison. Like him in Plutarch, that
would first play rude and harshly to his Scholars, before they should hear true
Consort. So have I to you, after my rude and rough course, gone a little way
before you in the Gospel in this Course; that your self may tune to your self
more pleasing Music. Where I have laid the Evangelists together, you may see
they tune themselves, and the Music is sweet; let my Descant invite you to a
better Strain.

II. In reading of the New Testament never take your Eye off the Old; for the
New is but again that in plainer Phrase. God himself has taught us by the
writing of the Scripture, what is the best way to read. For he has folded the
Two Testaments together; so that as the Law begins, so the Gospel ends; and as
the Prophets end, so the Gospel begins; as if calling upon you to look still
for the one in the other.

Moses and Elias, Law and Prophets, were Evangelists, as well as Matthew and
the other: So that he that sees not Christ in them first in a Cloud, sees him
not in the other in Glory. What did ever Christ do or suffer, which you may not
see in the Law and Prophets? Which laid to the Gospel, shows the more Luster.
It were worth Study and Labor, to trace Christ throughout all the Old
Testament, and to see a Gospel written by Moses and Elias, concerning Christ's
Actions, Passion and Doctrine. To show my Meaning, take here in brief what you
may at Leisure and Study enlarge, as you read.

SECT. XIII. Evangelium Mosaico-Propheticum.
WHEN Adam had sinned, God promised to him one that should break the Head of
the Serpent, who could be no other than God. Christ's two Natures taught in the
Garden.
But he should become the Seed of the Woman to do this, and so be Man. When the
Fullness of time came, when the Scepter was even ready to depart from Judah,
Genesis xlix. and the Stem of Je^^ even worn to the Root, Esa. xi. and the Feet of
the great Image broken, and the other parts fallen, Dan. ii. this came to pass.
For when Cittim afflicted Eber, Number. xxiv. and Augustus taxed all the World,
(and, among the rest, the Jews) Jesus is born; having been taxed in his
Mother's Womb, as Levi paid Tithes in the Loins of Abraham. His Mother was a
Virgin, yet bare him against the Course of Nature, as barren Women had done the
like above it. Immediately after his Conception, she goes to Hebron, where
Abraham had his first Land, and David his Kingdom. There she keeps her swelling
Belly undiscried three Months, as Moses was hid three Months after he was born.
Which when her Husband detected, he was incensed, till, like Tamar, Genesis
xxxviii. it was clear she was without Fault.

In Tisri she brings forth her Son; at what time of the Year Sin came into the
World; and at what time of the Year the solemn Festival of Expiation of Sin
was; and what time of the Year the great Jubilee-Year began; a Type of him, who
should work Release.

At two Years old he is visited and worshipped by Wise Men of Persia; who among
the Records laid up there, had found Daniel's Prophecy of the time of the
Messiah, Dan. ix. Upon the Appearance of a new Star they know the time is come*
and from Persia, from whence Cyrus had done Good to Jerusalem, they come
thither. Herod of Esau persecutes Christ into Egypt: Whence Pharaoh had
persecuted Moses; least Christ should surprise Herod of his Kingdom, as Jacob
had done Esau of his Birthright and Blessing. For now had Esau shaken off the
Yoke of Jacob, as Genesis xxvii.40.

At twelve Years old Christ shows his Wisdom in the Sanhedrin; at which Age
Solomon had done his, deciding the Matter of the two Harlots.

At thirty Years old he is baptized and anointed by the Holy Spirit, and begins
to publish the Gospel. At which Age the Priests entered their Office, Number. iv.
Joseph his Honor, Genesis xli.46. And David his Kingdom, 2 Samuel v.4. He is
tempted as Eve, to the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life; but overcomes, having fasted Forty Days and Nights, as did Moses, and
Elias in Horeb. So did he in the very same place.

Upon John i.29.
his Return by Jordan, John teaches the People, That he was the Aim of the
Paschal Lamb, which every Year; and the Offering Lamb, which every Day, was
sacrificed. At John ii.9.
Cana of Galilee, he turns Water into Wine: That beginning with the Elements,
and changing their Form; his working Miracles upon things composed of the
Elements might be without Exception. So did Moses in his Wonders in Egypt. At
John ii.14, 15.
the first Passover after his Baptism, he casts out Buyers and Sellers in the
Temple; coming to his own House, purges it, and the Sons of Levi, Mal. iii.1,
2, 3. He John iii.
teaches what the Spirit moving upon the Waters, Genesis i.2. and the Brazen
Serpent, Number. xxi. aimed at. In John iv.
the Valley of Achor, Hos. ii.15. he tells an Adulterous Woman, what Hosea's
Adulterous Wives represented; and briefly and sweetly expounds to her all
Hosea's Prophecy. He Mat. iv.
chooses Galileon Disciples of Nepthali, who must give goodly Words, Genesis xlix.
and Zebulun and Issachar, who must bring Men to God, to offer Righteous
Sacrifices, Deuteronomy. xxxiii.19. He heals Diseases at distance, Psalm. cxlvii,
etc. He Mat. v.
pronounces the Blessings upon a Mount, which, upon their Entrance into
Canaan, should have been pronounced with the Curses, and in number; but were
not, Deuteronomy. xxviii. In his Sermon there he destroys the Doctrine of the
Scribes, Pharisees and Sadduces; the three Shepherds whom his Soul hated, Zech.
xi.8. He Mark iii.3.
would not own his Mother, nor acknowledge his Brethren, Deuteronomy. xxxiii.9. when
they went about to hinder the Work of the Lord. He seeks to unite Judah and
Israel under one Head, Hos. i.11. by tendering an easy Yoke, to them that were
parted by the threatening of an heavy, 1 King. xii.

He opens his Mouth in Parables, as Psalm. xlix.2. and from that very Psalm
shows the State of Luxurious rich Men, Luke xvi. and gives more to the
Scriptures than to the Words of Apparitions, Luke xvi.31. from Esaias viii.19,
20. Upon Luke ix.
Mount Tabor, a place once of Offense, Hos. v.1. the Cloud of Glory, that
departed at Moses Death, is restored; and out of that Cloud a Voice proclaims
him that great Prophet, to whom all must hearken, Deuteronomy. xviii.

When he had lived Thirty-two Years and an half, the time that David reigned in
Jerusalem, 2 Samuel v.5. and had preached and opened the Kingdom of Heaven Three
Years and Six Months, the time that Elias shut Heaven by Prayer, Luke iv.25. he
is sold by his Disciple Judas, as Joseph was by his Brother Judah, Genesis xxxvii.
for Thirty Pieces of Silver, the Price of a Servant, Exodus xxi.32. Is
apprehended among Gethsemani in Hebrew signifies A Press for Olives, to press
out the Oil.
the Oil-presses under Mount Olivet. And from thence begins to tread the
Wine Press alone, Esa. lxiii.3. He is condemned by the Policy of Rome, Number.
xxiv.24. Rev. xi.8. Is delivered up to be crucified at the time of Adam's
Creation, and setting in Eden. Is nailed to his Cross at the time of Adam's
Fall. Dies at the time of Adam's Censure. Is Six and Thirty Hours under Death,
the length of the first Day of the World to one part of it. His Grave is as the
Ark with an Angel at either end. He rises the third Day after the Passover,
and is as the first Fruits of the Dead. Lives Forty Days after on Earth, and
breaths on his Disciples the Holy Spirit, as he had done upon Adam the Spirit
of Life. Is taken up visibly, as Elias; and now offers up our Prayers to God,
as the Priest did incense after Sacrifice, etc.

These things raptim. But a deliberate sad Eye, with Leisure, might bring all
the New Testament, or the most, both for Words and Sense, from the Old. And
this I ever held the surest way to expound both.

SECT. XIV. The Order of the Evangelists.
THE proper Order of the Evangelists, as they should be laid, to make an entire
continued Story, I have laid before you, till you come within a Twelvemonth of
Christ's Death. That last Years Story you will find to be like Moses his last
Months Work, a Deuteronomy, or a Rehearsal of diverse things, that went before.
Ingenuity needs not always to be led by the Hand. For the search of the last
Year of Christ's Life, I have left to your self. By this you will conclude what
it cost to lay the rest. But when you have done the Work, it self will pay you
for your Pains.

Among other things, as you go, have a special Eye to the Thirteenth of John,
about the Supper there mentioned. Which not well marked, has lost Men
themselves, while they have gone about to find what is not there to be found.

Great Doctors, having ex professo undertaken to write of that Chapter, have
missed the first Verse, and so spoiled all. Concluding the Supper there spoken
of to be the Passover Supper; when the first Verse plainly tells, it was before
the Passover; and two Days, as St. Matthew explains. The Popish Tenet of Judas
his real receiving of Christ, had been choked here, had Men but had Eyes, and
Minds to see and embrace Truth.

SECTION I.
Luke, CHAP. I. from the beginning of the Chapter to ver. 5.

Section 1.
Seeing that none of the Evangelists use a Preface, but St. Luke, his may fitly
be a general Preface to them all.

SECT. II.
John, CHAP. i. from the beginning to ver. 15.

Sect. 2.
The Preface being made, the Story is to begin. And most properly Christ's
Divine Nature is first to be handled.

SECT. III.
Luke CHAP. i. from ver. 5, to ver. 57.

Sect. 3.
The Order here shows it self.

SECT IV.
Matthew. CHAP. i. all the Chapter.

Sect. 4.
The reason of the Order is to be seen by the Texture of the Story. Mary upon
the Words of the Angel presently conceives with Child. She goes to her Cousin
Elizabeth, to see the Truth of the Angel's Words, Thy Cousin Elizabeth has
conceived. She stays with her Three Months, Luke i.56. Then returning to
Joseph, from whom she had been so long absent, he perceives her great Belly,
as Genesis xxxviii.24. So that it is plain to see, how properly the 18th Vers^ of
Mat. i. follows in order of time the 56th Verse of Luke i. The ^vangelist lays
the Genealogy before, that every Reader might be his own Expositor upon those
Words of the Angel, ver. 20. Joseph thou Son of David. The last Verse, He knew
her not, etc. is all that this Evangelist speaks about the Birth of Christ.
This may be as a brief Relation, upon which suppose the two next Sections to be
as Expositions.

SECT. V.
Luke, CHAP. i. from ver. 57, to the end of the Chapter.

Sect. 5.
When Mary departs to her own House, her Cousin Elizabeth has but one Month to
go with Child. This makes this Dependence necessary.

SECT. VI.
Luke, CHAP. ii. from the beginning, to ver. 40.

Sect. 6.
The Coherence here is apparent of it self.

SECT. VII.
Mat. CHAP. ii. all the Chapter.

Sect. 7.
Observe, that Christ was Two Years old, when the wise Men come to him, ver.
16. and your own Eye will show, and justify the Order. What St. Luke says,
Chapter ii.39. They returned to Nazareth, mean the same time, that that of Matthew
does, Chapter ii.23. But Luke speaks briefly, because he has no more to say of
Christ; till at Twelve Years old he bring him from Nazareth to dispute in the
Temple.

SECT. VIII.
Luke, CHAP. ii. from ver. 40, to the end of the Chapter.

Sect. 8.
From Christ's Return from Egypt to Nazareth, till he was Twelve Years old, the
Gospel mentions nothing of him. This makes the Dependence plain.

SECT. IX.
Mat. iii. all. Mark i. from the beginning, to ver. 12. Luke iii. from the
beginning to ver. 23. Only the 18, 19, and 20. Verses, about John's
Imprisonment, are to be reserved to another place.

Sect. 9.
Compare the three Evangelists together. One will help to explain another. You
see the Gospel it self does enforce this Order, by relating nothing since
Christ's Twelfth Year old till his Baptism, when he was Nine and Twenty
complete, or Thirty current. All the time of his Youth, till now, Christ was a
Carpenter: But did now and then some Miracles privately in the House, for
enlarging their Commons, when they were short. He is now Baptized in Tisri.

SECT. X.
Luke iii. from v. 23, to the end of the Chapter.

Sect. 10.
How divinely S. Luke places this Genealogy at Christ's Baptism is to be seen
by looking on the Promise, Genesis iii.15. Upon which, this, and that which
follows in the next Chapter, is a Glorious Exposition. The Seed of the Woman
shall break the Head of the Serpent, by the Power of the Gospel. Which Gospel,
when Christ begins to preach, as from his Baptism he does, the Evangelist
shows through Seventy-five Descents, even from Adam, that he was that Seed
promised to Adam; and in the next Chapter, how he begins to break Satan's Head,
Luke iv.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

SECT. XI.
Mark iv. from the beginning, to ver. 12.

Mark i. v. 12, 13.

Luke iv. from the beginning, to ver. 14.

Sect. 11.
That this Temptation of Christ was immediately after his Baptism, Mark shows,
ver. 12.

About the Order of the two last Temptations, Matthew and Luke differ.
Matthew's Order is the true. Luke inverts it, and sets his Temptation at
Jerusalem last, and concludes, that the Devil departed from him for a season.
Intending to show where it is, that the Devil returns to him again in sore
Temptation, namely, at Jerusalem, in Judas, and the Jews. Or, he leaves him in
his last Temptation at Jerusalem, that you may look for him there, before he
go into Galilee.

SECT. XII.
John, CHAP. i. from ver. 19. to the end of the Chapter.

Sect. 12.
After that the Holy Ghost, by descending upon Christ, had evidenced him to be
the Holy One of God, John Baptist publishes this to all Comers, ver. 15. and
answers no other thing to the Priests, that are sent to question him, ver. 19,
to 28. The next Day, ver. 29. John sees Jesus coming again out of the
Wilderness to Jordan, etc. The next Day after that, ver. 25. Andrew and Peter
follow Jesus.

SECT. XIII.
Christ's first Passover after his Baptism.

John, CHAP. ii. all the Chapter.

Sect. 13.
The first Words, And on the Third Day, are Evidence enough of Connection.

SECT. XIV.
John iii. all the Chapter.

Sect. 14.
Jesus in Chap. ii. v. 13. is at Jerusalem at the Passover. Thereabout he
continues till Pentecost, and the Feast of Tabernacles be over. For at those
times also every Male Israelite must be at Jerusalem. In this space is this
Conference with Nicodemus. And in this space Jesus travaileth Judea, and his
Disciples baptize, as John also did till now, ver. 23.

SECT. XV.
Luke iii. ver. 18, 19, 20.

Sect. 15.
Conceive the Continuance of the Story thus. John baptized in Enon, as John
iii.23. Multitudes resort to him. The ceremonious Jews begin to cavil about the
Dignity of Mosaical Purification, in Comparison of his Baptism and Christ's. He
stands out for Baptism, and extols it from Christ, the Author. Here the Jews
have a Quarrel against him, for crying down Moses Rites. This Herod readily
embraces, as a fit Opportunity for him to vent his Malice, which had been long
conceived against John about the Matter of Herodias, but for Shame and Fear
Herod could not execute it. Now when the Jews offer so fair an Occasion, Herod
shuts him quickly up in Prison.

SECT. XVI.
John iv. all the Chapter.

Sect. 16.
Jesus soon heard of John's Imprisonment, and of the pretended Cause, because
he had many Disciples, to the Neglect of Moses. Now when Jesus knew, that the
Pharisees heard, that he had more Disciples than John, and therefore was in the
same Danger, he gets out of Judea. This links this Passage through Samaria to the
foregoing Section, and ver. 43, and 54. knit the Chapter to it self.

SECT. XVII.
Luke iv. from ver 14, to ver. 31.

Sect. 17.
The Connection is apparent, the things preceding considered. The 14th Verse may
be as an Epiphonema to the preceding Section; the first Word being changed from
And to Thus Jesus returned, etc. With it, and with the same Inversion, may you
take v. 12. of Matthew. iv. THUS when Jesus heard that John was committed to
Prison, etc.

SECT. XVIII.
Mat. iv. ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Mark i. ver. 14, 15.

Luke iv. the beginning of ver. 31.

Sect. 18.
The unkind Usage of his Townsmen, the Nazarites, makes him to leave the Town,
where he was brought up, to go to another, Luke iv. ver. 30, and 31. shows the
Coherence.

SECT. XIX.
Mat. iv. ver. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

Mark i. ver. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

Luke v. from the beginning, to ver. 12.

Sect. 19.
Matthew and Mark make the Order conspicuous. Luke has put in two Miracles,
between the last Section and this, viz. Healing a Demoniac in Capernaum
Synagogue, and of Peter's Mother-in-law at home. Which were done after the
calling of the Disciples. But S. Luke, mentioning Christ's rejection by the
Nazarites out of their Synagogue, brings him presently into Capernaum
Synagogue, doing this Miracle, that it might better appear, whom and what an
one they had rejected.

After these Miracles also in Capernaum, Christ goes abroad over all Galilee.
So that Luke, having nothing more to relate of a long time done in Capernaum,
brings these altogether at Christ's coming thither, that he might dispatch his
present Story for that Town at once.

SECT. XX.
Mark i. from ver. 21. to ver. 39.

Luke iv. from ver. 31. to ver. 44.

Mat. viii. ver. 14, 15, 16. About the healing of Peter's Mother-in-law.

Sect. 20.
Mark does so link this with the last, that there is no doubt of the Order.
That Matthew lays this Story of Peter's Mother-in-law so far off, is strange.
But this may seem to be the reason. Because Chapter iv.23. he speaks of Christ's
Preaching and Teaching, etc. He first touches his Doctrine in the Sermon on
the Mount: which for this reason he has laid out of his proper place. Then
begins to speak of Miracles. Of which he sets the cleansing of the Leper first,
Chapter viii.2. which indeed was the first Miracle he showed upon his Perambulation
of Galilee, mentioned Mat. iv.23.

Then speaks he of healing the Centurion's Servant. Which was the first
Miracle Christ did after his Sermon in the Mount, Luke vii.1. This was done in
Capernaum. Which Town when he comes in mention of, he names the healing of
Peter's Mother-in-law, because it was in the same Town, though not at the same
time.

SECT. XXI.
Mat. iv. ver. 23, 24, 25.

Mark i. ver. 39.

Luke iv. ver. 44.

Sect. 21.
The Text it self at the first sight will clear the Coherence.

SECT. XXII.
Mark i. from ver. 40. to the end.

Luke v. ver. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

Mat. viii. ver. 2, 3, 4.

Sect. 22.
Mark and Luke show the Continuation of the order. Matthew misplacing this
Story, has made some to conjecture, that the Leper in Matthew, was not the
same with the Leper in Mark and Luke. Which though the same Words both of the
Leper and of Christ refute, yet the Scruple still sticks in this, that
Matthew has made his Leper to come to Christ, as he comes from the Mountain;
which in the other comes to him before his Sermon there. But the reason of this
you see in Sect. 20.

Now whereas the two first Verses, And he came down from the Mount, And behold
a Leper, lie so close, as that it may seem impossible to part them; the same
manner of Phrase in Chap. ix.1, 2. has taught us the Style of the Evangelist.

SECT. XXIII.
Mark ii. from the beginning to ver. 15.

Luke v. from ver. 17. to ver. 29.

Mat. ix. from ver. 2. to ver. 10.

Sect. 23.
Mark makes the Dependence, ver. 1. After a few Days. And the Connection of
Levi's calling to the Story foregoing, all the Evangelists confirm.

SECT. XXIV.
John, Chap. v. all the Chapter.

Sect. 24.
The Continuation of the Story here is the difficultest piece of all the
Gospel; and therefore requires the more serious Study, to resolve those Doubts,
that attend upon the laying of the History. Which Doubts are these.

Quest. I. Whereas the last Section ends with the calling of Levi, and all the
three Evangelists have spoken of a Feast that Levi made for Christ in the very
next Verse, as if it had been made the very next Day after his calling, if not
on the same, what reason is there to part his Calling, and Feast, which the
Text has so nearly joined together?

Ans. As you find the time of Levi's calling to be as it is here laid, by the
inviolable Continuance of the Story forward, as you have seen; so that the same
was not the time of his Feast, we must find by the Continuance of the Story
backward, as you may see from the retrograde Passage from Sect. 36, 37. unto
this Place. Your own Eye at that Section will be your Judge.

Quest. II. What reason is there to lay the Fifth of John here rather than any
other Parcel?

Ans. First, we are to prove, that Feast spoken of John v. to be a Passover;
which is easy to do from the first Words, And there was a Feast of the Jews,
etc. None of the solemn Assemblies at Jerusalem are called Feasts simply
without other Addition, but only the Passover.

The Chagigah, or their Festival Bullock, allowed them by the Law for that
time, got it this Privilege to be called the Feast. Any Talmudic, that should
but read this Verse, would soon conclude, that it speaks of the Passover.

This Ground then being thus laid; that this was the Passover, we proceed thus.

Mark and Luke, the two exactest for Order, have, next after Levi's Feast, and
the Passages there, (which they have joined to his calling, because they would
dispatch the mention of him at once, having no more at all to say to him) laid
the Disciples pulling the Ears of Corn, as the next thing of Note to Levi's
Calling. Now when it was, that they plucked the Corn, Luke has made it plain,
when he says it was (...), that is, not as our English renders it, The second
Sabbath after the first, but just contrary, The first Sabbath after the second:
That is, After the second Day in the Passover Week. As you see more fully, Page
7. at this Mark
.

So that a Passover was past, before they pulled the Ears of Corn; and this in
John v. being the Passover, you see the reason why it is thus to be laid.

SECT. XXV.
Mark ii. from ver. 23, to the end.

Luke vi. from the beginning, to ver. 6.

Matthew. xii. from the beginning, to ver. 9.

Sect. 25.
The Dependence is apparent from the former Section. S. Matthew's misplacing of
this Story, and the following, is to show the Opposition of Christ's Actions
and Doctrine altogether, and by what degrees.

SECT. XXVI.
Mark iii. from the beginning, to ver. 13.

Luke vi. from ver. 6, to ver. 12.

Matthew. xii. from ver. 9, to ver. 22.

Sect. 26.
The Evangelists themselves show the Connection undeniable.

SECT. XXVII.
Mark iii. ver. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Luke vi. from ver. 12, to the end.

Mat. v, vi, vii.

Sect. 27.
This is the proper place of the Sermon in the Mount. Why Matthew lays it so
forward, see Sect. 20, etc.

SECT. XXVIII.
Mat. viii. ver. 1. and thence leap to ver. 5. and from it read to ver. 14.

Luke vii. from the beginning, to ver. 11.

Sect. 28.
The Evangelists show the Coherence. Matthew's reason of interposing the
Healing of the Leper, see Sect. 20.

SECT. XXIX.
Luke vii. from ver. 11. to the end.

Mat. xi. from ver. 2, to ver. 20.

Sect. 29.
There is no scruple for order, unless this Action in Simon the Pharisee's
House be the same with that in Simon the Leper's. Which that it is not, is
plain from Luke viii.1.

SECT. XXX.
Luke viii. ver. 1, 2, 3.

Mark iii. the latter end of ver. 19, and ver. 20, 21.

Sect. 30.
The Coherence is plain. The Virgin Mary here shows her self actually sinful.

SECT. XXXI.
Mark iii. from ver. 22, to ver. 31.

Mat. xii. from ver. 22, to ver. 46.

Sect. 31.
By that that went before, and what follows, this Connection is justified. In
the last Section his Friends come to take him off from preaching. In the next,
they come to him as he is speaking the things of this Section.

SECT. XXXII.
Mat. xii. ver. 46, 47, 48, 49, 50.

Mark iii. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35.

Luke viii. ver. 19, 20, 21.

Sect. 32.
Matthew in ver. 46. makes the Dependence plain. Luke's setting this after the
Parable of the Sower, is to instance in Hearers of the Word, according to that
Parable.

SECT. XXXIII.
Mat. xiii. from the beginning, to ver. 54.

Mark iv. from the beginning, to ver. 35.

Luke viii. from ver. 4, to ver. 19.

Sect. 33.
Matthew and Mark join the Stories to your Hand.

SECT. XXXIV.
Mark iv. from ver. 35. to (...) end.

Luke viii. from ver. 22, to v^r. 26.

Mat. viii. from ver. 18, to ver. 28.

Sect. 34.
See Mark, ver. 35. and the Order is clear. The Story of Levi's Calling makes
Matthew so much to lay this before.

SECT. XXXV.
Mat. viii. from ver. 28. to the end.

Mark v. from the beginning, to ver. 21.

Luke viii. from ver. 26, to ver. 40.

Sect. 35.
The Text links it self.

SECT. XXXVI.
Mat. ix. ver. 1. Then leap to ver. 10. and read from thence to ver. 18.

Mark v. ver. 21. from thence go to Mark ii. and read from ver. 15. to ver. 23.

Luke viii. ver. 40. from thence return to Luke iv. and read from ver. 29, to
the end.

Sect. 36.
Here we are come to the true and proper time of Levi's Feast. That it is so,
is apparent by the next Section. At Levi's Feast the Question about Fasting is
propounded: Which Christ resolves. And as he speaks about it, Mat. ix.18.
Jairus comes to him. Now that Jairus comes not till now, you see the
Continuance of the History evinceth.

SECT. XXXVII.
Mat. ix. from ver. 18, to ver. 27.

Mark v. from ver. 22, to the end.

Luke viii. from ver. 41, to the end.

Sect. 37.
Matthew ties this and the last together: And the Continuance of the History
you see lays this undoubtedly here.

SECT. XXXVIII.
Mat. ix. from ver. 27, to ver. 35.

Sect. 38.
In ver. 27. the Coherence is sure.

SECT. XXXIX.
Mark vi. from the beginning, to the middle of ver. 6.

Mat. xiii. ver. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58.

Sect. 39.
Mark, joining this to his healing Jairus's Daughter, makes the Connection
plain. Matthew inserteth what fell in the way.

SECT. XL.
Mark vi. the latter end of ver. 6.

Mat. ix. ver. 35, 36, 37, 38.

Sect. 40.
That piece of ver. 6. in Mark vi. is enough for the Dependence.

SECT. XLI.
Mat. x. all the Chapter, and ver. 1. of Chap. xi.

Mark vi. ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Luke ix. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,

Sect. 41.
The Coherence is so plain, that it is not to be doubted of.

SECT. XLII.
Mark vi. from ver. 14, to ver. 30.

Matthew. xiv. from the beginning, to ver. 12.

Luke ix. ver. 7, 8, 9.

Sect. 42.
(...)

SECT. XLIII.
Mat. xiv. from ver. 12, to the end.

Mark vi. from ver. 30, to the end.

Luke ix. from ver. 10, to ver. 18.

John vi. from the beginning, to ver. 22.

Sect. 43.
(...)

SECT. XLIV.
John vi. from ver. 22, to the end.

Sect. 44.
The Coherence of the preceding Sections needed no Demonstration. In the last
Section* in John vi.4. he speaks of Christ's third Passover being near, when
Christ does this Miracle of multiplying the Loaves, and walking on the Sea. In
this Section you have him in Capernaum Synagogue; and from thence doubtless he
goes up to Jerusalem to his third Passover. And now has he but one Year to his
Passion.

-- Non displicuisse meretur
Festinat -- qui placuisse.

MEDITATIONS UPON SOME Abstruser Points of Divinity, AND EXPLANATIONS Of Diverse
Difficult Places of Holy Scripture.

In Three DECADS.

THE HEADS OF THE Ensuing Discourses.
DECAD I.
I. THAT the long Successes of some Sinners do not suppose a total Freedom from
a just Sentence, but only a Deferring the Execution.

II. Sin as it exposes to Punishment hereafter, so it is a present Punishment
in the Act.

III. A Meditation explanatory on the Book of Ecclesiastes.

IV. The Sin and Punishment of the Golden Calf explained.

V. How Israel was given up to Idolatry, and yet remained a long while after
God's People.

VI. The Case of Widows marrying again, considered.

VII. Wantonness unchristian.

VIII. The Fear which seized our Savior at his Passion, innocent.

IX. The Case of Jacob, when he wrestled with the Angel, explained.

X. An Inquiry into the Reason of Hezekiah's Tears upon God's Message to him,
that he must die.

DECAD II.
I. AN Inquiry, what Strength that was David requested, when he prayed to God
to spare him, that he might recover Strength, Psalm. xxxix.13.

II. The Necessity of Government explained from this Text, Judges xvii.6. In
those Days there was no King in Israel: but every Man did that which was right
in his own Eyes.

III. Who the SONS of God are, and the calling of the Gentiles, explained from
Romans viii.21. Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the
Bondage of Corruption, into the Glorious Liberty of the Children of God.

IV. The Christian's Holiness, as well as his future Happiness, styled GLORY.

V. An Elucidation of Heb. x.26, 27. If we sin wilfully after we have received
the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins, but a
fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the
Adversaries.

VI. Some Description of the Death and Doom of an ungodly Man.

VII. A Meditation upon the Widow's Mite.

VIII. A Meditation and Explanation of the HOPE of Christians, according to the
Apostle's Account of it, Heb, vi.17, 18, 19, 20.

XI. An Inquiry, why the Jews were so importunate with Christ for Signs and
Wonders; and why he was so backward to gratify their Curiosity therein.

X. An Explanatory Discourse of the Fall and Punishment of Angels.

DECAD III.
I. An Inquiry, which is most to be esteemed Evangelical Holiness, or Absolute
Perfection.

II. An Explanation of those Words of our Savior, That Servant that knew his
Lord's Will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall
be beaten with many Stripes: But he that knew not, and did commit Things worthy
of Stripes, shall be beaten with few Stripes, Luke xii.47, 48.

III. An Inquiry, why God appointed the Jews a Carnal Ceremonious Institution.

IV. A Meditation upon the Length of Time the Second Temple was in Building.
Forty and Six Years was this Temple in Building, John ii.20.

V. How the Face and Back-parts of God, Exodus xxxiii.20, 23. are to be
understood.

VI. An Inquiry, what that first Resurrection is, Revel. xx.5.

VII. An Examination into the Reason of that Eruption of the Apostle, O! the
Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! Romans xi.33.

VIII. Asa's perfect Heart how reconcilable with his Sufferance of the High
Places.

XI. In what Sense the Apostle thanks God, that the believing Romans had been
the Servants of Sin.

X. The Papists, the Millenaries, and the Traditionary Jews confuted from that
Place, Whom the Heavens must contain, until the times of Restitution of all
Things, etc. Act. iii.21.

MEDITATIONS UPON SOME Abstruser Points of Divinity, AND EXPLANATIONS Of Diverse
Difficult Places of Holy Scripture. DECAD I.
I. That the long Successes of some Sinners do not suppose a total Freedom from
a just Sentence, but only a Deferring the Execution.
IN Authors and Writings in the Chaldee Language we find a Thousand Times over
the Word which we translate SENTENCE, in Eccles. viii.11. Because Sentence
against an evil Work is not executed speedily, etc. But in all the Hebrew of
the Bible we hardly find it above once more, besides the abovesaid Place;
namely, Esth. i.20. where the Determination of A^asuerus for the unqueening of
Vashti is termed (...) The Decree of the King. The Word in the Chaldee does
primarily and properly signify A Word, and (...) Words. And nothing is more
frequent in that Language. Our English has rendered it A Sentence in that
Place of Ecclesiastes, and A Decree in that of Esther. Where the Chaldee
Translator uses both Senses, and renders it (...) The Word of the Decree. I
observe this the rather, because the Sentence of God against Evil is in his
Word Uttered, and in his Mind Decreed. In his Mouth, and in his Heart. The Lord
has Spoken it, the Lord has Decreed it.

How infinite in Scripture are Passages of this Nature and Purpose? Such and
such Judgments shall come, For the Lord has SPOKEN it. This is the PURPOSE of
the Lord, the DECREE of the Lord, the WORD of the Lord, against such and such
Sins. And do we read them, and can we doubt whether there be a SENTENCE against
an evil Work? Do not all the Instances and Examples of Judgments and Vengeance
executed in Scripture also prove this Truth from the Doom upon Cain in the
Beginning of Genesis, to the Doom of Babylon in the End of the Revelations? And
may not this be an Answer or Resolution about all the Judgments that have been
in the World, that they have been, because there is a Sentence against an evil
Work? Why the old World perished by Water, Sodom by Fire: Because there is
a Sentence against an evil Work. Why the Egyptians perished in the Sea, the
murmuring Israelites in the Wilderness, the Samaritans by Lions, Bethel's
Children by Bears: Because there is a Sentence against an evil Work.

But where is this Sentence, since Thousands and Thousands have abused the Holy
Things of God a Thousand times, whereas Belshazzar did but once, and yet their
Finger never aked for so doing? Many and many a Thousand have told a Thousand
and a Thousand Lies, whereas Ananias told but one; and yet have escaped in a
whole Skin. And there have been Thousands as proud in Heart as Herod could be,
and yet not met with his Fate. It was these Men's hard Luck to speed as they
did, but Millions speed better that do the same Things. Therefore where is this
Sentence?

I answer, There, where it is sure enough. And let God himself tell you where.
Deuteronomy. xxxii.34. Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my
Treasures? And what is it? Look before, and it is Vengeance, ver. 23, etc. and
look at the very next Verse after it, and it is Vengeance, ver. 35. To me
belongs Vengeance, and Recompense: their Feet shall slide in due time. If you
ask then, where is the Sentence of God against evil Works, when wicked Workers
go on, and flourish, and prosper, and no Hurt comes to them? It is laid up in
his Treasures. He has writ it out ready, and laid it up in his Desk, till he
see Time to take it out, and put it in Execution. In Job, Chapter xxxviii.22. there
is mention of Treasures of Snow. Have thou entered into the Treasures of the
Snow, or have thou seen the Treasures of the Hail? And Chap. xxxvii.6. He says
to the Snow, be thou on the Earth. Now, if one ask in the parching Heat of
Summer and Harvest, where is the Snow, you say, that God commands to be on
Earth? Where is any Figure or Token of Snow now? But it is in his Treasures.
He has it in his Shop and VVarehouse, to fetch out, when he sees his Time. So
is the Sentence against an evil Work laid up with him.

If you will yet have a narrower Answer to the ^^estion; where is this Sentence
whilst the wicked prosp^^* It is in his Word; it is in his Will; in his Book*
in his Bosom.

First, It is written and laid up sure in his Word, Esaias xxxiv. from ver. 8.
forward, speaking of the Desolations of the Cities and Habitations of the
wicked Enemies of God and Zion, it is said, that the Cor^^rant and Bittern
should possess them; the Owl and the Ra^en, and Satyr, etc. at ver. 16. he
comes on thus* Seek ye out of the Book of the Lord and read: Not one of these
shall ^ail; none shall want her Mate; for my Mouth has commanded it. Whilst
these Habitations flourished, and their wicked Inh^bitants prospered and
jovialized in them, they were ready to think in Heart, I shall never be moved,
and this Prosperity shall never have end. But Seek in the Book of the Lord, and
read, and there you find a Sentence of Desolation and Destruction of the
Habitations of Wickedness. Is there not a Doom and Sentence in Scripture
against every Transgression and Disobedience in Thought, Word and Deed? And
unless you will make God a Liar, and false of his Word, as Men are false, the
Sentence is sure.

It is said, Tit. i.2. In hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot lie
promised. Is it not true on the other Part, about the Certainty of God's
Threatenings, that God that cannot lie, Threatened. God threatened Adam, In the
Day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the Death. But where was any sign of
Death, when God so threatened? Adam was well, and immortal then, and no Sign of
Death or Disease upon him. But Death was in that Tree, if he meddled with it;
and so it proved. What that Tree was to Adam, God's Commands are to us. It
might be wondered at, what did that Tree in the Garden? It was as a Rule of his
Obedience, a Trial of his Obedience. But if he made bold with it, it would
prove his Death, God's Commands are the same to Men: A Rule, a Trial of their
Obedience. But if they make bold with God's Commandments, and meddle with them
otherwise than God allows, there is nothing but Death and Judgment. And the
Apostle finds it, Romans vii.10. The Commandment which was ordained for Life, I
^ound to be unto Death.

But many and many an evil Work is committed, and no Sign of Judgment, or
Death. And then where is the Sentence?

The Preacher says, that Sentence is not speedily executed. But in so saying,
it tells us not, that there is no Sentence: but rather the contrary, that there
is a Sentence in time to be executed, though not done speedily. Men mistake and
deceive themselves, because they willingly will misjudge concerning God's
Judgments, and his Sentence of Judgment, and construe it only of some Visible,
Bodily, or Temporal Judgment. And many a time the Wickedest meet with no such
thing, from the Womb to the Grave. As Experience shows abundantly* and the Holy
Ghost tells us, Psalm. lxxiii.5, 6. They are not in Trouble as other Men,
neither are they plagued as other Men. Therefore Pride compasses them about as
a Chain, Violence covers them a^ a Garment: And they think that Bravery and
Joviality shall never be changed. Whereas the Sentence of God against their
Evil Works stands, if they would but observe it.

Many things are wont here to be urged. That that I shall observe shall be only
this, that sinning it self is a Judgment. The Sinners sinning is their present
Punishment. And so the Word (...) in the Hebrew Tongue signifies both Sin and
Punishment. For indeed sinning is no less than a Penalty. What else means that
Passage, Ps. lxxxi.11, 12. My People would not hearken to my Voice, and Israel
would none of me. So I gave them up to their own Hearts Lusts, and they walked
in their own Councils. What is the plain English of this, but this, because
they would not hearken unto my Voice, therefore I punished them, by giving them
up to Sin, according to their own Lusts and Wills, to sin and spare not? God is
the only Choice, Excellent, Infinite Good. What, shall we set opposite for the
only desperate deep-dy'd Evil? What, is the direct contrary to God, as Black
is to White, as Darkness to Light? Nothing but Sin. The Devil indeed is
desperately contrary to God, as he is his Enemy; and the Devil is most deeply
dyed Evil. But it is Sin that makes him so, and that made him a Devil. Hell is
a dreadful, horrible, deep Evil; but it is Sin that has made it so. For if
there had been no (...) there had been no Hell.

Now if Sin be so great (...) Evil, so deep, so desperate, as that it caused
the Devil to be a Devil, Hell to be Hell, then certainly Sin it self is not a
small Punishment to the Soul that sins: Not to speak of the Punishment that
follows Sin hereafter.

II. SIN as it exposes to Punishment hereafter, so it is a present Punishment
in the Act.
FOR it deprives of God, and brings under a Curse.

First, It deprives of God. It loses God; it sets at a distance from God. The
Scripture styles sinning a Departing from the Living God. Heb. iii.12. Take
heed Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief in
DEPARTING from the Living God. That is, in sinning against God. And it styles
sinning also a Coming short of the Glory of God, Romans iii.23. which means not
only coming short of the Glory of Heaven, but short of the Glory of God, that
rested upon Man before he Sinned. It was God's Threatening, Genesis ii.17. In the
Day thou Eatest thereof, thou shall surely Die. And yet when they had Eaten,
they did not Die. Nay, they did not so much as Swoon; were not so much as Sick
toward Dying. So that the Devil might vaunt, and persuade them, You see, I told
you true, when I told you, you should not Die. Lo! you see, it is no danger to
follow my Counsel: For you see no sign of Death at all upon you. I, but Adam,
look into thy Soul, and there God which was the Life of thy Soul is departed
from thee. So the Secure, Profane, Wretched Heart may reason with it self:
There is talk of Sentence against Sin, of Punishment of Sin, and I know not
what: I feel no such thing, though I take mine own Courses: But I am Fat, and
Flourish, and grow Rich, and Prosper, and to Day is as Yesterday, and to Morrow
shall be as to Day, and much more abundant. But look, O wretched Man, at thy
State within. Is God there? Is the Presence of the Life of God in thy Soul? No,
Every Sin committed sets thee and him still at more and more Distance; loses
him, and Interest in him more and more. And if this be nothing with thee to
lose God, what will be any thing?

This is the very Preface and Porch of Hell, the Loosing of God here; as the
Preface and Porch of Heaven to the Saints of God here, is their enjoying and
partaking of God here. Does any ask or question about the State and Torment of
the Damned in Hell? This may be a full and adequate Answer, They have lost God.
What is their Damnation? They have lost God. What their Torment? They have lost
God. Whence their Howling? Because they have lost God. Whence their
Hopelesness? Because they have lost God. Alas! How did they lose him? Ask them,
and they may tell you; that their Sins have separated betwixt God and them. As
Esa. lix.2. That every Sin they committed, set God and them further and further
asunder, and deprived them more and more of God.

Some Intimation of this you have in Ezekiel, Chapter x.18. The Glory and Presence
of God departing from the Temple, and flitting away. And where is Israel, when
God is gone from them? It is Readiness sad Complaint, 1 Samuel xxviii.15. God is
departed from me. And you see what became of Saul. God and Sin cannot dwell
together in one Soul: As the Bondwoman and her Son must have no abiding with
the Freewoman and hers, in the same House.

Now if it be a Punishment, a sad Thing to lose God, to have God depart away
from the Soul; then the very Sinning of a Sinner is a Punishment to him,
because it strips him of God, and deprives him of that that should be the very
Life of his Soul.

Secondly, Sin is a Punishment because it brings the Sinner under a Curse. It
is not only a Privative mischief, depriving him of God, (though that is enough)
but it is a Positive Mischief, bringing a Curse upon the Sinner. Read Deuteronomy.
xxvii. ult. And Chap. xxviii. from ver. 15. and forward; and it needs not
more Proof. He says not only as before in Chap. xxvii. Cursed is he that
makes an Idol, and sets light by Father and Mother; that removes his
Neighbors Landmark, etc. But Cursed is he that confirms not all the words
of this Law: And Chap. xxviii.15. If thou will not hearken unto the Voice of
the Lord thy God, to do all his Commandments and his Statutes; Then Cursed
shall thou be in the City and in the Field, etc. He that did not all the
Commandments was Cursed; and all the People must say, Amen. And was not that a
hard Task to say Amen to their own Cursing? For who of them had observed all
God's Commandments, to do them? Durst we do the like? And yet God requires the
same thing from us, in the Sense he did it from them: And that was in a twofold
Regard.

1. To acknowledge their own Guilt and Deserving of a Curse for what was past,
in that they had not observed God's Commandments. And,

2. An engaging of their Hearts for the Time to come to Obedience of his
Commandments, or let them be Accursed. And so the Word Amen signifies in a
twofold Sense: Both an Assertion of a Thing, or Averring that it is true: And
so they and we are to acknowledge, that he that continues not in God's
Commandments, deserves a Curse: And Secondly, An Imprecation upon themselves,
if they willingly did so transgress again.

Now what was this Curse? Or what is the Curse that Hangs over the Head of
Sinners? It Is true, sometimes the Curse falls upon ungodly Men in Visible and
Temporal Judgments; as upon the Old World, Sodom, the Egyptians, and Ten
Thousand more such Direful Monuments. But this is not the Curse that he intends
for the Ungodly. For many and many a Thousand live and die in Prosperity, and
such horrid apparent Judgments never come nigh them. The Jews for their
Rebellion had all these Curses against them, Deuteronomy. xxviii, and yet Thousands of
them Prospered in the World, grew Rich and Great, and yet the Curse of God
remained upon them for all that: Therefore the Curse of God is twofold; either
to be inflicted in Temporal Judgments, or to be inflicted by turning all Things
that seem Mercies to a Curse: The former lights not on all wicked Men; the
latter does.

III. A Meditation explanatory on the Book of Ecclesiastes.
IN this Book, methinks, we may see Solomon setting down in deep Study. After
all the Contents and Delights that he had, or could find in Earthly Things he
is here set down with his Pen in Hand, casting up what all came to. And the
Summa Totalis ^f all, at the Foot of all, comes but to th^s, All is Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit.

Brave Buildings Ortyards, Gardens, Pomp, Wealth, Pleasure, Enjoying One's self
in this World in the fullest Delight possible. Solomon, what comes all to in
the Total Sum? Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. Care to provide great Matters
here, Rule, Dominion, Maintaining a brave Port and Retinue, Study and Prying
into the Things of Nature, and Men's Actions: What comes this to? To nothing
but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. Like him in the Story, that had a great
Iron-bound Chest by him, that he thought his Forefathers had filled full of
Treasure for him; but when he comes to open it, it proved nothing but Stones,
and Old Iron, and Rags, and such Trash.

The Title of his Book, as you see Chap. i. is Vanity of Vanities, all is
Vanity. Who would read such a Book, that carries no better, no more comfortable
a Title? If the Title were Pleasure of Pleasures, Profit of Profits,
Contentment of Contentments; here were a brave Book to Study that spoke of such
things as these. As it is in the Prophet, Prophecy to us of Wine and Strong
Drink: Such an one is a Prophet for this People. But a Book that goes about to
show me, that all that I set my mind upon, and take delight in, is but Vanity
of Vanities, and Vexation of Vexations; away with such a Book: Like Jeremy's
Prophecy with Jehoiakim, cut it with the Penknife, and cast it into the Fire.

Thus Flesh, and Blood, and Carnal Hearts, would be ready to Censure, and like
the Papists with their Index Expurgatorius, dash out in all Writings they meet
with, whatsoever was not to their own Minds. But what says the Heart of a
Solomon in this Case? Nay, what says the Sacred Spirit of God in this Case?
That there can hardly be a more useful Study for Worldly Men; nay, for all
Mortal Men, than to Study, Find out, and be Satisfied, that all Earthly things
whatsoever are but Vanity. That the Heart may be set to hearken after that
which is more than Earthly, more than Vanity. And Solomon the great Student,
the Wisest of Men, never showed himself more Learned, more Wise, than in this
Convictive Impression upon his own Heart, that all things under the Sun are but
Vanity of Vanities; Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity.

And as he among the Heathen was accounted the VVisest Man among them that
said, Hoc scio tantum me nihil; i. e. that he knew only this, that he knew
Nothing; so shall he approve himself a Wise Man indeed, that can come Solidly,
Thoroughly and Feelingly to know, and be convinced of this, that all Things here
below are but Vanity of Vanities. Solomon doubles the Word, because he would
heighten and enhaunce the Sense. And if you Observe, you shall find also, that
he takes the Word Vanity in a double Sense, viz. For Vanity of Things, and
Vanity of Minds: As all Things here below are but Vanity, and Fading in
themselves; and as the Minds of Men are but Vanity and Foolishness in their
Desires and Thoughts. And so you shall find, that he takes the Word sometimes
in one Sense, and sometimes in another.

That saying, Chap. viii.11. demonstrates this, and speaks to this double
Sense, Because Sentence against an evil Work is not executed speedily,
therefore the Heart of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do Evil. The
Verse before is this, There is a Time, wherein one Man rules over another to
his own Hurt. And so I saw the Wicked Buried, who had come, and went from the
Place of the Holy. And they were forgotten in the City, where they had done so.
This is also Vanity. That is, some Men Oppress, Domineer, Tyranize over others.
But at last I saw such come to the Grave. And then what proved all their
Insulting, but a wretched Vanity? Nay, they went, or were separated, from
Heaven, the Place of the Holy One. And their very Name rotted in the very Place
where they had so Domineered. And they were forgotten in the City where they
had done so. A Vanity of Vanities, that they should lose Heaven, and lose their
Name too; and all they had done and contrived to themselves, come to no better
Issue. And then in the following Verse he speaks of the wretched Vanity that is
in Men's Minds; That because Sentence against an Evil thing is not presently
executed; therefore the Hearts of the Sons of Men is fully set in them to do
Evil. One would expect, that Fear should move the Heart, that it should not be
Evil, because there is a Sentence against an Evil Work; and that Fairness and
Gentleness should move the Heart to be Good, because this Sentence is not
speedily put in Execution. But Behold! Wild Grapes indeed; Behold the Vanity of
Men's Minds; therefore the Heart of Man is fully set to do evil.

IV. The Sin and Punishment of the Golden Calf explained.
THE Golden Calf is often laid in the Jews Dish, and that deservedly: That ever a
People should so soon, so shamefully fall from God. It was not Forty Days
since the Law was given them, and the two First Commandments already broken. To
turn the Glory of God into a Calf, as it is expressed, Psalm. cvi.20. Was that the
God that brought them out of Egypt? Expositors cannot tell what to say of their
Intent. For they cannot think they were such Calves. And yet what can we say
else?

Jonathan says, The Devil got into the Metal, and fashioned it into a Calf.
The Devil indeed was too much there, but it was in their Fancies more than in
the Metal. The Jews will not suffer Aaron's Relation of this matter to be
interpreted, Exodus xxxii.24. But the Thing stands upon Record against them.
Whether they made it in imitation of the Egyptian APIS, or of a Cherub. Compare
Ezekiel. i.10. with Chapter x.14.

God Punished this Sin, 1. With the Sword, Exodus xxxii.28. There fell of the
People that Day about Three Thousand Men. And, 2. With a Plague, ver. ult. And
the Lord Plagued the People, because they made the Calf. And, 3. Which is worse
than both, God Punished the Sin with the Judgment of giving them up to Worship
the Host of Heaven, mentioned Acts vii.42. Then God turned, and gave them up to
Worship the Host of Heaven. The Verse immediately before speaks of their making
a Calf in those Days, and offering Sacrifice unto the Idol, and rejoicing in
the Works of their own Hands. THEN it was that God turned because they turned
first. Hitherto God and Israel were Face to Face, but now Contra. As it is said
of Moses, That he went out from Pharaoh in a great Anger, Exodus xi.8. So God
turned away from them, and leaves them.

What did God Turn from? And VVhither? Did he turn from his Covenant? They
broke it indeed; but did he? In the Eighth Chapter to the Hebrews, ver. 9. The
Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the Day when I took them by the
Hand, to lead them out of the Land of Egypt; because they continued not in my
Covenant. They continued not in the Covenant; but did not he? Yea, he returned
again, set up his Tabernacle among them, and brought them into the Land which
he Promised them. Had he broke his Covenant, he had played quit with them. And
the Covenant was not, but upon God's Conditions; and those not performed, he
was quit from any Obligation to it. But however God brake not his Covenant with
them. And therefore the forequoted Place means not that, but it speaks of a
particular thing.

In Egypt they were Idolators, Ezekiel. xx.7. Then said I unto them, cast ye away
every Man the Abominations of his Eyes, and Defile not your selves with the
Idols of Egypt. He brought them out, that they might be a People Serving the
true God. But this Idolatry now committed by them, made him turn, and give them
up to be as the Heathen.

This was a Critical Business, and set the Clock for future Ages in Judgment
upon them, As Adam's eating the Forbidden Fruit brought Guilt upon his
Posterity, so did this. Not that any particular Person was necessitated hence
to Idolatry; but that God revoked the Privilege he intended them, viz. That
they should be a People not Idolatrous. So that in this Necessitatem non
imposuit, sed Privilegia abstulit; i. e. God laid no Necessity upon them, but
took away certain Privileges from them. God took away that that should have
stopped them from falling into Idolatry.

But might not they say for this as they did, Ezekiel xviii.2. The Fathers have
eaten Sour Grapes, and the Children's Teeth are set on Edge? No: whosoever was
Idolatrous afterward was not necessitated to it. God had paled them in with
this Privilege, You shall be a Holy People. Exodus xix 5. Now therefore if ye
will obey my Voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar
Treasure unto me above all People. And ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of
Priests, and an holy Nation. They broke a great Gap in this Pale, and God
breaks down all. This does not drive them out, but if they go out, it is of
themselves. The Words are not, He made them Worship the Host of Heaven; but he
gave them up; lest them to themselves; whereas till now he had charged himself
with them.

But are they here bound over to Sin, to commit Idolatry? Does God punish the
Sins of the Fathers in the Souls of the Children? He does indeed in their
Bodies, in their Estates, in their Outward Concerns; but does he also punish
the Children in their Souls for their Fathers Faults? I answer, First, God is
the Cause of Sin to none. Giving up to Idolatry is not the Cause of Idolatry.
If he were the Cause of this Sin, he were the Cause of his own Dishonor; which
we cannot imagine. Secondly, God Causes not these to Sin, but suffered them to
walk in the Ways of their Fathers. Thirdly, Their Idolatry is to be looked on
as a Punishment to their Children, and not as a Sin to them.

So that it was a Great but Just Penalty: Great, because Spiritual; Just,
because he turned from them, when they first turned from him. He gave them up
to what they would be. Read both in Psalm. lxxxi.11, 12. My People would not
hearken to my Voice, and Israel would none of me. So I gave them up unto their
own Hearts Lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels. And yet he wishes,
ver. 13. O! that my People had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my
Ways! Lord, thou could as easily make them so, as wish them so. So Luke
xix.42. If thou had known in this thy Day the things which belong unto thy
Peace: But Men put themselves out of a Capacity of God's doing for them, and
necessitate him to do against them, if he will maintain his Truth and Justice.
It is not the Question what God can do for them, but what he cannot but do,
because of his Truth and Justice.

In the Penalty we may observe, 1. The proper Cause, Their Sin. 2. The
Inflicter, God. 3. The manner of it, By giving them up. 4. The Being and Nature
of it, To worship the Host of Heaven.

But it may be said that it seems not Parity, To worship the Host of Heaven,
rather it should be, to worship Cats and Dogs, as the Egyptians did. But in
answer hereunto, it is all one as to the thing it self, viz. the Worship of the
Creature more than the Creator. One indeed seemed to be a more noble Deity than
the other; but the Worship of either was abominable alike, in this Regard, that
either was a worshipping of the Creature. The Egyptians worshipped Onyons,
Garlic, etc. Israel would have a more noble Idolatry, to worship the Sun, Moon
and Stars. But all alike abominable; all forsook God alike; all worshipped the
Creature alike.

The Cause of Idolatry is Misconception of God. So it is Romans i.21. Because
when they knew God, they worshipped him not as God, neither were thankful, but
became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was darkened. And as
there the Gentiles, so here Israel is given up upon the like Account.

Now to make some Observations.

1. The Want of the right Knowledge of God is the Root of all Evil. Right
Knowledge of God? But he is unfathomable, will some say, past our Apprehension
to conceive or understand. Nay, Things in Nature are so. We know not how our
Cloths keep us warm; much more can we know God. But there is difference 'twixt
knowing God fully, and conceiving of God.

2. Observe upon the Sin it self, They made a Calf, how foolish Man is about
the things of God, when left to his own Wisdom. Here is an Example most
Pregnant.

3. Upon the Sin and the Punishment together observe, that one may sin till
there be no Healing, no Revocation of Punishment. So it happened to Israel, and
so the Nation of the Jews, for the Sins of Manasseh.

4. Upon the Word Turned observe, that God turns not from Men, till they turn
from him.

V. How Israel was given up to Idolatry, and yet remained a long while after
God's People.
THAT the whole Nation of Israel was given up by God upon the Sin of the Golden
Calf, is plain from Acts vii.42. God gave THEM up; that is, the whole People.
But here two Things seem strange. First, That they should be a Covenanted
People, and yet such a People given up. Secondly, That they should be given up,
and yet remain a People still. This was at the beginning of the State of the
Jews, and they continued a People still above a Thousand Years. Yet this Fate
and Doom appeared all along in them, that they were an Idolatrous People. Only
after the Captivity they were not; for then they were given up to Traditions.
But though God had thus given them up, yet he spared his Ordinances among them,
yet he spared them from utter Ruin; and that for two Reasons.

First, Because of his Covenant to their Fathers. This Reason is given, Ezekiel.
xx. etc. But why? Was he in Covenant to do Good to their Children, whether good
or no, whatsoever they were, howsoever they carried themselves? This were
strange Drudgery that God would have bound himself to. And yet what say you to
that, Romans xi.28. As touching the Election they are beloved for the Fathers
sake. (...). He had a Remnant according to Election among them, Romans xi.5. It
was then for the sake of their Fathers, and for his own Name's sake too, Ezekiel.
xxxvi. And that is the second Reason.

Secondly, He spared them for his own Name's sake. Consider we a little God's
Covenant with Abraham, Genesis xii.1, 2. Now the Lord had said unto Abram, get
thee out of thy Country, and from thy Kindred, and from thy Father's House: and
I wilt bless thee, and make thy Name great, and thou shall be a Blessing. 1.
Messiah must take Flesh of Abraham. God appointed it, that the Messiah should
be of this Seed. Heb. ii.16. He took not on him the Nature of Angels, but he
took on him the Seed of Abraham; and the rest of the Seed of Abraham God chose
for the visible Church. 2. Having chosen it, though perverse, yet it had two Ties
upon him, to show Mercy. First, His Covenant; and, Secondly, the Glory of his
Name. This Moses pleads in Behalf of Israel. Upon this it is that God wished,
Psalm. lxxxi.13. O! that my People had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked
in my Ways. And Deuteronomy. v. 29. O! that there were such a Heart in them, etc. That
is, that his Covenanted People for the Honor of his Name, would walk in his
Ways, and be obedient, that he might not destroy them. From hence we make two
Observations.

First, What a Canker stuck to this People in the beginning, and yet they
lasted a long time after. This Sin and God's Doom laid on them, and yet they
remained a People. Now wherein lies the proper Cause of a sinful Peoples
prospering, enjoying of the Gospel, and all good things? Let England be the
Example. How many profane People in it? How many that mind not God? What Sins
are among us? And yet England lives. Wherein lies the Cause? God's Covenant.
With whom? With a peculiar People that fear him. How God's Covenant? God's
Covenant is God's Word of Promise, and the Conditions thereof that be brought
to a People. And why does this Covenant procure us this Good from God? Because
there are some that do embrace it. For their sakes God does well to a Nation;
and yet they are commonly despised and persecuted. So Lot was in Sodom. Why
does the World stand? That the Elect may be gathered.

Secondly, A Generation may sin to that height, as to bring a Guilt and
Punishment upon succeeding Generations. God threatens, I will visit the Sins of
the Fathers upon the Children. This often proves true in whole Nations. As the
Jews Idolatry with the Golden Calf had a sad Influence upon their Posterity.
And so also had that Saying of theirs long after, His Blood be on us, and on
our Children.

VI. The Case of Widows, marrying again, considered.
CERTAIN Widows were shrewdly taxed by S. Paul for marrying again, in 1 Timothy
v. 11, 12. But the younger Widows refuse: for when they have begun to wax
wanton against Christ they will marry. Having Damnation, because they have cast
off their first Faith. And the Rhemists hereupon make second Matriages a Fault
little less, if any thing at all, than Adultery. I shall speak something of
such a Woman's Case.

The Matter here at first Sight is obscure. We will therefore take up first
the general Scope of the Apostle at this Place; and then particularly unfold
the several Clauses of these Verses.

Writing to Timothy, Minister of the Church at Ephesus, he gives Rules for
ordering the Church there, as Chap. iii.14, 15. These things I write unto thee,
^^ping to come unto thee shortly. But if I tarry long, that thou might know
how thou ought to behave thy self in the House of God. And, First, in the
Third Chapter, Rules for ordaining of Ministers, and appointing Deacons, and
what Persons they ought to be. And in this Chapter, Rules concerning poor
Widows, to be taken to the Charge and Maintenance of the Church, and to be in
some Office and Employment in it. They had their Xenedocheion, i. e. Hospital,
and Widows in it, to look to the Poor, to get Strangers Meat, to take Care of
their Lodging, etc. Romans xvi.1. will illustrate this, I commend unto you Phoebe
our Sister, which is a Servant of the Church, which is at Cenchrea. In ver. 9.
they are not to be taken in under Threescore Years old. So that the Apostle
allows Maintenance for Widows, poor Widows, and Aged. Widows, because they had
not Familes to care for, as the Married had: Poor, that they might be relieved
by the Church, and do the Church some Service: And Aged, because such would be
grave, prudent, and sober. But the younger Widows refuse; for when they have
begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry, etc.

The Rhemists brag here for the Vow of single Life; such as of Priests and
Nuns. Because the Apostle says not, They wax wanton, and play the Whore, but
wax wanton, and Marry. Therefore they conclude it means the Vow of Chastity and
single Life; and they extol that Vow, and cry out of the Marriage of such, who
have made such rash Vows.

First, Observe that, Rev. ix.8. The Locusts have the Hair of Women; that is,
long Hair as Nazarites, pretending Vows.

Secondly, We may say, Woe to them that call Evil Good, and Good Evil. What is
their Doom, that call Vowing single Life, so great a Piece of Religion, which
is in it self evil. Chastity is good, and single Life good in some Respects, 1
Cor. vii.34. but to vow either is Evil, because it is to vow what is not in our
own Power. Jer. iv.2. we are to vow in Judgment, as well as in Righteousness.
Not only to vow that which is lawful, but what is in our own Power to do. For a
Man to vow he will fly in the Air, walk on the Sea, etc. is a sinful Vow,
because impossible; so to vow a single Life is for ought he knows as impossible
for him, and to live chastely: And God has evidenced his Curse upon this their
wretched Vowing, by giving them up to horrid Uncleanness, and to the Murder of
their Children.

But we will not insist on this; we are taught that Marriage is Honorable, and
that all cannot attain to live single, and that it is better to marry than to
burn.

But in the Case before us there is no Vow at all, but another Matter. A poor
young Widow, if taken in to be sustained by the Stock of the Church, and do
some Service in it, as tending the Sick, etc. will be ready to hearken after
being married, and so will be careless of the Charge committed to her; will be
ready to be wanton, and so be a Scandal: Nay, may be ready to be wanton against
the Religion of Christ, and marry to an Infidel; and so cast off her first
Faith. The Apostle makes Supposal what young Widows may be incident to. Their
Age may incline them to marry; their Inclination to marry may incline them to
Wantonness, Wantonness to Apostasy. And therefore it was not prudent to take
such into Office in the Church, and to its Charge.

The Words admit two Senses.

I. Wanton against Christ, and the strict Rule of Christ, that they should be
under. They will not endure the Yoke, as the wanton Heifer, but will marry to
satisfy their own Will. Having Damnation, or Judgment; that is, being justly
condemned, because they cast off their first Faith, or Trust committed to them.
So that the Apostle condemns not their marrying simply, for then he should go
against his own Rule, It is better to marry than to burn; but provides that
such Inconveniences accrue not to the Church.

II. Wanton in Religion. She may fall in Love with an Infidel, and wantonly may
forsake her Religion, and so become a Scandal to the Church, and Perdition to
her self. As the Apostle cries down such Marriages, 2 Cor. vi.14. Be ye not
unequally yoked together with Unbelievers. And God complains, Mal. ii.11. That
Judah had profaned the Holiness of the Lord, and married the Daughter of a
strange God.

VII. Wantonness Unchristian.
THE Vulgar Latin reads (...), 1 Timothy v.11. Luxuriantes in Christo, to no Sense
at all. Others, They will marry in Christ, to as little. But the Words in the
English are very proper according to the Greek, Wax wanton against Christ. The
Greek word, as it properly signifies to be wanton, or to live delicately, and
in Pleasure, and so rendered Rev. xviii.7. so in proper Derivation it signifies
to shake off the Reins, as an untamed Horse.

Hence it may be observed, that Wantonness is a thing that is Unchristian, a
thing that becomes not Christians. The Apostle allows it not in any to be
employed in Office in the Church, in 1 Timothy v.11. and elsewhere, not in any
other. Romans xiii.13. Let us walk honestly as in the Day, not in Rioting and
Drunkenness, not in Chambering, and WANTONNESS, not in Strife and Envying.
Observe hence two things. First, That Christians that live in the Day, and not
in the Night, should walk as in the Day. Secondly, That they should walk (...),
Honestly, Comlily. Men in the Night care not how they are dressed, when none
sees them; but in the Day they take Care of their Habit that it be decent, that
they may appear comely before Men. And so it is with Christians, who are of the
Day. The Apostle gives two general Rules for Christians walking.

I. Negatively. Not to walk as Heathens, which are in Darkness, and walk they
know not, they care not, how; Ephesians. iv.17. This I say and testify in the Lord,
that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk in the Vanity of their Mind.
See with what Vehemence he speaks, I testify in the Lord. I speak it from God,
and charge you before him, That henceforth ye walk not as ^ther Gentiles. Nil
ultra: Now the Day is come, walk no more as Children of Darkness. 1 Thessalonians.
iv.3.4, 5. For this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, that ye
should abstain from Fornication: that every one of you should know, how to
possess his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor: Not in the L^st of
Concupiscence, even as the Gentiles, which know not God.

II. Positively, as becomes the Gospel. Phil. i.27. Let your Conversation be as
becomes the Gospel of Christ: That is, as is suitable to the Rule of the
Gospel; and, as may be an Honor to the Gospel: And, as becomes Saints, Ephesians.
v.3.

Now that Wantonness is Heathenish, and not becoming Saints, let us consider
how it may be taken, and that under two Considerations: First, As opposed to
that Gravity, and Seriousness, that should be in Christians; and is agreeable
to the Gospel. Secondly, As opposed to Chaste Modesty; or that Wantonness that
tends to Uncleanness, or is the same with Lasciviousness.

I.
It becomes not Christians to be foolish or toyish, or wanton in Word, Dress or
Action; but to be of such Gravity as is far from Wantonning, and as becomes the
Gravity of the Gospel. He that knows the Gospel, needs no proof out of the
Gospel; else I might produce the Rules particularly for all sorts of Men and
Women: In all requiring Sobriety, Gravity, Modesty: Take but that Place, Ephesians.
v.4. Neither Filthiness, nor Foolish Talking, nor Jesting, which are not
convenient. Take up that Copy, As becomes Saints. Where do we ever find the
least wanton Gestures in the Saints of God upon Record? What Gravity, what
sweet Severity in them? It is observed of Christ, that he wept, but was never
seen to laugh. Nor do you find much mention of any such thing in his Disciples.
It was an ingenious Answer of a Painter, that Pictured the Apostles of Ruddy
Complexions: Being asked why he so painted them; his Answer was, because they
would be ashamed to look on the Light, VVanton Carriage of many that called
themselves Christians.

The Saints commonly are called God's Fools; and the Reason is, because they
will not be Fools before Men, but keep themselves to the Sobriety of their
Profession. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. iii.18. If any Man among you seems to
be Wise in this World, let him become a Fool that he may be Wise. But it means,
as to Reliance upon Wisdom, not to befool themselves, to make sport to Men. It
was Sampson's Misery to be the Philistine's Fool, and make them Sport. But the
same unhappy Misery too many do willingly take to themselves, spending their
Life in VVantonness and Foolish Sporting. As those in Job. Chapter xxi.12, 13. They
take the Timbrel and Harp, and Rejoice at the Sound of the Organ. They spend
their Days in Wealth, and in a Moment go down to the Grave. And where are they
then? It is the Speech of an Atheist, not a Christian, Let us Eat and Drink;
for to Morrow we Die, 1 Cor. xv.32. But it is a Gospel-Counsel that follows,
ver. 33, 34. Be not deceived: Evil Communications corrupt good Manners. Awake
to Righteousness and Sin not. What did God bring us into the World to do? To
spend away a Life; and in fine, to be Damned? What are we admitted into the
Gospel to do? To live in Pleasure and VVantonness, like those that know not
God? How far is this from the End of a reasonable Soul? Of a Christian?
Consider those Words, Woe! unto you that Laugh now, for ye shall Mourn and Weep,
Luke vi.25.

But is no Mirth or Sporting allowed to Christians? Is not that too severe,
Eccles. ^i.2. I said of Laughter it is Mad, and of Mirth, what does it? And
Ephesians. v.4. ^here no Jesting is tolerated. Durus Serma, i. e. A hard Saying. To
make some Reply to this,

1. Earthly Pleasures and Delights are more Delights in Fancy and Opinion, than
Reality, Psalm. xxxix. Men walks in a vain Shadow. No Substance at all. Now a
Solid Christian goes upon other Grounds: His Delight is upon another
Foundation. There is substance in the things he delights in. And, Secondly, a
Christian's Delight in what he does is not founded in his own Mind, but in the
Mind of God. This is the Will of God, even your Sanctification. And he applies
to it.

2. What Profit does all our Fooling and wantonness bring? What Fruit had ye in
those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? A serious Christian is bettered by
his Holy Employment: A Gamesom Wanton, what is he bettered, when his
Foolishness is over? It is woeful to spend Time and Self, when the Issue is
nothing but Wind: Nay, it is well, if it be nothing else. But in Truth, it is
Guilt and Sorrow. Israel Sows the Wind, and Reaps the East Wind, viz. That that
Blasts and Withers. A Toyish Wanton, when he comes to Die, then he looks in his
Right Hand, and what finds he there? Nothing but a Lie. Did Abner die as a
Fool? Intimating what it is to Die such an one. Unhappy he, whose Wits come not
to him, till he is Dying: And then all his Wisdom is, to see that he has been
a Fool.

3. There is great Difference between Wantonness and lawful Mirth and
Recreation. These are allowed to Christians, both for Body and Mind. But where
is any allowance of Lightness or Fooling? There is Difference betwixt making
some Sport a Recreation, and a Trade; betwixt Honest, Moderate Mirth, and Talk
to recreate the Mind, and foolish Talking. God has allowed to recreate and be
merry; but then the End is to be better fitted to serve God after. If
Wantonness have that End too, let that be showed also. But what Wanton ever
aimed at that? Recreation also is to be but for a Time. How many are there that
are Idle, and Sport, and do nothing else? And what say we to them that make
Sporting, and Wantonness, and Foolish Talking their Trade? Such as
Stage Players, Fools in Plays, Common Fiddlers, Common Dancers upon the Sabbath.
But Gravity becomes Christians.

II.
Having spoken concerning Wantonness, as opposed to Christian Gravity, now we
shall Consider it as opposed to Chastity: A Degree worse, because coincident
with Lasciousness, an inlet to Uncleanness, the very Bawd of Filthiness and
Fornication. For so the Apostle makes it, Romans xiii.13, 14. Not in Rioting and
Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness -- But put ye on the Lord Jesus,
and make not Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof.

Of this there are Diverse sorts: Of every one of which we may say, it is a
Cockatrice Egg; every one of them a Venomous Brood, which if it be let alone,
will break out into Uncleanness; nay, is so already. I remember a Saying of the
Jews, A Serpent, be he never so little, dash in pieces, for he is a Serpent. So
these it behooves a Christian to dash betimes; for they cannot but prove
Serpentine and Deadly.

I. There is Wantonness in Heart. When the Heart Frisks and Frolicks in Unclean
Thoughts: And Men and Women Delight in it, and let it alone. How does many a
Heart feed its Delight with walking, in his Thoughts, in the Garden of
Pleasure, sporting with such Company as is Lascivious; realizing the delight at
least of Sin to themselves; though all but in Fancy. How many commit Whoredom
with their own Hearts. As the Body may be Chaste, though defiled in Rape, because
the Mind was Chaste; so the Mind may be Unchaste, though the Body want
opportunity to commit Lust. It is sad when a Man forbears only to Act Sin for
want of Opportunity. There should be another Bond to restrain us from Sin, than
barely the want of Opportunity. It may be a Riddle; a Man Acts Sin before he
Acts it; and when he has Acted it, though he Acted it not. So a Man by these
wanton Thoughts commits Uncleanness with his Heart, before he comes to his
Whore? And he commits it again, when past, by Delighting to think of it again.
As he that chews the Cud when he has done Eating.

II. There is the Wantonness of the Eyes. Esaias iii.16. The Daughters of Zion
walk with stretched out Necks, and Wanton Eyes. Or, high Looks and wanton. The
Chaldee reads, Painted. The Greek and Vulgar, (...), Nutibus oculorum. The
nodds of the Eyes. The Hebrew, (...) Deceiving with their Eyes, as it is in the
Margin. They lay Snares with their Eyes to catch others, to satisfy their
Lusts: Eyes that commit Adultery, Matt. v.28. Whosoever looks on a Woman to
Lust after her, has committed Adultery with her in his Heart. Nay, 2 Pet.
ii.14. Having Eyes (...), full of a Whore. A Whore has taken Lodging in them;
filled them that they can look at nothing else. Do I need to tell what this
Wantonness is? It is twofold, or of a twofold Acting.

1. Eyes talking Lasciviously to our own Hearts; looking wantonly on Man or
Woman, and desiring after them, and wishing to one's Heart the enjoyment of
them. Thus Shechem was taken by looking upon Dinah, Genesis xxxiv.2. And Amnon by
his own Sister. Therefore Solomon's Counsel is good, Prove. vi.25. Lust not
after her Beauty, in thine heart: Neither let her take thee with her Eyelids.
And Job xxxi.1. Made a Covenant with his Eyes, Why then, says he, should I
think upon a Maid?

2. Eyes talking Lasciviously with others Eyes* Wanton Glances 'twixt Men and
Women; catching each other with their Eyes. See Prove. vi.13. He winketh with
his Eyes, speaks with his Feet, teaches with his Fingers. Too common such
wanton Passages; I would it were not too common in the Church; And too many
make nothing of it. Thus they, like the Fly Playing with the Candle, till at
last her Wings are burnt at it. The workmanship of the Eye is admirable, but it
is miserable* that it should be employed to so unworthy a use: It is better we
were born Blind, than to make no better use of our Sight. (...) The Hebrew word
for an Eye* signifies a Fountain. It speaks Water; But it is so apt to kindle
Fire, that it seems to be a B^rning Glass. Yet it ought rather to be a Fountain
to weep for its Sins, as Jeremiah wished his. Chapter ix.1. Oh that my Head were
Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears.

Did this Man Sin, say the Disciples to Christ concerning the Blind Man, that
he was born Blind? It may sadden one's Heart to think that Men should Sin by
seeing; using Eyes to the destruction of the Soul, which God gave us for the
good both of Soul and Body. How comfortable is the Sight of the Eyes! What
excellent Ends was this Sense given us for? To look upon and Contemplate the
Works of God, etc. But Wantonness spoils all. One said that he was made Ut
coelum intuear, i. e. To look upon Heaven. So David makes use of his Eyes,
Psalm. viii.3. When I consider thy Heavens, etc. How contrary is this use of
them, to use them to wanton away God and the Soul? Their best Office now is to
shed Tears.

III. There is the Wantonness of the Ears. As there be Itching Ears, so there
be Wanton Ears; Ears that delight in Filthy Talk, Ephesians. v.3. Let it not be once
Named amongst you, as becomes Saints; neither Filthiness, nor Foolish talking,
etc. That is, it is not fit to be spoken of among Christians. Not fit for
Christians to hearken to any such thing. Auribus Vestris medendum: Men's Ears do
want a Cure. How many are there that endure not Serious, Grave Conference: But
he that speaks Lasciviously, he is a Prophet to this People. Let these sayings
sink into your Hearts, says our Savior. So do these wanton Discourses too
much; they sink and drain down from the Ear into the Heart.

And therefore as it is reported of Ulysses, that he stopped his Ears against
the Sirens, that they might not by their enchanting Voices ensnare him; So
should we decline such dangerous Discourses. It is a needful Lesson, Take heed
how ye hear. See Prove. ii.16. The strange Woman flattereth with her words. And
Chapter v.3. The Lips of a strange Woman drop as a Honeycomb, and her Mouth is
smoother than Oil. Satan by such talk is an Agent in the business. Evil words
corrupt good Manners.

IV. There is a wanton Tongue. This is a Relative, a Husband to the other. This
is a Broker to a wicked Heart, that vents from an Evil Heart to an Evil Heart.
Some there are that have Tongues tipped from Hell; that delight in no other
Language than Ribaldry. The Tongue and the Heart are created for Noble Ends.
The Heart to be a Present for God, his Habitation, his Delight. And does the
Heart become the Sink and Jakes of all Filthiness? The Tongue, that was created
to be Man's Glory, Namely, to praise God; that was created to be the
Interpreter 'twixt Men for Love and Friendship: this to be so much degenerate,
as to be a World of Iniquity, set on Fire from Hell: To Curse, Blaspheme, Lie,
Swear, Flatter, Boast, Talk filthily. Ah! what Mouths do too many carry! They
that speak the Language of Ashdod were but Bastards. So they that with their
Tongues say, they are Christians, and yet let their Tongues be wanton and
unclean, they are but Bastards, no true Christians. How shall the tune of
wanton Tongues be once changed?

V. There is a wanton Gesture. Courting, Dalliance, mixed Dancing; what are
these but Tinder to Lust? Avoid all appearance of Evil. And these are the
several kinds of VVantonness. To conclude, Consider these two or three things.

First, What proportion is there betwixt VVantonness, and the Purity of the
Gospel?

Secondly, What is the Fruit of VVantonning, but Guilt, and Sin, and Shame?

Thirdly, How unlike is this to the Divine Purity that is in Heaven?

VIII. The Fear, which Seized our Savior at his Passion, Innocent.
FEAR to Die may be so circumstantiated, as it may be Sinful with a VVitness:
But simply in it self considered, it is not sinful at all. For Peter to be
afraid to Die, so as that Fear put him upon denying his Master; this was sinful
and sinful again. But for his Master, who had no Sin, who could not Sin, to be
afraid to Die, could that be Sinful?

Let us take up the Case of Christ, as to this Matter, which will help to clear
his Case the better. Consider that in Heb. v.7. Who in the Days of his Flesh,
when he had offered up Prayers and Supplications with strong Crying and Tears,
unto him that was able to save him from Death, and was heard in that he Feared.
The last Clause in the Original is short and doubtful, and by some read as you
have it in the English Text, He was heard in that he feared; and by some as you
have it in the Margent, He was heard for his Piety. This latter is undoubtedly
true, that Christ's Piety and Devotion was such, as that his Prayers could not
but be heard. But certainly the other is the Apostles Meaning, and more
pertinent to his Discourse. The Greek is short, he was heard (...) from his
Fear. Like that Expression, Psalm. xxii.21. Thou have heard me FROM the Horns of
the Unicorns: That is, thou have heard me when I was upon the Horns of the
Unicorns: Or, thou have heard me so as to deliver me from them. So Christ was
heard, when in his Fear, or heard so as to be delivered from it. But the
Question is, in fear of what? Of what, but Death? That some will not allow,
because it might seem to speak some Diffidence or Distrust in Christ. But as
there is a Fear of Distrust, so there is a Fear in Nature: A Sinful Fear, and a
Natural Fear without Sin.

Adam in Innocence, though Death was not then in Being, as the Wages of Sin;
yet it was Natutural to him to fear every thing, that might be destructive to
his Body, or Person, or injurious to it. The Saints in Glory, it is true, are
past any such Fear, because they are beyond the possibility of any such Danger.
But wheresoever there is such a Possibility, it is Natural to have such a Fear.
The Brute Beasts that are free enough of Sin, yet will they never be without
such Fear; because Nature has put into all Living Creatures, a Natural and
Essential Instinct, to seek and serve their own Preservation. And Christ had
not been a true Man, had he not had such a Natural Fear of Death, as is
Essential to Man, as he is Man; and was Essential to Man before he was a Sinner.

So that to fear to Die, simply considered, is not sinful; and answerably, to
desire to have a Man's Life prolonged, simply considered, is not sinful
neither. It was not Sin at all for David to beg of God, O spare me a little,
Psalm. xxxix.13. Nor for the poor Afflicted in Psalm. cii.24. to Pray, Oh my God,
take me not away in the midst of my Days. But the Warrant, upon which a Man
comes with such a Request, had need to be right and current, and indeed such as
amount to a consideration above mere Living still.

IX. The Case of JACOB when he Wrestled with the Angel, explained.
IT was the Angel CHRIST that wrestled with Jacob, Genesis xxxii.24. That he was
then in danger of being killed by this Angel, is apparent enough by this, that
his best come off was, that he was Lamed by him to his Grave. And it is
apparent also by what Hosea says of his Demeanor at that time, that he Wept
and made Supplication, Hos. xii.4. Jacob, why weepest thou? Thou art in the
Arms of Christ himself. But he wrestleth with me, seeking to kill me: As it was
in the case of Moses, Exodus iv.24. where the Lord is said to meet him, and to
have sought to kill him. And what is it, that thou make Supplication for?
That he would yet spare me, and not take me away. And what is the matter thou
art so unwilling to Die? Because I have newly fallen into a Sin, and the Lord I
see is offended at it; and it is worse than Death to me to be taken away in the
Lords Displeasure. Jacob had newly fallen into the Sin of Distrust, upon his
Fear of Esau, and his Faith was shaken. And for this he saw God was come forth
against him in Anger. And how terrible was it to him to be cut off by God in
Anger? He wept. So did David, Psalm. xxxix.12. Hold not thy Peace at my Tears.
And he made Supplication. And his Supplication was much to the like Tenor with
that of David in the Verse after, O spare me a little, that I may recover
Strength, i. e. That I may recover the Strength of my Faith, and the Assurance
of God's Favor.

X. An Inquiry into the Reason of Hezekiah's Tears upon God's Message to him,
that he must Die.
EZEKIAH is Sick of the Plague, and has Tidings from God that he must Die of
it. He receives the Tidings with much Bitterness and Passion. He turns his Face
to the Wall, he Prays, he weeps, he weeps sore. And though it be not expressed,
yet it may very well be conceived out of his Carriage, and the Issue upon it,
that the Tenor of his Prayers and Tears was, that God would spare his Life,
Esa. xxxviii.2, 3. Then Hezekiah turned his Face to the Wall, and Prayed unto
the Lord, and said, Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart; and have done that which is
good in thy Sight: And Hezekiah wept sore.

Why, Hezekiah, why weepest thou? Art thou so unwilling to part with the World?
No, his Mind has never been upon the World, but upon Religion and God. Art
thou not fitted to Die and meet the Lord? Why? He was never unprepared. Was he
afraid of Judgment, and that his Lot in the other World would not be good? He
was secure against that; for he fears not to Appeal to God, Remember, Lord, how
I have walked before thee. Why? What ailes the Man that he Weeps so sadly? Many
and many a Thousand Men of a less gracious Temper than Ezekiah, have taken the
Tidings of Death with a great deal more Patience and less Passion: And what
ails him to take it so bitterly? Certainly, no bare Concernment of his own.
either in fear of his Soul or of his Body? In truth, the main Concernment that
moved him, was the Concernment of God. Our Savior once said, Weep not for me,
but Weep for your selves. Ezekiah weeps not for himself, but, as I may say, he
weeps for Christ; he weeps for God; for the Cause, Interest and Concernment of
God. For,

I. It was sad for him to think that he must Die of the Plague, a dreadful
Disease, that destroys suddenly and fearfully; that separates from the Comforts
of Friends, and that seems to carry with it Tokens of the Anger of God. And it
might very well be bitter to him to think of being taken away with a stroke
that sounded somewhat of God's Anger. But this was not all; Wicked and Profane
Ones would be ready to scoff at his Piety and Reformation, if he were taken
away by so fatal a Stroke: See, this is he that has kept such a Coil in
pulling down Altars, purging the Temple, and setting up of Religion; and now,
behold what is become of him. He has God's Tokens upon him, Signs of his Anger;
and dies not the Common Death of all Men, but by the fearful Stroke of the
Plague. It is no wonder if the horror of such Blasphemy as this against
Religion, set very sadly upon the Heart of the good Man: And he was afraid
ungodly VVretches would take occasion of such Blasphemings from the fatal
manner of his Death. And thus it is the Concern of God and his true Religion,
and not fear of his own Carcass that did stick so much upon this Holy Man's
Thoughts under his dangerous condition.

A very pertinent and needful Desire for every Christian to beg of God, that
his Death may not be such as to open the Mouths of Wicked Men to Blaspheme God
and Religion.

II It was sad to Hezekiah to Die before he could see Jerusalem, and the People
of God entirely delivered from their Danger. If you well compute the Times of
this King, you will find that that very Year that Senacherib was so busy, and
cruel against the Cities of Judah and Jerusalem, was the Year of Ezekiah's
Sickness. And observe that Passage of Esaias to him, foretelling him of his
Recovery, and of Fifteen Years added to his Life, Esa. xxxviii.6. I will
deliver thee and this City out of the Hand of the King of Assyria. It appears
there was danger abroad; and it grieved the good Man to the Soul to be taken
away before he saw any Deliverance.

A very just Cause to beg of God to spare Life: And it shows, that a Man does
it not out of bare love of Life, or of the World, if he Pray to God with
Submission to his Will, to prolong his Life; that he may See the Good of his
Afflicted Chosen, and may rejoice with the Gladness of his Nation, and Glory
with his Inheritance; as is the Psalmist's Petition, Psalm. cvi.5.

III. Ezekiah was now but Nine and Thirty Years Old, in his Strength and Prime:
Young in Comparison of the Ages at which diverse then Died. And certainly you
can hardly fancy a more probable Reason of his Unwillingness to Die, that
related to him, than this, that he thought he had not done enough for God. He
desired to be yet spared, that he might Reform more, set up Religion more, do
more for God and his People. A Holy and Blessed desire, that aimed at God and
his Honor, and his Peoples Good; regarding nothing the bare Life of this
World, or his own Carcass, in comparison of this. Much like is that, Psalm.
lxxi.18. Now, Lord, when I am Old forsake me not, until I have showed thy
Strength to this Generation: That I may more Praise thee, more impart the
Knowledge of thee, and thy Power to this Generation, and those to come.

DECAD II.
I. An Inquiry what Strength that was David requested, when he prayed to God to
spare him, that he might recover STRENGTH, Psalm. xxxix.13.
WHAT David's present Affliction was, we cannot tell, whether Sickness of Body,
some Dejection of Spirit, or some sore Trouble from his Enemies. It seems most
likely to be some sore Sickness of Body; at which his Enemies would rejoice,
and so add to his Trouble. Imagine it his deadly Palsy in his old Age, when he
could feel no Warmth either from his wearing Clothes, or Bed-Cloaths. Be it
which it will, do we think he prays heartily for the Recovery and Strength of
his Body? Doubtless, more especially for refreshing and strengthening in Soul,
before God should take him.

That which is rendered Recover Strength in the Hebrew is (...). Which Word is
translated by several Words, much in Tendency to the same thing, or at least
not much different. In Amos, Chapter v.9. it is used and rendered as here, That
strengthened the Spoiled against the Strong. In other Places it is rendered, To
comfort one's self; as Job ix.27.x.20, etc. The Greek has rendered it here,
Spare me a little, that I may be refreshed. The Syriac, That I may have Rest.
We will take our English, and applying to the S^nse of other Transl^tions, we
cannot better und^rstand it than of STRENGTH of Soul or Mind, Streng^h of Grace
or Comfort: For we can hardly think, that sick or dying David, as he seems very
near it in this 39th Psalm, should beg only Recovery of Body, to have his
Health again, and then to die; but that, if he aimed at that, the Concernment
of his Soul was especially in his Eye; viz. That God would spare him, that he
might g^t a lively and fit Composure to die, without fainting or drooping in
Soul.

This may justly call us to consider, what Spiritual Strength a Christian had
need to have against he die. Men little consider, how much Christian Strength
is requisite to encounter with Death; and few indeed have clear Apprehensions,
what Dying is. And where are such Persons then, when they come to die? Rev.
iii.10. Mention is there made of the Hour of Temptation, which should come upon
all the World, to try them that dwell upon the Earth. It means a sad
Persecution of the Church, raised by the Jews, not long before the Fall of
Jerusalem. Of which our Savior, Mat. xxiv.9. Then shall they deliver you up to
be afflicted, and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of all Men for my Names
sake. And of this you read, 1 Pet. iv.17. For the Time is come that Judgment
must begin at the House of God. But that HOUR of Temptation may well be applied
to the Hour of Death, which is an Hour of Temptation, or Trial indeed; and an
Hour of Trial that goes all the Earth over, and none escapes it, though there be
but few that consider it. And what Christian, Spiritual Soul-Strength is
required to bear the Brunt of this Hour of Trial?

II. The Necessity of Government, explained from this Text, Judge. xvii.6. In
those Days there was no King in Israel: but every Man did that which was right
in his own Eyes.
THIS is the Under-song; again in the last Verse of this Book, and in Preface
to Chap. xviii, and xix, and still where mention is of some horrid thing a
doing; here of the Idolatry of Micah. Chap. xviii. of the Idolatry of the
Danites. Chap. xix. of the horrid Wickedness of Gibeah; as if it gave a reason
of those Wickednesses: Why Micah set up Idolatry, because there was no King in
Israel: Why the Danites set up Idolatry, because there was no King in Israel:
Why the Men of Gibeah were so abominable, because no King in Israel.

These Stories were all before the time of any Judge, though set in the latter
end of the Book: Among many Proofs for which, take these Four.

First, The Idolatry in Dan was the first public Idolatry: And therefore the
Tribe of Dan is left out in Rev. vii.

Secondly, Phineas was at the War at Gibeah, Chapter xx.28. but he could not be
alive then, unless it were before the Judges.

Thirdly, The Sin at Gibeah is spoken of as a beginning of Sin. Hos. x.9. O
Israel, thou have sinned from the Days of Gibeah.

Fourthly, Deborah speaks of the Idolatry of Dan, and the Loss at Gibeah, as
things done and past, Chap. v.8. They chose new Gods, then was War in the
Gates. Was there a Shield or Spear sound among Forty Thousand in Israel?

And why no King in Israel? God had appointed them another Government, the
Sanhedrin. And that sat in those Days, but was corrupt: And thereupon God
raised Judges: And when those were corrupt, he raised Kings. So that the
Question is, whether the Words mean before there was any Judge, or any King:
And it is indifferent, for it means before such a one stood up to rule, and
reform, which was God's Disposition of Israel, after they were seated in the
Land of Canaan. Under the Sanhedrin the Land was conquered: They should have
had no Enemy, had they been as they should; so God promised. They had only the
Sanhedrin, which was to see to Laws and Religion. But that was careless now.
And so Wars arising, Judges stood up. And when Judges were evil, then Kings.
Now this partly shows these Stories were before the Judges; and partly shows
the reason of the Evil, because there was no Overseer or Reformer.

In the Words are two things severally expressed. First, There was no King.
Secondly, All did what was right in their own Eyes. And a Third thing we may
observe upon the Connection. They did so, because there was no King in Israel.

God bids them create a King of their Brethren, Deuteronomy. xvii. and yet was angry
when they asked a King; and he says, He gave them a King in his Anger; and
Zech. xi.6. I will deliver every one into the Hand of his King. How do all
these hang together? He appoints how to appoint a King, and yet would not have
one. He gives one, but says, it is in Anger. He says, he will give every one
into the Hand of his King; and yet says, Evil was for want of a King. I answer,

It was God's Determination to set up a Glorious Kingdom, yet he liked not the
People's asking a King in Imitation of the Heathen, and distrusting God's
Providence for them, as he had showed by the Judges. And he raised them Kings,
and put great Charge in their Hands; and by those that were good, did great
things; as under David, Solomon, Ezekiah, Josiah. It was good that the People
were in the Hand of those Kings. And it is said by way of threatening, Zech. xi.
I will deliver the Men every one into the Hand of his King; and they shall
smite the Land. But that means Caesar, that they had chosen in Opposition to
Christ. For that Chapter is a mere Prophecy of God's Judgment upon the Leaders
among the Jews, for their Rejection of Christ. It had been good for Israel now,
had they been in the Hand of good Kings: But there was no King at all; and
therefore every one did what was right in his own Eyes. And hence I raise this
Doctrine.

That it is happy with a People where there is Government to restrain, that
every one do not that which is right in his own Eyes. Even they that are for
Liberty of Conscience will not deny this. Now to prove this.

I. The first proof of this is by the rule of Contraries. Unhappy the Sheep
that are without a Shepherd; like a Man without Conscience to govern and
restrain him. Unhappy Family, where there is no Restraint. Such was Eli's.
Unhappy City, where is no Restraint. Such was Sodom. This Man came in to
sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge. A Judge, a Governor indeed they wanted.
Unhappy with Israel here. For Idolatry now began, because there was none to
restrain it. And in the last Times of the City, when the Reins of Government
were gone, what Murders, Robberies, Oppression, Confusion overspread all? And
in a word, conceive what Outrages and Uproars would be in London, with Whoring,
Thieving, Plundering, if there were no Government to restrain.

II. Proof, when Men do what is right in their own Eyes, they do commonly what
is not right in God's. This Phrase is put in Opposition to that, Right in the
Eyes of the Lord; that is, that that he delighted, and took Content to look on.
Evil he cannot behold, but that which is just and good, on that he looks with
Delight. Man's Will and God's are Antipodes. If Christ say, I came not to do
mine own Will, but the Will of God; making such a Difference betwixt his Will
and God's, what a vast Difference and Contrariety is there betwixt Man's Will
and God's? That which is right in Man's own Eyes is what makes for his own
Lusts: All seek their own, says the Apostle, in Opposition to the things of
Jesus. Oppression, VVantonness, etc. are right in the Eyes of Men, but most
displeasing to the Eyes of God. So was the Matter of David with Bathsheba: But
the thing that David had done displeased the Lord.

III. Proof. That which is not right in the Eyes of God, cannot be right, or
happy for a Nation. As Happiness consists in the Favor, so in the Fear of God.
Deuteronomy. xxviii. All these Blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if
thou shall hearken unto the Voice of the Lord thy God. Blessed shall thou be in
the City, and blessed shall thou be in the Field, etc. Please him, and prosper.
God dwelt in the midst of the Camp in the Ark, and that was his Strength: But
when any there was unclean, he departed. God bids Israel not to multiply
Horses, to place their Trust in them, by their Strength to overcome their
Enemies, but to fear God their Strength. This Book shows, when Israel did what
was Good in their own Eyes, they still fell into Misery.

IV. Proof. There are but three things to restrain us from doing our own Will;
Conscience, Shame, and Fear of Punishment. How little do the two former prevail
without the third. If the Government say, Let Ephraim alone, what would
restrain him?

1. How rare are Men to be ruled by a good Conscience? Most live as if no
Conscience belonged to the Soul: that they have made Shipwreck of. The Apostle
says, Romans ii.15. Which show the Work of the Law written in their Hearts,
their Conscience also bearing witness. Meaning the Virtuous of the Heathen; the
rest were given up to (...), a reprobate Mind. So some are now led by a good
Conscience, but most live as if there were no such thing in the World. If
there were no Let to Thieves, Cheats, Murderers, till Conscience restrain,
where should we be? Phaeton's Horses let loose would fire the World. What would
England be in such a Licentiousness? As one said of Free Will, Perdidit nos
libera voluntas, Free Will has destroyed us; so may I say in this Case, such
Liberty would undo all. They that are for Liberty of Conscience, would they
have this? Though some Liberty be to be granted as to Religion, yet we should
undo all, if it were so to Manners. Praestat nihil licere quam omnia. Better is
it, that nothing should be allowed, than all things. You may observe in the Ten
Commandments, that there is no Penalty; but barely, Thou shall not do Murder,
Thou shall not commit Adultery, etc. showing what proper Bond of Obedience
Conscience and Duty is. But God saw that would not avail, and therefore added
the Penalty of Death, Restitution, Retaliation, etc. 1 Timothy i.9. Knowing this,
that the Law is not made for a Righteous Man, but for the Lawless and
Disobedient. The Antinomians misconstrue here, that Righteous Men are exempted
from Obedience to the Law: But the meaning is, the Law is not to punish the
Righteous, that make Conscience of their Ways, but the Wicked, that will not
otherwise be restrained.

2. Shame will restrain some that Conscience cannot. But that will not do the
Work neither. There be Thousands and Thousands that have no more Shame than
Conscience. Could they be ashamed? A Whore's Forehead, a Brow of Brass. They
could not blush. Many such Complaints in the Prophets. It Is ever so with the
greatest part of every Nation. Romans vi.21. What Fruit had ye then in those
things, whereof ye are NOW ashamed? Not THEN, before ye were converted. It is
but wild, to be ashamed to do that before Men, that they are not ashamed to do
before God and Angels. Yet some such there be: But many there are, that have no
Shame for either. Such was the unjust Judge, that feared not God, nor regarded
Man.

If we were left without Restraint of Law, would either Conscience or Shame
make one Delinquent less than there is? One Thief, Whore, Liar than there is?
And therefore Restraint by Power and Penalty is needful; as Physic is bonum
necessarium, where there is no other Help. It includes good Sense, the Hangman
is as needful in the Nation, as the Physician: Fear of Death to restrain from
destroying the Commonwealth, as well as the Physician to recover particular
Persons. God himself has given Direction and Warrant in this case. He has
Mercies and Invitations; but he has Curses also, and executes Judgments. Esaias
xxvi.9. When thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will
learn Righteousness. When Men will not learn Righteousness otherwise, Judgment
makes them do it.

V. Proof. He set up Magistracy for this purpose. Romans xiii.3, 4. For Rulers
are not a Terror to good Works, but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid
of the Power? Do that which is Good, and thou shall have Praise of the same.
For he is the Minister of God to thee for Good. But if thou do that which is
Evil, be afraid, etc. There be many parts of the Magistrates Office, to relieve
the Fatherless, to execute Judgment, especially to break the Horns of the
Wicked. This is the more needful part of his Office; to encourage and defend
the Good is his Work; but those are but few; but numberless Numbers to be
restrained.

In a word, this is a Deputation of Christ in his Kingly Office, as the
Ministry is of his Prophetic.

The Use of this Discourse is threefold.

I. To set our selves another Rule for our selves, than our own Will; to
prevent Magistrates Restraints, To be a Law to our selves.

II. To assist Magistrates with our Prayers.

III. To take Charge in our several Families to restrain Vice.

III. Who the Sons of God are, and the Calling of the Gentiles, explained from
Romans viii.21. Because the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the
Bondage of Corruption, in-the Glorious Liberty of the Children of God.
AMong the Children of Men there are some Children of God. These Words speak
something concerning them and their Condition.

The Prophets speak much of Multitudes to be brought in to be Sons of God. Esaias
xliii.6. I will say to the North, give up, and to the South, keep not back.
Bring my SONS from far, and my DAUGHTERS from the ends of the Earth. And Ch
xlv.11. Thus says the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and his Maker, ask me of
things to come concerning my SONS. Hos. i.10. And it shall come to pass, that
in the Place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my People, there it shall
be said unto them, Ye are the SONS of the living God. And Caia^has, that
prophesied but once, John xi.51. Prop^^sied, that Jesus should die for that
Nation: And not for that Nation only, but that also he should gather together
i^to one, the CHILDREN of God that were scattered abroad. Therefore the Holy
Ghost in the New Testament, sets himself to speak to this thing, and to show
who these Sons of God are.

John i.12, 13. shows who are, and who are not. But as many as received him, to
them gave he Power to become the Sons of God* even to them that believe on his
Name. Which were born not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the
Will of Man, but of God. As many as received him, those were Sons, of what
Nation, Quality, or Rank whatsoever. Not born of Blood, nor of the Will of Man.
The Holy Ghost sets the Regeneration, in Opposition to natural Generation. In
natural Generation Men are born of Blood* and of the Will of Man, but it is not
so in this. Or else he sets the true Begetting and Birth of the Sons of God, in
Opposition to those fancied Ways the Jews thought Men were made Children of the
Godly. They concluded none were Children, but of Israel: And if they came to be
of Israel, then undoubtedly Children. So Christ speaks according to their
Sense, It is not meet to take the Children 's Bread* and cast it before Dogs.
And the Apostle confutes this Arrogant and Erroneous Opinion, Rom ix.7. Neither
because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children, but in Isaac shall
thy Seed be called; that is, they which are the Children of the Flesh, these
are not the Children of God. Now they thought they became the Sons of God, or
Israelites, these Ways.

I. By being born of Blood, (...), Bloods, that is, long Descent of Blood of
Ancestors, even to Abraham, or by Bloods of Sacrifice and Circumcision.

II. (...), of the Will of the Flesh: As they took many Wives, and desired many
Children, accounting all Children of Promise.

III. (...), Of the Will of Man, as the Consessus or Sanhedrin did, bring in
Proselites, and make them Israelites. Not this, nor that, nor that makes a Son;
but he that is born of God; and he is so that receives Christ, and believes on
his Name.

The Apostle is speaking of the same Subject in this Chapter, ver. 14, 15, 17.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. For ye
have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear; but ye have received the
Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. -- And if Children, then
Heirs, etc. And then he comes on to show, whence these Sons especially should
come, ver. 19. The earnest Expectation of the Creature waits for the
Manifestation of the Sons of God, etc. By Creature here, and whole Creation,
ver. 22. is meant nothing but the Gentiles, or Heathen World. A Phrase among
the Jews ordinarily put so to signify. Mark xvi.15. Col. i.23. Now this whole
Passage is to this Purpose. God had prophesied of Sons to come from the
Heathen; and the earnest Expectation of the Creature, that is, of the Heathen,
waited for this Manifestation of the Sons of God.

Two or three things there were, that might awaken the Heathen World a little,
to consider of their wretched Case. 1. It may be they had the Greek Bible. 2.
Howsoever, the Jews scattered abroad among them might something convince them
of their Condition. 3. We may conceive, that against their Call God had stirred
up their Hearts by way of Preparative, to be weary of Idolatry, and groping in
Darkness. As against the Reformation by Luther all Christendom desired some
Reformation; and as against the Coming of Christ, the People were in
Expectation of the Messiah. Observe that, John iv.35. Lift up your Eyes, and
look on the Fields, for they are white already to Harvest: By which Words he
hinteth at that Multitude of Samaritans, and under them of Heathen, that were
ready to be reaped by the Gospel. So the Earnest Expectation of the Heathen
World waited now for the Manifestation of the Sons of God.

Ver. 20. For the Creature was made subject to Vanity, etc. Not a few
understand this of the Frame of the World, made subject to Vanity by Sin: But
the Word (...), Vanity, means Vanity of Mind. So Romans i.21. (...). The Gentiles
become vain in their Imaginations. Ephesians. iv.17. The Gentiles walk in the Vanity
of their Mind: So the meaning is, that the Heathen were given up to the Vanity
and Folly of their own Mind. (...), Made subject; put under such a Condition by
the just Judgment of God; as the Apostle handles it, Chap. i. But they are put
under in Hope, that in time it should be better with them.

For the Creature it self also shall be delivered from the Bondage of
Corruption, etc. By Corruption is signified here, as generally in Scripture,
sinful Corruption, not natural Corruptibility, or fading away. 2 Pet. i.4.
Having escaped the Corruption, that is in the World through Lust. And Chapter
ii.19. Servants of Corruption. And elsewhere evil Men are styled Men of corrupt
Minds, and corrupt Communication. Meaning, that the Gentiles shall be delivered
from their sadly sinful Condition into the Evangelical and Spiritual Liberty
from Sin, that the Sons of God partake of.

Some understand it of the Change of the Frame of the World at the end of the
World, and think Peter speaks of the same thing, 2 Pet. iii.13. He does indeed
in some Sense, but far from theirs, viz. A new State of Affairs in the Church,
when the Gentiles shall be called. This is the new Heaven, and the new Earth,
that they looked for; of their Calling the Text speaks, which was now in
Agitation.

And of that let us first speak a little, partly for the observing of
Providence in so great a Work, and partly for the understanding of some
Passages in Scripture.

I. The casting off of the Gentiles was at Babel, Genesis xi. where there were
four Punishments inflicted on them. 1. Destroying their Building. 2.
Confounding their Tongues. 3. Scattering them. 4. The Loss of the true
Religion, with the Loss of the Hebrew Tongue. And now all the World are
Heathen, but one Family of Heber, and so to Abraham. Which was to all the
World, as Gideon's Fleece to all the Earth.

II. So were they given up above Two Thousand Years. An Hundred Years had been
long, and how many Souls might have gone to Hell in that time? But there were
an Hundred, or Two Hundred Years above Two Thousand. A strange mysterious
Providence! As their Calling was a Mystery, so indeed was their Casting off. Oh
how few were the Sons of God? That in a manner all the World should be born,
to live in Blindness, to sin, and to be damned. Better not to have been born.
Could not God have let them alone, and never brought them in the World. As
Israel said to God, Why do thou bring us into the Wilderness to die? So
might they say, Why have thou brought us into the World to sin and die?

For Answer to this.

1. As it is Romans ix.20, 21. Nay, but, O Man, who art thou that reply
against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou
made me thus? Has not the Potter Power over the Clay, of the same Lump to make
one Vessel unto Honor, and another unto Dishonor? Such things are not
resolved by Reason, but into the Will and Sovereignty of God. As other Points
are above Reason, the Incarnation, the Resurrection: let Reason scan them; and
as the Athenian Philosophers, Acts xvii. styled Paul, a Babbler, when he
treated of the Resurrection, so the same Reason will but laugh at them. But we
must resolve them into the Power, Wisdom and Will of God; and he knows not
what God is, that believes them not.

2. I answer as it is, Romans xi.22. Behold the Goodness and Severity of God: on
them which sell Severity, but toward thee, Goodness. Admire at his Goodness to
thee, in setting thee in so far better Condition: One of the Jews Thanksgivings
is, I thank thee, that thou have made me an Israelite, and not a Heathen. And
we have cause to thank God, that we are not Heathens, if we consider,

First, That these are utterly out of the way of Salvation; thou in it, if thou will hearken to it.

Secondly, These never heard from God; he calls to thee continually. Once for
all, if these were condemned, that never heard, how shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation? Heb. ii.3.

But we shall not speak to that Point of Controversy about their Casting off,
but speak to the Text about their Calling. And first let us take up that of the
Apostle, Ephesians. iii.5, 6. Which in other Ages was not made known unto the Sons of
Men, as it is now revealed unto his Holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit:
That the GENTILES should be Fellow Heirs, and of the same Body, and Partakers
of his Promise in Christ, by the Gospel. Was it not made known to the Sons of
Men before? Did not the Prophets speak of this? God told it to Abraham, Genesis
xii.2, 3. And I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will bless thee. -- And
in thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed. Jacob to his Sons, G^n.
x^^x.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Jud^^h* (...) Lawgiver from between
his Feet, until Shiloh co^^: and unto him shall the gathering of the People be.
Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy. xxxii.43. Rejoice, O ye Nations, with his People. And
how abundant are the Prophets in this from end to end? But how it was not known
may be considered, either in regard of the Persons, or the thing it self.

I. In regard of the Persons. First, It was not imparted at all to the Gentiles
before. It was not made known to the Sons of Men, in Opposition to Israel, who
are called the Sons of God. They sat in Darkness, and never heard of Light,
till it came among them, or very rarely; namely, such as had the Greek Bibles*
And when it came, how they that never heard of it rejoiced? Act. xiii.48. And
when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the Word of the
Lord. And Secondly, the Jews would not endure to hear of it. Though they knew it*
they would not know it; had not Patience to hear it. Take two Places and two
Examples for this. The Places are Acts xxii.21, 22. And he said unto me,
Depart, for I will send thee far hence unto the GENTILES. And they gave him
Audience unto this Word, and then lift up their Voices, and said, Away with
such a Fellow from the Earth; for it is not fit that he should live. 1 Thessalonians.
ii.16. Forbidding us to speak to the GENTILES, that they might be saved. The
Examples are, Luke iv.28. And all they in the Synagogue, when they heard these
things, were filled with Wrath. Why were they so angry? What things had he
told them? He had told them before, that there were many Widows in Israel, and
unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta a City of Sidon, unto a
Widow Woman there. And that there were many Lepers in Israel in the time of
Elizeus the Prophet, and none was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian. Why were
they angry at this? They knew the things were true. But they hinted the Call of
the Gentiles, as that VVidow and Naaman were. To that bent Christ's Discourse:
That Israel would not, but the Gentiles should, and would, hearken to him. And
one Example we have to this purpose long before; and that is in Jonah; who
would not go to Nineveh, lest they should be Converted; and so Israel cast off;
for that stuck on all their Stomachs, Deuteronomy. xxxii.21. They have moved me to
Jealousy with that which is not good, they have provoked me to Anger with
their Vanities: And I will move them to Jealousy with those which are not a
People, I will provoke them to Anger with a Foolish Nation.

II. In regard of the Thing it self. The Doctrine of Pardon and Justification
was not so plain before, until Christ and his Apostles cleared it.

This Delivery then of the Creature from the Bondage of Corruption is the
Calling of the Gentiles. Those words, the Creature it self, deserve their
Emphasis; and we ought to utter it with this accent, The very Gentiles
themselves shall be delivered. etc. They that were so abominable, brutish,
slaved to Sin. The glorious things in the Prophets, which many look for yet to
be accomplished, are fulfilled long ago in the Call of the Gentiles. And take
this with you in reading of the Prophets, that their aim is to illustrate this
great Work. A Matter which they, Acts xi.18. rejoiced at to hear begun: When
they heard these things they held their Peace, and Glorified God; saying, Then
has God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance unto Life. And for which we,
upon the seeing accomplished, have also cause to Glorify God with them; both as
to the magnifying of his Grace, as also for our own sakes and Interest.

The Ephesians cried out, Acts xix.28. Great is Diana of the Ephesians; and
could not tell for what reason; but we, when we hear of this, have known and
solid cause to cry out, Glorious is the Grace of God; which brought such Slaves
of Sin into the Glorious Liberty of the Children of God. Let me say as it is 1
Cor. xii.2. Ye know that ye were Gentiles carried away unto these Dumb Idols.
Do you not? And consult Stories, and they will tell you of the abominable
Blindness and Barbarousness of this our Britain. No Nation under Heaven went
beyond it in these things. And now look upon our Britain as under the Gospel;
and find ye not Cause to Glorify God upon the Promise in the Text now
accomplished, The Creature it self shall be delivered from the Bondage of
Corruption, etc? Could you but read Tacitus, Caesar, and others, to observe how
this Nation lived as Brutes, Worshipped Idols, Sacrificed sometimes Men and
Women, went most Naked, were Barbarous above the most Barbarous: And look upon
England now, and we have much like Cause of wonder to that, Luke viii.35. Where
those who found the Man out of whom the Devils were departed clothed, and in
his Right Mind, are said to be afraid. How great a Mercy does the Apostle speak
in the Words of the Text! The Creature it self shall be delivered, etc.

In it we have Night and Day, Darkness and Light; what the Gentiles were as
Gentiles, and what as Called. Set the Contraries one against another; Bondage,
Liberty; Corruption, Glory. For so it is in the Greek, (...), The Liberty of
Glory; which is not amiss rendered as we do, The Glorious Liberty (so some do
that, Ephesians. i.6. To the Praise of his Glorious Grace). But it bears a greater
Emphasis to take it as the Greek has it, Into the Liberty of the Glory of the
Children of God. And what is meant by Glory? Learn this by the contrary term.
It is opposed to Corruption; as Liberty is to Bondage. And therefore as
Corruption means Sinfulness, so Glory means Holiness. And that so it is taken
in the Phrase of Scripture, the next Discourse will show.

IV. The Christian Holiness, as well as his Future Happiness, styled GLORY.
A HOLY Christian has a Glory here, and a Glory hereafter. So that may be
taken, 2 Cor. iii. ult. We are changed into the Image of God from Glory to
Glory. That is, from HOLINESS to HAPPINESS. In 1 Pet. iv.14. Mention is there
made of the Spirit of Glory, and of God. If ye be reproached for the Name of
Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of GLORY and of God rests on you. We
need not dispute what this Spirit of Glory is; take it for the Spirit of
Holiness, and it gives it but its right Title, Romans viii.30. Whom he Called,
them he also Justified; and whom he Justified, them he also Glorified. Where is
Sanctified? It is included in Glorified. Those that he Justified he endued with
the Glory of Holiness here, and shall reward with Eternal Glory hereafter, Lam.
iv.2. The precious Sons of Zion, comparable to fine Gold, how are they esteemed
as Earthen Pitchers? Jeremiah was one of them: He and the rest were now poor
and contemptible in this sad Captivity; but they carried a precious Glory about
them, a Value and Shining above the finest Gold.

Psalm. cx.3. Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power, in the
Beauties of Holiness. Some take these Beauties of Holiness, to mean the Temple:
But take it in the Propriety of the Word, and it is a most fit Title for
Holiness. And observe it is, not Beauty only, but Beauties, (...) which may
well be rendered Glories: Not one Beauty, not one Glory, but many joined
together; or all Beauties are in Holiness, and none in any thing else.

Ephesians. v.27. That he might present it to himself a GLORIOUS Church. Alas! It was
a Poor Persecuted Church; but this made it a GLORIOUS Church, viz. The Glory of
Holiness it was decked withal; for so it follows, That it should be Holy and
without Blemish.

The Jews speak of (...) Clothes of Glory that God made for Adam, and that they
descended to the Firstborn. This is the true Clothing of the Children of God,
that God makes for them, as Jacob did for his Son Joseph, that they appear by
their GLORY the Sons of God.

A View and Proof of this Glory let us take by comparing it with all other
Glories set before you, as the Devil did before Christ, Luke iv.5, 6. All the
Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them; and then set before you a Child of
God in the Glory of Holiness, and what say you to the Comparison?

1. It Is a Glory and Beauty that all the World cannot give. As Solon said to
Craesus in all his Glory, that every Peacock was braver. Every Lilly of the
Field is finer than Solomon in all his Glory. But this is a Beauty above Art
and Nature, when God Decks and Dresseth a Saint, and that with his own Divine
Image, Ephesians. iv 24. There you Read of putting on a New Man after God's Image:
A New Creature Clothed in Righteousness and Holiness after God's own Image.
It Is but a poor Glory that Satan can give, as that in Luke iv. the Kingdoms of
the World: It Is but a poor Beauty that Art can give, as Jezebel's Face: It Is
but a poor Luster that Nature can give, as Skin-deep Beauty. That is the Glory
that God alone can give, that is found no where but in his Treasury, Jewels in
his Cabinet, the Dressings of his Wardrobe.

2. It Is a Glory and Beauty, that all the World cannot take away: A Treasure
that neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, nor Thieves break through and Steal.
The pitiful Bravery of the World that is blasted in a Moment; either fading by
its own Nature and Frailty, or by Thieves or Fire, or some other Occurrence, or
by an immediate Hand of God. Ah! Glorious Holiness that nothing can undo, Luke
x.42. Mary has chosen that good part that shall not be taken away from her.
This is a Treasure that all the Devils in Hell cannot Plunder from the Owner.
He could Plunder indeed Job's Estate, but he could not his Holiness. It is Gold
that the Fire of Persecution cannot Consume, but Refine. A Shining of the
Beauty and Image of God in the Soul, that cannot be defaced: An everlasting
Glory that never changes, but to a greater Glory.

3. It Is a Beauty and Glory that God himself is in Love withal, Ezekiel. xvi.
There Judah is said to be Lovely, not in the Eyes of Man, but of God. Holiness
is a Dress that only pleases God.

V. An Elucidation of Heb. x.26, 27. If we Sin wilfully after we have received
the Knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for Sins; but a
fearful looking for of Judgment, and Fiery Indignation, which shall Devour the
Adversaries.
THE Sin the Apostle speaks of here is not every Sin knowingly committed. For
then how would David and Peter have escaped with their Falls? But it is an
Apostasy from Truth once received; that is, the Gospel once professed; and an
Enmity and Fighting against it. A Sin that at ver. 29. he calls a Treading
under Foot the Son of God. And the Apostle John speaking of the very same Sin,
calls it a Sin unto Death, 1 John v.16.

The Apostle in this dreadful Passage has two Allusions to some Passages in
the Old Testament; One to Words, another to Things. When he speaks of Sinning
past Sacrifice, he alludes to those Words, Numb. xv.27, 28, etc. If any Soul
Sin through Ignorance, he shall bring a She-Goat of the first Year for a
Sin-offering, and the Priest, etc. But the Soul that does ought presumptuously,
whether Born in the Land or a Stranger, the same has reproached the Lord, and
that Soul shall be cut off from his People. No Sacrifice for the wilful Sinner,
but he was to be cut off by Divine Vengeance. And when he speaks of Fiery
Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries, he alludes to those fearful
Examples in the Old Testament, when ungodly Ones which have been Enemies to the
VVays and Ministers of God, have been dreadfully devoured by Fire; as in Number.
xvi. and 2 Kings i.

The Adversaries.
OUR English has well rendered the Word, Adversaries. But there is a peculiar
Phrase in the Greek* which is not easy to express in English. It is not only,
(...), which had been enough to signify Adversaries, but it is (...), which
makes it to speak Su^^^versarii, Un^era^versaries; that is, Adversaries under
an Hood, as I may say; Adversaries under a Pretense: As the Pharisees under a
Pretense of long Prayers devoured Widows Houses; so these under a Pretense of
Religion, were Adversaries to Religion: Under Pretense of Piety, were Enemies
to ^ie^y: Under Pretense of doing God good Service they Persecuted God's
Servants: Under Pretense of (...) for the Law, they sought to Destroy the
Gospel. And they were under^^ood Adversa^ies. The Greek Word is used again Col.
ii.24. (...), Contrary to us. The Word precisely signifies Subcontrary, or
Closely contrary to us. The Apostle speaks of Christ's having cancelled the
Ceremonial Law; which open faced seemed to be for them that used it;
Sacrifices, to make their Peace; Purifications, to cleanse them from their
Uncleanness: But closely also they pleaded against them: Sacrifices Slain
showed that they deserved Death; Purifications spoke that they were unclean:
And so other of the Rites of the Law.

Thousands in the World pretend to Love God, to walk Fair, to be Religious;
yet underhand are God's Adversaries and Enemies, as those Under-adversaries
spoken of in the Text before us. None will own that he is any Enemy of God, but
he will speak well of God, praise God, will be for God; whereas there is not
one of a Thousand, but underhand is God's Enemy.

These Adversaries then, of whom the Apostle here more particularly speaks,
were Apostates that had professed the Gospel, and had backslidden from it, and
were become bitter Enemies and Persecutors of it.

Fiery Indignation.
THE Greek is something Emphatical, but something Difficult* (...). Verbatim
thus, Zeal, or Jealousy, or Anger, of Fire shall eat up the Adversaries. Our
English has well rendered it, Fiery Indignation shall devour. And so the
Apostle calls God himself, in reference to his consuming of Wicked Men. Heb.
xii. ult. our God is a Consuming Fire.

As we may distinguish between the Anger of God, that he is sometimes provoked
to by the Sinning of his own People, and the Anger he is provoked to by his
Enemies: So may we distinguish upon the Firiness of this Anger. God's Anger,
when he is displeased with the Sins of his own People, is a Fire indeed, but it
is not a Consuming Fire, as it is toward the Wicked. That Expression, Esaias
xxvi.11. The FIRE of thine Enemies shall Consume them, is an intimation that
there is a Fire which is not the Fire of God's Enemies, or such a Fire as
devours them. His Anger indeed many a time scorched his own People very sore;
sometimes in their own Conscience; sometimes by outward Affliction: But it is
to Refine them, not to Consume them. But to the Enemies of the Lord, his
Indignation is a Fire that consumes them.

But to review this Fire more particularly, let us first consider upon some
Places that speak to the same purpose.

Job. xv.34. The Congregation of Hypocrites shall be desolate, and FIRE shall
consume the Tabernacles of Bribery. What? Does it mean their Houses shall be
burnt down? Oh! what Fires would then be seen abroad in England, if all that
take Bribes should have their Houses burnt down? But in Chapter xx.26. There is
mention of a Fire not blown, that shall consume such wicked Ones. All Darkness
shall be hid in his secret Places, a Fire NOT BLOWN shall consume him: It shall
go ill with him that is left in his Tabernacle. A Fire not blown, that is, not
such a Fire as those we blow; a Fire that needs no blowing, but when God
kindles it; is Hot enough, and Flaming enough; even the Fiery Indignation of
the Lord.

Esaias. ix.5. For every Battle of the Warrior is with confused Noise, and
Garments rolled in Blood; but this shall be with BURNING, and Fuel of FIRE. The
Prophecy is concerning the Destruction and Overthrow of the great Army of
Senacherib, of which the Story is so Famous: That whereas other Armies are not
routed and overthrown without a great deal of Fighting, Confused Noise, and
Garments rolled in Blood; this Army should be consumed with the Burning and
Fire of the Lord's Indignation. And it was Fiery Indignation that devoured
185000 Soldiers in one Night.

Our God, says Moses and Paul, is a Consuming Fire: And Esay's Question is,
Who among us shall dwell with the Devouring Fire? Who among us shall dwell with
everlasting Burnings, Chapter xxxiii.14. Yes, in the next Verse, He that walks
Righteously, and speaks Uprightly, and despises the Gain of Oppressions,
that shakes his Hands from holding of Bribes, etc. such an one shall dwell
with the Devouring Fire, and it shall not touch him; as the Fiery Furnace did
not touch an Hair of the three Children. But look at the beginning of Verse 14.
The Sinners in Zion are afraid, Fearfulness has surprised the Hypocrites; who
shall dwell with the devouring Fire? etc. Not they, but they shall be destroyed
and devoured by that Consuming Fire; as those that cast the three Children into
the Furnace were consumed by the Fire, though they came not into it.

The Fire and Burning that St. Peter speaks of, that should consume the Jewish
Church, and State, and Religion, 2 Pet. iii. means not so much the Fire that
the Romans burnt their City and Temple with, as that dreadful Fire and Fury of
God's Indignation that consumed all. But the Day of the Lord will come as a
Thief in the Night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great
Noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat; the Earth also, and the
Works that are therein, shall be burnt up, Ver. 10.

And in that dreadful Passage concerning the Damned, Their Worm never dies,
and their FIRE never goes out: We need not dispute what kind of Fire the Fire
of Hell is; whether Material Fire; whether it gives Light; whether it is of our
Fire-colour. With such Disputes some needlessly trouble themselves and others:
God's Indignation is Fire enough, and Hot enough to devour those wretched
Souls; and we need look no further.

VI. Some Description of the Death and Doom of an Ungodly Man.
I. IF any ask what it is an Ungodly Man Dies of, it may very well be answered,
of the Lord's Indignation. It was the Threatening of God to Adam, Moriendo
morieris, Thou shall Die the Death. The Ungodly Dies, and Dies the Death
Natural and Eternal. And in his Natural Death he Pays two Debts; a Debt to
Nature, because of the Sin of Adam; and a Debt to God's Anger, because of his
own Sins.

The Chaldee Paraphrast renders those Words, Deuteronomy. xxxiv.5. (...) At the Kiss
of the Lord; which we read, At the Word of the Lord: And the Jews speak much of
Dying at the Kiss of God; thereby not only expressing a Person's Dying in his
Favor, but to show how sweet the Death of God's Saints are to them: They are
at the Kisses, in the Embraces of God, as they are Dying: They reap Sweetness,
Comfort, Happiness from him, even in Dying. But where are the Ungodly at that
Time? Under the Flaming of his Fire, and the Scorching of his Wrath. As it is,
Psalm. lxxxviii 31. The Wrath of God comes upon them, and slays the Fattest of
them. It is the Wrath of God that tears the Soul from the Body, and devours the
Life like a Lion, and there is none to deliver. It is Wrath that cuts him off
to make an end of his Sinning.

You often meet with Cutting off threatened to such as commit such and such Sins;
as that in Numb. xv.30. That Soul shall be Cut off from among the People. Some
conceive it means nothing but Cutting off from the Congregation by
Excommunication; but it means God's Cutting them off by his Wrath and
Vengeance. And the Expression is Emphatical, to show their Thread is cut, which
they would have drawn out in Sinning ever, if they might have been let alone.
Thus every Ungodly Man, even in his Death, carries God Tokens, Dies of God's
Anger.

II. As we have considered the Wretch Dying, and having given up the Ghost; now
let us consider the Soul Departed out of the Body. Ah! VVretched Soul, where
art thou? Come into another World, into a strange World, and such an one as
he never Dreamed of, and is now confoundded to see: Into what a World he is
fallen? A World where there is neither Wine, nor Women, nor Sport, nor
Pleasure, nor use of any Creature. And what a case is that Carnal and
Voluptuous Soul in then? A worse Place than that that Israel complains of,
Numb. xx.5. How are we come into this evil Place? It is no Place of Seed, nor
Figs nor Olives, nor Pomgranates, nor any Water to Drink. Nay, this is a Place
where is no Sun, nor Moon, nor Light; a Place where there is no Friend to
Comfort, no Creature to Refresh, no use of any Thing that is Earthly and
Bodily. This must needs be a sad Change to that Soul that never took any
Delight, that never thought it lived, but in the use of such.

But this is the least part of Indignation that such a wretched Soul meets
withal. The Holy Souls of the Saints of God meet with the like Deprivation of
the Use of Earthly Creatures; and if they had always made them their Life and
Delight, and had nothing else to feed upon but Meat, and Drink, and Money, and
Pleasure, the Case would be much the same. But there is the Indignation from
the Creator meets the Cursed Soul, as well as the Deprivation of the Creature;
and that we shall consider in these several Particulars.

First, Think of that, Luke xvi.22. And it came to pass that the Beggar Died,
and was carried by the Angels into Abraham 's Bosom; the Rich Man also Died,
and was Buried. And do you not think the Devils carried the Soul of the Rich
Man to Hell? In the Text indeed is not expressed so much; but that left it to be
gathered by the Rule of Contrary; if Angels carry good Souls to Heaven, Devils
carry bad Ones to Hell.

Acts i.18. Falling headlong he burst asunder, and all his Bowels gushed out.
The Devil had been two or three Days Bodily in Judas; and when he burst in
sunder the Devil broke out of him, having torn him: And do you not think he
carried his Soul with him, as well as took away his Life?

It is true indeed, that the Devil is not in the Ungodly so Bodily as he was in
Judas, yet he is said, Ephesians. ii.2. To work in the Children of Disobedience.
Their Souls are under his Acting and Power, to carry them into all Evil. He is
the Mover and Actor of their Souls to do his Will.

Well, when they are Dying, is not the Devil busy there, waiting for his
Prey, and for what he has looked for all along? Is he not busy to keep that
Soul for his own, and that it be not taken out of his Hand? Psalm. xlviii.14.
For God is our God for ever and ever; he will be our Guide unto Death. He that
has made God his God for ever, he may be sure to have God his Guide even to
and in his Dying. And on the contrary, he that has made the Devil his God, and
Ruler, and Guide, all his Time, he must expect that he will be with him at his
Death. As the terrible Apparition to Brutus in Italy told him, he would be sure
to meet him at Philippi, where he was to Die.

Well, the Ungodly Wretch Dies. The Devil has Led, and Ruled, and Acted him
to the last Gasp: And now the last Gasp has slipped the Soul out of the Body, is
not the Devil there still looking after his Prey? Do you think the Devil has
done, and looks after that Soul no more? No, then is the time that he has got
his Prey, and now is seized on the Game that he had been ever hunting after.
The Dragon, Rev. xii.4. stood waiting before the Woman to devour her Child as
soon as it was Born. And when the Child was delivered, he was frustrate of his
Prey, because God took care of the Child and Mother; for both Child and Mother
were his Beloved. But in this Case, this great Red Dragon waits till the Soul
be delivered out of the Body; and as soon as it is delivered, he grasps it, and
seizes on it; for God has forsaken it, and utterly cast away all Care of it.
God has forsaken it; Persecute and take it, for there is none to deliver.

Consider seriously of these two Things.

I. That Sinful Souls departed are never under preserving Providence more.

II. That they are given up to the Power of Satan.

I. They are removed from under God's Preserving Providence. True, they are
kept in Being, that they may be kept in Punishment; but this is Avenging
Justice rather than Preserving Providence, Mat. ix.49. For every one shall be
Salted with Fire. Every such Soul shall be Salted with Fire. The very Fire of
its Torment shall be as Salt to keep it from Consuming. It shall be kept in
Being, that it may be kept in Fire. But first God has cast away all Care of
it, and secondly, exercises nothing of preserving Providence toward it, 1 Samuel xxv.29. But the Soul of my Lord shall be bound in the Bundle of Life with
the Lord thy God; and the Souls of thine Enemies, them shall be sling out, as
out of the middle of a Sling. Where she intimates, that a David, a Good Man
his Soul is bound up in the Bundle of Life with the Lord: But Evil Men, their
Souls be slung out, as out of a Sling. God casts them, flings them away from
him; Fly where they will, Light where they will, Sink or Swim, he looks no more
after them. While Wicked Men were here, Providence Preserved them, Fed them,
Clothed them, Strove with them with Patience, and kept the Soul and Body, that
the Devil did not run away with the Man Bodily: But when the Cursed Soul is
departed out of the Body, Patience no more, Care no more, Restraint of the
Devil no more, but take him Devil and do thy worst. Which is the Second thing
to be considered.

II. That Wicked Souls are given up to Satan's Absolute Power. You read of
giving up notorious Sinners to Satan here, that, if possibly they might be
amended. 1 Cor. v.5. To deliver such an one unto Satan for the Destruction of
the Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Timothy i.
ult. Whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to Blaspheme.
But when a Soul is now past all Amending, all hopes of Amending, conceive with
Fear and Trembling, how God gives up that Soul to the Roaring Lion to tear and
spare not.

And here is one dreadful Symptom, and Evidence of the Fiery Indignation, that
God in Anger gives up the Soul to Satan: And this is a Second degree of its
Misery; that as it has lost the use of the Creature, so also it has lost the
Care and Preserving Providence of the Creator.

We have an Emblem of both in the Egyptians sitting in Darkness; which
conceive of by reading two Places, Exodus, x.21, 23. It was Darkness that might
be felt. They saw not one another, neither rose any from his Place. And Psalm.
lxxviii.49. where, when the Holy Ghost should mention the Plague of Darkness in
its order, he Characters it in these terms, He cast upon them the fierceness of
his Anger, Wrath, and Indignation, by sending Evil Angels among them. Moses
says, that he sent Darkness; the Psalmist says, Evil Angels or Devils: And
both most true, Darkness and Devils: Devils in the Darkness. Moses says, They
saw not one another. The Psalmist intimates, that they saw Devils; and yet
could not stir from the place where they sat, to run from the Sight of them:
Chains of Darkness that tied them fast that they could not stir. So that the
Devil may Roar, and Rage, and Terrify, and the VVretches not able to stir an
Inch from under his Power and Terror.

The Fearful Estate of Damned Souls in Scripture is called Darkness, utter
Darkness, Chains of Darkness. I need not to cite Places. And why Darkness?
Because the Sun, Moon and Stars shine not there, as they do here? Because no
Candle there? The other World has nothing to do with such Bodily Lights as
these. These are Lights for Bodily Creatures, not for Souls and Spirits. The
Holy Ghost tells you, that in Heaven, where there is all Light, yet there is
nothing to do with such Lights as these, Rev. xxii.5* And there shall be no
Night there; and they need no Candle, neither Light of the Sun: for the Lord
God gives them Light. Is there Darkness in Hell, and utter Darkness, where is
so much Fire, and such Flames? Luke xvi.24. There Dives speaks of his being
tormented in Flames: Fire and Flames, and yet Darkness. It is the Fire of that
Indignation, mentioned in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that consumes them, and
that very Fire brings that Darkness with it. Darkness; for there is not one
Spark of God's Favor appearing there, nothing but Indignation, Indignation.
And not one Beam of Favor appearing through any Chink there. Everlasting
Burning, and no Intermission. The Worm never dies, and never but gnawing; and
the Fire never quenched, and never but scorching.

And it is Darkness, because there is no common preserving Providence, shining
or appearing there. God's shows not himself in the least Glimpse of his Care,
or Tenderness, or Preservation there. Their State is called Outer Darkness,
Mat. xxv.30. not Utter Darkness only, as we say, Utter Extremity, etc. but
Outer Darkness. The Phrase is very considerable. It may be understood, Darkness
that is without; that is, Darkness that is out of Heaven: As the Heathen are
said to be without; that is, were out of the Church; but there the Expression
is only (...), Those that are OUT. But this Expression is (...), Darkness, that
is OUTER; as if he should say, that Darkness that is beyond the other Darkness.
And we may very well interpret it, the Indignation of God against the Wicked in
Hell, beyond the Indignation of God against them here; his casting them off,
and casting off his Care of them in Hell, beyond his casting them off, and
casting off his Care of them here. His Wrath and his casting them off here, is
very black and dark; but there it is Outer Darkness, a Darkness beyond this
Darkness.

And now think with your selves, how fearful a Surprizal that Soul is surprised
withal: When it is just departed out of the Body, it is as it were midwived
into the other World by the Devil; and the first thing it sees there, is, that
it sees it self in the Paws of the Devil. It makes me remember the Story in
Saligniacus. A Company of Travelers, that went to visit the Holy Land, would
needs, for Religion-sake, forsooth, bathe themselves in Jordan, there where
John Baptized. And as they were refreshing, sporting, and delighting themselves
in the Water, and swimming, suddenly there comes a Crocodile, a dreadful Dragon
of the Waters, and lays hold of a Frenchman, by Profession a Physician, snaps
him up, and devours him. How miserably and unexpectedly was that poor Man
surprised! So how does the unhappy Soul we are speaking of, find it self
surprised, when it suddenly finds it self in the Clutches of the Great Red
Dragon, ready now to be devoured by him.

VII. A Meditation upon the Widow's Mite.
OUR Savior, sitting in the Second Court of the Temple, called commonly by the
Jews, The Court of the Women, but by the Gospel, The Treasury, (because there
stood the Thirteen Chests, into which the People put their Freewill Offerings;)
sees the rich Men casting in largely, and of their Abundance. But there comes a
poor Widow, and casts in a poor Pittance, Two Mites, that make but One
Farthing; a despicable Gift, and such an one as those rich Men would make a
Puff at, to see such a poor Business offered. And, as God in another Case, Mal.
i.8. offer such a Pittance to a great Man, how would he scorn it? But God sees
not as Man sees, God weighs not as Man weighs, but he sees and weighs
the Mind and Heart. And our Savior sees, that this Woman had put her Heart
into the Treasury with her two Mites; that she had cast in her Heart, and her
whole Living with her Farthing in the Chest she had chosen to put it in; and
accordingly he weighs, values and estimates her Offering according to the large
Heart wherewith she had given it, as the largest Gift that was given; nay,
larger than all the Gifts that were given. Of a Truth I say unto you, that this
poor Widow has cast in more than they all, Luke xxi.3.

A Woman to outvye all the Men in her Offering: A Widow all the great married
Dames and Ladies; and a poor Widow all the rich and wealthy Ones, with all
their Abundance. It is very fortunate for Women to bear the Bell for Piety and
Devotion in the Holy Story, and none to go beyond them in Zeal and Religion; or
rather they to go before all. The Virgin Mary, Martha, Mary Magdalen, Joanna,
Susanna, the Syrophaenician Woman with her great Faith, and this poor VVidow
with her great Offering. That as Peter's Zeal and Earnestness in promoting the
Gospel is more especially recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, to give
Evidence and Assurance of his Recovery out of his great Fall, in denying his
Master: So the noble Zeal and Piety of several Women is recorded in Holy
Writ, to be an Evidence of the Recovery of that Sex out of its foul Guilt of
bringing Sin into the World, and being first in the Transgression.

As the Apostle speaks something toward such an Observation, 1 Timothy ii. ult.
Adam was not deceived, but the Woman being deceived, was in the Transgression.
Notwithstanding she shall be saved by Childbearing, i. e. by the Birth of
Christ; a Child born to be a Savior: Though Pangs in Childbearing were laid upon
her, as a sad Punishment for her Transgression.

We might enquire whether this VVidow were a true Believer, or whether she
were still in the Jewish Religion and Belief, but only more sincerely Pious and
Religious in that way, than others were. And the Reason of this Enquiry is,
that if she were a true Believer, or had received the Gospel, it may seem
strange, that she would contribute to the Jewish Service. And if she were not a
true Believer, it may seem strange, that Christ should give such a Testimony to
her Offering, if it were not offered in Faith.

Whether she were the one or other, this Act of hers was certainly a Pious Act.
For observe with me these few things.

I. Observe, that all the Offerings or Gifts, that were thus put into the
Temple-Treasury, were laid out for the maintaining the Service of the Altar and
Temple. To buy Wood to maintain the Fire of the Altar, to buy Sacrifices for
the Altar, Salt for the Sacrifices, Oil for the Lamps, Wine for the
Drink Offering, etc. Whatsoever was offered in the Temple went to the
maintaining the Service and Religion of the Temple.

II. Observe, that the Service and Religion of Temple and People was now grown
exceeding Corrupt; and many things of Humane Invention and Tradition were added
to God's Institutions there. So that our Savior sticks not to say of the
Temple, that they had made it a House of Merchandise, nay, a Den of Thieves;
and himself with a Whip drives Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple: And yet,

III. Observe, that Christ himself contributed to the Maintenance of the
Service of the Temple, though such Corruption crept into it. For that
Tribute-Money that is demanded of him, Matthew. xvii.24. and which he works a
Miracle to pay, finding the Money in a Fish's Mouth, was the Half Shekel, that
every one was bound to pay Yearly; and the Money went toward buying the
Sacrifices for the Altar, and for the maintaining of the Service there. And as
himself did in that Payment contribute to that; so he commends this Widow, who
in her Gift did show the like Contribution to the same thing. For,

IV. Observe, that Good might be gathered out of the Service there, though such
Corruptions were crept in; because God's Institutions were there, and he had
set up his Candle there, his Worship, which he had not taken down. And every
Humane Invention does not presently destroy a Divine Institution, though it does
pollute it. And the seven Churches of Asia are Golden Candlesticks still, though
God find foul Corruption in all of them.

They that will pay nothing to our Churches, that will not come at our
Churches; nay, will not abide to be buried in our Church Yards, do they see any
abominable thing in the Service of our Churches, worse than the Corruptions
that were crept into the Jewish Religion; worse Superstition, worse
VVill-worship, worse Corruptions? If they do, let them show it; if they do not,
why do they so despise our Churches, and the Worship there? When Christ
himself refused not to be present at the Temple, and to contribute to maintain
the Service there. Let me ask them, and the negligent Comers to Church, (though
they do not quite refuse it) do they think that our Savior ever let a
Sabbath Day pass in all his time while here, but he was present at the Public
Service, either in the Temple, or in the Synagogue? Look the Gospel through, and
see by the Current of the Story there, whether ever he absented himself from
the Public Congregation on the Sabbath Day.

Read that, Luke iv.16. to spare more; He came to Nazareth, where he had been
brought up, and, as his Custom was, went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath, and
stood up for to read. It was his Custom to go to the Synagogue, to the Public
Service, and Congregation, on the Sabbath Day; and he never failed of it. And
he stood up for to read in his own Town Synagogue; as owning himself a Member
of that Congregation. For it is not recorded, that he read in any Synagogue
beside. It was his Custom to go to the Public Congregation on the Sabbath Day;
it is these Men's Custom not to come there. He never absented himself from the
Public Meeting, these Men account it Religion to absent themselves ever. Is our
Public Service more corrupt than theirs was then? If it be, let them show it.
If it be not, let these Men give a reason why they go so directly cross to our
Savior's own Practice.

VIII. A Meditation, and Explanation of the HOPE of Christians, according to
the Apostles Account of it, Heb. vi.17, 18, 19, 20.
THAT there is such a thing, the Apostle confirms, and what a thing it is he
illustrates, by two Particulars apiece.

I. The Sureness of this HOPE he confirms especially by these two things.

First, It is made certain by God's Promise, and his Oath. Two immutable
things, in which it is impossible God should lie.

Secondly, That Christ is gone into Heaven before, as an undoubted Pledge of
the Hope for us, that is laid up there.

II. The Nature or Quality of this Hope, he sets out especially by two things
also.

First, That it is an Anchor of the Soul, Sure and Steadfast.

Secondly, That it enters into that which is within the Vail.

The Hope that is here spoken of, the very Words in which it is mentioned do
show what it means; viz. not the Hope in us, but the Hope set before us. To lay
hold of the Hope set before us. Not the Acting of our Hope, but the Object of
it, or what is hoped for: As the Scripture when it mentions Faith, frequently
means the Object of Faith, or the thing believed.

This Distinction of Hope in us, and Hope set before us, see by comparing 1
Pet. iii.15. with the Words we have in Hand: Be ready always to give an Answer
to every Man that asks you a Reason of the Hope that is in you. That they
might do, but of the Hope set before them, it was not so ready to give a
Reason: Because it is above all Humane Reason, that such Hopes should be set
before poor, sinful Men; therefore the Socinians that would have all things
believed to be measured by Humane Reason, allege that Place of S. Peter to
little Purpose. For it speaks not of giving a Reason why such things were to be
hoped for, (for that is alone to be resolved into God's Grace and Goodness,
which is unfathomable to our Reason) but to give a Reason and Account, what
Ground they had to hope for such things. Which Reason must be fetched from
their own Conscience and Conversation, as well as from God's Grace and Promises.

Now what these things hoped for are, I need not spend time to reckon. They are
whatsoever God affords for the Blessedness of the Soul here, or hereafter,
Grace and Glory, Redemption and Salvation; the Spirit of God here, and the full
Enjoyment of God for ever. And accordingly this Hope is called The Hope of
Eternal Life, Tit. i.2. The Hope of Salvation, 1 Thessalonians. v.8. The Hope of Glory,
and the Hope of the Gospel, Col. i.23, 27. That is, whatsoever the Gospel holds
out, as declared for, and of Man's Blessedness: As Col. i.4. For the Hope which
is laid up for you in Heaven, whereof ye heard before in the Word of the Truth
of the Gospel.

One peculiar Hope, which indeed is the Cause of all the rest, we shall observe
by and by.

So that to speak of this Hope, I might Discourse of the Excellency, Dignity
and Certainty of these things hoped for. But I shall but touch the Nature of
them, as the Apostle gives a Character of it: Viz. That this Hope is an Anchor
of the Soul; that it is sure and steadfast; that it enters into that within the
Vail. Every one of which Particulars has its Worth and Weight.

I. The Expression, that it is the Anchor of the Soul, supposes that a Soul in
this World is as a Ship at Sea, ready to be tumbled, and tossed, and carried
with every Wind, if it do not anchor upon the Hope that is set before us within
the Vail. And blessed be the God of all Hope, that has provided such an Anchor
for poor Souls. That he has not left us to the Mercy of the Merciless Sea, and
Blasts of this World, but has showed us where we may lie at Anchor, and be
safe.

II. This An^hor is sure and steadfast in it self, and no Moveableness or
Weakness in it; but like him that laid it up there, without any Change or
Shadow of turning. And here I might show, that it is sure, in regard of him
that laid it up, in regard of it self, and in regard of the certain Promises
that he has made of it. I shall cite but this one Place for all, Tit. i.2. In
Hope of Eternal Life, which God, that cannot lie, promised before the World
began. It is most sure, because God has promised, because God that cannot lie
has promised, and because he has promised before the World was; that is,
before the Law.

III. This Hope that is set before us, enters into that within the Vail. You
see there is a plain Allusion to the High Priests entering into the most Holy
Place within the Vail once a Year. And that very Hint does intimate what the
Apostle mainly aims at, when he speaks of the Hope set before us, Viz. The
Blood of Christ, or the Merit of his Blood in Heaven. As the High Priest went
into the most Holy Place with Blood. And that was the great Day, Time, and
Manner of Atonement for the Sins of the People.

So that indeed the Blood of Christ, or the Merit of his Death, is the HOPE we
have in Heaven. And that is the proper Cause of all the other things that I
mentioned, Grace, Glory, Redemption, Salvation; all purchased for his People
with his Blood. The Blood of Christ was shed on Earth, but the Merit of it is
with God in Heaven. One Deep calls to another through the Noise of the
Water-Pipes. The Deeps of his Sufferings and Sorrows here, speak, and have
their Claim above in Heaven. As the Prophet Esaias speaks, I have labored in
vain, and spent my Strength for Naught, but my Reward is in Heaven.

This that our Hope has to anchor in, is the Blood of Christ, brought in
within the Vail; the Merit of Christ placed before God, to answer for us, to
plead for us, to pay for us. So that we may have strong Consolation, and a sure
Hold, if we cast Anchor there.

IX. An Inquiry why the Jews were so importunate with Christ for Signs and
Wonders: And why he was so backward to gratify their Curiosity therein.
THE Apostle tells us, The Jews require a Sign, 1 Cor. i.22. And the
Evangelists attest it, when they give a particular Account of their so doing
from our Savior, in diverse Places. And he himself confirms it, John iv.48.
Jesus said, Except ye see Signs and Wonders, ye will not believe. The Person
there considered, to whom he spoke, it may be, may illustrate the thing the
more. Our English in the Text calls him, A Noble Man; in the Margin, A
Courtier, ver. 46. And the Original Word, (...), signifies, that he was one,
that belonged to the King, one of Herod's Courtiers. Now in that Court time
was, when John Baptist was heard, reverenced, and followed, Mark vi.17. But
John did no Miracles, showed no Signs, John x.41. therefore at last John's Head
goes to the Block.

Now the reason why the Jews were so requiring of Signs and Wonders, besides
their Hardness of Heart, that would not believe without a Miracle, was, because
they had not had a Prophet among them of so long a time. It was full Four
Hundred Years since the Spirit of Prophecy departed from the Nation. For since
the Death of Zachary and Malachi, there had been no Prophet among them, till
these times; no, nor any that had taken upon him to be a Prophet; therefore it
is no wonder, if when Christ came among them in the Evidence of a Prophet, they
require him to show some Wonders, that they might thereby be confirmed, that he
was a true Prophet, and not a false.

Here now at his first coming into his Temple, after his entering into his
Public Ministry by his Baptism, he reforms and refines, as the last of the
Prophets, before Prophecy ceased, had foretold. Mal. iii.1, 3. The Lord, whom
ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple. And he shall sit as a Purifier, and
Refiner of Silver, and he shall purify the Sons of Levi. He overthrows the
Tables of the Money Changers, and whips the Buyers and Sellers out of the
Temple, in the Authority of a Prophet, or Messiah. I, say the Jews, Do thou
these things so authoritatively? I pray thee, what Sign show thou to prove,
that thou art either Messiah or Prophet?

Nay, Secondly, they were so urgent in requiring Signs from him, that they
require a Wonder, when they had newly seen a Wonder; nay, Wonder after Wonder,
like him in the Poet's Fiction, that stood Chin deep in Water, and was still
thirsty, and seeking after Water. Observe but two Passages.

1. In Mat. xii.22. there is a Man blind and dumb, and possessed with a Devil,
and Christ heals him. Three Miracles in one: And to have done any one of them,
either to have given Sight to the Blind, or Speech to the Dumb, or to
dispossess one possessed, had been enough and enough again to have convinced
any, much more, when he wrought all these things at once. And yet at ver. 38.
Certain of the Scribes and Pharisees say to him, Master, We would see a Sign
from thee.

2. In John vi. at the beginning of the Chapter, he feeds Five Thousand Persons
with Five Loaves, and Two Fishes. Who that had seen such a Sign and Miracle,
but would have said as they do, ver. 14. This is of a Truth, that Prophet that
should come into the World? And yet some of those very Men, that had seen that
Miracle, eaten of that Miracle, and confessed him, that of a Truth he was that
Prophet, etc. yet are at it, ver. 30. What Sign show thou then, that we may
see, and believe thee, etc. Why? What would these Men have? Can they tell
themselves? Yes, and I will tell you. Their foolish and blind Traditions had
taught them to look for these two Signs and Wonders from the Messiah, when he
came.

First, That he should raise the old Prophets, and the old Holy famous Men from
the Dead.

Secondly, That he should bring down Manna from Heaven for them. In their old
Writings and Records they speak much of these two things of their Expectation.
And I might show some Hint in the Gospel, that they expected such things.
Therefore let Christ do never so many Miracles, yet they will not be satisfied,
unless they see him do one, or both these things; but are still urging and
requiring, What Sign show thou?

Now they are not so urgent to ask a Sign, as our Savior is backward to
satisfy their Curiosity in such a thing. And to observe, what Return he made
to their Demand of a Sign, which was a second thing I mentioned to speak to,
let us consider these two things.

First, That he never did, nor never could be brought to show them a Sign, as a
mere Sign. You remember his own Words, A Wicked and Adulterous Generation
require a Sign, but no Sign shall be given them, Mat. xii.39. I call that a
mere Sign, which is barely a Sign, and nothing else: A Wonder showed ^owa^d
confirming the Doctrine or Authority of him, that shows it; and it proves no
mo^^. The ^urning of Moses Rod into a Serpent, and the Serpent into a R^d
again, was a bare Sign or Wonder to confirm M^se^ Authority, and it was no
more. B^t the Signs and Wonders that he wrought after, in turning Water into
Blood, bringing Frogs, etc. were more than Signs; for they were also Plagues on
(...), as well as Miracles. So the Miracles and Wonders which our Savior did,
healing the Sick, cleansing Lepers, casting out Devils, were more th^n mere
Signs; for they were for the Bodily Benefit of those, upon whom they were
wrought. But mere Sign, which was barely a Sign, and no more, he never showed,
never could be brought to show among them.

And I remember not more than one mere Sign, spoken of in all the New
Testament; and that was Paul's shaking the Viper off his Hand into the Fire,
and feeling no Hurt by her. Which the Church of Rome might have done well to
have considered of, before they had made Miracles so great a Sign of their
Church as they do.

Secondly, To their requiring of a Sign, our Savior once and again returns an
Answer about his own Resurr^ction, Mat. xii.39. There shall no Sign be given
unto it but the Sign of the Prophet Jonas. Meaning, as Jonas was Three Days and
Three Nights in the Whale's Belly, and at last cast out of his Belly on the
Shore again; so Christ should be Three Days and Three Nights in the Grave, and
then should be restored to Life again. And John ii. when they require a Sign,
he returns a like Answer, Destroy this Temple, and in Three Days I will raise
it up. That is, this shall be an undeniable Sign to you, that I am he that is
to come; that when you have destroyed this Temple of my Body, and put me to
Death, in Three Days I will raise it up again. Which was to be the great Proof
and Sign, whereby he evidenced himself to be the Son of God, or the Messiah;
namely, by his Resurrection from the Dead, Romans i.4.

X. An Explanatory Discourse of the Fall and Punishment of Angels.
WE look not now upon these Creatures in their Brightness and Luster, in the
Perfection of their Nature, and Nobleness of their Creation: Angels, Morning
Stars, Courtiers of Heaven, Attendants in God's own Chamber of Presence: But
are to see them in a clear, contrary, dismal, and dreery Condition. They had
not been so glorious before, but now they are as horrid; not so bright before,
but now as uggly; and not so happy before, but now as miserable and ruined. For
S. Peter shows them sinning, hurled from Heaven, cast into Hell, and damned
there to Chains and Darkness, and Judgment for evermore. 2 Ep. Chapter ii. Ver. 4.
God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and
delivered them into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment.

As God once said to Abraham, Lift up your Eyes to Heaven, and mark these
Stars; and, if you can, number them. What could be more Bright and Glorious
than they by Creation? And what an infinite number of them was made, and fell,
when a whole Legion of them, several Thousands, when they were fallen, dwelt in
one poor possessed Man? And yet these Glorious Creatures, Bright Morning Stars
for Excellency, parallel to the Stars of Heaven for number; you may see them
all falling from Heaven at one time, and tumbling into Ruin, Perdition, Misery
and Hell.

And what is that, and where is that, that has wrought this Mischief, and such
a Desolation? Oh! it is this wicked Haman, this cursed thing called Sin; that
never does better, that never will do better; and whose Trade is only to ruin
and destroy. The Angels that SINNED, God spared not, but cast them down to Hell.

Their sinning, which is so shortly expressed here, is uttered by the Apostle
Jude, That they kept not their first Estate, but left their own Habitation. Now
their first Estate was Righteousness and Holiness, and their own Habitation was
Heaven and Happiness. And when they kept not the one, and left the other, what
Estate did they then come into; and what Habitation did they then find out?
Instead of Righteous and Holy, they became horridly sinful; and instead of
Heaven and Happiness, their Habitation now is Hell, and Chains of Darkness.

As great a Change, as it was possible to be, and as it is possible to imagine,
unless you should imagine, that God should be changed. Great and sad was the
Change of Adam, when from all innocent he became all sinful, and from all happy
to all miserable. But this Change of the Angels, that fell, was more, by how
much they were once more happy, as being in Heaven already, and Adam but just
setting out for it. And in that they being once fallen, had no Possibility of
Recovery, but Adam had.

And was not their changing from Angels to Devils a greater, vaster, and more
astonishing Change, than if they had been changed from Angels to nothing again?
For if their Change from Angels to nothing had been a strange Change, their
changing from Angels to worse than nothing was much more strange. And by the
way, may we not say, that they wrought in themselves such a Change, as God
himself could not have wrought in them. His Power did change them from mere
nothing to Angels. And the same Power could have changed them from Angels to
mere nothing again; but God could not change them into Devils, that was their
own Work. For the most Holy God cannot work a Creature to Wickedness. It Is far
from the acting, (I may say, from the Power) of the All-holy God, to work or
make Wickedness in any Creature.

Well, by their own Wickedness, from Angels they are become Devils; from bright
Morning, shining Stars, they are become as black as Darkness it self; and they
that were lately in the highest Heaven, are cast into the lowest Hell, and
delivered into Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment.

And now, how may we look upon such a Spectacle, and Change as this? Job's
three Friends, when they first came to him, Misery and Sickness had so changed
the poor Man, that they knew him not. But when they did know him, they lift up
their Voices, and wept, Job ii.12. Can we know these Creatures now? Are these
they, that were lately so illustrious and resplendent Morning Stars, and shone
so gloriously in their Sphere and Orb? Are these they, that were once of God's
Privy Chamber, and among his choicest Nobles and Princes attending upon him?
Are these they, that are while, were singing, praising, and rejoicing, and ere
now in Hell in Chains and Darkness? Shall we lift up our Voices, and weep for
them? It may be some question, whether that may befit us, because they are
become Devils. And we may take up a more proper Rule and Practice, Weep not for
those, but weep for your selves.

Well, shall we rejoice at their casting into Hell and Damnation? That may be
some Question, whether that may befit us, though they be Devils. But certainly we
have a more proper Work to do, upon the Sight and Consideration of their Case:
That is, To hear and fear, and tremble, and to learn Wisdom, from their Madness
and Folly.

In the Words before us you see an Intimation of their Sin, and of their
Punishment. The former very briefly related, that they sinned; the latter
largely expressed, and in several Particulars, Viz. That they were not spared:
That they were cast into Hell, delivered into Chains, and reserved unto
Judgment.

I. As to the former, it is expressed that they sinned: but what their Sin was,
is not expressed, neither here; nor indeed is it spoken out in plain terms in
other Places of Scripture. And yet out of other Places, and Reason and
Argumentation from Scripture, it may be reasonably collected and con^^ctured,
what it was, and for Search of it, let us begin here.

1. Angels could not sin at a lower Rate, than wilfully, or of Pride, or
Malice, or of both, or of all. And indeed they could not sin at a higher Rate
than they did. Not at a lower Rate, because of their Nature, as they were
Angels; and not at a higher, in regard of their Sin, which was aggravated, that
nothing could be added.

Ignorance, or Weakness, was far from them, they were created in so noble and
excellent a Perfection. And deceived into any sinning, they could not be;
partly, because of the Greatness of their Knowledge and Wisdom; and partly,
because there was none to deceive them. And there can be no deceiving in the
World of Spirits. It may be probable, that there was a Chief, and a Captain of
them that fell? As there was a Chief or Captain of them that stood, viz. Our
Savior. For you have mention of the Devil and his Angels, and the Dragon and
his Angels, a Chief and Subordinate. But it is hardly probable that their Chief
did deceive them into their Rebellion, though he was Ringleader in it. As
Demetrius led the rest of the Silver-Smiths, that made the Insurrection in
Ephesus, but deceived them not; for they were all of the same Principles.

They were every one their own Tempters. And therein was their Sin so much
aggravated above the Sin of Adam. And what Stumbling Block they found in
Heaven, was only in their own Hearts; and that not so much any Ignorance, or
Weakness, or being Deceived, as Desperate Wilfulness to have their own Will
contrary to the Will of God.

2. Now in what particulars this their Wilfulness centered, and what it was, in
which they would have their own Minds, contrary to the Mind of God, may be the
better conjectured, by tracing them a little from their Creation to their Fall.

They were Created, as is most probable, at the very first b^ginning of the
Works of God, when he laid the Foundation of the Earth, the very first instant
of the Creation. Moses indeed does not mention their Creation at all, because
he would treat only of things Visible: The Great Book of Nature, and the
Letters of that Book which Men see, and from them read the Invisible things of
God, His Eternal Power and Godhead, Romans i.20.

Upon their first Creation they break into Singing and Praising God; upon the
Sight of the Glory of him that Created them; upon the Sense of the Gloriousness
in which themselves were created; and upon Observation of the Infinite Power of
the the Creator: From that first instant, they were Spectators of God's
proceeding in the Six Days Creation. They see him make the Firmament, and the
Sun, Moon, and Stars of Heaven: They see him command the Waters, that covered
the Earth into their Bounds and Channels; and they Obey him: They see him lay
the Earth dry, and plant it with all manner of Trees and Vegetables, and
Beasts: They see the whole Progress of the Creation; and Sing, and Praise, and
Shout for Joy all along. For no cause why they should rebel hitherto can be
imagined.

But at last, and the last of his Creation, God makes Man in his own Image, in
as Happy a Condition as an Earthly Creature could be capable of. He makes him
Lord of all the Creatures: Nay, he charge the Angels themselves to attend
upon him, and to be Ministering Spirits to him for his good: As the Apostle
tells us their Charge and Employment, Heb. i. ult.

This some of them embraced with all willingness of Mind; partly out of most
ready Obedience to God, for whom they saw they could never do too much, who had
done so much for them; and partly out of pure love to Man, whom they saw God
had made their Brother; having stamped him with his own Image, as well as
themselves.

Now as to the others, that fell, what can we imagine to have been the reason
of their Fall, more probably and properly, than that they envied this Honor
and Dignity of Adam, and scorned to obey the Command and Charge that God had
laid upon them, to attend upon him? What? Must a Piece of Clay be so Honored,
as to be Lord of the whole Creation? Must a lump of Earth be waited on by
Angels? And he that is but Dust and Ashes must he be attended on by such
Morning Stars; the Attendents of Heaven? No, they scorn this Service: They
account themselves too good to do it: It is a business below their Dignity. And
so for this Malice against Man, and his Honor, and their Pride against God,
and his Command, from Angels they become Devils, and from Heaven they are cast
into Hell; and Reserved there in Chains of Darkness, to the Judgment of the
last Day.

For a more proper Reason and Means of their Fall, I suppose, can hardly be
given. And their continual Malice and Hate to Mankind, does very much confirm
it: And I believe Eliphaz, Job. v.2. does speak something home to it. He had
said, Chapter iv.18. That God put no trust in his Servants, and his Angels he
charged with Folly. Much less might he put trust in poor Man that dwells in a
House of Clay, etc. And then he comes on and says, Call now if there be any
that will answer thee: And to which of the Saints will thou look? For Wrath
Kills the Foolish, and Envy Slays the Silly one.

The Papists would fain wrest this passage, to prove the Invocation of Saints
Departed, because there is mention made of Calling and Looking to the Saints.
But the meaning of the Holy Man looks clean another way, viz. to this Tenor,
Call, and look about to all the Saints, and Holy Ones whatsoever: And where can
you find any that God may put trust in? For Wrath kills the Foolish, and Envy
slays the Silly One. Wrath against God, and Envy against Man Killed the
Foolish and Silly Angels. So that God did justly charge them with Folly.

And very justly indeed, take Folly in its most common acceptance. And let
this, that we have mentioned, be their Sin and Fall, or be it something else,
(as some other Reasons are given,) they were Fools to purpose to forsake
Heaven, when they might have kept there: To leave their own Habitation, says
the Apostle Jude, and might have inhabited there still. To be in so Blessed
Company, God and Holy Angels, and would forsake it. In so Blessed Employment as
Praising, and Singing, and would leave it off. In the Blessed Presence of God,
in his Favor, in his Enjoyment, and weary of these things. Have I been a
Wilderness to Israel, says God, and a Land of Darkness? Is Heaven become a
Wilderness, a Land of Weariness and Tyring, that they that are there should be
weary of it?

What could be in these Creatures Minds, to make them so Mad and Desperate, so
Foolish and Besotted? The Raze-brain'd Prodigal to forsake his Father's House,
where it was so well with him, and to go to wander he knew not whither: Had he
been asked a Reason, why he would do so, he could have given no better than
this, Because I will do so. And these could be moved by no other Reason, than
this unreasonable one; they were desperately bent to have their own Will though
to the defiance of the Will of God. Be that their Sin, that we have spoken of,
or be it what else it will, it was without all doubting, their crossing of the
Will of God, to have their own Wills; and violating some of his Commands, upon
some wilful bent to have their own Mind. It was not Ignorance of what he would
have them to do: For they knew his Will, as well as those Angels that stood in
Obedience; but they would not do what he would have them. It was not of
Weakness or Disability to do what he would have them; for there is no Reason to
think otherwise, but that they had the same ability of Obedience that the other
had.

But it was a desperate Wilfulness, and a sturdy Resolvedness to have their own
Wills, let the Will of God be what it will. Had one been there to have
questioned these Rebels, when they first set upon their Rebellion; what do you
think to do? Do you think to better your Estates by crossing him, that set you
in your happy Estate? Or do you think to cross God that made you, and he not to
meet with you? Or do you think your Malice to Adam will any whit abate God's
Favor to him? Well, be it what it will in event, we will take our own Course,
and have our own Will. And this desperate Wilfulness was the Cursed
Stumbling Block, that they laid in their own Heart; at which they stumbled and
fell, and were ruined; and must never rise more.

II. Hitherto we have seen these Angels Sinning and Rebelling against God. Now
let us see them Punished and Rewarded, as they deserved. God spared them not,
but cast them down into Hell, and delivered them into Chains of Darkness, to be
reserved unto Judgment.

It is Related in the Story of the Witch of Endor, that when she saw Samuel
appear in his Mantle, she cried out for fear: And her reason was, Because I
see, says she, Gods Ascending out of the Earth. Are Gods arising out of the
Earth such a terror to Her? What terror may Devils falling from Heaven be to
Men? Satan like Lightning falling thence, and his Angels with him; Thousands,
and Ten Thousands, a Number numberless. Such another passage is, Rev. xii.9.
and forwards, The Dragon, the Old Serpent, the Devil is cast ou^ of Heaven, to
the Earth, and his Angels with him; and this Voice follows them, Woe to the
Inhabitants of the Earth, because the Devil is come down among you, having
great Wrath. And it has been VVo to the Earth, ever since he came down upon it.

Their Punishment you see is expressed in several Particulars, and all
Dreadful. The first Word, God spared them not, is the General, which includes
all the rest of the Particulars; and which may give a reason of all the rest.
Why did God cast them into Hell? Because he would not Spare them. Why did he
deliver them into Chains of Darkness? Because he would not Spare them. And upon
the same reason he reserves them to Judgment; because he will not Spare them.

The Expression, he spared them not, is like the Trumpet and Voices of Sinai;
from lower and milder, growing louder and louder; and becomes as a
Thunderclap, out of which came all the Thunderbolts following, viz. That they
were cast into Hell, into Chains; because God spared them not.

1. It signifies in its mildest and lowest Sense and Degree, that he let them
not go unpunished, though they were what they were. Though Angels, though in
Heaven, though Attendants upon him, and so nearly related to him; yet he
suffered them not to escape Scot-free: He spared them not from Punishment when
they Sinned: But,

2. The signification of the Expression rises higher; and it means not only,
that he would not let them go unpunished, but that he punished them home,
sorely, and severely. And so you have the Expression signifying in several
other Places, Deuteronomy. xxix.19, 20. The Man, that says, I shall have Peace,
though I walk after the imagination of mine own Heart; the Lord will not SPARE
him. Where the meaning is not only, the Lord will not let him go free, and
unpunished, but the punishment of the Lord shall light sore upon him; as it
follows in the next Words. But the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall
Smoke against that Man, and all the Curses, etc. Job. xvi.13. His Archers
compass me round about, he cleaves my Reins in sunder, and does not SPARE. His
meaning is, not only, he lets me not be in quiet, but he pays me home with sad
Affliction, Esa. xxx.14. He shall break it, as the breaking of a Potter's
Vessel, which is broken all to pieces: He shall not SPARE. And so in our common
Language, when we incite any one to vex or beat another, Oh! spare him not.
Which in our Meaning is not only, Let him not go free, but lay on Load, and pay
him home.

And so we may very well understand, nay, indeed we cannot but understand the
Expression her^, He spared not the Angels that sinned; that is, he let them not
escape, though they were Angels, but paid them home with severe Indignation; for
he cast them down into Hell, and delivered them into Chains of Darkness, etc.

The first Lash, that God's Severity whipped them with, is not expressed in plain
Terms, but included in the Terms that follow. There is no mention of his
casting them out of Heaven, and yet that is plainly enough intimated, when it is
said, He cast them into Hell. And there is no mention how speedily this was
done, and yet the Quickness of the Words intimates, and all reason confirms,
the Quickness of the thing. They sinned, and he spared not, but instantly cast
them out of Heaven into Hell. For would God suffer such abominable ones to
dwell any more with him? They sinned in Heaven, but Heaven was no Place to hold
Sin and Sinners. It is a Country, where no Venomous thing can live and subsist;
and when they are Sinners, they must be there no more.

The Case minds me of King Uzziah's Case, when he was struck Leprous in the
Temple, the Text tells us, that the Priests thrust him out: yea, that he
himself hasted to go out. For they knew, and he knew very well, that the Temple
was too clean, and holy a Place, to hold Leprosy, and a Lepe^. Heaven cannot
hold a Sinner, no, not a Moment: But, as soon as ever, even the Angels are
become Sinners, away with them; there is no staying for them there.

Nay, could Heaven have been Heaven to them, if it might be supposed they might
have stayed there, where they could see God only angry, and frowning on them;
and the Angels, that stood, loathing them, and abhorring their Company? There
they could see nothing, that could be pleasing and contentive to them, when God
and the Holy Angels were become their Enemies; and they had lost their Interest
in them both, and they had lost their own Purity and Glory. It was time for
them to pack out of Heaven, even of themselves, when now it was become another
kind of thing, than Heaven to them. But God packs them out; and when they had
forfeited Heaven, the Severity of the Lord takes the Forfeiture, and away with
them out of Heaven.

Israel in the Psalm despised the pleasant Land; and therefore God excluded
them for ever coming there. These Rebels despised that which the pleasant Land
signified; and therefore they must be hurled thence, that they be no longer
there.

It is the Opinion of some, that there were so many of these Angels that fell,
that their Number equalled the Number of all the Men, Women and Children, that
must be saved. And that God elected so many for Salvation, to supply and fill
up the room of these Angels, that had lost Salvation. Not to insist upon the
just Number, it is without all question, that it was a vast Number of them that
fell. And do but imagine you saw such an infinite Company of Morning Stars, not
so much falling from Heaven, as thrown from Heaven; and not lighting upon
Fountains and Rivers of Water, as the Star Wormwood does in the Revelations;
but lighting in Hell, and Chains of Darkness. And the very Imagination may
reasonably read to you the dreadful Signification of the Expression, God spared
not the Angels that sinned.

Upon their Sin, and Fall, and Punishment, how many useful Thoughts and
Meditations may be taken up, partly of Speculation, partly for Practice. Let us
but take a Taste of two or three.

I. When you read of Michael or Christ, and his Angels, and the Devil and his
Angels, Revel. xii. and to the like Tenor, though not in the same Terms,
otherwhere, you cannot but fairly conjecture these two things.

1. That there was an Head of those that fell, as Christ was the Head of those
that stood.

2. That doubtless the Head of those that fell was created a most noble
Creature indeed; that was set parallel to Christ in this respect, that he was
the Head of the one Company, as Christ was of the other. And I see neither
Absurdity nor Danger, if we should conceive, that he was created the noblest of
all Creatures; and only Christ, who was no Creature, was above him. And I see
no reason why not to conceive, that the Angels that fell with him, were of as
noble a Frame and Perfection by Creation, as they that stood.

This then may raise this Question and Meditation, what might make the
Difference, that some of the Angels fell, while the other stood; and some
stood, while the other fell. The Resolution of which I know not where to lodge
so properly as in this, viz. That they that stood, were under Christ's
Headship; and they that fell, only left to their created Perfection. Which,
like a Glass, was shining and resplendent, but brittle, and soon broken. But,

II. It is very considerable, that these Spirits that were in Heaven could not
keep there; and yet the Spirits of just Men made perfect, being once gotten
thither, cannot fall thence. That Angels in Heaven, should not stand, and that
Saints got to Heaven, cannot fall. Nay further, that Angels that were in Heaven
could not keep there, and that a poor sinful Creature should get from hence
thither, and to keep there for ever.

There was a vast Difference between the Case and Condition of Adam, and these
Angels, and both their Falls. They in Heaven already, he but just setting out
for it. They tempted themselves, or they had no Tempter: He tempted by them, or
he had not fallen. They upon their Fall are cast from Heaven, and must never
more come there again: He upon his Fall recovered for Heaven, and in Despite
of all their Power and Malice geteth thither.

Such is the blessed Privilege of being in the State of Grace, and having
^^terest in Christ. Both which these w^nted, being bottomed only upon the
Perfection of their own Nature, in which they were created. It might seem
strange, that Adam in the State of Innocence, when he had Power of perfect
Obedience, and of standing in his Innocence, in his own Hand, should be shaken
with the very first Temptation, and lose all. And yet when he was fallen, and
became sinful, he should break through a Thousand Temptations, and recover
Heaven, which he had lost, when Innocent. But Grace and Interest in Christ made
the Difference. For where before he had no Support, but barely himself, and the
Perfection of his created Nature, now he is supported by Christ, and the Spirit
and Grace of God. But,

III. We may see by this Dealing of God with the very Angels, his own Courtiers
of Heaven, how dreadful and terrible God is in his Severity against Sin and
Ungodliness.

The dreadful Severity of God toward these Rebels you may observe in these
three Things. Of which the Words of S. Peter give some Intimation.

I. That he not only cast them into Hell, and damned them, but that he dealt
thus with them for one Disobedience, and Violation of his one Command. The
Angels that SINNED he cast into Hell: That is, for the very first Sin, and
suffered them not to strike a second Stroke on this side Hell.

II. That which follows necessarily to be observed upon this, viz. That he gave
them not a Minutes Space of Repentance, but he takes them at the very Rebound;
and as soon as ever they have sinned, they are damned.

III. That he did not only give them no Time, and Space of Repentance, but that
he excluded them from all Possibility of Benefit by Repentance, and Hopes of
Recovery. For he not only cast them into Hell, but he reserves them in Chains
for further Judgment. No Reprieve, no Hope, no Pardon, ever waiting for the Day
of Execution.

Now look upon them, and let us reflect upon our selves. And first, consider
seriously why it should be so exceeding severe with Angels, and not with Men.
That they should be past all Pardon, all Recovery, and it should not be so with
sinning Man. Where can we lodge the proper Reason of this Difference? And what
can we say to the Cause of it?

I. We might observe, that the Angelical Nature is uncurable, if it be
diseased, and no Way but Death with it. And that old Saying, Corruption optimi
pessima, to take Place deeply here; and their Nature the more deeply corrupted,
when it became corrupted, by how much it had been the more pure before.

II. We might observe, that whereas they being in Heaven, despised Heaven, and
vilified the Delights there, it cannot be imaginable how ever they should
recover Heaven again. Poor Man was making for Heaven, and stumbled, and fell at
his first setting out. And it is a great deal more likely, that he might get
up, and get onward his Journey again, than they that had wilfully cast
themselves from Heaven, whither he was making.

III. We might observe their Sin to have been aggravated with whatsoever might
make Sin unpardonable. They sinned in Heaven; they sinned without a Tempter;
they sinned as wilfully, proudly, maliciously, as it was possible to sin. And
therefore the less Wonder, if it were impossible they should ever repent, and
be pardoned. The Sin of Man was not of so very deadly Aggravation; and yet we
must not lay the Reason of his being pardoned there, but in the infinite Mercy
of a Gracious God. It was not so much, for that Man was less sinful than these
Angels were; that he was therefore pardoned, and they not; but because God was
the more merciful. And whereas to them that so sinned he showed Severity, to
thee he shows Goodness; if thou continue in his Goodness, as the Apostle
speaks in another Case.

Lastly, Let us more nearly yet reflect upon our selves. Let your Thoughts at
once look up toward Heaven, and down toward Hell, and see the Angels sinning
in Heaven, and instantly cast into Hell for it, upon their first sinning, and
upon the very instant of their sinning. Now who can give a Reason, why we
Sinners are not thrown after them? Who among us all but has deserved Hell as
well as they, if God should take Vengeance on us, according to our Deservings,
as he did on them? What have we then to say of the Patience and Mercy that has
so forborne us?

DECAD III.
I. An Inquiry, which is most to be esteemed, Evangelical Holiness, or Absolute
Perfection.
THERE is a Generation among us, that talk of their Perfection, and
Pharisaically Boast, that they are perfect. In which you can hardly tell,
whether they bewray more Arrogance and Pride, or more Ignorance and Folly.
Folly, in that they think they pay such absolute Perfection; which it is
impossible for poor sinful Man to pay; and Ignorance, in that they do not know
that God does not require such Perfection as they dream of, and talk of in
their Dreams.

Well, what then is it the Lord requires? I might give the Prophet's Answer,
Mic. vi.8. To do justly, and love Mercy, and walk humbly with God. But I may
give it in one Word, HOLINESS. It is Holiness that the Lord requires, and not
such Perfection of Pharisee or Quaker, that the Lord requires. It was Holiness
to the Lord, that was written in the Forehead of Aaron, in a Plate of Gold, and
it is Holiness, that God would have his to be marked with. Need I to cite
Scriptures that speak his Mind? Levit. xi.44. Ye shall sanctify your selves,
and ye shall be Holy, for I am the Lord Lev. xix. 2. Ye shall be Holy; for I
the Lord your God am Holy. 2 Cor. vii.1. Perfecting Holiness in the Fear of
God. 1 These. iv.3. For this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, or
Holiness.

And this his requiring Holiness abates much of requiring absolute Perfection.
For perfect Obedience is one thing, and holy Obedience another. It is utterly
impossible to pay absolute Perfectness, but it is not impossible to pay
Holiness. Thousands of holy ones, that have done it, are a Cloud of Witnesses.
And hereupon this Point I may propose to you one or two things that may seem
Paradoxes and strange things; but yet, which carry with them Truth and
Soberness.

I. That Holiness, though cheaper than absolute Perfection, yet is more precious
than the absolutest Perfection that ever Man attained to here; and that was
Adam's in Innocence. It is cheaper* because it may be attained to here, which
absolute Perfection here cannot be* and yet it is more excellent, because being
attained to, it will never fail, which Adam's Perfection did in three Hours.

God aimed Man at an absolute, unchangeable Perfection in Heaven; and in
Tendency hereunto he created Man in a Perfection on Earth, but changeable. And
his Perfection was so soon changed, that it lasted but about Three Hours. And
it so sore changed, that it became most absolute Imperfection. And where is
poor Man now? What is now become of that most absolute Perfection, to which God
aimed him in Heaven? Who will bring me into the strong City? Who will bring me
into Edom? What will now bring him to Heaven? What will now bring him to his
unchangeable Perfection? The poor Man that is traveling 'twixt Jerusalem and
Jericho, and fallen among Thieves, and wounded, and left half dead; how will
this poor Man get home, or to his Journeys end? A Priest passes by, and he
helps him not. His Natural Perfection, in which he was created, can help him
nothing; for that is quite lost and gone. A Levite passes by, and helps him
not. The natural Faculties and Abilities, that are left in him, they can help
him little. For they are grown now but ^nfirmities and Imperfections. But it is
the good Samaritan that must do the Work. It is Holiness that we speak of, that
must heal and recover. For in it is the Work of Christ, and the Holy Ghost, as
well as any Work of the Saint himself. Whereas in the greatest Perfection of
Adam in Innocence, there was only the Strength of created Nature.

I might in many things show the excellent Estate of a Saint endued with
Holiness, above the State of Adam in Innocence; but I shall only briefly
mention these two things.

1. That a Saint of God in the State of Holiness that we speak of, has a
better Will toward God, than Adam had in Innocence; and a better Obedience
toward God, than Adam had in Innocence. This you will say is strange, since
Adam then had no Mixture of Sin in him, and a Saint of God, be he never so
holy, has. Do but consider this. A Saint of God desires with all his Soul, to
keep in with God; labors with all his Endeavor to obey God. If Adam would
have done so, he could have done it. If he had desired with all his Soul to
have kept in with God, he could have kept in with God. If he had used his
Endeavor to have obeyed God, and not to have sinned against him, he could have
done it. So that his Will clave not so close to God as a Saint's endued with
Holiness does. And a Saint, though sinful, yet sins not so wilfully, so willingly
as Adam, when he might have stood. He sins, because he cannot help it: Adam
could have helped it, and yet he would sin. Now guess whose Will and Mind was
in better Condition.

2. How much more desirable the State of a Saint in Holiness is, than the State
of Adam in his Perfection in Innocence, guess but by one Particular, to spare
more. And that you may take up from those Words of the Apostle, 2 Pet. i.4.
Whereby we are made Partakers of the Divine Nature. And so Adam was not: He was
made Partaker of the Divine Workmanship, but not of the Divine Nature. He was
not made Partaker of the Holy Spirit in the Work of Sanctification, as a Saint
of God is. But all his Holiness, all his Perfection was rooted and grounded
only in his own excellently created Nature.

So that by this you see the Truth of the Paradox I proposed, that though
Holiness is cheaper to come by, than absolute Perfection, (for it may be come
by, and the other cannot) yet it is more Excellent, Precious and Advantageous.

II. A second Paradox I have to propose upon this Point, is, That God in
requiring Holiness does not require that we should be sinless, (for that he
knows is impossible) but he requires that we should not sin. Go, and sin no
more, is what Christ required of the Man, healed at the Pool of Bethesda, and
of the Woman taken in Adultery: And it is the All he requires from us, Go, and
sin no more. I, and it is enough and enough again you will say; for who can do
it? Sin no more? Is not that impossible, while we are sinful? And in many
things we sin all, as the Apostle tells us, Jam. iii.2. Sin no more; that is
the State of Heaven, where the Saint is got above all Corruption and
Temptation: But little one may think to find any such thing on Earth.

But I will not be afraid to say, that the Meaning of sinning no more in a
Gospel Sense is to sin no more wilfully, to sin no more knowingly, customarily,
habitually; to leave off to be a Sinner, and to be Holy. He that cloths himself
with Holiness, sins no more.

But does not Holiness suppose Sinlesness? For the Comfort of some good Men
under any Scruples or Fears of Conscience occasioned hence, consider two Things.

I. When God requires Holiness, as he justly requires it, he requires not of
you what Holiness is possible for Man, but what Holiness is possible for you.
There are Degrees of Holiness; and God requires not that every one should come
up to every Degree, but every one to what Degree he can. Not every one to be a
Bezaleel, to contribute so incomparable skilful Work toward the Tabernacle,
but every one to contribute the best he can. God measures Holiness that he
requires from us, not by any Men's Measure, but by the thing it self. He says
not to us, Be holy as Enoch, as Abraham, as David, as Paul: but he says, Be ye
holy, for I am holy. It is true, the Apostle speaks of perfecting Holiness in
the Fear of God, 2 Cor. vii.1. but his Meaning is not to bring it to as great
Perfection as ever any did, but to bring it to as great Perfection as you are
able.

There has been many a good Soul, that has sitten down in much Sadness,
because they could not find they were so holy, so zealous, so fervent, so very
pious, as others they have had their Eyes upon. That as it was the Pharisee's
Pride, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other Men: So it is their Sadness on
the other Hand, Lord, it grieves me, that I am not so good as such other Men.
Such Emulation and Imitation is a good Perswader, but it is not a good Rule. It
is a good Imitation to Holiness, but it is not a good Judgment concerning a
Man's Estate. The Rule of so judging must be another Way.

I may compare Holiness to the Manna gathered and measured in the Wilderness.
He that had gathered less than another, when it came to be measured, had as
much as the other. The poor Christian that has not so much Holiness as
another, yet if he have true Holiness, it bears as full Measure in God's
measuring, as he that has more. For God judges by the Truth and Reality of
Holiness, not barely by the Degree. And,

II. For Truth and Reality, he looks at the Heart rather than the Action. As
our Savior looked at the Heart with which the Widow in the Gospel offered her
Mites, rather than at the Value of the Gift it self, which indeed was as good
as nothing. And in that Passage of our Savior to his Disciples, when they were
asleep, while they should have been watching with him in his great Exigent, had
he judged them by the Action, their Sleeping, it had been Woe with them; but he
judges by their Heart and Spirit. The Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is
weak. And in his Words you see, that the Willingness of the Heart is that that
he looks after: And the Holiness of a Man brought into that Circle, is reckoned
according as his Will stands to Holiness, so is he Holy, or not Holy. And if
his Failing be not in his Will, God passes by the Failing of his Action.

II. An Explanation of those Words of Christ, That Servant that knew his Lord's
Will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will, shall be
beaten with many Stripes; but he that knew not, and did commit Things worthy of
Stripes, shall be beaten with few Stripes, Luke xii.47, 48.
PREPARED not himself.] In the Greek it is only Prepared not, (...); and the
Word Himself not there. So that some construe it, Prepared not for his Lord
those Things that his Lord would have him to prepare for him. But the Sense
that our English gives it may very well justify it self, viz. That prepared
not, nor set himself to do his Lord's Will; Nor did it. As intimating to this
Purpose, that though he was not able to do his Lord's Will completely, as he
should have done, yet did he prepare and set himself to do it the best he
could? No, he did not. And the Syriac Translator, leaving out the next Clause,
Neither did it, shows that he understood this in this Sense; and that his doing
his Master's Will had been fair, if he had but set, and prepared himself the
best he could to do it.

We might hence observe, that Men that will do the Will of God, must prepare,
bend, and set themselves to do it. They must take (...) as the Jews often speak,
Full Bentness and Purpose of Heart to do the Will of God, if they ever hope to
do it acceptably.

Many and few Stripes.] The mention of these may cause us to think of that Law
that seems to stint Stripes to a set and certain Number. Deuteronomy. xxv.2. If the
wicked Man shall be worthy to be beaten, the Judge shall cause him to lie down,
and to be beaten before his Face according to his Fault, by a certain Number.
Forty Stripes he may give him, and not exceed. Upon which Passage let us
observe one or two things.

I. That whereas it is said, The Judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be
beaten, the Psalmist alludes to it, when he says, The Wicked, or Ungodly,
shall not RISE UP in Judgment, Psalm. i.5. For so the Words are in the
Original; they shall not rise up. Upon which some have concluded, that there
shall be no Resurrection for wicked Men; and it were the better for them, if
there were not. But the Words are to be taken, as speaking in Allusion to that
Practice. The Malefactor that was to be beaten, was to be laid, or bowed down,
and so beaten. And in Allusion to the same is that, Romans xi.10. Bow down their
Backs always; as the Malefactors is, when he is to be beaten.

II. Whereas there is Speech of Forty Stripes, it means not, that whosoever
was beaten had so many Stripes laid upon him; but for no Offense they were to
exceed that number. And they, when they went to the highest, yet ever abated
one of that Number, lest they should exceed. 2 Cor. xi.24. Of the Jews five
times received I Forty Stripes, save one. For they had three Cords of the same
length tied to a Handle; and with that threefold Lash they gave Thirteen
Strokes, which made Nine and Thirty Lashings. But there was Abatement of
Stripes according to the Abatement of the Offense; and the greater Offense had
more Strokes, and the less, fewer. As it was a greater Offense for a Servant
not to do his Master's Will, when he knew it (therefore to be beaten with many
Stripes) than to transgress against it, when he knew it not. Therefore that
Servant was to be beaten with less Stripes.

III. He says, He that knew his Lord's Will, and did it not: But he says not,
He that knew not his Lord's Will, and did it not. For it was not likely he
should do it, when he knew it not. But he says, He that knew not his Lord's
Will, and committed things worthy of Stripes. For he can do no otherwise that
knows not his Lord's Will, than offend, and do things that deserve Beating.
Which is a Matter to be considered of about the Sins and Condemnation of the
Heathen.

There be Four Things may be taken Notice of from these Words of Christ.

I. The Bond and Equity, that should bind Men to the Obedience of the Lord's
Will.

II. The Bond and Equity, that binds them over to Punishment, if they obey it
not.

III. The Distinction of the Sins of those that live under the Knowledge of the
Law, and Word of God, and those that do not.

IV. The Gradual Difference of their Punishment.

III. An Inquiry, why God appointed the Jews a Carnal, Ceremonious Institution.
IF any ask that material Question, Why, since God requires to be worshipped
in Spirit and Truth, did he set up a Worship Carnal and Ceremonious, as he did
among the Jews: Not the least part of the Answer must be, because they were a
Carnal People, and gross to apprehend the Things of Religion, doting infinitely
on Formal Services and Ceremonious Rites. The Apostle says of the Hebrews
converted to the Gospel, that they were dull af Hearing, Heb. v.11. Much more
might he say so of them unconverted. They must have a Visible, a Gay, a
Ceremonious Religion, or else no Religion will go down with them.

Remarkable is that Passage of the Apostle, Gal. iv.3. Even so we, when we were
Children, were in Bondage under the Elements of the World. As an Heir, before
he comes to Age, is under Tutors and Governors, ver. 2. Where you may observe
these Two considerable Things.

I. That till the Gentiles came in, to make up the Church of God, the Church
was in her Nonage, in her Minority or Childhood. But when they came in, to make
up the Church, then the Church grew into Manhood.

II. That because of the Childhood of the Church then, best pleased with
Childish things, God saw it requisite to set up such Childish, Carnal, Beggarly
Rudiments among them, as the Apostle calls them; because of the Dullness and
Grosness of their Hearts to apprehend better.

And what our Savior says of one Particular of their Law, Mat. xix.7. Moses,
because of the Hardness of their Hearts, gave them Commandment to give a Bill
of Divorce: So Moses, because of the Grosness and Dullness of their Hearts, gave
them all those Ceremonies that made up their Religion.

IV. A Meditation upon the Length of Time, the second Temple was in Building.
Forty and Six Years was this Temple in Building, John ii.20.
NOT to trouble our selves with the Disputes among Learned Men about the
Computation of these Years, it is enough that we have asserted by these Jews,
who, no doubt, knew the Matter well enough, that it was so long in building.

Six and Forty Years? A long time. Six times as long, and more than Solomon was
building his Temple; which yet was far a more noble Fabric than this was. And
so far more noble, that they which had seen that, and saw the Foundation of
this laid, wept sadly to see the Difference. Ezra iii.12.

First, God raised up Cyrus King of Persia, purposely for this End, that he
might be a Means for Building of the Temple, which the Soldiers of
Nebuchadnezzar had burnt down. See Esaias xliv.28. That says of Cyrus, He is my
Shepherd, and shall perform all my Pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, Thou
shall be built; and to the Temple, Thy Foundation shall be laid. And Chap.
xlv.1. Thus says the Lord to his Anointed, to Cyrus, whose Right Hand I have
holden, to subdue Nations before him; and I will loose the Loins of Kings, to
open before him the two leaved Gates; and the Gates shall not be shut.

Secondly, Cyrus accordingly sends the People out of Captivity, gives them
Commission and Charge to build the Temple, Ezra i.2, 3. gives Order for the
Measures of it, and restores the Silver and Golden Vessels to it, that had been
taken from the Temple, when the City was captived, Ezra vi. The People fall
upon Work immediately after their Return out of Captivity, Ezra iii. So that
here was God's setting on, Cyrus his Concurrence, and the People's setting
about the Work. Yet Forty Six Years was this Temple in Building.

If we look about to observe where the Reason lay, why the Work went on so
slow, we must look Three Ways.

I. We may look upon the Enemies of the Jews, that put in all the Hindrance
they could, as you may read in the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah. In Dan. ix.25.
Gabriel tells Daniel, that Jerusalem, Street and Wall, must be built in
troublous Times. And those two Books tell you, how the Enemies of the Jews
round about were Troublous Hinderers all the Time.

II. You may look upon the Jews themselves, and find them faulty, and
contributing to the slow going on of the Work, by their Coldness and little
Forwardness in it. They took more Care of Building their own Houses, than the
House of God. Hag. i.2. This People say, the Time is not yet come, the Time,
that the Lord^s House should be built. Ver. 4. Is it Time for you, O ye, to
dwell in your ceiled Houses, and this House to lie waste? They had got their
own Houses ceiled; but the Temple of God, little or nothing at all done to that.

III. Now you may say, Where is God's Providence all this while? Which is a
third thing to be looked upon. Did he bring the Children to the Birth, and
wanted Strength to bring them forth? Did he set his own Work of his House on
Foot, and yet is it carried on with no more Speed than that Forty-six Years are
taken up before it be finished? Nebuchadnezzar could build the great Babylon in
far less Time. And Alexander the Great could build I know not how many
Alexandria's in a few Years above Six; which is the odd Number in this Account.
And the Work wherein God's own Hand was a first and chief Mover, to find such a
Delay.

And so indeed God's Work of Building himself up a House; his Work of
Reforming, Repairing a Church, a People, a Nation, has ever gone but slowly
on; and the Wheels of that Work ever driven very heavy. Do I need Instances? We
may take it too sadly at home.

Well, from this present Business of the slow Proceeding that is hinted in the
foresaid Words of the Jews, we cannot but think of God's Providence, and may
very well be called to consider of it, since there came such interfering in
this Business of Building God's own House. Which one would have thought Divine
Providence would have carried on with more Success and Speed. Strange
Dispensation of Providence! That seems different, nay, contrary to it self; and
one while to promote one way, another while the contrary. As if the same God
that was well pleased with the Building of his House, and commanded it, seemed
as well content, when the Building was hindered; and his Providence would not
remove that Hindrance. It was the Dispensation of God's Providence that this
Building of it was begun and set upon; and it was not without the Dispensation
of his Providence, that it went so slowly on, and was hindered. What is the
Providence of God at Variance with it self? It was a Dispensation of
Providence, that Cyrus the first King makes Proclamation for the setting upon
the Building; and it was not without the Dispensation of Providence, that
Artaxerxes the second King made Proclamation for the stopping of the Work
begun. That great God that could build all the World in Six Days by Word of
Mouth, could have carried on this Building with a great deal more Quickness,
could have restrained all the Enemies that stopped it, and could have taken
away all Stops. Therefore it was not without his Providence, that it was so
long in Building, as it was by his Providence that it was begun. Dispensations
of Providence, that seem contrary one to another.

To speak to this Point, we may first fitly begin with that, 2 Pet. iii.19. The
Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, as some Men count Slackness. Here was
a thing of a clean contrary Tenor. The Place we are upon speaks of Building the
Temple; this of Peter of destroying it, the City and the Nation. God had
promised and foretold of such a thing to come, and it was long first; and as
yet not in Sight to the most Eyes. Thereupon ungodly Men begin to mock, Where
is the Promise of his Coming to do that Work? All things continue as from the
beginning: Here is no Sign, no Shadow of any such Matter. Well, says the
Apostle, yet for all this, God is not slack of his Promise, as you count
Slackness. So God had promised concerning the Building of the Temple, that all
Mountains of Hindrance should before Zerubbabel become a Plain; and that he
should bring forth the Topstone thereof with shouting, crying Grace, Grace unto
it, Zech. iv.7. And that greater should be the Glory of that Temple than the
former, Hag. ii.9. For that the Lord of the Temple himself, CHRIST, should come
unto his Temple, Mal. iii.1. But where was the Performance of these Promises,
when all the Reign of Artaxerxes the Work wholly cease, and not one Stroke
done of it all that while. Ezra iv.24? And yet the Lord is not slack of his
Promise, as some count Slackness.

And how is that, that some Men count Slackness? As if God minded not his
Promise, or drowsily and carelessly delayed to perform what he had promised? As
that wretched Servant in the Gospel, My Master delays his Coming; and therefore
he falls to eating and drinking, and being drunk, and beating his
Fellow Servants. And those wretched ones in Esaias v.19. that make a Mock of the
Promise, as if it would never be performed, because they saw it not performed
already; they said, Let him make speed, and hasten his Work, that we may see
it. But God is not slack of his Promise, as Men count Slackness. God's Work is
still going on toward the End promised, though Men see it not, but account him
slack, because they see it not. In that Case that S. Peter speaks of, the
Promise of his Coming in Vengeance against Jerusalem, the Wicked mocked and
laughed, and Where is the Promise of his Coming? Why? His Work toward that End
was going on as fast as might be. He was gathering in his own by the Gospel out
of that wicked Generation, that they should not perish with them. And when that
Work is done, then his Promise will come with a Vengeance. So in this very
thing we are upon, while the Building of the Temple is hindered, God's Work
toward the finishing it is going on.

But to take Notice more particularly of God's Providence and Dispensation in
such Cases, we shall do it from this Observation, that all Times and Events are
determined with God. That nothing occurreth in the World without his
Determination, his Predetermination. He had determined the Time, when the
Temple should be finished; he had determined all the Events that should
interpose before. Some have emblemed, or resembled God by a Circle. And a
Circle is so comprehensive, that there is nothing in the World but is within
the Comprehension of it. The everlasting Arms reach to all things, encompass
all things, though not all alike by way of Embracing, yet by way of
Comprehending. Divine Providence is like the Universe, nothing is on the
outside of it, but all things within: Nothing occurrs without, or beyond the
Bounds of Providence, but all within its Verge and Circumscription. I say, all
Times and Events are determined with God: And to give Proof of this in
reference to both Times and Events, need I to do any more, but only to remind
you of the Prophesies in Scripture, wherein were foretold the Times and Events
of Things that should come to pass Hundreds, Thousands of Years after? Did not
God, that by his Prophets foretold these things, by his Providence determine,
foredetermine of those things?

V. How the Face and Backparts of God, Exodus xxxiii.20, 23. are to be
understood.
GOD is the best Definer of himself. And it is very remarkable there where God
gives Account of what he is, Exodus xxxiii. he tells Moses, that he cannot see
his FACE, for none can see his FACE and live. But that he would hide him in the
Rock, and cover him with his Hand, while his Glory passed by; and when that was
past by, he would take away his Hand, and he should see his BACKPARTS, for his
FACE could not be seen. Now what was this GLORY of God, this FACE of God, that
could not be seen? It was the Dread, and Terror, and Severity of God, as he is
a Consuming Fire. And when that Terror was past and over, then upon the
Discovery of his BACKPARTS, Moses hears this Character of him, The Lord
merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Truth:
Keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin:
According to that Distinction, Chap. xxxiii.18, 19. Moses said, I beseech thee
show me thy GLORY. And the Lord answers him, I will make all my Goodness pass
before thee. His GLORY, that is, his Dread and Terror, is his FACE, his
FOREPARTS; that that is first to be apprehended of us in our Conception of God,
before we come to conceive of his Mercy.

We are to look on his Foreparts first, before we see his Backparts. As in his
Discovery to Elias, he first came in Fire, in an Earthquake, in a great Wind;
and then comes a still, gentle Voice. The Terror of the Lord is first to be
studied, to fit the Heart for the right studying (...) ^is Mercy.

VI. An Enquiry, What that first Resurrection is, Rev. xx.5.
THE Hour is coming, and now is, when the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear shall live, John v.25. That this means not the
general Resurrection at the last Day is plain enough by this, that he says,
The Hour is NOW when the Dead shall hear, etc. and he speaks distinctly of the
General Resurrection at ver. 28. But the raising of the Dead that he means
here, is the raising of the Heathen from the Death of Sin to the Life of
Righteousness: The Heathen, that had lain 2200 Years in Darkness and the Shadow
of Death; that had been dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. ii.1. Buried in all
Idolatry, Ignorance, Darkness, Wickedness and Abomination, from the Confusion
at Babel. When Christ came, and sent his Voice among them by the Gospel, these
dead Souls lived, as it were come out of Death and the Graves, to the Life of
Grace, Holiness, and the Obedience of the Gospel.

And this is that first Resurrection, mentioned Rev. xx.5. when the old
Serpent, the Devil, was bound up by the Chain of the Gospel: So that he could
no more deceive the Nations; as ver. 3. That he should no more delude the poor
Heathen with Idols, and Oracles, and Miracles, and such Delusions, as he had
done. This is the first Resurrection.

Here is a Resurrection; the great Work of Christ, and a great End of his
Coming: But it is a Resurrection of Souls, vile Souls, to make them Glorious,
like his Soul: Souls changed with a great and blessed Change from Death to
Life. This is the mighty Work of a Resurrection. Observe, how the Apostle sets
it out, Ephesians. i.19. What is the exceeding Greatness of his Power to usward that
believe; according to the working of his mighty Power, which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the Dead. God's bringing Men to believe, his
changing them from the State of Nature and Unbelief into the State of Grace and
Faith, is the great, exceeding great Work of God's Power. Such a mighty Working
as that was, when God raised Christ from the Dead. A first Resurrection. And
take that withal, Rev. xx.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the First
Resurrection: On such the Second Death has no Power. Either we must have a
Part in the First Resurrection, the raising of the Soul from the Death of Sin
and Unbelief, or never Blessed, never Holy, never escape the Power of the
Second Death.

VII. An Examination into the Reason of that Eruption of the Apostle, O! the
Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! Romans xi.33.
THE Cause of which Admiration lies in the Verse before: For God has concluded
them all in Unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon all. A strange Conclusion!
Does it not almost speak to this Sense, they all became Unbelievers, that they
might become Believers? He has concluded all under Darkness, that he might
bring them to Light. Like Elias pouring Water, where he meant to fetch out
Fire. The 25th Verse of that Chapter will help to clear this Matter very
pregnantly. Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant of this Mystery,
that Blindness in part is happened unto Israel, until the Fullness of the
Gentiles be come in. Blindness (...), In Parts, is happened unto Israel; for
that is his meaning. And for the Observation of it, take notice of these two
Things.

I. That the Apostle throughout the whole Chapter never names the Jews, but
Israel. Because he is treating of the whole Seed of Israel: Not the Jews only
of the two Tribes, but the Israelites of the ten Tribes also.

II. The Seed of Israel then considered in general had Blindness happened to
them In Parts. First, The ten Tribes were blinded by Jeroboam's Idolatry; and
that was their Ruin and Casting off. Then the two Tribes were blinded by their
Traditions: And that was their Ruin also, and Casting off.

Now this is the Mystery, which he would not have them ignorant of, that
whereas the Gentiles were blinded also, as well as Israel, and before, and
longer than Israel; and that there were many Prophesies and Predictions, that
they should be at last unblinded, and come to the Light; it pleased God to
conclude Israel under Blindness too, first the ten Tribes, and then the two,
till the Gentiles should be unblinded by the coming in of the Light of the
Gospel, and then Israel is unblinded also, Viz. That Remnant of them that
belonged to the Election of Grace, as he speaks ver. 5.

Thus God concluded all under Blindness, all under Unbelief, that he might have
Mercy upon all; the Gentiles under Unbelief, the ten Tribes under Unbelief, and
the two Tribes under Unbelief; that at length he might, as he did at the
bringing in of the Gospel, show Mercy unto all, in bringing Jew, Gentile, and
Israelite, to believe.

And observe what he says in the next Verses before: As ye, O Romans, who are
Gentiles, in time past have not believed, yet now have obtained Mercy through
their Unbelief: So these Israelites also now have not believed, that through
your Mercy they might obtain Mercy. Their Unbelief has caused God to hearken
unto you, O Gentiles, for his Church; and to bring you to believe hereby was
great Mercy to you. And through this Mercy to you, the Gospel rising and
shining to you, (thus bringing you to believe) Mercy also arises to them in
the same shining of the Gospel, that they also may believe. Here is Mercy to
Gentile, Mercy to Jew, Mercy to Israelite. God has concluded all under
Unbelief, that he might have Mercy upon all. And therefore, O! the Depth of the
Riches of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God.

VIII. Asa's perfect Heart how reconcilable with his Sufferance of the High
Places.
IT is said concerning Asa King of Judah, Nevertheless Asa his Heart was
perfect with the Lord all his Days, 1 Kin. xv.14. A Humane Chronicler is not
able to say, Such an one's HEART was perfect (...) because he is not able to
discern, what the Heart (...)* He writes the Story of a Man's Actions, he
cannot write the Story of his Heart, because he cannot know it. But he that
held the Pen, and wrote these sacred Chronicles, the Holy Ghost saw the
Carriage of all Actions, saw the secret Frame and Temper of all Hearts; and he
was able to give Judgment of them, whether they were good or evil; and he could
not but give right Judgment. How happy then is this good Man, of whom he gives
this true, and most noble Testimony, Asa his Heart was perfect with the Lord
all his Days. A more renowned Memorial than what all your Chroniclers can say
concerning Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, Tamerlane, or the great
Conquerors of the World. Their Story is like that Appearance of Elias at Mount
Horeb, a dreadful Earthquake, a tearing Wind, a devouring Fire. In their Story
nothing but blustering in the World, and blundering of Nations, Sword, and
Blood, and Fire, and Plunder. This is all the Noise and Sound of their Fame.
But happy is he that comes off with such a soft, sweet, still Voice as this,
Nevertheless Asa 's Heart, etc.

The first Word Nevertheless does bring in an Excuse, or Pleading for Asa in an
Accusation that might be laid against him. Oh! he reforms and pulls down
Images, and destroys Idolatry, and keeps ado; and in the mean while he lets the
People go contrary to the Command of God, in offering Sacrifices in the High
Places. It Is true, they do so; and they should not do so; but it is not through
any faultering of Asa in his Religion and Piety. For his Heart is perfect with
God for all this.

The High Places were not taken away. And the High Places were taken away, if
you compare the Story well together. 2 Chronicles. xiv.3. He took away the Altars of
the strange Gods, and the HIGH PLACES, and brake down the Images, and cut down
the Groves. There the High Places are taken away; that is, High Places used for
Idolatrous Worship. But in 1 King. xiv. the High Places are not taken away;
that is, that were used to the Worship of the true God; even their sacrificing
to God in every one of their own Towns and Cities, when they might not lawfully
Sacrifice any where, but at Jerusalem. See Deuteronomy. xii.5, 6.

And yet you find that it was their common Practice to Sacrifice at their own
Synagogues in their own Towns. And how often do you find it in the Stories of the
Kings of Judah, yea, of the good Kings, as is said of Asa here: Such and such
Kings did right in the Sight of the Lord: Nevertheless the High Places were not
taken away: the People still offered in High Places. And remarkable is that
Passage, which I believe every one does not observe, in 1 Kin. xix.10. Elias
complains, The Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down thine
Altars, and slain thy Prophets, etc. Elias his Converse was with the Children
of Israel of the ten Tribes, or of Samaria; and of these he complains, that
they had thrown down God's Altars. They have thrown down THINE Altars. Why? God
by his own Appointment had but one Altar, Viz. That that was at the Temple. And
then how does he speak of God's Altars otherwhere? It was of the Altars which
they had set up at their own Synagogues, whereon to offer to the true God.
Because upon every Occasion they thought it too great a Journey to go to
Jerusalem to offer their Offerings.

It might not be an impertinent Discussion to search out, under what Notion
these High Places were yet standing, and in Use, even in the Times of some of
the good Kings. Whether it were by God's Connivance and Toleration; as he
connived at their Poligamy, which was besides the Institution of Matrimony; and
as he tolerated their Divorces, because of the Hardness of their Hearts. Or was
it done by the Kings themselves in the Way of Policy and Prudence; that the
People might be eased as much as might be in their Religion, and not be
compelled more than needs must, to travail to Jerusalem; but that they might
offer their Sacrifices at their own Parish Churches. But I shall not insist
upon that Inquiry. Whatsoever Failing or Offense there was in tolerating these
High Places, yet Nevertheless Asa 's Heart was perfect with the Lord. And it
was not out of any faultering in his Religion, that these High Places were not
taken away, nor out of any halting with God. For his Heart was perfect.

It may seem very hard to reconcile these two together, that he failed to
reform thoroughly for God, and yet that his Heart was perfect with God. Much
more will it seem hard to reconcile what is besides said of him elsewhere, to
what is said of him here, that his Heart was perfect. When Baasha King of
Israel comes in War against him, he is shaken in his Confidence and Reliance
upon God, and plunders all the Treasures of the Temple, to send Money to the
King of Syria, to fight for him. Can we here subjoin the Words before us,
Nevertheless Asa 's Heart, etc? Nay, yet worse, 2 Chronicles. xvi. When he is
reproved, he claps up the Prophet in Prison. And can we write under such a
Passage as that, Nevertheless Asa 's Heart was perfect? Nay, yet not much
better, ver. 10. He oppressed some of the People at that time. And ver. 12. In
his Age he grows diseased in his Feet, until his Disease was exceeding great:
yet in his Disease he sought not to the Lord, but to Physicians. And can the
Undersong still be, Nevertheless Asa' s Heart was perfect?

That his Heart was so, is confirmed by the Mouth of two Witnesses, the Book of
Kings and Chronicles; and the Mouth of the Holy Ghost has spoken it twice
over, here and there; and his Word is Truth, and no Falsehood in it.

Therefore the Work is, to consider, How these things may be reconciled; How a
perfect Heart may consist with such Failings, or such Failings with a perfect
Heart: And here the great Matter is to consider what a perfect Heart is, which
God requires and looks after.

I answer, as the Heart means not that Fleshly Part in our Bosoms, so called,
but our Affections; so a Heart perfect with God means the Bent and Affections
of the Soul perfect toward him; the Moving, the Inclinations of the Soul and
Affections right toward him. As a Wife most dearly and entirely, and with all
her Soul loves her Husband. From which Parallel I may take up in one Particular
the whole Matter: namely, that a Heart perfect with God is a Man that loves ^he
Lord with all the Heart, and Soul, and Mind; and whose whole and entire
Affections are laid out upon God. And where this is,

First, The Aim of the Heart will be perfect in reference to God's Law.

Secondly, The Frame of the Heart will be perfect in its own Compactedness, as
to things relating to God. That is, when there is a Divine Consort in the Soul,
when Understanding, Conscience, Will, Affections are all tuned together to the
Work of God; when all act together in the Ways of pleasing and serving God.

This is a perfect Heart with God, though in it may be many Imperfections; as it
was with Asa. Hence may be gathered two Conclusions.

I. That a perfect Heart may have its Failings.

II. That God passes by the Failings of that Man, whose Heart is perfect with
him.

IX. In what Sense the Apostle thanks God, that the believing Romans had been
the Servants of Sin.
GOD be thanked that ye were the Servants of Sin, Romans vi.17. Had he said, God
be thanked that ye were the Servants of Righteousness, it had been very proper;
but to hear him say, God be thanked that ye were the Servants of Sin, may make
us amazed. One would think this were almost next Door to Blessing an Idol,
which is spoken of Es. lxvi.3. to bless God for Men's being sinful. But to clear
the Apostle's Sense, consider two things.

I. We have some Men saying in Latin Authors, Fuimus Troes, sed miserum est
Fuisse; i. e. We were of the City Troy, but it is our Unhappiness, that we must
say, WE WERE; and cannot, Now we are. So in this Case, God be thanked that ye
were the Servants of Sin; that it may be said, Ye were; but that now ye are
not. But,

II. Since there is mention of Servants, take a Parallel, viz. an Israelite,
saying thus, God be thanked that ye were Bondmen in Egypt. His meaning is
especially to thank God for their Delivery out of Egypt, and what accrued to
them upon their being Bondmen there. They had never seen so great Wonders,
never seen so great Deliverance, had they not been Bondmen. And he thanks not
God barely for their Bondage, but for the Good and Mercy that followed it. So,
God be thanked that ye were the Servants of Sin: Else ye had never known the
Riches of the Grace of God; else ye had never come to prize the Infiniteness of
his Mercy in your Deliverance. Ye had never been so careful to be Servants of
Righteousness, but that ye have known what Slavery it is to be Servants of Sin.
So that he gives not God Thanks barely for their Slavery to Sin, but especially
for what was come to pass with them upon their Sinfulness. He would not say to
any upon Earth, God be thanked, that ye ARE so sinful; but he says, God be
thanked, that ye WERE, and are not. That God made your great Sinfulness his
Opportunity to show you Mercy.

X. The Papists, the Millenaries, and the Traditionary Jews confuted from that
Place, Whom the Heavens must contain, until the Times of Restitution of all
things, etc. Act. iii.21.
HE shall send Jesus Christ to you, Act. iii.20. And yet the Heavens must
contain him. A Paradox; unless Christ could be in many Places at once. Which
the Papists would fain justify, that they may have his Body in every
Sacrament. And yet there is a great Truth in this Paradox, if we distinguish
'twixt the very Person of Christ, and the Influence that proceeds from him. As
God dwells in the highest Heaven, and yet dwells in an humble Heart. As the
Sun is in the Firmament, and yet the Sun in his Influence is on the Earth also.
So Christ in his Body and Person is in Heaven; and the Heaven must contain him,
till the Restitution of all things; and yet Christ is among Men in the Virtue
of his Word, and Influence of his Spirit. As the Prince is on his Throne, and
yet the Diffusion of his Power, Justice, Clemency, is through his whole Kingdom.

The Presence of Christ is everywhere, as he is God; and his Word and Spirit
everywhere, where he pleases to send them. But that the BODY of Christ should
be everywhere is utterly against all Philosophy, Divinity, Scripture, and the
Nature of a Body. And the Doctrine that Christ's very Body is received by every
one that receives the Sacrament, is clean against all these, and against the
very Nature of a Sacrament. But the thing is not worth insisting on; though an
Argument is commonly taken hence to confute that Doctrine.

Restitution.] This is a Word of Difficulty, and requires some Resolution; and
which being resolved will help the better to understand the rest of the Verse.
(...), Restitution, or Restoring of all things. Times of Restoring of all
things? Restitution? To what? To their old Estate? Or to a new and a better
Estate? This Expression breeds the main Difficulty in this Place. And this
encourages the Millenary to dream of Christ's reigning here on Earth a Thousand
Years before the final End of the World. For then they conceive the Jews shall
be restored to be a People again, universal Peace to be restored to all the
World, and Swords beaten into Plowshares, and Spears into Pruning hooks. Then
an universal Peace, Concord and Tranquillity to be restored to the Church, and
all the Glorious Things the Prophets have spoken of, to come to pass, and be
settled.

I. The Word indeed in Greek Authors commonly signifies Restoration to a
former Estate. Hence Circuitus Solis, the Course of the Sun from the Vernal
Equinox to that Point again is called the Restoration of the Year. And so is
that to be understood, Acts i.6. Lord, will thou at this Time restore the
Kingdom to Israel? That is, that Israel shall have a Kingdom, as heretofore.
But how does this Sense agree here? The restoring of all things in the Prophets
to their former Estate. What former Estate can here be meant to be the Pattern
of another to come? And the Millenary will not agree to this Interpretation,
who dreams not of restoring to any former Estate, but to such an one as never
was before.

II. Therefore there may be Restoration, or Restitution to a better Estate. As
Mat. xvii.11. Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things. Now Elias
in the Baptist restored not all things to the former Estate, but to a new and
better. And it is said, He restored all things. Yet here all things are to be
restored still, and the Restoration not yet effected. Therefore that
Restoration cannot be the Restoration here meant neither. Therefore,

III. The meaning is Making good, Accomplishing all things. So Elias Baptist
made good all things written of him, and that concerned his Office. And the
Times are coming, when there shall be an accomplishing, and making good all
Things in the Prophets. And so the Arabic reads, Until the Times which shall
confirm the fulfilling of all those things God has spoken by the Prophets. And
the Syriac not much unlike.

But it will be demanded then, When are those Times, when all things spoken by
the Prophets shall be fulfilled? Truly Reason it self may answer, At the end of
the World. For have not the Prophets spoke of the end of all things, and of the
Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust, and of the Eternal Reward of both?
Till that time then the Heavens must contain Christ. And where should we look
for Christ at any time in any Generation, but in Heaven?

All things that God has spoken by the Mouth of his Holy Prophets.] The
Apostle, in so saying, seems to face the saying of the Jews Traditions in this
Case. To give you a brief Story of their Traditions.

1. Before the Captivity they had Prophets, Urim, Visions of God, Apparitions
of Angels: So that in Matters of Doubt they resorted to a Prophet; as Saul and
his Servant to Samuel: In Matters of State to Urim, as David did.

2. After the Captivity these ceased, viz. After the first Generation. No
Vision, no Prophet more. So that in how changed a Condition were they now? How
destitute of their great Privilege?

3. Then the Devil saw his Opportunity, and stirred up some Instruments to
foist Traditions upon them, instead of Oracles. And they taught, that God gave
a written Law, but an unwritten Exposition of it. And some Glosses, that they
had invented themselves, they imposed, as the very Words of God to Moses at
Sinai. So that every fond Invention of Men now went current, as the Oracles of
God. And this is the undoing of the Nation to this Day. Against these our
Savior so declaimeth, Mat. xv.3. Why do you transgress the Commandment of God
by your Tradition? And in other Places. And the Apostle, 1 Pet. i.18. where he
speaks of their vain Conversation received by Tradition from their Fathers.

Now these Traditions in the two greatest Points of Religion, viz. Concerning
Christ, and the Way of Salvation, had introduced Doctrines as contrary to the
Prophets and Truth, as might be. They made the Way to Salvation so easy, that
it was no strait Gate, nor narrow Way, that led thither, but a few Ceremonious
Works, Washings, Purifications, Sacrifices, would do the Business. By these
they thought they could be justified. And how easy was it to perform these? As
for Christ our Messiah, they thought he should be a Temporal Deliverer, and
would live always, and converse among them, and enstate and keep them in all
Earthly Pomp and Prosperity.

To this it is the Apostle speaks here, God will send Jesus Christ among you,
but not as your Traditions teach, to be always bodily present with you; for he
is now in Heaven, and Heaven must contain him, and there he must be, till the
restoring, or accomplishing, of all things. But not of all things that are
spoken by your Masters of Traditions, but which God has spoken by the Mouth of
his holy Prophets: According to the Sense of the Prophets, not your Traditions.

AN EXPOSITION OF Two Select Articles OF THE Apostles Creed. VIZ. I. The Holy
Catholic Church. II. The Communion of Saints.


AN EXPOSITION OF Two Select Articles OF THE Apostles Creed.
I. I believe the Holy Catholic Church.
AFTER the Creed has done with what is to be believed concerning God, it comes
to speak of what is to be believed concerning other Matters of Faith. It
teaches the Trinity, and that we are to believe in Father, Son and Holy Ghost;
and most largely what to believe concerning the Son, His Incarnation and Acting
for Man's Redemption.

After mention of Faith in the Trinity, I believe in God the Father; In his Son
Jesus Christ; and I believe in the Holy Ghost; it first comes to teach what to
believe concerning the Church, and that in this Article. I believe the Holy
Catholic Church.

A Papist's Faith upon this Article comes to this, Credo in Ecclesiam Sanctam
Romanam Catholicam, i. e. I believe in the Holy Roman Catholic Church. In
which they speak Impiety, to believe in Men; Falsehood, to call the Roman Church
Holy; and Nonsense, to call that particular Church the Church Catholic, or
Universal.

I shall not insist to confute their Belief in this Point; the first Part
whereof is so plainly confuted by Scripture, that bids not to trust in Man; the
second by Experience and History, that tells of the abominable Unholiness of
the Roman Church; and the third by all Reason and common Language, that tells
it Nonsense, to call a particular Church the Church Universal.

I shall first unfold to you the Article, and then speak to what is observable
upon the Meaning and Intent of it.

The Church you see is made the Object of Faith in it. But of what Faith, and
in what Sense, the Articles following show- Viz. To believe, that there is a
Holy Catholic Church, as that there is a Communion of Saints; that there is
Forgiveness of Sins, etc.

In the Article are three Things to be believed.

I. That there is a Church of God. II. That it is Catholic. III. That it is
Holy.
The hardest thing is, What is meant by Catholic; and it is not easy to say,
How there is a Holy Church, when there is so much Wickedness and Abomination in
the World. It is said by the Psalmist, Psalm. xiv.2, 3. The Lord looked down
from Heaven upon the Children of Men, to see if there were any that did
understand, and seek after God. They are all gone aside, they are altogether
become filthy, there is none that does Good, no, not one. And where then can
you find a Holy Church? The Apostle Paul says, Phil. ii.21. All seek their
own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. And John says, 1 Ep. v.19. The
whole World lies in Wickedness. And where can you then find a Holy Church?
Diogenes searched the City throughout with a Candle at Noon day, and said,
Hominem quaero, I seek for a Man. So search Jerusalem with a Candle, and how
rarely can we find one that is Holy? And where then is the Holy Catholic
Church?

First, As to the Word Catholic, it signifies Universal. It is rendered General
in the Titles of the Epistles of James, Peter and John. And those are called
General Epistles, because not written to particular Persons, Cities, or
Countries, (as those to Timothy, the Romans, the Galatians, etc.) but generally
to all, in many or all Countries. As S. Peter to the Strangers in Pontus,
Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia. S. James to the twelve Tribes,
wheresoever scattered. So the Catholic Church is first meant in Opposition to
the particular Church of the Jews; and secondly, as meaning the Church of the
Gentiles, of all Nations that truly profess Christ throughout the World.

The Jews under the Law cried, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord
are these. So since the Gospel even hitherto, they cry, The Church of God are
we. But the Scripture tells us, they are a Synagogue of Satan. And Scripture
teaches us to acknowledge a Catholic Church, the Church of God abroad in the
World among all Nations at one time or other.

We shall take up the Words particularly and single. And first of the Word
Church. And the Article does teach, and call upon us to believe, That God has
ever a Church in the World.

I shall not insist upon the Signification of the Word in Greek and Latin; nor
of the Deduction of it into our English Tongue. Some think our English is
derived from the Greek Word (...), which signifies, Belonging to the Lord. As
(...), The Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. xi.20. And (...), The Lord's Day, Rev. i.10.
So (...), or Church, to mean the Lord's Portion; as Israel is called by that
Title very often.

There is none of you, I suppose, but know what is meant by the Church of God;
viz. Those, or that Company, that worship and serve God throughout the World.

About the Definition or Description of the Church of God, is now, and has
been almost ever, under the Gospel, the greatest Controversy, one of them, in
Religion. As at present, whether the Roman Church be a true Church. Which many
Protestants deny. And whether the Protestant Church be a true Church. Which the
Romanists deny. Whether the Church of England be a true Church. Which
Separatists deny. Whether Separatists be of the true Church. Which the Church
of England denies. The like Scruple is made of the Greek, Russian, Jacobin,
Abyssin, and other Churches. Into which Controversy I shall not enter. We are
upon Catechistical Method, to instruct the Ignorant in the necessary Points of
Religion. And according to that Task, I shall speak only to that which is
plain, undeniable and necessary.

I. God has ever had a Church since the beginning, and will have to the end of
the World. As the Cherubins Wings touched both Sides of the House of the Lord,
and met in the middle; so the Church touches both ends of the World, beginning
and end, and continues all along the Space between. No Generation, in which
there have not been some, that truly professed the Name of God, and belonged to
him. For we may take that for a handsome Definition of the Church. 2 Timothy
ii.19. The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows
them that are his, and, Let every one that names the Name of Christ depart
from Iniquity. It is a People that belong to God, call on the Name of God, and
depart from Iniquity. I might trace in Scripture the Footsteps of such a People
and Church from Generation to Generation, from Adam to Christ. But let the
Apostle do it for me, Heb. xi. But how can we trace it from Christ to these
times? This is the great Question of the Papists, Where was your Church before
Luther? How is it possible to trace Religion and the Church from Christ
hitherto, but in the Church of Rome?

Why? That there has been a true Church ever since Christ, and will be to the
end of the World, Christ has assured us by that, Matthew. xvi.18. The Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it. And to that reflecteth that, 2 Timothy ii.19.
The Foundation of God stands sure. Not to be shaken down, not to be brought
to nothing. And that speaks to the same Tenor, that Christ's Kingdom should
be everlasting, and have no end. Dan. ii.44. Which shall never be destroyed.
And Psalm. cxlv.13. Thy Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and thy Dominion
endures throughout all Generations. It is to endure throughout all
Generations. No Generation to be, in which is not some part of that Kingdom.

II. But for clearing, we must distinguish 'twixt the Church visible and
invisible, known of God, and seen of Men. The Apostle makes this Distinction, 1
Cor. i.2. To the Church of God, which is at Corinth, to them that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in every Place
call upon the Name of Jesus Christ. Sanctified and called to be Saints differ
from all that profess and take on them to call on the Name of Christ. Psalm.
lxxxiii.3. They have consulted against thin hidden ones. Hidden from the Eyes
of Men; that Men do not know, nor own them for the People of God, but he knows
and sees them. 2 Timothy ii.19. The Foundation of God stands sure, having this
Seal, The Lord knows those that are his. They are under Seal, as a sealed
Letter which Men cannot read; as a sealed Treasure, which Men cannot see. But
God knows those that are his.

First, We must say, God has ever had a Church, but cannot say he has ever
had a visible Church. Psalm. xiv.1, 2, 3. The Fool has said in his Heart there
is no God. They are corrupt, they have done abominable Works. There is none
that does Good, etc. Where was then a visible Church? Yet there was then a
Church; Ver. 4. Have all the Workers of Iniquity no Knowledge? Who eat up my
People as they eat Bread. There was a People of God; but the Wicked would
devour them, and eat them up. Look before the Flood, Genesis vi.12. And God looked
upon the Earth, and behold it was corrupt. For all Flesh had corrupted their
Ways upon the Earth. Where was a visible Church? See ver. 9. These are the
Generations of Noah. Noah was a just Man, and perfect in his Generations. And
Noah walked with God. There was a poor handful in the Family of Noah, known of
God, but despised of Men.

Look among Israel in Egypt. Where would you look for a Church but among them?
Yet see Ezekiel. xx.7, 8. Then I said unto them, Cast ye away every Man the
Abomination of his Eyes, and defile not your selves with the Idols of Egypt.
But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me. They did not every
Man cast away the Abominations of his Eyes, neither did they forsake the Idols
of Egypt. Where was a visible Church then, when the Nation generally followed
the Idols of Egypt? Yet God had then his invisible Church, Cohath, Amram,
Aaron, Moses, etc.

One for all, 1 Kin. xix.14, 18. I have been very jealous for the Lord God of
Hosts: because the Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, thrown down
thy Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the Sword, and I, even I only am left.
Yet, says God, I have left me seven Thousand in Israel, etc. Elias was
quick-sighted to have observed one that served God, and one that did not; and
yet he did not see one, that did, but himself. Yet God had Seven Thousand of
his hidden ones; Knees, that had not bowed to Baal, and Mouths, that had not
kissed him.

Secondly, There is no Salvation out of the Church, but there may be Salvation
out of the visible Church. As Multitudes, that are in the visible Church, are
not saved: So some out of it may be saved. I speak not this to encourage any to
neglect being of the visible Church, but to show the necessity of the
Distinction we are upon, as to the right stating the Notion of the Church in
Point of Conscience.

On one Hand there are some in the visible Church, that are more abominable
than ever were the Heathen. Are there not some of the Church of England, or
Holland, that will be called Christians, that are as abominable Atheists,
Drunkards, Whoremongers, as ever were any of the Heathen? Of such kind of
Christians the Apostle complained, 1 Cor. v.11. But now I have written unto you
not to keep Company: If any Man, that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or
Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner; with
such an one, no, not to eat. Implying, that there were some, called a Brother,
a Christian, yet a Fornicator, etc. and one that was not fit to be companied
withal. And Phil. iii.18, 19. For many walk of whom I have told you often, and
now tell you even weeping, that they are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ.
Whose end is Destruction, whose God is their Belly, and whose Glory is in their
Shame, who mind earthly things. And Tit. i.16. They profess that they know God,
but in Works they deny him; being abominable and disobedient, and to every good
Work reprobate.

Is not the greatest Company in any visible Church either such open profane, or
careless Christians, or downright Hypocrites? Are there not Ten, an Hundred of
such for One, that truly fears God? Well, when we speak of the Holy Catholic
Church, can we only think of that which is visible, as to an outward
Profession, in which Millions perish, and go to Hell for ever? No, we are to
think of the Church invisible; the number known to God of his Faithful ones.

And on the other Hand, as a Man may be in the visible Church, and yet not be
saved: So possibly a Man may be out of the visible Church, and yet may be
saved. An Infant, not yet Baptized, is not yet admitted into the visible
Church; but it were hard to say, all so dying were not saved. David's Child,
not Circumcised, died, and yet who doubts of his Salvation. Consider David's
Demeanor upon his Death, and compare it with the Demeanor of him, upon the
Death of Absalom, 2 Samuel xviii.33. The King was much moved, and went up to the
Chamber over the Gate, and wept: and as he went, thus he said, Oh my Son
Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom; would God I had died for thee, Oh Absalom, my
Son, my Son. This for Absalom. But for his Infant, 2 Samuel xii.18. David 's
Servants feared to tell him, that the Child was dead. For they said, Behold,
while the Child was yet alive, we spoke unto him, and he would not hearken unto
our Voice, how will he then vex himself, if we tell him, that the Child is
dead? But how well he took it, see v. 23. Now he is dead, wherefore should I
fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to
me. He could not but doubt Absalom's Condition, because he died in Rebellion.
But had he doubted so of the Child's Condition, could he have been so well
apaid upon his Death? Had he been of Popish Faith, to believe that Children are
not saved, that receive not the Sign of Admission into the Church, could he
have been so well satisfied?

And in another Case; a good Man may possibly die excommunicate out of the
visible Church. It were hard to conclude such a Man's Damnation merely upon
that reason, John ix.34. The Jews there cast out a Man for arguing that Christ
must be a true Prophet, because he cured him, who had been born blind. And ver.
22. The Jews had agreed already, that if any Man did confess that he was
Christ, he should be put out of the Synagogue. And Christ told the Disciples,
that they should be cast out of the Synagogue. If they died in that
Excommunication out of that visible Church, did that prove their Damnation? How
many Holy Men have died excommunicate out of the Church of Rome? Which so
little argues their Damnation, that it rather argues the contrary. Nay, it may
come to pass, that a good Man may die excommunicate out of a true Protestant
Church, neither for Heresy nor Impiety, and yet it were hard to doom such an
one to Perdition.

I speak not this to animate any to separate, or withdraw from the visible
Church, wherein we live. For such Divisions of Reuben there are sad Thoughts of
Heart. But that by observing this needful Distinction, you may the better
observe the Intent of this Article.

Learn then this Distinction of Visible and Invisible. As the Apostle has it,
All are not Israel, that are of Israel: So all are not the Church of God, that
are of the Church visible. As we may say, every Minister is not a Minister,
every Soldier is not a Soldier.

And let this be thy Meditation upon this Article, God has a Holy Church, that
serve him truly, whom the World cannot discern. And I must get to be of that
number, or this my Profession will be greater Damnation.

This needful Distinction will help to answer that Cavil of Papists, Where was
your Church before Luther? Answer, God saw his own, that professed his Truth in
the midst of Popery. As there was a Lot in Sodom, and Seven Thousand that bowed
not to Baal.

This also will afford an Answer to that reproachful Cavil, Do you think your
Ancestors were damned, that lived in Popery? And they think they have us in a
Strait by this Argument. But we may answer, It Is not for us to judge. God has
His, whom Men cannot discern. I doubt not, but that many were in the Popish
Church, that were not of it.

The Papists indeed brag of the Visibility of their Church. They will have it a
City on a Hill; a Candle on a Candlestick, etc. Mat. v.14, 15. and make a puff
at the Protestant Church, because it was not visible Two Hundred Years ago; and
their Church has been a Thousand Years. They tell us we had had no Scriptures,
had not their Church preserved them. No Ordination of Ministers, had it not
been conveyed all along in their Church. And such things as these they vapor,
as if there could be no true Church but theirs, which has been visible in all
Ages.

I remember a Story; when one had proclaimed a King with a World of Titles, the
King of France made his Herald proclaim him nothing but King of France, King
of France, diverse times over; accounting more Dignity in that one Title, than
in all the others. The Church of Rome proclaims her self pompously in her
arrogated Titles, that She, She is the Mother Church, the Holy Church, the
Catholic Church, the Only Church, and I know not what. The Protestant Church
need to say of her self no more, than that she is the Church of God. The other
brags of Antiquity, Universality, Visibility, Succession, and other Bravado's;
whereas the Protestant Church has but this to glory of, (and it is enough)
That she is built upon the Prophets and Apostles. Ingenious was that Picture:
In one Scale you see all the Trinklements of Popery, and the Pope and Friars
hanging on; in the other the Protestants put the Bible, and it outweighs. This
is the Glory and sure Friend of a Church, to be built upon the Holy Scriptures,
although there be no Visibility of that Church to the Eyes of Men at all.

But that we may take up the Consideration of this thing the better, and that
we may see how needful it is to take the Distinction proposed, observe these
things.

It is true, the Church of Rome, if a Church, has been visible a Thousand
Years and more, when no Protestant Church was to be seen. So the World was
visibly of one Religion Two Thousand Years, viz. Irreligious Heathenism; when,
but only in one spot of Ground, one that served the true God was not to be
found. Abraham in Chaldea, when he first hearkened to God, how might this Romish
Argument have been used against him? What thou only of all the World not
worship Gods of Gold and Silver? Look through Europe, Asia, and Africa, and thou will not find one of thy Mind. Was Abraham's Religion ever the worse for being
so lonely, or the other the better for being so universal? Michaiah, and the
false Prophets of Ahab; he One, they Hundreds: Were their Words ever the truer
for their Multitudes?

It Is true, that for some Hundreds of Years all this Western World was Popish,
Italy, Spain, France, England, Germany; and no Religion visible in all these
Countries but Popery. The Name of Protestant not owned; the Protestant Religion
not to be seen: And where was then your Religion, say the Papists to us? To
whom, to give a full Answer, let us compound these three or four things
together. We must tell them, or else we speak not as the Truth is, that the
Popish Religion was far from being the true Religion, and the Popish Church
from being the true Church all that time, or from ever being so.

I shall not insist upon many Arguments to prove this. I shall only give you
one Argument from a Scriptural Reason, and one Consideration of a Scriptural
Expression.

The Argument from a Scriptural Reason is this: That Church that is built more
on Traditions and Doctrines of Men, than on the Word of God, is no true Church,
nor Religion. But the Church of Rome is built more upon Traditions and
Doctrines of Men, than on the Word of God. Ergo. The Foundation of the true
Church of God is Scripture. Ephesians. ii.20. And are built upon the Foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets. But if you look upon what the whole Frame of Popery
is built, you will find it upon a Sand of Humane Tradition. That the Pope is
Head of the Church; that he pardons Sin, rules over Princes; where find you
this in Scripture? They are but Points of the cursed Inventions of Men. That
Priests can sing Souls out of Purgatory; that the Service of God should be in
an unknown Tongue; that the Priests can change the Bread into a God; and
generally the whole Rabble of their Romish Religion has not so much as any one
underpinning of Scripture Warrant, but all founded upon the rotten Trash of
Humane Invention, and Self Ends.

The Scriptural Expression to be considered is that Title of Rome, Rev. xvii.5.
MYSTERY, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the
Earth. For that it speaks of Rome, is plain, ver. 18. The Woman which thou
saw is the great City, which reigns over the Kings of the Earth. And
described even as the Roman Writers themselves do describe her, ver. 9. The
Seven Heads are Seven Mountains, on which the Woman sits. She is styled,
Mystery, Babylon. She was a Mystery of Iniquity. Babylon, while she takes upon
her Sion; Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, when she takes upon
her to be Mother of all Churches, and the only Spouse of Christ in the World. A
Jezabel, as Rev. ii.20. that takes on her to be a Prophetess, but is a Seducer.

And Mysterious is the Providence of God, in permitting such a Deceiver, that
should seduce all the Western World with a general Seduction. It is observed,
that Popery and Mahometism rose together; one overwhelmed all the East, the
other the West. Where had been Glorious Churches, there this Smoke of the
Bottomless Pit clouded and darkened all. And it is observable, that wheresoever
the Gospel had been, these two came and spoiled all. And Popery the more
abominable than the other, because under the Name of Christ and the Gospel, it
led Men from Christ and the Gospel. We may say upon Thoughts of both, as it is
Rev. xvi.5. Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be,
because thou have judged thus. Because they received not the Love of the Truth,
that they might be saved, it was just with thee, Righteous God, to send them
strong Delusions, that they might believe a Lie. That they all might be damned,
that believed not the Truth, but had Pleasure in Unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians.
ii.10, 11, 12.

So that to question, where was the Church of God before Luther, we must answer,

1. That the Roman Church was not it; for that was but Babylon, the Mystery of
Iniquity, the Plague of God upon the World for not receiving the Love of Divine
Truth.

2. Wheresoever there were any in that time, that kept to the Truth of God,
they were the Church of God. Ubi Imperator, ibi Roma. So wheresoever the true
Profession of the Truth was, there the Church was. Where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. The Seven
Thousand, that worshipped not Baal, were the true Church.

I shall not insist to show, that even in the thickest and darkest Times of
Popery, there were other Churches in the World, that were not infected with
that Plague, as the Grecians, Abyssines, etc. But even Stories do show, that
even within the Compass of the Popish Church there were some in all Ages, that
held to the Truth of God, and Abominated the Wickedness and Delusions of the
Church. But if any such could not be named, yet God never left himself without
Witness; and it has ever been the Glorious Providence of God to preserve a
Noah in a wicked old World, a Lot in Sodom, an Abraham in an Idolatrous
Chaldea, a Job in Heathen Arabia, and a Jeremy in a most wicked Jerusalem; a
Church to himself in the worst Times.

But observe, that the Church of God is the least part of the World, and so the
least part of the visible Church. We must distinguish the Church in Opposition
to the World, and in Opposition to Hypocrites, and carnal Gospellers: So the
Scripture names Saints in Opposition to the Heathen, and in Opposition to
unholy Christians. Now take the Word in this latter Sense, which is the most
proper, and the true Church of God is the least part of the Church. I deny not,
that the Church of England, Scotland and Ireland, is a true Church of God, in
regard of outward Profession. But there are Multitudes in these, that are not
the true Church, in regard of sincere Profession, but profane Hypocrites,
Castaways. Imagine a great Parish or Congregation, that meet together; and in
the Church hear and wait on the Ordinances, and have the Word and Ordinances
truly administered. They attend upon them in outward Attendance, but out of the
Church are Profane and Ungodly. We cannot but say, here is a Church in
Opposition to the Heathen; a true Church in Opposition to a false, where the
Ordinances are not rightly administered. Yet we cannot say, this is a true and
sincere Church of God; because they do but outwardly profess, and not at all
Practice.

So Israel professed, went to the Temple, Es. i. had Ordinances rightly
administered. This was a true Church so far. But they lied, swear falsely,
committed Adultery, oppressed the Innocent, and such like. Can we then say,
they were a true Church of God? See that Ephesians. v.25, 26, 27. Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it. That he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of Water by the Word. That he might present it to himself a
Glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it
should be Holy, and without Blemish. Let us take up all these Particulars.

1. Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it. What, for all that make
an outward Profession? Adulterers, Fornicators, Drunkards, and the like? Does
he love such? Does he give himself for such? Many and many better Professors
shall be refused of Christ at the great Day; because they were not sincere in
their Profession, though not so abominable in Conversation, Mat. vii.22, 23. Many
will say to me in that Day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and
in thy Name have cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many mavelous Works?
And then I will profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that
Work Iniquity. We cannot think that such were so abominable in their
Conversation; but Christ found they were not sincere in Profession. The foolish
Virgins, we cannot imagine that they were Whores; for they were Virgins: Or
that they were abominable in their Lives; but they were foolish, drowsy, and
negligent. Now if Christ is so far from owning such, as are so fair-carriaged,
think you he owns, loves, and gave himself for horrid Wretches, that despise
him?

2. The true Church is cleansed, sanctified, without Spot or Wrinkle. Look on
the most, nay, almost all in the visible Church, that make an outward
Profession; and do they carry such a Mark? How few are there, upon whose
Conversation is Holiness to the Lord? As Tit. i.16. They profess that they know
God, but in Works deny him. At Christ's Table there was One Devil to Eleven
Saints, in the visible Church it is well if there be one Saint to many Devils.
One of a City, and Two of a Tribe, like a few Berries after beating the
Olive Tree.

I may use the Style of Eliphaz, Job xxii.15. Have thou marked the old way,
which wicked Men have trodden? Mark the way of the World, which most Men walk
in: Observe how unsuitable it is to the Gospel, to the Example of Christ, and
the Discharge of a good Conscience: And then look upon these Marks of the true
Church of God. And then judge whether it be not true, that the Church of God is
the least part of the World, and the least part of the Church visible. Our
Savior asserts the former in Fear not, little Flock, etc. Also the latter in
Many are called, but few are chosen. Many in outward Profession, in the visible
Church, but few truly the Church of God.

And so we may answer that Cavil of the Papists we spoke of before, Where was
your Religion all the time of Popery? Answer, In the Scripture. Had a Jew
questioned a Heathen at his first Conversion, Where was your Religion
heretofore? He might have answered, In the Scriptures. We profess nothing but
what is in the Scripture. As Acts xxvi.22. Saying, none other things than
those, which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. But where was our
Church? It was; but invisible. Some there were that worshipped God according to
Scripture; that he saw and knew, though invisible and unknown to Men.

That then that we are to believe in this Article is,

I. That God ordinarily has had, has, and will have a visible Church, for the
glorifying of his Word and Name. But,

II. Though the Church be not visible, yet God has always some that belong to
him, and serve him. And this is the Church of God, though not to be discerned of
Men.

These most properly are the Church, as Ecclesia signifies; that is, Called
out. A People called out of the World; though in the World, yet called out of it,
so that they are not of it: Called off from the Course, Way, Doings of the
World, as it were into another Climate. Many are called; that is, Have the Call
held out to them, but they follow it not; called to, but not called out. But
these, as the Apostles did, follow the Call of Christ, and forsake the World.
Called to be Saints, and they become Saints, or Holy.

Now for further Explication and Illustration of this Article, I shall descend
to enquire into two Questions.

I. Whether every Christian, who is bound to believe, that there is a Church,
is bound also to believe, that he is of this Church.

II. How far Christians are obliged to believe the Church; that is, Councils,
Synods, or Primitive Fathers.

I. Whether every Christian is bound to believe that he is of this Church. For
certainly it seems strange for Men to believe as Standers by only, as if they
were not concerned in the thing believed. I believe that there is a holy chosen
number to be saved; that God delights in them; that they faithfully serve him;
and that they have Communion with God, Forgiveness of their Sins. But what is
all this to thee? What art thou the better for it? And therefore certainly the
Article has further aim, than to intend only a bare Belief. But does it reach
to this, I believe I am of this number.

To proceed gradually, first let me observe two things by the way.

1. That nothing is to be believed as a necessary Point of Faith, but it
concerns the Soul; therefore believing of it must be to benefit the Soul. Cord
creditur ad justitiam. With the Heart Man believes to Righteousness. It is not
all, to believe the thing is true; but f^rther to believe so, as the Soul may
have Advantage. Take an Instance: One of the first things in Religion to be
believed is, That the Scriptures are the Word of God, and divinely true. This,
who believes not? The Devil himself cannot deny it: Nay, he cited Scripture, as
the Word of God, to our Savior. And there are Thousands in Hell that never
made doubt of this. Therefore the believing of this must have a further reach,
that the Soul may receive Benefit upon so believing.

2. The believing the needful Points of Religion is not an Act of the
Understanding only, but of the Will and Conscience also. It is a Question,
Whether Faith be an Act of the Understanding, or Will: And it is concluded of
both, especially the latter. I believe that there was a Julius Caesar, an
Alexander Magnus. Here is only an Act of the Understanding, because I have no
more to do with it, but only to believe it. But I believe, that Christ was
born, died, rose again; that there is Forgiveness of Sins; that there is a God,
an Heaven, a Day of Judgment. And in reference to these, I have something more
to do, than barely to satisfy my Understanding, that the things are true. For
I have to work my Will and Affections upon my Belief, that my Soul may be
benefited to Eternity.

These things premised, let us apply to the thing in Hand. Then I am not only
barely to believe that there is a Church, but my Soul is to be working upon
this Belief for its Good; to be affected in Heart according to the Import of
the thing believed. And this may be upon a twofold Reflection. When I say, I
believe a Holy Catholic Church, that there is always a Company of Holy Men,
that truly fear God, Sursum corda; then lift up your Hearts.

First, To be affected with the Goodness and good Providence of God, that
picketh out, and preserves such a Company to himself. Not to think of the
Church on Earth, but to have such a thought also toward Heaven; hereat to
observe, admire, and be affected with God's wonderful Goodness in that regard.
Such are the Apostle's Thoughts upon the Thoughts of the Church. He looks on
the Church of Corinth once such a People as he describes, 1 Cor. vi.9, 10.
Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate, Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners. But now Washed,
Sanctified, Justified. And where are his Thoughts? Up toward God. 1 Cor. i.4. I
thank God always on your Behalf for the Grace of God, which is given you. So he
looks on the Church of the Ephesians, Chap. i.3. Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings,
etc. So on that of the Philippians, Chapter i.3. I thank my God upon every
Remembrance of you. And so to the Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. i.2. We give Thanks
to God always for you all. And so should a Christian, presly thinking of the
Church of God, have his Heart in Heaven, blessing the infinite Goodness, for
choosing and preserving such a People to himself. In the Inundation of Sin and
Damnation, to pick out a Number for himself, to escape Sin and Damnation; and
in all the Tumblings and Storms of the World, to keep a Church undrowned, and
unoverwhelmed; an Handful in Noah's Ark in the midst of the Deluge of Sin and
Troubles.

Secondly, To be affected with the Condition and Estate of the Members of the
Church. He, that truly knows that and them, cannot but take up that of the
Psalmist. Psalm. cxliv.15. Happy are the People, that are in such a case; yea,
happy is that People, who have the Lord for their God.

When you rehearse this, The Holy Catholic Church, in the Creed, let your
Thoughts first recoyl to your Bibles, and see how the Holy Ghost pictures them
there. Lam. iv.2. The precious Sons of Zion, comparable to fine Gold. Mal.
iii.17. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in the Day when I make
up my Jewels. Then that, Psalm. lxxxiii.3. They have consulted against thy
hidden ones. They are the Treasure of the Lord's Cabinet laid up with him, though
not minded of Men. Nay, yet the Divine Limner lays on more precious Colors.
Joh. xv.15. I have called you Friends. Nay, 2 Pet. i.4. Partakers of the Divine
Nature. Nay, further, 1 John iii.4. We are the Sons of God. And that is not
all, but more, if more may be, We shall be like to himself.

Now, Christian, when thou repeatest this Article, write this Exposition of the
Word, Church, in the Margin, These are the Lord's precious Ones, His Jewels,
His Friends, His Sons, His own Similitude: These are His Delight, His Portion,
His Chosen, and the very Apple of his own Eye. Deuteronomy. xxxii.10. And art thou not
affected with their happy Condition? And affected for thine own Soul's
Interest? I believe the Holy Catholic Church; that is, such a Happy, Blessed,
Glorious Company; and do thou not stir, O my Soul? No Life, no Holy
Emulation, no striving to be like to these? A poor miserable Beggar sees the
Wealth and Bravery of the great Ones, and he may happily envy it; but he cannot
emulate or hope to equal it. But God has shown thee a Way, that thou may be
like to these, and Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; and art
thou not moved?

Alexander weeps, because He was not so famous as Achilles, Julius Caesar,
because not so famous as Alexander. And have thou not a holy Emulation in thee,
O Christian? Such and such, Holy, Blessed, Dear to God; and have thou no
Emulation to be so too? Ponder but that Title, Friend of Christ, and that
Title, Child of God; and do we profess Christ and God? And are we not moved at
it? To be a Child of God, carried in the Bosom of his dearest Affections. To be
a Friend of Christ, always in his tender Affections and Remembrances, and
smiled on by him at the great Day; and Heart, art thou so lumpish, as not to be
warmed with such Thoughts?

This very Hint may answer the Question before us, viz. Is every one to believe
that he is of the true Church? Answer, Every Heart here, is he not to believe
that he should be of this Church; that it is not well, if he be not so? Nay,
further, that he is to strive with all his Endeavor to be of it, or else he is
not what he should be? Set this Church before you in the Picture of it, Mat.
xxv.33. standing on the Right Hand, and Christ smiling upon it: Do you not
believe you should be of that number? Do you not believe you ought to give all
Diligence to be of it? This it the thing the Article calls to you for, when you
repeat it. And let me be a little further its Interpreter, to show you yet this
Church its Meaning.

I. It would mind you, that that is the Church, that is a Church for ever. The
Church of God is that that shall be the Church of God, when the World shall be
no more. I may compare the Church visible and invisible, to the Body and the
Soul. The Body is visible, and at last shall come to Dust. But the Soul is
invisible, and is immortal. Visible Churches have died Generation after
Generation. Where are the visible Churches of Asia, Judea, etc. and time will
come, when all the visible Churches of Europe must come to nothing. But still
there was an immortal Soul in those Churches, a Company of Holy Ones, that go
to be a Church of God in another World, to praise, glorify, and have Communion
with God for ever. This Church in the World is like the Heart in the Body of
Man, Primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, The first that lives, and the last
that dies. It began to live in Adam and Eve, when they embraced Christ; and
when it dies, the World must die with it. When the last Saint is gathered, then
even the Soul of the World, and of the visible Church is gone, and they die too.

The Life of the visible Church is the Word, and Sacraments, and Ordinances.
Wheresoever these are, there the Church is alive. But if these are not rightly
administered, the Candlestick is removed; it has but a Name that it lives, but
is dead. And how has God, or may God remove these? But the Life of the
invisible Church is the Word and Spirit; and neither of these are ever to be
removed. For both are settled in Heaven. Observable is that Phrase, Jam. i.21.
The ingrafted Word. It is fast joined, and growing in the Heart. In the visible
Church it is in the Hands, but to the true Flock of Christ it is in the Heart
and Spirit, and there for ever.

II. This is the Church Militant here. Much is spoken of the Church Militant.
And Scripture Warrants such a Title: Ye sight against Principalities and
Powers. And, As a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. Now how many Thousands are
there in the visible Church, that never strike Stroke; that are Lookers on,
nay, scarce so much; that mind not the Christian Warfare at all; and that never
resist the Flesh, the World, or the Devil?

II. I come now to the second Question, How far to believe the Church; As the
Church is sometimes taken for Councils, Synods or Convocations, or Primitive
Fathers. I mean not barely the Colliar's Faith, to believe as the Church
believes, though he knew not what it was; but knowing thoroughly the
Determinations of these, whether it be absolutely necessary for us to believe
them, because they are the Determinations of the Church.

The Romanist says, Yes: And he that believes not what Holy Mother Church
determines, is a Heretic: He that believes not according to what the Council
of Trent has determined, let him be Anathema.

(...) answer, We first begin here: That the Scripture^ co^ntain all things
needful for Faith and Life. (...) in Es. viii.19, 20. And when they shall say
unto you, seek unto them that have familiar Spirits, and unto Wizzards, that
peep, and that Mutter; Should not a People seek unto their God? -- To the Law*
and to the Testimony: If they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no Light in them. So may I say also in this case, if they say to you,
Seek to Councils, Fathers, Canons, Determinations of the Church; To the Law,
and to the Testimony; to Scripture and Holy Writ, that contains every thing you
need to enquire after for Salvation: What to be believed, and what to be done.
Psalm. cxix.105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto my Path.
VVhithersoever you need to walk for the pleasing of God, doing your duty to
Men, or to your own Souls, the Word of God is a Light sufficient. In the Place
beforementioned, Es. viii.19, 20. Should not a People seek unto their God? For
the living to the dead? To the Law, and to the Testimony. It is curiosity to
enquire after Necromancy: But if we desire to know what is fit and needful, To
the Law and to the Testimony. Mal. iv.4. Remember ye the Law of Moses my
Servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the Statutes
and Judgments. Prophecy was then ceasing. People might complain what shall we
do for Instruction? Why, go to the Word of God, which you have in your Hands;
to the Law of Moses, that will teach you. Luke xvi. ult. Dives desires Abraham
to send one from the Dead to teach his Brethren, that they might escape that
Place of Torment. No, that needs not, Moses and the Prophets will teach all
things needful. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. The
Apostle speaks this fully, 2 Timothy iii.16, 17. All Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. That the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works.

The Papist says, it is not sufficient to instruct in all things of Religion.
True, not of the Romish Religion. For the Rags that patch that, you must go to
some Broker: For the Divine Wardrobe of Scripture has none such; viz. the
Orders of Monks and Friars, Pilgrimages, single Life of the Clergy, Salt, Oil,
Spittle in Baptism, Tapers at the Communion, Processions, Praying to and for
the Dead, and a Thousand other Trinklements, and Trumperies: Scripture never
knew such base VVare; we must go to some other kind of Shop for it. And that
Pedlar with them is Tradition. When they cannot find Authority to warrant them
by Scripture, then they have Recourse to some Tradition. When they have some
Bastard-Doctrine or Practice, and want Scripture to father it, then they go to
some old rotten Tradition. Just so did the Jews; and these are so like them,
that Egg to Egg is not more. You know Christ's Accusation of those, Mat. xv.8,
9. This People draws nigh unto me with their Mouth, and honors me with
their Lips, but their Heart is far from me. But in vain they do worship me,
teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. And the very same Quarrel has
he against these. The Jews pretended a Thousand Traditions of the Fathers, so
do these; they equalled them with Scripture, so do these; they spoiled all
Religion, and made the Word of God of none Effect; and so do these. As if God
were a Niggard in his Word, and did not afford Food for Salvation, but we must
seek it in Dunghills.

The Scriptures are called the Scriptures of Truth, the Word of Grace, of
Salvation, able to make Man perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good Work;
and yet these forsooth must be patched out with Traditions, or they avail
nothing. As Argo was patched till there was nothing of the old Ship left: So
these Men have patched up a Word of God, till there is nothing of the Word of
God left in it.

Secondly, The Scriptures are to be believed for themselves, and they need not
fetch their Credit from any thing else. Dan. x.21. I will show thee that which
is noted in the Scripture of Truth. They are the TRUTH. See John v.39. Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life; and they are they
that testify of me. Observe the Bent of Christ's Discourse. To clear that he
was the Messiah, he produces the VVitness of John, ver. 33. Ye sent unto John,
and he bare Witness unto the Truth. His own Works, v. 36. But I have a greater
Witness than that of John; for the Works which the Father has given me to
finish, the same Works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent
me. A Voice from Heaven, ver. 37. And the Father himself which has sent me,
has born witness of me. But he concludes in Scripture, as the most undeniable
Testimony. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life;
and they are they that testify of me. See also 2 Pet. i.17, 18, 19. For he
received from God the Father Honor and Glory, when there came such a Voice to
him from the excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son, etc. And this Voice which
came from Heaven we heard, when we were with him in the Holy Mount. We have
also a more sure Word of Prophecy. A Voice from Heaven might possibly deceive,
(the Jews feigned such,) but the Word of prophecy is sure; that is a more sure
Word.

The Reason of the Scriptures Credibility is, because they are the Word of God,
1 Thessalonians. ii.13. When ye received the Word of God, which ye heard of us, ye
received it not as the Word of Men, but (as it is in Truth) the Word of God:
which effectually works also in you that believe. They received it as the
Word of God. How knew they that? From the Scriptures themselves. Therefore it
is said that they are the Formal Object of Faith, as well as the Material. They
contain what is to be believed, and the reason why to believe them. And that is
especially twofold.

I. The Majesty of the Spirit of God speaking in them.

II. Their powerful Working.

I. The Majesty of the Spirit of God speaking in them such things as Man cannot
speak; 1 Cor. ii.10. The Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of
God. And we may say, the deep things of Man; yea, and the Depths of Satan; as
Rev. ii.24.

1. How impossible is it for Man to reveal the deep Mysteries of Salvation? i.
e. the Mind of God? 1 Cor. ii.16. Who has known the Mind of the Lord, that he
may instruct him? But we have the Mind of Christ. In Scripture we have it. And
ver. 7, 8, 9. of that Chapter, But we speak the Wisdom of God in a Mystery,
even the hidden Wisdom which God ordained before the World unto our Glory.
Which none of the Princes of this World knew. For had they known it, they would
not have Crucified the Lord of Glory. But as it is written, Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, etc. The hidden Wisdom of God. Let all the Wits in the World
have conspired together, could they have told the secret Wisdom, and Mind of
God about Salvation, God, Christ, and the Divine Operation of his Spirit, the
Fruits of Grace, and the Weight of Eternal Glory? How blind was the Wisdom of
all the World to these Mysteries? So far, that when they were revealed, they
were accounted but Folly, 1 Cor. i.25. Because the Foolishness of God is wiser
than Men, and the Weakness of God is stronger than Men. That is, as they took
them. And that Opinion is transplanted into Papacy; which will find out a wiser
Way to Salvation, than the Scriptures have directed.

Herein the Majesty of Scripture shows it self, because it speaks of those
sublime, Divine hidden things, that Men's Wisdom could never find out. As they,
John vii.46. are convinced that Christ was more than other Men, because he
spoke as never Man spoke; so the Majesty of the Scriptures declares, that they
are the Divine Word of God, because Men never spoke, Men cannot speak as they
speak.

2. The Majesty of the Spirit in Scripture appears, in that it reveals the very
Thoughts, and commands the very Heart of Man. Heb. iv.12. The Word of God is
quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a
Discerner of the Thoughts, and Intents of the Heart. And 1 Cor. xiv.24, 25. But
if all Prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or one unlearned,
he is convinced of all, he is judged of all. And thus are the Secrets of his
Heart made manifest; and so falling down on his Face, he will worship God, and
report, that God is in you of a Truth. It can discover a Hypocrite, can make an
Atheist tremble, can pierce to the very Thoughts, and Imaginations of the
Heart. That as the Woman of Samaria said, because Christ had told her the
secret Wickedness of her Life, John iv.29. Come, see a Man, which told me all
things that ever I did. So we must conclude of this, it is able to discern,
check, regulate the very Thoughts of the Heart. Therefore not the Invention of
Men, but the Powerful, Divine, Searching Word of God.

3. The Majesty of the Scriptures appears, in that it discovers the very
Subtilties of Satan. We are not ignorant of his Wiles, says the Apostle. How
come we to know them? This Divine Light has showed them. It would have been
hard to have known, that there is a Devil, had not this discovered it. And it
would have been impossible to have discovered his Plots and Malice, and
Temptations else. This Divine Word has done it in despite of Satan. Would he
ever have had his Plots discovered, if he could have hindered? That Men should
know his Mischief, and Malice, and Subtilty. He would gladly have walked as an
Angel of Light, that Men might not suspect his Delusions; but this Divine Word
has pulled off his Vizar, and showed his Designs in open Light. It madded the
King of Syria, that all his secret Stratagems against the King of Israel were
discovered by the Prophet Elisha, 2 Kings vi.11, 12. It vexes this King of
Darkness, that his private Policies and Actings should be laid open. But this
Sacred Word does it, and he cannot prevent it.

Thus does the Scripture reveal it self to be the Word of God, by its Divine
Majesty, wherein it speaks, and by the Wisdom, wherein it shows it self.

II. In its powerful Working; breaking Hearts, converting Souls, conquering the
Kingdom of Satan. How have the Scriptures gone through the World, and made
Nations bow before them, and have cast out Satan, and his Power? So that if we
should say, as they did, What Sign show thou, that thou art Christ? So what
Sign show ye, that ye are the Word of God? They may answer, Look through the
World, how many Thousands have been converted and saved, how is the Idolatry
and Blindness of the Heathen cast out; how has Satan been bound, and many poor
Souls taught and armed to resist all his Power?

Papists talk much what the Sign of the Cross, and Holy Water can do, for
mastering the Devil. Fabulae aniles. But Thousands of Experiences have showed,
what the Divine Word of God in Scripture can do against him. And thus do they
evidence themselves to be the Word of God; and so to be believed for
themselves, because they are the Word of God.

Then is no Man, no Company of Men to be believed, but as what they say is
agreeable to Scripture. No Council, Father, Church. If they speak not according
to Scripture, it is because there is no Light in them; and not to be believed.
Let God be true, and every Man a Liar, says the Apostle. So we are to say, in
this case, Whosoever speaks not according to the Truth of God in Scripture, he
is but a Liar, and the Truth is not in him.

You understand that I speak of things of Faith and Religion. In Historical,
Natural, Civil, Moral Things, we deny not, but that they speak much Truth. But
that is to be tried by our Reading and Reason. But in the things of Divine
Concernment, there is no Truth, but that of Scripture, or what speaks agreeable
to it. Gal. i.8. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel
unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

I might instance, how the Fathers themselves harp upon this String. Non quid
Augustinus, nec quid Hieronymus, sed quid Scriptura. Not that which Augustine
or Hierom say, but what the Scriptures say, is Truth. And, Non creditur, quia
non scribitur. It is not believed, because it is not written. And, Non quid
Hieronymus, sed quid, Moses, quid Paulus. Not that which Hierom says, but what
Moses, what Paul say.

Let us determine the thing by the Determination of this Question, Is any Man
to be damned, if he believe not what the Church, Councils, Fathers have spoken?
A Papist may chance say so; but will either Reason or Conscience say so with
him? Let any Religious Conscience say, Can he think himself damned, because he
believes not every thing that the Council of Nice has decreed; or what Hierom,
or Augustine have spoken? They have confessed themselves Men subject to Error: I
know they were so, and must I be bound, upon Pain of Damnation, to believe what
it may be in time they believed not themselves?

And let R^ason speak, Must I be bound to believe every Tradition, that a Monk,
Friar, or a whole Church of such hold out; fetched no one knows whence? Here is
the Advantage of your Protestant Religion, here the Benefit of the Ministry; we
refuse not, nay, we beg, that you try the Scriptures, whether we speak true or
no. If not, spit in our Faces. Do you think the Apostle took it ill, Acts
xvii.11. that the Bereans tried his Doctrine by the Scriptures? Luke has
honored them for it, with the Title of, More honorable than those of
Thessalonica. And it speaks the Mind of Paul, with whom he travailed, that he
took it well too. Our Ministry begs this of you, that you consult their
Bibles, whether we speak true or no; and we have but one Request more, that if
you find it true, you would believe, embrace and follow it.

A Popish Preacher would tell you, you must believe it, whether you understand
it or no: Whether it be agreeable to Scripture or no. For the Church, such a
Council, or Father, has said it; and they know better than you. I may say, as
it is 1 Cor. xv.19. If in this Life only we have Hope in Christ, we are of all
Men most miserable. So we are in a miserable Condition, if upon the Penalty of
Salvation we are to believe every Tradition, and Trash, that foolish, or
ungodly Men would put upon us. But we have a sure Word of Prophecy, and make
much of Scriptures, and bless God for them, that we have what to rely on.
Miserable Faith! to believe as the Church believes, we know not What; or if we
do, we know not Why. But we know what we believe, viz. The Word of God; and we
know why we believe it, viz. because it is the Word of God.

Object. But how do we believe that they are the Scriptures, but that the
Church has told us so? How do we believe that such and such Books were written
by such and such Men, but by the Authority of the Church? And the Scriptures
had never come to you, if it were not for the Church of Rome. Thus they plead.

Answer I. If the Church of Rome could have hindered, we must never have had the
Scriptures as we have. Some of the Learned of them have called the Scripture
a Book of Heresies, and wished that there were none at all. And they keep them
from their own People; have put not a few to Death for reading them, for having
Bibles. And would they let us have them, if they could choose? They are
sensible, that we by Scripture have discovered their Errors, and that we are
thereupon withdrawn from them: and would they have conveyed them to us?

No, it was the Work of the Lord, and the Mercy of the Lord; and it is
mavelous in our Eyes, that all their Policy, and the Slight of Satan, could
not hinder them from us. Like to that Picture, where you have a Candle burning,
and Pope, and Friars, and the Devil blowing, and cannot blow it out. This
Divine Light is the Sun in the World, that cannot be so totally clouded, but
that God makes it break out here and there. What would the Pope give, that
there were not a Bible in all the Protestant Churches? For then should we be
led blindfold by them, as they would have it. But blessed be God, who has
showed us Light; that Light is in Goshen. Which if at the Courtesy of Rome we
must never have had it.

II. As far as we owe our receiving of Scripture to Men, we are least beholden
to the Romish Church. They put us off with a Latin Translation, barbarous and
wild. But we have a surer Word, the Sacred Hebrew, and Divine Greek. And the
Hebrew we owe to the Jews, and the Greek to the Greek Church, rather than the
Roman. Romans iii.2. Unto them [the Jews] were committed the Oracles of God. And
from them we received the Old Testament. And not from them neither; for could
they have prevented, we had not had it.

Consider how many Copies were abroad in the World. The Old Testament was in
every Synagogue. And how many Copies would Men take of the New. So that it is
impossible, but still Scripture must be conveyed.

Could all the Policy of Satan have hindered, he had done it. For the Word of
God is his Overthrow. So that it was owing to a Divine Hand. And our Faith
stands not on the Church to believe the Scriptures; but God has carried the
Authority of them from Age to Age. I receive not Testimony from Men, says
Christ. No more does his Word. But the Scriptures themselves have overpowered
the Belief of Men.

As to the Comparison commonly made from John iv, 42. They said unto the Woman,
Now we believe, not because of thy saying; for we have heard him our selves;
and know that this is indeed the Christ: They first believed the Woman; but
then they believed not for her Words, but for Christ's sake. So first, say
some, Men believe the Scriptures are Scriptures for the Churches sake, but
after for their own.

But it is not proper to say, we believe Scriptures are Scriptures, because of
the Church, without distinguishing upon believing. As Augustin's, Non
credidissem Scripturis, etc. I had not believed the Scriptures, had not the
Church told me. That is, while he was unconverted. But we may satisfy this by
an easy Distinction, betwixt believing that Scripture is Scripture, and
believing that the Church all along has taken them for Scripture.

To make this plain by a Comparison. Canones Apostolorum, and Donatio
Constantini, are believed by the Church of Rome to be from the very Apostles,
and Constantine. I believe that that Church believed them so, and yet I believe
not a Word of them to be so. My Belief, the Church held them so, is from the
Church; but my Belief they are not so, is from themselves. A good Soul desires
to build up its self by the Rule of Faith and Life. He finds, that the Church
has counted Scripture so; and that he believes. But as yet he believes not
they are Scriptures upon that Account. But he reads, studies, meditates on
them, finds the Divine Excellency, Sweetness, Power of them. And then he
believes they are the Word of God. And that now is not for the Churches sake,
but for themselves.

The Church of England in the Thirty-nine Articles has determined such Books
Canonical. Why? Because the Church has ever held them so. That is some
Furtherance to their Belief, but not the cause of it. They first believed the
Church held them so, but they saw Cause and Reason in the Books themselves to
believe they were so. As the Samaritans believed not at first that Christ was
Christ for the Woman's Relation; but they believed she thought so, and
believed he might be so; but that he was so, they believed upon his own Words.
So we believe the Church owns the Scriptures; but he is but a poor Christian,
that believes the Scriptures are the Scriptures upon no other Account. He may
believe the Canons of the Council of Trent about Scripture upon such an
Account. But he is a right Christian, that believes the Scripture is the Word
of God upon Proof and Trial.

II. The Communion of Saints.
THIS Article harps upon the String of that before. I believe the Holy
Catholic Church; and I believe that Church is in a Communion. It is a Church
of Saints, for it is a Holy Church; and though it be Catholic, dispersed in
diverse Nations, yet there is a Communion of those Saints.

But to what is this Article material? What is it to me, whether there be a
Communion of Saints or no? It is material in it self; and if thou be a true
Christian, it is material to thee. And there is no true Saint, but he blesses
God, that there is such a Communion; and he rejoices to be of that Communion;
as in the opening of the thing you will see the Cause.

If I should say, there is a Communion of Devils, or a Communion of ungodly
Wretches, Devils incarnate, I doubt it would prove too true; and it might not
be unprofitable to observe such a fearful Communion, to avoid it. But when I
say there is a Communion of Saints, it is not only a Truth in Divinity, but it
is a Comfort in Religion, and a Persuasive in Reason; that Men would strive to
be of that Communion, if they did but understand what it meant.

It is not only, I believe there is a Company of Saints, for the Article before
speaks that; but I believe there is a Sacred Union, Communion, common Interest,
among that Company; what is advantageous to every Member, and to the whole.

What this Communion is, and wherein it consists, we must find out by these
Considerations.

I. That Saints are very thin in the World: Here one of Christ's little Flock,
there another; but very rare. Jer. iii.14. And I will take you one of a City,
and two of a Family; and I will bring you to Zion. There were many Thousands in
the City, and but One of so many; and many Cities in a Tribe, and but Two of
all these, the Lord's picked ones, to bring to Zion.

Take the Character of a true Saint of God, as David pictures him, Psalm. xv.
and how rarely is such an one to be found. Day was, when in all Jerusalem,
among Thousands of Persons such a Person was not to be found. Jer. v.1. Run ye
to and fro through the Streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in
the broad Places thereof, if ye can find a Man, if there be any that executes
Judgment, and seeks the Truth, and I will pardon it.

Cast out the Chaff, and Refuse that is in the World, and how very little Wheat
is to be found? Openly profane, and close Hypocrites; carnal Gospellers, and
lukewarm Christians; covetous Worldings, and voluptuous Epicures; set these
aside by themselves: and look at those that truly fear God, and eschew Evil;
that deny themselves, and dare not break any Command of God; and how small is
that Number? But Three Hundred in Gideon's Army fit to do the Work of God, of
Thirty-two Thousand. If there be Three Hundred of Three Hundred Thousand, that
prove true Saints, it is well if there be so many, as it is sad there be no
more.

Let me pose any one, or let every one pose their own Heart: Do thou think
thou art a true Saint of God? Every one will be ready to assume the Title; but
sift thy Heart to the Bran, and what says it? Is there no Love of the World?
No Malice, Pride, Self-seeking, Coldness in Religion, Carelessness of Duty
there? I tell thee, a Saint's Heart is a rare Jewel; we may go a great way
before we find one. Oh! that all the Lord's People were Prophets, as Moses
said; so I say, Oh! that they were Saints. But it proves not so. A Saint is a
rare Creature, and they grow very thin in the World; here and there a Berry in
the Top of a Bough; here and there a Plant of the Lord's planting, but very
rare.

Therefore when the Creed speaks of the Catholic Church, meaning true Saints,
that serve God in Truth, it speaks not Multitude, though it mean Universal. But
it speaks, that such are scattered up and down the World; here some in one
Nation, there some in another; here One in One City, there another in another.

II. Therefore Communion of Saints cannot mean Personal, or Local Union, or
Communion: Saints in one Place, or in one Lump together. Not a College of all
Saints in one Place, but a Communion 'twixt them, as scattered here and there
all the World over. As there is a Communion 'twixt two Friends, one in Turkey,
another in England; one in New England, another in Old.

The Jews little understand the Communion of Saints, when they construe Hos.
i.11. Then shall the Children of Judah, and the Children of Israel, be gathered
together, and they shall appoint themselves one Head, etc. (and such other
Places,) Literally, of their Meeting together, and going to Canaan together,
and dwelling there together. Whereas the Words mean their gathering into
Communion of another Nature.

How would you understand that, Mat. xxiv.31. And he shall send his Angels with
a great Sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather together his Elect from the
four Winds, from one end of Heaven to the other? By the Angels he means his
Messengers the Ministers; by the Sound of a Trumpet he means the Gospel; by the
whole he means, that after the Destruction of Jerusalem, of which the Speech is
in the Verses before, God by the preaching of the Gospel, would fetch in his
Elect among all Nations, or call home the Gentiles. But how gather them
together? What? Into any one Place, or Country, or City? No, but into such a
Communion, as we are speaking of, in the several Nations or Countries, where
they lived. One Saint in Judea, another in Assyria, another in Greece. All
staying in the Place where they receive the Gospel, and yet all gathered
together into one Communion.

III. This Communion is twofold. Doctrinal and Spiritual.

1. Doctrinal. As they do communicate in one and the same Faith, or Profession
of one and the same Religion. So all Protestant Churches hold Communion in one
and the same Doctrine of Faith, and, in regard of that, Disunion with the
Church of Rome. Holland and We, though so disunited, in regard of civil Converse,
yet we are at Communion as Christians, in the Profession of the same Religion.

But this is not the Communion the Article means. It speaks of Communion of
Saints. Now every profane, carnal Protestant, may hold such Communion in
outward Profession of the same Religion. Thousands of profane. Persons in
England hold Communion thus even with the preciousest Saints, viz. That they
acknowledge the same Articles of Religion, and yet are far from the Communion
of Saints here spoken of. Therefore the Communion of Saints is,

II. Spiritual. A hidden Manna; a Communion that the World knows not; a
Spiritual Interest, and Communicating, which they only partake of, and which
they only are sensible of. Which we may discern the better, by observing these
things.

1. That there is one and the same Spirit in every true Saint of God in the
World. 1 Cor. xii.4. There are Diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit. True,
there are Diversities of Degrees of Grace, and of Operations, but one and the
same Spirit, that works all in all. As Kinsmen have Communion in Kindred,
because the same Blood runs in all their Veins; so Saints have Spiritual
Communion, because the same Spirit dwells in them all. As in that Comparison,
that they are Members of the same Body, because the same Spirit of Life is in
every one of the Members.

It was the Custom with the Jews to enter into Communion, by eating of the same
Bread. To which the Apostle alludes, 1 Cor. x.17. For we being many, are one
Bread, and one Body: for we are all Partakers of that one Bread. And hereupon
they might not eat with those, with whom they might not have Communion. So
Christ feasts all his with the same Spirit, 1 Cor. xii.13. For by one Spirit
are we all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we
be bond or free: and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. That it is
that that gives their Souls Life and Growth, because they are all fed with the
same Spirit.

This is the Hunger and Thirst of a Child of God, to be filled and refreshed
with his Spirit. And this is the feeding and refreshing God affords them. John
vi.55, 63. For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. It is the
Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing. The Words that I speak
unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life. And John vii.37, 39. If any Man
thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. But this spoke he of the SPIRIT, which
they that believe on him should receive. This was David's Hunger and Thirst,
when his Soul was almost starved by his great Fall. Psalm. li.11, 12. Cast me
not away from thy Presence, and take not thine Holy Spirit from me. Restore
unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. And this
is a Trial, whether a Soul be alive and healthy, and whether a Person be a
Saint or no, by his longing and hungring for the Spirit of God.

Examine your Stomach, what craves it? Lord, give me Corn and Cattle. After
these things the Gentiles seek, not the Saints of God. But, Lord, give me thy
Spirit, fill me with thy Grace, support my fainting Soul with the Spirit of
Grace. This is a blessed hungring and thirsting, which shall be blessedly
satisfied. Matthew. v.6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
Righteousness: for they shall be filled. Thus in the first place Saints have
all Communion in the same Spirit of Christ; drink of the same Fountain, eat and
feed upon the same Manna.

2. Thus all communicating of the same Spirit of God, they have by that Spirit
Communion with God himself. 1 John i.3. And truly our Fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. A high Saying, blessed Apostle;
Fellowship with God and Christ! Let Haman brag of his great Friendship with
Ahashuerosh. Let Men b^^st of their accompanying with this, and that great Man;
their Friendship and Acquaintance with this or that noble Person; it is enough
if I can say I am acquainted with God, I have Friendship and Fellowship with
God, and his Son Jesus Christ.

Acquainted with God? Communion with Christ? Brave Company: That Man can never
be alone, never want excellent Company. Ah! poor Paul, how do thou do for
Company in a dark lonely Prison? Daniel, how solitary art thou in a Den of
Lions, when thou have no Company but those cruel Creatures? Oh! nunquam minus
solus, quam cum solus. I have God and Christ with me; they keep me Company, and
I can have no better. And so God himself has promised, When thou go through
the Waters, I will be with thee. Observe that Promise, Matthew. xxviii. ult. I
will be with you always, even unto the end of the World. Alas! we shall be in
Prisons, in Stocks. Ay, but then ye shall not be alone; for I will be with you
to the end of the World.

What mean such Expressions, but that God is present, near to his own People in
an extraordinary manner, different from common Providence. That Expression,
Walking with God, does hint special Intercourse and Converse 'twixt God and the
Saint, as 'twixt two Friends walking together. Observe a feeling Exposition of
it, Psalm. lxxiii.23, 24, etc. Nevertheless I am continually with thee: thou
have holden me by thy Right Hand. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and
afterward receive me to Glory. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is
none upon Earth I desire besides thee?

Here let us stay; and we may stand amazed, that poor sinful Men may have the
Honor and Happiness of Communion with God. Will God dwell upon Earth? It was
Solomon's Wonder* So may we wonder at this, that God should Converse, be in
Fellowship, and in Familiarity with Men. If God should take Advantage of that,
Be not unequally yoked, how far may this speak contrary to such Communion? For
what infinite Inequality is th^^e 'twixt God and Man, Creator, and Creature,
Dust and Glory? An Expression of this Communion you have, Rev. iii.20. If any
Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, and will sup with
him, and he with me. And another, Es. lxvi.1, 2. Thus says the Lord, The
Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool. Where is the House that ye
build unto me? And where is the Place of my Rest? For all those things has
mine Hand made; and all those things have been, says the Lord. But to this Man
will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite Heart, and trembles
at my Word. I will look to such, have a friendly Regard, and Respect to him.
Nay, I will come, and converse, and sup, and dwell with him. This was David's
Desire. Psalm. ci.2. Oh when will thou come unto me? I will walk in my House
with a perfect Heart. I will walk in my House; when will thou come, and walk
and dwell with me?

Now this Communion 'twixt God and Saints we may consider in the Rise of it,
the Nature of it, and the Means and Manner of it.

I. The Rise of it. It arises from the Union that is 'twixt God and the Saint.
We can never have Fellowship with God, unless we be at one with God. Abraham
was the Friend of God, and so he and God conversed: There is no Communion
'twixt Enemies. Es. lix.1, 2. Behold the Lord's Hand is not shortened, that it
cannot save: neither his Ear heavy, that it cannot hear. But your Iniquities
have separated between you and your God, and your Sins have hid his Face from
you, that he will not hear. Why, is God such a Stranger to you? You are his
Enemies: But turn to me, says the Lord, and I will turn unto you. Es. i.16,
17, 18. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the Evil of your Doings from before
mine Eyes, cease to do Evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow. Come now, and let us
reason together.

II. The Nature of this Communion is, that God imparts himself to the Saint,
and the Saint to God. I your God, you my People. There is no Strangeness 'twixt
them. They do freely give up Hearts one to another, as they that are in
Friendship, and tell their Minds one to another.

III. The Means of this Communion is by God's Ordinances* and by his Spirit.

1. It is impossible to have Communion with God, but by way of his Ordinances;
the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, and Meditation upon all. Communion is more than
Union. A Man in walking holily, walks in Union with God; but to come in
Communion, or converse with God, is something more. Two Friends apart are at
one, but their Converse together is by Letter or Conference.

(...) Set-Festivals signify Meetings also; People meeting in Communion with
themselves, and with God in these Appointments. Thou meetest him, etc. Es.
lxiv.5. As it is impossible to have Union with God, but in virtue of his
Covenant, so to have Communion, but in the Administrations of the Covenant.
Exodus xxiv.11. And upon the Nobles of the Children of Israel he laid not his
Hand. Also they saw God, and did eat and drink. By virtue of the Covenant,
spoken of just before, they were at Peace with God, so that he laid not his
Hand on them; and by the Administration of the Covenant, they were in
Communion; They eat and drank with him.

There is a further striving in Attendance upon Ordinances, than merely to do
Work, to hear, to patter out some Prayers, and the like; but to taste and feel
God in his Word, to send up the Heart to God, and to lay hold on him. Do you
not do it here, and in your Closet, in Prayer, and in Reading? This is not to
draw near to God, and hold Communion with him. How heartily does a true Saint
pour out his Heart, tell his Mind to God, his Failings, his Wants, as one
Friend to another? This is the reason why we should pray, though God knows our
Wants. Your Heavenly Father knows that ye have need of these things. Why then
have we need to tell him? That we may show our Communion with God, and that we
trust him with our Hearts and Estates.

How does a true Saint lay hold on every Word of God, as Benhadad's Servants by
Ahab's. Oh! this Instruction, this Reproof, this Exhortation, is God's Mind to
me. This is as a Letter or Message sent to me for my Good. He owns God, as in
Love and Friendship, imputing his Mind to him.

This is Communion with God in Ordinances; to tell God all our Soul in Prayer,
to taste the Mind of God to usward in hearing, and Attendance upon Sermons.
But,

2. Communion with God is by his Spirit. 2 Cor. xiii.14. The Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with
you all. What does the Apostle wish for in these Words, (...), Communion of the
Spirit? That they always may have the Fellowship of the Spirit; and also by
Communion of the Spirit, Fellowship with God. Take one Example, Romans viii.26.
The Spirit it self makes Intercession. Where is this Spirit? In Heaven? No,
the Spirit of God in the Soul, stirring up, and enlarging the Heart. The Spirit
of Grace and Supplication, Zach. xii.10. Here is the double Communion of the
Spirit spoken of, the Spirit always with the Saint, and the Spirit helping him
to converse with God in Prayer; bringing the Heart and God together. The Spirit
makes Intercession. Oh! how comfortable are the Prayers of a Saint? He has a
twofold Intercessor, Viz. The Spirit in his Heart, enabling him to pray, and
Christ in Heaven, praying, or interceding for him.

So for Communion in other Ordinances. The Eucharist is called the Communion,
not only of Receivers among themselves, but of the true Receiver with God and
Christ. God in it holds out the Benefits of Christ. The Holy Receiver by the
Spirit and Grace of God, thanks him for those Befits, takes hold of them, and
receives them at the Hand of God, and tastes the Sweetness of God's Gifts in
them.

So in Hearing, the Heart owns God speaking, counselling, comforting. Oh! this
is the Voice of my Beloved. And the Heart all along gives up it self to God's
Counsel, Correction, and Administration. This is Spiritual Communion with God
in his Ordinances.

Besides what I have already said upon this Argument, consider but two
Expressions, whereby Scripture sets forth the Union of a Saint with God; and
then judge of the Communion.

I. Under the Notion of Marriage 'twixt the Soul and God. Es. live.5. For thy
Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name. Hos. ii.19. I will betroth
thee to my self for ever. Oh! what Tidings are these to a poor Soul? The Lord
espouse it, be an Husband to it? Awake up, put on thine Ornaments, O my Soul:
Behold thy Bridegroom coming, go forth to meet him. Ah! dull, dirty Souls of
ours, why do we sit among the Pots, and marry our selves to Earth and
Dunghills, when a Soul may have the Lord for an Husband, and be espoused to him
for ever. Now Experience tells what Communion there is 'twixt Wife and Husband,
as well as Scripture; tells us, what Union, Communion of Heart, of Estates, of
Affections; neither is their own, but one another's. Such is the Communion
'twixt a Holy Soul and God: They are married together; their Hearts, as I may
say, are interchanged, and entirely each others. Hos. iii.3. Thou shall be for
me, and not another: and I will be for thee, says the Lord.

Observe that Expression, 1 Cor. vi.17. He that is joined unto the Lord is one
Spirit. Here is Union and Communion. Joined to the Lord, Beza renders it
Agglutinatus, There is Union. And Communion, One Spirit. He takes some
Comparison before from a married Couple. But this is nearer; there must be an
Union betwixt Man and Wife; nay, there is betwixt Man and Whore. Know ye not,
that he which is joined to an Harlot is one Body? For two, says he, shall be
one Flesh. But it may be no Communion of Hearts and Affections. But he that is
joined to God is one Spirit.

II. Observe this Communion by the Expression of the Members of his Body: Which
the Apostle follows in 1 Cor. xii. especially see ver. 27. Now ye are the Body
of Christ, and Members in particular. Ye are the Body in gross, and every
particular Christian a particular Member. Now the Body and Members relate to
the Head, which is Christ. Ephesians. iv.15. That ye may grow into him in all things,
which is the Head, even Christ. From whom the whole Body fitly joined together.
And Col. i.18. He is the Head of the Body, the Church.

So that here you may first see the Union 'twixt Christ and his Members, and
then the Communion. The Union as the Head to the Body, the Communion as betwixt
Head and Members. So what nearer Union or Communion can be in the World? And
this asserts what I said, that Communion with God and Christ is founded in
Union with God. No Member, if not in Union with the Head; and if a Member so in
Union, it cannot but have Communion. Members cannot but derive Virtue from the
Head; and cannot again but be serviceable all they can to it. Such a Communion
is there 'twixt a Saint and God. And what the particular Nature or Virtue of it
is, learn by observing how it comes, and how a Saint comes by it. For the
Discovery of which, we will take up this Question to speak to.

Quest. How should I do to come in Communion with God? I know it is good and
happy, but how shall I come by it?

Ans. Learn this from civil Converse 'twixt Friend and Friend. Abraham was the
Friend of God, and he came into that Nearness after the manner as Friend does
with Friend. Observe two Expressions in Scripture, Knowing of God. 1 Chro.
xxviii.9. Thou, Solomon my Son, know the God of thy Father. And Acquainting
one's self with God. Job xxii.21. Acquaint now thy self with him. So is the
Case with two, that come to converse as Friends. I know such a Person, and I
make my self acquainted with him.

I. So that the first Step to Communion with God is to know him. But under what
Notion, or what Knowledge?

1. Not a distant Knowledge. As wicked Men know there is a God. This is far
from bringing into Acquaintance. Every one of us know, there is a Turk and
Pope, but this is far from being in Converse with them: Nay, nearer; we all
know the King is our Sovereign, and own him so, yet this is far from conversing
with him. It is said, God beholds the Wicked afar off. So they, though they knew
him, they knew but afar off. As he, that was newly cured of his Blindness in
the Gospel saw Men walk, but they seemed to him like Trees. As Balaam says of
his seeing of God, Number. xxiv.17. I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold
him, but not nigh.

2. Nor is it barely to know God in his Attributes. That he is terrible,
glorious, just. The Devils know all this; but as far from Communion with God,
as Hell is from Heaven.

3. But so to know God is to love and desire him and his Communion. He that
would be acquainted with one, looks not on him barely as one he knows, nor
barely as one worthy to be acquainted with; but as by whose Acquaintance to
have Comfort, Benefit and Delight, and which he cannot comfortably be without.

Such is that Knowledge of God, that begins Communion with God. To make it our
Work to know God, as without Knowledge of whom, and acquaintance with whom, we
are undone. To desire his Knowledge and Acquaintance above all things in the
World, and to account nothing in the World worth our Study, Knowledge and
Acquaintance, but himself. So the Apostle professes over and over. 1 Cor.
ii.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and
him crucified. For nothing else in comparison of him is worth the Study and
Labor to know. And Phil. iii.8. Yea, doubtless, without any dispute, and I
count all things but Loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ
my Lord. This is that that makes me justly to move the Question, Do you
seriously ask, how I may come in Communion with God? Because that requires the
Preparative of the most affectionate Desires to come into Communion with him.
Such a Desire breathes the Heart of a true Saint, Esai. xxvi.8, 9. The Desire
of our Souls is to thy Name, and to the Remembrance of thee. With my Soul have
I desired thee in the Night; yea, with my Spirit within me will I seek thee
early.

II. The second Means to come into Communion with God is to be acquainted with
him. Now to make your selves acquainted with God, be not strange to him. The
Wicked are estranged from the Womb. Not only not knowing God, but not making
himself known to God. The Word in Job xxii.21. which we translate Acquaint, is
(...) Accustom thy self to God. The Word is used elsewhere, Number. xxii.30. The
Ass said unto Balaam, Am not I thine Ass, upon which thou have ridden ever
since I was thine unto this Day? Was I ever wont, or accustomed, to do so unto
thee? So that the Word signifies Accustoming, Frequenting. A Saint acquaints
himself with God by frequent coming to his Presence, in Prayer, and hearing,
and attending on him. As Acts iii.10. All knew the poor Creeple, which sat for
Alms at the beautiful Gate of the Temple, because there he constantly sat; so
God knows the Face of a Saint; he is ever and anon in the Presence of God. Oh!
I know thee by Name, thou art always at my Footstool, thou art always in my
School. I know thee, Moses, by Name, says God. And very good Reason for it; he
was always in his Presence. Ps. lxxxiii.23. I am continually with thee. Was it
possible then but that God should know him?

God at the Judgment will say to the Wicked, I know you not. And no wonder, for
he never saw their Faces in his Family. You are none of my Children: I never
saw you owning your Dependence upon me, knowing me as the Father. None of my
Servants: I never saw you doing my Work. None of my Scholars: I never saw you
in my School, studious, and taking out your Lesson. Your Faces are Strangers to
me: I never saw them look toward me, but away from me. Therefore, Depart, I
know you not.

There is none but would desire to be owned at that great Day: Oh! acquaint thy
self with God here, walk before him continually, tha^ (...) may know thee. Be
constantly in his House, about his Work, that he may know thee, and take Notice
of thee. This was the Course of David, Psalm. lxxxiv.9. Behold, O God, our
Shield, and look upon the Face of thine anointed. Lord, I am here in thy House
daily before thee, look upon my Face; know me, own me for one of thy Household.

Thus a Saint and God are come into Acquaintance. The Communion betwixt them is
yet something more. That is the Holy Place, this the Holy of Holies.

Quest. But wherein does it consist or appear? Is a Saint always sensible that
he has Communion with God? If so, why does he so often complain, that God hides
himself, that he hears not, that he is angry? He cannot find, that he is at
Peace and Union with God, much less in Communion.

Answer. To speak as to the acting of both Parties in this Case. For Communion
is a relative or mutual thing, Viz. Of a Saint to God, and of God to a Saint.

I. A Saint's Communion with God is first, that he goes to God as to his only
Friend, to impart his Mind and Heart to him, and to trust in, and rely upon
him. Hence is mention of going with Confidence to the Throne of Grace: and of
Boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus. Heb. x.19. As the
High Priest went into the most Holy Place to converse with God. In all his
Straits he goes with Confidence to God, as his only Friend; in all his Wants he
goes to God, as his dearest one, whom to rely upon.

Object. But many a time he thinks God is become his Enemy; that he frowns as a
Foe, and smiles not as a Friend.

Answer. True, but look all the Book through, and the Stories of Holy Men, and
you never find a Saint fleeing from God, as an Enemy, but getting to him, as a
Friend. The Child, though the Mother frowns, chides, whips him, yet he will not
but still hang upon her. David feels God's Arrows stick in him, Psalm.
xxxviii.2. yet at ver. 9. he goes to him, tells him his Condition, as his only
Friend and Relief. Lord, all my desire is before thee, etc. I tell thee my
whole woeful Case, as my only Friend, ver. 15. In thee, O Lord, do I hope, thou will hear me, O Lord my God. How does he there hang on God, and will not leave
him. He sees him frown, feels his Rod, yet will not run from, but hangs on him.
Lord, I will hope in thee, I know thou will not be always angry, but wilt hear
me. Though thou killest me, (says Job) yet will I trust in thee.

Secondly, He communicates himself to God, in engaging his Heart to him, and
his Ways, and his All to him. God calls, Jer. xxx.21. Who is this that engages
his Heart to me? I do it, says the Saint of God, with all my Soul, to be
thine, and only thine, and at thy Service. And this is the Saints Communion
with God.

II. We are to consider God's Communion with a Saint. How does God evidence his
Communion with a Saint?

He once did it visibly, as dining with Abraham, supping and lodging with Lot.
He sometimes did it, by manifesting his Mind by Revelations. But since these
ceased we must apprehend his Communion in another manner. Therefore consider
that Place of Scripture, Psalm. xxv.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. To which is parallel, Prove.
iii.32. For the Froward is Abomination to the Lord, but his Secret is with the
Righteous. Observe the Opposition, The Froward is Abomination to the Lord. God
cares not for him, but hates him as his Enemy. But his Secret is with the
Righteous, as a Friend. But how is his Secret with him? He imparts his Mind
indeed to him by his Word, (and so he does to the Wicked too, if they would
know it) But does he otherways impart his Mind by Revelation? Does he always
evidence to him his Prayer is heard? Does he ever whisper to him his Sins are
pardoned; that he shall be delivered out of Troubles? Many a dear Saint prays
long, and yet cannot attain to this Discovery; and yet the Secret of the Lord
is with him. How? Ans. His Secret; that is,

1. The secret Influences of his Grace: As Psalm. xvii.14. He fills the Bellies
of Worldings with his hid Treasure, so he fills the Souls of his Saints with
his hid Influences.

2. Secret Experiences. He teaches the Soul to feel Spiritual Experiences,
makes him taste how sweet Holiness is, and how good it is to serve God.

So that though God communicate not himself by Influences of Comfort, yet he does
by Influences of Graces.

We have hitherto considered the Communion of Saints with God; now concerning
their Communion among themselves. What their Communion is, since they are
scattered throughout the whole World, let us search out, first, by considering
wherein their Communion does not consist; then wherein it does.

I. Some have conceived it consists in Community of Goods, from Example of
that in the Apostolic Times. Act. ii.44. And all that believed were together,
and had all things common. And Chap. iv.32. And the Multitude of them that
believed were of one Heart, and of one Soul: neither said any of them, that
ought of the things which he possessed, was his own, but they had all things
common. And Cloisters of Monks and Friars forsooth must imitate this, as a
Saint-like Communion.

Do I need to speak any thing in Confutation of this Mistake, when both
Testaments do allow, nay, do enjoin Propriety; and do not only tell, that there
is a Meum and Tuum, but enjoin Men to look to their own, to provide for their
Families, and not to usurp, nay, not to desire what is another's.

That particular Example in the Apostles time was upon a singular Occasion, of
which we are not to expect any Imitation. The whole Church then in Jerusalem;
most of them far distant from their own Countries. Through this Remoteness there
were many poor among them; therefore it was needful that some special Provision
should be made for these poor, lest Poverty should have caused them to
Apostatize. And God stirred up diverse to part with their Estates for such
charitable Ends. And none of them knew how soon they and their Estates might be
parted by Persecution. And Christ had told of an Universal Deluge coming over
the Nation. Therefore upon these Grounds they make Friends of the Unrighteous
Mammon. A thing not obliging to Imitation, because there is not again the like
Occasion.

II. Some seem to make the Communion of Saints no more than the receiving the
Sacrament together, and will have none but Saints to receive it. You know the
hot Disputes that have been about this. And for the Divisions of Reuben there
are great Thoughts of Heart. Hence mainly are our Separations and Divisions in
Religion. As in Jephtha's Case, his dear Daughter was his greatest Trouble.
Judge. xi.35. Alas! my Daughter, thou have brought me very low, and thou art one
of them that trouble me. So this precious Sacrament of Communion is unhappily
proved the great Occ^sion of Division; but in the same Notion that Christ was a
Stumbling Block. Which was not of any Fault of his, but of Men, in faultering
about him.

It Is true, receiving of this Sacrament is a Communion, but it is most
especially external, in the Profession of the same Faith, and Doctrine of the
Gospel. And the Communion of Saints in this Article aims further.

I have formerly observed to you the Phrase, This is the New Testament in my
Blood, 1 Cor. xi.25. Not only, My Blood of the New Testament, nor only, A Seal
and Sanction of the New Testament, but the New Testament. That is, A new
Administration of the New Covenant; terminating Judaism, and binding over
Receivers to the Profession of the Evangelical Doctrine and Religion. So this
properly is the Communion, that Receivers have in this Sacrament one with
another: viz. That they join in the Profession of the same Christian Doctrine;
and that not only among themselves, but even with the whole Church, that
professes the same Truth. And hence it was, that in the Infancy of the Church,
they received the Sacrament almost daily; that those new Professors might
thereby be held to constant Profession against revolting to their Judaism.

So that in this there is indeed something of the Communion of Saints, all
professing the same Truth and Religion; but we must still look further for a
Communion among Saints, to take up the full meaning of the Article before us.

For the Inquiry after which, we are first to consider, that Christ's Mystical
Body the Church consists of all the Saints, that are or shall be in the World
from the beginning to the end of it. And so it includes the Saints in Glory
jointly with these, that are yet on Earth. Those in Glory, Members already
above Water, as their Head also is; yet in the Waves of this troublesome World,
and not got above them.

As it is said of Christ himself, Luke ii. ult. That he grew in Stature; so is
the Mystical Body of Christ growing in Stature, till it shall be consumate at
the last Day. Observe that, Ephesians. iv.13. Till we all come in the unity of the
Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the
measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, or, the measure of the full
Stature of Christ. Some fondly hence conclude, that all Saints shall be raised,
as at the very Age and Stature of Christ, when he was raised; which was at his
very Prime, viz. Two and Thirty years and an half of Age. That Elect Infants
shall not be raised Infants, but as of that Age and Stature: That the Aged
shall not be raised as Aged, but as at their Prime of that Age and Stature.
Which as it breeds confusion in the understanding of the Article of the
Resurrection of the Body; so it is clean besides the Apostles intent there. He
speaks not of our Bodies, but of Christ's Mystical Body, viz, That God had
given Apostles and Teachers for the building up that Body, the Church, by
degrees, till it came to its full Stature and Perfection in the Salvation of
all that belong to it.

So Saints are building up daily; and those that are gone to Glory, so much of
that Body is completed; and the rest growing on to the same Perfecting, till
all be Completed, and the whole Body Perfected. So that those completed in
Glory, and these completing toward Glory here, are the same Body, though at
present of a different condition. The Church Militant and Triumphant are not
two Churches; not two Bodies, but one whole Church and Body of Christ,
consisting of Members, some already Perfected, and some Perfecting. As Israel
at the Temple in the two Courts, were not two Congregations and Churches, but
one Congregation in two diverse places, two Companies of one Congregation.

The Apostle in Heb. xi. ult. says, God having provided some better thing for
us, that they without us should not be made perfect. When some say, the Saints
under the Law are not perfected in Glory till Christ's coming, but in Limbo.
Whereas the Apostle speaks in the sense we are upon, viz. That those Holy Ones,
without us under the Gospel, are not the perfect Body of Christ; but the Body
was to consist of Gentiles, as well as Jews. Of some yet to be saved, as well
as of them that are saved already.

Now is there any Communion 'twixt these two parts of the same Body, Saints on
Earth, and Saints in Glory? I mean, is there any imparting of the one to the
other, as there is 'twixt two Parties in Communion?

Some will tell you, Yes: We are to Pray to them, and they Pray for us. As he
in the Prophet makes a God, and then falls down to it. So it is common in the
Church of Rome, to make, whom they think good, Saints, and then to Pray to them
that they would Pray for them to God. Whereas they can never clear the Praying
to Creatures from Idolatry; and can never prove, that it is possible for a
Saint in Heaven to hear one Speaking and Praying on Earth, much less to know
the Heart with which he Prays. So can they ever prove that there is Praying in
Heaven at all? The Church here is called the House of Prayer; but it is hard to
prove that Heaven is so. There is Praising, and Thanksgiving, and Glorifying
God, and Adoring the Lamb: But where do we ever read of Praying in Heaven? Nay,
Can any prove, that Christ Prays there for his People? But he exercises his
Mediation some other way. He offers up the Prayers of his Saints, Rev.
viii.3. And another Angel came and stood at the Altar having a Golden Censer;
and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer it, with the
Prayers of all Saints upon the Golden Altar which was before the Throne. But
that he offers them, he Praying also, cannot be cleared.

But I shall not insist on this. The Article aims at the Communion of Saints
upon Earth according to David's Style, Psalm. xvi.3. To the Saints that are in
the Earth. Saints scattered in the Earth, and yet have they Communion? We may
think of that, Ezekiel. xxxvii.3. Can these dry scattered Bones come together and
Live? Yes, ver. 7. Bone came to his Bone, and Lived. So Son of Man, can Men
dispersed in Europe, Asia, Africa and America, have Communion? They know not
one another, never saw one another, and they have Communion? Yes: There is an
invisible Vein of Communion runs betwixt all Saints on Earth. Which we consider
in these Particulars.

I. There is a Communion of Converse, and Communion of Affection. There may be
the former, where there is not the latter. English Merchants have Communion of
Converse with Outland Merchants, when they come among them, Buy, Sell, Eat,
Drink together. When the Communion 'twixt them is merely of Civil Converse,
rather than of near Affection. And there may be Communion of Affection, where
there is no Converse. Nay, there is, as it were planted in Morality, an
Affection of one Excellent Person to another. A Valiant Man loves a Valiant
Man, though he never came near him. A Scholar loves a Scholar, that he has
only heard of. Much more is such an Affection planted in true Christianity in
an Heart truly Religious, be he who he will, where he will; though he never saw
him. As Psalm. xvi.3. My delight is in the Saints, and Excellent on the Earth,
be they far off or near.

II. There is Communion in Common Interest, where, it may be, there is not
Communion in Common Converse. Those that never saw, or heard of one another to
Converse together, yet may have Communion in Common Interest. Englishmen
meeting beyond Sea, that never saw each other before, yet will take parts, and
side together, as in the Common Interest of being Countrymen.

There is a Common Interest of all the Saints in the World, though at their
never so great Distance and Separation, viz. Glorifying God, and Loving the
Lord Jesus. As the Apostle says, 1 John i.3. Our Fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. So the Fellowship of the Saints among
themselves meets in this Center of Loving the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ.
And ask the same Apostle the Exposition of his Words in the same Epistle, Cap.
ii.14. We know that we have passed from Death to Life, because we love the
Brethren. He would tell you, It is a sign we Love God, and so are passed from
Death to Life, because we Love the Brethren that Love God.

This is the special Center, in which Saints meet, be they never so far
asunder. And in this Sense, Their Gathering together, is to be understood, (of
which there is so frequent mention;) not into one place, but into this one
Circle of Loving, Fearing, Serving God, Zeph. iii.9. That they may call upon
the Name of the Lord, and serve him with one Consent. In the Hebrew it is, With
one Shoulder. As if many were together shouldring up the same weight or burden:
All in their places jointly putting to their endeavor to bear up the Name,
Glory and Honor of God. East, West, North, South, every Saint joining in this
great Work, and Meeting in this Holy Point. As the Twelve Oxen under the Brazen
Sea, their Faces to the Four Quarters of Heaven, but their Bodies all Meeting
to bear up the Weight. Now,

III. They that are all of the same mind, all meet in this Common Interest
toward God, cannot but love one another, though they knew not one another.
Judge. v.9. My Heart, says Deborah, is toward the Governors of Israel, that
offered themselves willingly among the People. Did she know all their Faces and
Persons? Could she call them by their Names? No, but she could not but Love
them, be they whom they would, that put to their Hands and Shoulders to that
Common Cause. We see, how Men are ready to Affect any that they hear to be of
their Opinion, Humor, and Mind, though they never saw them. Much more does a
Saint love a Saint that is, Partner with him in this Holy Work. Though he knew
not where to find him, or Name him, yet if he be for God, he must have his
Heart; and loving God, he cannot but love whosoever loves him.

IV. Accordingly they sympathize one with another, 1 Cor. xii.26. Whether one
Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it; or one Member be Honored, all
the Members rejoice with it. They weep with those that weep, and rejoice with
those that rejoice. They bear one another's burdens. It grieves a Saint, if it
be ill with any Saint in the World; and he rejoiceth if it go well with him.
His Heart is touched with his Case, as with his own. As we are affected with
the well or ill doing of any Englishman in any part of the World, for Common
Interest of Country sake.

Neh. i.4. And it came to pass when I heard these words, that I sat down, and
wept, and mourned certain Days, and fasted and prayed before the God of Heaven.
Why? Nehemiah, thou art well enough; thou art in place of Honor, Pleasure,
Preferment. Oh! but it is ill with the People of God. And Psalm. cxxxvii.5, 6.
says the Psalmist, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my Right Hand forget her
cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of my
Mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy. I can never forget
Jerusalem.

V. Answerably they have one another's Prayers. There is not a Saint in the
World, but has the Prayers of all the Saints in the World. Any Child of God
makes it Conscience to Pray for every Child of God on Earth. One Member cannot
but do its best for another. Gal. vi.16. And as many as walk according to this
Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Pray for thy
self, Paul, and for thine own Churches. Nay, but every Saint wherever is a
Member of the same Body that I am of; and therefore, I must Pray for them also.
So Ephesians. vi.24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
Sincerity. Why pray so for them? Because of that Common Interest, that is
betwixt all Saints. I love Christ, and cannot but love and pray for all that
love him.

We may say, as Psalm. cxxxiii.1. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity. So, how blessed, how happy to be thus
joined together in this Common Union? If thy Prayers be weak, all the Saints in
the World pray thee; if thy Estate be miserable, if thou be tempted, still
thou have the Prayers of all good Men, through out the World. Oh! happy
condition of a true Saint! Christ mediating for him in Heaven, and all the
Saints on Earth Praying for him; as Acts xii.5. Peter was kept in Prison, but
Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church of God for him. Cheer up, poor
Child of God; why walk thou so heavily? Why? The Children of Belial curse
me, revile me. Oh! but all the Saints of God pray for thee. And this is the
true Communicating of Saints one to another. And so much for the Communion of
Saints with God, and one with another.

FINIS.
Advertisement. There are in the Press, and will all be Published about
Midsummer,
EXpository Notes, with Practical Observations, upon the Four Holy Evangelists;
wherein the Sacred Text is at large Recited, the Sense Explained, Doubts
Resolved, seeming Contradictions Reconcile and the Instructive Example of the
Holy Jesus to our Imitation Recommended. Designed for the Instruction of
Private Families. By William Burkitt, M. A. Vicar of Dedham in Essex. Folio.

A Catechetical Course of Sermons for the whole Year: Being an Explanation of
the Church-Catechism, in 52 distinct Discourses on so many several Texts of
Scripture, wherein are Briefly Contained the most necessary Points of Christian
Doctrine. Recommended especially for the use of Famimilies. By Peter Newcome,
M. A^ Vicar of Aldenham in Hertfordshire. In 2 Volumes in Octavo.

As also the Works of William Bates, D. D. in a large Folio and good Paper,
containing all he Printed in his Lifetime. To which are now added, two
Discourses never before Published; viz. 1. On Divine Meditation; and, 2. On the
Fear of God. Price 25 s. a single Book Unbound. They that will Buy Six shall
have a Seventh Gratis, provided they send in the first Payment some time before
Midsummer next.


