A FUNERAL SERNOM, DELIVERED Upon the SAD OCCASION OF THE Much Lamented Death
OF JOHN GOULD, Late of CLAPHAM, Esquire Who put on Immortality, Aug. 22. 1679.

By P. Lamb, Minister of the Gospel.

Be ye Followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises,
Heb. vi. 12. LONDON, Printed by M. C. for John Smith, at the Sign of the Hand
and Bible on London Bridge, 16^9

TO The truly Pious and Religious GENTLEVVOMAN, Mrs. JVDETH GOVLD, Late Wife of
JOHN GOULD, Esquire AND To all the rest of the Inhabitants of CLAPHAM, Grace,
Mercy, Peace, etc.
I Did not know how to pay may Respects to the Memory of so Eminent a Saint,
and Worthy a Person, as our late (too early) Deceased Friend; nor how to give
so lively a Testimony of my entire affectionate love to your Souls; nor make my
serious Sentiments and Sympathy (which I bear with you in this our common loss)
manifest to the Worlc; nor answer the Call of so Stupendous awakening a
Providence, if I had not according to my little skill broken the bonds of
Modesty, and reared this Pillar (In perpetuam hujus Rei Memoriam) inscribed
with that golden Sentence from Heaven;

Mark the Perfect man, and behold the Upright, for the end of that Man is
Peace.

You have here presented to you, that from the Press, which once you heard from
the Pulpit, wherein I follow the counsel and conduct of wiser heads than my own.

The Lord has lately alarmed us with much Sickness and many Deaths: Death and
Judgment, Heaven and Hell, are no little things; yet I am afraid we are no more
affected with them, than the People of Israel were with Amasa's Death, 2 Samuel
xx. 12. While he lay dead in their sight, they all stood still; but when he was
removed, and a Cloth laid over him, they all went on in pursuit of Sheba, the
Son of Bichri. So while we see our Friends dead, or dying, we are a little
serious; but when they are laid in their Graves, we follow this World, and are
apt to forget Death and Judgment to come: Though we know it is not the Riches
of this World, but the Righteousness of Christ; not greatness, but goodness,
that will stand us in stead when we die.

May this little Book lie before you, to mind you of these things; it will
serve as King Philips Boy, who saluted him every Morning with a Memento
Philippe quod sis mortalis. It contains nothing but seasonable plain truths,
concerning a Plain and Upright man, from one that had rather speak five words
in plainness to Edification, than ten thousand in a forced style, or vain
affectaion.

That which I greatly desire (at this time) is Elisha's wish to Elijah, 2 King.
2.9. that now you have sustained a very great loss in the departure of so
useful a Friend, A double portion of his spirit may be upon you. I shall now
leave you to read and transcribe in your hearts, and copy out in your lives
these few Characters and Rules of a Perfect and Upright man, that you may have
Peace at the last, which the God of peace grant both to you and to him; Who is

Your most entirely Affectionate Friend, and Faithful Servant, P. L.

A FUNERAL SERMON ON
PSALM xxxvii. 37. Mark the Perfect man, and behold the Upright, for the end of
that man is Peace.


A Little before Israel (after their long Wilderness-Pilgrimage) were to pass
over Jordan, Moses, that eminent Servant of the Lord (to whom he had committed
the conduct of his People died; in the last Chapter of Deuteronomy, and at the
8th. ver. the Children of Israel wept and mourned for him 30. days; and rather
than he should want a Funeral Sermon, the Great God (with reverence be it
spoken) became the Preacher himself; Joshua 1.2. saying, Moses my Servant is
dead.

This day (you all know) there is a Great Man fallen among us, and what
Terrible waters of Jordan we must pass through, who can tell? He is taken away
in the fullness of his strength, and in the day of his usefulness and activity;
your bitter mourning, sad countenances, and weeping eyes, proclaim your sad and
serious Resentment; and whiles we are grieving here upon Earth, that we have
lost the Company of so Excellent a Person, and so Dear a Friend, we may take an
easy prospect, and see how the Glorious Angels, and Glorified Spirits rejoice
and sing together in Heaven, at the approach of his refined Spirit to be of
their Society.

Out of that respect and honor that I bear to his Name and Memory, and from
that Reverence and Holy awe that is due to such a sad and signal Providence of
the Almighty, that neither He, nor It, may be slighted, or too soon forgotten,
I have erected this Monument, with this Inscription, Mark the Perfect Man,
behold the Upright, for the end of that man is Peace. As men are wont to
preserve the Memory of their dear Deceased Friends and Relations, by drawing
their Pictures as much to the life as they can, that so they may have some
shadows by them of their unexpressible worth: So I would present you with this
Character of our departed Friend, wherein if my Pencil fail, the Spirit of God
has done it to the life in this Text, which is both a lively description of
this deceased Saint, and a full breast of living Counsels and Comforts for us
his surviving Friends, viz. Mark the Perfect man, and behold the Upright, for
the end of that man is Peace.

This whole Psalm is the Golden Key of David, that opens the Cabinet of the
hidden mysteries of Providence. There are mysteries in the Works, as well as in
the Word of God. The Psalmist undertakes a Vindication of those unintelligible
and astonishing Dispensations of Providence, when the Supreme Lord and
Governor of the World shall send Prosperity into the Houses of the Wicked, and
cause the Sunshine of outward Mercies to rest upon their Tabernacles, and
crown their Families with an affluence of all temporal Comforts: When his
dearest Saints sit solitary, their Habitations full of darkness, their Nights
wearisome nights, their Days, days of trouble, and nothing but sufferings,
sickness, and sorrows attend them to their Grave.

He imparts to us this Heavenly art or skill, how to discern and understand
aright these various workings and dealings of God; and that he does these two
ways.

First, by showing us the use of that Spiritual Telescope (Faith) by which we
may perceive and give a right judgment of these things, and behold the purpose
of God through his Providence, and be able to reconcile Providence and
Promises when they seem most contrary, and in the Saints most cloudy and
darkest day of trouble, see the bright side of the Cloud, and apprehend the
Sunshine of Divine favor upon their Spirits, and that when he gives the
Wicked their hearts desire, at the same time he sends leanness into their souls.

Secondly: By directing us to judge of men, not so much by what they have of
Visibles, or things seen, as what they have of Invisibles, or things not seen,
nor by what they have of this World in their present possession, as by what
they have of another World in futurition, nor by what they are, but what they
shall be; not according to the occurrences of Life, but their happiness in
Death, which he thus demonstrates from his own observation and experience in
the Text and context.

In the 35. v. of this Psalm, he shows us the Wicked in all their pomp and
grandeur; I have seen the Wicked in great power, and spreading himself as a
green Bay tree, or as in the Margin, a green Tree that grows in his own Soil:
And what is this goodly show? in the 36. verse he says, Yet he passes away,
and lo, he was not; yea, I sought him, but he could not be found. And why
could he see no more of him? He gives a reason in the 38. verse, The
Transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the Wicked shall be cut
off.

But is it so with the Saints? No: Though they be like a dry Tree, yet mark the
Perfect man, trace him through all the troubles of life, Behold the Upright,
for the end of that man is Peace.

The Text is a description of the Life and Death of a Pious man.

First his Life; that is Perfect and Upright. Secondly, his Death; and that is
Peace: The conclusion arises out of the Premises.
Mark the Perfect man, and behold the Upright, etc.

From the doubling of the terms, we may learn these three things, as intended
thereby.

First, to mark him with a curious eye of observation, and serious
consideration; to mark how he carries it toward God, and toward man; how he is
at home and abroad; how he deports himself in every condition of Life; mark him
exactly in all his Natural, Civil, and Spiritual actions; observe him Inside
and Outside; the more you know him, the better you will love him; and the
better you love him, the more you will look upon him: Behold his Life, and if
there be no comeliness in the outward appearance, yet there is comfort enough in
his Death. The end of that Man is Peace. Even Balaam did wish, Oh that I might
die the death of the Righteous, that my latter end may be like his.

Secondly; Mark him, and behold him with an eye of imitation; let the Upright
man be the Copy, after which you write: Though we cannot safely follow Man in
all things, because the best Lights out of Heaven are but Moon-lights at best,
and have their blemishes, yet we may safely follow them in their Uprightness;
and it is our duty to follow them, as they are followers of Christ Jesus,
especially in these three Specimens of their Uprightness.

First, the Purity and Singleness of their heart, having the testimony of a
good Conscience, that there is no way of Wickedness in them; but they are like
the followers of the Lamb, in Rev. 14.5. In whose mouth was found no Guile, for
they are without fault before the Throne of God.

Secondly, in the Beauty and Purity of a spotless life, whose Conversation as
well as Conscience is without spot and blame, abstaining from all appearance of
evil, according to that Exhortation in Phil. 2.15. That ye may be blameless and
harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the World.

Thirdly, In a faithful perseverance in the ways of God, to the end, as in
Prove. 4.25, 26, 27. Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look
straight before thee: Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
established: Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left; which implies these
two things especially;

First, That there must be no decays nor faintings in the way, and work of
Holiness, but a continual increase, as in Prove. 4.18. The path of the Just is
as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day; lest it
be with us, as it was charged upon Ephesus, as in Rev. 2.4. Nevertheless I have
somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first love: As some
understand, she had left Christ, who was the Object of her love; or as others,
She left that degree and measure of love, wherewith she at first loved him. We
must not only keep up the same heat of love, and height of affections to
Christ, but love to Christ, being a Divine fire, must increase more and more,
till the Soul ascend in a holy flame into his Bosom.

Secondly, There must be no diversion, or turning from the ways of God, neither
to the right hand, nor to the left, (i. e.) either to avoid the frowns on the
one hand, or to enjoy the smiles of the world on the other hand: Or else

First, Not turn to the right hand by any excesses, or doing more than God has
commanded; for God will say to men that do so, Who has required these things
at your hands? Or charge us as he did the People, Jer. 7.81. That they did that
which came not into his heart: Their hearts can never be right with God, that
is only right in their own eyes.

Secondly, Turn not to the left hand, by any defects or neglect of what God
has commanded, but go straight on, as the Kine that carried the Ark, 1 Samuel
6.12. They went straight on, and turned not as they went. Let it be your aim to
be thorow-pac'd in Religion; throughout with God, that though you cannot do all
the good, and shun all the evil you would, yet you may be able to say, as in
Psalm. 18.21. I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed
from my God; and in the shutting up o^ our days, appeal with good Hezekiah,
Isa. 38.3. Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart.

Thirdly, It implies, To behold the Upright man, till he comes to the Grave;
Mark the Perfect man, observe his Life, behold him till ye see his latter end,
till ye see how he comes off the Stage; the end of that man is to be
considered, as well as his beginning; see him in Life, see him in Death. Death
is said to be a man's End in several respects.

1. As it puts an end to all the actions of his life, when death appears, it
shuts the Windows, binds up or breaks the Working-instruments, Eccles. 9.10.
Solomon tells us, Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither
thou go.

2. It Is the end of man, because it brings man to the end of his Journey;
therefore when man dies, he is said to go to his Long home, Eccles. 12.5. the
Grave is said to be his Long home, not his last home, for the body must not
lodge there for ever; nor is it said to be his long home, because he is long
going thither, for many times we step from the Womb into the Tomb, or in the
midst of our days, drop into the Grave; but it is called our Long home, because
of our long stay there.

3. Death is called the end of man, because it puts an end to all the troubles,
temptations, fears, and pains of life; it is the Outlet of all Misery, and the
Inlet to all Happiness. When Death comes to put an end to the days of the
Upright, he then begins his Triumphs, and may go away with Colors flying, and
Trumpets sounding, O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory?

From the whole, Observe.
I shall give you this Doctrinal point; That

He that is Perfect and Upright in his Life, shall certainly have Peace in his
Death.

When the Question is asked, Who shall be admitted into the Mount Zion below,
or enter into the new Jerusalem above? the Answer from Heaven is, Psalm. 15.1,
2. as you may see, Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in
thy holy Hill? He that walks Uprightly, and works Righteousness, and
speaks the Truth in his heart.

That great Gospel-promise, Isa. 26.2, 3. Open ye the Gates, that the Righteous
Nation, which keeps the Truth, may enter in. Thou will keep him in perfect
peace, whose mind is stayed on thee. It is also promised in Isa. 57.1, 2. The
Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and Merciful men are taken
away, none considering that the Righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
He shall enter into peace; they shall rest in their Beds, each one walking in
his Uprightness.

In opening and confirming this Doctrine, I shall show you three things,

First, What is meant by these terms, Perfect, and Upright, as they are
understood sometimes in the same, and sometimes in a different sense; sometimes
they are taken Conjunctim, and as Synonymous, signifying one and the same
thing; and sometimes divisim, severally.

First, As they are taken divisim, so the word Perfect here, seems to relate to
the Upright man's Inside, and to the pure frame of his heart especially, and the
regular motions of all the faculties of the soul: In this sense it is taken
chiefly in that command of God to Abraham, Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God,
walk before me, and be thou perfect: And in that holy Profession of David,
Psalm. 101.2. I will walk in the midst of my House with a perfect heart. There
are two other respects also, in which men are said to be perfect.

First, In respect of their Justification by the complete Righteousness of
Christ, every true Believer in this respect may be said to be Perfect, having
all his imperfections covered, and done away by him, whose Name is the Lord our
Righteousness: As in Heb. 10.14. For by one offering, he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified.

Secondly, Men may be said to be Perfect with respect unto their
Sanctification, though the work it self be yet Imperfect.

First, In respect of the Spirit of God, the Author of that Glorious work, who
will certainly perfect what he has begun, according to that Prayer of the
Apostle, 1 These. 5.23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I
pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless, unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, In respect of the work it self, which is a tendency unto perfection,
a direct tendency to the future perfect state of Saints in Glory: Where ever it
is begun, the gracious heart is always breathing, longing, and working in
continual motion toward that perfection; and content with no state, measures,
or degrees short of it: As we may see in that Blessed Apostle Paul, Phil. 3.13,
14, 15. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those
things which are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us therefore, as many as be Perfect, be
thus minded.

Secondly, When these terms are severally understood, this word Upright seems
more specially to relate to the regularity of a man's outward deportment, in a
just, exact, and holy Conversation, according to the rules of Righteousness,
prescribed in that Royal Law, the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, when he is
holy in all manner of Conversation, without Deceit and Guile, in all his
commerce and dealing with men, both in Commutative and Distributive Justice, in
his private and public capacity.

They that Defraud and Cheat, and deal Unjustly with their Brother, are
strangers to Uprightness, the Shame and Reproach of their Holy profession.

Thirdly, Here in this place (I conceive) both Perfect and Upright signify the
same thing, and are exegetical, as if one Epithete had been too little to
express the worth of such an excellent and incomparable Person. That you may
see the excellency of that perfect Man,

First, we will hear what the Scripture says of him; not to say any thing of
Noah, Lot, Job, and others, who were perfect and upright in their Generation,
who were the glory of the places and days in which they lived, Genesis 25.27.
there is a description of the Righteous and the Wicked, the Perfect and the
Profane, as Learned Authors observe: Esau was a cunning Hunter, a Man of the
Field; and Jacob was a plain Man, dwelling in Tents: Esau was like Nimrod, a
mighty Hunter before the Lord, like the Hectors of our times, a man of a
rugged, ranting spirit: But Jacob was Ish Tam, a plain Man, sine fuco, and
fallacia, without Welt or Guard, as we are wont to say; non acutus ad
fallendum, not cunning to deceive, though once he did supplant his Brother,
which was more his Mothers contrivance, than his own; and another time which
was more his Brothers folly, than his own fraud: There is so much excellency in
a Perfect and Upright man, that the Lord commands Moses, Exodus 28.30. Thou
shall put on the Breast Plate of Judgment, the Urim and the Thummim, and they
shall be upon Aarons heart, when he goes in before the Lord: And Aaron shall
bear the Judgment of the Children of Israel upon his heart before the Lord
continually. That the words Urim and Thummim were engraven on the precious
Stones of the Breast Plate, is agreed upon by the most; and some are of
opinion, that they were done by the Finger of God himself: Urim signifies
Lights; Thummim, which comes from the same root, with that word, by which Jacob
was expressed, is rendered Perfections, both in the Plural number; to imply,
that abundance of Knowledge, and Holiness that should be in the Priests of the
Lord. Uprightness, (i. e.) upright toward God, and upright toward Man, and to
teach the Spiritual Priests of God, if they will enter into the Holy of Holies,
and ask Counsel of God, they must have this Urim and Thummim, this light of
Knowledge and Perfection. Uprightness is called Perfection, because the
perfection of a Saint is his uprightness.

I shall now give you a few Lines or Characters of a Perfect and Upright man,
and you will easily observe how they suit both the Original and the Copy, (this
worthy Friend, and precious Saint, for whose sake they were drawn.)

First, A Perfect and Upright man is one, of a sound and single heart: A
single-hearted Christian, his heart is never more divided in him, than when he
cannot keep his heart undivided from God; he is inside and outside the same; he
professes the true God to be his God, and is like the God whom he does profess;
he owns the truth, and is like the truth which he owns, which is said to be
Una, semper sui similis, his tongue is always the Index of his heart, and his
heart does never give his tongue the lie: As they that search into the Veins of
the Earth for Silver and Gold, the deeper they dig (they say) the purer is the
Ore: The more you know of his heart, and the more you see him in his private
Chamber, and secret Closet, the more pure, and the more refined will you
observe him to be; he may indeed (as a Man) have some blemishes in his face,
but his heart in the mean time, cries out with the Apostle, Romans 7.15. That
which I do, I allow not; for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that
do I.

He dares not indeed come to be weighed in the Balance with a God of infinite
Holiness, yet is content, and humbly desires to be tried by the Touchstone of
the Spirit of the Holy God: As in Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search one, O God, and know
my heart; try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in
me, and lead me in the way everlasting.

Secondly, He is One, all whose motions are guided and directed by the will of
God, to which he is so fixed, that nothing can make him warp from it: As they
said of Fabritius amongst the Heathens, That he was so true to his principles,
that it was as easy to persuade the Sun from his Ecliptic Line, as to hope
that he should leave them. So this Perfect and Upright Saint regards not
Traditions and Opinions of Men, without God, but exactly observes his Sacred
and Divine Precepts. And when he sees how some men lose themselves by leaving
the Word; as a wise Pilot, he Steers his course by Card and Compass, having
Oculos ad Coelum, Manus ad Clavum, his eye to the Star, and his hand to the
Helm; and as the Pin of a wellset Dial casts shadow according to the Suns
motion, so he moves according to the conduct and direction of the Word and
Spirit; that he may be according to the Apostles exhortation, 1 Phil. 27. Only
let your Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Thirdly, A Perfect and Upright man is one, whose thoughts, words, and actions,
do all tend to, and terminate in the Glory and Honor of God; as in 1 Cor.
10.13. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all ^o the
glory of God. As in the well-disciplin'd Army of Israel, ^he Ark of God was
always car^ied in the midst of the Host: So in all the well-ordered affairs of
his life, the Honor of God ^s still in the midst of all his ^houghts, he
knows that he ^s not his own: as in 1 Cor. 6.^0. But is bought with a price,
therefore must glorify God in body, and in spirit, which are Gods.

Fourthly, The Perfect and Upright man is One, who is the same at all times, in
all companies and conditions.

First, at all times: In the time of the Gospels prosperity, he leads the Van
in all the duties of Religious Worship: In the time of Religions Wane, he is
Religions Champion: In days of the greatest Defection, he keeps himself from
the pollution of the times; like Noah in Genesis 6.9. When all flesh had corrupted
their way, he had this testimony, Noah was a just man, an^ perfect in his
generation, and Noah walked with God. He is another Nehemiah, Baruch, Jeremiah,
o^ Ebedmelech, or one of those few names in Sardis.

Secondly, In all Companie^ he is the same: He remembers he is one of Gods
Witnesses, and therefore out of a mealy-mouthed baseness will not betray the
truth.

Thirdly, He is the same in every condition, Rich, or Poor, he is (...), Homo
quadratus, a square man; cast him where you will, what ever he lose, he will
not make Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience.

Secondly, I must show you what Peace that is, which is the end of a Perfect
and Upright man.

First, what it is not: Secondly, what it is.

First, It is not meant that they shall have no pains in their Death; for
sometimes they that have the most inward purity and peace, have the most
outward pain; and they that have no purity nor peace within, have little or no
pain without; but they go off (as they are wont to say) like Lambs, that were
filthy Swine and cruel Lions in their Lives. These things the Lord does
variously dispense, as seems best in his own Wisdom, and most for his own
Glory, Psalm. 73.4. It is said of the Wicked, There are no bands in their death,
but their strength is firm, and so sail smoothly to their Eternal torment.

Secondly, Neither is this the Peace here meant, which is mentioned in Luke
11.21. When a strong man armed keeps his Palace, his good are in peace: That
is, the peace of the Wicked arising from the Devils possession of their hearts,
or from their carnal security; not that their case is good, but they see not
their own danger, and think all is well: either 1. From a blind Conscience that
cannot see; or, 2. From a bribed Conscience (by some formal duties, or good
works) which must not see; or, 3. From a sleepy Conscience that cannot foresee;
or, 4. From a seared Conscience that will not see.


But by Peace here is meant, all Good, the highest Good, Joy, Rest, and Glory;
as in that Prayer of the Apostle, Romans 15.13. Now the God of hope, (the God
that works hope in you, the God who is the object of your hope) fill you with
all joy and peace in believing; a peace that is founded in Faith, perfected in
Vision, of which the Saints have some fore-tasts in this life, the fullness in
the life to come, when they shall enter into peace, a true, spiritual,
internal, and eternal peace; a peace arising from satisfaction; the Lord Jesus
Christ having born the Wrath, and satisfied the Justice of God, that they may
have full peace: Therefore in Joh. 14.2. it is called his peace: Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you; not as the world gives, give I unto you:
Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.

Secondly, This Peace is the fruit of Victory, the absolute Conquest of Jesus
Christ over Principalities and Powers, and triumph over the world, Joh. 16.33.
These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have Peace: In the
World ye shall have Tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
World.

Thirdly, It is a peace that springs up from Purity and Sanctification; the
heart being purged, the Conscience refined, the Soul is full of peace within,
by the help of the testimony of a good Conscience, goes triumphant into his
Eternal rest.

Thirdly,

Reas. 1. Because the God of peace has an infinite, intimate and everlasting
love for his upright ones, he loves them and they love him above all the world,
Cant. i. 4. We will be glad, and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love
more than wine: the upright love thee. And he loves them as in Psalm. xi. 7. The
righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance does behold the upright.
He bids us behold the upright, yea he beholds them with delight himself. And in
Psalm iv. 3. He has set apart him that is godly for himself, he has made a
Covenant with them, a Covenant of Peace, and because he loves them, he will
lodge them in his Bosom. Though Death can break the Knot of all human love and
friendship, yet it can never loosen the Bond of Divine Love; as the Apostle
says in Romans viii. 37, 38. Nay, in all these things we are more than
Conquerors, through him that loved us. For I am persuaded, that neither Death,
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come. Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Secondly, Reas. 2. Because he has proclaimed and promised Peace, Rest and
Glory to such, Isa. lvii. 2. He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in
their beds, each one walking in his uprightness. And Rev. xiv. 13. And I heard
a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the dead which die in
the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labors, and their works do follow them. And Psalm lxxxiv. 11. The Lord God is
a Sun and Shield: the Lord will give Grace and Glory: no good thing will be
withhold from them that walk uprightly: His time of Life is his time of War, at
the instant of Death the Warfare is ended, and everlasting peace proclaimed,
his life is his Seedtime, his end is the beginning of Harvest, a full Harvest
of peace and joy. Psalm xcvii. 11. Light is sown for the Righteous, and
gladness for the Upright in heart. When the body and soul of the Upright do
part asunder, the body betakes it self to rest in the Grave, the soul flies
into the regions of peace, in the Divine Presence.

Thirdly, Reas. 3. Because God is righteous, and he will recompense his Saints,
2 Thessalonians. i. 6, 7. It is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation
to them that trouble you. And to you that are troubled, rest with us. And thus
you shall see Christ leading them into a land of peace, Rev. vii. 14, 15, 16,
17. These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before
the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple: and he that
sits on the throne shall dwell among them. They shall hunger no more,
neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat. For
the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them and shall lead
them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes. It is great trouble that Saints undergo, and a hard matter for a
man to maintain his integrity amidst so many snares, frowns and flatteries of
the world. This is their great comfort and encouragement, and shall be their
reward, to inherit peace at the last. As Lamech said, Genesis v. 29. When the Lord
gave him his Son Noah, whose name signifies Rest, and whose person was a type
of Christ, This same shall comfort us concerning our work, and toil of our
hands, because of the ground which the Lord has cursed. Which the Apostle also
intimates, 1 Cor. xv. 19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are
of all men most miserable. Implying, 1. That Saints are not altogether hopeless
in this life. 2. That all their hope is not here.


Fourthly, Reas. 4. Because when a Perfect and Upright man dies, he is gone
out of the reach of all those things that might annoy his peace, where the
wicked cease from troubling, and the weary be at rest, Job. iii 17. and are
wafted over into Emmanuel's Land, where they have all those glorious enjoyments
in which they shall eternally acquiesce.

1. He is totally freed from all evil, sin cannot be there, Rev. 21.27. And
there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles. Here he is full
of complaints, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
the body of this death? But when he dies, he sings this Epinikion, I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. When the Perfect and Upright man dies, he and his Portion, and Inheritance
are brought together; the Heir is restless in his expectations, till he comes
to the Inheritance; but here the Portion is God himself, which the Saint has
many times with much pleasure surveyed, and has had thereof many a delightful
prospect of Faith rejoicing in it, as sweet, and full, and satisfying; and now
does possess that Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved for him in Heaven, 1 Pet. 2.4. and shall ever be with the Lord,
1 These. 3.17.

3. He comes to enjoy his Beloved in Glory, of whom he said, when he saw him by
Faith, Cant. 5.10. My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten
thousands; and in the 16. verse, Yea, he is altogether lovely: What will he say
when he shall see him, and be with him in his highest Exaltations in Glory?

4. All his Graces shall be then completed, and there shall be no more place
for desire, for he shall sit down at that Fountainhead, where is fullness of
joy, and pleasures for evermore.

Cor. 7.5. That he had no rest in the flesh, but was troubled on every side;
without were fightings, within were fears. Saints in this life, sail (as it
were) upon a Sea of glass, mingled with fire, the Persecutions of men, the
Buffetings of Satan, the Law in their Members, make their present state
unquiet. How did he deal with that holy and upright Man Job? read the History
of his Patience, and you shall see: If the Devil be at any time silent, the
World will make an outcry: If the World withold its rage for a little space,
the Devil will invade their spirits.

It is said of him, that when he accosted the Lord Jesus Christ himself, and
had spent all his Arrows against him, Luke 4.13. When the Devil had ended all
the temptation, he departed from him for a season. If he left him but for a
little while, in whom he could find nothing to fasten one temptation upon, as
Christ says in John 14.30. The Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in
me: Will he ever leave his Saints, who have too much matter in them for his
temptations to work upon? He will not suffer them to be a moment quiet.

1. He is continually striving against the very Being of Grace; this Abaddon
would utterly destroy it, and maintains a War against it; the Flesh lusting
against the Spirit, but that greater is he that is in us, than he that is in
the world.

2. He is disturbing the exercise of Grace, his posture you shall see in Zach.
3.1. And he showed me Joshua the High Priest standing before the Angel of the
Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand, to resist him. I have often thought
in my solemn retirements, of Anselms Bird, fastened to a stone by a thread,
often striving to fly up, but the weight of the stone, as often pulled him
down again: A true Emblem of a gracious Soul, who many times endeavors to get
up into the Divine Presence, but as often as he attempts it, the Devil is at
hand, to hinder and pluck him down again.

Use 2. If the Perfect and Upright man's end shall be Peace, then the days of
the Upright man shall have an end, the Psalmist says, Psalm. 39.5, 6. Verily,
every man at his best state is altogether Vanity: Surely every man walks in a
vain show: There is an Emphasis in every word, Man is Vanity; every man is
Vanity; every man at his best state is Vanity; he is altogether Vanity; verily
it is a certain truth, surely every man walks in a vain show, his life is but
the show or shadow of a life: That Sentence is unto all, Dust thou art, and
unto Dust shall thou return; and there is no exemption from that general
Statute Law, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed to all men once to die, and after
death, the judgment. Heretofore to the Fathers of old, their Lives were like a
long Summers day; but as sin at first brought in death, so as sin multiplied,
it shortened men's days; and now our Lives are like a Winters day in all
respects, cold, cloudy, dark, and short, it is no sooner Morning, but the Night
approaches, Jer. 6.4. I may allude to that place, The day goes away, the
shadows of the Evening are stretched out.

Two things may be deduced from hence.

First, Here is comfort for the Perfect and Upright man, though his life be
trouble, yet his end will come and bring him peace; the great Devourer, the
Grave, that swallows up others, shall give him meat; and the strong Lion
(Death) that feeds on others, shall yield him sweetness: When Abraham had
fought hard, till the going down of the Sun, and rescued Lot, that was taken
Captive, Melchizedeck met him with Bread and Wine for his refreshment, who was
King of the City of Peace: So when the upright Saint has been in his hot
disputes, to deliver his soul from his Spiritual Enemies, our Melchizedeck, the
Lord Jesus Christ, will refresh him with Bread and Wine; for his Flesh is Meat
indeed, and his Blood is Drink indeed; and will lead him into the City of
Salem, a Land of Peace, as the Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith; henceforth there is
laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Judge,
shall give me at that day; and after many a terrible shock, and dangerous
storm, the perfect and upright Saint (through the wise conduct of his Pilot)
shall arrive safely at his desired Port of peace; For there remains a rest to
the People of God, Heb. 4.9.

Secondly, If the Perfect and Upright man does die, then here is matter of
serious consideration and lamentation for the living; the life of Saints is to
be desired, and their death to be lamented, unless we will incur that censure,
Isa. 57.1. The Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful
men are taken away, none considering that the Righteous is taken away from the
evil to come.

1. Consider what resentment the people of God had of old of the death of the
Saints; how they mourned and wept for them, when they left their Society; Jacob
died, and Israel wept; Moses died, and all the People mourned for him thirty
days; and when Stephen died, Act. 8.2. Devout men carried him to his Burial,
and made great lamentation over him.

2. Consider the great usefulness of living Saints, especially in these three
respects:

First, As they are Supports, Props, and Pillars; for so they are called, Psalm.
75.3. The Earth and all the Inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I bear up the
Pillars of it: They that take this to be the Psalm of Asaph, do understand
these words to be the words of God, that he preserves and upholds his Saints,
which are the Pillars of the Earth. They that take the Psalm to be a Psalm of
David for Asaph, do understand them as the words of David, that he would
countenance and encourage the people of God, who were the Pillars to uphold a
shaking Kingdom. If a Moses be removed out of the gap, what should hinder, why
the Judgment should not break in upon the people, Isa. 1.9. The Prophet tells
us that the people acknowledge, Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto us a
very small Remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like
unto Gomorrah. If God gather up his Jewels, and takes them away, he seems to be
removing Himself, that is a great truth; Isa. 57.1. Merciful men are taken away
from the evil to come; and an old saying, many times true, That they are taken
away, that evil may come. Thus the Lord is said in Psalm. 78.50. He made a way
to his anger: When he had secured Lot, he let down the fire upon Sodom, and
when he had Housed Noah in the Ark, what could the wicked World expect, but an
overwhelming Deluge? Thus they observed of old, that the death of eminent
Saints, was the forerunner of some great Calamity; as that long-lived
Methuselah (whose name does signify a Messenger of death) died the year before
the Flood came upon the whole World. Augustine the year before Hippo was
Sacked: Pareus a little before Heidleberg was taken: Luther a little time
before the Wars in Germany: Ambrose a little before the Ruin of Italy. What the
taking away of so many Worthies of the Lord, eminent Lights in the Church, and
excellent Instruments, both here and elsewhere, may portend, I cannot tell.

Secondly: Consider their usefulness in being examples of Holiness in the
places where God has set them; the examples of Saints are of great use in
their generation: Justin Martyr was Converted by reading the Lives of dead
Saints. The examples of Men, whether good or bad, have a mighty influence upon
the minds and manners of others. Theodosius owning Religion, made all his
Courtiers to become Religious.

Thirdly: The Lives of Perfect and Upright men are greatly useful and
desirable, for their Counsels and Instructions to propagate and promote
Religion, Prove. 10.21. The Lips of the Righteous feed many: A few words the
Woman of Samaria spoke to the people, brought many to seek after Christ, John
4.29. How useful this our Deceased worthy Friend in all these respects was, you
all know; as a Prop and Pillar to the Family, to the place where he lived; and
by his Example and Counsels, that scarce any that conversed with him, but was
the better for him; let us then lament and cry out with David, Help Lord, for
the Godly man cease, for the Faithful fail from among the Children of men,
Psalm. 12.1.

I need not tell you of his eminency in Religion, his Love to Christ, his Zeal
for the Gospel, and for the House of God; his free and generous mind to the
faithful Ministers and Members of Jesus Christ, which you know better than I: I
shall say only this of him, He lived a pious life, he died full of gracious
breathings after God, and is entered into his glorious, never-ending
enjoyments; only my heart moves me to send up this affectionate expression
after him, which was David's for his Beloved Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.26. I am
distressed for thee my Brother Jonathan; very pleasant have thou been unto me.

There be two Uses of Exhortation:

First; To live the life of the Perfect and Upright man.

Secondly; So to prepare for the Perfect and Upright man's end, that we may have
peace.

First: 1. Use of Exhort.
Imitate the Perfect and Upright man, or rather take your measure from Heaven;
let this be your Ambition, to strive who may write most exactly after this
Copy, or the Original, Matthew. 5.48. Be you perfect, as your Heavenly Father is
perfect; sincere and upright, complete in all parts of piety: Be you like him,
though you cannot be equal to him.

1 Cons. The Wisdom of man is to approve himself to God, who judges of men
according to the integrity of the heart: Though David had great failings, and
foul miscarryings, yet he has this remark put on him, that he was a man after
Gods own heart; and he is a man after the heart of God, whose heart comports
with the heart of God, and in whose heart God is, who dwells with the Upright
in their hearts, as on his little Throne or lower Heaven. He that is every
where, per modum vestigii, is with the Upright, per modum imaginis, they bear
his Image; it is no matter if men commend us, who are very free and prodigal of
their praises, or what we think of our selves; but as the Apostle says in 2
Cor. 10.18. Not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord
commends.

2. Cons. It Is our work to keep our hearts upright, and it is Gods promise to
give us peace: He that will have the Beatifical Vision, must be pure in heart,
Matthew. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; and he that
will ascend to the spirits of just men made perfect in Heaven, must be perfect
and upright, and of a refined spirit on Earth, Heb. 12.23. There is no comfort
like this in a dying hour; to be able to say as Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. Remember O
Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and
have done that which is good in thy sight; which made Paul make it the business
of his life, Act. 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a
Conscience void of offense toward God and toward men, having a true and firm
hope of the Resurrection; as in v. 15. and that he might have peace at the
last. It is a remarkable story I have sometimes read, of an ancient Servant,
when Age and Infirmity had thrown him upon his Deathbed, in a kind of soliloquy
thus he discourses; I am now a dying man, and am going to the Judge of all the
World, What Friend have I to stand by me in this day? His Riches, Gold and
Silver, Houses, Lands, tell him they will bear the expense of his Sickness, buy
his Coffin and Winding Sheet, etc. His Acquaintants and Relations tell him,
they could Weep and Pray for him, and attend him to the Grave: But his good
Conscience says, He would go through Death, and to the Judge with him: O says
he, This is a Friend indeed, farewell Estate, farewell Relations, I and my good
Conscience will go together.

3. Cons. Without a perfect and upright heart all your Profession is but one
continued act of provocation; your duties, like the Beauty-spots (as they call
them) upon their painted faces, they account them their Beauty, but they are
their Deformity; and such are all Religious duties without a perfect heart.

This Integrity and Uprightness is the Golden thread that must run through all
the actions of our life. An Hypocrit may do as much or more than others, but a
perfect man (though he may not do so much) yet he does better than others: The
Devil may put on Samuels Mantle, but that cannot change his nature, he is the
Devil still. The Apostle tells us, That out of the dregs of time, both the
Gloworm-Formalist, and such like Vermin should arise, 2 Timothy 3.1. to the 10. v.

4. Cons. Mark and consider the end of the Partial, Formal, and Hypocritical
Professors, like Comets that blaze for a time, yet go off with an ill savor;
so the hope of the Hypocrit fails; or, as the New Moon that shines briskly and
clearly at first, until it come to the Wane, and then leaves the World under an
universal darkness. They are hated of God and Man; of God, because they be not
as they seem to be; of Men, because they seem to be what they are not; and at
last, Isa. 33.14. The Sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has suprized the
Hypocrite; who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? Direct.


1. If you would be Perfect and Upright in your lives;

First: Look to your heart at all times, which is the seat of affections, and
the fountain of actions:

1. And especially; In your Spiritual duties observe how the Upright man
carries it with God, let your heart and God be together in all your duties: If
your heart be perfect in duty, there will be peace in the duty; but the prayers
of the Wicked are abomination; and in Psalm. 66.18. If I regard Iniquity in my
heart, the Lord will not hear me.

2. In your civil commerce, take heed to your spirit, that you may be Perfect,
Just, and Righteous in all your dealings; shall Religion suffer among them that
seem to love, and own it? Shall Piety be accounted a piece of Pageantry? and
Profession be esteemed no better than a Religious Cheat by the world, through
your unjust practices? and so Religion have cause to say under all her
Reproaches, These be the wounds that I have received in the House of my Friends.

To Lie, Dissemble, violate Faith, to break Promise, and to break in Trade,
with design to defraud others, and raise their own Families; shut up Shops to
shut out Creditors from their just dues, is become a most prodigious practice,
a common and Epidemical sin both in City and Country, the more is the pity, if
any such be concerned that should have a better regard to the honor of
Religion. He that will be a complete Christian, must observe
Second-table-duties as well as First-table-duties, lest the World say of us,
that we are like Gods in our Meetings, and Devils in the Market; Saints at
Church, and Cheats in the Shop and on the Exchange. These loose and unjust
dealings of Professors, are the things that hurry the World into Atheism; this
is one of those great Evils of our times, that makes God angry, and Men
Atheists.

2. Direct.
Principle your hearts with a true love to, and fear of God.

1. A true love to God, and then you will serve God for God; not as poor
Tenants serve their Rich Landlords, out of force, or servile fear; or as
Lactantius said of the Graecians, That they did worship their Gods, alios, ne
noceant; alios, ut prosint, their black Devils or mischievous Gods, that they
might not hurt them, as well as their white Devils, or more favorable gods,
that they might receive good from them.

2. With a true fear of God, without which we can never be true to God or Man:
As Constantius once tried his Courtiers, when he publicly declared that those
of them that would not forsake Christianity, and the Worship of the true God,
and turn to the Idol-worship, should be Banished his Court; and when he found
that many for Court-honours forsook their Religion, he discarded them, and
entertained those only that did adhere to the true God; saying, They that will
not be true to God, will never be true to Man.

3. Let Love and Fear go together; Love will make us serve God willingly, and
true Fear will make us perform our duty to God and Man faithfully. Let these
two be as Aaron and Hur, that held up Moses hands steady, to keep our hearts
steadfast and upright with God.

Thirdly: Direct.
Remember the Eye of the Lord is upon all your ways, a, Deus videt, Angeli
testantur; God beholds, and his Angels bear witness, is enough to make any man
cautelous and upright in his walking. He sees us, whose Eyes are ten-thousand
times brighter than the Sun; in Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any Creature that
is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked, and opened unto the
eyes of him, with whom we have to do, Psalm. 11.4. The Lord is in his holy
Temple; i^ Lords Throne is in Heaven; his eyes behold, his eyelids try the
Children of men, as a Judge who tries the cause and matter by the ear, and
observes by his eye the Malefactors countenance. I have often told you, and now
tell you again, Man may deceive Men, but he cannot deceive God, 1 King. 22.34.
Though Ahab disguised himself, and girt on his Harness never so close, yet
could he not keep off the fatal (...): So, though the Hypocrite disguise
himself, he cannot hide from the eyes of God, nor escape his Righteous hand.

Lastly: Mind seriously Death, 4 Direct.
and Judgment to come Jeroms, Sive edo, etc. Semper vox illa terribilis sonat
in auribus meis, Surgite mortui and venite ad judicium: Rise ye Dead, and come
to Judgment; would be a dreadful and awaking peal in the Ears of all sleepy and
careless Sinners, 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat
of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad; and in Eccles. 12.14. For God
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil. When Death comes, it draws aside the Curtain, then
all your false and vain pretenses will be exposed to public view. Death plucks
off the Sinners Vizor, and unmasks the Hypocrit; and then, though he lived in
honor and esteem in the world, comes off the Stage, like a Fool, and dies with
shame.

The second Use of Exhortation is to prepare for the Perfect and Upright man's
end; 2 Use of Exhort.
there must be an habitual and actual preparation.

First consider, 1 Consid.
no man knows how soon he may die, Death is a sly and impartial Messenger, who
is deaf to all entreaties and arguments, and cannot be bribed; it is not
greatness, nor goodness, nor youth, nor age, nor riches, nor interest can
supersede it; wherefore, as Christ says, Luke 12.35, 36. Let your loins be
girded about you, and your lights burning, and ye your selves like unto men
that wait for their Lord. If Death delay its coming, it is the Bridegrooms
favor that the Bride may make her self ready. But when God cuts down the sound
and fruitful Trees, that are all spine, it is a wonder he spares the rotten,
unsound, and barren Trees, that cumber the ground. There be three things, one
of which we shall never escape.

First, There be sudden, unseen Occurrences or Providence of God, by which men
are taken off, and of these they say, Casus nunciat mortem latentem; these
accidental strokes of providence do show us that death lies in ambush: Some men
die at Land, sometimes at Sea, sometimes they go forth well in the Morning, and
in a moment are dead.

Secondly, There be Sicknesses and Diseases, of which they say Morbus nunciat
mortem appropinquantem; every pain and distemper in the body, is a real warning
of deaths approach; if we should escape both these, there is*

Thirdly, That which will certainly take men off (Old age) of which it is said,
Senectus nuncia^ mortem praesentem; Decrepit, infirm Old age, is Death begun in
the body, so that Nil habet, quod speret senectus, Old age can hope for nothing
but Death.

Secondly: Consider, 2 Cons.
He that is prepared for Death before it comes, shall not be afraid of the King
of Terrors, when he comes: Though Death be in it self terrible, yet I may
allude to that in Isa. 11.8. The prepared Saint shall play on the hole of this
Asp, and put his hand on the Cockatrice-den, and not be afraid. What Agag
proudly and presumptuously said, he may truly and comfortably say, Surely the
bitterness of death is past; while others say of Death and the Grave, as Jacob
said of Luz at first, How terrible is this place? He may say of them, This is
none other than the House of God.

Thirdly: 3. Cons.
Consider, the wicked, ungodly, and unprepared Sinner can have no hopes in his
death, Isa. 57.2. There is no peace (says my God) to the Wicked; every pain
and sickness that befalls him, is like the rattling of the wheels of the fiery
Chariots, and the prancing of the horses of the terrible ones, that come to
fetch away his soul, and now he has no hope nor life left in him, Job 8.13.
The Hypocrites hope shall perish; he can expect no other, but that his soul and
body must shortly be plucked asunder, never to meet together but in Hell.

That we be habitually prepared; 2. Direct.


First, Let us get an interest in Christ, without him there is no peace with
God; and without peace with God, there can be no peace in the latter end, Job
22.21. Acquaint now thy self with God, and be at peace: Whence once we have got
an interest in Christ, we may die in peace. As Simeon when he had got Christ in
his arms, could say, Now let thou thy Servant depart in peace: O be
persuaded to receive and embrace Christ, to believe in him, and resign up your
selves to him, as you desire to die in peace, and to be happy for ever. If you
were now upon your Deathbeds, and your Physician should turn Preacher, and your
Doctor become a Divine, and tell you your Sickness is incurable, there is no
more hopes of your life, you are not like to be men of this world, you must
prepare for another world; you had best make your peace with God, and get an
interest in Christ. I can do no more for you, and so the Lord have mercy upon
your souls. Oh! what would the Blood of Christ be worth in such a day? how
welcome would he be in such an hour?

Secondly, Be sure that ye be in a Regenerate and Converted state. Except a man
be born again, he shall never see the Kingdom of Heaven.

And lastly, Repent of all your sins; Sin, like Jonahs Gourd, will eat up the
comforts of life, and devour your peace in death; therefore said the Heathen,
(...), A good and holy life prepares for an happy death. Deal with sin as the
Lords of the Philistines advised, concerning David, 1 Samuel 29.4. Who, though he
had lived peaceably amongst them, yet when they went down to fight against
Israel, would not suffer him to go down to the battle along with them, lest he
should turn his hand against them: So, though sin has been a pleasant
Companion with us all our life; yet when we go down to encounter death, we must
take heed that sin don't go along with us, for it will certainly turn its hand
against us, and put a sting into Death, and deadly teeth into that Lion.

Secondly: That you may be actually prepared,

First, 1 Direct.
Let every day be well filled: Days well filled with the works of
Righteousness, will make souls well filled with the fruits of Righteousness,
which are Peace and Joy. Let every days work be well done; examine your selves
every night, whether your work be done, and what is done amiss; and ask your
souls every night (upon doing this) whether it can willingly pass from this day
into Eternity, Job 5.26. it is said concerning that upright man, Thou shall
come to thy Grave in thy full Age (Diu vixit qui been vixit) like as a Shock of
Corn comes in his season; which implies two things.

First, That he shall come willingly to his grave, as a man that has done his
work, goes willingly to his rest, so is he a Volunteer to Death, that his soul
need not be forced out of his body, as Lot was out of Sodom; nor need he be
dragged out of the World, as the rich Fool in the Gospel.

Secondly: That when the Upright man dies, he goes as one ready and prepared,
as a Shock of Wheat in its season; this Saint goes like the Ox in the Emblem,
that that stands betwixt the Altar and the Plough, with this Motto, Ad utrumque
paratus, as ready for the Sacrifice as for the Yoke; and thus Paul says of
himself, Phil. 1.23. I am in a strait, betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ, which is far better; betwixt two, (i. e.) betwixt Life
and Death. In a Strait; that is, as a City that is Besieged and straightened; or
as Iron between two Loadstones, loath to leave the Philippians, and loath to stay
any longer from Christ; and therefore after he had stood a while in
Aequilibrio, at last he inclines rather to be with Christ, who is altogether
desirable.

1. His Common Presence is the preservation of the World.

2. His Spiritual Presence is the very joy and life of Saints.

3. His Glorious Presence, the Eternal happiness of Believers; and Oh! how did
the heart of our deceased Friend breath after this highest of enjoyments?

Secondly: 2 Direct.
Let your accounts be always ready: The careless Steward cannot bear the news of
his Lords coming, before his Accounts be ready and adjusted. There is a secret
fearfulness in all persons negligent of their Accounts, to hear of Christ's
coming: Every one of us must give account of himself to God, and the sleepy
soul fears to hear this Voice, Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou
may be no longer Steward; and having so many Debts and Talents to account
for, he knows not how to set upon that work, yet he that will be always ready,
must keep his accounts even, and must often ask how the case stands between God
and his soul, and he need not be afraid, though he has never so many Talents,
Debts, and Arrears to account for beyond his ability, having the Blood and
Righteousness of Jesus Christ to balance the account.

Thirdly, 3 Direct.
take your solemn leave every day of all the World, that if God should call
you, the World may not be found hanging on your hearts, to make you unwilling
to go at his call. Every night say to your Friends, and to your Estates,
farewell, as being willing to leave them: This is to die daily, and by this
means you will die comfortably and willingly.

Fourthly: Let your Graces be all in a readiness, active, vigorous, and
abounding, that when Christ comes, these Graces being in you, 2 Pet. 1.11. An
entrance may be abundantly ministered unto you, into the everlasting Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Faith, Hope, and Love, must stand always
expecting the Lords coming, and be renewing Acquaintance with God, and making a
fresh application of the Blood of Christ, that the soul may have a clear sight
of his interest in the Righteousness of Christ, and his right to Divine favor.

Lastly: 5 Direct.
Familiarize Death to your souls; we are afraid of Death, and remain unprepared
for Death, because we and Death are strangers. When you lie down, let Death lie
down with you; when you awake, let Death talk with you; when you walk, let
Death be your Companion. Make a more serious improvement of your spectacles of
Mortality, and Funeral occasions, than you are wont to do; that if God bid you
die, as Number. 27.12. He bad Moses go up to Mount Abarim, and die there. You may
be as ready to go and die, as to go to your Beds: Only let Faith give you
always the fair Prospect of Christ, of Heaven, and Glory, that your hearts may
be possessed with this assurance, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know, that if our earthly house
of this Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, not made with
hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

FINIS.

