Let Envy burst -- Vrania's glad to see
Her Sons thus Joined in a Triplicity
To Cardan and to Guido much is Due
But in one Lilly we behold them Two

Anima Astrologiae: OR, A GUIDE FOR ASTROLOGERS.

BEING The considerations of the Famous GUIDO BONATUS Faithfully rendered into
English.

As also The Choicest Aphorisms of CARDANS Seven Segments, Translated; and
methodically digested under their proper Heads.

With a New Table of the fixed Stars, rectified for several years to come, and
diverse other necessary Illustrations.

A Work most useful and necessary for all Students, and recommended as such to
the Sons of Art.

By William Lilly, Student in Astrology.

London, Printed for B. Harris at the Stationers Arms in Sweethings Rents near
the Royal Exchange, 1676.

LICENSED,

April. 29. 1675. Roger L'Estrange.

To the Ingenious Lovers of Art.
WE had formerly some thoughts of Revising our Introduction to Astrology now
out of Print, and to have Enricht it for another Edition with the choicest
Aphorisms, both from the writings of the Ancients, and our own many years
Experience, but the Laboriousness of that Work, Considering our Age, and many
Infirmities of body, with the Discouragements we have already met with from
some ungrateful persons, caused us to lay aside (at least for the present)
those Intentions.

Yet that we might not be holy wanting to promote any thing that might tend to
the Advancement of Art, and Gratification of its painful Students, and knowing
how necessary the ensuing Considerations of Guido Bonatus, and Aphorisms
adjoined, are to be known and Reguarded, which many of our Ingenious
Countrymen could not do, for that they have hitherto remained in the Latin
Tongue, with the rest of the works of those Authors in Large Volumes, difficult
to be got, and too chargable for many to buy, we thereupon Recommended them to
a Friend to be translated by themselves, which he has Judiciously performed in
plain Significant Language, so that we Judge the work may deserve the Title of
Anima Astrologiae, which we have given it; Comprehending the Marrow and
Substance of Astrology, and much excellent matter, necessary to be observed by
all Honest Students, that practice Art to discover Truth, and not to Vapor
with.

We doubt not but the Legitimate Sons and well-willers of Urania will find
Considerable Advantages from hence, directing them to a certainty in giving
their Judgments upon all occasions, and that they will for this publication
have cause to thank their old Friend,

Walton upon Thames 2 Aug. 1675. William Lilly.

To the Reader.
THou art here presented with 2. Choice pieces of Art in our Mother Tongue, The
first the Considerations of Guido Bonatus, A Person no less happy in the
practice, than skillful in the Theory of Astrology, of which I will here give
thee one Instance as it is recorded by that eminent Historian Fulgosus, L. 8.
C. 11. That Guido Earl of Mount-ferrant being beseiged in that City, our Author
Bonatus sent him word, that if such a day and hour he would make a Sally on the
Enemies Camp, he should give them an absolute Defeat, and force them to raise
their seige and quit the place, but should himself receive a dangerous (but not
mortal) wound in the thigh, The Earl took his Council, made his Sally on the
day appointed, providing himself of all things necessary in case of a wound,
and according to the prediction, though vastly inferior in numbers, obtained a
most signal and entire Victory, but following the pursuit was wounded in the
place foretold, of which in short time recovered.

The Second consists of the Choicest Aphorisms of Cardanus, a man famous to
the learned world, and of whom the Judicious and severe Scaliger (though an
Adversary) in the Preface to the book he wrote against him, gives a most
respective and applauding Character. These Aphorisms (by which is meant short
comprehensive and approved Rules of Art) were in the original delivered
promiscuously, but I for better method have taken the pains here to marshall
them under their distinct and proper Titles, and that I might not unnecessarily
Charge the Reader, have omitted such as seemed trivial or Superfluous; This
much I thought fit to premise, and have only more to add, that by reason of my
absence some faults have escaped the Press, besides those which my self may be
chargable with in the Translation, the Reader will show his Judgment in
Distinguishing, and his good nature in Pardoning them; vale.

H. C.

A GUIDE FOR ASTROLOGERS.
The Proem.
AMongst those things that appertain to giving Judgment in Questions of
Astrology, there are six to be chiefly considered.

First, Nations and their particular kinds.

Secondly, Families, and the Constitutions and Ordinations of Families and
Houses.

Thirdly, Rich and potent Persons, Disposition and Affairs.

Fourthly, Regard is to be had to the Individuals of Human kind.

Fifthly, Elections or Times proper for the beginning of any Work or Enterprise.

Sixthly, Questions as well Universal as Particular, pertinent and fit to be
demanded.

But First of all There are some things necessary to be premised; as the fit
manner of propounding a Question, and diverse other Points to be observed in
giving Judgment.

Of which sort of Considerations we shall reck on up no fewer then One Hundred
Forty and Six, which though it is impossible they should happenor be observed
altogether; yet they all deserve to be known, and without them an Astrologer
shall never be able to give true and perfect Judgment. But before we Treat
distinctly of them, it will be convenient to say a little of the right way or
manner how a Question should be proposed for to Judge of things to come, is no
casie Task, nor indeed can it always be exactly performed; but we may come
near the Truth, and differ from it only in some small time or circumstances;
which difficulty should not at all discourage us from studying, and
endeavoring to obtain as great a Knowledge therein, as Humane minds are
capable of; for since Inferiors are governed by Superiors (as all Agree) and
that the Nature and Disposition of such Superiors may be known by their
Motions, which are now exactly found out by the Learned in Astronomy; we may
thence undoubtedly arrive at an Ability of Judging of things to come: That is,
Declare what will happen by or from such their motions, and by consequence
truly foretell future Accidents; for this Art has it is peculiar Rules and
Aphorisms, and it is End is Judgment, which takes off their objection who say
that Astrology is nothing worth; for it would not be an Art, unless it had its
proper precepts; but that it is an Art we have sufficiently proved elsewhere,
and the same is generally acknowledged; and its end is to give Judgment, as
aforesaid, which are of Accidents Imprinted on Inferiors by the Motions of the
Superior Bodies, and their Qualities and Effects in or upon the same.

Now of the One hundred forty and six Considerations beforementioned.
THE First, Is to observe what it is that moves a person to propose or ask a
Question of an Astrologer; where we must take notice of Three motions, the
First of the mind, when a man is stirred up in his thoughts and has an intent
to inquire; a Second of the Superior and Celestial Bodies; so that they at that
time imprint on the things inquired after, what shall become of it; the Third
of the free will which disposes him to the very Act of Inquiring; for although
the mind be moved to Inquire, it is not enough, unless the Superior Bodies
sympathize therewith; nor is such motion of the Stars enough, unless by the
Election of his will the person does actually Inquire.

The Second Considerable is (what we hinted at before) the method or manner
every one ought to observe that inquires of an Astrologer; which is, that when
he intends to take an Artist's Judgment of things past, present, or to come, he
should first with a devour Spirit pray unto the Lord, from whom proceeds the
success of every lawful enterprise, that he would grant him the knowledge of
those things, of the Truth of which he would be resolved: And then let him
apply himself to the Astrologer with a serious intent of being satisfied in
some certain and particular doubt, and this not on trifling occasions, or light
sudden motions, much less in matters bafe or unlawful, as many ignorant people
use to do; but in matters of honest importance, and such as have possessed and
disturbed his mind for the space of a day and night or longer; unless in sudden
accidents which admit not of delay.

Those that take this sober Course, shall find the Truth in what they inquire
after; but whosoever do otherwise, deceive both themselves and the Artist; for
a foolish Querent may cause a wise Respondent to err, which brings a scandal
upon Art amongst inconsiderate people; when as the Astrologer is not blameable,
but the ignoran silly Querent.

The Third, Is to consider how many ways Planets operate upon Inferior Bodies,
according to the diverse Qualities of their Motions; there being Sixteen
different ways of such their Operations and Effects in all things that are
either wholly or in part perfected or destroyed.

The Fourth, Is to consider particularly these several Sixteen ways, and what
are the assisting causes that help forwards things to perfection, and what
those are that destroy things after they are perfected: Now of these the first
is Profection, or an Advance of or in things; which the Philosophers call
Alchecohol. 2. Detriment, which they call Aliber. 3. Conjunction or Reversion,
which they call Alitisall. 4. Separation, which they call Alnichirat. 5.
Translation of light, which they call Annecad. 6. Collection, which they call
Algemei. 7. Prohibition, which they call Almana. 8. Reception, called Alcohol.
9. Being void of course, called Gastalcobol. 10. Permission, called Galaalocir.
11. The restoring or giving of Virtue or Disposition, called Alteat. 12. The
withdrawing of Virtue, called Dalpha Alchoa. 13. The with-drawer or driver
away of Disposition, called Daff aredbit. 14. Fortitude, Alcoevah. 15. Debisity
Adirof. The 16th. Is the state of the Moon, called Gnaymel, or the Moon
ill-affected; which the Ancients generally hold to be of ill signification.

The fifth, Is to consider, How many ways the Moon comes to be so ill
affected, which are generally reckoned to be Ten, but in my opinion Seven more
may be added, whereby hindrances and damage happen in all Questions,
Nativities, Elections, and Actions whatsoever: The First is, When the Moon is
Combust, that is to say under the Suns Beams, which is counted from 15 degrees
of the Body of the Sun as she applies to him to 12 degrees distance from him as
she is seperating from him; and the Impediment is greater when she is going to
the Sun than when she is going from him; because as she goes off, when she is
got five degrees distant, she is said to be escaped; though not wholly freed:
As when a Feavor has left a Man, he is said to be recovered, although he be
Weak and Faint, because he is secure now that he shall obtain his health
again. The 2d. Is when she is in the degrees of her Descensions, that is in the
3d. degree of Scorpio, or in any part of Scorpio or Capricorn or enjoined with
any Planet that is in her or its own Decensions as if she be joined with the
Sun, who is in Scorpio or Capricorn or in his proper Descension, viz. in Aquary
or Libra, viz. in its 19th. degree or in any part of Libra; or should be joined
with Mars, and he be in Libra or Taurus, or in the 28th. degree, or in any part
of Cancer; and so with any other Planet or Planets respectively. The 3d. Is
when she is posited in any of the Combust degrees, of which the worst are those
12. degrees which are before the degree which is directly opposite to the
degree in which the Sun is, wherever she shall happen to be. The 4th. Is when
she is in Conjunction, Opposition, or Square to either of the Infortunes Saturn
or Mars, without a perfect reception; for with one it hinders but little, but
in all other places it is a grand Impediment, both in the said Aspects and also
in Corporal Conjunction, save only where the Infortune shall have Two of his
smaller Dignities, as with Saturn in the 4. last degrees of Aries or Gemini, in
each of which he has a Term and a Triplicity; or with Mars in the last 10.
degrees of Pisces, where he has a Face and a Triplicity; and so in any other
Sign or place. The 5th. Is when she is with the Dragons Head or with the
Dragons Tail, that is within Twelve degrees of either of them, because that is
the place where she is eclipsed. The 6th. Is when she is in Gemini which is the
Twelfth from her own House. The 7th. Is when she is in the ends of Signs, which
are all Terms of the Infortunes, except the last 6. degrees of Leo, which
belong to Jupiter; but in the first eight she is weakened, because they are
Terms of Saturn. If it be objected by the same reason she must be impedited
likewise in the first 6. degrees of Cancer, since they are Terms of Mars; I
answer no, because Cancer is her own House and greatest Fortitude. The 8th. Is
when she is in the 6th. 8th. 9th. or 12th. Houses (not in reception with the
Ascendent) or joined to any Planet that is in any of them, or posited in the
Third House, because it is Cadent from Augies; yet because the same is said to
be her joy (or that she delights therein) she is not afflicted there so much as
in other Cadent Houses. The 9th. Is when she is between the 15. degree of Libra
and the 15. degree of Scorpio, which 30. degrees are called the Combust way.
The 10th. When she is void of course, that is not joined to any Planet by Body
or Aspect, or in that condition when they call her Ferall or Desert, that is in
a place where she has not any Dignity. The 11th. When she is slow of course,
because then she may be compared to a Planet Retrograde. The 12th. When she is
in want of light, so that no part or very little of her is seen, which happens
about the end of the Lunar Month. The 13th. When she is besieged by the two
Infortunes impediting her. The 14th. If she be in Azimene degrees. The 15th. If
in Pitted degrees. The 16th. If in Smoaky degrees. The 17th. and last, Is when
she is posited in those degrees which are called dark: To know and distinguish
all which you have Tables commonly in most Books of Astrology.

The Sixth Consideration, Is to regard another manner whereby Planets are
dibilitated or weakened and afflicted, not much different from the former;
which comes to pass Ten ways. The 1. When a Planet is Candent from Angles or
from the Ascendant, so that he does not behold the same. The 2. When a Planet
is Retrograd. The 3. If they be Combust, that is within 15 degrees before or
after the Sun; the lower Planets are more debilitated being behind the Sun, and
less before him, when they are direct; but when retrograde the contrary. 4.
When any of them is in Opposition, Corporal Conjunction, or Square of either or
both the Infortunes, without Reception. 5. When they are besieged by the
Infortunes, so as to separate from one and be joined to another, without
perfect Reception of House, Exaltation, or two of the smaller Dignities, which
are Term, Triplicity, and Face. 6. When a Planet is joined to another in his
Declension or Fall; that is, in Opposition to its own House or Exaltation. 7.
When it is joined to a Planet Cadent from the Ascendent, or separates from a
Planet that did receive him, and is joined to one that does not. 8. When a
Planet is Perigrine, that is, In a place where he has not any Dignity; or
being one of the Superiors, is followed by the Sun, or being of the Inferiors
when it follows the Sun. 9. When a Planet is with the Head or Tail of the
Dragon, without Latitude. 10. When a Planet weakens it self, that is, when it
is in the Seventh House from its own, Feral, or not in Reception. These are the
Impediments of the Planets, that cause Hindrances Delays and Mischiefs in
Nativities, Questions, Elections, etc. All which thou ought to be well
acquainted with. There are some more that seem necessary to be known, but to
avoid tediousness and confusion, I shall at present omit them.

The Seventh Consideration, Is to beware of those Cases wherein the Astrologer
is subject to err and mistake; of which the Learned have named Four: 1. When
the Querent is so silly that he knows not how to ask, nor what he would have.
2. When the time for which the Figure is erected, is mistaken. 3. When the
Artist knows not whether the Sun be gone off the line of the Mid-heaven, or be
still upon it; or be behind or before it. 4. When the Fortunes and Infortunes
shall be of equal strength; at which time thou therefore ought not to
receive any Question. But in my opinion there may well be added yet three ways
more, wherein the Astrologer will be subject to err: 1. When the Querent comes
only to try him, or put a trick upon him; as many do, saying, Let us go to
such an Astrologer, and ask him such a thing, and see if he can tell us the
truth or not. Just as the Jews propounded Questions to our Lord Jesus Christ,
not so much to be resolved, as to tempt and ensnare him. 2. Wherein the Artist
will be liable to err in, is when the Querent does not ask out of a serious or
settled intention; as some do when they meet an Astrologer by chance, or go to
him on other business; on a sudden they think of something, and so ask as it
were by the by; wherein it is a thousand to one but mistakes happen.

But thou may be ready to say, How shall I know whether the Querent come out
of a solid intention, or only to try me? To which I answer, That it seems a
very abstruse and difficult point, perfectly to find out; but this I have often
experienced and found true, viz. I observed the hour of the Question, and if
the Ascendent then happened very near the end of one Sign and beginning of
another, so that it seemed as between both; I said they did not ask seriously,
or that they came to try me; and I have had many that have thereupon confessed
what I said to be true, and began to think that I knew more than before they
believed. For in such Cases I use to say, Pray Friend do not trouble me, unless
you ask seriously; for I suspect that you would put a trick upon me, by not
proposing this Question as you ought; however if you will give me trouble for
your pleasure, be pleased to give me likewise satisfaction for my pains; and
immediately, if there were any deceit intended, away they went. Another, viz. a
third way whereby an Astrologer may err, Is when the Lord of the Asendant and
Lord of the Hour are not the same, nor of the same Triplicity; or be not of the
same Complexion with the Ascendant; for then the Question is not Radical, as I
have frequently found by experience. And this I have recited, that thou may
know for what persons thou should undertake to give Judgment; for as one
says, The issue of the thing is according to the solicitude of the Querent, and
as he comes in necessity, as sad, thoughtful, and hoping that thou art able and
know how to satisfy him the truth of the matter; and in such case thou
may securely venture upon the Question.

The Eighth Consideration is, To mind how many of the aforesaid manners or
points necessary to be used and heeded in giving Judgments, thou have to
consider; and they are thirty: that is to say, sixteen impediments of the Moon,
ten of the other Planets, as has been said; and besides all those the Planets
several Joys, which are four, of which the first is the House which each Planet
does delight in, as Mercury in the Ascendant, the Moon in the third, Venus in
the fifth, Mars in the sixth, the Sun in the ninth, Jupiter in the eleventh,
Saturn in the twelfth. The second is, When a Planet is in a Sign he delights
in, as Saturn in Aquarius, Jupiter in Sagittary, Mars in Scorpio, Sol in Leo,
Venus in Taurus, Mercury in Virgo, and the Moon in Cancer. The third is, When
Diurnal Planets, as Saturn, Jupiter, Sol, and Mercury, are in Diurnal Houses in
the East and Oriental of the Sun near the Horoscope; and Nocturnal Planets, as
Mars, Venus, Luna, and Mercury, are in Nocturnal Houses in the West, and
Occidental of the Sun; especially near the Cusp of the Seventh. The fourth is,
When the three Superiors, Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars, are in Masculine Quarters;
which are counted from the Cusp of the tenth House to the Cusp of the
Ascendant, and from the Cusp of the fourth House to the Cusp of the seventh
House; and when the Feminines, viz. Venus or the Moon, are in Feminine
Quarters, which are from the Cusp of the Ascendant to the Cusp of the fourth
House, and from the Cusp of the seventh to the Cusp of the tenth. As for
Mercury he delights when with Masculine Planets in Masculine Quarters, but with
Feminine Planets in Feminine.

The Ninth Consideration is, To take notice of the several ways as well secret
as manifest, good and evil, whereby things are helped or hindered to be done or
not done; and of these there are one and twenty in Number: 1. A most strong
secret Helper. 2. A very strong secret Helper. 3. A strong Helper. 4. A weak
secret Helper. 5. A weaker secret Helper. 6. A most secret Helper. 7. A most
strong manifest Helper 8. A very strong manifest Helper. 9. A strong manifest
Helper. 10. A weak manifest Helper. 12. A most weak manifest Helper. 13. A most
strong secret Hinderer. 14. A very strong secret Hinderer. 15. A strong secret
Hinderer. 16. A weak secret Hinderer. 17. A weaker secret Hinderer. 18. A most
weak secret Hinderer. 19. A most strong manifest Hinderer. 20. A very strong
manifest Hinderer. And 21. A strong manifest Hinderer. All which we shall treat
particularly, the same being a secret of secrets. In the Judicial part of
Astrology, which the Ancients did not regard, nor have said any thing plainly
of it that I find, save only that Haly seems to have touched a little upon it
in his Exposition of the 23th. of Ptolomy's Centiloquium; nor do I believe they
omitted those things out of Ignorance, but rather through disuse or fear of
being too tedious, or burthening the minds of their Readers or Auditors: For
they were wont to judge according as they found the Planets disposed in Houses
and Signs, their Fortitudes and Debilities, together with the part of Fortune,
and some few other things: But thou ought to consider in thy Judgments, not
only what they did, but also all other circumstances that thou can: For when
thou do erect a Figure, thou should first find the Significator of the
thing inquired after, or to be undertaken; and see if any of the Fixed Stars of
his own nature be in either of his Houses, or in his Exaltation, or in
Conjunction with him to a minute: for then such Star shall so far help the
Significator, that the thing shall be accomplished and effected, even beyond
the Querents hopes; and this is a most strong secret Helper: For the Quaerent
may well wonder how it comes to pass. Now if the same Star should be in the
same degree with the Significator from one minute to 15 before him or 5 behind
him; it will still help him, but not so much; and this we call a very strong
secret Helper: but if it be with him in the same degree, but above 16 minutes
distance and within 50, it will somewhat help, yet this less; and this we call
in the Positive degree only a strong secret Helper. If it be in the same
degree with the Significator, in a place where he has two of his smaller
Dignities, in the very same minute, or within 16 minutes, it will help him, yet
less, and then it is a weak secret Helper; from 16 to 50 min. still less; and
then it is a weaker secret Helper: but if it be with the Significator in a place
where he has no dignities at all, it will still help, but as it were
insensibly; and this we call a most weak secret Helper. The like we may say on
the contrary of those things that prejudice, frustrate, and hinder business:
For if a Planet, which is a Significator of any thing, being in a place where
he has not any Dignities, shall be joined with one of the Fixed Stars of a
contrary nature, it will weaken him, and not suffer the thing to come to pass;
although otherwise by the Figure it seemed never so probable: so that for want
of heeding this, the Artist often gets discredit, and raises a scandal on the
Art it self amongst the ignorant; and this is a most strong secret Hinderer:
Whereas if the same Star be remote above 16 minutes from the Significator, it
will weaken him, but not altogether so much; whence it may be called only a
very strong secret Hinderer. And so downwards through all degrees in the same
manner as we said of the Helpers or Assistant Causes respectively.

Of the several 21 Modes aforesaid, which are most strong Helpers, etc. and
which strongest obstructs.
The several Modes beforementioned are thus to be known and distinguished, A
most strong manifest Helper or Adjuvant Cause, is when the Planet which is
Significator of a thing, is in his own House: in an Angle on the very minute of
the Cusp, direct, swift of course, in reception, and free from all affliction
and impediment; which most seldom happens.

A very strong manifest Helper, is when the Significator is in his House or
Exaltation in an Angle, within a degree or two of the Cusp, free from
impediment, and in Reception; which very seldom happens.

A strong manifest Helper is when the Significator is in an Angle in his House
or Exaltation, within 3 degrees before the Cusp, or 5 after it.

A weak manifest Helper is where a Planet is in two of his lesser Dignities in
an Angle within 5 degrees before or 15 after it; or is in his House or
Exaltation in a succedent House free from Affliction.

A weaker open Helper is when the Significator is in his own House or
Exaltation, or two of his lesser Dignities, but in a Cadent House of the
Figure, yet beholding the Ascendant.

A most weak open Helper is when the Significator is in some of his greater
Dignities or two of his lesser, not beholding the Ascendant; or in one of his
lesser Dignities, only beholding the same, or joined to a Planet that beholds
the same, and has some Dignities therein.

A most strong open Hinderer is when the Significator is in a place where he
has no dignity, no delight is not received; besieged by the two Infortunes,
cadent from an Angle, and from the Ascendant; and so much the worse, if joined
with any of the Fixed Stars, of a mischievous nature, etc.

There may be other both adjuvant and obstructing causes, besides what we have
mentioned, both open and secret, proceeding from the Conjunctions of Planets
and their Aspects, too tedious here to discourse of. Nor shall I here enlarge
on all those beforementioned, but must assure thee that this Ninth
Consideration carefully observed; will be of great use in raising a true and
wary Judgment; especially if thou have always a diligent Eye to the Moon: for
she of all the Planets has the greatest similitude and correspondence with
inferior things, both in general and particular; as well the species of the
kinds as the individuals of the Species, with winds, to pass by her daily
effects which she causes in all things here, and frequent revolutions about the
Elements and Elementary Bodies, by reason of the nearness of her Orb to the
Earth, and smaller Circle than any other Planet; so that she seems a Mediatrix
between Superior and Inferior Bodies.

And as we see that in the New Moon she appears small, thin, and little, but
afterward her light gradually increases, till all that part of her body
toward us becomes replenisht with luster; and then again it decays by
insensible degrees, till she totally disappears: just so do all bodies both of
things Rational, Irrational, and Vegetative; as Men grow until they are
completed to their determinate stature, and then droop and decline
continually, till their life is ended; and so of all other things: Hence it is
necessary to make the Moon concerned in the Signification of every Question,
Nativity, Enterprise, and Business, and her good condition to show the good
issue of the thing; and so on the contrary. For her Virtue and Power is such
and so great, That if the Lord of the Ascendant or other Significator of a
business be so weak and afflicted, that he cannot bring it about and complete
it as he ought; if she be but strong, it shall notwithstanding be accomplished:
For she is the School-mistriss of all things, the Bringer down of all the
Planets Influences, and a kind of an Inter-nuncio between them; carrying their
Virtues from one to the other, by receiving the disposition of one Planet and
bearing it to another. And some have thought that she does this at all times,
of which opinion was that Tyrant Cylinus de Romano, viz. That when she
separates from one planet, she takes the virtue and carries it to another,
committing the same to the first that she can meet with. And some have imagined
that Zael said the same, but his meaning was not absolutely so; for he
believed, That the Moon did bear what was committed to her; but if it were not
so given or committed to her, she could not carry any thing to any; to which I
assent: for when the Moon is joined to any planet that receives her, then that
planet commits its disposition to her, who carries it with her, and bestows it
on that planet whom she first meets with in any of her dignities, and not to
another; according to that Aphorism, A planet gives nothing in a place where
he has promised nothing.

The Tenth Consideration, Is warily to observe what Fixed Stars may either help
or hinder the matter in question; for they have oftentimes great power, and
lead the Astrologer sometimes into error: and let the Artist be sure to
consider the places of the Fixed Stars, as they are in the present age
carefully reduced.

The Eleventh Consideration, Is to take notice of the Malevolent planets, and
what they signify; for Saturn and Mars are naturally bad, Saturn for excess of
cold, and Mars for excess of heat; not that either of them is really hot or
cold, but virtually so; and these are their effects. And so they signify evil
and damage and hinderance, unless they receive the Significator or the Moon by
House, Exaltation, or two of their smaller Dignities; or shall themselves be
Significators; for then they will bridle in their malice, and not weaken or
hinder him whom they receive, with what Aspect soever they behold him; but if
they do not receive, their malice is increased; and so much the more if they be
in opposition or square; for in sextill or trine the mischief is less: Yet
Zaell seems to say, That the Infortunes lay aside or restrain their malice,
where they are in trine or sextill; but his meaning was only that they were
not then so violent, and intended not that their malice was wholly abated.

The Twelfth Consideration, Is to behold the Fortunes, and see what they
signify; for Jupiter and Venus are Fortunes by nature, and being temperate,
are said to be without any malice, because they do hurt to none, unless now and
then by accident; which is beside their intention and very seldom: for they
make their impressions temperately and profitably, and always endeavor to help
both their own and others, whether they receive them or not; but so much the
better if they receive them: and their trine or sextill is better and more
advantageous than their square, and their square than their oppositions.

The Thirteenth Consideration, Is to regard the Sun and his Significators, for
he is also called a Fortune, and is so, whatever aspect he shall be beheld by,
unless it be opposition; but by conjunction he becomes an Infortune, because
then he renders every Star that is so in conjunction with him, combust and
unfortunate; unless the same shall be in the heart of the Sun, and there every
Star is fortified.

The Fourteenth Consideration, Is to mind Mercury and the Moon, and what
planets they are joined with, because they will have the same significations
with those with whom they are so joined; being of a convertible nature.

The Fifteenth Consideration, Is to regard the several ways in general whereby
planets make impressions on these inferior things, which are two, one good and
the other bad; for the Fortunes have power of imprinting good naturally, and
the Infortunes as naturally shower down ill impressions, whence thou may
where ever thou see the Fortunes, hope for good; and when thou beholdest the
Malevolents, fear mischief, unless the same be restrained as aforesaid.

The Sixteenth Consideration, Is to take notice whether the planet that is
Significator of any thing, be afflicted by either of the Malevolents; which is
when one of them casts his rays upon the rays of such Significators,
according to the quantity of their Orbs: and whilst he so continues with his
rays or light under those of the Malevolent, such Significator is said to be
impedited, hindered, or afflicted, till the Malevolent have passed him: and
Zael says, After the ill planet has past the planet he did afflict one whole
degree, the planet shall be said to be freed from him. But I rather think, that
after the Malevolent is past him one minute, he may be said to be free and
escaped; for afterward he can only frighten him: True it is, he raises a
greater fear when he is past him only one minute, than when he is gone by a
whole degree: but yet even then it is such a kind of fear as is not altogether
without some glimmering of hope. As thus, One intending to go into a Battle,
inquires whether he shall return from thence safe and sound or not? And the
Ascendant is Gemini 13 degrees, and Mercury in the 7th. degree and 54 min. of
Aquary, in the 9th. joined with Saturn; who is likewise in 7 degr. 53 min. of
Aquary; so that Mercury is now separated from Saturn, who was Lord of the House
of Death one minute; whence it appears that he should have died in that
Engagement by reason of the Conjunction, and was in peril of death and a kind
of desperate fear that he should be slain by his Enemies, and shall be pursued
by them so that he shall seem not able to escape, and they shall often lay
hands on him; but at last he shall get from them and make his escape, even
beyond his own hopes; and all because Mercury is separated from Saturn. And
Zael says, That if a Malevolent planet that would hinder any business, be
cadent from the Ascendant, so that he cannot behold it, he cannot really hinder
the matters; but only puts the persons concerned into terrors and frights
about it.

The Seventeenth Consideration, Is to view whether the planet that is
Significator, be safe and prosperous, that is free from any affliction from the
Infortunes; and one of the Fortunes casts his beams or light on beams of such
Significator; for then shall that planet be said to be safe and guarded; till
the Fortune is past by the space of one minute, and signifies the perfection of
the thing. But after he has past him one minute, it will not be perfected or
accomplished; for it only raises hopes, as (we said) the Malevolent in the
like case could do nothing, but create fear; yet is such a hope as the Querent
will believe and fancy himself as it were certain, yet not without something of
doubt: As for example, A Question is proposed of some weighty and difficult
business, whether it will be done and brought to pass or not? And 17 degrees of
Scorpio ascends, and Mars is 12 degrees 13 min. of Taurus, and Venus in 12 degrees.
and 14 min. of Capricorn; so that Venus is joined to Mars by a trine, and
receives him in her House, who likewise receives her in his Exaltation; so that
the Querent thinks, and all others concerned verily believe that it would be
accomplished by that aspect of perfect friendship; in which flattering hopes
they continue till Venus has passed the aspect of Mars one whole degree; but
at last the business comes to just nothing at all, because Venus was past Mars
one minute at the time of the Question proposed: yet may a thing possibly in
such a case be brought to pass, but not without extraordinary labor and
trouble. And here likewise Zaell affirms, That if the Fortune be cadent from
the Ascendant, so that it cannot behold the same, it only flatters with
splendid hopes, but never compleats the business.

The Eighteenth Consideration, Is to take notice when a planet is in the Angles
of the Infortunes, for unless these receive him there, he shall be said to be
in an ill condition, and in straits and troubles; as a man on whom some have
made an assault; who has many to combat with and none to assist or take his
part; or like one that strives against the stream, or falls into a deep pool,
and knows not how to swim; and yet by thrusting out his hands and feet, may
obtain the bank and escape; though this seldom happens.

Now a planet is said to be in the Angles of a Malevolent, when the Malevolent
or Infortune, viz. Saturn and Mars is in one Sign, and the other planet in the
fourth, seventh, or tenth from him; as if Mars be in Aries, and Mercury in
Cancer, Libra, or Capricorn, he is said to be in his Angles: understand the
like of their Corporeal Conjunction. But if there be a reception, he does not
afflict; for reception abates all malice, as we have said elsewhere.

The Nineteenth Consideration, Is to behold the Moon if she be void of course,
for then it signifies an impediment to the thing in question; it will not come
to a good end, nor be accomplished: but the Querent shall be forced to desist
with shame and loss.

The Twentieth Consideration, Is to observe whether the Moon or Significator be
joined to any of the planets, for thence you must derive your judgment of what
is like to happen in the business. Take notice therefore whether the planet to
which the Moon or Significator joins, receives them; for then there will be a
good laudable end: and the matter will be accomplished with success, if the
receiver be a Fortune. But if there be no reception, yet if the Moon or
Significator shall give virtue to that planet, the thing will still come to
pass. But if it be an Infortune; though they do not give him virtue, yet
without a reception it will not do; but with a reception, if he be not
afflicted, it signifies a good end of the matter, though not without much
labor and tediousness.

The 21 Consideration is, To see from what planet the Moon separates; for that
signifies what is past of the business: as from a Fortune the good, from an
Infortunes the ill that has been.

The 22 Consideration is, To note which of the planets the Moon is now joined
to, for that signifies what is now present; and from thence we must judge of
the present state of any matter.

The 23 Consideration is, To behold to whom the Moon is now joining, so as her
Conjunction is not yet completed; for that signifies what is to come;
wherefore if thou would judge of a thing, which as yet is not, but it is hoped
will hereafter be brought to pass, it is necessary then thou should see to
whom the Moon will next join; and according to her Significations, judge
whether good or evil

The 24 Consideration is, To note whether the planet who is Significator, be in
his Declension, for then it causes a hinderance to every thing thereby
signified, and trouble and grief about it; and if the Question be about a
prison wherein the querent fears he shall be put; it signifies he shall be cast
into the same together with disgrace and prejudice; and if the Question
concerus one already in Prison, it signifies a tedious confinement and more
affliction then he believes.

The 25 Consideration is, Whether the Planet that is Significator be
Retrograde, or Stationary to Retrogradation; for then it signifies mischief and
damage, discord, contradiction, and going backwards with damage; yet being
stationary, is not so bad, as being retrogaade: For the last notes the mischief
to be as it were present and in being. But being stationary, notes that it is
past and over.

The 26 Consideration is, Whether the Significator be in his second station,
that is toward Direction: for that signifies also hinderance and evil, which
already has been and is past; yet some say that this second station is as good
as direction: but that is only a way of speaking, as when one has been sick
and begins to grow well, we say he is recovered and sound, which is not simply
true, but somewhat near it: for as the first station is not so bad as
Retrogradation, so the second station is not so good as direction.

The 27 Consideration is, Whether the Infortunes are the Significators of any
thing; for if they signify ill, the evil will be much augmented, and if good,
it will be much diminished, abated, imperfect, and with difficulty; so that the
party will scarce think his business done, unless by chance they be in a very
good condition and excellently disposed.

The 28 Consideration is, Whether the Significator be slow of Course, for then
it delays the effect; and if it be in the beginning of any thing, retards it,
so that it will scarce ever be finished: Besides, things proceed slowly, whose
Significators are posited in Sagittary, Capricorn, Aquary, or Pisces; or who
are the Lords of them, whether they be slow of course; in Aries or Scorpio they
are not quite so dilatory. In Leo they hasten business, more in Taurus or
Libra, but most of all in Gemini or Virgo.

The 29 Consideration is, Whether the Moon be joined to any planet by body or
aspect exactly to a minute; for that signifies the present state of the things;
and from that minute observe what planet she joins next, for he shall be
Significator of all that shall happen of that thing; as the planet she was last
before with, was of what is already past as aforesaid.

The 30 Consideration is, To observe when a planet that is Significator, or the
Moon, shall have past the 29th. degree of the Sign wherein it is, and touches
the 30th. and especially if it have past one minute of that degree; for then it
shall have no strength in that Sign, but in the next; so that if in the first
it signified any evil, it shall hurt the person, or thing threatened, no more
than the fall of a house shall one that is just got out of it, or being with
one foot upon the threshold, has one behind him that throws him out; and then
the building falls. And if it signified any good, it shall profit no more than
he that has spread a net for birds, and just touches the feathers of their
tails, but never catches their bodies; and therefore Zaell says, If a Planet or
the Moon be in the 29th. degree of any Sign, its virtue is yet in that Sign
wherein he is; because he has not yet wholly past the 29th. degree. etc.

The 31 Consideration is, To look when one planet applies to the Conjunction of
another, if he be near the end of the same Sign wherein he is himself, or that
other to whom he applies; so that he will pass out of that Sign before the
Conjunction is perfected: and to see if he be joined with him in the following
Sign to which he is changed, because then the cause is perfected; if that
planet confers any thing on him in that Sign wherein he is so joined to him:
that is, if any reception happen, unless the said planet, or he to whom he
applies, be first joined to another; for then the business comes to nothing,
and will not be perfected, though he be joined again to the first after he is
separated from him to whom he would have joined when he changed from the said
Sign; since the other interposed before the first Conjunction is accomplished.
Nor must it be forgotten that a Corporal Conjunction forbids an Aspect and cuts
it off, but an Aspect cannot do so by a Conjunction.

The 32 Consideration is, If an Infortune be the Significator, what his
Condition is; for if it be good, there will good come of the thing; if bad
rather evil; as Sarviator says in Pentadeca, An ill planet strong in his own
House or Exaltation, not joined with any other Infortune to impede or weaken
him, is better than a Fortune Retrograde afflicted.

The 33 Consideration is, To see whether either of the Infortunes be the
Significator of any thing, and be joined to another Infortune impeding him, or
has joined to him the Lord of the Ascendant or the Moon, by a Square or
Opposition; for then this Infortune will perfect the business: but the business
will not be good, or rather it will be destroyed after it seems perfected. But
if the Infortune that impedes be the lighter of the two, so that he apply to a
Conjunction with the Significator, it will hinder less than if the Significator
apply to the other.

The 34 Consideration is, To mind in Questions or Nativities, whether the
Significator of the business be an Infortune and Lord of the Ascendant, and the
Ascendant direct not vitiated, and in a good condition; for then he will both
effect the same and bring it to a good conclusion; nay, although he be not
Significator nor Lord of the Ascendant, but only be in the Ascendant, and that
the same be his Exaltation; he lays aside all his malice, and is restrained
from mischief: but if he be weak and afflicted, his malice and contrariety is
increased, so as to destroy the business wholly.

The 35 Consideration is, To look whether an Infortune be in Signs like him, or
of his own nature, for that abates his ill effects: like a cross fellow when he
is pleased and has what he will, as Saturn in Capricorn, Aquary, or Libra, or
in a cold Sign, especially if he have any Dignities there: And so Mars in
Aries, Scorpio, Capricorn, or a hot Sign, etc. But if Saturn be in a hot Sign,
or Mars in a cold Sign, out of their Dignities, it will be bad, and the
business be no more completed, than Oil will mix with water; but if strong
and well disposed, they will mix in good, like Water with Wine, or Milk with
Honey.

The 36 Consideration is, To observe when the Infortunes are the Obstructers of
a business, whether the Fortunes behold them with a trine or sextill Aspect;
for then their ill nature will be allayed and mitigated: but much more if these
receive them.

The 37 Consideration is, To look if the Fortunes are the Significators?
whether the Infortunes behold them with an opposition or square? for that will
much lessen their kind effects, and diminish the good they otherwise promised.

The 38 Consideration is, To consider if the Fortunts are Significators,
whether they are cadent from Angles or from the Ascendant, so as not to behold
the same, and be retrograde: for under these Impedimenrs they will be almost as
bad as the Infortunes themselves, unless they be in reception.

The 39th is, To consider if the Significator be in reception; for if it be a
Fortune, its Signification will thereby be much bettered, and its impediment
and mischief much lessened, if it be an Infortune.

The 40th is, To consider if an Infortune, whether he be Significator or not,
be perigrine, that is not in any of his Dignities, for then his malice is
increased; but when in his Dignities it somewhat abates it: that is in his
House, Exaltation, or Terms; but in his Triplicity or Face very little, and in
Haym least of all.

The 41th is, If an Infortune being Significator, be in his own House or
Exaltation, or in his own Terms or Triplicity, or in Angles or succedent
Houses; for by all these means he is fortisied, and shall be counted strong as
a Fortune.

The 42th is, If a Fortune be Significator, or give virtue or assistance to any
of the Planets, and be in a House where he has none of the Lordly Dignities,
then his good signification will be lessened and abated; and so on the contrary.

The 43th is, If the Fortunes and Infortunes be together ill posited, that is,
in some of the said Impediments, as Houses where they have no Dignities
Combust, or the like; then whatever they signify it is but weakly; according to
that Aphorism of the Philosopher, A planet retrograde and combust, has no
strength in signification. The Fortunes when combust and under the Sun beams,
signify none or very little good; and the Infortunes in like case have little
or no virtue to signify ill.

The 44th is, To consider if the Significator. Fortune or Infortune, be in his
own House, Exaltation, Triplicity, Terms or Face (but the latter being not of
that virtue with the rest, it is necessary it should be assisted with another
Dignity, which is Hays or Light) for in such case the Infortune loses his
sting; and being rein'd in like a wild horse from doing mischief his malice is
converted into good: and though this seem strange, yet the Ancients affirm and
I my self have often found it true by experience.

The 45 his, To consider if Infortunes are in Angles of the Ascendant (that is
in such Signs as are in square or opposition to the Ascendant) when they
afflict any Planet by square or opposition; for then they afflict so much the
worse, and do more mischief, especially if they be in a stronger place than
such afflicted Planet.

The 46th is, To see whether the Significator be a Fortune or an Infortune, the
first naturally signifies good and prosperity, the last naturally evil by its
malignity; therefore consider the Planets places from the Ascendant where they
are: For if a Planet be in his Light, or his Hays in any of his Dignities, or
in a good place from the Ascendant, it signifies good; and if it be a good
Planet the better.

The 47th is, To consider whether the Significator be in his Light or no, that
is a Diurnal planet in the day above the earth, and in the night under the
earth; and a Nocturnal planet in the night above the earth, and in the day
under it; for this renders such planet more strong. But if a Nocturnal planet
be Significator of any thing in the day above the earth, or a Diurnal planet in
the night, the same is thereby weakened and under a kind of impediment, that he
can scarce accomplish what he signifies.

The 48th. is to consider, When an Infortune is Significator and his ill
effects are mitigated, whether Jupiter behold him, or is joined corporally to
him? for that will wholly destroy his malignity and turn his nature into good,
how bad soever he be; so that if Saturn in that place of himself would not
bestow some good or perform what he seems to promise, Jupiter will make him do
it, provided he be not afflicted himself, as in his fall, combust or retrograde
(yet even then he helps, but not so powerfully) on the other side Venus takes
off the fury of Mars, by reason of that endearing intimacy which is between
them, unless the thing be very d^fficult, as wars and bloodshed, etc. But she
cannot so well divert the mischief of Saturn without the help of Jupiter (and
then she can do it as well as at other times these of M^rs) The reason is,
there is no such sympathy between Saturn and she in any respect; for he is slow
she swife, he heavy she light, he delights in melancholy, she in mirth.

The 49th is, to consider, Whether one of the Infortunes being Significator, be
joined to another, for if he signified a good of himself, this will destroy or
frustrate it; but if any evil, it will augment and double it, or change it into
some worse mischief of another kind; as when the pain near the Navel turns into
a dry Dropsy: but if joined to a Fortune with a Reception on either side, the
evil will be converted into good; but without a Reception it will only be
allayed and abated, according to the strength of such Fortune.

The 50th is, To observe the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon, whether they
or either of them are afflicted by either of the Infortunes, by Conjunction,
Opposition or Square, the business will be spoiled without the aspect of a
Fortune; but if a Fortune, that is, Jupiter, Venus, the Sun or Moon shall then
behold him, it slackens and dissolves the rigors of such Infortune, and the
party signified shall be freed from the danger impending, although the aspect
be a square, provided it be with a Reception; but if a Fortune without
Reception by a square or opposition, or an Infortune with a trine or sextill
without Reception, shall behold the said Lord of the Ascendant, it is possible
the party may be delivered from the present danger; but it will be turned into
another as great: so that it will not profit him.

The 51th is, To see whether the Significator be cadent from an Angle or from
the Ascendant, and in none of his Dignities, nor in his Joy; for then he
signifies nothing but doubts and mischiefs, and there are no hopes of good or
profit from a planet so disposed.

The 52th is, When the three Inferiors Venus, Mercury, and Luna, come from
under the Rays of the Sun, and appear in the l^vening after his setting, for
before ( viz. till they are got from him 12 degrees, they (or any other
planets) are weak; so that a Fortune can advantage little, and an Infortune
prejudice as much. Now if the Fortune came forth slow in motion, as with
labor, then will not the good expected be obtained without much pains and
trouble; and if it be an Infortune, his signification will appear slowly. But
in the Superiors, as Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, those things happen when they
come from under the Sun beams in the Morning, and shine before his rising.

The 53th Consideration is, Whether the Significator be under the Sunbeams,
for then he will be of a small efficacy in any thing, as aforesaid; yet the
Malevolents will be something more strong in evil than the Benevolents in good.

Now a planet is properly said to be under the Sun beams, when there are only
12 degrees, or less, and yet above 16 minutes distance between it and the Sun;
for when there is only 16 minutes distance, it is said to be strong, being in
Cazimi or the heart of the Sun; but when there are more than 12, and less than
15 degrees; it is said to be going from under the Suns beams.

The 54th is, To consider whether a superior planet be removed 12 degrees from
the Sun going to his Morning rising, or an inferior is so much, and direct,
going to his Evening rising, for then he is said to be fortified; but when he
is got 15 degrees, so that he appears, he is more fortified in every thing:
like one coming out of a battle rejoicing, having destroyed and routed all his
enemies. But when the Sun follows the three superiors, and there shall be
between them and him less than 15 degrees, their weakness is said to be
increased, until there shall be only 7 degrees between them, and afterward,
until they shall be in the heart of the Sun, they are said to be in extreme
debility; but the debility of the inferiors is contrary to them, for it is said
to be increased when they follow the Sun, and that there is between them and
the Sun from 15 degrees to 7, and from 7 till they are in the heart of the Sun,
they are said to be in their greatest debility.

The 55th is, To consider whether the Significator be perigrine, for then the
person whom he signifies, either in a Nativity or Question, etc. will be
subtle, crafty, malicious, one that shall know how to act both good and evil;
but more inclinable to the latter.

The 56th is, To consider if the Significator of any thing shall commit his
disposition or virtue to any other planet? whether it be to one that is
Oriental or Occidental? for if he be Oriental and one of the Inferiors and
direct, or if he be Occidental and one of the Superiors, and that there be not
above 20 minutes between him and the Sun, he will be weak, says Sarcinator, and
not perform what he shows, but hinders many things; under that impediment like
a sick man whose disease has prevailed so far, that he is forced to lie by it,
and cannot help himself; or a falling house which none can preserve from ruin;
and so much further as such planet shall be from the Sun, so much less shall he
be afflicted. And if it be Oriental, and one of the Superiors, or Occidental
and one of the Inferiors, and not retrograde, he shall be strong and fit to
perfect what he promises; as one that has been ill, but is more perfectly
recovered; or a building which fell and is repaired, and so of all other
planets so disposed.

The 57th is, To consider whether the Significator be in the Eighth from the
Ascendant? for it he be there, and a Fortune, though he do not harm he will do
no good; and if he been Infortune, he will do greater mischief than in any
other place of the Figure; and if the Question be of going to War, advise not
the Querent to go then, although it be a Fortune; for always some evil is to
be suspected, that is death, or at least captivity, for it is a place of
darkness and death: but if it be an Infortune, judge death, unless he separate
then from the Lord of the Eighth; for then it may be only a wound or bruise,
or a fall, wherein he was in danger of death, although he may escape; and if it
be a journey, especially a long one, he will be taken prisoner, or in great
dread of it; understand still if he separate from the Lord of the Eighth: And
also remember that an Infortune so disposed, always does more mischief than a
Fortune.

The 58th is to consider, Whether the Significator be fixed in that Sign where
he is found? Now Zaell says, That a Planet is not said to be fixed in a sign
till be has past 5 degrees thereof. But I am of opinion that when he has
passed one whole degree of a Sign he is firmly therein, but he said it for more
certinty. So likewise he says, That a planet is not said to be cadent from the
Ascendant, unless he be removed from thence 5 degrees; as for Example the
Ascendant is 9 degrees of Aries, and a planet was in the fifth degree thereof,
Ptolomy and many other Sages affirm, That planet to be in an Angle, with whom I
agree; yet some would have it, that a planet should be said to be in an Angle
only, when he is in the very degree of the Ascendant, or one degree before it
or two after it; but they meant in revolutions, and that they might be so
certain as not to be in the least deceived. But I have experimented that a
planet is in an Angle to the space of 5 degrees beyond the Cusp; for as once I
sought the revolution of a year, I found Mars in the 5th degree beyond the Cusp
of the Angle of the Earth in Capricorn, South Latitude, which signified the
killing of the Roman Emperor; and acquainted him with it, for his Court was at
Grossietti and I at Forl^rii; and it was found that Pandulfus de Farsenella and
Theobaldus Franciscus and diverse others of the Secretaries had conspired to
slay him, and none of his own Astrologers observed it, because they did not
believe that Mars was in an Angle, for he was 4 degrees beyond the Cusp, and 58
min. in their opinion: however after a planet shall be removed from the Cusp or
Line of any Angle full 5 degrees or more he is to be counted cadent from that
Angle.

The 59th is to consider, Whether the Significator be behind the Cusp of an
Angle 15 degrees and no more; for he shall be said to be in an Angle as well as
he that is exactly there, as Zaell affirms; whence he said before that it was
not in an Angle, nor had any strength there beyond the 15th degree after the
Cusp of the Angle: For Example the Ascendant is 4 degrees of Taurus, and the
end thereof was behind the Angle, whatever planet is posited from the 4th to
the 19th degree thereof, is in the angle, but what is beyond that is not; but
Ptolomy seems to intimate, though he says not expressly, That every planet who
shall be 5 degrees before or 25 after the Cusp, is in the angle. Now Zaell
would clear the doubt, least that great distance of the planet from the angle
should hinder the business.

The same Ptolomy (from whom I cannot dissent) seems to assert, That no part of
any house remains void of virtue; and my self am of opinion, I think not
idly, that every planet that is in any house shall be said to be in that
house where he is found, from the beginning of the house even to the end
thereof; and therefore I say in the house not in the sign, because sometimes
the same house comprehends more than one sign and sometimes less; for it seems
ridiculous that any part of any house should continue idle, and be left void of
virtue.

The 60th is to consider, Whether the Significator be in a sign fixed, common
or movable, because in a fixed sign he signifies stability and continuance of
the thing begun or to be undertaken or inquired of. In a common sign, a change
with a return or repeating of it, that the same will once be broken off and
afterward begun again, or something added, or other alteration happen; for
which reason in things that require alteration, as buying, selling, or the
like, we should put the Significator and Moon, or one of them, into a common
sign; but in a moveable sign it signifies a sudden change, a quick dispatch or
end, whether good or ill. And therefore in matters where we desire a sudden
conclusion, we ought to put the Significator in moveable signs; but in things
that we desire should be fixed and endure, we ought to place them in fixed
signs; where we would have a mean, let them be in common signs, understand the
same always of the nature of the Moon, if at any time thou can observe it.

The 61th is to behold, Whether the Lord of the Ascendent, or Moon, be with the
Dragons head or tail; for that is an impediment in all affairs, and the
hindrance or mischief will proceed from a cause signified by that House in
which such conjunction happens. But no Conjunction of the Dragons head or tail
hurts, unless it be corporal; for they have no Aspect nor Opposition. And it is
worse when the Significator, or Moon, goes toward them, than when they go from
them: For in the first case is signified the mischief in its full height, like
a man in a Ship that is split in the Sea, when there is no hope. But in the
last, it is like a Ship that is only in danger, but has hopes and probabilities
of escaping. And note, That when the Significator, or Moon, goes to the Dragons
head, its malice is augmented, for its nature is to increase; and when they go
to the tail, the mischief is not absolutely at the worst, as it is when they go
from it; that is, within one degree: for from one degree forwards it is not so
great as in that degree, although much; and from 1 to 3 less, and from 3 to 5
yet less, and from 5 to 7 very small; from 7 to 9 smaller, and from thence to
12 little or nothing at all.

The 62th is to consider, Whether the Moon be void of course? for that
signifies that the thing enquired after shall scarce ever come to a good end,
or not without much labor, sorrow and trouble, unless the Lord of the
Ascendant, or Significator of the thing, shall be in very good condition, and
then it may be hindered, but not wholly frustrated: yet it is a good time then
for drinking, bathing, feasting, etc. and to use ointments for taking away of
hair, especially if she be in Scorpio.

The 63th is to consider, Whether the Moon be far from the Conjunction of the
Infortunes, so as not to cast her beams on theirs, for then the event will be
good, but rather if she touch with her beams those of the Fortunes. And yet
better, if besides this the Lord of the Ascendant, or of the business, be in a
good condition; for if they be not well disposed, it may impair the good
promised, but not wholly prevent it.

The 64th is to consider, Whether the Moon be in Cancer, Taurus, Sagittarius,
or Pisces; for it signifies good in the business, although she be joined to the
Infortunes, and not to the Fortunes; nor does she, being void of course,
prejudice so much in those places as elsewhere. provided she be not combust,
for then they will advantage her little or nothing.

The 65th is to consider, Whether the Lord of the seventh is afflicted or not?
for that will be an impediment to the business, And you ought to defer
judgment, if you can, and warily search always whence such impediment shall
arise, as well by the conjunction of the Lord of the seventh with the Planets,
as by their separation; and also of the Moon: so may thou find whence it will
proceed, and afterward give judgment with more safety.

The 66th is to consider, When the Infortunes threaten mischief, whether the
place on which their threats fall, be the dignity of any of the Fortunes? and
whether such fortune behold the same place by Trine or Sextile? for then it
will take away the mischief, and annul it wholly. If by a Square, it will only
lessen it; if by an Opposition, take away some part of it; But if it cast no
Aspect at all, the mischiet will happen; but it will proceed from honest just
persons, and it may be the Querent suffers rightfully, being cast in a just
cause before a Judge, or the like. But if the aforesaid place be the Dignity of
an Infortune, the prejudice will come from unjust men, false witnesses, a
corrupt Judge, or some sentence unjustly given through a mistake, etc.

The 67th is to consider, Whether there be any Eclipse near, which is less than
12 degrees from the Significator? for the same will bring damage and mischief
to the Querent or business, unless there be there a Fortune which has
Dignities in the same place, for then the same is abated: but if there be no
such, thou ought to look what Planet beholds the said place of the Eclipse,
and how. For if the Fortunes behold it, they do but augment the evil; and if
they are Infortunes, they lessen and abate it: which seems a kind of riddle or
wonder in Art.

The 68th Is to consider, in questions relating to sick people, or
decumbitures, Whether the Lord of the seventh, and seventh house it self, be
free from impedments? for if it be, the sick may safely trust himself to the
care of the Physicians, for Medicines will do very well. But if the seventh
house and his Lord shall be afflicted, Ptolomy says, The Physician must be
changed, for neither his Physic nor care will do any good; for the seventh
signifies the Medicine, as Zaell says; or at least the Disease grows chronical
and lasting. The like is to be expected if the same positious happen at the
beginning of any cure.

The 69th is to consider, Whether the Significators of the Ascendent, and of
the house signifying the thing enquired, be of equal strength and debility? for
then thou can not safely give judgment; but in such case thou must mind the
Lord of the Conjunction or Prevention (as the thing is either conjunctional or
preventional) which was last before, and by that judge. But if the Lord of the
Conjunction or Prevention, and of the thing, be still equal, thou must then
turn to the Moon, and see to whom she first applies, and thence deduce
judgment. If she join not to any in or from the sign in which she is, take that
with whom she joins first in the next sign, and this is very considerably
useful.

The 70th consideration is, To mind another secret not well searched into by
Astrologers, but often times doing them much prejudice; that is, See in all
questions, etc. whether the Lord of the New or Full Moon, preventional last
before, be in any of the Angles of the thing enquired after; if it be, it
denotes that the business will be accomplished, unless it be the Querents own
fault, (or that God overruled against it) though perhaps by other
significations it seemed not likely. But if it shall not happen so, but only
the same is in the Ascendant, and the other Significators, that is, the Lord of
the Ascendant of the thing enquired of, and the Moon, or any of them assist,
the thing will be done with ease. If it be in cadent houses it will scarce ever
be, though other Significators seem never so favorable; and if two at least of
them be not so, take it for certain it will never be done.

The 71th Is to consider, Whether the Significator falls between the Ascendant
and the twelfth, for that signifies continuance or length of time, when a thing
will be done; or if done already, how long it will continue in days or hours.
If between the twelfth and the tenth, it notes half weeks; between the tenth
and seventh, months or weeks; between the seventh and fourth, years; and
between the fourth and the Ascendant, half years.

The 72th is to observe, That if the Questions be of a journey, and the Moon
afflicted, it is not safe to undertake it; but if it cannot be put off, make
the Planet that afflicts her Lord of the Ascendant at the time of the Querents
setting forth.

The 73th is to mind, Whether the Question signify good or evil? If good,
Whether the Fortunes behold the Significator of the Question, or the Moon? for
then the good thereof will be increased; but if the infortunes cast in their
beams, as much or more diminished. But if it originally signify evil, and the
Infortunes behold the Significator or Moon, as aforesaid, the evil threatened
will be increased, and become much worse.

The 74th is to consider, Whether the Significator be in his first station,
going to be retrograde? for that signifies crosness and inobedience, and that
the matter, though never so probable, will not be accomplished. If any work or
building be then begun, it will not be finished. And if such Significator, so
asserted, be then under the earth, such building shall not be raised to any
purpose in thirty years, and then not finished; and if it be raised a little
then, it will be a raising thirty years more. And if not then completed, it
will not be completed till ninety years after its first; and if not then, it
will never be finished, unless the property be altered, and come into the
possession of strangers from its former owners. But if the Significator be in
his second station, going to be direct, it notes, that the affair will be done,
but slowly, intricately, and with pains and trouble. And if any Edesice he then
begun, it will be finished, but not so soon as was at first believed, provided
the Significator be not under the earth; for then he that begins it shall never
make an end of it, nor raise it very high above the earth.

And note, A Planet in this second station signifies an aptness, and the
renewing and strength of every thing; but in his first station, dissolution and
destruction. Remember and understand those things well, for they will often
come in practice.

The 75th is to consider, Whether the Moon be afflicted by any Planet? for then
whatever the question be, the same will suffer impediment. But if the Moon be
in a good place from the Ascendant, so as to behold it with a Trine or Sextile,
or if the Planet that afflicts her do behold the same, either of those Aspects
will mitigate the mischief intended, and it may be wholly take it away, as the
said afflicting Planet is disposed; so that he be not cadent from Angles, nor
from the Ascendant, nor in his fall, that is with the seventh from his own
house. Zael seems to say, That if an Infortune afflicting be cadent from the
Ascendant, or retrograde, it causes fear in the Querent; but I always fear
the affliction of the Moon above all other impediments, and scarce remember
that I ever saw a good end of any thing where she was afflicted: And in
journeys, if to war, was apprehensive of the Querents case and person; if for
trafick, of straits, quarrels, sadness in his travels, and loss of money, etc.

The 76th is to consider, From what Planet the Moon seperates, and which she is
joined to; he whom she seperates from signifies what has been, the other what
is to come, as we have said. And therefore if she separate from an Infortune,
and applies to a Fortuue, the worst is past; and what hitherto has been had,
will end happily to the Querents content. But if she seperates from a Fortune,
and goes to an Infortune, understand the contrary; the thing was good in its
beginning, but proves naught in the end. If from a Fortune to a Fortune, it was
and is good, and will have a laudable end. If from an Infortune to an
Infortune, it will be an ugly conclusion.

The 77th is to consider, Whether the Lord of the Ascendant, or Moon, be in
opposition; that is, whether the Moon be in Capricorn, Mercury in Sagittarius
or Pisces, or Venus in Scorpio or Aries, the Sun in Aquarius, Mars in Taurus or
Libra, Jupiter in Gemini or Virgo, Saturn in Cancer or Leo? for then such Lords
of the Question abhor the business nor does he love it should be accomplished,
but is rather against it.

The 78th is to consider, The House that signifies the thing whereof the
Question is asked. For the first signifies the Person, the second Substance,
the third Brethren, etc. as we before have taught; and as it shall appear, so
judge, having duly pondered all circumstances.

The 79th is to consider, Whether the Significator, or Moon, be joined to good
or ill Planets by Conjunction or by Aspect, which is diligently to be headed
and distinguished; for a corporal Conjunction with the Sun is the greatest
misfortune can befall a Planet.

The 80th is to consider, How the Significator is posited in respect of his own
house, whether in the second, third, or fourth, etc. sign, from it, according
to the signification of that sign, shall thou judge as thou would. Judge of
any Planet in such an house from the Ascendant.

The 81th is to consider, Whether the Significator be in an angle, or in a
succedent, or cadent house? for how much any Planet is near to the cusp of any
angle, so much is he the stronger; how much the farther, so much the weak. And
by how much soever he shall be nearer the cusp of a cadent house, so much shall
he be the weaker; how much the farther, so much the less weak.

The 82th is to consider, Whether the Significator receive disposition or
virtue from any Planet, Fortune or Infortune. If from a Fortune, it signifies
good; and the better, if such Fortune be in a good condition. If from an
Infortune, the contrary; and so much the worse, by how much the more weak and
afflicted he is.

The 83th is to consider, Whether the Fortunes and Infortunes are equally
strong in the Question? for that signifies no positive judgment, either good or
ill; but a kind of indifferency, and that the business will bring neither gain
nor loss.

The 84th is to consider, Whether the Fortunes or Infortunes are strongest; for
if both be strong, and the Fortunes prevail in strength, it signifies a kind of
mediocrity of good; if the Infortunes in such a case are strongest, a
mediocrity of evil; not in excess on either side.

The 85th is to consider, Whether part of Fortune fall in a good or bad place
of the Figure; that is, in a Angle, or in a Succedent, or in a Cadent house;
and how the same is Aspected and by whom, a Fortune or an Infortune? and
whether it be in reception of that Planet by whom it was aspected? For
questions may sometimes seem good, but the part of fortune happening in an
untoward place, weakens it much, and renders it less profitable, so as to
deceive the Qurrents hopes. And on the contrary, a question may seem ill, yet
the part of Fortune happening luckily, joined with a good Planet that receives
it, etc. lesseas the evil, and not so much happens to the Querent as the Figure
otherwise seems to threaten.

The 86th is to consider, Whether either of the Infortunes beholds the
Significator, both Retrograde, Cadent, Peregrine, and in Signs contrary to
their respective natures? for then they bring such an absolute mischief as
cannot be avoided, nor averted by any thing but God alone. And if any shall be
born under such positions, he will always be a beggar, let him do what he can:
or if any house be built then, no man shall ever live happily, or get money in
it; but by losses and crosses his estate and goods shall moulder away, and come
to nothing; and his most probable designs strangely frustrated and destroyed,
unless the Divine Goodness in mercy interpose.

The 87th is to consider, (Novenarium Lunae) which is a thing much to be
heeded, for it often hinders the Astrologer from discovering the truth, and
leads him into error, not knowing the cause that makes him deceive.

The 88th is to consider, The Planet from whom not only the Moon seperates, how
he is disposed, and next to whom she is joined, so that there be not above 51
miutes distance between them; the first signifying what is past, the second
what is now present, as we have already said; but also look to whom she will be
next j^yned after separation from him with whom she is at present; for he will
signify (according as he is disposed) the issue, or what is to come.

The 89th is to consider. The (Duedenariam Lunae) a thing very observable in
many cases, even more than diverse things that we have said; for there is
greatest danger of mistakes in abstruce considerations, and such as Astrologers
rather through sloth than ignorance do not regard; whereby they often fall into
disgrace and contempt of the rabble, rather than take a little pains.

The 90th is to consider, Whether he Lord of the house in which the Sun is, and
of that wherein the Moon is, and also the Lord of the Ascendant, be all
oriental, and in Angles, (though that rerely happens) and mutually behold each
other from good places with friendly Aspects; for these positions shall
signify the greatest good, and most superlative fortune imaginable. If they
shall not be all so dispsed, the remaining part shall signify prosperity and
selicity proportionably, as for as they are able, though not in so vast a
measure.

The 91th consideration, Is to observe in Questions or Nativities, Whether Mars
be in any of the Angles of the Figure, especially in fixed Signs; or when
Scorpio ascends, for then he destroys all the good signified by that question,
or at least much impedes and diminishes it, unless Jupiter behold him with a
Trine or Sextile; for then his malice is mitigated: but yet as Jupiter is
either strong or weak.

The 92th is to observe in Nativities and Questions, especially of death,
Whether the Lord of the house of death, or Significator of death, or Lord of
the house in which the Lord of the eighth is posited, applies to the
Significator of the Native or Querent, or he to them; because a Planet so
affected becomes the destroys of life, and kills as well if it be a Fortune as
an Infortune, and that whether there be a reception or not.

The 93th is to consider, If the Question concern a thing that one would desire
of another, or that one would get out of a secret hidden place, Whether the
Significator of the Querent, or thing inquired after, behold Saturn, or is
corporally joined to him; or whether Saturn be in the house of the thing
inquired after? for then the business will hardly be done, or not without much
labor and trouble, and more tediousness than the Querent can imagine.

The 94th Is to consider, in Questions, etc. Whether the Significator of the
thing inquired about be Cadent from the Ascendant, or other Angles, or from the
house that signifies the thing or business sought after, or its Lord? or
whether he be Retrograde, or in a bad condition with the Sun; or whether there
be in the said house signifying the thing inquired after, a Planet Cadent or
Retrograde, or in such ill condition with the Sun, or in an ill place from him,
or ill aspected by him? for any of these things signify a hindrance to the
thing, although otherwise the question seem good and probable.

The 95th is, Whether the Planets signifying the thing sought, join mutually
with each other? for that signifies it will be done; yet be not too confident
to judge so, till thou have well weighed the nature of the Sign wherein they
are joined, whether it be of their own nature; for then it will be easy,
otherwise difficultly, or scarce at all.

The 96th Is to consider in Questions which seem to show, that what is enquired
after shall be perfected, Whether the Significator of the thing, and the Moon,
are in Angles? for if they be both above 25 degrees from Angles, it will not be
accomplished; but if one shall, and the other shall not be so far off, then it
may be done, but with difficulty, unless it be a journey; which will speed well
enough, if the Significator be remote from Angles.

The 97th Is to consider, In what climate thou receivest the question? for
judgment must be varied as the ascensions of Countries and climates differ,
there being not the order in the ascensions or elevations of Signs, in one
climate as in another, nor the same Ascendant in one Region as in another.
Beware therefore of a mistake here, for it will be very unhandsome and blame
worthy; for whatever part thou travellest toward, from one Region to another,
whether from the East to the West, from the North to the South; or contrarily,
your Ascendant will be changed from one degree, from East to West in longitude,
and e contra; and from the North to South, and the contrary. But some Gowned
fools, or Monks in their Cubs, may arise and say, If your judgments are changed
according to the situation of Nations, they are false. But there is no talking
to such Brutes, they neither understand nor believe, nor is any thing probable
to them; yet there are some very learned men amongst them, such as Conradus B
ixiersis, a preaching Friar, who excellently understands Art, and practices it
honestly.

Want of heeding what I have said has made Astrologers to err, and I doubt
does so still; for right judgment cannot be given but by the Ascendant and
other Houses: and therefore if those vary, those must do so too. There fore you
should have Tables of Elevation for every Climate and Region: yet it is more
difficult to find out the difference of one Climate from another, than of one
Region or Country from another, acco^ding to the longitude; for if thou have
Tables of the Elevation of the Signs in any Region from East to West, thou
may by guess find the Elevation in another, which way thou please either
toward the East or West, according to the same Climate, by taking the
difference; but in diverse Climates thou can not so easily conjecture.

The 98th Is to observe, Whether if what appears by the Sign likely to be
effected, be signified by the Planets by Corporal Conjunction, or Aspect, or
translation of Light? if by either of the two first; the thing will be effected
by the Querent, and the party enquired off, without any third persons
intermedling; but if by the last, it shall be done by Ambassadors, Friends, or
some person interposing himself; and it shall be brought to pass by a person or
thing signified by that House, whose Lords translates the lights, as aforesaid.
Thus if it be the Lord of the second, it will be done by expenses, or a piece
of money: if by the third, by some brother, or the like; if by the fourth, by
the father, etc. according to the respective signification of each House.

The 99th Is to consider well in Questions, Nativities. etc. what will
certainly come of them? for sometimes by the Figure, a thing seems likely to be
absolutely done; but is not wholly, but in part; sometimes it is wholly
perfected, and sometimes neither wholly nor in part; upon which account
Astrologers are often blamed, and scarce know how to excuse themselves, not
knowing how this comes to pass, being a difficult point, and of a most subtle
disquisition; so that the Ancients would not meddle with it, save only the most
honored Albumazar said something more than the rest, whose judgments I have
found more efficacious and correct than others, though Ptolomy, the great
explainer of this Science, must be acknowledged more curious than the rest. Now
that which I say, is the consideration of certain fixed Stars: Note that these
fixed Stars are now removed many degrees forwards in the Ecliptic than they
were in Bonatus his time, in respect of longitude, which ought to be carefully
considered by the industrious Astrologer, which I shall name, whereof some are
of the nature of the Fortunes, and perfect those things with them not like to
be perfected by the significations of the Planets; others are of the nature of
the Infortunes, which suffer not things to be perfected according to the
Planets significations; of which latter there are some in every Sign: as in
Guido Bonatus his time there were two in the head of Aries, that is, one in 13
degrees and 45 minutes, the other in 14 degrees and 45 minutes, and are
southern, and of the nature of Saturn and Mars. In Tanrus are 6 stars, the
first in 9 degrees and 55 minutes; the Pleiades, which yet are called and
counted but as one, and are of the nature of Mars and the Moon; another in the
13 degeee and 2 minutes; another in the 14 degree and 45 minutes, called the
Devil: another in the 15 degree, called the Devils head; another in the belly
of Taurus, and 19 degrees and 15 minutes, called Aldeboram, which are all of
the nature of Mars and Mercury. In Gemini there is one in 8 degrees, called the
Shoulder of the Dog, of the nature of Mars and Saturn; another in 10 degrees
and 15 minutes, of the nature of Mars, called the Warrior; another in 17
degrees and 55 minutes; another in 18 degrees and 52 minutes, called the Witch,
of the nature of Sol and Mars. In Cancer there is one in 2 degrees and 3
minutes, called the Camel, of the nature of Saturn and the Moon; another in 7
degrees and 55 minutes; another in 13 degrees, called the Western Camel, of the
nature of the Sun and Moon; another in the same degree, called the Foot of the
Dog, of the nature of Saturn: and another in 17 degrees and 55 minutes, of the
same nature. In Leo there is one in 15 degrees and 55 minutes, of the nature of
Saturn. In Virgo two, one in 7 degrees and 11 minutes, of the nature of Mars;
the other in 15 degrees, of the nature of Saturn. In Libra on in 26 degrees, of
the nature of Saturn. In Scorpio three, one in the first degree and 3 minutes,
another in the 8th degree and 7 minutes, another in the 9th degree, all of the
nature of Mars. In Sagittarius two small ones, one in 19 degrees and 2 minutes,
the other in 21 degrees and 2 minutes, of the nature of Saturn. In Capricorn
two, one in 27 degrees and 2 minutes, the other in 29 degrees and 5 minutes,
both of the nature of Saturn. In Aquarius one in 9 degrees and 4 minutes, of
the nature of Mars and Saturn. Iu Pisces one in 4 degrees and 7 minutes, of the
nature of Mars and Mercury.

All these Stars are hurtful and malevolent, hindering and destroying things
after they seem probable to be accomplished, and theresooe to be avoided as
much as is possible. Here 'twill not be supersluous, but very convenient, to
insert a Table of the fixed Stars, that have small latitude, as they are now
placed, or rectify them for some succeeding years.

The 100th Consideration is, To observe the fixed Stars assisting and promoting
the accomplishment of things; which are thus situated. In Aries there are two,
one in 5 degrees and 6 minutes, of the nature of Jove and Venus; another in the
26th degree and first minute, of the nature of Jupiter. In Taurus three, one in
the first degree and 3 minutes, another in 8 degrees and 7 minutes, and the
last in 9 degrees and 1 minute, all of the nature of Venus. In Gemini are two
Stars, one in 19 degrees and 2 minutes, the other in 21 degrees and 8 minutes,
both of the nature of Jupiter, and of the second magnitude. In Cancer likewise
two, one in 2 degrees 2 minutes, the other in 29 degrees 5 minutes, both of the
nature of Jupiter. In Leo one, in 9 degrees 4 minutes, of the nature of Jupiter
and Venus. In Virgo one in 4 degrees and 7 minutes, of the nature of Venus and
the Moon. In Libra two, both of the nature of Jupiter and Venus, one in 13
degrees and 45 minutes, the other in 14 degrees and 45 minutes. In Scorpio
four, one in 9 degrees 55 minutes, another in 13 degrees 1 minute, a third in 14
degrees 45 minutes, the last in 19 degrees 15 minutes, all of the nature of
Jupiter. In Sagittarius two, one in 10 degrees and 15 minutes, the other in 7
degrees and 55 minutes, both of the nature of Jupiter. In Capricorn three, one
2 degrees and 3 minutes, another 7 degrees and 55 minutes, the other 7 degrees
and 55 minutes, all of Jupiter's nature. In Pisces two, one in 7 degrees and 11
minutes, of the nature of Venus, the other 14 degrees and 59 minutes, of the
nature of Jupiter. Wherefore always when thou find the Significator in a
Corporal Conjunction with any of these, thou may pronounce happiness and a
good end.

The 101st Cosideration is, To mark in Nativities or Questions, which Planet is
the cutter off of life or years, or hinderer of a thing from being done? for he
it is who destroys the life of the Native, etc. who is strongest in testimonies
of dignities or power. Yet Messahala concealed this, and discovered the same
and another useful secret only to a certain Scholar of his, who out of pride
appropriated the same to himself. Now, after thou have found who is this
destroyer, etc. then see to whom the Lord of the Ascendant or the Moon is
joined (who participates in signification of every thing, as we have said
before) or the Lord of the thing enquired after, and Lord of the House of the
Moon, or one or more of them; for if it be joined to a Planet Retrograde or
Combust, or Cadent from the Ascendant, or any other Angle, or to any of the
Infortunes who does not receive him; or is afflicted by an Infortune, which
cuts off the light of the Significator: the thing is destroyed, and so the
years of the Native are diminished, and he lives not long.

Further, if the Lord of the Ascendant or the Moon, or the Lord of thing
enquired after, be joined to a Planet who is free from the Conjunction of the
Infortunes, and so is sase as to himself, but is joined to another Planet
afflicted some of the aforesaid ways, the matter shall be brought to naught,
even after it seems accomplished, and the Natives life shall be suddenly cut
off, when there is all the probability that may be of the contrary: And this
will also happen though there be no Conjunction with the killing Planet, if
only the Significator, or Moon, be afflicted in manner aforesaid.

The 102d Consideration is, Of things signified, how they shall be found or
known, and from what Significator they are to be taken? which must be from the
Significators of the Querent, and of the thing questioned or enquired after:
which two Significators, if they shall be joined together with the Moon, it
signifies wholly and absolutely the effect of the thing; if not joined, then
the contrary. And from the Conjunction of the Significators we ought to know
why, or by what the question is made. And by the Lord of the House in which
such Conjunction happens, we know of what the question will be, or the end
thereof; for if that be a Fortune, it will be good, according to the condition
and signification of such Fortune, and the House wherein he is, and
signification of the Lord of that House, and of the place in which the Lord is
posited of that House wherein its self is. But if it be an Infortune, it will
be bad, according to the signification of the Infortune, and such other
positions as aforesaid. If the Lord of the House or Exaltation, or of any two
smaller Dignities, casts an Aspect, or there be a translation of Light, you may
know by that the question shall be brought to pass, but if there be none of
these, it cannot be precisely known, but it will be by or from a cause not yet
discovered; and by the Aspects of the Fortunes or Infortunes may be known what
will be the effects.

The 103d Consideration is, To mind in Nativities and general Questions, in
what House the part of Fortune happens; for from the things signified by that
House will the fortune or gain of the Native or Querent arise, if the same be
well disposed: otherwise the same will be cause of his misfortune and loss.

The 104th Consideration is, To observe in Nativities and general Questions,
whether the Significator of the Native or Querent be posited in the seventh
from his own House, or in Opposition to the Lord of the Ascendant? for he will
not in such case signify gain from the things signified by that House, but
rather expense and loss.

The 105th Consideration is, To observe in Nativities or general Questions,
whether that an Infortune unfortunate be in the seventh? for that signifies
that the Native or Querent shall not live in peace or any delight with his
wives, sweet-hearts, or companions, but will perpetually have brawls and
quarrels with them; it seldom happens otherwise from such a position.

The 106th Is to consider in Nativities and general Questions, if a Fortune
fortunate, and no way afflicted, be in the seventh? for then the Native or
Querent shall be happy in good wives and associates, yet shall have many rivals
and persons that hate him, but rather out of envy than cause, so that he shall
seldom bring his enterprises and designs to pass, without much labor and
trouble.

The 107th Is to consider in Nativities and general Questions, whether Mars be
in the second or in the tenth, and well disposed? for it denotes that the
Native or Querent shall gain a Fortune or Estate by those persons that deal or
work in Iron and Fire, as Smiths, Furnace men, Glassmen, etc. or in
Victualling, or keeping Innes, Taverns, etc. But if Mars be weak or afflicted,
loss and damage from all those.

The 108th Is to consider, If either of the Planets beholds two Houses? for his
virtue and fortitude shall be in that wherein he has most dignities, and which
is most proper for him, and the thing he signifies.

The 109th Is to consider, Whether the Lord of the fifth be in the seventh
afflicted? for then the Native will never be happy at Feasts or Banquets,
either be averse from or slighted at such meetings, or some affronts put upon
him; nor will he ever go neat in his clothes, nor get any credit by them.

The 110th Is to consider in Nativities, etc. whether Scorpio ascend? for such
a Native is never like to get any great preferment in the Roman Church; because
Cancer, the Exaltation of Jupiter, natural Significator of Clerks, will then be
in the ninth House, which signifies the Church, and Jupiter is an enemy to
Mars, who is Lord of the Ascendant.

The 111th Is to consider in Nativities and Questions, especially of Lawsuits
and Controversies, whether the Dragons tail be in the seventh? for that
signifies damage or overthrow to the Natives enemies, and prosperity to the
Native or Querent, because the head will then be in the Ascendant. If it be in
the eight, it denotes the decay and loss of their estate or substance, and
increase of the Natives. In the third, prejudice to the Natives Brethren. In
the fourth, to his Parents. In the fifth, to his Children. In the sixth, to his
Servants. In the ninth, to his Journeys. In the tenth, to his Preferment. In
the eleventh, to his Friends. In the twelfth, to his Cattle of the greater
sort, etc. and so to all other things signified by each House respectively; so
do Saturn and Mars also, but not so much. Likewise it is observable, that other
ill positions may make void the said significations, but not so much as Saturn
and Mars, unless they themselves are Significators of the mischief, and then
much of their malice is abated.

The 112th Is strictly to examine and regard in every Nativity or Question the
Ascendant; for whosoever shall have Virgo ascend, and Mercury in a good
condition, or at least not afflicted; if he study and practice Physic, he
shall have success, and do great cures, but shall be unhappy in his salary or
profit thereby; not being able to get his fees of most of his Patients: and
besides, shall be unhappy in Lawsuits. But if he follow the Law, he shall be
unfortunate in all his business, and slighted; his words, though never so
prudent, not regarded, no not by them for whose advantage he speaks, but a
fools discourse preferred; and whatever he meddles in shall fadge untowardly,
and people be his enemies without cause, and asperse and scandalize him they
know not why. But far otherwise will it be if Sagittarius, Taurus, or Pisces
ascend, and Jupiter, Venus and Mercury, shall be all in the Ascendant, or if
Jupiter and Venus shall happen to be in Zaminium, or the heart of the Sun,
whatever the Ascendant be, the Native shall be admired as a Prophet, and all
his words received as Oracles, or the dictates of destiny.

The 113th Is to consider, Whether either of the Infortunes be in the 9th
House, and without Dignities? for then the Native or Querent shall be often
blamed and accused, and that without cause, as much as for one: But if Fortune
be there well affected (especially having dignity there) he shall on the other
side be praised, applauded, and honored, whether there be cause or reason for
it or no.

The 114th Is to consider, Whether the Lord of the eighth be a Fortune, and in
the second? for then the Native or Querent shall gain considerably by the goods
of people deceased, of his enemies, and by his wives, especially if such Planet
shall be free from impediment, or have dignities there. But if an Infortune be
there, it signifies loss and decay of the Natives estate, unless he have
dignities there, and be otherwise well affected, and in good condition, for
then it will be little or no prejudice; but without dignities, and in an ill
state, it wholly and totally destroys and ruins all hopes of estate.

The 115th Is to consider, Whether the eighth Horse, or its Lord, be afflicted?
for then shall the Querent or Native he damnified, and lose an estate by the
death of a wife, which she enjoyed for life, or the like.

The 116th Is to consider, Which of the Hou^es, or their Lords, are afflicted,
or under impediment? for that signifies, that hurt and damage will accrue to
the Native, by reason of the things signified by that House; and so on the
contrary, if they are Fortunes, good and advantage from the same things.

The 117th Is to consider. If the Dragons tail be in the fourth; for that
signifies, that whatever the Native or Querent shall get, shall be squandred
away, and come to nothing: and wherever it is, it signifies damage to the
Native in and from that House represented.

The 118 Is to consider, In what House a Fortune shall be fortunate and strong,
well disposed, and not afflicted; for in and by these, persons or things by
that House signified, shall the Native or Querent gain profit, and make his
fortune; and so on the contrary of a House that is afflicted.

The 119th Is to consider, If the Lord of the second be in the seventh, and the
seventh be in Aries, Scorpio, Capricorn, or Aquarius; for then the Natives
enemies shall easily take away his goods and right; and if he associate himself
with persons, they shall rob him; and his Wife, or Mistress, shall cheat him,
and steal whatever she can from him; unless the Lord of the Ascendant be in
Trine or Sextile to the Lord of the seventh, or in other Aspects with reception.

The 120th Consideration, is to observe, Whether the Lords of any of these
eight Houses, viz. the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, or
twelfth, be in the seventh? for which soever of them is there, the person by
him signified will prove the Natives enemy, unless a perfect Reception, and
some good Aspect, as Trine or Sextile intervene. Yet a Square or Opposition
with Reception, will abate the enmity, but not wholly prevent it. Thus if it be
the Lord of the third, his Brethren will prove his enemies; if of the fourth,
his Parents; if of the fifth, his Children, etc. nor shall he gain of or by
them so much as he shall lose another time; or if any of them sometimes appear
kindly, it will be but from the teeth outward, and for their own ends, etc.

The 121th is, Whether the Moon be in the eighth, and the Lord of the Ascendant
in the Ascendant, second or twelfth, Retrograde? for then the Native or Querent
will not he fortunate, nor have any luck at playing at Dice, or any other
Gaming.

The 122th is, Whether part of Fortune be in the first 10 degrees of the fourth
House, with the Dragons head, the Moon, Venus and Jupiter, and they direct? for
that signifies that the Native shall be lucky in discovering and finding out
hidden treasure. If it be in the second, 10 degrees, or but with two of the
said Planets, he shall find some, but not in so great quantity. In the last, 10
degrees, and with but one less, and yet a considerable parcel: and if only the
part of Fortune be there, not afflicted, then a small quantity. If the Sun
behold it with a Trine or Sextile, it will be Gold uncoyned; if the Moon,
Silver; if Jupiter, a mixture of Gold and Silver, etc. If Venus, precious
stones, Lockets, and for the most part Women's Ornaments. But if they be
Retrograde, he shall discover the treasure, but not for himself, another shall
get the profit. If the Lord of the eighth behold the Lord of the Ascendant with
a Square or Opposition, the finder shall die by reason of it; but if it be with
a Trine or Sextile, he shall only catch some small sickness or disease. If the
Dragons tail be there instead of the head, he shall find it, but it shall be
taken from him; or being ignorant what it is, he shall give it away almost for
nothing, And if the Moon be then separated from the Lord of the Ascendant, and
joined to an Infortune that afflicts her, he to whom it is so given shall have
little profit by it. If Mars, or the Lord of the eighth, behold the Lord of the
Ascendant, they that take it from him shall kill him. But if Mars and Saturn
shall be in the place of Jupiter and Venus, the business will be only Brass, or
Copper, or Lead. And if the Lord of the Ascendant be with them, the discoverer
is wearied with it, whatever it be, whether vile or precious.

The 123th Consideration is, to observe in Nativities or Questions, Whether the
Sun and Moon are in Conjunction in one and the same minute, both according to
longitude and latitude, and any of the Fortunes in the Ascendant, that is,
within 15 minutes above the Cusp thereof, or 24 minutes below it; for that
signifies that the Native shall be happy in getting a great estate and heaping
up of money; but if they be only in exact Conjunction to longitude, and not
according to latitude, and their distance one from the other be within 15
minutes, he will still be fortunate in acquiring substance; but so much the
less, by how much the further such distance is; and so proportionably. If they
happen to be above 15 minutes distance, the same thou may conclude if the
Moon shall be ill the very minute of Opposition to the Sun, and a Fortune be in
the seventh, which signifies the estate of the Querent or Native in respect of
his wives, companions, or enemies. And if at that time of birth Taurus ascend,
and the Moon be there, or the very minute ascending, or Leo ascending, and the
Sun in the minute ascending, not afflicted by either of the Infortunes, it
signifies that the Native shall get much money, and come to great preferment
and honor; but if either of the Infortunes be in the said places instead of a
Fortune, it denotes loss and destruction of estate to the Native or Querent by
or on the occasions aforesaid.

The 124th Consideration is, To regard in Nativities and Questions, the
Significators of the Querents and Natives estate, and also of his preferment,
calling, or profession; which thou may take to be the Lord of the tenth, or
of the Ascendant, if the other shall not be fit to signify the same; for if
the Lord, or Almuten of the tonth, be with the Light of the Tyne, or erect and
tall from it, and distant 60 degrees or upwards, even to 90 degrees; if it be
one of the Superiors, or 30 degrees if it be one of the Inferiors, and in the
Angle of the tenth, or in the Ascendant within 30 minutes above the Cusp, or a
degree and a half below it, and not afflicted, it signifies that the Native
shall attain to the dignity and profession of his Ancestors, and not exceed it,
yet shall be more skilful, excellent, and perfect therein than any of them: but
if there be in either of the said Angles any of the aforesaid helping and
fortunate fixed Stars with the Planet of Fortune, or any of the Planets, he will
far surpass all his forefathers in dignity. And if such fixed Stars shall be
of the first magnitude, and sole Significators, the Native or Querent shall be
raised to vast honors and riches, almost inestimable: which if beheld by the
Lord of the Ascendant, then his fame and honor lies in his own person; if by
the Lord of the second, in his riches; if by the Lord of the tenth, in his
Offices, Command, or Empire; and this though in never so poor and vile people;
the meaner their condition was, to so much the greater height shall they
arrive. But this shall not endure long, for they seldom go beyond twenty seven
or thirty years. And look how much the more sublime was their fortune, by so
much the more grievous, miserable, and calamitous shall be their fall; for they
shall die an ignoble filthy death; or if they escape it, the same shall happen
to their next Successor.

The 125th Consideration, Is to observe in Nativities or Questions, what Sign
ascends; if it be the Sign of a Planet that has two Houses, the exercise or
troubles of the Native or Querent shall be chiefly in those things signified by
the other house of the said Planet, which shall lightly happen to him, and for
the most part through his own means.

As if the Ascendant be Aries, he shall be exercised in such things as shall be
the cause of his own death or fall, because Scorpio, the other House of Mars,
will be then in the eighth House; but if Mars be well disposed, and part of
Fortune happen in the 8th, he shall be very fortunate in all things signified
by that House. If Taurus ascend, he shall be exercised in such things as shall
cause his own weakness; because Libra, which is the other House of Mercury will
be then the sixth House. But if Venus be well disposed, and part of Fortune in
the sixth, he shall be most lucky in things appertaining to the sixth House. If
the Ascendant be in Gemini, he shall be exercised in such things as shall
occasion his being taken; because Virgo, Mercuries other House, will be on the
fourth; but if Mercury be well disposed, and part of Fortune in the fourth, he
will be prosperous in things belonging to the fourth House. If Virgo ascend, he
will be excrcised in things that will gain him honor and power, because
Gemini, Mercuries other House, is the tenth; if Mercury be then in Conjunction
with part of Fortune, and in the Ascendant, he shall acquire as it were a Kings
revenue. But if Mercury be in the the tenth, with the part of Empire, fortunate
and strong, he shall undoubtedly obtain a Kingdom, or supreme Command. And if
with this part of Fortune and the Moon be also in the tenth, he will be a
mighty Prince infallibly. If Libra ascend, he shall be exercised in things that
shall hasten his own death, because Taurus, the other House of Venus, will be
then in the eighth. But if Venus be well disposed, and part of Fortune in the
eighth, he will be lucky in things represented by the eigth House; and so of
any other Sign. Scorpio ascending, the Native or Querent shall bring diseases
on himself, because Aries is on the sixth. Sagittarius ascending, he shall fool
himself into captivity, because Pisces is on the fourth. Capricorn ascending,
he shall gain much by his industry, for Aquarius is then on the second House.
But if Saturn be ill disposed, he shall squander away and waste his own
substance idly, If Aquarius ascend, he shall procure himself many secret
enemies, because Capricorn will be then in the twelsth House. If Pisces ascend,
he shall raise himself to honor, etc.

The 126th Consideration is, To take notice in Nativities or Questions, whether
Mercury be Significator wholly or in part fortunate and strong, and in
Capricorn or Aquarius? for then the Native shall be of a profound and piercing
wit, and great understanding; one that shall dive into the bottom of things,
and see from the beginning what the issue will be; and so much the more, if
Saturn's fortunate shall behold Mercury with a good Aspect, especially if
Mercury be in Aquarius, which is the delight of Saturn; and still more if a
Fortune shall be with Mercury and he with one of the propitious fixed Stars.
But if Mercury be in Aries or Scorpio, the Native will be bold, perfidious,
unconstant, arrogant, and yet quick of apprehension; rather nimble to repeat or
find out things said by others, than invent them himself.

The 127th Consideration is, To observe in Nativities, if the Lord of the
Ascendant be Saturn or Mars, and sole Lord of the Nativity, without any Fortune
pertaking in the dominion, the taste or smelling of the Native, or his
complexion, shall not be like those of other men, for if it be Saturn, he shall
delight in sour or insipid things, as Halion Ptolomy avers; if it be Mars, in
sharp and bitter, Flesh half stinking, Wine dead, and palled Aloes, snuffs of
candles, dung, etc. as also with filthy, dirty unhandsome women, more than in
others; or if it be a woman, in the homeliest men, etc.

The 128th Consideration is, In Nativities, whether the Ascendant be a human
Sign, or the Lord of it in a human Sign? for that signifies the Native an
honest, sociable and neighbourly man, more especially if both happen together:
But if the Ascendant carry the similitude of some creature which men use to
labor with, as Aries, Taurus, the last part of Sagittarius and Capricorn, the
Native is very submiss and humble to men, yet very sociable: But if it be a
Sign half feral, as Cancer and Pisces, he will be yet less sociable; but if it
be a feral, furious or salvane Sign, as Leo and Scorpio, he will be of a
brutish savage temper, delighting in the woods, hunting, and living upon spoil
and rapine; caring not to associate himself with men, so that he seldom remains
long with his own Parents, or nearest Relations.

The 129th Consideration is, To observe in Nativities, whether the Moon be in
Opposition to the Sun, with any of the Stars called Cloudy, which are
Althazaic, and the Head of Gemini* or in a place called The Place of falling
into the water, which Aquarius spouts forth, or the drops of the Lion, said to
be near his heart, and others which by reason of their mixture with each other
do not shine distinctly.

For when the Moon shall not be above 10 minutes distance from them, according
to Longitude and Latitude, it seems unavoidable, that the Native shall have
diseases in his eyes, not to be remedied by any human help or medicine. If the
Moon be then accidental in an Angle, and Mars and Saturn likewise accidental,
nor far distant from her, or opposing the Sun in any of the Angles, it
signifies that the Native shall be blind of both eyes at his death; nor does
there appear any way whereby it may be prevented: But if it be not of
Luminaries, but only one, he shall lose but one eye; if it be Sol, and a man,
the right eye; if a woman, the left eye; but if it be the Moon, and a man, the
left eye; but if a woman, the right eye.

The 130th Consideration is, To regard in Nativities, whether the Moon be
joined with Mercury by Body or Aspect, or there be a translation of light by
any Planet between them? if there be nothing of this, and the Sign ascending be
neither of the nature of Mercury or the Moon, and Saturn in a Diurnal Nativity,
and Mars in a Nocturnal, and one be in an Angle, the Native will be mad,
distracted, troubled with fits, a fool, or at least exceeding forgetful, unless
a Fortune very strong shall at the same time behold the Ascendant, Mercury or
the Moon; and so much the worse, if the Angle wherein such Infortune is happen
to be Cancer, which is the Exaltation of Jupiter or Virgo, the Exaltation of
Mercury or Pisces, the Exaltation of Venus: The reason is, because the Moon in
Nativities is the general Significarix of the Natives person, and the Planet
with whom she is joined, or its faculties and powers; and therefore it she be
corporally joined or applying to such Planet, the Native will prove of good
understanding, and very well retain his senses and intellectuals. And if
Mercury be in Capricorn or Aquarius not afflicted, but in good condition, the
Native will be of an exceeding wit, and a great Philosopher; and if Jupiter and
Venus be in (Zamini Solis) he will prove an Hermit or kind of Prophet, whose
words shall be received as Oracles beyond those of other men.

The 131st Consideration is, To take notice in the Nativity of a man, whether
the Sun and Moon be both in Masculine Signs, or both in one Masculine Quarter,
or one Masculine Sign; for if so, it signifies that the Native's acts and
temper shall be naturally such as belongs to men: But in a woman's Nativity, the
Lummaries so disposed make a kind of Virago, one that shall despise men, and
obtrude her self into their affaris; and such a one, if she marry, will be sure
to wear the breeches.

If Venus and Mars shall be both in Masculine Signs, the Native will be
moderately affected toward the delights of Venus, and use them according to
Nature and Law; but if they happen to be Oriental, he will be more salacious
and immoderate, inclinable to Incest, Sodomy, etc. But if they be Occidental,
and in Feminine Signs, his sports will be nasty and brutish; and so much the
more, if Saturn cast any Aspects to them: But if it be a woman, and Mars and
Venus Oriental, and in Masculine Signs, she will abhor men's embraces, and take
no delight therein, but rather please her self with some little wantonness with
persons of her own sex. But if Mars and Venus be in Feminine Signs, and
Occidental, she will love and take delight in men's kindness. And Ptolomy in his
Centiloquium affirms, That if Venus be joined with Saturn in a Nativity, and
have Dignities in the seventh, the Native shall be somewhat faulty and untoward
in his venerial caresses.

The 132d Is to mark in Nativities, Whether Mars be corporally joined with a
certain fiery Star of his own nature in Taurus, called Agol, so that they are
not above 16 minutes asunder, Mars applying thereunto, and the Lord of the
House wherein the Luminary for the time ruling is posited, which is called the
Lord Anauba, or of its Exaltation, and two others of its Dignities, and shall
be in Opposition or Square of Mars, and neither of the Fortunes shall behold
the Ascendant, nor be posited in the eighth House; it undoubtedly signifies the
Native shall be beheaded. And if Mars shall not be distant from it in Latitude
above 6 minutes, it will infallibly happen so, not to be avoided but by God
alone. And though a Fortune, Retrograde or Combust should behold the Ascendant,
yet it will scarce preserve him from beheading; only in such case it may happen
not to he occasioned by his own fault; for a Fortune in such a case not
impedited, may save him from such an ill death, and permit him to die in his
bed; but then it will be of some capital disease, proceeding from a hot house
and this before he comes to be fifty years of age. But if Mars shall not be
thus affected, yet if an Infortune be in the eighth, the Native shall come to
an untimely or ignominious end; but if a Fortune be there in good state, he
shall expire naturally; but if such Fortune be afflicted, he shall die of some
mischance coming upon him. Ptolomy in his Centiloquiam tells us, That if the
light of the Tyne shall happen to be in the mid heaven (I say in the conditions
aforesaid) such Native shall be hanged. If either of the Infortunes be in
Gemini, and the other in Pisces, his hands or feet shall be cut off, according
to the signification of the Sign wherein the Planet is posited, which is most
malevolent. If Mars be in Conjunction with the Lord of the Ascendant in Leo,
and has no Dignities in the Ascendant, nor either of the Fortunes in the
eighth, the Native shall be burnt to death; and if Mars be then Retrograde,
Combust, or in his fall, it will be for some crime, otherwise by mischance, or
unjustly. Ptolomy says, That if Saturn in a Nativity be in the mid-heaven, and
the Planet to which he is Anauba a Dispositor be in Opposition to him, and a
dry Sign on the Cusp of the fourth, the Native shall be knocked of the the head,
and die by some ruins falling on him; but if a moist Sign be there, he shall be
drowned; but if it be an human Sign, he will be strangled. If Mars or Saturn be
in the Ascendant at birth, and Peregrine, the Native shall have a skar or mark
on his face or head; if the Infortune be afflicted, Combust or Retrograde, the
same will be very deformed, and much disfigure him, otherwise not.

The 133d Consideration is, To mark in Nativities, whether Gemini or
Sagittarius ascend, and whether its Lord be well disposed, that is, fortunate
and strong, and likewise the Moon? for that signifies, that if the Native live,
he will get great riches. If Virgo or Pisces ascend, and its Lord, or the Moon,
be well affected, he shall get money, and lay the same out well, and live
splendidly, being beloved for his generosity and bounty. But in the other case,
where the Ascendant is Gemini or Sagittarius, he will not be so liberal, but
very frugal and sparing; besides, he who has Gemini or Virgo for his
Ascendant, may lose his estate, and come to want; but he that has Sagittarius
or Pisces, shall never lose his means, nor fall into poverty. If Aries,
Scorpio, Capricorn, or Aquarius ascend, the Native will be miserably covetous,
if Jupiter behold the Ascendant, he may somewhat mitigate the sordid humor,
but will not wholly prevent or take it away.

The 134th Consideration is, To mind in Nativities, whether Mars or Venus be in
the sixth, and otherwise well disposed? for that signifies that the Native
shall be not really fit for Physic, and grow a perfect Doctor in every part of
the Art. If Mercury be in Conjunction with Venus, and she Retrograde, he will
make naturally a good Singer; but if Mercury be in the twelfth, not afflicted,
he will be studious and famous in most Sciences, especially Philosophy.

The 135th Consideration is, To consider in Nativities, whether the Lord of the
Ascendant, and the Moon, and Jupiter, and Venus, are either all in the
Ascendant, or whether Jupiter and Venus behold the Lord of the Ascendant, and
the Moon in the Ascendant by a Trine or Sextile, and free from affliction? for
then the Native will prove very strong and courageous, and none will dare to
disobey his commands.

The 136th Consideration is, To note in the Nativities of Kings and Rich Men,
and such Grandees as are fit to bear rale, whether both Luminaries are in the
Degrees of their Exaltations, or in their own Houses in the same Degree one
with the other, and free from affliction? for this signifies that the Native
shall obtain great honors; for he shall be made Emperor, or something like it:
so that he shall be as it were Monarch of the World, which shall continue to
the fourth generation of his posterity. But if all the Planets below Jupiter
shall be disposed of by him, and he shall receive virtue from every of them,
notwithstanding the condition aforesaid, and afterward commit both them and
himself to Saturn, and both he Oriental from the Sun and in Angles, the Native
will be a person of great renown and power, although perhaps not with the title
of King; but his same shall endure for a long time, that is to say, all his
life time; and after his death for three revolutions of Saturn, or longer.

The 137th Consideration is, To see whether Mercury be in Conjunction with
Saturn in the Ascendant? for that signifies that the Native is a foolish
talkative fellow, that would be counted wise; he shall speak ill of all, both
men and women; the greatest wit he has is to invent many lies; nor does he
ever open his month, but something of untruth appears intermixed with his
discourse; so natural it will be for him to tell lies: Saturn gives him a foul
tongue, and Mercury a sharpness of malice to employ it.

The 138th Consideration is, To see in Nativities, whether the two Infortunes
are in the fourth House, or whether the Angles are possessed with movable Signs,
and Mars and Saturn in them? for then the Native will be poor, wretched, and
unfortunate above all others, all his life time, unless Jupiter, or the Lord of
the Triplicity ascending, prevent.

The 139th Consideration is, To be careful both in Nativities and Questions,
where the Dragons tail is? for that signifies the wasting and destruction of
the thing signified by that House, and especially if it relate to gain: for in
the first it signifies expenses, and loss of gain to the Querent, from or by
reason of his person; in the second destruction, and loss of money and
substance; and in the third, loss by means of Brethren, Sisters, Neighbors;
etc. in the fourth, damage that one shall sustain by ones Grandfather,
Father-in-law, and such things relating to inheritances, and that the Native
shall change houses often, and get little by it: in the fifth, damage from or
by reason of Children; in the sixth, losses by Servants, or small Cattle; in
the seventh, loss by Women, Companions, or open Enemies; in the ninth, loss by
Religious men, and on the account of Religion; in the tenth, by or in his
preferments, honors, etc. in the eleventh, loss by his Friends, or for their
sakes; and in the twelfth, damage sustained by great Cattle, or by means of
hidden Enemies.

The 140th Consideration is, To see whether the Significator of the thing in
question, or the Moon, be so weak that it cannot bring the matter to
perfection? and if they be, take the Significator of the Querent and thing
enquired after, and substract the lesser from the greater, and add to the
reminder the degrees of the Sign ascending, and project what they amount unto
from the Ascendant, and observe where it happens; for the Lord of that Sign
signifies what was enquired of, and according to his condition shall thou give
judgment, as thou find him fortunate and strong, or unfortunate and weak:
For if the business concern a man's estate, and he be placed in the second, as
he is so shall the Querents estate prove; if in the third, the Brethren will be
disposed accordingly; in the fourth, those of greatest Relations; in the fifth,
the Children; in the sixth, Servants; in the seventh, Wives; in the eighth,
Wives portions; in the ninth, long Journeys; in the tenth, his Preferments; in
the eleventh, his Friends; in the twelfth, his Enemies.

The 141st Is to consider in Nativities, the gifts and properties bestowed on
men by the fixed Stars, and how long they continue, together with the reason
why they prove not lasting, as those which proceed from the Planets, since it
seems a little probable that they should continus longer than those; of which I
do not remember to have met with any thing in the Ancients, save only that
Ptolomy in his Centiloquium says, The fixed Stars sometimes confer exceeding
great benefits, but often times they end ill. And Almansa in his Treatise to
the great King of the Sarazous, That the fixed Stars bestow notable gifts, and
raise from poverty to happiness and high degree, more than any of the seven
Planets.

Now the reason that, the gifts of the fixed Stars to men, abide less with them
than those given by the Phanets, is, because the fixed Stars being the Agenes,
and Men the Patients, the subject on which they are to operate, are not
agreeable to them, nor are born to be able to receive their impression; for it
is requisite that there should be some conformity and likeness, or
agreeableness between the Agent and the Patient: but the fixed Stars a^e most
slow in motion, and consequently in mutation, whence it comes to pass that
their impressions require subjects and patients of the same nature; that is to
say, such as are the most lasting, and carry a conformity with them to perfect
or accomplish their effects: For the revolution of the fixed Stars is finished
but in six and thirty thousand years, but the Viventhipolis, or life of man,
generally exceeds not three revolutions of Saturn, that is to say, the space of
ninety years, very few exceed that age (though possibly some may, by the
addition of the years of some Planets to the years of the Alcocoden) in their
Nativities, which bears no conformity or proportion with 36000 years to
complete the effects of their influences. And therefore as an Eagle cannot
exercise the complement of her flight or power on a Fly, nor a Stone coming
forth (a sunda, Trabathi) do any great execution (in Musciovem) no more can the
fixed Stars complete the effects of their impression, and therefore their gifts
or the good promised by them, continues no longer with men, because men are of
so small a duration, and subject to a swift mutability in respect of their
motion. And upon this is that Aphorism grounded, that advises to make use of
fixed Stars in the To nation of Cities, but of Planets in the erection of
Houses; because Cities are generally of the longest continuance amongst
corruptible things, and far more durable than particular Houses; for these in
respect of their individuals do not endure always, whereas Cities remain by a
successive building and rebuilding of Houses; and therefore though Castles are
very lafting, yet are they not equal in the respect to Cities; so that although
we may use the superior Planets in elections for building of Castles, it is
better to take fixed Stars; yet still because Cities are of longer continuance
than Castles, they are more appropriated to the fixed Stars, whose Subjects
they are. For the impressions which a solid thing makes in a more solid thing,
continues much longer than that which it makes on a less solid thing; and far
less in a thing not solid, than a thing somewhat solid; and yet less in a very
slippery transient thing, than in a thing less lubricous or changeable. Hence
the impressions which the fixed Stars make on Cities, continue longer than
those on Castles; because Cities are more correlative to them in lenght of
time, and accordingly those of Castles more durable than those of Houses, for
the same reason proportionably. But bodies of men are more remote from those
fixed Stars than houses themselves, and so more corruptible; and for that cause
their significations apply less to them, or if they happen, abide but little;
the significations of the fixed Stars being so great and noble, so high and
free from corruption and mutability, that they cannot easily take upon them a
variable commixture with things quickly corruptible and suddenly changeable,
unless it be as oil on water; for though it may enter into it, yet such
impression will not long continue; for the fixed Lights operate with so much
nobleness, that by reason of their long distance from those vile, corruptible,
changeable bodies, and neighborhood to the supreme Light, their effects cannot
remain in or with them, when they are lightly or suddenly changed and
corrupted; especially in base people, and mean spirits; for they seldom
transcend his person to whom they happen, and often times leaves him whilst he
lives, and that to his damage, so great that God alone can prevent; as I affirm
for the most part: though it is possible they may sometimes terminate in good
and continue long: As it has sometimes happened, that some have lived to the
greatest years of the Alcocoden, of whom I never saw but one in my time, who
was named Richard, who affirmed himself to have been a Courtier under Charles
the Great, King of France, and that he had lived five hundred years. At what
time there was a report of one that had continued alive ever since our
Savior's days, called Johan Buttadeus, because he had impulissed the Lord as
he was led to be crucified, Who said to him, Thou shall expect, or wait for me,
till I come. The aforesaid Richard I saw at Revenna, in the year 1223; and the
said John is said to have passed through Florilivium, in his journey to St.
James's at Compostella, in the year 1267.

Nor could the significations of the fixed Stars be applied, or adhere to men,
nor sensibly remain in them, unless there were some Medium by which they might
act upon them which are the Planets, which are secondary Agents, as the first
are principal; for wherever there are diverse actions in order, attributed to
several Agents, the principal act ought to be referred to the principal Agent,
which in respect of the effects or corruptible things, was the primary cause,
and the Planets as secondary; for that corruption which those in inferiors
suffer, happens by reason of their too great distance from the incorruptible
superiors; yet their effects sometimes continue long in Grandees, and persons
very rich, who are apt for Empire, magnanimous, and of brave and excellent
spirits; such as in my time was the Emperor Frederick the Second, who when he
was indigent and in great necessity, was arrived to the Imperial Dignity, and
brought under his obedience all Apulia, the Kingdom of Sicily, Jerusalem,
Cracovia, Italian, and the whole Roman Empire (except of Lombardy) subduing all
Enemies, Traitors and Rebels, and remained in that illustrious flourishing
condition; yet at last died miserably, being poisoned by his Domestics and all
his Family extirpated; so that scarce any of them remained. Such another was
Ecilinus de Romano, who when he was but mean, was far exalted above all other
Italians, for he ruled, and as it were tyrannized over the Marquisate of
Treves, even to Almaine and Trent, and within four or five miles of Venice, and
his Tyranny continued twenty six years; but at last all these glories were
overcast with calamity, for when it seemed impossible to suppress him, he fell
into the hands of his Enemies at a Battle in the Country of Mediolanensi apud
Cassianum, and died wretched, and all his posterity was destroyed, not one of
them remaining. In the same manner there was one in the Kingdom of Apulias, of
base descent, called Peter de Vinea, who when he was a Scholar at Bononia, was
forced to beg for his living, and had not bread to eat, yet made Notary, and
after that Protonotary of the Court of the Emperor Frederick the Second; he
became a Judge, and climed to such a grandeur, that he was happy that could
obtain the least of his favor, for whatever he did the Emperor would confirm:
but himself would often set aside what had been established by the Emperor, who
made him Lord of Apulia: whereby he grew so rich, that he had ten thousand
pounds of Gold (Augustanensium) besides other Treasures almost inestimable; yet
in the end he fell, and was reduced to such misery, that the Emperor ordered
his eyes to be put out: enraged at which, out of mere indignation he struck out
his own brains against a wall, as it was then commonly reported. Another was at
Pysa, called Smerolus, one of the dregs of the Vulgar, who came to be (as it is
said) Lord of that Province; nor durst any of the Nobility for a while contend
with him; yet at last he came to nothing. After whom one Oddo Gualduzins, a
mean fellow, tapered up so high, that he did as it were sway the whole City,
and none would contradict him, till Galyver, a Judge, caused him to be chopp'd
all to pieces. The same happened at Florylycium, one called Simon Mustaguere
the Son of obscure Parents, who mounted so high, that all the People adored
him: nor durst any oppose him save only my self, who knew him thoroughly; and
what mischief he could, he did at his pleasure for three years space: but at
last down he came, being banished the City, which happened for the od^ousness of
his person and cowardice. Another, being a Friar of the Preaching Order, by
name John, by Nation Vicentinus, was admired as a Saint by all the Italians
that acknowledged the Roman Chruch; but I ever thought him an Hypocrite: he
grew so high, that he was reported to have raised eighteen from the dead,
(though never one of them could be seen) and to cure all Dieases, fright Devils
etc. yet could I not perceive any body freed by him, though I made much enquiry
into his Miracles; however the whole World seemed to run after him, and thought
himself happy that could get a Thread of his Cap, which they esteemed equal
with the Relics of the Saints; and in his Preaching he would publicly boast,
That he had converse with Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary, and Angels when he
list. By which Tricks, the Friars of his Order at Bononia, got more than Twenty
thousand Marks. And his power was so great, that by his own will he released a
Soldier as he was going to Execution for murder. Nor durst the Magistretes
deny him, nor any speak ill of him but my self, who knew all his whe^dles and
cozsnages; for which the Rabble, merely out of fear of him, reported me an
Heretic, In which esteem and pomp he continued above a year, but at last want
out like a snuff of a Candle, with a stink, his Devices and Hypocrisy being
discovered; so that he became as generally, and every body was ashamed to be
seen in his company.

The 142d Consideration is, To observe in Nativities and general Questions, the
gifts and good advantages bestowed on men by the Planets; because those are
applied more easily to them, and continue longer extended to their successors,
according as they are disposed in the Radixes of their Nativities; but they are
seldom exceeding great, unless when applied by fortunate fixed Stars, because
being of a more swift mutability, they have a closer affinity with them,
especially if proceeding from the inferior Planets, for their conformity with
men, their correlative subjects. Those of the Superiors last not so long, with
men, but in building of houses they are much better than the other.

Of the good given by Saturn and the other planets.
Saturn Oriental and well disposed, that is strong and in Reception, gives
great Fortune in Building, Planting Trees requiring a long growth, in Manuring
Ground, Waterworks, and the like. Jupiter gives good luck in Scientiis, such
as the Law, and in Dignities, being made a Bishop, a Judge, or the like. Mars
in leading forth of Armies, etc. Sol in Lay Preferments, as Kingdoms,
Governments, etc.

But the Lower Planets bestow their gifts inherent to men and more durable; as,
Venus in the Attempts of Women, their Ornaments, Courting them. etc. Mercury in
Trading, Writing, etc. The Moon in Navigation, Planting Vines, Using Drinks,
Selling Wine, etc. All these, I say, are excellently well bestowed by the
Planets advantageously posited, and endure longer, that is to say, The
Prosperities given by the Moon may continue to the seventh year or generation,
because she is the Seventh Planet, reckoning downwards; and if they pass the
Seventh Age or Generation, they cannot exceed the Eighth; as suppose from the
42d year to the 45th year including both those of Mercury may endure to the
sixth Age, being the sixth from Saturn, but will scarce hold out the seventh.
Those of Venus to the fifth Age, she being the fifth Planet from Saturn; but
will not exceed the sixth. Those of the Sun to the fourth Age. Those of Mars to
the third Age. Those of Jupiter to the second Age. Those of Saturn only for
one Age, and cannot transcend, nay seldom reach the third. And though I say
that they may continue so long, yet do I not say that they shall not be
finished before. For as Aristotle says, There are terms that cannot be past
over; yet he does not say but that they may be prevented and come short off: so
in these cases. And further, When I say that they cannot continue longer, I
mean without vanishing wholly; or so deprest, that it will be no more like what
was before, than Green or Russet to a persect White, unless by chance something
from another cause happens anew; which seldom chances, nor can truly be said to
be the same, but quite another thing from the first. Hence comes perhaps the
common Observation, That Goods or Possessions ill got never abide to the fifth
or third Age; many that use that proverb not knowing whence it comes to pass,
but only because they have heard others say so, or seen it often happen thus.
But from what we have here laid down, some reason may be given: For illgotten
goods count such as are got by way of Usury, Lies, Drceit, Theft, Rapine, and
the like.

The 143 Consideration, Is to understand the true Method of Judging, and by
what ways thou may come to some result, that thou may examine and
rightly discuss the same, and discover the truth of what the Stars shall show
thee? And herein there are 14 points to be heeded: 1. Whether the Querent
proposes the Question really and intentively or not? For if the Lord of the
Ascandandant and Lord of the hour be the same, or the Signs wherein those
Significators are placed, be of the same Triplicity or Complexion, the
Question is serious: but otherwise, if the Ascendant shall be the end of any
Sign, the Question is not Radical. 2. Behold the Ascendant and his Lord, the
Moon and the Planet from which she separates, and assign them for Signisieators
of the Querent; the seventh and the Planer with which the Moon is joined, shall
represent the person inquired after: but if it be necessary, descend to the
persons, as the things are, signified by the Houses, from the first to the
twelfth. 3. Consider the nature of the thing, inquire about the House and Sign
whereby it is signified. 4. The Aspects of the Planets both good and malevolent
to the Significators of the things sought after. 5. In what place from its own
House each of the Significators are; viz. Whether in his own or the second,
third, or fourth, etc. or in the Combust way, or the like places. 6. Whether
they are found in Angles Cadent or Succedent Houses. 7. Diligently see where
the Querents assistants must come, viz. whether from a Father, a Son, a King, a
Kinsman, or a Friend, etc. 8. By the Mirth of the Querent, as if the Lord of
the Ascendant shall be in the fifth, or elsewhere joined with its Lord; free
from being afflicted by the Infortunes, or by his sadness: as if his
Significator happen in the sixth, seventh, eighth, or twelfth; unless the
Question be of things signified by those Houses: and as thou find judge. 9.
By the Fortunes and Inforttunes, according as thou find them in places
signified, the things about which the Question is moved; and if the benevolents
are more, it is good, if otherwise the contrary; if the testimonies are equal,
then indifferent. 10. Whether the Lord of the Ascendant be in the House of the
thing enquired after, or with its Lord. 11. In what House the Lord of the first
is joined with the Significator of the things looked after; for by the
Significator of that House, or his occasion, thou may judge the matter will
be brought about. 12. If the Significators are not joined there, whether there
be any traslation of light between them by any other Planet, or receives their
description, thou shall judge the same thing. 13. By the natures of the
Significators themselves, agreeing in their natures and significations with
each other. 14. According as the receiver of the Significators virtue or
disposition shall be, a Fortune or an Infortune, strong or weak, and does
behold the Significator, or the Moon, or any with Aspects of love or enmity, so
shall thou pronounce judgment.

The 144th Consideration is, To observe in Questions, Nativities or Elections,
when the Significators shall not clearly show thee what thou would know, but
the signification remains dubious, so that the mind is in suspense, take the
place of the Lord of the Ascendant, and the place of the Lord of the House of
the Moon, and see the distance of degrees between them, beginning from Aries;
of which make Signs, and add the degree of the Sign ascending; and project from
the Ascendant as well by day as night; and where the number falls, the Lord of
that House shall be Significator, and from him take the signification of the
business enquired, for according to his disposition thou may judge.

The 145th Consideration is, That thou see in Diurnal Nativities, whether Cor
Leonis be in the Ascendant, that is to say, in the Oriental Line, or above it
one degree, or below it three degrees; or whether it be in the tenth in like
degrees, without the Conjunction or Aspect of any of the Fortunes; for this
alone signifies that the Native shall be a person of great note and power, too
much exalted, and attain to high perferment and honors, although descended
from the meanest Parents; and if any of the Fortunes behold that place also,
his glory shall be the more increased: but if the Nativity be Nocturnal, his
Fortune will be somewhat meaner, but not much; but if the Infortunes cast their
Aspects there* it will still be more mean; but if the Fortune behold it also,
they will augment the good promised a fourth part, and mitigate the evil as
much: yet still whatever of all this happens, it signifies that the Native
shall die an unhappy death; or at least, that all his honors, greatness and
power, shall at last suffer an eclipse, and set in a cloud.

The 146th Consideration is, That thou take the place of the Lord of the
Ascendant, and the place of the Lord of the twelfth, and substracting the
lesser from the greater, add to the remainder the degrees of the Sign ascending
and project from the Ascending; and where the number falls, the Lord of that
Sign shall be Partner with the Lord of the Question, and shall be called the
Principal Partner. Again, take the place of the Lord of the said Sign, and the
place of the Lord of the part of Fortune, and substracting the lesser from the
greater, add the degrees of the Sign ascending; and where the number falls, the
Lord of that Sign shall be another Partner, and be called the Secondary
Partner: which if it happen to be the same Planet, regard only that; but if
different, then take both, and substract the lesser from the greater, and add
the degrees of the Sign ascending, and the Planet on whose House the number
falls shall be the third Partner; and which of those three is the strongest,
shall be the chiefest sharer in the signification of the thing enquired after.
If all the remainders, or two of them, shall happen on the House of one Planet
that shall be preferred. If the Question seem good, and those Partners are ill
disposed, they will diminish of the good signified by the Question, and so on
the contrary: but if the Question seem evil, and they are well disposed, they
will allay and mirigate the evil signified by the Question, and so likewise on
the contrary.

There are many other Considerations which might be added to these, but it
would render Art too perplexed and intricate; we therefore leave them, as less
material to the Students industry, to observe them in their due time and place,
as they happen; wherein his care and diligence will not fail of a reward in
advantageous discoveries of truth, worthy his pains.

FINIS.

