A FUNERAL SERMON AFTER THE INTERMENT OF Mrs. SARAH LIE The late WIFE of Mr.
Thomas Lie of Clapham

By PHIL. LAMB, Minister of the WORD.

Together with the Scriptural Evidence and Experiences of the Grace of God
toward, and in her, left under her own hand.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1679.

PROVE. VIII. 17. I love them that love me; and those that seek me early, shall
find me.
OUR dear deceased Friend (whose death occasioned this diversion from our
wonted course) as often as she thought (as indeed she did often think) of her
great change approaching, and as she was going to her Fathers House (where
doubtless she is now in glory) desired her dearest friends, that these words
might be the Text, or Theme of her Funeral Sermon, being (as we may very well
conceive) willing to tell her surviving friends o^ that Love of God of which
she had tasted in her wilderness state and of which she has now (undoubtedly)
her fill: we enjoy few drops, but she is got to the Fountainhead. She desired
tha^ all hers, and all you, might know the way to the enjoyment of this Love,
as well as her self. The Text she chose is a worthy Text Perhaps you may think
it is not so suitable to a Funeral occasion but let me tell you. Funeral Sermons
are not Subsidia mortuorun^ sed solatia vivorum, they are not they cannot be
for the help of dead Saints, they need no such little things: but they are for
the comfort and solace of living Saints. The words are the words of Wisdom,
they are (I say) the words of Wisdom it self. I love them that love me; and
those that seek me early shall find me.

In which, I shall only take notice of these two parts, or branches.

1. In the first part, there is a most glorious display of Divine Grace And
Love, in an act of wonderful condescension, enough to astonish Men and Angels:
I love them that love me.

2. Here is a most gracious promise, the product of that glorious infinite
Love; And those that seek me early shall find me.

The first part of the Text is a fair Preface and Introduction to a most
excellent Promise.

The second part is a Promise every way suited to the glory and excellency of
such a Preface.

It Is true indeed, it begins with some kind of limitation and straitness: Those
that love me, Those that seek me early. But then it has a most pleasant and
desired Exit with abundant satisfaction, They shall find me. There is your
glory, your heaven, your eternal happiness; here is the work of your lives. I
beseech you remember it, and let not this Text, or Sermon, be ever forgotten by
you.

Here (I say) is the work of your lives, to seek early; The happiness of
Eternity, to find God, and to enjoy him for ever.

Before I come to the Observations, give me leave to speak a little to these
two things.

1. To the Author of these words, that I may not leave one Soul here at an
uncertainty. And

2. I would speak a little to the Form of the words, that I may leave none of
you under any mistakes.

1. The Author of this great and glorious Text (if you look into the beginning
of the Chapter) is Wisdom uttering her voice. Verse. 1, Does not wisdom cry? and
understanding put forth her voice? verse. 2, She stands in the top of high
places, by the way, in the places of the paths. Verse. 3, She cries at the
gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming in at the doors. Behold, I stand
at the door and knock, Rev. 3. 20. Wisdom knocks, Wisdom calls, Wisdom cries,
and utters her voice.

The Acceptations of Wisdom in the Holy Scriptures, in the Word of God, are
various.

It Is sometimes taken for the God of Wisdom himself. Sometimes for the Son of
God, the wisdom of the Father. Sometimes for the Spirit of Christ, who reveals
wisdom to the Saints of God, the Spirit of wisdom and illumination. Sometimes
for the grace of wisdom, and spiritual knowledge. And sometimes for the Word of
Wisdom, the Gospel of Christ, as he says himself, Matt. 11. 19, Wisdom is
justified of her Children. That is, the Gospel of Jesus Christ, wherein the
wonderful Wisdom of God is displayed. (...), Ephesians. 3. 10.

But to wave the rest (as having many things to speak to you this day, that
concern the happiness of your precious and immortal souls to Eternity, and
therefore I hope, that you will not only bear with me, but also bear me up by
your prayers.)

Doubtless by Wisdom here in this Text, is meant the Interna sapientia, (...),
Filius Dei; and we are to understand the Internal, Eternal Wisdom of God, that
is called in Scripture, The Word of God, the Word that was made Flesh, Wisdom
speaking, the speaking Wisdom, the Son of God, the Son of God (In quo, and a
quo omnis sapientia) in whom and from whom is all wisdom, all counsel and
spiritual understanding, without whom we cannot know God the Father, or the
Truth as we should do; and by whom we know the Truth as it is in Jesus.

In the first Verse of this Chapter, Wisdom is entitled to this great Speech,
and indeed in the whole Chapter (if you will but take the pains, when you are
gone from hence, to read it seriously) before you come to the end thereof, you
will be convinced, as well as I, that this Wisdom is the Son of God, the Lord
Jesus Christ, making this great Proclamation to all the World, I love them that
love me; and those that seek me early shall find me.

2. I told you, that I would show you somewhat concerning the form or manner of
this expression, I love them that love me: to prevent the mistakes, and errors,
as we have need to do, especially in this Age, wherein the minds and hearts of
men, like Spiders suck poison from the most precious and most glorious Truths
of the Gospel.

I love them that love me, does not in the least, 1. Intimate, that our love,
or the love of the creature, is the cause of the love of God to our souls; nor
does it in the least imply that our love is antecedaneous (the least moment of
time) to the love of God; which will the more clearly appear, if we curiously
observe the manner of expressing it: It Is not said, I will love them that will
love me, but I love them that love me.

Besides, the Apostle John clears the Text, and puts all out of doubt, in 1
John 4. 10, Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us. And
verse. 19, We love him, because he first loved us.

2. As it does not at all any way intimate, or suggest the precedence of our
love to God, before he loved us; so in the next place, I must tell you, that it
is a most excellent Truth, a golden Maxim, fit to be written on your
Doorposts; yea, on your very hearts, Wisdoms thus saying to you, I love them
that love me.

And it may serve especially for these four great ends:

1. For the support and comfort of poor doubting souls, that now lie very low,
in a dark day, in a time of sickness, under great afflictions; perhaps God has
come, and snatched away a dear Wife out of an Husbands bosom, or has taken away
the Child of his delight; it may be many and long continued afflictions lie on
him, and he looks upon these bitter and severe providence, and begins to
question now, whether God does love him: Time was, when all things went well
with me, and I had peace within, and comfort without, a House full of
enjoyments; but now it is a dark day, God has smitten me with the strokes of an
enemy, the chastisements of a cruel one are upon me, so that I doubt whether
God loves me. Thus the poor doubting soul is apt to reason. But says God, look
not at my providence, on thine own losses, crosses, troubles, and on these
outward dispensations; look rather into thy own heart, and if thou can read
there but one line of love to my name, if thou can read there any true love
to Jesus Christ, then thou may conclude with thy self, that whatever
Providence thou have met (or may yet meet with) shall be for thy good. I
love them that love me. And these Providence are not the fruits of wrath, but
rather the effects of pure love. Romans 8. 28, And we know (says the Apostle)
that all things work together for good to them that love God. I can chastise,
correct, smite, but cannot hate my Sons and Daughters, says God. Whom the Lord
loves, he chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives, Heb. 12. 6. I
love them that love me.

2. For the Relief of despairing souls, that are affected, deeply affected with
their sinning against God, and their utter unworthiness, by reason thereof, of
any smile from Heaven; but are ready to reason against their own souls, and to
say, that surely God can never love such a treacherous Apostate, and
backsliding sinner as I have been, and am; it is in vain for me to expect any
love from Heaven, but rather in fury to be turned into Hell, and to be for ever
rejected; my case and condition is worse than that of Cain. But for the relief
of such, God reasons thus, Did ever love me? Did ever love Jesus Christ,
and the Children of God? If so, take comfort to thy soul: for certainly, I love
them that love me. Though it be so low, as it is, though thou can see nothing
but wrath, and vengeance, and hell; yet, if thou have any love to me, to Jesus
Christ, and the Saints, thou may be assured, that I love thee. I love them
that love me.

3. For the help, wonderful help, and encouragement of poor sinners to duty:
How is this glorious proclamation of Love and Grace accommodated for the help
of poor souls, through their whole lives? Have you any true love for God? You
say, you have no strength, no might, so that you are not able to do any thing
to please God: Why, what is the matter? You cannot see, that you have any share
of the Love of God. Look into the transcript, look into the Copy in your
hearts, and if you can see any true love to God there, go and pray, and hear,
and suffer what is allotted for you, and you shall find all sweet and easy to
you.

4. And Lastly, and that undoubtedly, this great truth from the mouth of
Wisdom, I love them that love me, is intended for a general proclamation of
sovereign grace and mercy to all the Sons and Daughters of men, and a sweet
invitation to all persons, to perform the duty contained in the next words,
namely, to seek early after God: Here is wonderful freeness and fullness of
Divine Grace* large enough for all men; and it is enough to encourage those
persons (that are naturally haters of God in their minds) to return, and
enquire after him* because God is ready to meet them, and requite them with
reciprocal love: Do your duty, and if you love me, and seek me, be sure I have
a love for you.

But I will detain you no longer among the terms and words of the Text, though
to keep my usual ^ont and method, I must always endeavor to make the way plain
before you.

The Text I told you had two branches, and 'its my purpose (if the Lord enable
me) to gather some fruit from each of them.

From the first part, I love them that love me. I would offer this to you,

Doct. 1. That there is a mutual and reciprocal love between Christ and his
Saints.

I told you, that it was a Proclamation of the love of Christ, and where he
loves, he begets love; so that whensover a Saint truly loves Christ, he may be
sure, that Christ does entirely love him: I am my beloveds, and my beloved is
mine. The believing soul says so; And who can but live and dye on such a word
as this is? especially when Christ says, as in the Text, I love them that love
me. I love this Saint, and he loves me.

That is the first Observation.

The second is much like it, and that is,

Doct. 2. That they that seek the Lord early, shall certainly find him, shall
certainly enjoy, eternally enjoy him, shall find him a God of Grace and Mercy,
and shall enjoy him for ever.

But first, of the first of these:

That there is a mutual and a reciprocal love between Christ and his Saints.

To dispatch this, (and yet not ^o make more haste than good speed) that you
may understand it, shall endeavor to show you here,

1. That Christ loves his Saints.

2. How he discovers, and manifests his love to them.

3. That the Saints of God do love the Lord Jesus.

4. How they do express and manifest their love to him: That by all this put
together, you may easily conclude, that there is a mutual, and reciprocal love
between Christ and the Saints.

1. First of all, That Jesus Christ has a peculiar, a special, dea^ love to
his Saints; Jer. 31. 3, ^ have loved thee with an everlasting love. Ephesians. 5.
25, 26, 27, Wh^ loved his Church, and gave himself for it (that is evidence
enough (...) that he might sanctify, and clean (...) it, with the washing of
water, (...) the word. That he might prese^^ it to himself a glorious Church,
(...) having spot, or wrinkle, or any su^^ thing; but that it should be (...)
and without blemish: And this Text I mention the rather, because it is one of
the last Scriptures that our Deceased Friend insisted on, when she took her
last farwell of me; Who loved his Church (said she) and gave himself for it, etc.

2. For the manner, how the Lord Jesus Christ does express and discover his
love to his Saints. Though I might instance in many methods and ways of his
discovering his love to them; yet I shall confine my self to these three
particulars, by which he eminently makes known the intireness of his indeared
love to his Saints; and by the same ways I shall show you by and by, that the
Saints of God (...) express their love to Jesus Christ.

1. First of all, he discovers and makes known his love to his Saints, in
denying himself of all the glory he had with his Father, in leaving those
Regions above, that he might come down, and gather his Saints together, that he
might redeem them out of the hands of Hell, and deliver them out of the House
of their Prison and bondage. Rev. 1. 6, Unto him that loved us, and washed us
from our sins in his own blood; he gave his heart blood for us. Phil. 2. 5, 6,
7, Who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
Gods fellow, coequal with the Father: What did he do? why, He made himself of
no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Was not here love?
Greater love has no man than this, That a man lay down his life for his
friend; yet this was greater love, for Christ laid down his life for his
enemies, Romans 5. 10.

2. He manifests his entire love to his Saints, in the delight he has in their
communion, and in fellowship with them: Christ is never better pleased, or more
delighted, than when his Saints are in communion and fellowship with him. When,
and Wherever two or three are gathered together in my name, there is my
heaven, here I delight to dwell: If you read over this 8th Chapter of Proverbs,
it the 31 verse, you shall see the ^edundancy of Christ's love to his people,
before ever he had a people; they were his contemplative delight, that he
should come down and be with them, and give himself for them. Rejoicing in the
habitable part of his earth, and my delights were with the sons of men. Do but
read Cant. 7. 5, and there you shall see how the Spouse her self takes notice
of the delight her Beloved takes in communion with her; The King (says she) is
held (or bound, as in the Margin) in the Galleries. What are the Galleries?
why, they are the Ordinances, wherein he promises to meet his Saints: the King
will sit at his round Table, he will walk with them in the Galleries, in
private communion; he is held or bound there: That is, he takes so much
pleasure and delight, he is taken so much with the beauty he has put upon his
Saints, that (to speak it with reverence) he cannot tell how to go from them,
and leave them; as a man with his best beloved is bound (as it were) with
chains of love.

3. And lastly, Christ manifests his love to his Saints, in the earnest longing
he has to have them with him in his glory. When any one sinner is converted,
it is said there is joy in heaven, the King of Saints rejoices, all the Angels
and Saints sing together; there is (I say) joy in Heaven when one sinner comes
in; Christ's sends forth his Angels to entertain them, and to bring them into
his Fathers presence; nay, he leads them in, himself. In Joh. 14. 2, 3, Christ
tells his Disciples, In my Fathers house are many mansions; if it were not so,
I would have told you; I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare
a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I
am, there y^^ may be also. And you may read at your leisure that ravishing
Chapter Joh. 17, and if you read it with understanding, and your souls go with
your eyes (be it spoken with reverence to such a glorious God and King as he
is) you will perceive, that he seems not satisfied with his own glory at the
right hand of the Majesty on high, without the Company of his dear-bought
Saints, that he has bought with his own blood; Read especially the 22, 23, 24
verses; And the glory that thou gave me. I have given them; that they may be
one, even as we are one. Verse. 23, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be
made perfect in one, and that the world may know, that thou have sent me, and
have loved them, as thou have loved me. Verse. 24, Father, I will, that they
also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory which thou have given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of
the world. Then Christ's Mediatory Kingdom will be completed, and the shame and
sufferings that were undergon by him, will be answered, when he has gathered
his Saints to himself, to behold his glory.

3. And now I shall show you the second part; if we turn the Table, then we
shall see, that the Saints of God, in their measure, and according to their
strength, those that are truly such, do love the Lord Jesus with all their
hearts; and you find it not thus with you, you have reason to be jealous of,
and to suspect your selves; I say the true Saints of God do love the Lord Jesus
with all their hearts* Whom having not seen, ye love: i^ whom, though now you
see him not yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1
Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen ye love, with such a love as raises your
hearts; it is, Amor vulnerans ligans, etc. a love (as one says) that wounds,
that strikes them to the very heart; a love that binds their souls to Christ;
which made the Spouse cry out, Cant. 2. 5, Stay me with flagons, comfort me
with apples, for I am sick of love. The truth is, you may imagine that it is an
Hyperbolical expression; but indeed there is no expression that can fully set
it out; and therefore you see, how the Spouse hangs, as it were, on the lips of
Christ, Cant. 1. 2, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love,
or loves, is better than wine. And every Saint, while he is in the wilderness,
in his Wilderness-state, leans on his beloved: What would a Saint have in any
condition? None but Christ, Christ is his All in all.

4. And therefore in the second place I shall show you, That the Saints of God
do mutually and reciprocally express and discover their love to Jesus Christ,
in their measure, in their degree, as he makes known his love to them. As,

1. They express their love to Christ, in denying all for him. Christ left a
Kingdom, and all the glory of his Fathers House: But alas! the Saints of God
they have nothing to leave in comparison of what he left. They that leave
Houses, Lands, Manors, Kingdoms for Christ, all this is little (I say) in
comparison of what Christ left for them; but the truth is, whatever the Saints
have, all that they have, they will lay at the feet of Christ when he calls
them to it, and this, as soon as ever they apprehend that love of Christ to
them; as soon as ever they come to be made sensible of the worthiness of
Christ, of the All Sufficiency that is in Christ to do them good, away goes the
world, they sit loose to it, as loose as Elijah's Mantle, 2 Kings 2. 13, which
fell off when he was taken up to Heaven: Thus said, and thus did the Disciples
of Christ, We have left all and followed thee. But I shall only add the example
of one eminent Saint, who left all for Christ; and if all the Princes in the
World had thrown their Crowns into his lap, he would have left them all. Phil.
3. 7, 8, What things were gain to me, those were counted loss for Christ. Yea
doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and
do count them but dung that I may win Christ. v. 9, And be found in him, etc.

2. As Christ discovers his love to the Saints, in his delight of communion
with them, so the people of God do entirely love, earnestly desire, and delight
in communion with the Lord Jesus Christ; the^ would be in fellowship with
Christ wherever they be, Cant. 1. 1^ A bundle of myrrh is my well-belove^
unto me, he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts, that is, near my heart. And
therefore is the Spous^ brought in, Cant. 2. 7, breaking ou^ after this strange
kind of manner I charge you, or I adjure you, O y^ Daughters of Jerusalem, by
the Roes and by the Hindes of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my
love, till he please. The Lord Christ (as i^ she had said) is come to abide
with me, and I take so much delight in communion and fellowiship with him, that
I charge you not to disturb him: I would not have the dearest lust, I would not
have any sin whatsoever to interpose betwixt Christ and me.

3. As Christ discovers the greatness of his love to his Saints, in longing to
enjoy them with himself in his glory; so the Saints of God, here upon earth, do
long (earnestly long) to enjoy him in his Fathers presence, in the House of his
glory, to be in those Mansions that he has provided for them, in those Regions
of glory above: They look earnestly for the glorious appearance of the great
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Apostle to Titus expresses it, Titus 2.
13, 14, Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works. They look out, as Sisera's Mother, out of her Window,
and cry through the Lattice, Judge. 5. 28, Why is his Chariot so long in coming?
why tarry the wheels of his Chariots? So the soul of a Saint looks out at every
cranny, at the eye, and at the ear, and cries out, Why tarries his Chariot? why
is he so long in coming? That dear Saint that is gone before us, was wont to
tell me, That she had waited a long time for her great change, and did continue
waiting: And the truth is, it cannot be otherwise, when once a Soul is espoused
to Jesus Christ, and has been kissed with the kisses of his mouth, and knows
any thing of his love, and loveliness; from the very day of espousals, there
will be, there must be a longing desire of enjoyment; as it is with young
Lovers, when once true love is between them, all the time after is a time of
desire and longing: Make haste (says the soul to Christ) and come away;
Egredere anima, says the longing Saint; go out, Soul, to meet Jesus Christ:
this is the Case, as it is between Christ and a believing Soul: Says the Soul
to Christ, either come down to me, or take me up to thee; Dear Jesus Christ,
when shall I come, and appear before God? I desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, which is best of all. I would also observe to you, that passionate
outcry of the Spouse to Jesus Christ, Cant. 8. 14, Make haste, my beloved, and
be thou like to a young Roe, or to a young Heart upon the mountains of spices.
It is the voice of a believer to Jesus Christ.

I should now make a transition from hence to the next Observation; but let me
first a little, improve this.

And the use I shall make of the first Doctrine is this,

Use. 1. To stand a while, together with you, admiring at the infinite,
sovereign, and free Grace of God, who has set his love upon man, and has done
poor creatures that honor, as to engage their hearts to love God, and the
truths of God. God is not beholding to us for our love; for he is an object
infinitely above our love, and it is a wonder of mercy, that God accounts us
worthy to love him, and to love Jesus Christ: What a mercy is this, that God
should beget in us any love to himself, by revealing his infinite love to us!
that his love should be shed abroad in our hearts! Oh! stand amazed at this!
especially when you hear God saying, Isa. 65. 1, I am sought of them that asked
not for me; I am found of them that sought me not: I said, behold me, behold
me, unto a nation that was not called by my name. But more of this anon, when I
come to the second Branch. Only here we may go away with admiring thoughts into
Heaven, at this infinite, free, and condescending love of God to our poor
souls: and to raise up our hearts to the greater admiration, consider,

1. What a great, what a wonderful and immense Love this Love of God is, that
he bears to poor creatures, his favor is better than life it self. Psalm. 63.
3, Because (says the Psalmist) thy loving kindness is better than life, my lips
shall praise thee. What shall we call it A Fountain, a Fountain without brim or
bottom: Amor Dei est infundens and creans bonitatem. The Love of Christ (as one
says) it is that which creates and infuseth goodness, all manner of good,
temporal, spiritual, and eternal.

2. Would you see the fruits and effects of this Love? Alas! it is not a small
matter for the great, and glorious, and holy God, to tell a poor soul, I love
thee. Men may say so, and it may signify little: but God never says so to any,
but it creates a Heaven in the Soul, it fills the Soul with all the joys and
delights of Heaven, it leads him into the Regions of Life and Peace, peace,
peace, and assurance for ever, Isa. 26. 3. and 32. 17. In all your duties, this
will be your delight, That God loves you: In a time of darkness, this will be
your light; and in the pangs of death, this will be your living comfort, That
God loves you, and that you have had an heart truly to love God; and you know
that he loves you by your love to him, and your love to God being (as it were)
the transcript of Gods Love to you in your souls. And indeed, (which may raise
your admirings) where God loves, and whom he loves, he never leave, he never
ceases to love. Romans 8. 38, 39, For I am persuaded (says the Apostle there)
that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, good or bad Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come: Nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

2. Use of exhortation to them that truly love the Lord Jesus:

Dear Saints, you that have indeed a true love to God, and do by that see his
love to your souls; Oh, keep your selves in the love of God. To that end,

Direct. 1. Set a high price on this grace that is wrought in you, and (as the
Apostle says) let it be your great care to preserve, and to keep life in this
love of yours to Jesus Christ. Jude verse. 21, Keep your selves in the love of
God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And for
this purpose.

1. First of all consider the worth of this love to Christ, what an excellent
and wonderful grace this is, to have a heart truly to love the Lord Jesus
Christ.

1. It is that, which is the clearest evidence of the Love of God, it gives you
all your life and comfort in a time of darkness, in a dark day, to know by your
love to Jesus Christ, that he loves you, and that the Father loves you; there
is no such clear evidence as this in all the World: If a man had all the
treasures of gold and silver in the world, he could not read the love of God in
them; but in your true love to Jesus Christ you may. When you walk in darkness,
and can see no light, this is that spark of light that will give you light when
you are at a loss. When it is dark round about us, when we can see little or no
faith, little or no hope, little or no strength that we have; let us then
inquire, and see whether we have any love, and if we have any true love to
Christ, this will give us light and life. Romans 8. 28, We know that all things
(says the Apostle) work together for good, To whom? to them that love God. If
one should ask me this question, Why is the promise made to those that love
God? I answer, because the Saints do want somewhat to comfort, to support, and
relieve them in a dark day; and when all other light fails, and we can see no
faith, find no holiness, this will never fail them: If there be once true love
to Christ, there will be some spark remaining, that will administer comfort to
them in the darkest day.

2. Consider with your selves, that if you preserve and keep up this love, this
love to Jesus Christ in your hearts, it will work in you a likeness to Christ;
And can you desire to be like any person that you love better? or that is more
exactly and perfectly pure and holy, that is, more lovely than Christ? This
true love is a fire that makes all things like it self; true love to God is of
an assimilating virtue, it will make us like to God, and like to Christ, whom
we love: Love is like a Looking-glass, if you turn the Glass downward, there
will appear nothing but the representation of earth, and terrestrial creatures,
all earth; but if you turn it upward, then there will appear Heaven, and
celestial, and the urseen glory of another world, unseen as to our bodily eyes,
but visible to the eye of faith: If we give forth our love to Christ, why then
all Christ, all Heaven, and all holiness is on the soul.

Direction 2. Be diligent and exact on your watch: if you do prize, and set any
value upon this love to Jesus Christ, endeavor to keep it, as you would keep
your lives; keep it as you would keep the best Jewel in the world; nay, the
world cannot give, cannot afford you such another Jewel: This Christ has
bought for you with his own most precious blood, by his death, his shameful and
accursed death; and therefore you have reason, great reason to keep it safe,
for its own worth, and because it is of so great use, as has been before
mentioned, because it will be a light to you in a dark, in the darkest day, and
because it will make you like God, and like Christ; take heed therefore, lest
it be stolen from you, or abated in you. As persons that have a Jewel of great
price and value, will be often looking into the place where they laid it up, to
see whether it be safe; so this spark of Divine fire, which is put into, and
laid up in our Souls, is a Jewel of matchless and inestimable price; How
therefore should we inquire concerning it, how it is with us, as to our love to
God and Christ? We should be trying and examining our selves, whether Wives, or
Children, or any earthly Relations, or worldly concernments or enjoyments, have
not stolen away our hearts, or abated our love: We should say to our own hearts
in this case, as Christ to Peter on another account, Love thou me more than
those? Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17. So we should say to our hearts, Do thou love
Jesus Christ? do thou love him indeed and in earnest? do thou love him
better than these, than these Children, these pretty little Idols that are set
up before our eyes? do love him better than all creature comforts and
relations? do love him better than all earthly treasures, better than thy
estate, better than all the world, better than all these? Yea, better than
Heaven it self without Christ? Thus I say, we should still be examining our
hearts, and see how it is with us, as to our love to Christ: for to tell you
the truth, our hearts are very treacherous: I know not how it is with yours,
but I find it so with mine, and that it is a very hard matter to keep up that
height of love to Jesus Christ as there should be. The Prophet Jeremiah tells
us, Jer. 17. 9, That the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked, who can know it? And as it is so in general, so especially with God,
the heart is more inclined to be treacherous with God, and in things relating
to God, than in any other things; and therefore we have great need to look well
to them, to be diligent, and exact upon our watch, in reference to this love to
Christ.

Direct. 3. If God has vouchsafed this grace to you, as he has made you
partakers of his love, and given you the transcript or reflection thereof, be
you sure that you love him again, and be you sure also to keep off every thing
that may stifle or quench the heat of your love; take heed of those strong
blasts, those wicked and cursed temptations that arise from Hell; take heed
also of those damps that arise from the world; if you set your affections
there, those cold vapors arising thence, will either abate or extinguish the
heat of this pure heavenly fire of love; take heed of being Servants, with the
World, to the lusts of the flesh; beware of these things: Sin, the lusts of the
flesh, the love of the World, and Christ, are, (...), inconsistent, they cannot
dwell together in one Soul. 1 John 2. 15, If any man love the world, the love
of the father is not in him. These are like two fires in one Chimney, the one
will extinguish the other.

Direct. 4. Fourthly and Lastly, Be sure to add fuel to this fire, and keep
this heat you have received from Heaven warm, take heed that your hearts never
get cold; I must confess, that we live in a cold and frozen age, in the worlds
old age, in an age wherein there is little love to God, to Jesus Christ, and to
the Saints; and if you would in this cold season keep up the height of your
love to Christ, I would advise you,

1. To be much in communion with him; the nearer you are to the Sun, the more
heat you will have.

2. Be diligent, and active, and vigorous in the performance of every duty,
clothe your selves well with the constant performance of duty; tender bodies,
delicate persons, if they leave off a Garment, are very apt to catch cold, and
so it will be with us if we neglect the constant performance of duty; the
neglect of praying morning and evening, the neglect of praying constantly in
your Closets, the neglect of hearing Sermons, the neglect of the due
observation of the Sabbath, in the neglect of these things you will be apt to
get cold; yet it is not enough barely to attend these duties (which is too
common a folly and sin) but there is one thing more to be done, and that is,
when you have been in the exercise of your love, and in communion with Christ,
when you have warmed your selves in your Closets, or at an Ordinance, go not
too soon into the world; this care we do usually take for our bodies, when we
are warm, when we are hot, we do not presently expose our selves to the cold;
and thus we should do in reference to our souls, when we have been at an
Ordinance, and have been warmed and heated there, we should not too soon
adventure abroad into the world; this has done a world of mischief, and
persons have thereby cooled and dampt their love.

3. And one thing more: When you meet together, not to be quench-coals one to
another, not to abate the love and zeal one of another, but (as the Apostle
exhorts, Heb. 10. 24,) Consider one another; What to do? to provoke unto love
and to good works, love to God, love to Christ, love one to another, love to
the Ordinances of God: When you meet together, do not meet together (I say) to
cool one another, but meet as so many live-coals, that will kindle and enliven
one another, that you may make the greater heat, that you may warm your selves,
and one another, and so keep your hearts and affections continually warm for
God.

Use. 2. I have yet a word to another sort of people by way of Application, and
that is, to such as have never yet tasted of the love of God, nor never yet
have found any love to Christ in their souls; I hope there are, or may be none,
or few such here, and therefore I shall speak but little to this; if there
should be any such here, or any of yours at home should be such, their case is
as bad as that of Cain or Judas. If they have yet no love to God, and to
Christ, I tell them that are here, and do you that are here tell them that are
at home, that they must never content themselves without it any longer, without
which they can never be able to say, truly to say, that God loves them: for if
they hate Christ, Christ will hate them, and set himself against them; yea,
there is a curse gone out, and pronounced against them already, 1 Cor. 16. 22,
If any man (says the Apostle) love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema Maranatha. And therefore you that are such as I am now speaking to, be
you persuaded from henceforth to love Christ, and in order thereto, wait upon
the means of grace, where God has promised to show forth his love, and to
inkindle it, and inflame their hearts with a greater and higher love to
himself. In Job 22. 21, says Eliphas to Job, Acquaint thy self with him, that
is, with God, and be at peace: thereby good shall come unto thee. And this
brings me now at last (though I have staid long from it) to the second
Observation from the Text, wherein lies much comfort for poor souls, though you
have had hitherto but a little light and love from God, and but little love to
God; And that is,

Doct. 2. That they that seek the Lord early, shall certainly find him, and
shall find him a God full of grace and mercy, and shall certainly enjoy him
eternally in Heaven.

Our deceased Friend (that precious Saint of God that is gone before us) having
found the benefit of an early seeking after God and Christ in the way of his
Ordinances, desired that her nearest Friends, Relations, and Children, might be
(and indeed by choosing this Text does advise us all to be) a Generation of
Seekers; and oh that God would make every one of us such, as may seek thy face,
O Jacob, O God of Jacob; that is, that may seek after Jesus Christ: This is the
work of our lives, and it is well for us that Jesus Christ came into the world
to seek and to save that which was lost, and to put this great advantage into
our hands, that we could never have had without him. In Matt. 7. 7, 8, Christ
exhorts us, Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and
it shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks, receives: and he that
seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be opened.

Under the Covenant of works you might seek, and seek, till your eyes sunk into
the holes of your heads, and never have found Christ nor God; but now he tell
us, that he is come into the world, and that if we seek him with our whole
hearts, in the way of his Ordinances and appointments, we shall find him; and
that if we knock there, it shall be opened unto us.

In the prosecution of this Observation, I shall only speak to these three
things.

1. First of all I shall show you, That man is born in a natural estrangement
from God, every man, every individual person, every Mothers Child is brought
into the world, naturally estranged from God. In Psalm. 58. 3, The wicked are
estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies.
There is the very Character and Picture of a man in a natural state, he is born
with his back upon God, and going with his face toward Hell; before he can
walk with men, he can run away from God.

2. I shall show you, That they that would escape that sin and misery that
attend this estate of estrangement from God, must seek him early; for they are
in the Regions of darkness, and in a state of sin and misery (as the Apostle
expresses it, Ephesians. 2. 12,) Being without Christ, aliens form the
commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope
and without God in the world. And the Apostle speaking of such, so living, and
so dying, in 2 These. 1. 9, says, Who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord* and from the glory of his power. And
there is no way to escape this, but by seeking early after God, by seeking
early after Jesus Christ. And this is that which I shall now speak to, and
which the Prophet Isa. 55. 6, 7, offers to us in the like terms. Seek ye the
Lord while he may be found; call ye upon him while he is near. Now is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6. 2, You cannot tell how
soon it may be, that you may seek, and God will not be found; that you may
call, and he will not answer; that you may knock, and yet it shall not be
opened to you: for I tell you, (yea, Christ himself tells you) Luke 13. 24,
That many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able: and it must be, and is
spoken of such kind of persons as we be, of persons that make a high
profession, that enjoy the Ordinances of God; Mat. 7. 22, 23. Many (says
Christ) will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name? and in thy name have cast out Devils? and in thy name done many wonderful
works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me ye
that work iniquity. Now is the time of your seeking. And because there is the
greatest Emphasis intended in this term early, early seeking after God, I shall
wave all the rest, and apply my self to a timous, to an early seeking after
God, if God shall give us the wisdom of the Swallow, the Turtle, the Stork and
the Crane, Jer. 8. 7, to let us know our season, and the things that belong to
our peace.

And in reference to this, I should have thought it most proper for me to have
spoken more largely to five or six particulars; but the time will not give me
leave, and therefore I shall but only name them.

1. I should have showed you, what it is to seek, what is meant by the act of
seeking.

2. What it is to seek God, considering the act with the object, what it is to
seek Christ: And that under these Four Heads.

1. To seek the Lord, is to seek an acquaintance with God, to seek after the
knowledge of Christ: this we should do early; and because we cannot do it more
early, we should do it now; and it is our great concern to get an acquaintance
with God; we should seek now to know God and Christ; this is of so great
weight, that Christ himself tells us, Joh. 17. 3, This is life eternal, that
they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

2. To seek God, is to seek reconciliation with God: for there is enmity and
hostility between God and us poor sinful wretches; every one of us, as we are
sinners by nature and by practice, ought to seek reconciliation with God, and
an interest in Christ, and to make him our Friend; and for this we are
Ambassadors; the whole Gospel serves for this end; it is the Ministry of
reconciliation. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20, All things are of God, (says the Apostle)
who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the
ministry of reconciliation; To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed
unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then, we are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God.

3. To seek the Lord, is to seek communion with God, and to seek communion with
Jesus Christ, to seek him in his Ordinances, in his public Ordinances,
Institutions, and Appointments; to seek him in our private duties, in our
closets, to have close communion with God, and with Christ there: If any man
love me, he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our abode with him (says Christ), Joh. 14. 23. So that it is
a duty that lies on us to seek God more in secret duties, and more in public
Ordinances night and day, wherever we be, to have further rnd more intimate
acquaintance with him, and to have a more clear interest in Christ, and more
intimate communion with him: By night on my bed, says the Spouse, Cant. 3. 1,
2, 3, 4, I sought him whom my soul loves, I sought him (on her bed, but that
perhaps may be drowsily, it was a kind of drowsy seeking) and I found him not.
What then? I will rise now and go about the City in the streets* and in the
broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I found him
not: The watchmen that go about the City, found me: to whom I said* Saw ye him
whom my soul loves? It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found
him whom my soul loves: I held him, and would not let him go, etc. Thus should
we seek Jesus Christ, thus should we seek communion and fellowship with him.
And in Cant. 1. 7. She thus bespeaks the Lord Jesus, Tell me, O thou whom my
soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make thy flock to rest at noon:
for why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy companions?
And this Scripture I mention the rather, because I now it was much the spirit
of our deceased Friend, that precious Saint now with God, who did seek Jesus
Christ in pure Ordinances, and desired to wait for him in the most incorrupt,
and purest ways of Communion; for which she had a great zeal, to my certain
knowledge.

4. And Lastly, To seek the Lord, is to seek the eternal enjoyment of God, and
so to seek the Lord Jesus Christ, as that we may enjoy him in his glory,
setting our faces heavenward, as in Jer. 50. 4, 5, It is said of the Children
of Israel, and the Children of Judah, that they shall come together, going, and
weeping; that they shall go and seek the Lord their God. And that they shall
ask the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward, etc. They did not only look,
but they went; they did not look one way and go another, but they looked, and
went where they might find God; for they said, come, and let us join our selves
to the Lord, in a perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten. I should have
also shown you

3. Where you should seek the Lord Jesus.

4. How you should seek him. And then

5. Why you should seek him.

But the time constrains me to retire to that one single term (early) to that
circumstance of time, because in it lies the greatest Emphasis (as I said
before) and may be of great use to us at this day: and here I shall show you,
what is intended by early seeking of God. I am sure, those that have lived
longest, are most concerned herein; the youngest, yea, every one of us should
account it our greatest concern, early to seek the Lord. But what is it that is
intended by this expression, early to seek the Lord? This I shall show you in
Three particulars.

1. It seems to have reference unto a day of Gods severe dispensations, when he
goes forth to correct the Nations, to afflict Families, and persons; there is
such a day, and that is the day of the Lord; and in this day, as it is our duty
so it should be our wisdom to seek the Lord early, before he kills and destroys
us, before he makes an utter end by the severity of his stroke. In Zeph. 2. 1,
2, 3, says the Prophet, Gather together, O nation not desired. Before the
decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger
of the Lord come upon you, etc. seek ye the LORD, all ye meek of the earth,
seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the
LORD's anger. And in this sense, this is the most seasonable word that I could
have offered you in such a day as this is, when God is gone forth to contend
with the Nations; we hear of much sickness and death both in City and Country;
God is shaking his Rod, now therefore it is time early to seek the Lord: It is
a hard matter for a man that is secure, to be awakened though the rod be coming
upon him, though the Lion roar, though judgments are breaking in upon us; as
long as we can tell what shift to make, (with the Prodigal Son) we never think
of returning to our Fathers House, we never think of seeking unto God. 2 Samuel
14. 29, 30, 31, 32, When Absalom set Joabs Corn on fire, he then made haste to
come to him. And thus it is with us, we will not seek after God; but if he set
our Houses on fire, our bodies with burning Fevers; when he comes, and
consumes, and scorches our comforts, then it may be we make haste, and seek
after him. In Isa. 26. 16, LORD, (says the Prophet) in trouble have they
visited thee: they poured out a prayer, when thy chastening was upon them. And
so in Hos. 5. 15, In their affliction they will seek me early, says the Lord by
the Prophet. When they saw their sickness, and their wound, they sought other
means: when none would do, and their case was desperate, they will then plead
guilty, acknowledge their offense, and seek my face. In their affliction they
will seek me early. And so likewise in Psalm. 78. 34, When he slew them, then
they sought him, and they returned, and enquired early after God; Here were a
people (methinks) much of the spirit of the people of England; when he slew
them, then they sought him, and they returned, and enquired early after God;
early, that is in respect of themselves, though too late in respect of others
that were already consumed and destroyed; early, that is, before they
themselves were destroyed: though it was not early absolutely, yet
comparatively so; though it was late, yet the Lord accounts it for an early
seeking.

But 2dly, To enquire and seek early after God, may have respect to the morning
of every day of our lives, and then the duty lies thus upon us, They that seek
me early shall find me; that is, if we seek God in the morning, we shall find
him all the day long with us. Early in the morning (says David) will I direct
my prayer unto thee, and will look up. And in another place (says he) I
prevented the dawning of the morning. And if we would learn this lesson this
day, and constantly practice it, we shall find greater advantages thereby, than
we are aware of. The Poets say, That Aurora Musis amica, the morning is a
friend to the Muses; and doubtless the Saints of God will find the morning as
much a friend to their Graces, as the Poets did to the Muses. When I awake,
says David, Psalm. 139. 18, I am still with thee; when I awake, I season my self
with the thoughts of God.

3. In the 3d place, and that which doubtless is most properly to be
understood, and is especially intended here is, as it has respect to the day
of our lives, and the morning-part of that day. Now then, you that are young,
awake betimes, improve your morning, make use of it before it pass away;
consider seriously your follies and neglects, what they have been, and be
ashamed: It is well for you that you are in the morning of your day; look out
therefore early after Jesus Christ, study to know God betimes, study to know
Jesus Christ while you be young. In Matt. 6. 33, The Lord Jesus exhorts to seek
first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and doubtless he there intends
this, namely, seeking after God and his Kingdom in youth; do not first seek
your pleasures, do not first seek to fulfill your lusts and vain delights, and
think it will be time enough to seek the Kingdom of God afterward: No, you
ought to seek that in the first place, before, and above all other things
whatsoever. It is a Maxim of Hell, Quaerenda pecunia primum, virtus post
nummos, (but the Sons and Daughters of men are too apt to take it up; yea, it
is their rule they walk by) first to get an estate, and to grow rich, and when
they have done that, then (if they can find leisure) to serve God, and to seek
after Christ. But I say, that it is good to begin betimes, and so did this
servant of God that is gone to Heaven before us; she began betimes to seek
after Christ, and has left upon record her early enquiries after the ways of
God, after the knowledge of Christ: And oh what an honor is it to be like
Obadiah? who says of himself, 1 Kings 18. 12, That he feared the Lord from his
youth. Children, hear me, possibly I may never speak to you more; Do you, as
Obadiah did, fear the Lord from your youth. Do as Timothy did, in your
childhood; hear this Children, your souls are precious and immortal, 2 Timothy 3.
15, It is here said of him, that from a Child, he had known the Holy
Scriptures, which were able to make him wise to salvation: Oh let it be truly
so said of you.

Use 1. Of Information. The folly and inadvertency of the most of the Sons and
Daughters of men, who seek the world, serve their lusts, pursue lying vanities,
and forget God, and seek him not. Oh what cause have we to complain of
Children, of Parents, and Masters of Families, how little care there is among
any of an early seeking after Christ? Parents (generally) teach their Children
to seek pride, to seek the lusts and pleasures of this world, and their carnal
delights: But who is there that goe^ forth early to seek the Lord?

We can rise early for the world, go from Mountain to Hill to seek after the
Profits thereof. Isa. 5. 11, The Drunkard will rise early that he may follow
strong drink; the Thief watches the twilight, but none seek the Lord.

Use 2. Exhort. To those that have sought the Lord while they were young, and
do yet continue to seek him, I have a word or two to you.

1. The first is, to advise you to admire (exceedingly to admire) the goodnefs
of God to you, in that he ever gave you hearts to seek him: Oh wonderful grace,
that you that were born at the same time with others, have sat under the same
means with them that never yet have looked toward Heaven, and their souls are
now perhaps dropped into Hell. Oh (I say) admire, exceedingly admire, that God
gave you, and not them, an heart to seek after him, to mind Christ, and Heaven,
and the great concern of your souls; and surely you cannot but admire it, if
you consider how little of man there was in it, and how much of man there was
against it. When did ever a straying Sheep seek the Shepherd? When ever did the
wild-Goats look after one to lead them? If Jesus Christ had not found you
first, you would never have sought after him; if he had not found you, you
would, or could never have found him; if he had not took hold of your hearts,
it had been impossible for you to lay hold on him: It is utterly impossible for
any man in his natural estate and condition, to seek after Jesus Christ; this
is a work that never will or can be done, unless God give a new heart, and a
new spirit; there wants something within to promote and effect this work, which
God only can, and must give.

2. You that have so done, you that have sought the Lord early, I would advise
you to go on, and to persist in seeking Christ; and as you go on, forget not
what sweet experiences you have had of the love and kindness of Jesus Christ,
what discoveries of light and grace, what comforts and revivings, what
refreshing joys and delights you have met with in your seeking of him; these
things ought not to be forgotten by you. And here I shall set before you the
worthy example of a Knight of 80 years of age, who two or three days before he
dyed, set apart a day on purpose to call to mind the former experiences he had
of God, and of what kind, and how God had dealt with him in his waiting upon
him in his Ordinances from time to time. And I am informed that this dear
servant of God that is now gone, has left behind her a Diary written with her
own hand, what experiences she had of God in her waiting upon him in his
Ordinances; and how, and what God had spoken to her, and by what Ministers. And
these examples are worthy both of your serious consideration, and also
excellent patterns for your imitation. But

3. You that have so done, you that have sought God and Christ early, I would
advise you to go on in seeking the Lord till you have found him in his glory:
As you have in your seeking, found him in a way of grace here; so go on (I say)
till you have found him in his glory hereafter, what darkness and difficulties
soever lie in the way of your waiting upon him in his Ordinances and
appointments; that you may be like the Church of Thyatira, and that it may be
truly said of you, as it is said of that Church; Rev. 2. 19, I know thy works,
and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience, and thy works, and thy
last to be more than the first. This Testimony Christ himself gives concerning
this Church. The nearer you come to Christ, and to enjoyment of him in glory,
the more haste you should make; every thing in nature does so; a Stone, the
nearer it comes to the center, the swifter is its motion: And the Sun seems to
move swiftest, when it is near setting: Trees of Gods planting, bring forth
more fruit in old age. Psalm. 92. 13, 14, Those that are planted in the house of
the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. They shall still bring forth
fruit in old age: they shall be fat and flourishing. See Isa. 49. 29, 30, 31.

2. I have a word of advice to them (if there be any such here) that are full
of days, and it may be full of the world; but empty, very empty, of the
knowledge of God, and have had little, or it may be no acquaintaince at all with
Jesus Christ, nor did ever look after any. We may perhaps say, as Job said, Job
12. 12, 13, With the ancient is wisdom; and in length of days, understanding.
With him is wisdom and strength, he has counsel and understanding. But is it
always so? Is there wisdom and understanding always among the aged? Be there
not among them such, as are like Ephraim? of whom it is said, Hos. 7. 9, 10,
Gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows it not. And the pride of
Israel testifies to his face, and they do not return to the Lord their God,
nor seek him for all this. They do not consider the grave, whither they are
going. Be there not careless men and women among us, that do not yet look out
after Christ? that do not provide for the welfare of their souls, but are
cumbred about many things, as Martha was? Yea, many aged men and aged women,
who have lived all their days pudling in, and about the world, and worldly
concerns, and have hitherto neglected the one thing necessary, viz. seeking
after Christ, and the knowledge of him, and to get an interest in him. Do you
not yet know, that you are going to appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ?
And will you not yet come off from this world, but the longer you live, you
will love the world so much the better? Is it not high time, that something of
the concernments of another world should interpose between your life and your
death? I shall offer you only two or three considerations in reference to this,

1. And first, I would beseech you, and persuade you, as I would be persuaded
my self, That seeing you have hitherto neglected your souls, your precious and
immortal souls, your spiritual (which are your greatest) concernments till now
you are grown old, I would persuade you, yea, even beseech you to consider,
that now you have but a little time left to do your greatest work; you have now
but one hour. In Matt. 20. 6, it is said, that Christ went out about the
eleventh hour, (when there was but one hour more to night) to hire laborers
into his vineyard. So it is with you, it is the eleventh hour, your last hour.
Besides, have you no eyes, no ears, to see, and hear, that many dye daily and
weekly? how many goodly plants, (that God had planted in his own house) have of
late been plucked up by the roots, and laid in their Graves? yea, every day the
death of young and old do ring a peal in our ears, to awaken us to consider
what is to come; And will not Conscience it self (think you) ring a dreadful
peal in our ears, when we come to dye, for that neither a voice from the Grave,
nor yet a voice from the Temple, have yet prevailed with us to seek, and secure
to our selves an interest in God and in Christ? Younger persons than our selves
are often taken away, and may we not thereby see and read that death it self is
coming to teach us all to be prepared and in readiness for this our great
change? Death lies (as it were) in Ambuscado for us, and sometimes men are
taken away by it in the field, and sometimes at home, sometimes by this, and
sometimes by that disease; but death comes to old age, aperto mart, in the
plain and open field (as it were); and old men and old women cannot imagine
that death is many days march from them; and therefore they (of all persons)
had need to seek after God, and an interest in Christ night and day; seek after
this in your Houses, in your Closets, in your Beds, in his Ordinances; yea,
wherever he is to be found, and not to give over seeking, till (with the
Spouse before mentioned) you have found him.

2. Consider how Christ calls on you in the Text. Read the beginning of the
Chapter, Does not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice? verse. 1.
From whence? She stands in the top of high places, by the way in the places
of the paths, verse. 2. She cries at the gates, at the entry of the city, at
the coming in at the doors, verse. 3. To whom does she cry? Unto you, O men, I
call, and my voice is to the sons of men, verse. 4. What does she call to them
for? That they would come and seek wisdom of Christ, that they would come and
get understanding of him, that they would come and get knowledge of him, which
is wisdom indeed; The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom indeed. Does Christ thus
call, and will you not regard, nor answer this call? What then will be his next
call? For ought I know it may be this, Arise from the dead, and come to
judgment. Consider this.

3. And Lastly, Consider your grand inducement and encouragement, They that
seek me early, shall find me: They that will yet seek him, that is your early,
and God acconnts it so. In Psalm. 78. 34, When he slew them, then they sought
him, and they returned, and enquired early after God. While grace is
proclaimed, while God says, They that seek me early, shall find me; This (I
say) is your early, and that which God himself accounts so; and will God yet be
found of you, if you seek him? Oh! what cause have you to bless God, that ever
he made such a promise as this, which is, Tabula post naufragium. And that in
Isa. 55. 6, 7, Seek ye the Lord while he, may be found; call upon him while he
is near. Oh wonderful grace! that such promises should be published to you and
me! I love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find me.

And now I shall no longer be burdensome to you, but shall beg of you Children,
for whom I have provided a few words, a short Sermon, To hearken to your own
Sermon, etc.

Thirdly, A word of Exhortation, or, a short Sermon to young ones: Children
seek the Lord early, whiles you are yet tender and young. The Children of their
dear deceased Mother, should hear her always saying what the Lord said to her,
They that seek me early, shall find me. O little Children! you lie much upon my
heart, Remember your Creator in the days of your youth, and seek him betimes,
Eccles. 12. 1.

1. Consider you must dye, It is appointed to all men once to dye, Heb. 9. 27.
And you may dye whiles you are Children. How many pretty little ones are every
day taken away before your eyes? And if you be snatched away by the cold hand of
death, before you know God, and have found Christ, what will become of your
precious and immortal souls? Would you be willing to dye, and be damned? Would
you leave this world, and be content to be turned into Hell, and be punished
with the Devil and his Angels? Can you think of losing your Friends, and your
God too for ever?

2. Consider what was the great errand upon which God sent you into the world?
Not to gratify your Lusts, nor to pursue lying vanities; but to know God, and
Jesus Christ. And will you, dare you neglect your special work? O! whiles you
are in your prime, mind what you have to do for your souls. Can you think it
reasonable, that the Devil should have your youth, the flower and strength of
your days, and God be served only with a crazy body, or the rottenness of old
Age?

O, then, delay no longer, but seek the Lord. And.

1. Do it speedily, the Mannagatherers must go forth betimes, Exodus 16. 21, so
must the Christseekers, before the Sun be up, before the heat of youthful
lusts, or earthly cares, hinder your diligent seeking.

2. Do it in earnest, with all your hearts: Psalm. 119. 2, Blessed are they that
keep his testimonies, that seek him with their whole heart.

3. Resolve to seek the Lord till you find him in glory; not only while your
Father, Mother, or Friends live, but as long as you live. It was a sad story in
Genesis 35. 19, That Rachel dyed, when she was but a little way from Ephrath: But
more sad, Luke 13. 24, When many shall seek to enter into Heaven, and not be
able.

3. Consider, That if you seek him early, you shall be sure to find him; I
would bespeak you, as David did his young Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9, And thou
Solomon, my son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect
heart, and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches all hearts, and
understands all the imaginations of the thoughts: if thou seek him, he will
be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. It
was a very serious speech of Azariah to Asa, and to all Judah and Benjamin, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2, The Lord is with you, while you be with him; and if you seek him,
he will be found of you: but if you forsake him, he will forsake you.

Quest. But what shall we do to seek him?

Ans. If you will seek, you must forsake sin, and flee youthful lusts, 2 Timothy
2. 22.

1. Especially take heed of lying, that is the Devils chain, by which he holds
poor Children from Christ; Lies are the refuge of guilt* and folly, where the
inconsiderate youth hides himself from man, and is kept from God; as Adam, when
he knew he was naked, Genesis 3. 7, sewed Fig Leaves together; a poor shift to
hide his nakedness! so the sons of Adam, when they become guilty, make Lies
their covert; and instead of seeking, fly further from God, and bring a double
guilt and punishment upon their heads.

2. Beware of Pride; the wanton youth is like the wild Asses Colt, or as Jer.
2. 23, 24, The swift Dromedary traversing her ways, or a wild Ass used to the
wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure. The souls not seeking
God, is charged upon his Pride, Psalm. 10. 4, The wicked through the pride of
his countenance (his looks testify his pride) will not seek after God, God is
not in all his thoughts.

3. Be not of a stubborn or disobedient spirit to the counsels of Parents and
Teachers; but hearken to their instruction. It is the most sad and certain
presage of the ruin of your souls, if you refuse the serious and early advice
of your natural and spiritual Fathers. That Is a dreadful saying, 1 Samuel 2. 25,
concerning Eli's Sons, They hearkened not unto the voice of their Father,
because the Lord would slay them.

2. Go read the Scriptures; the Eunuch found Christ there, and Augustine found
him there while he was reading Romans 13. 13. Go, ask your Teachers, and they
will direct you in the way; go hence into your corners, and weep, and pray, and
God will come to you; and when you hear the word Preached, mind what is spoken
to you; it is God that speaks, whom you should seek.

4. Consider, If you will seek the Lord early, you will lay the foundation of
your own peace and comfort, living and dying; O how may you prevent the sighs,
the groans, the repentings, the heartakings that have filled up our days, for
want of an early seeking after God: What a comfort was this to our dying
Friend, as also to her surviving Friends and Relations, That She did, and could
truly say, that she began to know God betimes, and her great preparation-work
for death (to use her own words) was not now to do: And as that was your
comfort then, so let it be your Copy now. What a great advantage was that to
David, Psalm. 71. 17, 18, That when he was old, he could plead an old
acquaintance with God? O Lord, thou have taught me from my youth. Now also when
I am old, and gray headed (O God) forsake me not.

Two things more I would briefly show you.

1. What will be the difference between them that made it their business early
to seek the Lord, and them that sought him not, or sought him too late; and
that with reference to eternity, in a dying hour?

2. Whence that difference does arise?

1. What will be the difference betwixt Saints and Sinners, with respect to
death at last?

1. The wicked and ungodly sinner, that would seek the world, his own pleasure
and sinful lusts; When he comes to dye, Conscience rings a dreadful peal, and
makes him cry out in the bitterness of his soul, Alas! Friend, I must dye,
Animula, vagula, blandula, quos nunc ad ibis locos? Poor flitting, dear
departing soul, whither art thou going? Christ is an enemy, God is a stranger,
I have no friend to save me, I must be damned, I am undone, I am undone for
ever.

But the dying Saint, when he has the sentence of death in him, has the hopes
of life before him; I must dye (says he) O welcome Death, I am now going to
enjoy him whom I have loved; to possess him whom I have sought (as this
precious Saint said to me a little before her death, I know whom I have
trusted) I am my Beloveds, and my Beloved is mine, says the Believer, Now shall
I ever be with the Lord.

2. The careless sinner that would not seek the Lord, when he comes to dye,
bids a doleful adieu to all his comforts; farwell Friends, Relations, pleasures
and delights, for ever, I shall never see a good day more.

But he that sought the Lord while he lived, when he comes to dye, says,
Behold, I dye, now farwell troubles, temptations, sin, and sorrow for ever; I am
lanching forth into a glorious eternity, I shall never see a sad day more.

3. The wilful sinner, when he is about to dye, (after all the counsels he has
slighted, and now time shall be no more) cries out with horror, I have for
ever lost my opportunities of seeking God, it is now too late, I am left to
perpetual howlings.

But the gracious Soul, who has sought, and found God in seeking, when he is
about to dye, looks back with delight upon all the Ordinances, wherein he has
many times met with Christ, and found God nigh to his soul, and says, I am
going where I shall need Ordinances no more, but God shall be all in all; I am
going to mine eternal rest, to an everlasting Sabbath-keeping in Heaven.

2. Whence does that difference arise? From the wisdom of the one, and foolish
inadvertency, or rather obstinacy of the other; one knew his season, and did
the things that did belong to his peace; the other had his season, but knew it
not, and now his misery is great upon him; one sought after Christ, that he
might have an interest in him, and make God his friend; the other refused
Christ, and now God is his enemy, and so death is to him the King of terrors:
But the believing soul can (to allude to that in Isa. 11. 8,) play upon the
hole of the Asp, and put his hand on the Cockatrice Den; and when the pains of
an irksom disease are upon him, and pangs of death before him, he says, all
these rackings and grievous aches, be but like the rattling of the
Charriot-wheels that Joseph sent to fetch his Father and his Brethren to him;
and all his wearisom waking nights, be to him as the valley of Achor, or door
of Hope.

1. Because he knows death is no death to him, but a passage unto a glorious
life with God, whom (...) has sought and served all his days he is but going
unto his Beloved the Lord Jesus, who is gone (...) way before him.

2. Because he looks on the Grave not as his Prison, but a bed of Spices; or
rather the Saints Tyring-Room, where they throw off mortality, to put on
immortality; and lay aside corruption, to put on incorruption.

I thought here to have spoken a word to the nearest Friends and Relations of
this deceased Saint, to let them see how little cause they have to mourn and to
afflict their souls; but the Lord, who knows how to speak comfort infinitely
better, has been with their hearts. Only let not the Husband grieve, and say,
Ah! what a dear Wife have I lost! nor the Children say, what a dear Mother have
we lost! But rather,

1. Consider, What she has found; She has found that, which ^he has been
seeking all her days; ^he has found that God, that Christ, that Heaven, that
Bosom, and those embraces that she waited and longed for.

3. Consider, You will never be happy till you be where she is gone before you.

3. Consider, It is but a very little while and you shall see her again; as
Augustine comforted his Italica concerning her dead Husband; and let you, and
I, and all of us mind our work, and be upon our march toward Heaven, taking
our encouragement from the Text, where the Lords makes a proclamation of Grace,
I love them that love me; and those that seek me early, shall find me.

FINIS.
POSTCRIPT.
NOW though the Husband of our Deceased Friend has been somewhat averse from
publishing any thing of her own; yet being at last prevailed upon, I shall
commend to the Reader some particular Experiences of the Lords early dealing
with her soul, as I have found them written by her own hand.

First, I find this Position laid down by her in her own Book, viz. That very
many Scriptures do imply a possibility, that a believer may know that he is
elected of God, and that his election is of free grace through our Lord Jesus
Christ unto holiness, which shall end in glory, Phil. 2. 12, 13. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
2 Pet. 1. 10. with very many more, which I shall forbear to mention.

On which ground she proceeds to take a particular account of her own spiritual
estate, as follows.

IT has been much upon my thoughts to write some of those Scriptural
Experiences which I have found and received great comfort in from the Word of
God; being, as I judge, brought home to my soul, by the Spirit: And being now
past the Fortieth year of my age, not knowing how soon the Lord may call,
having always had a desire to be on my watch, that I may be found ready and
willing when ever my Lords time is (This Mercy I have been begging many years).

I can truly say, for some Months past I have had no rest in my spirit till I
began to write these things; and after fasting and prayer by my self, while in
doubt what to do, fearing the falsness of my own heart, I was encouraged by a
Sermon that I heard on these words in Psalm. 77. 1^, I will remember the works
of the Lord; surely I will remember thy wonders of old. Where was much pressed
the duty of Christians, To relate what God had done for them.

And out of the longing desire I have for the good of you my dear Little ones,
that you may value the precious Word of God wherein your Mother has found so
much comfort; you two, that is, SA. and MA. are the only remnant that God has
spared (and blessed be God that has left us as to this day a Berry or two):
You are the children of many prayers; the Lord grant you may be blessed with
all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus; and make you serviceable while you
live, and fit you for an inheritance among the Saints in light. In order to
that, I beg you in the name and fear of God, that you highly prize the Word of
God, and every Ordinance of Jesus Christ appointed in his Word: I would say
with David, Come my Children, hearken unto me, and I will tell you what he has
done for my soul, Psalm. 34. 11. Psalm. 66. 16. I have found the Word read and
preached, yea many a Scripture that I could not remember I read or heard
preached on; yet it has pleased my gracious God to send many a word to relieve
and comfort my soul: his word has been to me a convincing word, a reproving,
an instructing, and a very comforting word, and that my soul knows by great
experience.

I intend, if the Lord permit, and will send his Spirit to bring things to my
remembrance (without that I can do nothing) to set down the kindness of the
Lord from my Childhood, that was pleased to begin with me be-times. O the depth
of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, etc. Romans 11. 33, 34, 35,
36.

I can remember, while a Girl at school, about the age of nine or ten, I took
great delight in reading the stories in the Scripture, which did much affect
me. Afterward I was more taken with the New Testament, that did reveal more of
Christ to me. Then I began to pray as I was able. I do not remember, that I
ever did make use of any written or printed form.

The first sin that I remember troubled me, was telling my Father a lie; and it
had this aggravation with it, that he told me, If I would tell him how it was,
he would believe me rather than my Brothers and Sisters; and out of fear of
them, I said as they did; but with a very trembling heart, which much troubled
me some years after this, when I begun to hearken to the word Preached, where I
heard that sin set out.

I was much affected, and mourned much under the sense of sin; seeing a burden
in it, I desired to look after a remedy.

The first Minister that I remember, I hearkened to, was Mr. H. of Kensington,
where my Father was, in the summer. I did then begin to understand my state by
nature, how under the wrath and curse of God. Then I began to see my need of,
and did desire after Jesus Christ, being, as I thought then, willing to take
him on his own terms. Jesus Christ was then, as I thought, precious to me; and
being willing to understand my own case and condition, it pleased the Lord to
open my heart, to hearken diligently to the word Preached, wherein I found much
comfort, which engaged my heart unto the Lord, and made me unwilling to neglect
any duty which he commanded, or to commit any sin which the Lord forbids. This
I well remember to be the frame of my spirit near thirty years ago.

Hearing much, that it was the end of life to glorfie God, it made the earnest
breathings of my soul to be this; Oh, but how shall I glorify God!

After this, by a Providence I heard Mr. M. at Westminster, my Father being
there for some months; he was on that Scripture, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. Nevertheless
the heart of Asa was perfect all his days. I took great delight to hear him,
being often angry he had done so soon. My soul was much refreshed by the signs
and marks he gave of a perfect heart.

I did usually go from hearing, into my Chamber, and beg earnestly of God for a
perfect heart, in which as I thought, I saw more of value, than in any
enjoyments whatever; it was what did concern my spiritual estate.

I begun to be much troubled about, how such a poor sinful creature that was by
natnre under the wrath and curse of God, should escape this. I did believe as I
had been taught, it was by a Redeemer; I did also believe that there was no
name given under Heaven, by which I must be saved, but the Lord Christ Jesus. I
did also much hearken to the tenders of Christ in the Gospel, and how he
invited sinners to himself, and that he offered himself freely: this gave me
encouragement. But as I had read and heard it was a strait gate, and a narrow
way, few that find it: this made me very careful, lest I should be deceived.

And here came in the great question, But how shall I know that God in Christ
will accept me? For many are called, but few chosen; God has mercy on whom he
will, and it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy. This made me very diligent to hearken to marks and signs of
grace.

The first that I remember troubled me, was this; understanding it was the
common lot of all Gods People, through many afflictions to enter into heaven:
This did much trouble me at that time, and I was apt to think I should be able
to bear any thing that God would lay on me, so it might evidence to me the love
of God to my soul: but fool that I was! I judged too soon; for when it pleased
the Allwise God to try me, I quickly saw that my strength was but small, by my
fainting so much as I did in a day of adversity, which by many sad experiences
I can show, how unable to bear any thing when tried. However then I thought I
could bear any thing from with out, so all might be well within.

After this, by a Providence, I came to hear Mr. V. at St. Olaves; the first
Sermon that I heard him, was on these words, And all the things thou can
desire, are not to be compared unto her, Prove. 3. 15. Wherein was set out the
value of Jesus Christ above all that the world afforded, which very much
wrought on my heart, with great longing after this Christ; but still came this
question, How shall you know your interest? However, it pleased God so to bless
his Ministry to me, that usually I found my doubts so resolved, and my heart so
opened, that I went away with great joy and comfort; but for all this I was
perplexed with dreadful thoughts; after I had such peace and joy, then Satan
begun to work indeed: I, but is there such a God, and such a Christ to be
believed in? How to answer this temptation, I was at a great loss, and would
tell none what did ail me; I mourned much under it, and thought, I questioned
whether there was a God or no; yet then I did not neglect praying, and did as
it were pour out my soul daily unto God for victory, that he would not give me
up to an unbelieving heart, and of his free grace (who knew my soul in
adversity) by his word to send me relief.

Going to hear on a Lecture-day, he then Preached on these words, Hos. 2. 7. I
will go and return to my first husband, for then was it better with me than
now. It pleased God so to order it, that he gave great caution against such
thoughts, saying, Take heed, poor soul, when the Devil casts in such
thoughts: Is there a God, or a Christ? Take heed, for then Satan will have you
in his snare. This, with many other things was set home on my heart; then he
did convince me, by appealing to the Saints experience, Is it not better to
entertain good thoughts of God, and of Christ? was it not better with you then,
than now? The Lord gave me so to close in with the truth of that word, that I
had great joy and peace through believing, and went home full of comfort, that
God had so met me with a word. By that means it pleased the Lord to give check
to those unbelieving thoughts that so overcame me.

And yet to this day, I have great cause to mourn, for that unbelief I find in
my heart, notwithstanding all the experiences that God has given me; that
Scripture does often reprove me, Heb. 3. 12. Take heed, lest there be in any of
you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God.

After this I kept waiting at the posts of Wisdoms gate, that I might
understand the state of my soul, which was the one thing necessary that I
desired to look after; and finding by the word Preached, that the usual way and
method of God, was to strike the soul down, as he did them in the second of the
Acts, and the Jailer, and the like; this did raise in me great doubts what to
think of my self, because I could not find in my self such convictions of, and
humiliation for sin, as was pressed; and as to Original sin, it did not seem
much to affect me; this did bring me into great fears: However, I took that way
I had found comfort in, which was by prayer to the Lord, to bless his word to
me. Mr. V. was then on this Text, Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace are ye saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. To this I diligently
hearkened, and received great support, for all my objections seemed to be
answered; yet for all this I did as it were refuse to be comforted: he being on
signs of grace, closed the Text with these two marks: 1. A souls going on in a
way of duty, was a very hopeful sign. 2. But the Spirit of God was the only
infallible witness: the spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we
are the Children of God. The first did comfort me, the second did very much
trouble me; for I could not understand the meaning of the spirits witness,
which fearing lest I should be deceived in a matter of so great a concern, made
me give all diligence in reading and hearing, that my doubts might be resolved;
but as yet no rest in my spirit: and the more increased, being the time to go
into the Country, where usually our family was; this added much to my grief to
be taken off from hearing Mr. V.

I began to look more into the Scriptures, and to pick up whatever did come
suddenly into my mind; and it pleased God to cast in many that seemed to
comfort me, which I wrote down in that year.

But then came this question, These are marks and signs that belong to such and
such Saints in Scripture: But what is this to thee? These thoughts much cast me
down; what to do I knew not, but kept still praying and waiting on God, and I
found speedy relief, when I least thought of it. My Father being at
Hammersmith, I went constantly to hear there, and that Summer several
City-Ministers did supply the place; and among the rest, I heard Mr. G. on
these words, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life,
Joh. 6. 68. As I remember, this was his Observation, That soul that had once
given up it self to, could never bear a going off from Jesus Christ. His
arguing thus with a doubting soul; Try thy self; cannot you bear a leaving of
God? then doubt not that he will leave you: would you know whether God loves
you? consider, do you love God? for you could not love him, unless he loved you
first. By these and several arguments, the Lord was pleased so to set it home
on my heart; I may well forget the words, my heart being so full of peace and
joy through believing, 1 Pet. 1. that I cannot express it, being as I judge,
better felt than expressed; it did seem at that time to me, as if I had tasted of
that joy unspeakable and full of glory. I know not what to make of it, except
it were a sealing unto the day of redemption. I thought then my joy being so
great, I could willingly have gone out of the body, to have been with the Lord.
I remember I went home and fell on my knees, admiring the freeness of grace to
such a worm as I; crying out with the Apostle, O the depth! The sense of
free grace and rich mercy did much overcome me; the which, I hope, I shall
admire to all eternity: O the goodness of God! when I had again and again
refused to be comforted, yet he waited to be gracious to me! This I write and
speak, that God the Father, and God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost may have
the glory of their own work.

When under my doubts and fears, I seldom went to hear, but the word did seem
to speak unto me; and several Scriptures came suddenly to my mind, that did
reprove, and quiet, and comfort me, such as these, Why art thou cast down, O my
soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God, for I shall yet
praise him. This has been made good unto me; and that in the Psalm; In the
multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul; and that it
is good for me to draw near to God, Psalm. 73. 28. And that a day in thy courts
is better than a thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. And I can truly say as David did, I
had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in tents of
wickedness. Experienced I have that of Job, I have esteemed thy word more than
my necessary food, Job 23. 12. I have had great support from that Scripture,
All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6. 37. I have often thought of that Scripture
with joy, Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto me, and not
unto the world? for who makes thee differ from another? and what have thou
that thou did not receive? I have again and again in these words, and many
more, admired freeness of grace toward such a poor doubting soul as I was; I
doubt not, but he which has begun, will finish his own work on Sarah Lie.
Amen, Amen.

Thus far I have written a relation of the first 20 years of my age, what was
the great thing that most troubled me; it was, That I might have assurance of
the love of God, and a well-grounded hope of an interest in Christ; that what
the Lord Jesus had done and suffered, might be applied unto me; and having
hopes through grace, and rejoicing much in hopes of the glory of God, which
hope makes not ashamed.

After this I began to have great trials, as to the loss of my relations; my
Parents; that were very dear to me, both dying within four Months; this with
many more troubles much cast me down; yet to observe the Providence of God to
me, and how by his word he sent me relieving experiences, should I set it down
in order, would swell to a great Volume.

Only thus much I may speak to the praise of God, that when Father and Mother
forsook, God took me into his care, and has graciously provided for me, and
has given me an Agurs portion, which I begged of the Lord when but a Girl: I
can truly say, All the ways of the Lord are, and have been to me mercy and
truth: For this God I have chosen to be my God, for ever and ever; and I doubt
not, but he will be my guide even unto death.

And now, my dear Child, or Children, that shall read of this way and method
that the Lord did use in bringing me off from all things to himself, take heed,
pray, take heed you do not limit the holy One of Israel; nor tie up God to
this, or any way of working; the Lord works all things after the counsel of
his own will: but we are commanded to search our hearts, and try our ways, and
to examine our selves, and to give all diligence to make our calling and
election sure.

Look that the work of conversion be wrought, and leave time and way to the
All-wise God, that governs the world, and orders all things, to whom be glory
for ever and ever, Amen, and Amen.

All that I have written in these few sheets, is not out of any book but that
of my own conscience; no assister, but the spirit; and to no end, but that God
in all things may have glory, for I will not dare to speak of any of those
things which Christ has not wrought in me.

FINIS.
Books sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
ONe Hundred select Sermons, upon several occasions, by Tho. Horton, D. D.

Sermons on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Collossians, by Mr. J.
Daille, translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwin's, and Dr. John
Owens Epistles Recommendatory.

An Exposition of Christ's Temptation on Matthew. 4. and Peter's Sermon to
Cornelius; and circumspect walking. By Dr. Tho. Tailor.

A Practical Exposition on the third Chapter of the first Epistle of Saint Paul
to the Corinthians, with the Godly man's choice, on Psalm 4. v. 6, 7, 8. by
Anthony Burgess.

Forty six Sermons upon the whole eighth Chapter of the Epistle of the Apostle
Paul to the Romans. Both by Tho. Horton, D. D. late Minister of Saint Hellens.

An Analytical Exposition of Genesis, and of twenty three Chapters of Exodus,
by George Hughes, D. D.

Books 4to.
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinrock,
M. A.

A Discourse of Actual Providence, by John Collings, D. D.

An Exposition of the Five first Chapters of the Revelation of St. John, by
Charles Phelpes.

An Antidote against Quakerism, by Step. Scandret.

An Exposition on the five first Chapters of Ezekiel, with useful observations
thereupon, by William Greenhil.

The Gospel Covenant opened, by Pet. Bulkley.

Gods holy Mind touching matters Moral, which he uttered in ten Commandments:
Also, an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, by Edward Eston, B. D.

The Fiery-Jesuit, or an Historical Collection of the rise, increase, doctrines
and deeds of the Jesuits, exposed to view for the sake of London.

Horologiographia optica; Dyalling, universal and particular, speculative and
practical; together with a description of the Court of Arts, by a new Method,
by Sylvanus Morgan.

The Practical Divinity of the Papists discovered to be destructive to true
Religion, and men's souls, by J. Clarkson.

The Creatures goodness as they came out of Gods hand, and the good-mans mercy
to the bruit-creatures, in two Sermons, by Tho. Hodges, B. D.

Certain considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity amongst Protestants.

Mediocria, or the most plain and natural apprehensions which the Scripture
offers, concerning the great Doctrines of the Christian Religion: of Election,
Redemption, the Covenant, the Law and Gospel, and Perfection.

The vanity of man in his best estate, in a discourse on Psalm. 39. 5. at the
Funeral of the Lady Susanna Keate, by Richard Kidder, M. A.

The Morning-Lectures against Popery, or the principal Errors of the Church of
Rome detected and confuted in a Morning-Lecture* preached by several Ministers
of the Gospel in or near London.

Four useful discourses: (1) The art of improving a full and prosperous
condition for the glory of God; being an appendix to the art of Contentment in
three Sermons on Phil. 4. 12. (2) Christian submission, on 1 Samuel 3. 18. (3)
Christ a Christians life and death is gain, on Phil. 1. 21. (4) The Gospel of
peace sent to the sons of peace, in six Sermons, on Luke 10. 5, 6. by Jeremiah
Buroughs.

Dr. Wilds Letter of Thanks and Poems.

A new Copy-book of all sorts of useful hands.

The Saints privilege by dying, by Mr. Scot.

The Virtuous Daughter, a Funeral Sermon, by Mr. Brian.

The Miracle of Miracles, or Christ in our Nature: by Dr. Rich. Sibbs.


