THE LIFE Of Captain James Whitney.

Containing, his Most Remarkable Robberies And other Adventures, etc.

CONTINUED To his Execution near Smithfield Bars the first of February 1692/3.

Aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris and carcere dignum
Si vis esse aliquid. --
LONDON, Printed for A. R. near Temple Bar.

MEMOIRS OF Capt. James Whitney, etc.
TO Commence our History from the very Birth of our Hero, the Subject of our
present Treatise, he descended from very bumble Parentage, being born near
Hitchin: About the Age of 14 he was put Apprentice to a Butcher at Chesson, in
Hertfordshire; but before he had half served his time, being too Masterly for a
Servant, and having a Natural Aversion to so sordid a Profession, his higher
Thoughts led him to a contemptible Opinion of at least so slovenly an
Occupation of Throat-cutting, possibly fancying himself Capacitated for more
manly Attacks than upon Tame Heifers and blearing Sheep, insomuch that he got
loose from that Subjection by consent of all sides; and then Marrying a
Countrywoman thereabout, he took the Bear Inn in Chesson. In this Post his
Fortune was no ways answerable to his Expectation, our Hero found not half.
Trade enough to make the Pot Boil; till 'twas observed that once in four or
five Days a Jolly Troop of well Mounted Gallants would visit his House, and by
spending and Revelling at a very high rate, make a little amends for the slow
doings all the Week besides. 'Twas thought that this Jovial Gang laid the first
Foundation of his Ambition in Emulating those Gay Examples; and thence aspiring
to the Mercurial Life of a Rover and Son of Fortune. For very soon after, our
Spigget Merchant made his Abdication from Chesson, for farther Walks abroad,
and bolder Adventures. Now his poor Domestic Household Stuff, his Wife, as
troublesome Lumber was dropped at a poor cott near Enf^ild; where nevertheless,
though his now more elevated Gentleman Appetite disdained the Despicable course
Fare of an homely Mattimon^al Dish, as daily Feasting and Rioting upon the
variety of Gay Misses, and Lond^n Dames; however he took that care as now and
then to drop a Guinea in his Travels to Melancholy Spouse at home; and in
fine, to keep her House over her Head, and Bread in Cupboard. I am the more
short in this Part of our Sorry, as that several little Pamphlets, already
peeped abroad, have been more prolix in this part of his Life, and therefore I
shall not treat my Reader with so insipid a Repetition. Nor shall I make it my
Business to Enumerate every particular grosser Robbery, which affording little
Matter more than the rough Compliment of Stand and Deliver, would consequently
make but a dull and undivertising Narration, such as the Robbing the Lancashire
Carrier, his Butchery of the poor Horses at Mimms Wash, or any other of his
heavyer Feats of Activity, as the tiresome Pamphleteers upon the same Subject
have foolishly done before me. No, the design of this Treatise is only to
select those more Intriguing and more Comical Rencounters of his, of which kind
near four years Reign of his cannot want Variety; and thereby make my Reader a
more pleasant Entertainment.

To return therefore to our Captain, and shorten the Saturnine part of our
History. I shall only inform you that to qualify him for this resolute
Employment, he was one of the greatest Dear-stealers in the Nation, an
exercise highly in fashion with him in his very Prentiship; and a very good
Initiation to him for the Hazards and Hardiness of the Highway. In the
beginning of his performance for some considerable while he excercised his
Prowess in Robbing alone. But when Time had laid Honor and Reputation upon his
Back, a great many young Adventurers were proud of Listing under so brisk a
Leader, and the Jolly Troop increasing he acquired the honorable Title of
Capt. Whitney. And now notwithstanding I have sought and received the most
substantial Authority for the Credit and Truth of the following Narrations;
however, I have not tied my self up to that nicety, as to be too critical in
the exact order and succession of his Exploits, that difficult and needless
Information is more than our Subject requires, or my Reader may expect; as to
all other. Points we value our selves upon playing the Faithful Historian.

But before I proceed to our History, I shall only tell you that his first
Desertion of his Inn-keeping, was on this occasion: One of the Gang of his
high-flown Guests being Apprehended about four years since for suspicion of
Robbery, his kind Host was pleased to offer himself and another Man, a
pretended Londoner, to be his Bayl before Sir H -- G -- a worthy Justice of
Peace of Hartfordshire; but Sessions soon after Drawing on, the Principal and
both the Seconds, all three of the Birds were fairly flown, and from that day
the Captain was no farther seen or heard of thereabouts, but in the Fame and
Trumpets of his public Atcheivements, etc. And so to come to our Memoirs, etc.

Being one Evening alone upon the Parade near Newbery, he over took a good
Motherly neat Country woman, and a very Pretty young Creature her Daughter,
both indifferently Mounted, and in very deep Tears and Lamentation. The Captain
could not forbear looking with a great deal of Compassion upon the Sweetness
and Innocence of the young Damsel, especially in that wayling condition. And
hereupon (tho indeed already suspecting the Cause) he asked the occasion of so
much saucy sorrow, that durst give so violent a Disturbance to the sweet Eyes
of so pretty a Creature. The Mother, of the two, being the readier with an
Answer, immediately told him, That her self and her Daughter had been most
inhumanly Robbed of the sum of forty Pounds, that they were both utterly undone,
for that very Money was her Daughters Portion, the all in the whole World she
had to give her, and that to morrow she was to have been Married to a very
honest Countryman, a Mealman, near Newbery, that had long Wooed her; and that
now the Loss of the Money would not only undoubtedly break off the Match, but
likewise be the utter inevitable Ruin of her poor miserable Child. The
Captain, who presently smelt the Rat, and was partly satisfied which of his
Gang had done this Execution; nevertheless felt a great deal of tenderness for
the Afflicted Damsel, and endeavored to pacify both Mother and Daughter, by
telling them, That the Bridegroom intended, could never be such a Barbarian
sure, as to desert his contracted Bride for what was her Misfortune, not her
Fault. That considering the Beauty and Charms of so pretty a Creature he was
going to possess certainly so poor a Trifle as the inconsiderable Sum of Forty
Pounds, would break no squares, nor make any Bars to either of their Happiness.
Alas, replied the Mother, you are a Gentleman, and I suppose a Man of an
Estate, and forty Pounds may be little in yo^^ Pocket, but truly, it is a great
sum in a poor Countryman's Purse. A Pox of Money (replied the Captain,
interrupting her) does not he Love her? Ay, Sir, rep'yed the Young Virgin, He
does Love me, and heartily too, otherwise I should not be such a foolish
Creature as to Sacrifice my whole Life to a man that did not Love me. But,
alas, Sir, you Courteirs and Gallants have a great deal higher Notions of Love,
than poor Country Folks; Love with us must have Convenience go along with it.
And as much Beauty and Charms and other fine things, as you are pleased to lay
to my Charge, if my Portion be to seek, I may go seek for a Husband too. A
great deal of Discourse past more upon the same Subject, but to come to
Business, the Captain offered to Inn with them at Newberry, and wait the Lovers
intended Visit next Morning, (as he understood he was to meet 'em there) and
see what persuading Influence he could have over him, or at least what he would
propose toward making an Accommodation in this business. They accepted the
Gentleman's kind offer, tho with very little hopes of success from it, for they
were pretty well assured that a few kind pacyfying words, for that was the most
they could expect from a Stranger, would do bur little in so important a
Negotiation. As they traveled soberly toward the Town, the Captain desired
them to make no Noise of their Loss at the Inn, but hush their Misfortunes for
some Reasons he would give them there: As they traveled along the old woman
told him how they had been at London, to fetch this money from a Friend, in
whose hands it had been Lodged there for her Child's sake, and afterward gave
him a long Relation of her own Family and her Affairs, in which there was
nothing worth the Captains remembrance, except a very comical description of
the hard Labor she had with this poor Girl to bring her into the World, and
the harder Labor she had to Nurse her up.

When they came to the Inn, the matter was discussed over again, where 'twas
urged, that the Husband designed was a wary thrifty Man, and would no more
Marry a Beggar tho with all the Charms of an Arch Angel, then he would build
Churches. And in short, nothing but Ruin and Despair lay before 'em, for truly
the Girl did very much love him, and really had cause for it, for he had wooed
her 2 whole years together, with all the Passion and Faith imaginable, and more
to that purpose, etc. The Captain by this Time, mightily smitten with the young
Bride, very frankly offered to lay down the 40 l. which he had in Gold about
him, to make up the Portion, and reconcile the Lovers. They were ^oth astonished
at this surprising Goodness, and could not really believe him in Earnest in so
great a Favor, unless he had some hard Terms to join with it, and therein they
were not deceived, for truly the Captain in all the insinuating smooth Language
he could dress it, told 'em that he would not lend, but present her with the
Money, for to lend it, as that he might do, and force her Husband to pay it
afterward, would not only be a very great hardship upon him, but possibly make
a great fraction in their Peace, and raise an irreconcilable Fewd betwixt Man
and Wife; no, he would accommodate her on much gentler Terms; what Return he
expected, (as really he could not but be so much mercinary) was the happiness
of this one Nights Lodging with the Bride. The Mother and Daughter, as you may
well imagine, were highly sta^tled at such a Proposal, which the Capt. had no
ways to excuse, but by urging the strange hold that this young Creature, tho in
so short a Conversation, had got upon his Heart, with a 100 more passionate
Expressions upon so tender a theme to the same amorous tune. A very great flood
of Tears followed from the fair Eyes at so harsh a motion: but to draw matters
to a point, and omit the Arguments bandyed on both sides; the loss of a
Husband, the loss of a Fortune, and indeed all the poor Girls expectation in
this World, were such potent considerations, that in fine, to repair so fatal a
Breach, as this Gentleman's kind 40 l. would re-cement, the Mothers heart
beginning to mollysy first, she could not, though with much Regret, but yield.
And truly to soften the Daughter, after some small reflections upon the
Gentleman's hard terms, she used a Motherly Authority, to induce her Daughter to
Compliance; it is true, indeed she objected, that 'twas a little severe to rob a
poor longing Bridearoom of an expected Virginity; yet considering that means
might be used to make him wholly unsensible of his Loss, what the Eye saw not
the Heart rued not; besides the hardship and Calamity that lay upon her must
oblige her to a Consent, which would be a great lessening to her Fault, under
her necessity that forced it. The Capt. too exercised his softning Talent, and
amongst other pressing Arguments, he told the young Girl 'twas not so hanious a
fault as perhaps she fancied it. The time was when by the custom of some
Tenures in some Countries the Lords of the Manor claimed the first Night with
the Bride, and that with the very Husbands consent, but this gentler Night
carried with silence and secresy, would be a ten times easier and more venial
Trespass At last, the Fort being won, it was concluded, (after a splendid
Supper at the Capt's Charge, in which, a cheaful Glass of Wine had perhaps a
little helped forwards,) that their Bed-chambers being chosen next Room to each
other, the Mother should leave the door a-jar on purpose for the Captain's
admission, and then retire her self to his bed chamber, for the Captain's
Accommodation with the Daughter. The Plot thus laid, I dare not recount the
Sweets the Capt. tasted at the first gathering of such unblown Roses; it is
enough to tell you, that the Capt. applied that substantial Eloquence to his
sweet Bedfellow, as softened infinitely more than all the ver^al Rhetoric he
had used before; insomuch that not altogether so much repining at the Captain's
hard Terms (as we called 'em before) she had not quite so resenting a thought
of her Bridegroom's Hardship, nay truly, before morning (such miraculous
operation had one short night wrought) that she could not forbear, amongst
other Endearments, to tell her bed-mate, That truly her Bridegroom (as much as
we told you she loved him before) was but an ordinary Countryman, and truly she
could wish he were but half so sweet a Person as himself; but that was a
happiness too high for a poor Country Girls Ambition, etc. How ravishingly the
Capt. spent his dear Night, may be better guest than told. Let it suffice, he
was so pleased with his Bedfellow, that he threw in a Five Pound Piece of Gold
to the 40 before stipulated.

Early in the morning the Bridegroom, and some few friends attended the
supposed Virgin Bride, and amongst many Country Jokes, some of his friends were
pleased to droll upon the hard Nights Labor he must expect, little imagining
that the Capt. had taken that Toil off his hands. The Bride was pleased to
recommend the Capt. to her Husband's Acquaintance, telling him, that she had
fortunately met a Gentleman that proved to be a Cousin of hers, one Mrs. such a
one, his second Cousin, being a first Cousin to a third Cousin of hers, Mary
such a one, or some such kind of Altiance between 'em; insomuch that several
mutual Compliments past upon the Claiming Kin to so Honorable a Relation. To
conclude, the Capt's Affairs not permitting him to make one at the Wedding, tho
much invited, all the fair Bride at parting could do, was to tell him, her
husband's house was at such a Place, and to make her husband Join with her in
the same request, etc. to conjure him, whenever he traveled that way, to make
their house his home; and so they shook hands, and kissed, not without a falling
Tear, a Pearl bestowed upon the Capt. at parting, from the fair Bride, in
spite of all her endeavors to conceal it.

This Adventure not ending here, it happened that about Ten Months after, the
Capt. in his Travels that way, made bold to accept of the Invitation aforesaid,
and made the New Couple a Visit at their house near Newberry. Now it fell out
that the poor woman was then in the Straw, having lain in about 3 Weeks. Here
was great Joy of all hands for their long looked for Gentle Cousen, more
particularly on the female side. The husband (it being nigh Supper-time)
presently kills a couple of the fattest Fowls, and makes preparations for an
extraordinary Entertainment; but the good Lady not being satisfied with those
Regales the house could afford, besought her dear Spouse to take a Walk to a
Neighboring Miller's, something above half a Mile off, for a brace of Trouts.
The good man offered to send his Servant; but the good woman (for Reasons that
shall be nameless) thought her husband the properest messenger; telling him,
that his Man was such a Blockhead he knew not a Fish in season from one out of
it. No, she was resolved none should manage a Dish for her Couzen's
Entertainment but himself. When the good man was upon the march for the Fish,
the good Dame, who had her Nets to lay, was extremely fond of her Visitant;
nay, she could not forbear telling him, that the thumping Boy she showed him in
the Cradle, was his own proper flesh and blood; desiring him to number back
Weeks and Days to that dear Night with him at Newberry, and he should find the
Account exactly agreeing: besides, she was pleased, amongst a great many
amorous Caresses, to let him know, she tasted those blisses that Night which
were never equaled since, intimating, that there was not Manhood enough at
home to go to the making of so Lusty a Bantling. This Conversation, assisted by
the husband's absence, made way for some nearer and dearer familiarity; and
tho, it is true, a green woman, yet the Capt. not valuing colors, and the Lady
trusting to the strength of her Constitution, gave him the Invitation of laying
a foundation for a New Scion from the same fruitful Stock. Before the husband's
Return, being all alone with the Capt. and being now a little hardier
Love-Combitant than in her first Engagement with him, she laid heads together
with him for his company the whole night with her; the design being much
favored by the dismission of her Nurse the day before to a new Mrs. Now all
things convenient, and the Guest-Room for Lodging of Strangers being a lower
Parlour, and lying beyond her husband's bed-room, through which he must pass,
she durst not advise him to come and steal that way up to her Chamber, as being
too dangerous a hazard. Upon mature result, it came to this conclusion, that
the Captain having a small backdoor into the Yard from his Chamber, and the
Room next to hers was a kind of Granary, into which her husband craned up all
his Sacks of Meal, etc. it was agreed he should, after the whole house was in
bed, steal out to the Crane, and she would draw him up (being a matter not
beyond her strength) into the Granary, and so take him to bed with her.

After this Project was laid, the Husband returned with a Brace and an half of
good Trouts, which, together with some other Provisions, made a sumptuous
Banquet. During Supper-time, amongst other discourse in praise of the Trouts,
the Captain was pleased to say, he was a piece of a Fisherman himself, but all
the Trouts he took were with tickling; which the smiling Young Dame was pleased
to say, was a very pretty way of fish catching. Bed time drawing on, and the
Capt. being introduced to the Parlour, to his intended Lodging, he undrest
himself for Bed; but as soon as by all signs he found all fast, he slipped on his
Coat, Breeches and Shoes only, and softly unbolting the back door. went to the
Crane, where the kind Lady above soon hoysted him up; and nothing now but a
clear Stage, and from him no Favor, etc. Thus they continued all night, till a
glimmering of day began to appear. But as a spightful piece of Ill Luck, the
poor husband feasting a little too heartily in the Entertainment of his Cousen,
had a necessity to go to the backside for a certain occasion. From whence
returning, he spied the Parlour open, at which a little surpised, he made bold
to peep into the Captain's Room, where by the small dawn of day he plainly
perceived the bed empty, seeing only the Hat, Wig, and some other of the Capt's
Accoutrements remaining on the Table. In some sudden start hereat, led by an
unhappy haste, he went up Sta^rs in some Precipitation, to discourse his dear
Sp^u^e upon the Subject of his surprise. Just at this minute it fell out that
the Lovers very carefully were upon drawing off, and the Lady at the Crane just
letting him down, when the husband bolting in upon her, she gave a great sh^iek
and let the Crane go, and the Capt. drop; and he being at that time out of the
window, and within 5 or 6 foot of the ground, the suddenness of the fall made a
noise, and occasioned the husband to cry, What Is that? but she, after her
shreik, wisely flinging her Arms round her husband's neck, (as if the Effect of
her Fright) held him in that close hug so long till the Capt. had time to
recover his chamber. The hu^band mightily wondered at finding his wife in such
an unwomanly exercise as handing of Cranes; but she, ready provided with an
answer, told him, that such a motherly woman had told her it was for her
health, and that she had practiced it for above a week together; which
fatisfi'd the credulous husband; and in answer to the shreik she made, 'twas
occasioned she said, by her start at the sudden encounter of her husband at
that unseasonable hour. All matters thus adjusted, the hour of up-rising drew
on, and the Capt. complaining of the new Cider he had drank overplentifully
last night, cunningly gave his host some sort of hints, that it had opened more
back-doors than one and so left him to believe, that his missing him from his
bed proceeded from the very same occasion of his own over-early rising in the
Morning; and consequently hushed all farther curiosity; insomuch that nothing
but Mirth attended a very cheerful bre^kfast. So the Capt. having his Belly
well filled, and possibly the good Dame hers so too, parting drew on, and so
making a small Oblation of a Broad Price, to buy the Boy a Coral, he took his
Leave of his kind Landlord and kinder Landlady.

Another comical Adventure of his: He over-took a Jacobite Captain bound
toward London, pretty well mounted (en Cavalier) with a good Sword, a brace of
Pistols, and other suitable Habilements; the Captain, who never feared a single
Adversary though never so martially accoutred (and perhaps had never less
occasion than here) was pleased fairly to bid him Stand and Deliver: Stand and
Deliver, dear Joy, replied the poor Teague (being indeed a true Hero of the
Bogland-breed) letting fall his Bridle upon his Horse-neck, both Eyes and Hands
up-lifted, and almost Thunderstruck with two such terrible hard Words; and what
must ee deliver and please thy sweet Face! Your Purse, you Dog (answered the
Captain.) My Purse, noble Shoul; I profess indeed ee have a Purse, and dat
Purse have 20 Guinea's in the Belly of it; but by my Shalvation, dear Joy, if
dou do taake it from me (as by St. Patrick I hope dou wilt not) me self and
three other noble Eerish Captains more, must be force to make starve for three
whole Mont together; ford is 20 Guinea is de whole Sum dat ee have gather from
de noble Friend in de Country, to keep my shelf and de other three to buy
Bread, and Drink, and Snush, for all five of us, from Whitsontide to Christmas,
dat be three whole long Winter Mont: And dat dou may believe, sweet Colonel,
dat de poor Eerish Captain do scorn to make Lie upon thee sweet Faace, look
here be de Letter, if dou be Scholar to make read, dat vill tell thee de Trute
and the whole Trute, dat dis 20 Guinea be de noble Bounty of honorable Friends
and Cousins in de Country, dat have make Charity to keep me own self and three
Brother Captains from make starve. And so (says the Captain) belike you and your
Irish Brethren have been soliciting your kind Patrons and Benefactors, the
Country Jacobites, and they have chosen you for their Commissary general to
raise Contributions. By St. Patrick, dear Joy, dou have de deep Sense and de
great Shole, and dou speak like de Oracle and de Prophet: Ara, Joy, ee had de
great Grannum dat was Hang for de great Witch, and by Creese she had not half
de great Brain-piece as dou have: Verily, as thou say, I have been de
Commishary sheneral, and have raise dis poor 20 Guinea -- Damn your wild Irish
Gibberish, replied the Captain, and deliver your 20 Guinea's with a Pox to you,
and go and beg more like a Scoundrel, or rob like a Gentlemen as I do; what a
Plague are you and your Brother Bogtrotters to me? In short, the poor O hone
was forced to dismantle the whole three Months Fortification and Provision; but
with so doleful and rueful a Countenance, that the Captain could not forbear
smiling at the extraordinariness of the Figure; and being a little diverted
with the odd Phys of the Fellow, and the lamentable Moan he made for his Loss,
he rode along with him, and examined him how he came to be a Captain? By my
Showl, dear Joy, (quoth Teague) ee will tell dee de whole Story of all me
Renown and Glory, if dou vill promise to make Mercy and Compassion upon me.
Well, well (says the Captain) tell me the Story first, and trust to my mercy
afterward, as I find you deserve it. Hereupon the poor Teague, very formally
tells him, That in the beginning of his dear Master King James his Reign, he
came over with a great many hundred more of his dear Countrymen, in those
blessed days of Irish Honor and Preferment; that truly having a great mind to
speak a word to his Majesty for a Captains Plaace, a wicked Heretic English
Man, had the Impudence to ask him Half a Crown to write a Petition for him; but
truly, Money being hard with him, he did buy a white Sheet of gilt Paaper for a
Halfpenny, and he did present it to his Majesty's Graash at St. James his
Park, upon his Knee; and did tell his Majesty ^ere was de Paper for de Petition
for de Captain's Place in de Irish Army: And that his English Majesty's Grace
being very kind and generous, and knowing his want and occasion as well as
himself, did order a Letter to his Irish Majesty's Grace Tyrconnel (for he, God
bless him, had Half a Crown to pay for Writing though poor Teague had not) and
hereupon he did kiss his Royal Hand, and return to his own Country; and his
Graace Tyrconnel did give him a Commission, and dub him a Captain. Here, in
sine, he run on at a high Rate, how many Heroic Feats he had performed, how
many Men, Captains and Colonels, he had killed with his own Hand, and what
extraordinary Proofs of Manhood he had shown in all the Battles from before
Londonderry to Agrim. Our Captain, whose Patience almost tired, having heard
him out with a seeming Admiration of so renowned a Commander, could not forbear
throwing in this unlucky Question; Prithee, dear Captain, says be, if thou have
been in so many Skirmishes, and Battles, and Sieges, and behaved thy self in
all of 'em with such signal Testimonials of thy undaunted Valor; how comes it
about, that with a good Horse under thee, a pair of Pistols before thee, and
all things answerable, thou have so tamely and coldly suffered one single Man,
no better provided than thy self, to rob thee of all thou have in the World, to
keep thee from starving, without the least dispute or resistance for so
important a Preservation? Alas, dear Joy, replies Teague, dou do not know de
great occasion dat tie up my Arm; for I have made solemn Vow and Oat upon de
Virgin Psalter, dat I will never draw Sword nor handle Weapon, till that blessed
day when my great Master set Foot again upon English Ground. Oh, is it so! Says
the Captain, then you have sworn you will never fight till King James's Return;
and therefore, in complaisance to that religious loyal Oath, you stood still to
be robbed. By St. Patrick, and de Devil taake me, so I did (cries Teague.) Oh
dear Joy, dou do not know de Honor and Conscience of an Oat; ee would not
break my Oat for ten thousand Worlds: No, I perceive so (replies the Captain.)
To conclude, the Captain being highly and humbly pressed, by his Jacobite
Petitioner, for a little pity and mercy upon his great Poverty, at last he was
so molifyed, that he resolved he would not starve four Men by one Robbery, and
so e'ne returned him his Purse and Guinea's again. Poor Teague was so highly
transported at this unexpected Favor, that he gave him a hundred Prayers; but
above all, besought him to take care of his sweet Life, and not fall into the
Heretic Hands of Law, till his great Master came to his Crown again; which
would be as soon as ever King Lewis could land him on Shore, and lead him to
Whitehall; and then if he had committed ten thousand Robberies, this one favor
to poor Teague, should seal him a Pardon for 'em all.

Our Captain, more especially in the beginning of his Travels, was extreme
hardy, and would daily venture into several Companies in all Parts of the Town,
but chiefly in the Out-parts, as Bishopsgate-street, Minories, Spittle-fields,
etc. and was many times his own Intelligencer where to set a good Prize,
through his discovery which way Money traveled, and where a lumping Booty was
to be gotten. He happened one Evening to drink a Glass of Wine with an old
Fellow, formerly an Alderman of the City of Durham, and pretty strong in
Pocket; the Captain being that time in a modest black Suit, professed himself a
piece of a Doctor of Physic, whereupon the Alderman, in the mirth of his brisk
Cups, began to unbosome some little part of his Soul, and tell him, He had made
an Assignation with a very pretty young Girl, and the Morrow-night was to Bed
with her all night; but, truly, being within a Year or two of Threescore, and
under the Rose, a pretty Weather-beaten Fornicator, really he was afraid he
should not hold out, to perform answerable to his desire in the Enjoyment of so
sweet a Creature; and, therefore, if 'twere possible for him to get any
strengthening Cordial to invigorate Nature, and make him a little brisk for that
one dear night, he would grutch no Reward to the Ingenious Artist that would
accommodate him with such a favor. The Captain immediately engaged to serve
him in it, and that he would prepare him a Bolus, and send it him to
Morrow-morning, that should make him an absolute Boy of 22, so vigorous a
Lover, etc. and indeed make him perform Wonders; that he had had experience of
the Preparation already, and had gotten good Gold by it. This generous Promise
extremely inliven'd the old Spark, who paying the whole Shot, about one in the
morning they shook Hands, and parted, with a Promise of a Gratuity, according
to the Skill of his Doctor, and the Merit of his Medicine. Accordingly, the
Captain makes use of a Quack, a Friend of his, and sends him in the morning a
Pot of Electuary, with Directions to take the quantity of a large Walnut, about
3 in the Afternoon, and about Bedtime he should find the Effects desired to
his Hearts content. The night after the Doctor and Patient, about the hour of
9, had agreed to meet at the same Tavern, and there the Alderman was to make
him a Largess of acknowledgment, proportionable to the Raptures he tasted in
the soft Arms of his sweet Bedfellow, and the prowess and puissance he had
received from his inspiring Electuary. They both met at the hour precisely, and
our new Doctor saluting his Patient, and inquiring how Matters stood with him?
Stood! with a Pox, replies the Alderman. Ay Friend, how and how did thou
perform? How many dear Bouts old Boy? Was it not rare Physic? Did I not tell
you what Miracles it would work? Hold a little (quoth Alderman) fair and
softly: I tell you and your Doctorship, never was Man so abused as I have been;
Electuary in the Devil's Name! If this be your Cordial, with a vengeance? Why
how no Man, replies the Doctor, sure you do but banter with me; I Will stand by
my Electuary to the last Penny of my Estate, and answer the Composition to the
whole College of Physicians; and therefore prithee speak plain, out with it
Man; what Effects, what Operation, old Lad? Operation! (quoth Alderman) with a
piteous mortifyed Look. Ay Friend, replied the Captain, Operation. It Is
impossible that such a Preparation should fail; and therefore to make no Secret
with thy Bodily Confessor, but in the Name of soft Love and sweet Lechery, how
and how my Heart of Oak? In short, after much pressing from his importunate
Quack, to know the full force and effects, what it had done, and how it had
wrought, etc. at last, after a very deep Sigh, this doleful Answer broke out.
Only three Stools (quoth Alderman) that is all. Stools, replied the Captain,
hardly holding his Countenance at so comical an Answer. Lord, Sir, it is
impossible. Ay, Stools, quoth the Alderman, nothing in the whole World, but
three wicked filthy Stools; a Plague of your beastly Physic. The Captain
seemed very much concerned (hardly crediting the Relation) at such an
unexpected Operation; and therefore desired the Alderman to tell him, how and
when, and how much he took of it. So that the Alderman made answer, that truly
he took it about the Hour of Three, according to prescription; and that being
resolved not to fail in the Dose, but lay a more than ordinary Foundation for
his intended Felicity, as he had ordered the quantity of one Walnut, to make
sure work, he had taken the quantity of two. Ounds, Man, replied the Captain,
you spoiled all; two Doses at once! Death, I wonder it had not killed you;
three Stools! Nay, it is well you come off so well. Would any, but a Madman,
outrun his Recipe! and be wiser than his Doctor! and so make Poison of his
Physic. In fine, the Captain carried on the Rebuke with a very high Hand, and
reprimanded his Patient's Folly and Frenzy at no small rate, insomuch that the
Alderman cried Peccavi, imputed his Misfortune to his own Indiscretion, and the
Doctor recovered his Reputation as fair and whole again as his Heart could
wish. And now the poor lamenting Alderman unbosoming his whole Load of Sorrow,
told him, how the contrary Effects of his Bolus had utterly disabled him from
tasting any Delights at all with his young Bedfellow; nay, what was worst of
all, it being his mischance to be locked up in the Room, together with her, and
the Key in another Body's hand, not able to get out, he was forced to make use
of the Chamber Pot, and that, as the Devil would have it, not large enough for
the treble Discharge aforesaid, he was compelled to make use of the Chimney for
disposing the Overplus, to his great shame and confusion, being not only a most
impotent, but likewise a most unsavory Bedfellow. And all he could do to
excuse his Calamity, was by telling the whole naked Truth to the poor defeated
Creature, and laying the whole Fault upon the Villainy of the Physician. That
the Girl was kindly pleased (much more than he deserved) to commiserate rather
than laugh at him, and that truly having atoned for his Miscarriage by a brace
of Jacobusses next Morning, he had made a new Contract with her, and sent her
down to a Lodging at North-hall, whether himself was next Morning to follow
her, and there to enjoy her for the whole Waterseason. The Captain offered his
Service of waiting him thither, having (as he told him) a long Inclination to a
little Diversion at those Wells, which the Alderman kindly embraced; whether
lovingly letting out together early next Morning, the Doctor, at a convenient
opportunity in the Road, was pleased to give his Patient a gentle Purgation of
about fifty odd Pounds, and some other small Toys about him, as a Ring, Watch,
etc. and so left the poor Limberham as feeble in Purse as before in Back, to
his best Entertainment of his North hull Bona Roba.

Another no less divertive Narrative we have to make you, viz. That one
Evening, according to his customary hardiness of Company-keeping, he fell into
the Society of three or four sturdy Jacobites of good Quality and Fashion. One
of which a Gentleman of a considerable Estate, and a little above midway,
between 20 and 30 Years old, lay under an obligation of never cutting his
Beard, till K. James returned; and having commenced his Oath as far since as
the first day of Abdication, etc. and being naturally a handsome black Man, his
overgrown, Raven-colour'd Excrescence in so many Years, unhappily brindled with
a mixture of white, had reached down almost to his Waste, and perhaps altogether
was not so modish nor so beauish a Figure, as otherwise so accomplished a
Gentleman might have made. Nevertheless his high Adoration for his old Master,
and his Veneration for the Solemness of his Vow superseded all other
Considerations, and no Advice nor Interest whatever could prevail with our
resolute Nazareen to part with the least Twig from so spreading a Bush. Nay, as
ill luck would have it, the Gentleman was at that time fallen desperately in
Love with a young and most beautiful Lady, who had no dislike to his Person,
nor any disrelish to his Addresses, only she utterly refused to marry him, till
he would yield to sacrifice that unweildy Crabnest, and bring a smooth Chin to
her soft Embraces. In fine, his Beard being the only Bar to his Felicity, the
Consummation, he declared, was wholly obstructed on no other account. This
Subject being a great part of the present Conversation, some of the Company
were pleased to applaud his Masculine Resolution, in keeping firm to his Loyal
Vow, whatever the Effeminate Whispers of Love might persuade to the contrary.
Others were a little more inclining to the Lady's Party, and could not but
approve her Resolution in not exposing her soft Lips and smooth Cheeks to such
rude and barbarous Bristles. The Gentleman for his part avowed, that he could
half hang or drown to possess so sweet a Creature, nevertheless could no ways
recede from his Oath; and if she persisted wholly inexorable, whatever his
Sufferings would prove, he must continue deaf, even to the least thought of
violation of so solemn an Engagement. In fine, as fast and as deep as the Lady
was in his Heart, his Beard was as fast rooted too; and nothing but the Return
of his great Master, with the bright Sword in his Hand, should ever bring the
gentle Razour to his Chin.

Many Arguments were bandied round amongst this jolly Company, and a great
Contest of Love and Honor, betwixt Beard and Mistress, was no small piece of
the Entertainment, and amongst the many Bumpers to the old Master, and the
young Lady, a good Health to the honorable Beard, made one or two cheerful
Glasses go round extraordinary. The Captain being as high a Jacobite as the
best of them, took occasion highly to commiserate the Gentleman's unhappiness
in the strange obstinacy of his fair Adored; for that was the best Name he
could give to her unreasonable Denials, of so accomplished a Gentleman, on so
trivial an Account. What the Devil must the Women in some parts of the World do
for Husbands, if the Objection of a Beard were a sufficient refusal? Nay, what
must all our great Grand-mothers here in England have done in the old Days of
Gravity, when thicker Chins and thinner Foretops were in fashion? Some Beard,
not all Perriwig; a little lower Tire, not all upper Tire, Curl and Friz. For
his part, he did not doubt but if he had the Honor of seeing this fair Lady,
but he should be so powerful an Orator in his behalf, as to reduce her to
reason, and make an entire Accommodation in the Affair: Nay, something (he
proceeded) whispered him, that he was certainly born to do the Gentleman some
service in this Business, and undoubtedly obtain him his Lady. The Gentleman
could not but return him his hearty thanks for the Zeal he expressed in his
behalf, and that truly since all Intercession and Eloquence had hitherto proved
unsuccessful, nevertheless, if he pleased to try his abler Rhetoric in the
matter, he should be proud of his good Company at the Lady's at Dinner to
Morrow, she living not above a dozen Miles out of Town, and whither an Hour and
a half's riding in the cool of the Morning would bring 'em so early Visitants
as to nick the Lady's uprising. Hands being shook upon it, and the next
Morning's loving Journey accordingly concluded, the Company soon after broke
up, and the Captain failed not to awake the Gentleman out of his Bed next
Morning, and to call our amorous Knight Errant for Mount and Away. The
Gentleman, on his side, took no Servant with him, only the Captain had his
Friend, a Gentleman who had occasion of traveling that way, and would make one
to increase the good Company. So all three merrily jogging on, Convenience soon
offered, when the Captain desiring to search the Depth of the Gentleman's
Pocket, the Gentleman, though otherwise pretty brisk, yet well remembering, that
two to one, etc. was an old Proverb, was forced peaceably to unhorse, and
surrender at discretion, and discumber his Pocket of a Gold-Watch, and about
half a hundred Yellow-Boys, being at that time his whole Cargo. Nay, says the
Captain, since you have so very generously resigned, though, perhaps, I may
have surpised you in this unexpected Treatment, nevertheless I ^^all be as big
as my Promise in serving you with your Mistress, a Compensation that shall
overpay these inconsiderable Trifles: And therefore, Tom, (says he) turning to
his Comrade, Where are the Snippers? Here, Master, replies his Mate, pulling
out of his Pocket a large Pair of Barber's Scissors. To come to the point, They
over-master'd the poor Gentleman, and getting both upon him, they held him down
by main force, till Tom made a hard shift to snip off entirely just one side of
his Beard, close to his Face; then giving him fair leave to rise, the Captain
addressed himself in this manner: Look you, Sir, says he, here is Love and Honor
reconciled. You have sworn, you would never consent to cut your Beard, till K.
J. returned; and now thank Heaven for raising you those Friends that have cut
it without your consent. You have sworn you will wear a Beard, Right; but you
have not sworn you will wear one side of one, when t'other's off. Your Mistress
has sworn, she will not marry you with your Beard on; and I Will be sworn you
have but half a Beard on to trouble her, and when you have sworn the next kind
Barber you meet to take the other half off, you may be fairly sworn yourself to
live and die her ever faithful Servant; and both your old Master and young
Mistress have a true and loyal Vassal of you, with neither Oath broken on one
side, nor Love lost of the other: And so pray present my humble Service to your
fair Bride, for now I may safely call her so, and rest contented that your two
humble Servants here are the best Cutbeards you ever met with, and have as
honestly earned and deserved your Watch and the few paltry Guinea's you have
paid us, as a Thief deserves a Halter.

The Gentleman how unkindly soever he might resent this Insult and Raillery
upon him, however partly as overpowered, but chiefly satisfied in the plain
Truth of the case, (how drollingly soever the Captain had worded it,) could not
forbear, after two or three hearty Oaths, telling the Captain, that By G -- he
was an honest fellow and had done his work for him; And therefore since he had
found out so dexterous a Dispensation to his long troublesome vow, and opened
so fair a path to his Mrs's Arms upon the Honor of a Gentleman he truly
forgave him all he had took from him; To which were it twice as much he was
heartily welcome; And to show him he was so, he kindly invited him to his
Wedding, binding it with an hundred Oaths that not a Hair of his Head should
suffer, if he would grant him that favor of his Company; The Captain seeing
him so heartily press it, gave him as solemn a promise that he would make one
at the Nuptials, and accordingly agreed that he should give him notice of the
day by a Penny Post Letter left in such a name at such a House in London. 'Twas
not ten days after, before the inviting Letter came, and the Day appointed, the
Nuptials to be celebrated at his own Seat about 30 Miles from London. In the
Afternoon about two hours after the Bridal Feast, a jolly Troop of about half a
score of Sparks well mounted, all with half Vizords Lighted at the Gentleman's
Gate, and desired admission as Masquers to entertain the Bride and Bridegroom,
which was immediately granted, and they all very ceremoniously introduced. The
Captain took the Bridegroom aside and discovered his Face, telling him he had
kept his word, but withal desiring his secrecy, at the same time assuring him,
that though the rest of his Gang were all Brothers of his own Mystery, yet as
this Visit was purely Honor and Friendship, neither himself nor any one of his
Honorable Guests, should suffer the least farthing either going or coming, by
himself or any one of his small Troop. The Gentleman no ways distrusting his
Fidelity, the best half of the Night was past in Dancing, Feasting and
Revelling, the Masqueraders performing in all points to Admiration, and gaining
as far upon all the uningaged Female Hearts in the Company, as nimble Heels and
half Faces could push toward a Conquest. When the Bride, not till near
Cock-crowing, could get loose, stolen out by her kind Bridemaids, to the envied
felicity of a Nuptial Bed, and the brisk now smooth-chind Lover was preparing
to follow her, the Captain took his leave being extremely carest by his
Honorable Host.

About three months after the Captain had set a Booty of two hundred pound,
being some part of the Pelf of an Overgrown Miser traveling up with it to
London in the Banbury Stage Coach. It happened that the Coach was full, having
five Women besides Sir Mammon himself in it, who infinitely disobliged his
Female Fellow Travelers by smoking all the way a sort of a Bermudas Funk,
strong and cheap, and though highly courted to some moderation in his Mundungo,
yet being an ill natured old chuff, and past the Age of Complaisance, not all
the entreaties of the Fair Sex could prevail, insomuch that he had almost
poisoned or at least half choked them. But the Captain destined for their
Deliverance with 3 or 4 more of his Retinue, riding up to the Coach desired the
favor of easing the Coach-box of two hundred pound burden. The old Muckworm
as (you may imagine) in no small consternation at this mortal Alarm, so
frighted that 'twas hard to distinguish which end of him stunk worst; the
Ladies were a little startled at first, but the Captain soon dissipated their
fears by professing all the kindness and civility they could desire, being
indeed always generous to that Sex. However after he had uncased our fat old
Fox he spyed a Diamond Ring upon one of the Ladies Fingers, and a Necklace of
Pearl upon another Neck, both which he was pleased to request, which were
accordingly granted him; only the young Miss from whom he took the Necklace
being not above thirteen years old fell into a desperate fit of crying for the
Loss of her Necklace, which the Captain perceiving, in kind pity returned it
her again; and not to be partial in his favors was going to do the like by the
Lady from whom he took the Ring, making her a very courteous Complement
beseeching the whole fair Companies Pardon, avowing that soft Sex should have
no reason to complain of Captain Whitney, whatever murmurs the old Hunk, the
gruff Sir with them might conceive against him.

The Lady at the name of Whitney utterly refused the return of her Ring,
desiring him to wear it for her sake, telling him that he had helped her to the
best Husband in Christendom, and so small a present was the least
Acknowledgment of so signal an Obligation, desiring him withal to accept of a
Glass of Aqua Mirabilis, so drinking to him out of a Glass Bottle his own
Health, not forgetting his Man Tom, the best mad Shaver in the three Kingdoms;
the Captain pledged her, and dealt the Ladies Health round amongst his Brothers
of the Pad, and so took his leave, having at least so far obliged them all,
that the Old Tobacco-monger had broken his Pipe for madness at the loss of his
Money, and this last sad Whiff had put him so out of all his patience, or
thoughts of Smoking, that the Air began a little to clear again amongst 'em;
But of all his Adventures this following is perhaps the boldest and bravest.
Amongst his Intelligencers he had been advertised of seven hundred Guineas that
a person of very high Quality, and a great Cock-fighter, had taken up, and such
a day was to move home with them about thirty Miles Westward, and accordingly a
substantial Attaque was resolved upon at such a Post in the Road; but as
matters fell out, a Maggot and a Glass extraordinary in the Gentleman's Head
mounted him a day sooner than resolved, insomuch that the Captain was defeated
of the Prize, his whole Gang being over-reacht by coming a day after the Fair,
and the Gentleman reaching Harbor with the Cargo safe within Walls and
Sanctuary. This Disappointment vexed the Captain to the Soul, but resolved not
to give over the Game as desperate as it seemed, he at last invented one of the
most politic and hardiest Stratagems that possibly was ever undertaken; which
take as follows.

The Gentleman one day soon after, as customary with him, taking his Horse,
(without any Ceremony of Retinue or Servants) to Dine with another
Countrey-Gentleman about half a dozen Miles off, in the Evening returning on
the Road, and within two Miles of home, he was assaulted by five High-waymen,
who led him about six or seven Pole aside into a By-Lane, but not out of sight
of the Road; there they dismounted him, took away his Watch, and that little
Money he had about him, and not contented with that, stripped him of his Coat,
Hat, and embroidered Wastcoat, binding him hand and foot, and resolving to drag
him up higher in the By-Lane out of hearing, and sight of the Road, there to
gag him, and leave him bound in a Ditch all night. This Barbarity, you may well
imagine, was a very terrible Apprehension to the unhappy Gentleman, who though
not valuing his inconsiderable Loss, nevertheless the Dread of being exposed
almost naked all night, suggested little less than his certain Death from so
much Inhumanity. But just in this doleful Minute of Horror and Despair, it
happened that a Gentleman very well dressed, and nobly well mounted, attended by
a Servant in the Norsolk Livery, and as well mounted as his Master, traveling
that way, who discovering a pack of Thieves with an unfortunate Prey in their
Talons, Lamn me says he what is yonder? Thieves! At this his Man and he both
putting Spurs to their Horses, gallopped in amongst them, when the Master
discharging a Pistol at the head of the first he met, who immediately dropped,
and the Man as liberal of his Fire as his Master, a very brisk Encounter
ensued, and Lightning and Thunder soon followed on both sides; and when all
their Artillery was spent, they came to dint of Sword, to hew and slash: But to
bring our Battle to a Conclusion Victory at length declared for the generous
Deliverer, the Thieves either vanquished or cowd began to give ground and move
off in some precipitation; four of 'em, (two of which were he that first fell,
and another who the Noble Stranger had cruppered and dismounted, who were
neither so mortified, but they made a shift to recover their Saddles,) rod off
full speed, the fifth only being left prisoner behind; who most piteously
beseeching mercy from his Conqueror, our Hero was contented to give him a cut
cross the pate, and bid him Loop Skellum; he having first refunded a Watch and
some small matter of Money, and what else they had before taken from the
Gentleman. Here our generous Champion and his Man both dismounted to unbind the
poor Gentleman, who could scarce forbear acknowledging his Gratitude for so
signal a Deliverance upon his knees. But amongst other Caresses humbly desiring
to know to whom he owed this extraordinary protection; The Stranger was pleased
to answer him his Name was B. H. Here the Gentleman renewed his Acknowledgments
to his Deliverer, telling him he was no Stranger to that Right Honorable Name,
though it was his first happiness of being acquainted with his Person, more
especially on such an occasion, under such a Load of Obligations received from
him. Amongst other expressions of his Gratitude, he humbly besought the
felicity of doing his House the honor of Entertaining him that night, which
Invitation our kind B. H. embraced, declaring indeed that it was some part of
his way, being designed some few days hence for a great Horse Race near
Salisbury. I will not particularize the Gallant Treatment our Right Honorable
Guest received that night; let it suffice that no Entreaties could beg any
longer stay than morning, though infinitely solicited, resolving to take the
Cool before Sunrise for his departure toward Sarum. The Gentleman being early
up to entertain him, and visiting him in his Bedchamber, our Gallant Guest
took an occasion of praising the Gentleman's House, the stateliness of the Seat,
Building, etc. His kind Landlord proud of any occasion to entertain him,
immediately entreated him to take a walk into some of his best Apart ments, and
view the House; which motion being readily embraced, he was conducted from Room
to Room (the Gentleman being his only Guide and Interpreter in any piece of
Painting, Rarity and Antiquity relating to the House or Family) till at last he
showed him his own Bedchamber. Here our Honorable Norfolk amongst other
furniture of the Room discovering a very large Rich Scrutore, was pleased
smilingly to say, Well Sir, and I suppose that Cabinet there is your Treasury.
Yes Sir, replied the Gentleman, that little Treasure I have, which lies in a
small Room amongst hard Times and poor Tenants. Then Sir, replied our Norfolk
Spark, a little changing the Air of his face, There Is seven hundred Guineas
there which I have a very pressing occasion for. And look you Sir to unriddle
your Amazement, for I perceive you are surpised, in plain English you were a
saver last night to be a loser to day; for instead of the Right Honorable B.
H. I am only the Right Honest Captain Whitney, and so without more Ceremony I
must have that seven hundred pound, or your Life Sir. The Gentleman finding
himself in no capacity to resist, being at this time naked and unarmed, and
upon unequal Terms; nevertheless had there been equality in the case, yet
considering he was not stockt with more Courage than his Post required, being
only a Captain of the Country Militia, it is thought the Contest would not have
been extraordinary; so very patiently unlocking one of his Drawers, he
peaceably surrendered the seven hundred Guineas. Nay, continued the Captain, I
have some few Terms more to annex, which are, That you must wait upon me the
Stable, and not stir out of my sight; caress me all the way without a wrinkle
in your face, or so much as a side-glance to any of your Servants that shall
but hint a disgust, and pay me all the Respect due to the Right Honorable B.
H. till my Man and I are both mounted, or you are a dead Man. The Gentleman
seeing the Pistol ready stuck under the Cloak at his Girdle, and all the
symptoms of Military Execution upon the least Breach of Articles, most
religiously observed the whole Cap^tulation, and with all the Address and
Veneration, and a hundred Thanks for all Favors and Honor received, conducted
him to his Horse, and saw him safely mounted, when bidding farewell, and giving
a little tickle with the Spur, he and his Man trooped off with that Expedition
as defied the best four Legs in his Stable to overtake them.

Now Reader, having given you this choice Collection of his liveliest and
sprightliest Adventures, I shall only conclude with that last Rencounter, the
misfortune of which brought him to his Catastrophe.

About Michaelmas last on the Essex Road, being that time by chance alone, he
met a Gentleman Mounted upon a pretty indifferent good Hack, with a Pair of
Pistols before him and his Lady single Horsed, attended by a sturdy Lout, with
a Sword tied to his Breech. This odds of two to one disheartened not our brisk
Captain, who very fairly perking up to the Master, gives him the customary
salute of Stand and Deliver; The Gentleman, whether through surprise, or any
other consideration, without any Resistance, very patiently delivers him the
All he had, being not above five or six pounds. The Gentlewoman seeing her
Husband so Cow-hearted, in so tame a submission, fell very loud upon him,
called him a hundred Chicken-soul'd Cowards, and in short no name bad enough.
The Captian seeing the Lady so Spirited a Virago, addressed himself to her,
telling her, the little Money he had taken, was not worth all this Passion The
Money! Damn the Money, replied the Dame, for though as little as it is, it is
something in an Abdicated Officers Pocket, yet it is not that Trifle I am
concerned for, no it is the Nature of the Brute, the shame of the Coward and
Craven that Delivered it, that disturbs me; A fellow that has had the honor of
a Commission in his Pocket, and to have a Heart no bigger. Princes are finely
helped up with such doughty Commanders. Himself and his overgrown Booby at his
Arse, both of 'em such a pair of Tame Turtles, to suffer themselves to be so
basely and scandalously robbed. Death! If I had been half so well armed my self,
I Would have changed one brace of Bullets with you before I Would have yielded. The
Captain was strangely amazed and as highly delighted with the Spirit and
Bravery of the Woman, together with no little charm in her Face, to add to his
Delight, being indeed a very lovely Creature; And gave her a great many very
caressing Compliments, which the Lady as courteously returned, at which the
Captain seeing the Gray Mare the better Horse, very generously made her a
present of what he had taken from her Husband, which the Lady thankfully
received, telling him, that she had that veneration for so much Honor and
Bravery, that if ever it were her good fortune to meet him in London, she would
express her gratitude for his generosity and her esteem for his Gallantry in a
more substantial acknowledgment. The Captain swore a great Oath he would make
it his business to find her out there. That you may soon do, replied the Lady,
if you have old-fashioned Religion enough to carry you to the Spanish
Ambassadors Chapel, whither the little Devotion I have brings me generally
every Morning. The Captain told her that whatever his own Religion was, his
Respects to so fair a Lady could convert him to any Church, and he should not
fail the Pious Assignation aforesaid. But to prevent his Quest of his fair
Inviter at Chapels and High Altars, it was his Fortune to meet her in less
Holy Ground; For one Morning about five or six days after, the Captain muffled
in his Cloak and in a Coach with the Windows drawn up, had occasion to make a
stand in the Strand for one of his Comrades to meet him there. During his stop
there, through a broken Pane in the Coach Window, he discovered the very Lady
at a Milliners Shop buying a pair of Gloves and some other small matters, which
when she had purchased, turning her Face to the Street-ward, a Coach was called
for her, which the Captain perceiving threw open the door of his Coach, and
told the Lady here was one at her Service; The Lady immediately remembering the
Face. Oh dear Cousen, says she, are you there! And so accepting his Kindness,
immediately stepped into the Coach to him; Where the Door and Window where both
presently closed again. The Captain very joyfully embracing her, and asking
whither they should drive; answer was made, e'ne where he pleased. Hereupon the
Coachman was bid to drive to Knights-bridge, where lighting at the Swan, a very
sumptuous Dinner was bespoken, and the Lovers (for so I Will venture to call 'em)
left to all the Enjoyment and Felicity the Accommodation of so Hospitable a
House could yield 'em. I shall not be tedious in telling you, that this Meeting
ended in Love, and the best and heartiest effects of it the Captain could give
her. Let it suffice the satisfaction was infinitely pleasing on both sides, the
Lady amongst a hundred other Caresses, assuring him, that this was the first
time she ever wronged her Husband in this kind, (at least you have the Ladys
word for it if Cuckolding a Coward may be properly called wronging him, being
indeed the least he deserved. Amongst the rest of the Conversation she told the
Captain how her Husband was once a Cornet in K. J -- s his Army, that she had
always affectionately loved him, with all the Truth and Fidelity of a Wife,
till that Adventure upon the Road utterly alienated her Heart from him,
conceiving such a natural Aversion to a to a Coward, (in which to her long
delusion, she had never till then an occasion of trial of him) that she loathed
the very thought of him. This Declaration was but a new Spur to the Captains
Affections, being strangely delighted both with her Person and Humor, insomuch
that before they parted, a match was struck up between 'em, that the Lady
should leave her Husband, and live with him, who would take care to maintain
her like a Gentlewoman, she being indeed so pleased with the Captain, that she
was easily won to relinquish the broken Fortune of a slighted Husband, for the
Embraces of a Darling Gallant.

Accordingly, the Captain in a day or two after, (by which time she so managed
matters at home, as to troop off with all the Bag and Baggage she could make)
provided her a Retirement, a Lodging Alamode; And accompanied her as often as
Affairs would permit, with all the Endearments and Caresses imaginable. But as
Men of his cautious Profession generally make their Residences, like Tartar
Camps, not long in a place, but always in motion, he danced her about from one
quarter of the Town to another, and at last a Lodging was fixed for her at one
Mr. Hills a Turner, his House in a Court at Hounds-Ditch: Hither the Captain
made his visits, under the Title of a Brother, his name Captain Alcock; For by
this time his Fame being loud in the World, and himself under the Apprehension
of too many close Hunters, he made it his study to cross the Scent by short
turns, and small stops; Insomuch that his visits here were but once in five or
six days, and those generally of Saturdays, and always at Night Time, not
daring to stay a whole Night with his dear Mistress, and therefore on purpose
dignified at this Lodging by no higher a Title than a Sister. The Landlord had
some time before seen and known Captain Whitney, but this new name of Alcock,
and the several years ago since this little knowledge of his person had almost
defaced that remembrance, insomuch that he went and came without any curiosity
or observation from his Landlord, till unfortunately about a week before his
apprehension the Lady having occasion to call him back at the Stair Head, upon
his departure, instead of Brother or Alcock, unluckily cried, Mr. Whitney, Mr.
Whitney, one word with you before you go. This being casually overheard by his
Landlord perfectly refresht his Memory, and recollected his sleeping knowledge
of the Captain; and accordingly resolving to be prepared for his next visit,
and bid fair for the 40 l. set upon his Head, he had provided a Constable
within call, resolved to snap him. But it fell out, as the Miss it is thought
had some small smoking of danger, and therefore had given him some cautionary
Advice, this last Visit was an extreme short one, for before the Constable
could be fetched, the Captain had taken leave, and rusht by the justled
Constable; but his Landlord more pressing and hardy, pusht forward, and boldly
grappled him alone himself in the Street, in the surprise tripping up the
Captains Heels; but the Captain recovering himself, and getting the Advantage
of his weaker Assailant, drew his Sword, and backward under his Cloak wounded
the Joyner in his Thigh, at which he fell, and a great Outcry of Stop Thief
ensuing, throwing off his Cloak, made a fair pair of Heels for his Life; when
unluckily mistaking his way, instead of running down Bedlam Lane, he ran
through a Hosiers Shop, where for want of a passage through, being stopped in the
back Room, the whole Body of the Mob soon advanced, and our Captain with Sword
and Pistol in hand stood at Bay and faced them, till such time Message was sent
both to Major Richardson and the Sheriffs, who approaching with their
Respective Retinue, Resistance was thought wholly in vain, and the Captain
patiently surrendered; from whence being Hand cuft, and put into a Coach, he was
ushered in great Ceremony, (especially if Crowds and Noise be any part of
State) to Newgate.

In this unhappy Durance, though his Legs were a little tied, his Name roved
far enough; for the whole Town rung at no little rate: His Visitants were
presently numerous; for where one came under any pretense of charging him with
any Robbery, a hundred came purely for a sight of his sweet Face. To these last
sort of Guests he behaved himself with a sort of a pride and strutt, as if he
seemed pleased with so popular a Vanity as making a Raree-show. To the other
sort that came in as Spies, he desired 'em to be cautious how they charged him
with any thing; for it had been a customary Fallacy amongst the Highway-men on
all occasions, to own themselves all to be Whitneys, by a trick of showing
their left Hands with their Thumbs slipped into the palm of their Gloves; whereby
very notorious Faults were fathered upon him, of which he was utterly innocent.

Amongst his Visitants one honest Countryman came to Impeach him of a very
Extraordinary Robbery, viz. a Maidenhead that the Captain had taken from a
young Girl, the Countreymans Sweetheart, which was no little heartbreaking to
him, as being no mean adorer (if that word be not too high for him) of his dear
Lass thus unhappily debaucht, and worse than ravished from him. The Captain was
much concerned at the poor Countrey-mans Tears and Sighs on so sorrowful a
Subject, and like a Man of Honor utterly abjured so much as his least
knowledge of the poor Girl so traduced and slandered, averring her to be a
Virgin and a Saint for any thing he knew of her; and in short so salved her
wounded Reputation, and so sweetened the believing good Man into an opinion of
her Innocence, that he begged a hundred pardons, and immediately troop'd to the
very next Goldsmiths for a certain Implement called a Thumb-Ring, and thence
to Snow-Hill to the first Sales-mans Shop, resolving to rig himself for a
Bridegroom immediately, and consummate before to morrow night; being only
heartily afflicted that he could not have the Captain for a Bride-man, unless
he would make use of the Ordinary for a Chaplain.

But to take our leave of his gentler Conversation his kind prison Visitants,
and bring him before more formidable Faces the Session drew on, and on Tuesday
the seventeenth of January, he was brought to the Old-Bayly and Indicted for a
Burglary committed upon the House of John Flanders of Enfield in the County of
Mialesex, on the 28th of August was twelve month last past. Here the Evidence,
as you have been told at length in the common Sessions paper, not fully proving
the charge upon him, he was Acquitted of this first Inditctment: But on the
morrow on a new charge, for a Robbery committed at South-Mims wash, on the
tenth of November last, he was pressed a little more home, and possitively
charged with the said Robbery, upon Coviction whereof, he received Sentence of
Death.

After such Serious Circumstances as the consideration of approaching Death we
ought to suit our discourse accordingly, nevertheless we cannot omit one
pleasant Adventure more. One of his Feminie Votaries was pleased to write him
this following Letter,

LETTER.
SIR,
I Am very sorry to hear of your Fatal Sentence, but do not presume so brave a
valiant Man as your self will fail of Pardon, but if you are in danger, send
word by the Bearer, and if you think it can be procured, a Party of young
Ladies are resolved to petition Their Majesty's in your behalf; but I am told
it cannot be done without taking for better for worse, and then I am sure there
is a great Objection in the way, being your self already in the Matrimonial
Noose. Now my simple Opinion is, after Sentence is past a Person is free, but
that is but a Woman's imagination, and one that does heartily wish it may be so.
If what I propose be possible, and you have Courage to venture on the most
undeserving of our whole Sex, I Will venture to cross my Inclination to save what
I cannot give, for I have ever been averse toward Matrimony, nor do I now do
it for the sake of a Husband, or any other Self-Interest; for if I were once
assured of your dear Life, I desire no more to see you.


After his perusal hereof, he borrowed some Minutes from his deepest
Meditations to return this Acknowledging Answer.

MADAM,
I Am now at a stand how to express my Thanks for your most generous Intentions
toward me, and cannot imagine how I have merited two such great Favors as you
are pleased to mention; first to save my Life, and then to make that happy by
this way you mention. As for the Noose you speak of, it is easier slipped, than
that I am like to come into, if not prevented by you, having no Assurance or
Hopes of Life from any body.


We will not presume to enquire into the Integrity of this professing kind
Lady, or whether her self in the Head of her Female Troop were true to their
Assignation, in meeting at the doleful Padington Scene, in their necessary
supplicating Virgin Weeds, as the forementioned charitable suppliants for his
Deliverance by tying one Noose for the slipping the other; all we have to
assure you is that both our Letters are verbatim from the Originals.

But notwithstanding the dismal Voice of Fate; viz. To the Place of Execution,
etc. the Captain so divided the Affections of the People, that the favorable
Party had that extraordinary Esteem for something they were pleased to call
Bravery in him, that whether from their skill in the Stars that some Benign
Mercurial Planet smiled upon him, or that they fancied the Court must look upon
him with Their Eyes, they concluded for certain that a Beam of Royal Mercy
would shine for his Deliverance. Insomuch that his Life and Death, like the
Surrender of Limerick, was the daily subject of very high Wagers. But the
high-flown Deliverance-Men received some small Mortification when they saw him
move off up the High-Holborn Road, the Right-hand-man of the first File, with
seven others of his Melancholy Brethren on Friday the 27th of January. But
their drooping Hearts were soon enlivened again. For the Deputy Marshal by a
Reprieve from the Court of King's Bench posting toward Tyburn in a Coach
through Hide-Park, attended his Reception there, where the Crowd was so thick,
that he could not possibly get up to the Captain but by mounting a Horse to
make his way through the Press. The Captain was then dressed in a fine Silk
Nightgown, a large white Wig, and a white Beaver-Hat; all which personal
Imbellishments more highly attracted a great many favorable, if not some wet
Eyes, and possible more particularly entitled him to that last universal
Civility always paid to his circumstances; viz. That every Man's handsome that
goes to be hanged. But when his Reprieve came, there was no small repeated
Shouts amongst his numerous Spectators. From thence presently mounted behind a
Ruggedfac'd Man-catcher of the Poultrey-Compter, his particular Friend, and as
to the Aspect much more the Butcher of the two; and under a Detachment of some
other of the Halbeteers he was with great Joy ushered back toward Newgate;
where by the way, to take a cheering Cup, he was conveyed to the Fountain
Tavern on Snow-Hill, and entertained for near two hours to the Tune of Two and
twenty shillings Reckoning: For which his aforesaid hard-favour'd
Poultrey-Steward, at that time being not strong in pocket, for want of the
Rhino, very kindly dropped his Silver Sword at the Bar, as honorable Guarrantee
for the said sum. During his Entertainment here, the House was so thronged,
that the Landlord was forced to be at the charge of Watch and Ward to keep his
Door; and 'twas no small Ticket could gain Admission. Access being so
difficult, amongst the other crouding Visitants, were four passionate Females,
being a French Baud, and three of her fair Nursery, who though they were
Mistresses of but little English, had happily so much French Stratagem, that
coming all dressed in white Sarcenet-Hoods, Night-Rails, and white Aprons, they
pretended they had been at the Gallows with a design to have begged his Life,
and therefore desired the honor of coming to the speech of him: So generous a
pretension soon made their way up to him; but the Captain being altogether a
stranger to 'em, and truly a little wanting Faith, gave 'em but a short, and
not over courteous Reception. However this short-snatcht Blessing had those
transporting Effects, that our four white Damsels, with two kind Cullies, their
warm Companions, made a Jubilee Afternoon on it, the Revel not concluding till
past Twelve at Night, in which time they made a hard shift to suck up Thirty
shillings in good soft Sack, in which 'twas observed that the dear Captain's
often repeated Health made it go so glibly down, that in truth they staled as
much as they drank.

But to return to our Captain, this short-lived Reprieve was attended by a new
Summons to Mortality; viz. a new Warrant received on Sunday Morning following
for his Execution at the May Pole in the Strand on Wednesday next the first of
February. Here our Wager Men's Hearts began to beat again; and for a suitable
Accommodation for his Funeral Guests, a great many Scaffolds were accordingly
built, and seats bespoken at pretty lumping Prices, in Balconies, Windows,
Turrets, etc. But (...) their great defeat, by Virtue of a second Warrant not
received till late on Tuesday night, the Tragic Scene was changed to St.
Johns-Street between Hicks Hall, and Smithfield Bars. Hither accordingly our
departing Capt to bid the World adieu, was ushered with the usual Formalities;
and possibly this last Exit Scene was chosen for him, on purpose to take his
farewell amongst his own Original Fraternity, the Brothers of the Pole-axe and
Cleaver, the Smithfield Bar Neighborhood; and partly as a rebuke to their over
insolent rejoycings at his Reprieve, and over hasty confidence of his Life and
Pardon.

But now to shake hands with the Rover, and to take a little Discourse with the
Christian at parting. We must do his Memory this Right, that not only his whole
Behavior in the Prison was all along very Modest and Serious; but after his
Sentence he was so sensibly touched with the Thoughts of Death, that he made a
considerable Preparation for appearing before a Higher Tribunal. It Is true he
did not think fit in all his penitence to oblige the World with any particular
Detection of his Accomplices, or the Arraignment of any other sins but his own.
And at the Place of Execution (where he received the favor of about an hour
and a halfs preparation for Eternity) he was extremely penitent, prayed
heartily for the King, acknowledging his grateful Thanks for his kind five days
Reprieve, owning Charity to all Mankind, and dying with all the Symptoms of the
most fervent Zeal and Devotion.

FINIS.
Page 18. l. 3. for Banbury read Bury.


