MORE LIGHT TO Mr. John Lilburnes JURY.
GENTLEMEN,
THe main thing you are to know, is, That the true Common Laws of England,
were neither the dictates of any Conquerors sword, nor the Will and pleasure of
any King, nor (yet to speak impartialy and freely) the results of any
Parliament that ^ver sat in this land, Parliaments (under the more rightful
title of Commoncouncels of the Nation) having its foundation only in the common
law; and so at most is but one of them; and neither has, nor can have power
over the rest of its fellow-standing Laws; to contradict, alter, or repeal any
of them, more then it has power to destroy its own being.

And the most learned Judges when they would give the greatest respect unto
them, have been wont to tell the People, That they are so Ancient that no Man
knows the beginning of them; so Just in themselves, and so approved in all
times by our Ancestors, that they frequently adventured their lives, and freely
spent their bloods to preserve them from Violation and Innovation; being, as it
should seem, a Compact of the first Possessors of the Land, binding Themselves
and their Posterity to the unalterable observance of them: which they might
well do, considering that it was a Law in it self so excellent, as that at
this day no considerable inconvenience can be showed therein; but where any
alteration has been made, though by Parliaments, it can be manifestly proved
to be ever for the worse.

Like unto that alteration mentioned by Sir Edward Coke, page 74. of 2 part.
Institut. where he says, by the Common Law, to avoid all extortion and
Grievance of the Subject, no Sheriff, Coroner, Jayler, or other of the Kings
ministers ought to take any reward for doing his Office, but only of the King
upon penalty. After that this Rule of the common Law was altered, it is
incredible what extortions and oppressions have thereupon ensued; so dangerous
a thing it is to shake or alter any of the Rules or Fundamental points of the
Common Law: which in truth are the main Pillars and supporters of the fabric
of the Commonwealth, as elsewhere, says he, I have noted more largely, and yet
not so largely as the weight of the matter deserves.

Such, and so mischievous for the most part, have bin the fruits of Parliament
alterations and Innovations upon our ancient Laws and Rights: And which
occasioned the same learned Author magnifying the 29 Chapter of Magna Charta,
for binding in all causes to Trials by Juries: Immediately to cry out thus,
Against this Ancient Fundamental Law and in the face thereof; I find an Act
of Parliament made (as deeming it a most wicked and impudent thing) and when he
has largely set forth the foulness thereof in the Cases of Empson and Dudly,
he pursues it thus most effectually, That the ill success thereof, and the
fearful Ends of those two Oppressors, should deterr others from committing the
like (that is, executing of unlawful Acts of Parliament though unrepealed) for
that was their Crime, for which they were indicted, and were found Traitors,
and suffered death accordingly) And should admonish Parliaments, that instead of
this ordinary and precious Trial by the law of the Land (that is by Juries)
they bring not in absolute and partial Trials by discretion: by which
arbitrary rule and no other, the late long Parliament (nevertheless adjudged Mr
Lilburne) than which nothing can be more grossly contrary to the Common Law of
England.

And as Parliaments have not power over this precious way of Trials by Iuries,
no more here have they power to make that Felony, which in the common Law of
England is at most but matter of Trespass, it being as Fundamental as
Parliaments themselves, that no man is to be punishd greatly for a small fault,
nor smally for a great; so that in all the Proceedings with him, there was
nothing from end to end, but Arbitrariness; For they judge him that are not by
Law his Judges; that belonging only to Iuries; never charged him with any
Particulars, nor hear him in his own defense; and are as extravagant in their
measure there being no pretense of any Crime above scandalizing Sir Arthur
Haslerigg and the Committee of Haberdashers Hall, and publishing a Petition
before presented; and yet for this they Fine him twice his Estate, and banish
him for ever his Native Country, and Enact him a Felon if he return

Which being an Act in all respects contrary to the known Law of the Land,
being either groundless (for in the Act none are expressed) or grounded only on
their most illegal Arbitrary proceedings with him: or rather upon his name, for
they never judged him in person at all: now this being an act of Parliament (if
it can be proved a Parliament) contrary to the fundamental common and standing
Laws of England, is no other but a void Law and such as is no warrantable rule
to the good men of England to judge by, or find any man of Mr. Lilburnes name
guilty thereupon: and if any should be so unadvised, or so unchristian, and
unconscionable as to find him guilty thereupon, and be the occasion of his
death ^he, whosoever it be,) will stand liable all the days of his life to be
questioned for the same, and to suffer life for life, as many as shall be found
so to betray the just Rights of the Nation in his murder, it being ^o less in
the eye of the Law.

And though at present they may see no danger, and may think the times may
bear them out: yet as that's no cure for a conscience besmeared with innocent
blood, so is there no security can be given for subverting the fundamental Laws
of England, in a Case of murder, all good men being bound to prosecute.

And that this is a void Law appears yet further, in that it is grounded upon;
and is in execution of a Judgment given in Parliament in way of punishment of
a fact, that was never before known, or declared by any Law to be a Crime,
whereby Mr. Lilburne or any other could be warned from the same.

Now that all Laws of this Nature, 42 Edw. 3.3. The Petition of Right, the Act
that Abolished the Star Chamber, and the Lord Cokes second part Institutes,
folio 53 5.
in being contrary to the known Laws of the Land, are void Laws, and no rules,
(but snares both to people and Juries) is manifest, in that at least thirty
Parliaments have both confirmed the Ancient Laws and Liberties of England, and
declared all Laws made by Parlia. contrary thereto null and void in themselves.

And the reason is evident, for if there should be no firm, standing and
established unalterable Law which Parliaments, Juries and all people were bound
to maintain, no man could be certain of any thing belonging to his person,
life, estate, wife, children, family, conscience, religion, good name, no, not
for an hour; for what assurance has he, but that a Parliament are in this
instant is making alterations in some of these, and every day and hour
changing, and that dangerously, as the most godly men found in Queen Mary's
days, and too many since; though scarce any upon so known a slight account as
Mr. Lilburns, whose case yet is every man's case; for by the same rule that they
enacted him a felon, in case he returned: They might as justly have enacted
banishment to every one that should twice dispute the payment of his Taxes, and
make it Felony if he returned: And how soon this and worse may be done, if
Jurymen will but give encouragement, by finding Mr. Lilburne Guilty of Felony:
Let every wise man judge in time, and be more wise, then by so doing, involve
himself and posterity in blood and slavery.

Now such Laws as these being void Laws, who are to know them to be such but
chiefly Juries, who are the only Legal Tryers of all men in all causes, and
they are bound in conscience to try all Laws made by Parliament, by the
Fundamental Laws; and where they find them contrary, and that men stand before
them to be tried as Felons upon those Laws, they are bound in conscience to
pronounce them not guilty: That is no Felons, nor in the least deserving death,
as in Mr. Lilburns case, and not to expect the Direction of Judges and
Recorders in the case, who many of them lie under sore temptations of losing
their honors, and places of profit, in case they wrest not judgment to the
wills of those that are in Power: but you are to keep a good conscience, and to
stick close to the Ancient standing Law, as to that which will stand you in
stead, and preserve you being innocent against the greatest and most powerful
upon earth. Much

Much you know may be said, to prove the makers of the Act before you, no
Parliament; no more a Parliament, then you would deem that a Commoncouncel of
London, when the major part were excluded per force. In which case you would
think it strange, that Acts made by the minor part should be binding to the
City, or any one Citizen; it is all a case; and those that have any
understanding cannot but know it; and their consciences will put them in mind
of it when they shall be most unwilling: those very men that excluded the major
part, declaring that they did not look upon the remaining party as a competent
judicatory to make Laws; but as persons reserved in order to a new Parliament
to be speedily chosen.

And for further illustration, you know, though a full Comoncouncel may
lawfully make Acts of Commoncouncel for the better government of the City; yet
if they make any contrary to the Charter and ancient Custom of the City, it is
a void Act: and being so pleaded, has so proved; and by Juries has been given
against the plaintiff thereupon. Now as the City has standing Laws, so much
more has the Nation: and though the Commoncouncel of the Nation may possibly
have a power of making Laws in some cases; yet as they must not be busi-bodies
which have confounded all, so must they be sure to make none contrary to the
standing Laws: or if they do, they are to be holden for none, and void Laws, by
the good men of England, who are the strong out-guards and Fortresses of the
Laws and Liberties of England, and must not betray their trust, for any reason
whatsoever; there being a certain (...) and express power of judgment fixed
in them to judge in all causes whatsoever, which none can contradict. For the
learned well observe (as an unerring maxim) That by experience of all times,
and the consideration of humane frailty, this conclusion is necessarily
deduced, That it is not possible to keep men at all times (be they the two
Houses, or the King and his Council) but there will be sometimes some deviation
from the Laws; and therefore the constant and certain powers fixed by the
ancient Law must not be made void.

Whereby it appears, that it is taken for granted, Parliaments may err, and
that they do err, when they deviate from the ancient Laws, by which Laws only
their errors are to be known: those being like touchstones to try all laws made
by Parliament, whether they are current or counterfeit, and that Juries only in
such cases are the Judges; they being the only legal tryers of all causes; and
this power fixed in them, is not to be made void either through their
superstitious dotage upon Parliaments, nor by any childish fear in themselves;
nor by the presumptuous affirmations of Judges, Recorders, or such Lawyers as
are apt to tell you Acts of Parliament are not to be disputed: Parliaments
having been long time their very good friends; their making, altering, and
repealing Laws, having made long work for them to their profit and advancement;
but to the perplexing and vexation of the people, as you very well know; and
therefore hearken not to them, but without fear or favor discharge your
consciences faithfully and confidently, as becomes true Englishmen, and good
Christians; and even in this case of Mr. Lilburns, not to stagger in the least;
but since it is evident to every one of your consciences, that he is not
charged with any thing that in the true Law of England is a fellonious crime;
nor has in the least deserved to die: you can do no less then pronounce him
not guilty; and in so doing, not only preserve this most miserably afflicted
man and his family, but in him, your selves, your wives, children, families,
and posterities, in the preservation of our ancient Laws and Liberties, from
the tyranny of Bye-laws, or Parliament Innovations.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed in the YEAR, 1653. August 16.


