A Thanksgiving SERMON Preached at CHRIST-CHURCH, Before the LORDS JUSTICES And
COUNCIL. Upon the 23 of October, 1661.

By W.L. D.D. Chaunter of Christ-Church DVBLIN.

Printed by Order of the Lords Justices of IRELAND.

DVBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And are to be sold by Samuel Dancer, Bookseller in Castle-street. 1661.

To the Right Honorable, The Lords Justices And COUNCIL of IRELAND.
Right Honorable,
IT was never in my thoughts to make these my Meditations public, I could not
conceive them to be fitting for the Press; but Your Lordships Orders, and the
Commands of those whom I stand obliged to obey, have occasioned it. If
therefore You find here no excellency of speech, no elegancy of phrase, be
pleased to remember it was a Sermon preached upon the 23. of October, the day
designed by the bloody Popish Irish Rebels for our destruction, the day when
stripping and whipping began to be in fashion. If therefore there want the
clothing of words, I say, Habitum temporis hujus habet.

My design was not to tickle the Ear, but to affect the Heart; and to move the
Auditory to a thankful acknowledgment of the goodness of God toward us, (the
Remnant that are left) that we were not involved in the common Calamity, that
our lives were given to us for a prey, and we were rescued by a hand of
Providence, as so many Brands plucked out of the midst of the burning. Cursed
be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel, Genesis
49.7. Like Joah, they shed the blood of war, in the days of peace, 1 King. 2.5.
They had Copies to write after, the Sicilian Vespers, the Massacre of Paris,
etc. but they endeavored to go beyond their Masters. The Rudiments of their
Religion (if they wanted Copies and Examples) teach and warrant them to be
perfidious, bloody and cruel to us. It shall ever be remembered (while Popery
endures) what their determination was, in the Council of Constance; in the case
of John Huss and Jerome of Prague, when it was required, that those two servants
of God should appear in that malignant Council to give a reason of their Faith
and Doctrine (which they were still ready and desirous to do) the Lords and
Nobles of Bohemia would not hazard the Lights of their Church, till the
public Faith of the Imperial Majesty was engaged for their safety, and the
Emperor had sent them his safe Conduct: And when (upon those Letters of safe
Conduct) they appeared in the Council, and had given an account of their Faith
and Doctrine, and that the Papists were not able to resist the Wisdom and
Spirit by which they spoke, they resolved to choke the Light of the Gospel with
the Smoke of the bottomless Pit, and condemned them for Heretics, adjudging
them to be burned, (a very hot Answer to their Arguments.) The Lords of Bohemia
have recourse to the Emperor, complain of the unheard of Example, and declare,
That the Honor of the Imperial Majesty lay at stake, the Faith of the Empire
was engaged, and in point of Honor was to be vindicated. Antoninus pars 3.
Chronicorum lays down the matter thus: Condemnati sunt ad ignem. Et quia
imperator non videbatur hoc aequanimiter far; propter salvum conductum eis
datum; respondit ei sacrosancta Synodus; cum argui non posse de fide mentita;
quia Concilium ipsum non dederat iis salvum conductum, and Concilium majus est
Imperatore, etc. Cui determinationi ut bonus Ecclesiae filius acquievit, etc.
Conc. Constable. Sess. 19. Declarat sancta Synodus ex salvo conductu per
Imparatorem; aut alios Principes haereticis concesso, nullum fidei Christianae
aut jurisdictioni Ecclesiae praejudicium generari posse aut debere; qu^minus
liceat judici Ecclesiastico de hujusmodi personarum erroribus inquirere; eosque
punire, quantum justitia suadebit; si errores suos revecare pertinaciter
noluerint, etiamsi de salvo conductu confisi ad locum venerint judicii, alias
non venturi. Nec sic Promittentem quum fecerit quod in ipso est, ex hoc
remanere obligatum.
The Emperor bestirs himself, and interposes with the Council, but at last the
Physician of Rome salves the Emperors scruples, and with those Catholic
Fathers (upon mature deliberation) lays down this Catholic Decision, as a
Catholic Maxim of their Catholic Religion (Can. 19. Conc. Constable.) Fidem non
esse servandam Haereticis; No faith is to be kept with Heretics: So they
called them, and so they call us. And so this Catholic Declararion of his
Holiness and his Council, will warrant them never to keep any Oath, Faith, or
Promise, with us, but still to be treacherous, perfidious and rebellious, as
long as a Protestant lives, and to be like Dan, a serpent by the way, and an
adder in the path, that bites the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall
backward, Genesis 49.17.

The Ringleaders in this Catholic Mischief were Priests and Friars, (I speak
not universally of all, for some condemned it as abominable) but such there
were, Incendiaries, Captains of Troops, high-way-Robbers, and
high-way-Murtherers; they had learned of Pope Julius the Second, to cast away
Peter's Keys, and to take Paul's Sword; they left the Mass, which they call an
unbloody Sacrifice, and slew, murdered and sacrificed men, women and children,
a bloody Sacrifice indeed; and thus they raged promiscuously against all, and
the scarlet whore was made drunk with the blood of the Saints.

The Massacre of Paris was tragical and bloody enough, it was of 60000 persons;
and that (they say) as a gallant and heroic Act, was pictured in the Popes
Palace: but this Tragoedy being so universal, and of so vast a number, so many
thousands, there was no room left for it in the Popes House, but it shall not
want a Memorandum in our Hearts for ever.

They showed their inveteracie and implacable hatred against the very Name of
English; they were cruel to the very Beasts and Cattle that were of English
strain, and in some places they would not presently kill them, but now and then
cut Collops out of them, and so let them run and roar to death. And they dealt
with some men as with the beasts, they broke their backs, and so left them in
the fields to graze, and when they had eaten round about them, they would not
kill them, but remove them to better pasture. Multitudes of all sorts they
dispatched and killed out right, many they left half dead, entreating for many
days for no other favor at their hands but death, but that was refused.
Amongst those thousands thus tortured, tormented, hanged, and drowned, and
burned, I cannot but remember that horrid Murder at Port a down, where
(besides those whom they drowned to make them sport) they continued that act of
drowning for seven or eight weeks together. It has been credibly reported by
many, that daily and nightly Visions were there seen, representing the men,
women and children whom they had drowned, sometimes singing Psalms, sometimes
brandishing naked Swords, sometimes scritching in a fearful manner; the very
Rebels that dwelt near the place confessed it, and were so terrified with those
daily Apparitions, that they were forced to remove their dwellings: But the
Priests and Friars to make the matter sound the better in the ears of their
seduced Proselytes, told them it was the cunning sleight of the Devil to hinder
the great work of propagating the Catholic Religion, and killing the
Heretics. And indeed these two must go together, they cannot propagate their
Catholic Doctrine, but by our destruction: If the Protestants stand, Rome must
fall; but if Rome stand, Rome will be still contriving our fall.

(I must write one thing in a Parenthesis, because it is not fit to come into
the sentence, and that is the prodigious and unheard of villainies which they
acted with women even after they were dead.) In a word, I may say of those many
prodigious Villainies, savage Cruelties, and barbarous Inhumanities, which they
without any scuple commonly and generally acted, as the Poet said, Saevior es
tristi Busiride; saevior illo;
Qui falsum lenio torruit igne bovem.
Quique bovem Siculo fertur donasse tyranno;
Et dictis arts conciliasse suas.
Non mihi si centum linguae sint; oraque centum;
Ferrea vox.


If I had an hundred Tongues, and a Voice of Thunders, I could not speak all
that they have acted, and others suffered in the time of the late unparallelled
Rebellion. My Lords, the Lord has preserved you and us in the midst of the
overflowing waters of Jordan, that the waters of the proud have not gone over
our soul. Our Danger was great, our Deliverance was great, and therefore we
should endeavor to render to the Lord according to the great Blessings we have
received. This is the sum and substance of the following Sermon, which I humbly
offer unto Your Honors. Now He that keeps Israel, watch over You
continually, guide You here with his Counsel, and after receive You to glory.
This is the Prayer of

Your Honors unworthy Servant, W. LIGHTBVRN.
From my Study in S. Audoens Arch, October. 25. 1661.
EXODUS XVIII. X. And Jethro said, Blessed be the Lord who has delivered you
out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who has
delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.


THE Book of Exodus may be divided into two parts, Historical and Dogmatical;
the Historical part is laid down in this and the seventeen preceding Chapters,
the Dogmatical part begins in the next Chapter. The Historical part is a
Compendium, or a summary Recaptitulation of the remarkable passages of the
Lords providential actings toward Israel in the time of their abode in Egypt,
their coming out of Egypt, and their travels in the Wilderness.

In the beginning of this Chapter we have a relation of Jethro's journey to
visit Moses his Son-in-law; Moses Declaration of the goodness of God to Israel,
and Jethro's return of praise.

Jethro comes to Rephidim, Number. 33.14. (the eleventh stage where Israel pitched
after their coming out of Egypt) and that is (as Geographers account) but
sixteen miles from the City of Midian, the place of Jethro's residence.

When Moses was given to understand of Jethro's coming, he goes forth to meet
him; wherein (by the way) we may note, 1. Moses humility, who being so great a
Prince, Commander in chief of so great a People, yet disdains not to humble
himself not only to go out to meet him, but also to do obeisance unto him. 2.
His love, he kissed him. 3. His humanity, gentleness and courtesy, he asked him
of his welfare. 4. His hospitality and beneficence, he brought him into his
tent. 5. His gratitude, he makes a thankful rehearsal and repetition of
Isreal's wonderful deliverance. 6. We have an intimation of his patience under
the afflictions of Israel. 7. His fidelity in all God's house; he teaches
others by his Example to celebrate the praises of God, his mercy and his
goodness, and not to fall into despondencie under the pressure of the greatest
afflictions, but to rely upon the promises, to depend upon God, and to commit
the issue to him; knowing it is but a little while, and then he that shall come
will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37. All this we have in the 8th verse.
Thus Moses informs Jethro in the History of the Church, and Jethro advises
Moses touching the administration of the Commonwealth, verse. 19. etc. seq.

Then Jethro is described, 1. by his proper Name (Jethro,) 2. by the name of
his Office (a Priest,) 3. by the place where he exercised his Priesthood (in
Midian,) verse. 1. The Midianites were of the progeny of Abraham by Keturah,
Genesis 25.2. and therefore Jethro may be presumed to have some measures of
knowledge of the true God, though he lived among a people that were drunk with
idolatry, and drowned in the Errors of heathenish superstitions, 1. Because he
came from the loins of Abraham, of whom the Lord gives this Character, Genesis
18.19. I know that Abraham will command his children, and his household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that
the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. 2. Because of
his long conversing with M^ses.If any object that expression verse. 11. Now I
know that the Lord is great, etc. I answer: This is no argument that he knew
not the greatness and goodness of JEHOVAH before this time, but that he knew it
now, that is, more evidently, more conspicuously, and by a new demonstration;
it argues an increase and corroboration of his faith, and that now his former
knowledge was sealed up by a new argument and experiment, how great the Lord is
in his power, in delivering his people; and how terrible he is in his Majesty,
in confounding their enemies. Such an expression is used Act. 10.34. Now I
perceive that God is no respecter of persons; Peter knew this before, but he is
said to know it now, because he knew it anew, by a new miracle, by anew vision
and revelation. And so 1 King. 17.24. the woman of Zarephath says, Now by this
I know that thou art a man of God; she knew it before, by the multiplying of
the meal in the barrel, and the oil in the cruse, verse. 14.15,16. but she says,
I know it now; that is, by a new miracle, by raising my dead son to life. And
Psalm. 20.7. Now know I that the Lord saves his anointed, etc. David knew this
before, but he is said now to know it, because he then knew it by a new
salvation, by a new deliverance.

The Text contains Jethro's Doxology for Israel's Deliverance. 1. Jethro
rejoiced, v. 9. Hebr. Vaiichad, Gr. (...), he was astonished, he was (as it
were) in an ecstasy, that imports the greatness of his wonder and admiration at
such a stupendous Act. 2. He expresses his joy by bursting forth into praises,
Blessed be the Lord, etc. 3. He lays down the grounds and reasons; 1. the
deliverance of the Israelites from the hand of the Egyptians; 2. the
destruction of the Egyptians before the face of Israel, v. 11. 4. He offers
Sacrifices and Burnt-offerings; and so he rejoices Cord, Ore, and Opere, in
Heart, in Word and in Work, v. 12. 5. Aaron and all Israel rejoice with him, in
the last part of the 12th verse.

Doct. Hence we learn, That it is a Duty incumbent upon all, Jethro and Moses,
Aaron and Israel, Priest and People, to bless God, and to make his praise to be
glorious, when he glorifies his mercy in delivering his Church; we are then to
praise God greatly, when he gives us great Deliverances; then it is seasonable
to sing a Benedictus, Blessed be the Lord, who has delivered his people from
the hand of the Egyptians, etc. So Psalm. 66.8. O bless our God, ye people, and
make the voice of his praise heard, which holds our soul in life, and
suffers not our feet to be moved: for thou, O God, have proved us, thou have
tried us as ^lver is tried; thou broughtest us into the net, thou layedst
affliction upon our loins; that have caused men to ride over our heads, we went
through fire and through water, etc. Here is great affliction, the net, men
riding over their heads, passing through fire, and through water, (great
Dangers) then great Deliverances, v. 12. Thou broughtest us out into a wealthy
place; therefore they sing great praises, v. 13. I will go into thy house with
burnt-offerings, I will pay thee my vows which my lips have uttered when I was
in trouble; I will offer thee burnt sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense of
rams, I will offer bullocks and goats: and then he concludes with a Benedictus,
Blessed be God, v. 20. I might multiply Scriptures for further evidences of
this truth, but this may suffice.

Now to come to the Reasons and Arguments of the point Why is this a duty
incumbent upon all? Why are we then to sing great praises, when the Lord gives
us great Deliverances? 1. Because by so doing, we glorify God, Psalm. 50.23.
Whosoever offers praise, he glorifieth me. Thus did David, 1 Chronicles. 29.10.
Benedictus, Blessed be thou, O Lord God of Israel our father, for ever and
ever. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the
victory, and the Majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in the earth is
thine, thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all.
God requires not our Wisdom to direct him, nor our strength to assist him, nor
our dignity to advance him; but our thankfulness to adore him. Grace requires
Gratitude; when God extends his bountifulness, we are to be enlarged in our
thankfulness; when Benefits are gotten, the Benefactors must not be forgotten:
we must glorify God, and sing praises to him that is holy, and that inhabiteth
the praises of Israel, Psalm. 22.4.

Secondly, Why is it so? etc. It is because such return of blessing, thanks and
praises is Gods tribute, that pepper-Corn of acknowledgement, that all we have,
we hold in Capite, we have it from him from whom every good gift and every
perfect gift does descend, even from him who is the father of lights, Jam.
1.17. and the detaining of this tribute is no less then God-robbing, and the
Apostles exhortation is, Let him that stole steal no more, Ephesians. 4.28. It is
Gods tribute, Psalm. 50.14,15. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows to
the most high: And call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver
thee^, and thou shall glorify me. Thus Melchisedeck King of Salem, and Priest
of the most high God, pays his tribute, and returns praise for Abraham's
deliverance from the sword of the four Kings that fought against Sodom;
Benedictus Deus fortis excelsus, Blessed be the most high strong God, Genesis
14.20. And the Prophet Habakkuk (seeing by the perspective of Prophecy) the
deliverance of the Church from the Captivity of Babel, pays his tribute
beforehand, and blesses God greatly for that great deliverance, Hab. 3.17,
etc. David's Psalms are so many storehouses of Examples: Every Psalm (as one
notes) is either an Hosanna, or else an Hallelujah; either God bless, or God be
blessed; either Prayers, or Praises; either Prayers for Mercies, or Praises for
Mercies.

Thirdly, Because thankfulness for Mercies or Deliverances received, is honum
and jucundum; it is fit, meet, and decent; it is a good and pleasant thing,
Psalm. 92.1. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing
praises unto thy name, O most high; to show forth thy loving kindeness in the
morning, and thy faithfulness in the night: for thou, Lord, have made me glad
through thy work, and I will give thanks for the operation of thy hands: It is
good and pleasant; it is Mel in One, Melos in Aure, Jubilatio in Cord, Honey
in the Mouth, Music in the Ear, and Melody in the Heart. And therefore the
Apostle exhorts us, Ephesians. 5.19,20. Speak to your selves in Psalms, and Hymns,
and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord,
giving thanks always for all things unto God, and the Father, in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ; and Col. 3.16. Let the word of God dwell in you richly,
in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. Thus did David
sing with grace in his heart, Psalm. 108.1. O God, my heart is fixed, my heart
is fixed; I will sing and give praise, even with my glory. I will praise thee,
O Lord, amongst the people; and I will sing praises unto thee among the
nations: For thy mercy is great above the heavens, and thy truth reaches unto
the clouds. Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory above all
the earth.

Fourthly, The very Dictates of Nature teach us gratuity and thankfulness to
our Benefactors. All rivers (says the wise man) come from the sea, and all
rivers (by way of a thankful Retribution) return and empty their waters into
the Sea. God is the main Ocean, the great sea of all blessings, all Rivers of
blessings flow from him, and therefore (according to the very dictates of
Nature) ought to be returned unto him. Psalm. 93.3. The floods have lifted up, O
Lord, the floods have lifted up their voice. Ainsworth (in locum) tells us,
That the Chaldee has it thus: The floods have lifted up their voice of praises
to God, and the floods have received the reward of their praises from God, Psalm
91.1. The heavens declare the glory of God, Psalm. 96.12. Psalm. 98.7. Psalm. 148.
There is a general summons and invitation, not only of all sorts of men, but
also all manner of Creatures to this duty, and to join together in this
Harmony, to give praises to God, and to make the voice of his praise to be
glorious.

Fifthly, Because ingratitude and unthankfulness (even among Barbarians) has
been ever reputed a monstrous thing; it is a preternatural thing, one of those
Privations and Deficiencies which GOD never wrought, but the malice of the
Devil brought into the world, by shouldering out the contrary positive and
primitive Virtues. We speak of an unthankful person with more then ordinary
detestation, and account an ungrateful person, an unnatural man. One phrases
Ingratitude a Solecism in sense, a Paradox in manners, and a Prodigy in
nature. See how the Lord detests and abominates it, and calls the Heavens and
the Earth to witness against it; Isa. 1.2. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O
Earth; for the Lord has spoken: I have nourished and brought up children, and
they have rebelled against me, the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his
Masters crib; (they know their Benefactors) but Israel does not know, my people
does not consider. And the Lord (by the Prophet Micah) calls upon the
mountains, and the strong foundations of the earth to listen and attend to the
plea and controversy he has with them that were called his people, for their
monstrous ingratitude, Mich. 6.1. Hear ye now what the Lord says: Arise,
contend thou before the mountains and let the hills hear thy voice. Hear ye, O
ye mountains, the Lords controversy, and ye strong foundations of the earth:
for the Lord has a controversy with his people, and he will plead with
Israel: O my people, what have I done unto thee? testify against me. For I
brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of
servants; and I sent before thee Moses, A iron and Miriam: O my people,
remember now what Balak king of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the Son of Beor
answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the righteousness of
the Lord* Here the Lord upbraids them with their monstrous and more then
beastly sin of ingratitude, and calls the insensible creatures to witness
against them, and the Psalmist, Psalm. 78.11. They forgot his works and his
wonders that he had showed them; marvelous works did he in the sight of their
fathers, etc. but v. 32. for all this they sinned still, and believed not his
wondrous works, v. 42. They remembered not his hands nor the day when he
delivered them from the enemy; how he had wrought his signs in Egypt, and his
wonders in the field of Zoan, etc. That is the fifth Argument, taken from the
nature of the sin of Unthankfulness; it is a monstrous and horrid sin.

Sixthly, Another Argument may be taken from the example of Saints. and here
(to use the Apostles phrase) we have (...) (Arias Montanus) circumjacentum
nubem testium; or as Beza, Circumstantem nubem; We are compassed about with a
cloud of witnesses. When they received Mercies, and Blessings, and
Deliverances, they looked up and returned Blessings to him that was the
Fountain of those Blessings and Deliverances: They did not ( Hab. 1.16.)
sacrifice to their own nets, or burn incense to their own drags, as though
their portion was made fat, or their meat plentious by them; they did not
ascribe it to their own sword, or their own bow, but to him who is the Savior
of Israel, the Deliverer of those that trust in him, Psalm. 44.1. We have heard
with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us what works thou did in their
days, in the times of old, how thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand,
and plantedst them, how thou did afflict the people, and cast them out. For
they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own
arm save them; but thy right hand, and thine arm, the light of thy countenance,
because thou had a favor unto them. V. 6. I will not trust in my bow, it is
not my sword that shall save me. But thou have saved us from our enemies, and
have put them to confusion that hated us. Therefore in God we make our boast
all the day long, and will praise thy name for ever.

Secondly, They did not only thankfully acknowledge that their Deliverances
came from Heaven, and offer up the Sacrifice of Praise, Jehovae liberatori, to
God that delivered them; but also they did it, in die illo, in the same day.
The same day in which they were delivered, the same day was the day of their
thanksgiving. Seneca tells us that thanks deferred or slowly returned, lessens
the estimation of the benefit received, and is no thanks; and therefore the
people of God delayed not, but offered their Sacrifice of praise, in die illo,
the same day in which they received their deliverance. Exodus 14.30. Thus the
Lord saved Israel on that day out of the hand of the Egyptians. And on that day
Moses and Israel returned a Sacrifice of praises for that Deliverance; Exodus
15.1. Then (in die illo) sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto
the Lord, and spoke saying, I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed
gloriously, etc. Lyra notes (upon the Text) that they did not only sing
praises, but they also invited one another, stirred up one another to the same,
according to that of the Prophet, Psalm. 34.3. O magnify the Lord with me, and
let us exalt his Name together. The like Example we have in Deborah and Barak,
Judge. 5.1. The Lord had given Israel a great deliverance from Sisera, who had
nine hundred Chariots of Iron, and twenty years had mightily oppressed the
children of Israel, Judge. 4 3. Then (says the Text) sang Deborah and Barak the
son of Abinoam (on that day) saying, Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of
Israel: They sang praises in die illo, on that same day on which the Lord
delivered them. And the practice of David was the same, as we see in the
inscription of Psalm. 18. A Psalm of David the Servant of the Lord, who spoke
unto the Lord the words of this song IN THE DAY that the Lord delivered him out
of the hand of all his enemies, and from the band of Saul, etc. He sang praises
in die illo, on the same day on which he received his deliverance. The same we
find in the practice of religious Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 20.26. Thus they praised
God for their deliverances, they returned the Rivers of thanks to the Sea of
Blessings; and delayed not their returns, but offered Sacrificium laudis, their
sacrifice of praise to the Lord, at the same day and time that they were
delivered.

Thirdly, They did not only bless God for his Blessings by themselvess and in
their own persons, but it was their practice to preach their mercy, and
deliverances to their children, and so one generation to another, that the
thankful memorial and remembrance of them might never die, but be perpetuated
to all posterity. This was the Precept of God frequently repeated in the Book
of Deuteronomy: there (after a rehearsal of the many Blessings and Deliverances
which the Lord had given them) the Lord gives them a charges, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Take
heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things
which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thine heart, all the days
of thy life; but teach them to thy sans and to thy sons sons. And this was
their practice, Psalm. 44.1. We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers
have told us what work thou did in their days, in the time of old; how thou
did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them, how thou did
afflict the people, and cast them out, etc. And Psalm. 78.3. I will speak that
which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us; we will not hide
them from their children, showing to the generations to come the praises of the
Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful works that he has done: the Lord
commanded our fathers that they should make them known to their children, that
the generations to come might know them, even the children which should be
born, who should arise and declare them to their children, etc. Psalm. 102.18.
This shall be written for the generations to come, and the people that shall be
created shall praise the Lord. Thus the people of God did not only return
thanks in an heat for their deliverances, whiles the memory of the mercy was
fresh, but they made frequent and serious rehearsals of them to their children,
and their childrens children, that for the mercy bestowed upon many, thanks
also might be given by many, 2 Cor. 1.11.

Fourthly, That they might for ever retain in a thankful remembrance such
gracious deliverances, and that the generations to come, and the children which
should be born might praise the LORD for them; they had also annual
festivities and stationary days, which they (yearly) kept holy to the Lord, and
on such days thankfully celebrated the goodness of God for the particular
mercies and deliverances received on those days; as the annual Festivity of the
Passover, Pentecost, Expiation, Tabernacles, Trumpets, etc. all of them
instituted to be thankful memorials of special mercies relating to those days
and times. So Exodus 12.14. This day shall be to thee for a memorial, and you
shall keep it a feast to the Lord throughout your generations, you shall keep
it a feast by an ordinance for ever. Here we have an Ordinance for an
anniversary festival, a day yearly and every year, to be kept holy to the Lord,
for an yearly solemn remembrance of the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt:
(this day) note the same day they were delivered, the same day was to be kept
(yearly) holy to the Lord for a memorial and a day of thanksgiving for that
deliverance: (you shall keep it a feast) Hebr. you shall keep it festivally
(that is) with mirth, rejoicing and jubilation (as Nehem. 8.9.12.) (you shall
keep it by an ordinance for ever) Hebr. an everlasting ordinance, an ordinance
of perpetuity, extending to all generations, Exodus 12.17. This self same day
have I brought out your Armies out of Egypt, therefore shall ye observe this
day in your generations by an ordinance for ever; and the same is repeated v.
24. So here we see a day was yearly and every year to be kept holy to the Lord
by the ordinance of God, in a thankful and mo^e solemn remembrance of Isreal's
deliverance from the hand of the Egyptians: Nay, and more then this, howsoever
Festivals and holy days have been in our times cried down by some, (as Popish,
matters of Superstition and Will Worship, for which we have ^o ordinance or
command from God) yet we find the ancient Church has from time to time,
according to the emergent occasion, without any express ordinance or
commandment of God, laudably and religiously appointed certain days to be kept
yearly holy to the Lord in a thankful commemoration of mercies and deliverances
received upon those days; and such are the fifth of November, and the three and
twentieth of October with us, days appointed to be kept holy eevery year for
ever, in a thankful remembrance of our Deliverances on those days. So the days
of Purim were ordained to be kept as Festivals, and holy to the Lord; by all
the Jews, in a thankful and joyful remembranc of their deliverances from the
mischief which Haman had devised against them. Those days (I say) were
ordained and commanded to be kept holy by Hester and Mordecai; and afterward
ratified and confirmed by the Subscription of the whole Church; as an Ordinance
of perpetuity to continue to all generations for ever. Hest.
9.20,21,22,23,27,28. And we read. Macc. 4.59. That the Church and the
Congregation of Israel (when they were delivered from their enemies and had
restored the worship and service of God, and dedicated the Altar, for
Sacrifice) they made an Ordinance, that certain days should be kept holy to
the Lord yearly, and for ever, in a grateful remembrance of that mercy, and
that festival was called the feast of dedication. If any object, the text is
Apocryphal, and therefore signifies little: I answer, that this Act of the
Church had our Saviors approbation, who honored it with his presence, and
preaching at that Solemnity. J^h. 10.22. And thus the Church in the new
Testament has instituted and appointed certain days yearly to be kept
Festivalls, and holy to the Lord, in a thankful remembrance, of some special
and spiritual mercies solemnly to be celebrated on those days, as the
Nativity, Circumcision, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, which days St
Augustine. Ep. 118.119. avouches were observed by the whole Church of Christ,
from the time of the Apostles, and by Apostolic tradition, and the primitive
Apostolic Church (without any divine commandment that we read of) appointed
the first day of the week to be the Christian Sabbath, and I see no reason, but
men may as well abrogate, and cry down that Festival, as others that are of
the same institution, that day (I say) the primitive Apostolic Church ordained
to be kept holy, as the Christian Sabbath, in a thankful remembrance, of the
glorious Resurrection of our Savior Christ that day. And these days so
ordained by the Church, to be kept Festivalls and holy to the Lord, are called
by the Fathers, Festival days, holy days, Solemn days, Sacred days,
mystical days, and were so kept and observed by them. Thus (in the fourth
place, the people of God (that the memorial of their deliverance might be
derived to their posterities) had yearly certain days set apart, to be kept
holy to the Lord, to praise him for those particular mercies.

Then fifthly, at such Solemn assemblies, they did not only rest from their
labors, and all servile works, and keep a day holy to the Lord, but also they
expressed their thankfullnes, for mercies and deliverances; which they had
received, by Singing Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, in singing
praises to their God, in singing praises singing praises to their King Psalm.
47.6. in singing praises with Instruments of music; to make the praises of God
to be the more glorious, and the more to raise up their spirits to an higher
strein; that their Souls and all that was within them might echo forth the
goodness of God, and praise his holy name, and men and women, and all the
congregation might with more cherefulness, join together, in that harmony: so
Ex. 15.1. there Moses sets the song, is Praecentor of the choire, and he and
all the men of Israel sing separately by themselves, I will sing unto the Lord,
for he has triumphed gloriously, etc. and then the women, they make an other
Choire, and sing separately by themselves ( Miriam the Prophetess beginning the
song) they sing alternatim, as in a Choire, and they sing, with musical
instruments. v. 20. And Miriam the Prophetess the Sister of Aaron, took a
timbrel in her hand and all the women went out after her, with timbrels and
with dances, and Miriam answered them and said, sing ye to the Lord, for he
has triumphed gloriously, etc. The Doway translators note upon the beginning
of the chapter, out of Origin in his 6 Homily upon Exodus, that this is the
first canticle, hat ever we read of, either sacred or profane. Thus did Deborah
and Barak after the deliverance of Israel from the oppression of Sisera, they
sang their Psalm of thanksgiving, Jud. 5.1. And thus we read that the women
sang with musical instruments, alternatim, answering one another. 1. Sam.
18.6. The women came out of all the Cities of Israel, singing and dancing, with
tabrets with joy, and with instruments of music (or three stringed
instruments) and the women answered one another, as they played and said, etc.
Thus when Jehosaphat and the remnant of Juda had received a gracious
deliverance from the numerous Army of the Ammonites, Moabites, and Edomites, he
and all Juda with him, sang Psalms of thanksgiving to the Lord, for that great
deliverance with psalteries and harps, and trumpets, 2 Chr. 20.27. they
returned (says the text) every man of Juda and Jerusalem, and Jehosaphat in
the forefront of them to go again to Jerusalem with joy, for the Lord had made
them to rejoice over their enemies. And they came to Jerusalem with Psalteryes,
and Harps, and trumpets, unto the house of the Lord. Many such examples we have
in David's Psalms, as Psalms to be sung on Neginoth, and upon Nehiloth, and upon
Sheminith, upon Gittith, upon Muthlabben, etc. which were musical instruments,
used in singing praises, such as the flute, trumpet, cornet, organs, virginals,
etc. And in particular, there are 15. Psalms, called gradual psalms, psalms of
Ascents, or psalms of degrees, which begin with the 120. Psalm. which are
Gratulatory Psalms, made to be sung with musical Instruments, for the
deliverance of the Church from the Captivity of Babell: and the Jews in their
celebration of the Passover, have of ancient time used to sing gratulatory
Psalms, or Songs of thanksgiving, for the deliverance of the Church, from the
bondage of Egypt. Sic Paulus Burgensis in Psalm. 113. and Buxtorf. Lex. Talmud.
page. 613.
That is Psalm. 113. 114, 115, 116, 117. and 118. which they call Magnum
Hallelujah, and this Song or hymn (the learned are of opinion) was the same
which our Savior and his disciples sung after they had celebrated his last
passover; and the text will bear it, Mat. 26.30. (...) that is hymning it, or
singing the hymn, what hymn? the hymn (...) that hymn which the Jews used to
sing at their three greatest feasts and especially, at the feast of the
passover, and with which hymn they concluded the feast, and when our Savior
had celebrated the same feast it may well be, he concluded with the same Song,
a Song of thanksgiving for Isreal's deliverances.

Then sixthly in there their Solemnities, they stirred up themselves to the more
thankfulness, by rehersals, and repetitions of the manner or means by which
they were delivered, they did set forth Magnalia and Mirifica Dei, Jud. 5.11.
there is a rehersall of the rightous acts of the Lord toward Israel, and the
end was, that his name only might have the praise; thus when Moses and Israel
Sung a Song of praise, to Jehova, for their deliverance out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and from the hand of Pharao, a principal part of that Song is to
set forth Magnalia Dei, the great and wonderful working of the Lord in that
deliverance, in the manner, and the greatness of his Excellency that in his
wrath consumed the Egyptians like stubble. Ex. 15.7. That with the blast of his
nostrills he made the waters stand upon an heap, and the depths to be
congealed in the heart of the Sea, that he did but bl^w with his wind, and the
Sea covered them and they sanke as lead (...) the mighty waters, he did but
stretch out his hand, his right hand, and the earth swallowed them, and
thereupon they sing, who is like unto thee O Lord among the Gods? who is like
unto thee glorious in holiness? fearful in praises, doing wonders? v. 11. And
the prophet David making a thankful memorial of that great deliverance,
invites all men to come and see, and consider Magnalia and Mirabilia Dei, the
wonderful workings of God, in bringing to pass that great deliverance. Psalm.
66.1. Make a joyful noise, unto God, all ye Lands; sing for the honor of his
name, make his praise to be glorious. Say unto God, how terrible art thou in
thy works? through the greatness of thy power shall thine enemies submit
themselves unto thee. All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto
thee; they shall sing unto thy name. Selah. Come and see the works of God, he
is terrible in his doings toward the children of men: he turned the Sea, into
dry Land, they went through the flood on foot, there did we rejoice in him. O
bless God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard. etc. Psalm.
77.16. The waters saw thee O God, the waters saw thee, and were afraid, the
depths also wear troubled, the clouds poured out water, the Skies sent out a
sound, thine arrows also went abroad the voice of thy thunder was in the
heaven, the lightnings lightened the world, the earth trembled and shook; Thy
way is in the Sea and thy path in the great waters, and thy foot steps are not
known. Psalm. 78.12. Mavelous things did he in the sight of their fathers, in
the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan. He divided the Sea, and caused them to
pass through, and he made the waters to stand as an heap. In the day time, he
led them also with a cloud, and all the night, with a light of fire. etc. And
Deborah and Barak, in their song of thanksgiving set forth Magnalia, and
Mirabilia Dei; the wonderful works of God, how the armies of Heaven and Earth
fought for their rescue, and deliverance. Jud. 5.20. They fought from heaven,
the stars in their courses fought against Sisera. The river Kishon swept them
away, that ancient River, the River Kishon. O my soul thou have trodden down
strength.

Then Seaventhly for the better expression of their thankfulness, for such
mercyes and deliverances and that they might be transmitted and handed over, to
all posterity, and generations, and that the people that were unborn might
praise the Lord, it was usual, and ordinary, with them, to put some remarkable
sign, or token of remembrance, upon the particular mercy, and deliverance,
which they had received, or upon the place, where they received it by giving it
a name, that did import and signifye the same, that so when their children or
their childrens children should in time to come, ask the reason, why is this
thing, or this place called by this name, then their fathers might preach unto
them the gracious deliverance of the Church in that thing, or that place and
make rehearsal and repetition of the righteous Acts of the Lord: thus the Lord
instructed them in the ordinance of the Passover. Exodus 12.25. it was called
the Passover, because the Lord commanded the destroying Angel to pass over
the houses of Israel when he slew all the first born of the Egyptians. And it
shall come to pass (says the text) when ye be come to the land which the Lord
will give you according as he has promised that ye shall keep this service.
And it shall come to pass when your children shall say unto you what mean you
by this service that ye shall say it is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover
who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the
Egyptians, and delivered our houses. Hebr. Pasch, from Pasach, that is to
leap, or Passover
And when the waters of Jordan were cut off (or divided) that the people might
pass into the land of promise; Josua commanded (for a perpetual remembranise;
f this Act to all posterity) that twelve men (that is) one out of every tribe
of Israel should take a great stone out of midst of Jordan and set them up upon
a heap upon that place which was dried up for their passage, that when the
generations to come should ask, what means this great heap of stones, then the
fathers might preach to their children the righteous Acts of the Lord, and (by
reviving the memorial of that wonderful mercy) stir them up to praise the
Lord. Jos. 4.6. The Lord gave Israel a great deliverance, from their enemies by
the hand of Samson; first Samson returned thanks (Lord thou have given this
great deliverance to thy servant) and then he puts a name upon the place, for a
Memorandum to posterity, he calls it, Jud. 15.17. Ramath Lehi (that is) the
lifting up of the jaw bone; that when the generations to come should inquire,
why is this place called Ramath Lehi? then their fathers might preach unto them
the righteous Acts of the Lord; and show them the greatness of the deliverance
by the weakness of the means. So Isreal's great deliverance from the enemy,
that surrounded and compassed them about; David thankfully ascribes unto the
Lord; the Lord (says he) ha^h broken in upon mine enemies like the breach of
waters; and then he gives a name to the place, for a Memorandum to Posterity,
he calls it Baal-Perazim (that is) the plain of breaches. 2. Sam. 5.20. That
when the children in time to come should inquire, why is this place called
Baal-Perazim? then their fathers might teach them the great mercies of God
toward Israel; and say unto them, in this place the enemy compassed us about,
and thought to swallow us up quick: and here the Lord broke in upon them like
the breach of waters, and therefore this place is called Baal-Perazim, the
plain of breaches. The like may be said of Samuel when the Lord had delivered
Israel from the Army of the Philistines, not by sword, or by bow or by battle,
but by thunder from heaven, then Samuel set up a great pillar of stone for a
memorial to all generations, and gives it a name, he called it Eben-Ezer, that
is the stone of help, saying thus far the Lord has helped us. 1. Sam. 7.12.
And after that Jehosaphat had received a notable deliverance, (from the
numerous Army of the Ammonites, the Moabites, and the Edomites, that came
against Juda) not by fighting but by singing, and praising God. 2. Chr.
20.21.23. That the memorial of so great a deliverance might be perpetuated to
all posterity, he put a name upon the place and called it Berachah; that is
blessing, and so that valley, was called the valley of blessing, that when
their children in time to come etc.

Eighthly they expressed their thankfulness, by erecting of Altars, as Moses.
Exo. 17.14. and Gideon. Jud. 6.24. and Josua. Jos. 8.30. and others.

Ninethly. They did not only bless God for their deliverances, and build
Altars, and erect great pillars, and monuments: but also they writ whole
Rolls, Books and volumes, of their deliverances, for the instruction of
future generations, and thus the Lord commanded Moses, to write Isreal's
deliverance from the lying in wait of Amelek (the first enemy that affronted
them after their coming out of Egypt) Jos. 17.14. The Lord said unto Moses,
write this for a Memorial in a book: the Lord will have written and recorded
not only what Amalek did to Israel, but also what the God of Israel did to
Amalek, for a Memorial to Israel, for instruction to posterity, that the
generations to come might praise the Lord. Thus Isreal's deliverance from the
Amorites and the wonderful Acting of the Lord in order thereunto, they
recorded in a book for the benefit of posterity. Jos. 10.13. The Sun stood
still in Gibeon and the Moon in the valley of Ajalon, till the people were
avenged of their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jasher? The great
deliverance of Israel in the red sea, and the wonders which the Lord wrought in
the brooks of Arnon were recorded for a Memorial to posterity in the book of
the wars of the Lord. Number. 21.14. It is said in the book of the wars of the
Lord, what he did in the red sea and in the brooks of Arnon. And at the stream
of the brooks that goes down to the dwelling of Ar, and lies upon the border
of Moab. The vulgar latin reads the rocks of the torrents were bowed down that
they might rest in Ar, and lie in the borders of moab, upon which the do way
translators comment thus. A the Egyptians were drowned in the sea: so the
Amorites were oppressed with the rocks falling upon them, and the waters
carried their carcases into the valley of Moab. This was recorded in the book
of the wars of the Lord. And thus they writ volumes and books of their
deliverances, for an everlasting Memorial to all posterity. And was it thus
with our fathers and the people of God informer ages, then surely whatsoever
things were written a foretime, were written for our learning, and that we
might be led forward to perfection. These examples are so many instructions to
us, so many memorials and Memorandums for us to show what is required of us,
what duty is incumbent upon us, and what the Lord requires at our hands for so
many mercies and blessings and deliverances which we have received.

But a first use may be by way of reproof of the lukewarmness the incogitancy,
and inconsideration of the men and women of our times and our great
unthankfulness. Have we not been like Gideons fleece abundantly watered with
the dew of heaven, when the Nations round about us have been dry? and where is
the demonstration of our thankfulness; have we not received showers of mercies,
plenty of blessings and deliverances Corporal and Spiritual, of soul and of
body, and where is the manifesto of our thankfulness, did not we, our wives and
our children, our familyes and relations receive a wonde^full deliverance as
upon this day. the 23. of October. 1641. from the treachery, the inveterate and
implacable malice and fury of our bloodthirsty enemies? and where is the
expression of our thankfulness? had we not our lives given to us for a prey and
were rescued from the hand of the Egyptians and from the hand of Pharao? but
where is our thankfulness? have we not been delivered from many and very many
dangers since, but then where is the Expression of our thankfulness? have we
not been delivered from sword, and from famine and from pestilence? yea, but
where is the token of our thankfulness? have we not been lately delivered from
Anarchy and tyranny, and bondage, and vassalage, and oppression? and very
mushroms of men that did more then King it over us, King it? nay one of these
petty tyrants little fingers was heavier then a Kings loins: and where is the
index of our thankfulness? we have the worship and service of God restored, and
the priests again set in their orders, to praise God in the beauty of holiness
instead of Anarchy; we have our Ancient monarchy, instead of confused parity;
we have our Reverend Hierarchy instead of an arbitrary power; we have our
judges restored, to us, as at the first and our counselors as at the beginning;
instead of oppression, we have justice in our gates; instead of war we have
peace; instead of sickness, we have health; instead of penury, we have plenty;
what is it which the Lord could have done for a people, that he has not done
for us? what is it that the Lord has not given us? we may say with Moses, Deu.
29.2. ye have seen all that the Lord has done to the Egyptians, the great
temptations which your eyes have seen, the signs and great wonders, yet the
Lord has not given you hearts to perceive and eyes to see and ears to hear to
this day: what is it that the Lord has not given us? Oh he has not given us
thankful hearts to this day, we are like the barren ground that receives
abundance of good seed, but returns little fruit of increase, ten lepers (in
the Gospel) were cleansed, and but one returned, to give thanks to God. Luc.
17.17. The Lord may take up his ancient complaint by Moses Deuteronomy. 32.5. They
have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children, (or as
it is in the margin; they are not his children, that is their blot) they are a
perverse and crooked generation: Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people
and unwise; do we thus requite him? Brethren this unthankfulness of ours is a
sin of an high Elevation, of very great provocation; and let us take heed lest
our unthankfulness for mercyes in time past, render us incapable of the like
mercyes for the time to come. Remember Hezekiah. 2. Chr. 32.25. When the Lord
had saved him* from his enemies on every side, he was puffed up and rendered not
again according to the benefit done unto him; therefore there was wrath upon
him and upon Juda and Jerusalem. This is our case, we render not again
according to the mercyes we have received, we have forgotten our dangers and
we have forgotten our deliverances. Note that Apoc. 9.12. One woe (says the
Angel) is past, and behold there come two woes more hereafter: God has many
Arrows in his quiver, all are not spent when one woe is past, all is not past;
there are two more, and (it may be) two greater yet to come, and therefore
mind that saying of our Savior to the impotent man, that was made whole, Go
thy way sin no more (be not unthankful) lest a worse thing happen unto thee.
Secondly, it may serve for a use of exhortation, let us be exhorted, to turn a
new leaf, to learn a new lesson, to pay our tribute to whom tribute is due, to
render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God, the things that
are Gods. Let us learn to be thankful for all our mercyes; to be thankful
for every mercy. If I should here take upon me, to number our mercyes, and call
for a Benedictus Dominus, for every particular mercy and deliverance, the time
would soon sail me but matter could never sail me. I will therefore say with
the Kingly Prophet. Psalm. 139.17. O how precious are thy thoughts (O God) to us
ward; O how great is the sum of them? If I should count them they are more in
number then the sand. But If I will not forget the occasion of this days
solemnity (as Orbilius forgot his name) I must speak one word concerning that
great mercy and wonderful deliverance which we all received, as upon this
day, which calls for an universal thankfullness, from all sorts throughout all
generations.

There was a mischeivous, damnable, and divelish project hatched by a degenerate
generation of men, the Sons of Belial, against our Church and state, our
persons, our lives, our nation, and Religion; their devise was, to root out
all at once, to cut off head and tail, branch and rush, in one day: they had
been (as one says) a long time gathering of fagots, and as upon this day they
intended to set them on fire, to consume us all: but the Lord has preserved us
from the jaws of those lions whelps, plucked us like brands out of the midst of
the burning, and many of those who were so industrious in gathering of fagotts,
(like Nadab and Abihu) have been consumed with the flame, which themselves had
kindled. * Hebr. Palms or bellows, for the secret manner of working. Psalm. 9.
verse. 15.16.
Thus the Heathen are sunk down into the pit that they made, in the net which
they hid is their own foot taken. The Lord is known by the judgment which he
executes; the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgajon Selah
The Chaldee paraphrase (the just shall joyfully shout for ever) Tremellius
renders it ( rem sum memorandam, a thing chiefly to be remembered) The holy
Catholics had contrived a Catholic Apostasy and Rebellion, a Catholic
massacre and doomesday, for the good old cause (that is) for the advancement of
the Catholic interest, they had projected to quench the light of the Gospel
with the blood of us that professed it, and for the effecting their project
with the more facility, they had resolved to seize all the strong holds, forts,
castles and magazines in the Kingdom (and especially the Castle of Dublin) at
one time, that is upon this 23. of October and so to get all the Arms, and
Ammunition in the Kingdom into their own hands and then to fall to the Sword
and Skeane, and to cry with the Edomites, Down with them even to the ground,
Psalm. 137. v. 7. They had brought their design to the very nick of execution:
the liars in wait were entered into their Ambush to surprise the Castle of this
city at the hour appointed: they had brought their mischeivons devise as nigh
execution as Faux was to the blowing up of the Parliament house, the powder and
the billets were ready, the train was laid, there wanted nothing but applying
the match to the powder. Fire and wood were ready, and we were designed for the
sacrifice.
And these sons of Belial had brought their divelish plot within less then 14
hours to the time which they had designed for the execution: it was a work of
darkness, saw not the light, could not be discovered, and therefore could not
be prevented, but he that keeps Israel, that never slumbers nor sleeps, was
pleased to watchover us seasonably to bring this work of darkeness to light,
and by a wonderful way to discover their machinations and to deliver us by a
great deliverance as we see this day: And does not this call upon us to sing
Jethro's Song of thanksgiving Benedictus Dominus: Blessed be the Lord, who has
deliverd us out of the hadd of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharao;
who has delivered the people from the hand of the Egyptians.

When this design was discovered, and the Execution of it prevented; they fell
notwithstanding to carry on their purpose of rooting us out; by the practice of
all kind of mischief; that mischief which they had before concluded and that
as men in desperation. Haec quia non successit alia aggrediendum via.Now (I
confess) I should much afflict your minds and torment your patience (I say not
if I should make rehearsal: But) if I should but point and glaunce at those
manyfold and barbarous cruelties; inhumanities; and savage butcheries which
they used and practiced in every place were they came a against the British
Protestants (as atoken of their inveterate hatred both to their nation and
Religion) It is hard to judge whether they were more in genious in the
invention of variety of tortures or barbarously cruel in the execution. But
exungue leonem, you may know the lion by his paw and guesle at Hercules stature
by the impression of his foot in Olympus I will but mention (and I cannot
without trembling) the barbarous and inhumane stripping of men women and
children naked, in the depth of winter, in the height of frost, and snow, and
so turning them out of doors to wander in the bogs and mountains, destitute,
afflicted and tormented, feeding some like dogs and starving others with
hunger, their fearful reproaches blasphem^es, and insultations. Some they
would bring to the Church, strip them naked, set them before the Pulpit, beat
them with cudgels, or scourge them with rods, to the effusion of their blood,
and then ask them, how like you such a Sermon as this? to morrow you shall
hear such an other: what wanted this of the blasphemy of David's enemies, who
(in his distress) cried where is now thy God? Psalm. 42. v. 10. Hanging,
drowning, stabbing, knocking in the head were common and ordinary, and might be
reputed mercies at their hands, and indeed were mercies comparatively, that is
in comparison of the lingering torments inflicted upon many others. Some they
made drunk, with strong drink, or inveigled them to go to mass upon promise to
preserve their lives, and then immediately hanged them, indeavoring and
intending (as much as in them lay) to destroy both body and Soul together, some
they buried a live and took much pleasure and delight to hear their cries, and
pittyfull complaints, and few they buried otherwise, it is conceived (upon good
grounds) that in one River they drowned no fewer then a thousand persons, and
that in the province of Ulster, there perished (in the beginning of the
Rebellion) above 154000. persons, and then (as Ahashucrus said) what have they
done in the rest of the Kingdom? so that we may truly say with the Prophet,
Psalm. 79.1. Oh God the heathen are came into thine inheritance, thy holy
temples have they defiled, and have made Jerusalem an heap of of stones. The
dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat to the fowls of the
heaven, and the flesh of thy servants have the heasts of the earth. Their blood
have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury
them. Thus we were made a reproach to our neighbors, a very scorn and
derision to them that were round about us.

Now that the Lord has thus wonderfully delivered us, out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and preserved us alive, as it is this day, is it not a duty
incumbent upon all of us to sing a Benedictus Dominus? and say Psalm. 124.1.
etc. If the Lord himself had not been on our side (now may Israel say) If the
Lord himself had not been on our side when men rose up against us. Then they
had swallowed us quick, when they were so wrathfully displeased at us. Then the
waters had overwelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul. Blessed be the
Lord, who has not given us over as a prey unto their teeth. Our souls are
escaped, as a bird out of the snare of the fowler, the snare is broken and we
are delivered, let them then (says the Prophet) give thanks unto the Lord,
whom he has redeamed, and delivered from the hand of the enemy, and gathered
them from the east and from the west; and from the north; and from the south
Psalm. 107.2,3. Let the princes of the people sing their Benedctius: Give unto
the Lord (Oh ye mighty) Psalm. 29.1.2. give unto the Lord glory and strength,
give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name, worship the Lord in the beauty
of holiness, Let the priest be clothed with righteousness and let the saints
sing with joyfulnesse. Let the priests with Jethro sing their Benedictus:
Blessed be the Lord who has delivered us out of the hand of the Egyptians, Let
men sing with Zachary their Benedictus: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel Luc.
1.69. for he has visited and redeamed his people and has raised up a mighty
salvation for us. Let the women sing their Benedictus: Luc. 1.46. with Mary,
and say My soul does magnify the Lord; and my spirit rejoices in God my
Savior, etc. Let the children sing their Benedictus, with the young ones in
the temple, and say, Hosanna to the son of David, Hosanna in the highest, Mat.
21.9. Let us all give thanks and say, The Lord is good for his mercy endures
for ever. Who remembered us in our low estate; for his mercy endures for ever.
And has delivered us from our enemies, for his mercy endures for ever, Oh
give thanks to the God of heaven for his mercy endures for ever, Oh give
thanks to the Lord of all Lords; for his mercy endures for ever.

Psalm. 102.18. This shall be written for the generations that are yet to come;
and the children that are yet unborne shall praise the Lord.


FINIS.

