Something in Answer to Thomas Curtis and B. C' s Reasons why the Meeting House
Doors were shut up at Reading.
Friendly Reader,
FInding of late ^ Printed Paper spread abroad, in City and Country, with the
Name of Thomas Curtis to the first part of it, and B. C. to the latter; wherein
one of them pretends to give an account of the grounds upon which he intended
to shut up the Public Meeting House Door, of the People called Quakers in
Reading, and the other endeavors by certain Reasons to justify and defend the
doing thereof; We held our selves engaged in Christian duty to give an Answer
thereto, for the Clearing of the Truth we profess, Vindicating our selves in
the profession thereof, and Undeceiving all such as through the false
Insinuations in the said Paper either already are, or may be in danger to be
deceived thereby.

The Paper says, It is publicly known in this Town (Reading) that a Difference
is amongst the People called Quakers, as very frequently at our public
Meeting House does appear, to the dishonor of Almighty God, stumbling of the
Weak, and grief of many tender hearted, that W. L. I. B. etc. do from time to
time stir up Strife, by endeavoring the defamation of their ancient Friends,
rendering them to be departed from their first Principles, etc.

To which we answer in Truth and Plainness, that what T. (...) here charge upon
us is indeed that which they themselves are guilty of, for it is too well
known, that many Scandalous and Reproachful Books and Papers, have of late
Years been Written, and Published in Print to the World by some of their party
(as namely W. Rogers, F. Bugg, Tho. Crisp, S. Aldridge) greatly tending to the
defamation of our ancient Friends in Truth, and rendering them to be departed
from men first Principles, etc. This is too plain to be denied, their Books and
Papers being in Print, to be seen, and T. C. and others of party with him,
being in too great measure gone into, and joined with the same evil spirit of
defamation, as those opposers of Friends and Truth are in, have received,
owned, dispersed or spread aborad those Books and Papers or some of them, of
which we have often with grief complained to them, before we appeared in that
Testimony against them, of keeping on our Hats (which so much disturbs them)
but could obtain no satisfaction from them, although we plainly declared unto
them, that if they continued in that spirit of Division, and to own and spread
those ungodly scandalous Books, we should be necessiated to disown their
Testimonies in our Meetings; so that indeed and in truth it is they that have
endeavored to defame the ancient Friends of Truth (and that publicly in
Print) rendering them to be departed from their first Principles; it is they
that in thus doing have stirred up Strife to the dishonor of Almighty-God,
stumbling of the Weak, and grief of many tender hearted, and this before we
appeared in that Testimony of keeping on our Hats at their Prayers, whereby we
think it evidently appears that it is they that have caused the Divisions and
Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which we have learned; and since the Apostle
plainly says (as in their Paper is recited) They that are such, serve not our
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. We think it concerns them well to consider what ground
they now have to claim a right to a part of the Ministry of Christ Jesus our
Lord, since none that do not serve our Lord Jesus Christ can have a right to a
part of his Ministry. And whereas their Paper intimates, As if we had denied
that it is fit they should acknowledge to Almighty God in the Congregations of
his people those Mercies and Blessings that he is graciously pleased from time
to time to bestow on them, etc.

We answer that in the wording of this Passage they have rather used Art to
beguile the Reader, then Plainness to set forth the true state of the matter,
for as they have expressed it, some may be misled to think that we are against
acknowledging to Almighty God in the Congregations of his people the Mercies
and Blessings by him bestowed, and supplicating at the Throne of his Grace for
a future supply; whereas indeed we believe, and hold that every one that is
right sensible of the Mercies and Benefits received from God, and of his own
Inabillity, ought in that sense, and in the moving of the holy Spirit, to make
such acknowledgments and supplications; yet we planly declare we hold it not
fit for any who are gone out from the Unity and Communion of Gods people, and
have publicly defamed and disowned them as Apostates and Innovators (which
those have done the faithful Friends of Truth) to take upon them to make any
such Acknowledgments, or put up any such Supplications in the Congregations of
Gods people, as the mouth, or in the name and behalf of those Congregations
which such are gone out of the unity of; and when any such do take upon them so
to do, we do not believe there is any obligation upon those Congregations of
Gods people, or any Members thereof, to join in outward appearance with such
who in Spirit are departed from the fellowship of the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
but rather that such an outward compliance with that which in Spirit they have
not unity with (but the contrary) would be but an effect of Hypocrisy and
Deceit, for T. C. said to I. B. (before the Meeting House door was shut up)
That the Difference between them and us (meaning Friends) was not only in
outward things, but it was now in the heart and spirit.

Having thus endeavored to clear some passages wherein we and our Friends have
been misrepresented, we now proceed to the rest of the Paper, and first we
take notice that the reason given for the publishing their Paper is, That a
Copy of it was read publicly in the Meeting, and there tendered to some of
them that were concerned, but they would not take it. To which we answer, that
this is also unfairly represented; for tho it be true, that the Copy of that
Paper (or some such) was read, and tendered in the Meeting, and not then
received, not thinking fit at that time to meddle with it, our Spirits being
then engaged in the worship and service of God, which B. C. in the second
reason of their Paper says, Ought to be performed with great Seriousness and
Reverence; yet since some of us concerned did within the time in their said
Paper per^ix'd go to them to ask for the said Copy, but were denied to have it,
and one of them put off with Flouts, we think the not taking it at that
instant, when it was tendered (to divert us from the great Seriousness and
Reverence which the Worship and Service of God (Friends were then engaged in)
ought to be performed with) can by no means be admitted for a plain and just
ground of putting it and us in Print.

And whereas T. C. pretends in his Paper to a Power and Authority of shutting
up our Meeting House door, and keeping us out there, upon the score of his
being the chief Proprietor, as he is pleased to call himself, and B. C. also
calls him; we answer we know not upon what just ground (...) or any other of
the Proprietors, should claim a superiority, or chiefship of propriety in the
Meeting House, which was Built by common consent and agreement (tho B. C. in
his fourth reason says, without distinction, T C. Built it) and at the common
charg of the Friends of Reading, and other places, with what came out of the
public Stock and Rents, for if in common and public Works and Services
jointly undertaken and performed by any Christian Society or People for their
common and public Christian use, and so declared and settled by and amongst
them, the greatest Contributor should afterward challenge to himself a power
and right of disposing the whole; this were indeed a ready way to introduce a
Gentile like Lordship and Usurpation over one another, but would be altogether
unlike the Disciples and Followers of Jesus; but if T. C. did repute himself
the chief Proprietor upon the account of his being the largest Contributor, yet
since he well knows, that after the Meeting House was Built and Finished, he
did (because the Lease of the Ground whereon it was Built was taken in his
Name) pass over and legally convey his particular and personal Right and
Property therein to certain Friends in Trust, then agreed on by the whole, to
receive and keep the same for the whole, he might both in Reason and Modesty
have foreborn now to style himself the chief Proprietor, and much more from
taking upon him as such, to shut up the Meeting House door, and keep others of
the Proprietors out, his telling the Justices that he was chief Proprietor does
not make him so, no more then it did regain the House from the Soldiers that
had entered into it; and if it had never been regained, the loss had been
occasioned by him, and his adherence, inasmuch as that Meeting for which the
House was seized on, was set up by them, without and against the Consent and
Unity of Friends. And whereas He bids the Impartial Reader judge whether in
Reason and Equity he ought to look upon himself engaged to hazard his Estate to
pay Fines for a Meeting House, for such as publicly do disown him and his
Friends. We say, that although some of us have been fined because of the
Preaching of some of them who disowned us, yet we never desired T. C. or any
other particular of them should hazard their Estates on our accounts; if T. C.
exposed himself or Estate to any hazard in that respect, it was his own doing,
neither desired consented to, nor approved of by us, yet we offered to secure
him from any danger that should come upon him, if he left the Meeting House to
us. To his offer of reimbursing any that were dissatisfied because of their
having disburst some Money on the Premises, etc. We say we had not freedom to
receive the Money again which we had freely giving and devoted to that Service,
knowing that we had given it with an upright and conscientious regard to God,
neither were we willing to consent to, or help forward the Separation, which we
saw was designed and intended thereby, yet because we sawsome of them uneasy,
and to take off from them all occasions of Complaint, that they might see we
desired not to enjoy what they had any Share or Interest in against their minds
without making allowance to them; therefore we did offer to make them
reasonable Satisfaction for what Money they had laid down upon the Premises,
and we saw not, nor yet see any just ground they have to expect that we should
be more obliged to part with our Intrest then they with theirs; therefore in
truth of Heart and plainness of Speech we do sincerely declare, that we do
believe Tho. Curtis has no right nor just power in Equity, or in Law to do as
he has done, in shutting up the Meeting House Doors, and keeping out those
that both in Law and Equity have a right thereto: That the Propositions he
mentions in his Paper are Arbitrary and Penal, Arbitrary because they depend
only upon his and other men's Wills and Humors without Right and Reason; for
what Right or Reason can he pretend for tying us to give him our Answer to this
Paper of his by next 6th. day at farthest, after he had caused it to be Read
amongst us on the first day before, or to bind us to claim our Money in one
Months time: And that it is Penal appears in this, that in case his Proposals
were not complied with, he declared in his Paper he did intend to fasten up the
Doors, as he did accordingly, for on the 7th. day following the 6th. day B. C.
came to W. L. and J. B. and told them That if they had any thing to offer for
Reconciliation they might come, but W. L. came not, so the Doors that Evening
were fastened up; says B. C. in his 9th. Reason, but in this as in other parts
he writes unfairly, stating it as if the reason of their shutting up the Doors
that evening was because W. L. came not, etc. whereas W. L. being hindered by
necessary occasions desired J. B. to go, who accordingly did go, and offered
such terms both in his own and W. L. Name as they in Truth judged most
expedient for a right Reconciliation.

And that the Reader may see how ready we have been to comply with any
reasonable and just Proposals for a right Reconciliation, (however we have been
misrepresented in that respect) we will here for brevity give one particular
Instance, and leave it to the Impartial Readers Judgment; In the first Month
1685, 86. J. O. a Friend of London (an ancient Acquaintance both of theirs and
ours) came to this Town, and desired, and had a Meeting with T. C. and some
others of those that shut us out of the Meeting House, and some of us that were
shut out, where he signified to both them and us, that the Friends London
having heard that they had shut up the Meeting House doors, whereby Truth might
suffer, and Friends were kept out, and exposed to the Cold and Rain, and were
very much concerned about it, and had desired him to enquire the Reasons of it;
and when the Reasons they gave (being mostly such as B. C. has now Published)
were not Satisfactory to J. O. he proposed several ways to them and us jointly
to refer the matter to some Friends to be Indifferently chosen on both Parties,
to deside the matter between us, which we willingly agreed to, but they
refused. By which the honest Reader may judge how little sincerity there is in
all their talk of terms of Reconcilement, Accommodation, etc. who had set up
their own wills for a Law, and would admit no Judges but themselves in their
own Cause.

As for B. C's Reasons, although being much of the same nature with T. C's part
of the Paper, they either deserve no Answer, or no other then what is already
giving to that, yet to take from him all pretense of Boasting that he is not
particularly Answered, we shall here annex the Answer that was some time ago
sent him by another Friend in writing, while they were only in writing, which
notwithstanding the Alterations R. C. has since, made in some of his Reasons,
will yet, we do not doubt appear, to be a sufficient Answer to them.

Reading the 4th. of the 4th Month 1686. William Lamboll, John B^y,

and the rest concerned. This to go in persuance of the Paper it is an Answer
to.
Postscript to the Reader.
THese things are not pleasant to us, but rather a grief that we have cause on
this wise to appear in Public upon such a Subject, especially, against them
who were once our Friends and Familiers, that we must cry out against them as
Job did against his Friends (who often spoke good words, as these may do) yet
said he, Behold, I cry out of Wrong, but I am not heard, I cry aloud, but there
is no Judgment: So that notwithstanding their good words, their Ear was shut to
the cry of the Wronged, and though he cried aloud, there was no Judgment; and
now may not we well thus complain, who are kept out of our Right (which we have
called for) and our Bodies exposed to the Weather, to the great hazard of our
Healths, and endangering of our Lives, yet our cry of wrong cannot be heard,
and tho we cry aloud there is no Judgment. Oh that it should be thus with any
professing the equal Truth to do (in some measure) too like Ahab, who did not
not cover, and presently take, but proffered first a better Vinyard there it, or
would have given Naboth the worth of it in Money; but when this would not do,
the Woman Jezabel contrives or lays a Plot against Naboth, through whose crafty
Means and subtle. Contrivances, Innocent and Conscientions Naboth, who scrupled
to sell the Inheritance of his Father, was deprived of his Life and Vinyard
too, and as we are now deprived of our Property, so may we be of our Lives, by
reason of the hardships we are exposed too, if the Lord by his power and
goodness does not preserve us, who have been Conscientiously concerned not to
let go our Right, and give way to that which is Wrong, as Naboth was.

And what shall we say to such, but as Paul to the Corinthians, see 1 Cor. 6.
5. Is there not a wise man among you, no not one, that you may be able to
Judge, that you refuse a Reference; if so, then follow Paul's Advice, (if ye
account your selves of Christ's Church) and set them that are least esteemed in
the Church to Judge; for said Paul, There is utterly a fault among you, for you
Wrong and Defraud, and that your Brethren. So that it appears there were some
such that were Cloaked under the name of Christians, and yet did Wrong and
Defraud even their Brethren: Therefore, let none think it strange, if some now
under the name of Quaker, yea such as account themselves THE CHRISTIAN QUAKER,
are found in that which is wrong; neither let any think it strange if there be
some from among us that are unrulely, for there were such among the Primitive
Believers, whom the Apostle exhorted the Christians to warn, see 1 Thessalonians. 5.
14. yea, there was also a falling away, see, 2 Thessalonians. 2. And the Apostle says,
1 Cor. 11. 18, 19. I hear, there be Divisions among you, and I partly believe
it, for there must be Heresies among you, and the Reason he gives is, That they
which are Approved may be made manifest among you.

So to that divine Light that lights every man, are we willing to bring our
Deeds, knowing that what is reproved is made maniest by the Light, in which our
Desires are, that all may have their minds exercised, that so they may have a
true Discerning, and right Judgment in these and all things, and may not be
stumbled at what of this kind has or may happen, but may live and walk in that
Light where no occasion of stumbling is.

For had those of whom we complain, walked in this Light, they had kept in the
Unity of the Spirit of Truth, and in the Fellowship of the Gospel of Peace, and
Saints in Light, and had not given offense to Jew, or Gentile, or the Church of
Christ.

Benjamin Cole,
I Have received thy Paper given (as thou say) as Reasons why the Meeting
House Doors were shut up; which for my part I look upon as no good or
sufficient Reasons at all, neither can any good or sufficient reason be giving
for us (or indeed for a any people) to take away or detain one another Rights
from them, or to do one another any Wrong or Injury, which is wholly out of the
way, and inconsistant with the Truth which leads to overcome Evil with Good,
and such who walk in the path of it, their Weapons are not Carnal, but
Spiritual, and can do no violence to any man's Person, State or Interest,
neither forcibly or unjustly detain either of them, which are the effects of
the Carnal, and not the Spiritual.

And now as to thy first pretended Reason, whereas thou say, you could not
enjoy peaceable Society, etc. I say, your rising up against your Brethren, and
justifying and spreading the Scurrillous, Clamorous, False, Scoffing, Unsavory
and Pernicious Books, of William Rogers, Thomas Crisp and Francis Bugg, who
joined together, and published their Books to the World, endeavoring to stir
up Persecution, and to set Professors and Profane, as far as they could, atop
of us, to tread us down (which might be, together with some things within your
selves of like nature) could not but break the Society or Fellowship betwixt
you and them. And so I know they have born against you in their Testimonies,
and so have you against them, which if this be the Opposition, they may
likewise say, that Tho. Curtis and you did oppose them; Though I am satisfied,
that if they had been in the possession of it (as it should seem you were) they
would have abhorred to have shut you out of the House, though I see not but
that they might as justly and as honestly have done it, as what you have done,
their right being as real and as just as yours, though its probable not so much.

II. That the Worship of God is to performed with Seriousness, etc. is not
denied, but if you could charge any of them with being light, and not serious,
and out of love in their service, such after due admonition are to be left to
the Lord to deal with; and not to take away or keep them out of their rights,
that is not the way to make them Serious, or to bring them into Love, but
rather to harden them; and indeed its too manifest that you are but talkers of
Love and Charity, which bears all things, and thinks no Evil, that are so
full of Jealousies and evil surmisings against so many ancient, serviceable and
honest Friends; and do not all those clamorous scandalous Books, spread about
the Country by you, tend to bring Friends into Confusion, and set them one
against another; and now keeping your Brethren out of their Propriety; these
are the effects of Strife and Envy on your parts, and answers that Scripture
which thou have made use of, Where Envying and Stife is, there is Confusion and
every evil Work.

III. Though where Contention is, and a Meeting divided, cannot be profitable,
etc. I say such who hold the Truth in the love of it, will bear and suffer till
the Lord make the decision, which your contrary unfruitful work of fastening up
the Meeting House Doors against your Brethren sufficiently shows (to any that
are in any true measure of it) that you are too far out of it.

IV. I doubt not-but when the House was built Tho. Curtis and they were in one
mind, and unanimous in building of it, and to good ends, for the Service of God
to be performed in, and not for Strife, which I could wish your were clear of
your selves, though you would altogether charge it on them, though the effects
manifest too much the contrary, and though the end has been too often
perverted for which it was built, and therefore thou say, its not reasonable
it should be continued, Then it should be with consent of both Parties; seeing
both are concerned in it; but if it be therefore reasonable for one Party to
take it away from the other, then such who are the perverters of it may take it
away from the most innocent, and most likely so to do; for be sure, such as
keep in the innocent Truth cannot do any such thing, its nature being to lead
otherwise, into Patience, Quietness and Contentedness of Mind, committing their
Cause to him that judges righteously.

And as for Tho. Curtis his standing engaged for the House, its no ground at
all for him or you to take it away, or keep your Brethren out of that wherein
they have a right, he might have let it alone when it was forth of his hands;
and since, I doubt not, but upon reasonable terms he may be clear of that
danger, if there be any.

V. The endeavoring to have innocent Women keep their Meeting in so sitting a
place for them to do and perform those things that God has concerned them in,
is no reason, nor part of any reason for you to take it away, I think no
understanding man can judge so; and for Friends keeping on their Hats when you
have Prayed, when they have no Unity with you, nor you with them, is like the
other; and it had been better, and more fairer-dealing for you to have kept
yours on, when they Prayed (and so have signified to your Brethren that you had
no Unity with them) then to put them off, and afterward call them
Image-makers, setters up of Idols and Roods publishing them Apostates, Popishly
Principled, and such like, to the World.

VI. As for your endeavoring for Peace; I have heard them say as much, and
that they have had cross and abusive Language from you, and in this case the
Lord who knows both your hearts, is to make the decision as aforesaid, and such
who are of him, can trust him till that time.

VII. When no accommodation nor reasonable satisfaction can be had, and persons
will not agree, except others will submit to their wills, or give them the
House, etc. Your taking of it away shows you to be too much in your wills. And
I do not believe that they did seek or desire that you should give them the
House, for theyhave offered to give you your Money that you laid out for it, as
far as reasonable, which also shows that they have not in that refused to make
a bargain with you; though in something, or things of another nature, they
might refuse to bargain with you, and if you think it reasonable that they
should take their Money, or otherwise you may keep it wholly from them, then is
it not as reasonable that you should take your Money from them, and most
reasonable, for they were contented it should have been continued as it was,
and you were the disatisfied Persons; and seeing you call your selves the
Christian Quakers, and us Apostates, how do you herein answer the Doctrine of
Christ? who says, Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, do ye the
same unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets, which if you are short
of, besure you are short of him; and so I think understanding men will not
judge, that because you are pleased to leave off to meet in the House, that
therefore you should keep them out, nor yet because you are the greatest
Proprietors, that therefore you may justly take away the lessers Right, and so
you have great reason to fear you should be counted Persecutors, whatever thou
say. And how it can be said that any have no right in it, that it was given
and settled upon by Act and Deed for a public House to meet in? for my part I
cannot see, nor yet for any after such gift and settlement, how they can justly
take it away or detain it from them.

VIII. That they have another Meeting Place, or Place to Meet in, etc. I know
no other, but what they have by permission from the Owner. But if they had an
other public Meeting House wherein several of them were concerned as
Proprietors that is no reason for you to take away their right in that, and that
they meet on purpose to oppose and disquiet you, I do not in the least believe,
nor that their practice did at all manifest it; being fully satisfied that they
are not persons of such unruly Spirits, but if they were such as thou art
pleased to render them, as some such have been amongst us, as Temperance Tailor
in your Town, and many at London, and other parts, yet it was never Friends
way, who abode in the Truth, to deal in that nature, or after that manner with
them; but to stand over them, and judge them down in Gods Authority, and also
patiently to bear and suffer when the Lord should please to exercise them under
their Spirits, who has pleaded with many of them, and will in his time with
all others that are of their Spirit: And if any through these things, that are
fallen out among you, are gone back to the Steeple House, that is not the way
to bring them back again (or at least to the Truth) for you to do such
unreasonable things, as aforesaid, which are so contrary to the Truth.

IX. By thy last it seems, That the Doors were shut up by consent, and
concluded on by several of you. Then it was not wholly T. Curtis his act,
though I cannot see but it must needs be contrary to his Act and Deed to the
Trustees, of which I know not how you will clear him of the breach of that
Covenant, who as I am informed made it over by a Deed of Uses to four Friends,
for a public Meeting House, for the People called Quakers at Reading, and
there abouts, and though three of them did unworthily relinquish their Trust,
yet William Lambole, who was one of them refused so to do: So what was done in
relation to that must needs stand effectual to him, and what you have done in
taking it away, must needs be contrary to that Engagement, several of them,
with himself, being by you shut out of Doors, and cannot have the benefit to
keep their Meeting in it accordingly, and for which end several of them gave
considerable sums of Money; sure such dealings would have been abhorred by you
many years since the beginning, which you are very forward to talk of, but too
far degenerated from.

And now Benjamin, one of my ancient Acquaintance in that place, what shall I
say unto thee, or what could I not do if the ancient Love and Society among you
in that place may be again revived? surely it cannot be as things stands, and
therefore I could wish that a deep and narrow search may pass through every
heart that is concerned among you. And now as things stands you have outwardly
separated your selves from your Brethren (indeed an inward Separation was
before) and you have left the Meeting House, and keep them out also; I desire
thee, and all of you to be like men, and let true reason have place in you, and
let them in again, wherein they have a right and propriety, and let not breach
of Covenant rest upon your ancient friend Tho. Curtis, nor injustice nor wrong
doing upon any of you. Or if you would not be counted Persecutors, nor examples
to Persecutors, I say let them meet in the House again, and not keep them forth
any longer; for though you are the greatest Proprietors, yet they have a
considerable share in it, sufficient to answer the use of the Meeting-Room
twice or three times a Week, and you also may meet or forbear as you please;
and for that which thou live in, and the rest of the Buildings belonging to
it, you may do as in reason shall be seen meet. And sure what I here offer is
according to that true and right reason that God has endued me with, and I
doubt not but will answer Gods witness in all unbyassed Friends, and innocent
wel-wishing People, and I can truly say is in love to thee, and all of you. And
is from your wel-wishing Friend.

James Potter.

Page 3. Line 25. for go to them, read, go to some of them. Page 7. line 14.
dele not. page 7. l. 32. for defraud, r. defrauded. p. 8. l. 11. for mauiest,
r. manifest.

THE END.

