To every individual Member of the honorable House of COMMONS.
The humble Remonstrance of George Lilburn, Esquire.
SIR,
AS I have studied nothing more then to be serviceable in my generation, by
employing all my power to preserve the Nations interest, (as an evidence whereof
in the worst of times I was not only an opposer, but one that suffered both in
person and estate, for opposing Ship Money, Projects, Bishops, etc.) so it
could never enter into my thoughts, that I who had been such an eminent
assertor of the privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the people, should
have been (as now) necessitated to take this course to manifest my integrity,
and blow off that dust which has lately been cast upon me by Mr. John
Blackston, a supposed member of your House, and some other his accomplices,
whose slanderous suggestions, backed with his power and interest, seemingly has
gained so much credit, even with the best men, (who have been Strangers to my
actions, (save only by report) that I find it a very hard matter, by private
discourse to remove that prejudice by many conceived against men. To the end
therefore that the whole Truth may be made manifest, and that you may not be
guided by report, I have been bold in this way to represent unto you the true
state of my case, together with the original rise and growth of Mr. John
Blackstons enmity, in which I shall not deviate in the least from the truth;
neither shall it be in his power to contradict me in a syllable. Truth fears no
colors, nor seeks corners. I shall declare it, and leave you to judge
righteous judgment between my accusers and me.

The Copy of Colonel Tho. Midfords Certificate, with others given under their
hands.
THat about July, 1642. Thomas Midford and George Lilburn went on purpose to
the House of Sir Henry Vane the elder, near Charing Cross, and there acquainted
him of the frequent meetings of the Papists and their adherents in the County
of Durham, and that they did not only gather together most of the prime Horses
of the said County, but did exercise them in Arms, and trained the said Horse,
to the discouragement of all the true-hearted Protestants of the said County:
And that the Seaports of the said County were fit to be taken care of, which
the said Sir Henry Vane promised to take timely care of, making show that he
intended shortly to go down into the said County: In the mean time, desired
the said George Lilburn, and the said Thomas Midford to go to the
Deputy-Lievtenants and acquaint them with the aforesaid information, and to
tell them from him, that he could not then write to them concerning the same,
but bid them take care thereof, till he gave further Order.

The said Thomas Midford, about the end of the said month, coming into the
said County, went to Durham, and did acquaint Sir Will. Darcy, being then high
Sheriff of the said County, Sir John Conyers, and others at John Hals house in
Durham, of the same, who returned the said Midford no other answer, but well,
well, and seemed to make no great matter thereof.

28 June, 1642. Tho. Midford

Suddenly after I returned from London into the Country, where I remained till
about the end of August 1642, where, at the general Assize held for the County
of Durham, being a Justice of Peace for the said County, I was indicted upon
the Statute of Recusancy for not coming to common Prayer, and put of the Bench,
and turned out of Commission by Judge Heath.

Suddenly after, the Earl of Newcastle beginning to Array men) I was invited by
several Northern Gentlemen, viz. Mr. George Gray, Mr. Henry Lever, Mr. Robert
Carre, etc. to go into Scotland, to try if they could obtain force to oppose
the Earl of Newcastle, and accordingly I with several other Gentlemen did wait
upon Mr. John Pickering the States Agent resident at Edenborough, and informed
him of the state of the Northern Counties, which he by Letter intimated to the
Parliament, but received no answer thereto.

Soon after I returned to Berwick, and thence to Anwick, where I received a
Letter from my Wife, intimating, That if I would come home and be quiet, Sir
William Lampton had promised to protect me.

But coming home, I found that Capt. Sawkell was ordered to seiz upon my house
and goods, by order of the Earl of Newcastle; whereupon I was necessitated to
go to the said Earl at Newcastle, to try if I could prevent the said seizure;
where being come, I was seized on by Baron Lidall and others, and hurried to
and fro, and put in danger of my life; but by the mercy of God, and through the
favor of M. Francis Carnaby, at length I escaped and got home to my house,
where I remained privately for about a fortnight, at which time there was to be
a meeting at Durham by several Gentlemen of the Country, who endeavored to put
the Commission of Array in execution; to which meeting I was invited by
several well-affected Gentlemen, viz. Captain Fulthorp, and Mr. Robert Hutton;
to the end, that in the face of the Country we might oppose the said Commission
which accordingly we did, first with words, showing the illegality thereof,
afterward with swords and staves for some space, till being overpowered with
armed men, I and the rest were forced to fly for our lives from Durham. From
which time, there were many endevors to take me prisoner; for prevention
whereof, I removed to Stockton, and going from Stockton I heard that Captain
Hotham was come to Darneton; so I endeavored to get thither, but in my journey
was taken, (having only one man) it being November 11. 1642. and brought to
Durham Jail; and my Horses, weapons and clothes taken from me, where, after
many invitations, solicitations and threats to induce me to join and
contribute, (all which I refused) I was carried to York pinioned, on foot,
through water and dirt, where I lay in great misery for the space of 14 Months,
in which time I was often solicited by Mr. Ralph Lambton but to send a horse,
or give some small contrbution to the maintenance the Earl of Newcastles Army:
All which proffers were scorned and refused, as will be attested by the said
Ralph Lambton, and others.

That being after fourteen months imprisonment exchanged by the Parliament for
one Captain Cock prisoner at Dover Castle, the Parliament were pleased by their
Ordinance of April 1 1643, together with others, to appoint me to be one of the
Committee for Sequestrations in the said County; the faithful discharge of
which Trust, my most malicious adversaries (I am confident) cannot question.

That about August 1647, John Husbands, the States Agent for Sequestrations,
preferred a Charge against one Thomas Shadford (Mr. Blackston's Brother in Law)
a member of the said Committee, and produced me, with several others, for the
proof of the said Charge.

The particulars of which Charge, because it is now depending before the
honorable Committee for the Northern Association to be tried, I shall forbear
to mention; although it be apparent, that my appearing against Mr. Blackstons
Brother in law (Mr. Shadford) has been one of the original causes of Mr.
Blackstons envy, and my present trouble. For, Soon after the exhibition and
proof of the said Charge, Mr. Shadford, in stead of answering the said Charge,
preferred a Charge against me to the same Committee, but proved never a word of
it; which Charge I answered the same month, and often solicited to have a fair
trial, but never could obtain it: the cause of which, together with the reason
of Mr. Blackston's envy, shall more at large appear.

Mr. John Blackston having obtained an Order from the House of Commons for the
settling of three orthodox Ministers, in stead whereof he would have settled
three malignant disaffected Priests; viz. Lee, Mason, and a Scotishman; the
doing whereof I opposed and prevented for that time, (there being good cause
for the same:) however, Mr. John Blackston soon after made a party in the
C^itee in my absence, and placed them, and settled upon (...) ^em 120 pounds per
annum.

That when the Charge against Mr. Shadford was exhibited (in which I did, I
confess, eminently appear, being convinced in conscience of the truth thereof;)
and that Mr. Shadford had also brought a Charge against me, (I will not say, by
Master Blackston's advice, although it be more then probable,) Mr. John
Blackston by his power in the Committee caused an Order to be entered by the
Clerk of the Committee to make all the proceedings concerning the said two
Charges, null; and likewise commanded the Clerk that he should not give copies
thereof to any, as by the said Order may appear.

That Mr. Blackston having got himself into the possession of the Lordship of
Newton, which was part of the estate of Toby Blackston his Brother, a notorious
Delinquent; which estate was protected by the said Mr. John Blackston,
notwithstanding it was sequestrable, and endeavored to be sequestered by John
Husbands and my self: which estate lay nigh unto Frankland and Frankland Wood,
part of the Lands belonging to the Bishop of Durham, which Land was at that
time under the surveigh of Mr. George Gray, Mr. Thomas Sanders, Mr. John
Husbands, and my self, who were chosen Surveighors of those Lands by the
Trustees for the sale of Bishops Lands. We (having taken a view our selves, and
having called a Jury of fifteen Gentlemen and Yeomen of the said County, who
with us surveighed the same upon oath, and examined all Writings and Records
concerning the said Manor) were drawing up the surveigh to make return thereof
to the Trustees and Contractors; at which time Mistress Blackston, in the name
of her Husband, came unto me, desiring my favor, that I would be a means that
it might be certified in the Surveigh, that the Manor of Newton formerly had
right for peranage, and mastage for hogs, and for house-boot, hedge-boot, and
free-boot for the house, To which I replied, That either she must produce some
evidence or writing for the title, or else the Surveighors could not make any
such return: notwithstanding, she did once or twice solicit to the same
purpose; and being told we could not do such an unjust act, she gave many
upbraiding Speeche^ (...) ^d the rest of the Surveighours: insomuch, that w^
(...) forced to leave her alone in the room.

Soon after we had returned the Surveigh of the said Manor of Chester, under
our hands and seals, to the Trustees one part, and to the Contractors another,
as just as ever was, as by our Oaths we are ready to aver, Mr. John Blackston
took out a Particular, and purchased Durham Castle, and diverse of of those
Woods and Lands, to the value of about 5000 pound; after the purchase of which,
the said Mr. John Blackston, or some other for him, dealt with one Edward
Colston (who was a Surveighor, but never surveighed any of those Lands)
together with the aforesaid Mr. Sanders, to make him some reprisals for Pannage
and Mastage, and many other things, which ought not to be done, nor could be
found by the Jury to be incident to any of the said Lands: by which he got an
abatement of a thousand and odd pounds more then what was allowed by the
former Jury, as by the reprisals does appear. And because there was an
Ordinance of Parliament that no certificate should be valid, unless it were
under the hands of three Surveighours, the hand of one Mr. John Duncalfe was
counterfeited to the said certificate, who then was out of the County, as he
has before witness affirmed; whereby the State was cheated of above a
thousand pounds.

Now because I have from time to time discovered the unjust and indirect
dealings of the said Mr. John Blackston and his accomplices, he has from time
to time endeavored by Scandalous informations to the Parliament, and several
Members thereof, to blast my repute by terming me a delinquent, etc. the very
thought whereof I abhor, and desire no other favor for all my service, but
to obtain a speedy and fair trial, by which I doubt not but that their envy
and my innocence will plainly appear.

To conclude,

I desire you to observe in the first place, that these crimes I am accused of
are crimes of almost seven years standing; and if true, by them concealed, and
I suffered to act with them by authority of Parliament, which they ought not to
have suffered, but rather to have sequestered me; but it seems when they found
me opposite to their interest, and themselves like to be brought upon the
stage, they sought for matter against me, and finding none, they were resolved
they would frame something that they might found a slander upon, hoping thereby
to prevent their further prosecution.

Secondly, I pray observe that Mr. Shadfords charge was exhibited, and the
greatest part of it proved about August, 1647, but yet in all this time he has
not answered thereto, and that my charge was exhibited about September, 1647,
and answered the same mouth, but never a word proved to this very day, although
I have from time to time solicited to obtain a legal hearing, that by the law
I might be justified or condemned.

Thirdly, I appeal to all rational Gentlemen to be judges in this case,
whether it be not a sufficient ground for me to except against Mr. John
Blackstons being one of my Judges, being brother in law to my accuser, and a
person who from time to time harh privately and publicly by slanderous
suggestions endeavored to destroy my repute, by which actions he has
apparently prejudged me a Delinquent without evidence or hearing, as is known
to several Members of your House; by which means he has (being indeed a party
interested in the accusation) made himself incapable of being a Judge, no man
being by Law or reason to be Judge in his own case.

Nor do I this as fearing the Justice of my cause (for were my worst enemies my
Judges herein, I could not fear) only reserving unto my self the benefit the
law allows me as an Englishman. For my part (although I shall be careful to
prevent a surprise, yet) not being conscious of guilt, I am not careful what
to answer; truth needs no Sophistry, nor fidelity friends or supporters, I fear
not the Justice of my Judges, and being innocent I shall not need their mercy;
It Is fit for Traitors and perfidious persons (not those whose deeds are done in
the day) to fear a trial, and flatter a Judge. According to the utmost of my
power I have been upright, and having betrothed the interest of the Nation; and
in all things done unto others, as I would they should do unto me; am bold to
say my innocence and fidelity will shine maugre the cloudy calumiations of Mr.
Blackston and his accomplices.

Sir, The nations interest has engaged me on the one side, and my reputation
(which to an Englishman should be dearer then life) has engaged me on the
other, for the preservation whereof I am resolved to hazard all my
possibilities, interest and relations; In order whereunto in this way I press
to obtain a fair and legal Trial, that Justice may take place, and the truth
be manifest, which is the only desire of.

March 18. 1649. Being the promised year of freedom. George Lilburn Esquire

FINIS.

