engraved portrait of Michiel Adriaenszoon de Ruyter

THE LIFE OF Michael Adrian De RVYTER ADMIRAL OF HOLLAND.

Licensed,

October. 1. Rog. L'Estrange.



LONDON, Printed by J. B. for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey,
1677.

THE LIFE OF Admiral De Ruyter.
ARts in all ages have had their Chiefs and Grandecs, who by inventing of new,
or improving of old devices, have been esteemed whilst alive, and renowned
after death. And as their attempts were no otherwise to be valued but as the
prevailing genius of their times weighed the uses of them so several ages
according to their predominating measures, have placed, or displaced their
Artists in the Classis and Register of fame; which ought indeed to be the Royal
Standard of such Worthies praise; though fond Posterity either over-affected
with the advantages of their own, or not thoroughly informed of the usefulness
of elder-atchivements, do for the most part unjustly rank the Illustrious of
former times in that order; that these have the precedence who seem most to
favor the prerogative of the present applauded practices: when antiquated
contrivances being tried by a true survey of their profitableness when they
Flourished, and the advances they gained beyond their respective Predecessors,
may appear to have made as high a rise above their antecedent hints, as our
Great Guns excel the Roman battering Rams, or our roaring Trumpet-speaker, old
bauling Stentor, who now with the great Heroes of distant ages are sent again
to School,

Vt pueris placeant and declamatio fiant. The Masters of the Military Art as
well as others, being obnoxious to this severe and partial Judgment, the
contemporaries of great men have in all ages labored to vindicate the honor
of their Heroes, by bringing to a fair trial of their Country, the seize
and feats of such as they (the only competent Judges) thought worthy to be
listed in the Roll of Fame: and to crown them with such Verdant Bays as
nothing but a hotter season of newer attempts, and more taking discoveries,
could ever blast or wither: And as careful Navigators in coasting of newfound
Lands, or Ingenious Painters at the view of some rare and surprising beauty,
fail not to make some transient designs of the new objects; that either
misfortune might not altogether deprive the world of them, or that the
curiosity of others who should have better opportunities might be raised to
finish and complete their intended draughts: So in all times some have been,
who have left to posterity the true and natural proportions and more
discernable lineaments of the actions of famous men, which others who lived
nearer them might fill up and imbellish with the several colors and shaddows
of smaller occurrences. Now since our Age has brought forth as many (if not
more) Instances of this nature, then any past, and rewarded them with as
suitable honors and titles, as the most triumphant times whatsoever: I thought
it not amiss at this time, when every little Ale and Coffee-house Virtuoso
comes blustering upon us from the press; to give the world a view of the Life
and Death of the late Renowned Sea-General Michael Ad. de Ruyter
Lieutenant-Admiral of the States of the United Netherlands, whose rare
Endowments and memorable Exploits have rendered him parallel to his most famed
Competitors, and the high pitch to which he grew from so low a root, more
conspicuous then all: wherein if every little period of the several
vicissitudes and changes of his fortune, be not so distinctly and punctually
handled, as might be expected from an exact Diary, or Memoires (which is not
the intent of this Treatise;) yet the more observable Circumstances of his
whole life, partly from Relations of his own mouth, and partly from the
authentic Testimonies of Witnesses and Records, shall be faithfully collected
to the satisfaction of every Reader.

DUring the Wars betwixt the Spaniards and Dutch in Flanders, there served for
some years the States of Holland, in quality of a private Trooper (a stranger
by some judged a scottish man, so little known by his family, that his
profession gave him his Surname,) the happy Father of this brave man; who
(being disbanded from, or displeased with that course of life;) with his wife,
his only then child Michael Ad. de Ruyter, born to him at Flushing in Zealand,
(the subject of this present Discourse,) and servingmaid, being the whole of
his Family, retired himself to a Countrey-house at two miles distance from
Bergen ap Zome, and there to the quieter employment of a husbandmans life:
where by his industrous endeavors, with two horses, the greatest part of his
substance, in the usual labor of that Country, he supplied the wants of his
family with care and pains: but neither the lowness of the poor man's fortune
(which commonly begets either contempt or pity) nor yet the privilege of his
person, as having sometime served under the same Ensigns; could secure him or
his beasts from the violence of licentious Soldiers: his two horses are taken
from him by force; and carried to the Dutch Camp in Flanders, by some of the
Troopers of that Army: this loss was too considerable to be neglected by him,
who thereby saw himself and family utterly ruined: He therefore hastens after
them to the camp; but finding his addresses for justice fruitless, by the
delays and neglect of the Officers, and being well acquainted with the
proceedings of loosly disciplined or ill-paid Armies, where the Commanders
either share in, or connive at the rapine of the Soldiers: he resolved on a
speedier and more effectual way of reparation, by stealing from robbers what
they had unjustly forced from him: And so having discovered where his horses
were at grass, watching his opportunity, he secretly conveyed them away, and
left them in a place somewhat remote from his own house, where he judged them
farthest from danger, foreseeing (as indeed it happened) that these new Masters
would not fail to look after the strays. The soldiers missing there booty, and
concluding that the owner had them, returned in the night with a purpose to
find them at his house; but being by his provident care disappointed; in
barbarous revenge they set on fire the poor single thatcht Cothouse about the
ears of the helpless Inhabitants; In the horror of this sudden surprise,
whilst the father, mother and servant save themselves, by breaking through the
merciless flames, with that care of self-preservation, which is common to all
creatures, and astonishment, usual in such unexpected frights; the poor
harmless child the future darling of Neptune, lay at the mercy of devouring
Vulcan fast asleep in an upper room, swadled in his cradle; but the flames of
Parental love toward an only child, stronger than those of fire, soon scorcht
the mothers heart with so great apprehensions of the danger of her Son; that
aided by that providence which saved the Children in the fiery furnace, with
more than masculine courage, she threw her self into the house again, to save
or die with that child, by whose life and death fortune had decreed her
honor: and having in her petticoat, through smoke and flames, got into the
upper Room, first threw the child out of the window into a sheet held by the
father and maid to receive him, and afterward jump't out her self, saving from
that little Troy her young Aeneas. So cross and unlucky are many times the
beginnings of virtuous Men, and low the basis of Fames Pyramides, misery being
commonly the first step to happiness, and a gloomy morning the portal of a fair
day: Having thus happily avoided the Fury of this cruel Element, though stripped
of all, naked as truth it self, the disconsolate Father in this so great
uncertainty, finding no other hopes of relief but the Charity of the Merciful,
betook himself with his wretched Family to Bergen ap Zome the next Town of
Note, where arriving early in the morning, he presented to his compassionate
Countrymen a lamentable spectacle of his new disaster:

The commendable care of that Country in providing for the Necessities of the
indigent, either by maintaining of the infirm and impotent, or by employing the
stronger and those that are able, to work: afforded means for the poor man to
subsist and feed his family; until his young son being grown up to the state
of a boy, able to do somewhat for himself, was placed in the ropeground of the
Here Lampson in Flushing, a considerable Merchant; who had a Manufactory of
Ropes there: The poor child complying with the condition which he could not
alter, with several other boys of his own rank and age, dilligently followed,
his business in spinning of rope-yarn, and other drudgeries of that vocation to
the content of his Overseers; until some time after, the Here Lampson himself
coming into the rope-ground, and eying the lad; his fancy suggested to him
(observing the features and carriage of the boy) the unsuitableness of that
trade to the genius of the lad: and finding upon examination the forwardness of
his wit, and confident readiness in his answers, and his willingness to leave
that course, and to serve him in some other capacity; he released him from that
slavery, and sent him to school; where in a short time he gave such pregnant
proofs of his parts and industry, that his Master finding his proficiency ripe
for employment, prudently at first entrusted him with the charge of keeping of
the accounts of his family-expences, that so he might the better have a trial
of the youths abilities, and prevent the errors, into which higher advancement
and distance of place often misleads unexperienced beginners; imitating herein
the example of Falconers, who use first to call their hawks to their fists with
a guard, before they venture them at large to the lure: In this office he
carried himself with so great fidelity and discretion, and thereby gained so
great esteem from his Master; that he advanced him to be his book-keeper, and
to the management of his Merchant-affairs: wherein being likewise much
satisfied with his skill and diligence; he pitched upon him as a person every
way qualified for a Factor in his trade in Ireland, which consisted in butter,
herrings, tallow and hides: and accordingly sent him to Dublin; There he lived
seven years under the inspection of Mr Cremor, Mr Vanhorn, Mr Wiborn, and some
others of his Masters Correspondents; during which space, besides his attaining
of the English Tongue (very necessary to him who was afterward to treat so
often with the English in their own Language) he gave so great proofs of his
dexterity in the conduct of affairs of Trading, and of his faithfulness to his
trust, and thereby so much content to his Master and Correspondents; that by
them he was sent into the Streights, to negotiate as Supercargo of their
Concerns there. And whilst in his several Voyages from Port to Port in those
parts, he successfully improved his traffic to the profit both of his Master
and himself; being a natural enemy to idleness, and an Unactive life, and
totally averse from the lazy and brutish revellings of the most part of
Seamen; he had leisure to rub up those few impressions and hints of the
Mathematics, and particularly Navigation, which he had learned when a boy:
wherein by the ripeness of his wit, his constant pains and study, and the
assistance of some Artists, in a short time he made such laudable progress;
that he not only became able to conduct any Ship himself, but obtained a great
Name amongst Navigators. And having afterward made several Voyages into the
Streights and Barbary, upon the account of the Here Lampson his Master and
Benefactor, with constant good fortune and applause, he married a Widow, and
settled himself in Flushing in Zealand.

The many good services which he had performed to his Master, and the
reputation gained in his Sea-expeditions, began to plain the way to his
preferment: In the year 1650. the daily damages received from the Corsairs of
Argiers, the enemies of the Hollanders, being so sensible, that thereby the
Mediterranean Trade, of great advantage to that Nation, was much obstructed:
the States (for the security of their Merchants) resolved to send Convoys with
their Ships: the Here Lampson laying hold of this opportunity to serve his
Country, and at the same time to show his love and gratitude to his friend, by
the cheapest, and yet most noble way of reward; so effectually recommended Mr
De Ruyter to the States General, that he obtained for him a Commission to be
Captain of a Man of War appointed by them, as a Convoy for their Merchantmen
in the Streights, those fatal Narrow Seas, the Hercules-pillars of his life and
honor, where he began and ended his Sea-preferment; and gave the first and
last proofs of his Conduct and Valor.

In this expedition he had the Occasion to lay the foundation of his future
greatness, first, by rendering himself remarkable in his Command, and next in
his Estate, the two usual handmaids of rising fortunes: for as by his Valor
and Conduct in many successful Engagements with these Pirates, he procured the
one, so by his lawful and honest endeavors, he missed not of the other.
Insomuch that his Name being grown public in Holland, by the daily characters
of those who had been obliged by his care and good offices; the States began to
think him worthy of some higher rank.

The Occasion was not long wanting to his more prosperous fortune, For in anno
1652. the equal success of the two Neighboring Commonwealths of England (then
too unhappily established) and the States of the United Netherlands more deeply
rooted; began to advance to the incompatible height of Superiority (which was
as much as Supremacy) their pretensions on the Seas: And although their claims
were as different as that of an old possessor from a new intruder; yet the
younger Rival the Hollanders thinking their power not inferior to the other,
the English, who upon the account of long and uninterrupted possession,
demanded of them the usual submissions: resolved to dispute the right by force
of Arms, and so broke forth a War; which for the eagerness of the parties, the
frequency of engagements, and the undaunted constancy of the adversaryes whilst
it lasted; may justly take place of all which before that time enobled the
Ocean. Now was Captain Michael Adr. De Ruyter (signalized for his good services
in the Mediterranean, and eyed by the States as a person fit for greater
action) called home: And whilst Old Admiral Van Trump (after the engagement on
the nineteenth of May, 1652. with General Blake off of Dover-rode, the first
action of hostility in this war, where he was defeated with the loss of two
Ships and many men) was equipping and preparing in Holland his Fleet, and broom
to sweep the Seas; De Ruyter with a squadron of Fifty Men of War was speeded
out from Zealand, to Convoy the Merchantmen to the Westward out of danger; and
to scowr the Seas of the English; who on that side rendered the Navigation
unsafe: This great Fleet first appearing off of Bright Hamstead in Sussex,
where they forced ashore, and took several Barks, continued their course
Westward by the back of the Isle of Wight: Advice of this being brought to the
pretended Parliament of England, Sir George Ayscue who then Commanded a Fleet
of forty Men of War in the West about Plymouth; was ordered to stretch over
the Channel toward the Coast of France, to hinder, or at least dispute them
their passage: this he accordingly obeying, on the sixth of August 1652. the
two Fleets came in sight; and about four in the afternoon, to blows; and here
continued a sharp Fight, bravely maintained on both sides, till separated by
night, both lay by: But De Ruyters chief business being to secure his
Merchantmen, and Sir George not thinking it convenient to renew the
Engagement: he carried off his Fleet without loss of a Ship.

The States acquainted with his good Conduct in this First Expedition,
appointed him his station in the mouth of the Channel, to stop and seize all
English Ships homeward or outwardbound: There he discharged an English Ship
that he had taken, upon condition that the Master should acquaint Sir George
Ayscue, that he stayed for him, and would be glad to see him: but Sir George
knowing well the prudence and valor of the Commander, and the humor of the
Dutch, not rash to run any apparent risk only for ostentation of bravery, his
own Fleet being inferior in number; and having received no new Orders from his
Masters; returned no answer: This brisk carriage won De Ruyter a singular
reputation of gallantry and good conduct from the States General, but in
particular manner from the States of Zealand: In this station he continued
cruising, till De Wit with another considerable Fleet from Holland joined him,
on the Twenty fourth of September; and having received six Plate ships with
their convoy whom they expected from Cadiz, they both together set sail
homewards.

General Blake returning with the English Fleet from Plymouth toward the
Downs, discovered the Dutch Fleet commanded by De Wit and De Ruyter riding at
the back of the Goodwin-Sands, after that they had sent their charge into
Holland; Blake resolved to have engaged them, but the wind blowing hard
hindered his attempt then until afterward; the season being more favorable on
the Twenty eighth of October, with three Squadrons of Ships he made up to them;
but finding them so well protected by the Sands amongst which they rode, and
having run aground the Sovereign and Resolution, (which were presently got off
again) in his too rash approach with the great Ships, he was forced to desist.
De Wit and De Ruyter in the entry of a War being ashamed thus to be braved,
voluntarily left their advantageous station, came forth and fought the English;
but with so great loss, that notwithstanding all the courage and conduct
employed by the two Admiralls during the action, they were forced to run,
leaving many Ships burnt and sunk; and were pursued by the English within
twelve Leagues, E. S. E. of the Maes, on the Coast of Holland; till with the
remainder of the Fleet shattered and torn de Wit and de Ruyter got into Goree.
The Hollanders imputed their ill success in this Fight to the over-match of
the English, and the cowardice of some of their Captains, who did not fight;
but experience has since demonstrated, that the prudent use which the cautious
De Ruyter made of the misfortune, was never to forsake an advantageous station
till a more advantageous opportunity of fighting offfered.

This Defeat spurred the Dutch on revenge: For on the Nine and twentieth of
November following, old Van Trump and Vice Admiral De Ruyter with a Fleet of
Eighty Men of War, and Ten Fireships put to Sea again, and finding General
Blake at his station with a number far inferior, not much exceeding forty
Sail, but with equal resolution to fight: Van Trump and De Ruyter made up
toward him, and he not shrinking, there began a hot and bloody combat,
obstinatly maintained for some time; but the disparity of number being
unreasonably great, the English were routed, and the Garland-Frygat taken: In
this Fight De Ruyter sustained much damage in his Ship, and lost many men,
having been observed as forward in the Engagement as any, and as long in action.

The Dutch in the mean time kept the Seas, cruising in the Channel off of the
Isle of Wight, whilst Blake impatient of long delay, having with great
expedition fitted and reinforced his Fleet: the Eight of February 1653. set
sail from Quinborough with sixty Men of War, intending to join twenty more at
Portsmouth. These keen Competitors seemed only to withdraw a little, and take
breath, that with greater force, and fury, they might renew their onset, as it
proved shortly after: For Van Trump being sailed according to his Orders to the
Westward, to attend and Convoy a Numerous and Rich Fleet of Merchantmen,
coming from the Streights, and other Southern parts; and on the eleventh of
February General Blake having joined the Portsmouth Fleet at Beachy-head, he
sailed the height of Portland, and there lay cross the Channel, expecting the
coming of the Dutch: On the Eighteenth, about break of day, were discovered Van
Trump and De Ruyter with their Fleet, to the number of between three and four
hundred Sail, Men of War and Merchantmen: The English stoutly bore up and
engaged them, and were with no less valor received by the Dutch; but Blake
resolving to make them sensible, that it was not their courage, but number,
which had given the English the former ruffle; pressed them with such
irresistible courage and force, that they were forced to run, and with great
loss to get home; yet the conduct and courage of Van Trump and De Ruyter was so
remarkable in bringing off the Merchantmen; that both merited and received
special and public thanks from the States.

By this time the Hollanders having by fresh experience learned the danger of
tempting the Lion even in his den, resolved no more to hazard their
Merchantmen in the Channel; but judged the farthest way about to be the
nearest way home; and so having ordered them to return by the back of Ireland
and Scotland; Leiutenant Admiral Van Trump and Vice Admiral De Ruyter were set
out from the Texel with Eighty Men of War to meet and Convoy a Fleet of Two
hundred Sail of Merchantmen coming that way from France: which being
successfully effected without interruption from the English then in the Downs,
they kept out at sea expecting their Enemies. The English then being commanded
by a triumvirate of Generals of equal and joint authority, Blake, Dean, and
Monck, on the second of June, came in sight of the Dutch Fleet, and about
eleven or twelve of the Clock engaged them. It was fought till night with much
blood and fierce resolution; but the English accustomed to victory, having lost
Dean, one of their Generals, plied them so warmly, that they thought it safest
to fly to Blanckenburgh; General Monck pursuing them at the heels to seven
fathom water. During the whole fight Vice Admiral De Ruyter and Rear-Admiral
Lawson on the English side, having singled themselves out, fought singly with
such courage and emulation as might be expected from two Commanders of so much
Fame and Honor.

Hardly can there be shown greater struglings for Victory, or stiffer ambition
for greatness, than appeared in the Dutch, during all this War; who the more
they were beaten (like balls against a wall) the sooner they rebounded: About
the latter end of July, Van Trump and De Ruyter from Zealand, and De Wit from
Holland, set out again to sea; and being joined, made up a Fleet of Ninety Sail
of Men of War, and ten Fireships. General Monck with a Fleet far less in number
being then abroad, the twenty nineth of July toward night came up with them:
but the Master of his Ship fearing the enemies Fireships, and advising him not
to venture an Engagement, the General in anger, and in terms more of a stout
Commander, than expert Seaman; bid him Turn again: And so with prodigious
courage gave them their last, and most fatal defeat, in these their Wars with
the Commonwealth of England: wherein besides the loss of Twenty six Men of War,
their Admiral Van Trump ended his days; and of all the Flagships of their
Fleet only that of De Ruyter had the fortune to come into Port with the Flag
standing.

After the death of Van Trump, Opdam was made Admiral in his place, a
Land-Souldier and Officer of Horse; the States probably thinking, that by
matching the quality of their Admiral with that of the English General Monck;
they might equal their fortune: De Wit Vice Admiral, and De Ruyter
Rear-Admiral of Holland. But whilst the Dutch are fitting for new action,
though with somewhat slower procedure than formerly, their heat and strength
being much, cooled and abated; there starts up in England a new Statholder;
Oliver Cromwell General of the Army made Protector of the Commonwealth. This
New Usurper, knowing that his authority being forced, violent, and against
nature, needed greater confirmation and support, than he could expect from the
free and voluntary obedience of an overpowered people: and the States general
finding themselves much weakened by the past War, they both understood one
another so well, and their several interests, that about the latter end of
January 1653/4. a peace was concluded betwixt them, which at that time stopped
the troubled humors, but removed not the causes of relapses.

After this peace, De Ruyter transports himself with his Wife, Son Engell De
Ruyter, two daughters, and the rest of his family, from Flushing, where he had
formerly lived, to Amsterdam, as the place of his future residence, and more
conspicuous stage of Honor: but here he had hardly warmed his new House, when
the States found new business for him in the Old Streights. The Pirates of
these Seas after their wonted manner so incommoded Navigation in these parts,
that De Ruyter with a Squadron of Men of War in anno 1654. was sent by the
States to suppress and tame their insolency: In his Voyage thither he friendly
met with his ancient enemy Blake, who then was in the Streights with a Fleet of
Ships upon the account of the Protector and Commonwealth of England; where they
saluted each other, shook hands, and parted in very good terms; and De Ruyter
continuing his course to Argiers; in a short time so humbled the Corsairs of
that place, Tripoli and Tunnis, that he brought them to a peace, though of
short duration, and so with honor and applause returned back again to Holland:
where shortly after a greater field of honor was designed for him.

Men that would be great and rich by hook and by crook, by potching, and
fishing where sometime they should not; first grow envious and pettish, and
then angry and quarrelsome with their thriving Neighbors. In the year 1657.
the Victorious Arms of Swedland had lodged themselves in the very heart of
Poland, threatening danger if not ruin to that Kingdom. The States of Holland
fearing lest the prosperous success of that Crown with which their friendship
and correspondence was always doubtful and uncertain, might keep bread from
their butter, and much damnifie their traffic in the Baltic Sea: persuaded
the King of Denmark their ancient Allie, who had more reason then force, to
break with Swedland, promising him all assistance to regain from that King what
he had wrested and detained from him some years before: This instance of the
States General so prevailed with him, that he declared War against the King of
Swedland, and invaded his Kingdoms; wherewith the Swede being allarmed, was
forced to leave Poland, and with all his forces return home against the Dane.

The bad success which the Danes had in these Wars both by Sea and land,
obliged the States of Holland to put a Fleet to Sea under the command of
Admiral De Wit to assist them in the Sound; But his Fleet being by the Swedes
there routed, the Admirals Ship the Bredrow sunk, and De Wit himself either
killed or drowned: a fresh Recruit was dispatched with Admiral Opdam to
reinforce their Fleet: Opdam arrived in the Sound, but finding himself too
weak to encounter the enemy; was forced to secure himself and Fleet in
Copenhagen, then blockt up by the Swedes with a strait Siege, both by Sea and
land: The King of Swedland in the mean time hearing of greater preparations in
Holland for a stronger Fleet to be sent under the command of De Ruyter, whose
conduct and fortune was more apprehended then that of the others, ordered his
Ministers in England vigorously to prosecute with the Usurper Oliver, their
instances for assistance: This they so accomplished, that the intended succors
(his death preventing) were by him recommended to the care of his Son Richard,
the short Successor to his Usurped authority: Richard with the consent of the
then pretended Parliament, for that end, and for the security of the English
Trade in the Baltic, in the beginning of the year 1659. sent the brave General
Montague, afterward Earl of Sandwich, with forty Men of War well manned, and
some Fireships, who on the twenty seventh of April, arrived in the Sound:
Shortly after came also De Ruyter with a strong Fleet from Holland, whose
presence relieved Copenhagen and Opdams Fleet; For the Swedes not being able
alone to come to a trial, the English refusing to fight until they were
satisfied in some demands, and the news of the alteration of Government in
England (Richard the Protector being turned out of power) supervening at the
same instant, which called them home again, relieved the Besieged, and hindered
a new rupture betwixt the English and the Dutch, which in all probability must
have immediately ensued.

The King of Denmark by this timely succor revived, and the English Fleet
returned to England, and Opdam to Holland; De Ruyter with the Dutch and Danish
Fleet continued Master of the Seas, ready for some Land-undertaking, since the
Swedes (then too weak) declined all engaging at Sea: The Island of Funnen in
the Baltic Sea, of the ancient inheritance of the Danes, but then in the
possession of the Swedes, being taken by them some years before, offered a
necessary occasion: And for that purpose General Schaack, with seven thousand
men, being put aboard of the Fleet at Kiel, were by De Ruyter conducted; and on
the last of October landed at Kortemundor, in the Island of Funnen: The Swedes
made brave resistance; but De Ruyter diverting their Forces, with alarming at
the same time other parts of the Island, and with a stout example, he himself
standing in the water, encouraging the Soldiers to land, whom in great numbers
they poured ashore; The Swedes were overthrown with great loss, and the Island
regained to the Danes.

This brave action of De Ruyter gained him more reputation from his Country,
and honor from his masters, then all which before that time he had achieved,
and so endeared him to the favor and esteem of the King of Denmark, that he
honored him with the highest Order of Knighthood of that Kingdom, being that
of the Elephant; and presented him with a Chain and Meddal of Gold, which
afterward he wore; and having remained there among the Swedes, until the Peace
between the Danes and them in May. 1660. was ratified, he with great applause
returned with his Fleet home.

The War betwixt the Danes and Swedes ended, and De Ruyter with his Fleet
safely returned into Holland, new losses from the Pirates of Argiers, Tripoli,
and Tunis, called afresh to the States for remedy: The vigilant and successful
De Ruyter was by the States designed for that charge; whose good services (on
the like occasion) even in the infancy of his Sea-command had been remarkable
in those Seas; and is therefore dispatched with a Squadron of Ships into the
Streights; where he kept ranging with his Fleet, pursuing and pressing those
Gorsairs with so great care and success, that the benefit of his constant pains
and valor became sensible to all the Merchants who traded there; whereby he
confirmed to himself that fame and reputation which he had heretofore so justly
merited, until matters of greater concern called him thence, upon the occasion
following.

After the wonderful and long-wished-for re-establishment of his Majesty, the
King of Great Britain, in the Throne of his Ancestors, from which by the
madness of his Subjects he had been long banished; the States of the United
Provinces overgrown with the wealth and prosperity of many years peace, the
ordinary promoters of ambition; being conscious to themselves, that their
carriage toward their Neighbors, especially the English, however cloaked,
could not but breed such jealousies as must in time break forth into open
enmity; and perceiving his Majesty of Great Britain already so dissatisfied
with their disguised practices, as could not but of necessty produce a War,
resolved to bring it to a trial as soon as possibly they could, by giving the
first occasion of rupture, under the pretext of being provoked by injuries
received upon the Coast of Guiny, and elsewhere; Hereupon they Ordered Admiral
De Ruyter with a squardron of thirteen Men of War then at Gibraltor in Spain,
to make sail for the Coast of Guiny, and to set upon the English there; This he
so effectually performed, that in a short time he destroyed most of their
Factories, took Cormanteen Castle with other places, several Ships and goods
belonging to the English.

That action so incensed his Majesty of Great Britain, that war was thereupon
in anno 1664. publicly proclaimed against the States General of the United
Provinces, impowering all his Majesty's Subjects, to use against them their
subjects and people, all acts of hostility; but whilst this was doing at home,
De Ruyter diligent in the pursuance of his Commission abroad, attempted the
burning of the English Ships at Barbados, but in vain; and from thence sailing
to Newfound land, took several Merchants Ships, stripped the men, and left them
without provisions; an act unworthy the name of so brave a man: Thus whilst
Opdam Admiral of the Dutch Fleet in June 1665, having engaged his Royal
Highness the Duke of York, was in fire and smoke hurried out of this world, and
his Fleet beat home with great loss of Ships and men; De Rayter remained at
Sea, annoying the Ships and Foreign Plantations of the English: But Opdams
death rendered his presence at home absolutely necessary, his experience and
success in War being so well known to all, that the universal voice of the
people daily called his Name, whom (according to the interest and power they
pretend to upon the Seas) they adopted, and entitled, Son of Neptune: Advice
was therefore sent to him, that he should with his Fleet hasten home with all
expedition; which he obeying, slily slipped by the English Fleet wrapped in mist,
as men with their cloaks about their mouths shun the company of those whom they
are not willing to meet; And on the last of July 1665. safely arrived in the
Emmes: his arrival was congratulated by the States, and he thereupon made
Admiral, but with authority not so absolute, but that he was subordinate to the
Triumvirate of De Wit, Huygens and Bureel; who according to a new Model, had
the superintendency of the Navall affairs. He was no sooner installed in his
new Command, but August 13. with a Fleet of Ninety Sail of Men of War, he was
Ordered out from the Texel, to secure and convoy home the East India Fleet, and
many other rich Merchantmen, which stopped at Bergen for fear of the English
Fleet then at Sea under the Command of the Earl of Sandwich; and who had been
put in great alarm by the brave, but fruitless attempt of Sir Thomas Tiddyman,
who was sent out to have seized them in their harbor; In his going he met not
with the English Fleet, but in his return was discovered and attacqued by the
Earl of Sandwich, who finding himself too weak, his charge great, and the
winds very high, with a running Fight he made the best of his way, and with
the loss of two great East India Ships, some other Merchantmen, and five Men
of War, he brought his Fleet into the West Emmes.

Before his Arrival by a Master of a Ship which he had met at Sea, he sent a
challenge to Major Holmes to meet him there; that seeing they two had been the
first Adventurers in the War, they might try the success of the public
quarrel, as far as their particular prowess and fortune could incline it: The
Challenge was as nobly accepted by the Major, as generously and gallantly sent
by De Ruyter; and the King of England to encourage the undertaking, Knighted
Major Holmes, and assigned him a stately New Ship then built at Deptford which
he purposely called the Defiance: but this combat was diverted by other
intervening accidents.

In May 1666. De Ruyter with his Fleet being at Sea, His Majesty of Great
Britain set out a well appointed and great Fleet, under the joint Command of
his Highness Prince Rupert, and his Grace the Duke of Albemarle, renowned for
his valor and success in the former War against the Dutch, and now advanced to
that title; for the great and memorable Services performed to the King: but a
false rumor of the French being at Sea, occasioned the dividing of that Fleet:
for Prince Rupert with the white Squadron, being ordered to make for the coast
of France, to hinder the conjunction of the French and Dutch, who before the
French came to Sea, the Duke of Albemarle was left, with about fifty Sail of
Men of War, to wait on the Dutch: The boundless courage of that Duke, a
dispiser of danger, led him to a gallant, but rash attempt, upon De Ruyter and
his Fleet, who then riding at anchor off of Dunkirk, with a number of Ships far
exceeding the English; was upon Friday the first of June so unexpectedly
assaulted by them, the wind blowing high; that many of his Ships were fain to
cut their cables in haste to put themselves in order of fighting: This was
indeed a bloody and terrible engagement, which continued with matchless fury
and resolution on both sides, till Sunday in the Evening; when the English
Fleet being much torn, and the Generals own Ship disabled; (the disproportion
of number, and the enemies Fleet being to the Leeward, whereby they played
their great guns, which the English could not, being to the weather, and the
wind high; giving great advantage to the Dutch) they drew off, having lost the
evening, before the brave Ship the Prince, which being stranded, was burnt by
the Dutch, and Sir George Ayscue Commander made Prisoner: yet notwithstanding
their great loss, Prince Rupert upon notice given, and the noise of the guns
then heard, having on Sunday in the Evening rejoyned the Fleet, and given the
usual proofs of his great and undaunted valor: both Generals on Monday early
in the morning, pursued the Dutch, who were almost out of sight, passed and
repassed their Fleet several times: But De Ruyter finding himself
(notwithstanding of the recruits received) so weakened, that his longer
continuance in action might have produced the effects rather of a vain glorious
Bravo, then of a prudent circumspect General, and good Countryman; having
given wonderful marks of his carriage and conduct, made made what haste he
could to secure his Fleet: This was the first encounter that De Ruyter as
Commander in chief had with the English in these Wars; the victory of which was
equally celebrated in both Nations, but whoever had the better, it is certain,
both sustained very great losses.

The pretensions to victory in this last Fngagement owned mutually by both
parties, occasioned their hastening out again with all speed to Sea, either to
make good the old, or to gain a new title; and so in July both Fleets were
abroad; The English commanded by Albemarle, and the Dutch by De Ruyter; And on
S. James's day about nine in the morning met and fell to blows again. De Ruyter
with his Fleet for some considerable time made a brisk and a stout resistance,
but the English jealous of their honor which seemed to suffer by the Dutch
arrogating to themselves the Victory in the former Engagement, plied them so
fiercely, that provident De Ruyter finding his fleet in a bad condition,
according to his saving principles, of making the best of an ill bargain, began
to give way, and was so closely pursued by the English Red and White Squadrons
(whilst Van Trump courageously entertained the Blew) that De Ruyters own Ship
was much shattered, and himself in all probability, if the English great ships
could have got up with him, in danger of being taken, and two squadrons of his
Fleet utterly destroyed: In this fight, on the English side, were only three
Captains killed, the Resolution burnt, and not many above three hundred men
killed and wounded: On the Dutch side (according to the general computation of
that time) above four thousand men killed, three hundred common Seamen
wounded, and many Captains slain, amongst which Everson Admiral of Zeland,
Dirickhids Admiral of Friesland, the Vice Admiral of Friesland, and
Rear-Admiral Van Saen, and the number of their fleet so impaired, that of above
an hundred Ships there returned but eighty into harbor. The Dutch who hitherto
still boasted of Victory, gave now sensible signs of the English having the
better, by leaving their harbors and rodes undefended; so that Sir Robert
Holmes shortly after this fight, sails into the Ulie, and with one fifth-rate
Frigate, some Ketches and fireships, there burnt an hundred and sixty sail of
Dutch Vessels.

But neither was this nor the last blow so fatal as to keep the Dutch from
Sea, for about the end of August Admiral De Ruyter appears again with a
stronger fleet then before, stretching along the back of the Goodwin sands, for
the French-coast, with design to have joined the Duke of Beaufort, who with
about forty sail of French ships lay at Rochel ready to come to their
assistance: The English fleet having advice, made after them with such
diligence, that they were forced to stand in for Bulloign-road, and there very
narrowly escaped a new Engagement, by reason of the weather, which growing
extremely tempestuous, constrained the English to bear away for S. Hellens Bay,
the place of rendevouz, and the most proper station to hinder the conjunction
of the French and Dutch: In the mean while the Ruby a French-ship of fifty four
guns, commanded by Monsieur le Roche separated by foul weather from the rest of
the fleet, mistaking the enemies white-flag for their own, fell in amongst the
English, and after some stout resistance, was taken, and the Captain made
Prisoner, but in complement to his valor, was afterward dismissed: And now De
Ruyter falling sick, was forced to return to Amsterdam, leaving the care and
charge of the Dutch fleet to Van Ness; But the States finding the season far
spent, and the weather stormy and tempestuous, commanded their fleet home.

After that the Dutch Fleet was returned into harbor, and De Ruyter recovered
of his sickness, some grudgings and animosities arisen betwixt him and Van
Trump during the late actions, proceeding partly (as it was conceived) from the
bias of their differing factions, the former being a declared re-publican, and
the latter a favourer of the interest of the Prince of Orange, who was not then
advanced to the dignity of Stat-holder;) broke forth into such open debate,
that they mutually accused and blamed each other, for the ill success and
miscarriages of the past Summers actions; but Admiral De Ruyter highly esteemed
by the States for his Valor, prudence and fingular conduct, and supported by
the favor of the leading Party, so far prevailed with his Masters, that
several Sea-Commanders were put to death for cowardice, and himself confirmed
with greater power and authority then before.

About the end of this year 1666. the Dutch being weary of the vast expenses,
and weakened by the great losses of the war, and the English much disheartened by
the burning of the City of London, which happened in September; both seemed
inclinanable to an accommodation; and overtures of peace thereupon began to be
set on foot on either side; which seemed to some who thought themselves wise
very hopeful.

In the beginning of the Spring De Ruyter was again speeded out to Sea, and in
April 1667, made an attempt with a good Fleet upon Brunt-Island, a Town in the
Scottish firth, intending to have landed and spoiled the Country; but by the
vigilant care, and conduct of the Earl of Rothoes, Chancellor of that Kingdom,
with the Trained Bands of the Country, he was bravely repulsed with loss.

After this, De Ruyter to amuse the English (who in a small Fleet were at sea)
sent off a detachment of twenty five sail of ships to cruise to the Northward,
who on the third of June falling in with Nineteen Sail of English Frigates off
of Hull, began a furious and bloody conflict, which was so stoutly and
obstinately maintained on both sides, that from twenty five the Dutch were
reduced to fourteen sail, and the English from nineteen to fifteen.

Shortly after he made an attempt upon some Neighboring parts of Harwich,
having put ashore three thousand men near Felston-cliff, and commanded two
thousand of them to make an assault upon Langward-Fort, which was twice
essayed, the first lasting about three quarters of an hour, and the other one
quarter; but at last with the loss of an hundred men, they were forced to
retreat in so much haste and disorder, that they left behind them all their
ladders: whilst these actions continued at Langward-fort, a party of twelve
hundred Dutch being posted at the cliff their landing-place, to secure and make
good their retreat, were attacked by the Trained Bands of the Country under
the Command of the Earl of Suffolk, and the Dutch being supplied with fresh
recruits from the Fleet, a very smart skirmish continued betwixt them till ten
of the night; but the English horse then coming in sight, the Dutch thought it
safest to quit the Land, and so as soon as their boats were afloat, in great
haste they embarked, and returned to their Fleet.

The day following this defeat at Langward-Fort, de Ruyter with the Dutch Fleet
was pursued by Sir Edward Spragg and Sir Joseph Jordan with about twenty sail
of small Frigates; but whether De Ruyter finding his Orders limited, or for the
reasons above-hinted, notwithstanding he had a much stronger Fleet, kept at
distance, and carefully avoided engagement; taking his course through the
channel for the Western parts of England: In his passage he appeared before
Portsmouth, but knowing the strength of the place, and finding the Country in
arms, he only showed himself there, and so continued his voyage to the Western
coasts.

In Devonshire he endeavored to have landed some men at Wenbury, but the
Militia of the Country being ready to receive them, so warmly saluted them
with some Volleys of small shot, that they were forced with all speed to betake
themselves back again to their ships. The Admiral despairing to effect any
thing here by force, sent off a boat with a white flag, desiring leave to come
ashore to buy fresh provisions, but it was denied him by the Gentlemen and
Officers that commanded there; alleging that no such permission could be
granted without the consent and authority of the Commander in chief, who then
was absent: De Ruyter in this manner disappointed of his intent at Wenbury,
came with his whole Fleet before Couland in Cornwall, and having anchored
within musket shot of the shore; sent off twelve boats full of men with design
of landing, whilst he in the mean time played on the land with his great guns
from aboard: but the Foot of the Country, that were posted there, purposely to
oppose their landing, charged them so briskly, that they were forced to put off
again without effecting an^ thing.

By this time De Ruyter being informed from Holland of the progress of the
Treaty of Peace, which now was in a tendency to a speedy conclusion, not
willing with new hostilities to retard that which was so heartily desired by
both parties; relented a little in the ardour of his proceedings, and began to
heal the wounds which he had formerly made, by prudent application of the
politic plasters of necessity and ignorance; excusing some hostilities, as
thereto enjoined by his Commission, and others as committed without his Order:
And to that purpose sent off two officers with a flag of truce, who being
brought before Sir Jonathan Trelawny, who commanded in chief under the Earl of
Bath in these parts, and having made the complement and apologies of the
^dmiral, desired in his name a conference with some English aboard, for whose
safe coming and returning, he was ready to engage the faith of the Seven
Provinces. Sir Jonathan having herewith advised the Earl of Bath, by his Order
De Ruyter was visited aboard of his own Ship, by the same Sir Jonathan
Trelawny, Major Sparks, and Mr. Windham. The Admiral upon their approach
courteously came over his Ships-side, met, and received them in their boat,
where after mutual salutations, having renewed the Apologies formerly made by
his messengers; he invited them aboard, received them with a salute of
Ordinance, and entertained them with the Chief Officers of his Fleet at a
magnificent dinner in the great Cabin: During which he gave honorable
demonstrations of love and esteem for their persons, and frequently repeated
the expressions of the great honor he had for his Majesty and Kingdom of
England; and real and hearty wishes for a solid and permanent correspondence
betwixt both Nations, lamenting the great damages and loss which acorued to
both by so ruinating a War. The English entertained his civilities with
reciprocal returns of honor and kindeness, and having offered him supplies of
all necessary provisions for his own Table, refusing more until the peace
should be concluded; they took their leave, having been first assured by him,
that no more hurt should be done to the Country whilst he remained on these
Coasts. The Earl of Bath afterward presented him with such provisions and
necessaries, as the Country and season of the year afforded; which he
courteously received, and in sign of gratitude fired several guns, and so
departed: but notwithstanding the promises of indemnity given, after his
departure from Plymouth, two of his Fleet, advancing toward Foy, for some time
lay annoying and battering the harbor and shore with great shot, till having
received damage in their hulls, and one of them having lost his main topmast,
they desisted and went off; whether this was by the Generals Order or not, is
not known; there having been no enquiry ever made in the action, by reason of
the peace that immediately followed; but it is believed that De Ruyter had no
hand in it.

This long expected Peace concluded at Breda the 21 of June, and at length the
14th of August 1667. ratified in England, rather by the exigency and necessity
of the times, than the entire and full satisfaction of both parties, as
appeared within few years afterward, gave respite to both Nations to breathe a
little, and recruit their mutual past losses by industrious prosecuting their
traffic, the hugged darling of both people: and to consider in cold blood what
had been done amiss by either side, during the War, that from so seasonable a
peace, they might pick the necessary means of future reparation. And now De
Ruyter having safely reconducted his Fleet into harbor, was received by the
States with thanks and honors suitable to his merit, and with the universal
acclamations and applause of the Country; and was judged by all discreet men
to have understood as well the measures of a General in that Commonwealth as
any whosoever, by his never giving way to the transports of vainglory, or rage
in the heat of action, but by timely retreat or advantageous fighting; like the
Roman Fabius Maximus, Cunctando restituit rem.

The States having now no more need of so eminent a Commander at sea, the great
and dreadful War being over, but occasion still of a wise and practiced
Statesman at home; admitted the Here De Ruyter with no less expectation into
their Councils of difficult affairs, then they had formerly empowered him as
General at sea: wherein he so answered their hopes; that during the four years
peace, or rather cessation of arms betwixt England and Holland, he gave so
signal proofs of his prudence, that they were only fain to dispense with his
being at home; because they could not find a Successor for him abroad which
the business of the year 1672. urgently required.

The French King in anno 1671. with a considerable army came to Dunkirk in
Flanders, this progress in a time of peace being accompanied with great
preparations for War, gave apprehensions to all his Neighbors, but especially
to the States of the United Provinces, who suspecting that his approach so near
them, was to show them the rod with which he intended to chastise the rudeness
and insolency which the States were said to have used toward his Majesty;
began to arm, and make ready for their own defense. The King of Great Britain,
likewise seeing his potent and most dangerous competitors so busy and earnest
at work, the design of which was not as yet made public; thought it time to
look to the security of his subjects, and to put his Kingdoms out of danger of
a surprise: and so at the same time (as by an influence of destiny) most States
of Christendom seemed to prepare for war. The French who pretended to teach
civility and good manners to those, who oftentimes are not willing to learn;
thought the Dutch stood in need of some documents; and the partial and slow
performances made by the States to the King of England, and his subjects, of
the Articles of their last Peace, and the quarrel of the Dutch fishing,
anciently in the English seas, and more lately in their rivers, being neither
so well adjusted, nor digested, as might stand with the honor and security of
public interest; the King herewith provoked, and by reviling Pamphlets against
his Royal Person, joined with the French King in a strict League of pursuing by
arms their mutual pretentions against the Dutch: And having first friendly
demanded satisfaction of the past abuses by his Ambassador Sir George Downing,
his Majesty resolved to summon them to their duty by a more effectual Method.

On the thirteenth of January, two parties meeting, and the Dutch refusing to
strike, there followed an engagement, and this first blow being thus given, the
King of Great Britain publishes his Declaration against the States of the
United Provinces to this effect; That the dissatisfaction which his Majesty had
from the carriage of the States General of the United Provinces toward him,
for some years past, being such, that he could no longer without diminution of
his own honor, dissemble the indignation raised in him by a treatment too
unsuitable to the great obligations which he and his Predecessors had so
liberally heaped upon them; He was resolved to declare war against them,
forbidding all his Subjects to hold correspondence with them upon pain of
death. This Declaration being with the usual solemnities proclaimed in London
and Westminster, was seconded by the French King with actions previous to a
rupture with that Crown also: he having laid great taxes and customs upon all
Dutch goods in his kingdom, and raised an imposition of fifty per cent. upon
salt, and other merchandises of France exported by the Dutch, and upon all
herrings, spices, and other goods imported into his dominions by them:
prohibiting all his subjects to lade any brandy aboard of any Holland or Dutch
Vessels, and shortly after publicly, and in good earnest declared war.

The States of Holland foreseeing the storm which now began to break upon them,
had so fortified themselves with the powerful alliances of Spain, Germany, and
Denmark, that they seemed not unequally matched with their mighty enemies in so
great a conjunction: so that in the year 1672. the greatest part of the States
of Christendom became involved in a bloody and expensive War, which is not yet
ended.

Matters thus advancing toward action, the Dutch who were not behind in their
preparations, but wanting a head, resolved to gratify both Kings in the choice
of their General, and so in a full Assembly of the States, the Prince of Orange
is unanimously elected Generallissimo of all their Forces both by Sea and Land,
for that years expedition, with promise to renew his authority after
expiration, during life: and Jan De Wit and the Rereward van Putten (the two
unfortunate brothers that were afterward barbarously murdered in a tumult of
the incensed rabble at the Hague) with some others, appointed as Commissioners
to assist him: Under him De Ruyter was made Lieutenant-Admiral, whose power
(notwithstanding of his many tried services, such is the fear of that State of
an absolute authority) was stinted, having the Rereward Van Putten placed over
him by the States as a check and curb: and considering the forewardness of the
English in their preparations, was ordered with all expedition to hasten with
his Fleet to Sea.

His Royal Highness the Duke of York, whose former success against the Dutch
had rendered his very name more terrible to that people, than the wonders of
others, being at Sea with the English Fleet commanded by himself in chief, and
the Earl of Sandwich Admiral of the Blew; and having joined the French with the
white flag under the Command of the Count d'Estree, which all together made a
formidable Navy, of about an hundred and sixty sail, great and small: In May
1672. made toward the Coast of Holland, in search of the Dutch Fleet, then
likewise at Sea, Commanded by De Ruyter, Van Ghent and Banckert; and having had
several views of the enemy, but no opportunity of fighting, which the cautious
De Ruyter always avoided, according to his politic Maxims, without some
apparent advantage; but more especially at this juncture, when the States had
so much lying at stake, not thinking it safe to quit his sands: his Highness
with the whole Fleet returned to the Coast of England, and came to anchor in
Southwold Bay.

De Ruyter (in the mean while) who was seldom out in his conjectures,
concluding that his declining of an Engagement would certainly be by the
English and French interpreted fear, and consequently breed in them contempt of
their enemy, and thereby security, resolved to come up with them before he was
expected: and being by his scouts advertised in what posture the English fleet
lay, and having the wind favorable at E. N. E. weighed anchor from behind
his banks with his whole Fleet and on May 29th. by five of the clock in the
morning came in sight of the Royal Fleet, so unexpected, that several Ships
were forced to cut their cables in disorder, to put themselves in posture of
fighting, and about eight in the morning fell in with them. The fight began
betwixt the Earl of Sandwich in the Royal James with the blew Squadron, and
Van Ghent, whilst his Royal Highness in the Prince with the Red, engaged De
Ruyter, and the Count De Estree with the French, and white Squadron, Banckert.
The fight was terrible and bloody, especially between the blew Squadron and Van
Ghent, who in the beginning of the battle was shot to death. The brave Earl of
Sandwich who was resolved to pawn his life for his honor, being engaged in the
middle of the Dutch with a few ships; the Sovereign, and others of his
Squadron, having stood off to gain the weather-gage, and the Duke in hot action
with De Ruyter, overpowerd with a number of men of War and fireships, and a
hardy Dutch Captain Adrian Brackell, having laid him aboard athwart the hass;
yet still continued the fight with such unshaken courage, that he sunk two of
three of the fireships that had grapled with him, and forced the Dutch Captain
to call for quarter: but at last his ship being unhappily fired by a third
Fireship, was burnt, and he himself with many persons of quality bravely, but
unfortunately perished; to the grief of the King his Master, and unspeakable
regret of his Country; having left to posterity an immortal proof, that Valor
crowned with honor, does not shrink, but swells by its reward. Haddock his
Captain though wounded, escaped by swimming, till he was taken up. This
happened in the afternoon, when those ships of the blew-squadron, that had
stood off, having got the wind, bore down upon the Dutch, and assisted the
Duke who pressed De Ruyter so straightly, that toward the evening he gave way,
and stood over for the Dutch Coast, and was pursued by the Duke all night. In
this Engagement besides the loss of the Noble Earl of Sandwich, and his ship,
the Henry and Royal Catherine, two great ships on the English side were taken,
Captain Dighy Commander of the first being killed, and Sir John Chichely of the
latter made prisoner, but were both shortly after regained by the English
prisoners aboard, who forced and overcome their guards. On the Dutch side,
Admiral Van Ghent was slain, most of their great ships miserably torn, and two
of them sunk, and one of forty eight guns Captain Elderson of Amsterdam
Commander taken, many more were missing, of which no particular account can be
given. The Dutch with confidence pleased themselves to brag of a Victory with
the accustomed solemnities of rejoicing; and imputed much of the English loss
to the French seperating from the rest of the Fleet that day, about noon; but
it is certain that the Duke having pursued them to their own Coast, and having
next day in vain offered battle, kept the seas, and could bring them to no more
action this year.

The advice of the prevailing progress of the French on the one hand, and the
Bishop of Munster on the other, which put the States in much apprehension, and
the people in great fright and confusion; being brought to De Ruyter, as he
rode with his Fleet at the Oyster-bank; occasioned his hastening from thence to
Blanckenburgh, there to put ashore a great part of his men to be employed at
land, where the danger then seemed most pressing: And whilst he continued there
with a Fleet half manned to secure the arrival of the East India Fleet, which
was then looked for; the Duke of York kept at sea, sometime cruising, sometime
at anchor on the Doggerbank, in very bad weather, with intention either to
seize that Fleet, or to provoke voke the Dutch to a New Engagement by their
attempting to defend them. About this time the tumult of the untractable people
who imputed all their calamities to the errors of their Governors, grew every
where so high, that it seemed to threaten a dissolution of Government;
especially at Dort, where the Burghers armed in a great body having surrounded
the house where the Prince of Orange sat at dinner, with the Magistrates of
the place; sent some of their Officers with a form of writing, containing a New
Election of his Highness to be hereditary Statholder of the Commonwealth,
with a renunciation of all malicious Acts and Edicts made by the Lovestein
faction to the contrary; threatening the Magistrates with the loss of their
lives, unless they presently signed it: This peremptory desire the Magistrates
durst not refuse, but presently signed the Writing, and dispensed with the Oath
formerly extorted from the Prince, never to accept any such dignity for the
future by the contrary and swaying party: and this tumultuary procedure had the
influence upon the other Corporations, that most did the like; so that at
length it advanced so far as to be publicly ratified and confirmed by the
States; so great order many times by a guiding providence is produced from
greatest confusion.

In the rage of this unruly multitude De Ruyter himself there celebrated
tutelary and guardian, though then at sea, for their defense hardly escaped
their fury; for a company of common people having mutined into a body beset his
house in the New Island of Amsterdam; and if they had not been hindered by the
Magistrates had plundered and sacked it: this was so strange when no previous
set discourse (that is known) did wind up the Jack to such a revolution; that
it affords us another easy and obvious remark, that men when they are mad, are
never wise.

The Duke of York having for many weeks kept his station, and suffered very
foul weather on the Dogger-bank; and De Ruyter at Blanckenburgh, without any
offer of fighting; the long wished for East India Fleet (which the Duke hoped
might give occasion to a new trial) at length appeared near the Coast of
Holland. De Ruyter by his advice-boats informed of this, thinking himself
obliged to use his utmost endeavors, for the security of so great a concern:
weighed from Blanckenburgh, and with a Fleet ill-mann'd, and in bad condition
of fighting; slid along the shore, without being discovered by the English; met
the Fleet, and safely conducted them into Delfzey in the West-Emms. The
Cambridge and Bristol two English Frigates, being then upon the scout, came up
with them, and had some little encounter; but the winds was high, and the sea
so rough, that no booty could be gained. The Duke having now lost all hopes of
alluring the Dutch to any more action this year, left Sir Edward Spragg with a
squadron of ships to keep the seas, and disturb their fishing, and he himself
with the rest of the fleet returned home.

The torrent of the French conquests at land being now somewhat stopped, and the
tumult and, rage of the people quieted, the affairs of Sea came next in play;
In the preparations for which, the vigilant De-Ruyter with much diligence
employed the winter (which happened by reason of its openness, to be very
favorable to the Dutch) proposing to himself reasonable advantages, if he
could have a Fleet in readiness next spring at Sea, before the coming of the
French, which he effected. For in May 1673. with a strong and well-appointed
Navy commanded by himself, Van Trump and Banckert, he was out again at Sea, and
in the mouth of the River of Thames, with design, by sinking of several great
Ships in the narrow passages of the Channel, called the Middleground, to have
stopped and blockt up the mouth and entry of the river; but the breadth of that
channel, and the commodiousness of others, rendered his attempts altogether in
vain.

Prince Rupert, who for this Years Expedition Commanded the Royal Navies, lying
at the Buoy of the Nore, with part of the English fleet (the French being not
as yet arrived) when De Ruyter appeared, was hindered by the winds to get out;
but afterward having with much difficulty put to Sea, and made toward the
Dutch: De Ruyter not swerving from his former measures, thinking he gained
enough when he did not lose, warily retired behind the banks, those
impregnable sea-ramparts, shunning at that time any engagement: The Prince
seeing this, stood with his fleet for the Streights off Calais, with intention
to meet the French and Portsmouth fleets; whom after a short stay, he having
joined at Dungean ness, with the whole fleet, returned for the coast of
Holland, and May 26. 1673. arrived before Schonvelt where de Ruyter lay with
his fleet.

The wind and Sea then unseasonable, allowed no fair opportunity of fighting,
but the twenty eighth in the morning, the weather fair, and a fresh gale,
invited the Prince to action: De Ruyter still kept his station where the great
ships could not approach: and the Prince resolving by all means possible to
draw him to an engagement, sent off thirty five sail of small Frigates to
provoke him to battle: The Dutch contrary to the expectation of the English and
French in excellent order came forth, and boldly encountered this Vanguard of
the fleet with such hot service, that they being forced a little to yield,
disordered the rest of the Royal Navy: The fight continued desperately on both
sides, the English and French with mutual emulation behaving themselves
bravely, and with so much eagerness, that they entangled each other, and gave
some advantage to the enemy: For the Valiant Earl of Ossory being pestered
amongst the French, ran foul of an English Fregat, and was entangled with a
fireship; and was no sooner got clear, but the observant De Ruyter laying hold
of the opportunity, bore down upon him with his whole Squadron, and gave him
fresh occasion to signalize his Valor: The Earl with his ships that were with
him, received the Admiral with no less resolution then he was attacqued, and
maintained a bloody fight, with equal success, till both being sufficiently
battered, the night put an end to the conflict, and the Dutch returned to their
lurking holes: In this Fight de Ruyter lost only the Ship called the Debenter,
and had killed the Vice-Admsral Schram, Rear-Admiral Ulugh, and six Captains:
After the old manner both Parties claimed the honor of the Victory; The Dutch
because they had repulsed the Assailants, and the English because they had
forced the Dutch to their banks of refuge; but both fleets were much damnified.

The next three days were spent in mending and re-fitting their shattered
ships, which the Dutch had better opportunity to perform (having all
necessaries from their stores at hand) then the English, who were so remote
from their own Coast; So that de Ruyter knowing well the advantage, in the
beginning of June put out again, and by his approach allarmed the English, who
had not as yet got into such readiness; yet notwithstanding they presently put
themselves in a posture of engaging, observing the motion of the Dutch; which
de Ruyter perceiving drew all his fleet into a line, reaching three leagues,
and so came to an anchor, expecting the coming unto the fleet of the Heers
Boschovelt, Van der Meyden, Moregnault, and Van der Vierse the Deputies of the
States General; who being arrived and in a Council of War having approved his
intent of fighting, and afterward returned again ashore; on the fourth of June,
De Ruyter with his whole Fleet, was by eleven of the clock again under sail,
making directly toward the English, who kept their old station. Sir Edward
Spragg Admiral of the English blew squadron, who had the Van, not believing
that the Dutch intended to fight, but only as before to change their rode; made
no great haste to bear up, and so lost the wind; and being much pressed by the
French, as they by the Prince in the rear, who were all eager to come to blows;
he was put in some little disorder. The two Fleets for some time fought
stoutly, especially where the Earl of Ossory and Sir Edward Spragg engaged,
till the Prince finding the disadvantage of the wind, with the red and white
squadrons stood away N W. De Ruyter thinking it was to get the wind, which he
was not willing to lose, did the like, and left Van Trump with the rest of the
Fleet in a sharp conflict with Spragg and Ossory. The day began to close before
the shot on either side betwixt the Prince and De Ruyter began to do execution:
but at length the English must confess, that to their great wonder, they first
learned here, that the Dutch powder was stronger and the guns longer than their
own. So Prince Rupert having shifted himself from the Royal Charles into the
Old Soverain, and Sir Edward Spragg rejoyned the Fleet, they fought at distance
most part of the night, and by break of day both Fleets being out of sight of
each other, the Prince with the loss of many men, and disabled ships, made for
the Thames; and De Ruyter with little loss having had the advantage of the
wind and a distant fight, stood back for his old station on the Coast of
Zeland. De Ruyter in this action gave evident proof that he knew when it was
time to pursue as well as retreat, and that he never turned his back but with
intent to show his face.

It was now the twentieth of July before the English and French were in
condition again to visit the Dutch Coasts, and then having discovered De Ruyter
with his Fleet eight leagues off of the Coast of Zealand, and in posture of
Fighting, the Royal Navy expected an Engagement, but wise De Ruyter who always
fought after his own manner, knew well the importance of so great a trial, and
that the affairs of his Country so embarrassed on all hands, did not require
the hazarding of the interest and honor of his Masters, or of himself, without
some probable hopes of saving of both; stood in nearer the shore, and bore away
along the Coast, declining all engagement until the one and twentieth of
August following.

On the twentieth of August, Prince Rupert being informed that the Dutch Fleet
were about Goree, made thither, and toward the evening discovered them: but
being then late, thought best not to attacque them that night: In the mean time
De Ruyter according to his ordinary conduct improving the benefit of the
darkness, stood in close to the shore, and bearing up before next morning,
gained the wind of the English, and by seven of the Clock bore down upon them
freshly. The Prince upon this, changing his course, stood away S. W. and the
French who had the Van engaged Banckert, the Prince in the middle, De Ruyter
and Sir Edward Spragg in the rear, (after the old manner) Van Trump. This Fight
was so managed between the English and Dutch, as if both parties being by some
secret instinct acquainted that this was to be the last, resolved to prove
their utmost and last effects of fortitude and conduct among the French, Capt.
Martel behaved himself bravely: Banckert sent off a few ships to wait the
French motion, and with the rest of his squadron came in to the assistance of
De Ruyter against the Prince, who for some time valiantly exchanged their
broadsides, and behaved themselves with equal courage and success. Sir Edward
Spragg and Van Trump (the two declared Competitiours and Rivals for honor)
with their squadrons in the mean time persisted in action with such determinate
resolution, that the Dutch avow the like never to have been seen, their own two
ships having without touching of a sail strangely endured the fury of three
full hours uncessant battery. But Sir Edward Spraggs Ship the Prince, having
lost her masts, and being so fearfully torn, as to be unfit for more service,
with his flag displayed in his boat, he shifted aboard off the St. George; and
finding her likewise disabled, as he was leaving of her to get into the Royal
Charles, a cruel shot funk his boat, and left him helpless in the Ocean, whose
power being greater then that of Van Trump; by his death chilled that heat of
courage, which Trump could never have cooled above water: His death was by all,
even the Dutch themselves bewailed, who acknowledged him to have been a brave
man, and valiant Soldier: His Ship courageously defended by the stout Earl of
Ossory (notwithstanding all the attempts that Van Trump made to be Master of
her.) was safely towed off by the Hampshire Fregat. The Prince and de Ruyter at
this time finding themselves at too great distance from the squadrons so hotly
engaged, who stood both in need of assistance; as by mutual consent, tacked
both, and in friendly manner without firing, stood toward their respective
friends: but de Ruyter having joined Van Trump who was still engaged, with the
blew, before the Prince could could come in; fell upon the blew with renewed
fury, intending to have totally out off that squadron from the rest of the
English Fleet; but at length the Prince coming in time, broke in amongst the
Dutch with unanswerable force, and Captain Leg with his fireships, put them in
great disorder and confusion; It was believed by all, that if the French had
made their best use of that wind, de Ruyter and his Fleet could not so fairly
(as they did) by the favor of the night, have taken their leave of this and
all other public action with the English, during this War. The losses in this
last Fight were great on both sides; many brave Commanders, and Vast number of
men killed and wounded; but both so positively pretending to victory, it is
hard to determine who had the better; yet the Dutch by Sir Edward Spraggs death
thinking their title good, made the whole Country so merry with the ringing
noise of Victory: that the States changed the following day of Humiliation into
thanksgiving, and in stead of fasting, drunk and sung Psalms.

The singular prudence and conduct of Admiral de Ruyter in the several passages
of this War, rendered him so useful to his Country (of whose tottering and
decaying state he seemed the Atlas and guardian) and so considerable to his
enemies, who by experience found it not easy to triumph-over him; that
notwithstanding the powerful efforts made for that end, the success of affairs
remained so little inclined to either side, that the one had no reason to
despair, nor the other to scorn the prossers of accommodation; made way for a
Treaty of peace with England; and the States of Holland catching their
opportunity, when the vigorous intercession of the Crown, and Ministers of
Spain concurred so pat with the public good offices of their friends in
England: they so effectually pursued the necessary and advantageous concern of
peace with that kingdom, that by the frequent solicitations and busy
importunities of one and other, the King of Great Britain did at length
condescend to a peace with the Dutch: which was concluded at Westminster the
Ninth of February, 1674. to the unspeakable joy of the States, and perpetual
renown of de Ruyter, in such a pinching nick of time, that the Dutch had good
reason to be thankful for so seasonable an accommodation.

Janus Temple being thus half shut, and the States General having now but one
way to look; resolved to bend all their forces against the French, both by Sea
and land: and knowing that the French would not adventure to meet them at Sea;
being disjoined from the English; judged it most convenient to molest their
navigation, annoy their Coasts, and destroy (as much as conveniently could be
done) their Country and Plantations. In Order hereunto, they sent out a great
Fleet of sixty six men of War, besides victuallars, tenders and fireships,
under the Command of Lieutenant Admiral De Ruyter, and Van Trump, with a
flying Army of Landforces, Commanded by Count William Van Horn. This Fleet
joined at their rendevous on the fourteenth of May 1674. set sail from the
Weelings; and having by a Squadron of fifteen men of War, allarmed all the
Coast of Calais and Bulloigne, they passed along the English shore, and Isle of
Wight, and come to anchor in Tourbay. Here after a great Council of War, they
divided the Fleet into two Squadrons; appointing one and twenty fail of Men of
War, and forty eight other Ships, with several Companies of Land-souldiers,
under the Command of Old De Ruyter Admiral, Evertse of Zealand Vice Admiral,
and young Engell de Ruyter Son of the other Rear-Admiral for the Western French
Islands; and Van Trump and the Count Horn, with the rest of the fleet and
Landforces, for the Coast of France.

The design so laid, was accordingly put in execution; for De Ruyter with his
fleet on the 29. of May made sail to the Westward, and ten days after Van Trump
for the coast of France; de Ruyter continuing his course with fair winds, on
the ninth of July came in sight of the Isle of Martenique, and the tenth
arrived in the Bay called Cusack: The French being advertised of their coming,
appeared in readiness, marching toward the shore, and the Dutch with some
small ships that sailed near the land, told them their errand, by firing
smartly against them from aboard? this salute forced the French a little to
retreat, and burn some houses, which they thought stood in their way, and
favored the Enemy: In the afternoon a Council of War being held, a descent was
concluded on, and de Ruyter having given the sign of landing, the landforces
divided into 3. squadrons, under the Command of Col. Vytenhove, with 20 men to
throw grenades for each Squadron, immediately embarked in their boats and
shalloops, and with great courage, notwithstanding the French violent firing on
them from their ships which they had ashore, and out of their woods, landed and
made themselves Masters of a Bank, which the French had cast up to prevent
their landing, and forced the Enemy to retire to their Fort: De Ruyter
perceiving the Engagement hot, sent off 1500. seamen to reinforce his party,
but the French firing furiously from behind their ships, and battery, which
they had raised, flanking the Dutch who stood naked to their shot, and whose
Canon did them little service, toward the Evening beat them off again to their
ships, with the loss of many men, and several brave Officers, and so freed the
Island at this time from further danger.

De Ruyter after much loss finding the attempt fruitless, left four ships to
cruise thereabouts, and wait the coming of some Victuallers expected from
Holland, and next day sailed to Dominico, there to take in fresh water, which
being done, passing by Mevis and the Barmoodoes, and having mutually received
and rendered civilities with the English there, made sail for Holland, and
about latter end of September, with little success in this expedition, arrived
safely at home, and Trump and Van-Horn having by several descents on Bell-Isle,
and other parts of that coast of France, allarmed and vexed the French, and
plundered the country; and the fleet having after conducted and brought back
from Spain the Count Van Horn, who went to negotiate at Madrid, with 18 sail of
the fleet (the rest being otherways employed) in the latter end of November
following, returned likewise to the Texell.

Now the difficulty of the reducing Messina, so strongly protected by the
French, requiring much of the care and Forces of Spain to be employed in
Sicily, sensibly weakened the Confederates of the States of Holland in
Flanders, where the danger lay at their doors. The States therefore being
solicited by the Ministers of Spain, that they might either give a necessary
diversion to the French, who in good earnest espoused the quarrel, and
endeavored the assistance of the Messinesses, and thereby hinder the progress
nearer home; or that they might effectually aid the Spaniards to the entire
subduing of these Revolters, and so bring over to Flanders the Spanish Forces,
and other instruments of war employed in these parts; In the beginning of 1675.
resolved to dispatch their successeful Admiral De Ruyter, with a considerable
fleet of Men of war into the Streights, to join the Prince Montesarchio
General of the Spanish Armada for the effecting of that design; accordingly
about the latter end of August, de Ruyter with a fleet of 25. sail, wyed from
Schonvelt, and having stopped at Cadiz, and other places, by the way, in December
following joined Montesarchio at Palermo with part of his Fleet, and after that
he had stayed some time for those of his Ships which then were returned to
Naples from Argiers under the Command of Vice Admiral de Haen, and received
them at the place of Rendevouz: They sailed all together from Palermo to
Melazzo, where de Ruyter having had conference with the Duke of Ferrandina the
Spanish Viceroy of Sicily, It was resolved that the Dutch and Spanish Fleet by
Sea, and the Viceroy by Land should attacque and molest Messina, before that
any further succors did arrive there: In order to that, de Ruyter being
informed of a Fleet of Ships laden with provisions and necessaries for the
besieged who then were in great straits by want, and not like long to subsist
without relief, being at sea under the Convoy of a squadron of Men of War
commanded by the Sieur de Quesny, made toward the fare of Messina to intercept
and hinder their passage; and whilst the Prince Montesarchio left with some
ships to guard the mouth of the fare, was separated from the rest of the Fleet,
on the 29th of January, 1675. de Ruyter encountered the French off of Lipari,
with a fleet not much odd in number to his own, having both between twenty and
thirty sail of Men of War a piece, besides galleys, fireships, and other small
craft, and with much courage and bravery engaged them: The French received him
with no less resolution; so that there began a very brisk dispute betwixt them,
which continued all that day and the next, with considerable damage to their
Ships and rigging, but no great loss of men, the fight having been at some
distance: In this engagement the French lost one man of War, and two fireships,
and the Dutch one Fregat, which being disabled in the engagement, as the
Galleys were towing of her off for Palermo, sunk, but the men were saved. The
day following de Ruyter being advised, that the Sieur de Quesny by another way
round the Island, unperceived by the Dutch, had conveyed the destined succors
into Messina; and foreseeing well the bad consequences of the disappointment,
being much displeased with the slow proceedings of the Spanish grave and
Phlegmatic circumspection, and their conduct of affairs; thought it not
convenient further to pursue the French, nor to abide longer in these quarters,
(the six Months appointed by the States his Masters for that expedition being
now expired) and therefore having rejoyned Montesarchio with his eight Spanish
Men of War, he took his leave of him, in order to his returning homeward.

This sudden departure threatened by de Ruyter, put the Viceroys of Sicily and
Naples in great perplexity, and the Court of Spain in much trouble, who judged
thereby the business of Messina almost desperate; so that all means possible
were used by the Agents of Spain, to retain him in these parts; and
particularly importunate instances in Holland for the prolonging the time of
his Commission, which prevailed.

New Orders from Holland being arrived at Naples, the Viceroy the Duke de los
Velos, fearing that de Ruyter might pass without touching there, and so miss
of receiving of his Letters, of so great concern to the Spanish interest: sent
off the Dutch Consul with some Galleys to meet him, and to acquaint him with
the will of the States, and to invite him to Naples: This occasioned de Ruyters
coming to Naples, where he was splendidly entertained by the Viceroy; and in
visiting the City treated with the same honors as are usually rendered to his
own person, but hastened again aboard. The advice sent from Holland of his
Commission renewed, and a re-inforcement of his Fleet promised, set him at work
to animate and push forward the slow and heavy march of the Spaniards in the
execution of their Gounsils; and so having cruised with his Fleet some time at
Palermo, and some time at Melazzo; and had conference with the Viceroy of
Sicily: It was condescended on, that Augusta, a place that held for the Rebels,
should be invested by Sea and Land, and accordingly de Ruyter with his fleet
made haste for the Bay of Augusta, a place to him too satal for so famous a
name; whilst he was there, intelligence was brought him, that the French were
at Sea; whereupon that night he sailed, and next morning got sight of the
Enemy, they being about the Cape Spartivento, and he himself with his fleet
three Leagues from Augusta: The morning was calm, so that he could not come up
with the Enemy, but in the afternoon a fresh gale blowing from S. E. brought
both fleets nearer together: De Ruyter being in the Van, the Spaniards in the
body, and Vice Admiral de Haen in the Rear of the fleet, which besides the
Spanish consisted but of seventeen Dutch Men of War, with other galleys,
fireships and small craft; They bore down with great eagerness upon the French,
consisting of thirty Men of war, and seven fireships, with galleys, and other
Tenders: About four in the afternoon the fight began, and lasted till seven,
with obstinate resolution and courage, betwixt the Dutch and French, who
sustained the whole brunt of this Engagement; for the Spanish did but little,
only kept themselves out of harms way, and did what mischief they could at a
distance.

The Dutch had in this Engagement three Ships so disabled as to be towed off,
and one Captain killed, but smaller losses are undiscernable when the great De
Ruyter fell; For here it was that pressing the French at the latter end of the
Fight, so as to make them give way; a bold bullet from the Enemies Fleet stopped
him in his carreer; which having carried away part of his left foot, and broke
his left leg above the ancle, threw him on the deck, so as by his fall he was
wounded in the head: The Fleet hereupon slackened sail, and stood for the Bay
of Syracusa: The wounded General was carried ashore for the more convenience of
cure; which then did not seem desperate, but the greatness of his mind
unacquainted with such checks of fortune, increased so that distemper of body;
which it patiently bore, that the nineteenth of April having been speechless a
day before, between nine and ten of the Clock at night, in the Seveniteth year
and Second Month of his Age, at the first violent summons of Fortune; yielded
his last Duty to Nature; and as he had lived, died in the embraces of beloved
honor.

This his Death, as it filled his friends and Country with grief and
lamentation, and all men with pity and regret, so being a loss great enough
to cast the balance of advantage even to the most forlorn and despairing side;
gave the French a Victory not equalled by their confederate Adversaries, unless
when last year Triumphant Turene the only Paragon of his worth and fame, upon a
different Stage, played his last Act: which two great Champions much unlike in
their Original (the one being born to a great share of his honor, and the
other to make all his own,) did so resemble each other, in the course of their
Lives and Fortune, and manner and Circumstances of dying; that it seemed nature
had framed them for two Subjects whereon Fortune might show her skill, in
dispencing equally her inclinations to great and powerful adversaries in the
highest pitch of competition. For as either had been the constant Favorite of
their respective Masters, and the often and long experieneed prop of their
Victorious hopes; the one at Land, and the other at Sea, so both fell by an
interchanged great Shot, in such a point of time, when their actions gave great
hopes and confidence to their several Parties; and their death was attended
with remarkable and dangerous consequences to either side: and had Fortune
proceeded from the beginning, and should she still continue with so even and
impartial a hand in all the occurrences and transactions, of this formidable
war; both parties might have occasion to celebrate their triumphs with tears,
and with drawn stakes sit down, and mutually confess, that

Iam sumus ergo pares. De Ruyter was a person (as most brave men have been) of
a middle stature, a strong and well compacted body, not fat, but fleshy, of a
graceful and majestic countenance, his aspect pleasant and cheerful, not
terrible by too much fierceness, nor by too great mildeness unawful; of a
complexion sanguine, and a constitution temperate and healthful; sober in his
diet, and moderate, though free in his words; neither sullen with rigid and
morose reservedness, nor by loquacity affected or vain; his gestures manly and
natural; and generally of a frame of temper so even and harmonious, as rendered
him sedate and constant, and altogether free from the mistakes and waverings
that accompany fickle and light natures, in the greater vicissitudes of
fortune: He advanced to the height of Honor by the regular steps of merit and
patience, never importuning his destiny by untimely and precipitant ambition;
nor slighting or being out of the way when Fortune called him to preferment:
which he conducted by such wise and prudent measures, as made him acceptable to
all; not staining the reputation of his great actions by vainglorious
ostentation, and overweening pride; but by being dutiful to his superiors,
respectfull to his equals, grateful to his benefactors, affable and courteous
to his inferiors; and in a word, obliging to all: he gained the love and
esteem of all that knew him; entertaining even the meanest of the acquaintances
of his low estate with that civility, that if in the top of honor, they
enjoyed not the ancient familiarity of his baser fortune, they easily saw, that
it was his place and dignity, and not the change of humor, that altered the
style. In fine, he was so good a man, so devout and pious a Christian, so stout
a Soldier, so wise, expert, and successful a General; and so faithful,
trusty, and honest a Lover of his Country, that he deserves justly to be
recommended to Posterity, as an ornament of his Age, the darling of the Seas,
and the delight and honor of his Country.

FINIS.
These Books are Sold by Dorm. Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey.
Tachmas, Prince of Persia, an historical Novel, which happened under the Sophy
Seliman, who reigns at this day.

A Treatise of the Gout, Written originally in the French Tongue by Theodor
Turquet de Mayerne, Knight. Baron of Aubonne, Counselor and Chief Physician to
the late King and Queen of England, Englished by Tho. Sherly Physician in
Ordinary to his Majesty. Whereto is added, Advice about Hypochoudriacal fits,
By the same Author.

A New and Easy English Grammar Dictionary and Nomenclator, English and Dutch.

The Doctrine of Devils proved to be the grand Apostasy of these latter times,
An Essay tending to rectify those undue notions men have about Demons and
evil Spirits.

Truth Vnveyled, in behalf of the Church of England, giving particular
Instances of such (amongst her professed Sons) as have ventured upon Innovations
in her Doctrine, being a Vindication of Mr. Standish his Sermon before the
King, and published by his Majesty's special Command; By a Person of Quality.

The whole Body of Arithmetic made Easy, wherein the Rules of that Art are
briefly explained and illustrated with such familiar examples as may reach the
capacity of any that desire to learn.

Dr Robert Bayfields Anatomy.

Kitchen Physic, With Rules to prevent sickness, and cure diseases by diet,
and such things as are daily sold in the Market, By Tho Cock. Whereunto is
added, A Discourse of Stoving.

Letters of Advice from two Reverend Divines to a young Gentleman about a Case
of Conscience

The School of the Heart in 47 Emblemes.

Sixteen Sermons Preached on Sever all Occasions: By Edw. Boys, B. D.


