A NEW VOYAGE INTO THE NORTHERN COUNTRIES Being a Description of the Manners,
Customs, Superstition, Buildings, and Habits of the Norwegians, Laponians,
Kilops, Borandians, Siberians, Samojedes, Zemblans and Islanders.

With Reflections upon an Error in our Geographers about the situation and
Extent of Greenland and Nova Zembla.

LONDON Printed for John Starkey, at the Miter in Fleetstreet near Temple Bar.
1674.

THE TABLE.
CHAP. I. THe Authors embarking at Copenhagen in a Vessel belonging to the King
of Denmarks Northern Company, and his Arrival at Christiana in Norway. CHAP.
II. Particulars of the Country about Christiana; with the Manners and Customs
of the Pesantry in Norway. CHAP. III. Their way of fetching the Elks; the
rediculous opinion of the Virtue of their Claw; the power and authority of the
Norwegian Nobles. CHAP. IV. The Authors reimbarking at Christiania; his arrival
at Berghen, with some particulars of that Town. CHAP. V. The Authors
reinbarking at Berghen, and his arrival at Dronthem. CHAP. VI. The Authors
departure from Dronthem to to take a view of the Silver and Copper Mines
belonging to the King of Danemark. CHAP. VII. Particulars of the Silver and
Copper Mines in Norway. CHAP. VIII. The entertainment the Author received from
a Norwegian Peasant in his return from the Mines. CHAP. IX. The Authors
reimbarkment at Dronthem, The Mariners buying a Wind, and the danger of sailing
in those Northern Seas. CHAP. X. The Authors great danger in a Storm. CAAP. XI.
The Authors arrival at Varanger in the Danish Laponia. CHAP. XII. The Manners,
Customs, Superstition and Habit of the Danish Laplanders. CHAP. XIII. The
Authors departure from Varanger toward Mourmanskoimore. CHAP. XIV. His
traveling with Elks, with some particulars of that Beast. CHAP. XV. The
Authors Arrival at Mourmanskoimore with some particulars of that Country. CHAP.
XVI. The Authors Voyage into the Country of the Killopes, with their manner of
Living. CHAP. XVII. The Authors Arrival in the Muscovian Lapland. Their Trade,
Customs, and Manners. CHAP. XVIII. The Authors Arrival at Kola, the situation
of the Town, with the manner of their buildings and other particulars. CHAP.
XIX. The Authors departure from Kola, in his return to Varanger, with the
Funeral Formalities of the Muscovian Laplanders. CHAP. XX. The work and
employment of the Laponian Women, with other particulars of that Country. CHAP.
XXI. The Authors meeting a Laplander going a hunting. CHAP. XXII. The Authors
return to Varanger, the dexterity of the Laponians in throwing their Darts
shooting with their Bows and other particulars. CHAP. XXIII. The Authors
sailing out of the Sea of Varanger, the continuation of thisi Voyage, with
other particulars. CHAP. XXIV. The meeting of the Danish Ships which came out
of Danemark with the Author and had been separated by Storm, with an account of
their adventures. CHAP. XXV. The Danes resolution to Trade to Boranday and the
Authors accompanying them. CHAP. XXVI. The Stature, Habit, buildings. and
manner of Living of the Borandians, with other particulars. CHAP. XXVII. The
entertainment the Danes gave the Borandians on Board, and the Authors Voyage
into Boranday. CHAP. XXVIII. The success of the Authors Voyage into Boranday,
and other particulars of that Country. CHAP. XXIX. The Author meets a Borandine
Lord returning from hunting, with a description of their Clothes. CHAP. XXX.
The Authors departure from Vitzora, toward Potzora, and his traffic there.
CHAP. XXXI. The Authors departure from Potzora, to go into Siberia, his meeting
with five persons of quality sent thither into exile by the grand Czar, their
miseries and his arrival at Papinogorod. CHAP. XXXII. The Governors reception
of the Danish Merchants amongst whom was the Author. CHAP. XXXIII. The Danes,
and the Authors trassick in Papinogorod, the situation of the Town? with the
Habit, and Customs of the Syberians, and Muscovites. CHAP. XXXIV. The Authors
departure from Papinogorod, toward his Ship, his passage through Samojespia,
with their Manners, Customs and Vestments. CHAP. XXXV. The Author departs from
Boranday to go to Zembla, where he saw a Company of Zemblanes worshipping the
Sun, and two others worshipping a wooden Idol, they called Fetitot. CHAP. XXXVI.
Of a disease called the Scurvy with which the Author and most of the Danes in
his Company were sick. CHAP. XXXVII. Their Fishing for the Seahorse, with the
relation how two of their Sea men were struck over board with one of their
Tails. CHAP. XXXVIII. The boldness of the Bears upon the Mountains of Voygat,
with the taking of certain Foul called Pingoines, CHAP. XXXIX. Of a Zemblane
which had like to have been surprised by the Danes, of another and his wife
taken in their Canoe, with a description of their Boat. CHAP. XL. The taking of
another Zemblan and his wife, their Habits, Arms, and manner of living. DHAP.
XLI. Their departure from Zembla back again to Danemark, their Arrival in
Greenland the whale Fishing, and the way they make their Oil. CHAP. XLII. Their
departure from Greenland, three Suns appear to them at Sea, with the relation
how by the Violence of a Storm they were driven upon the Coast of Island. CHAP.
XLIII. Their Arrival at Kirkebar,, their journey to Hecla, the danger the Author
incurred there, the mavelous effects of two Fountvins which spring out of
that Mountain, with other particulars. CHAP. XLIV. The Habitations, Manners,
Superstitions of the Islanders, with other particulars. CHAP. XLV. Their
departure from Cape Hori, their Arrival at Copenhagen, the present of the Horns
of two Sea-Horses, which were taken for Unicorns. CHAP. XLVI. The Error about
the Unicorn and the virtue of its Horn. CHAP. XLVII. The Authors reflections
upon an Error i^ our Geographers in the situation and extent of Greenland and
Zembla, with Observations upon such as have writ about Voygat and the
Samojedes.
FINIS.
THE VOYAGE OF Monsieur MARTINIERE INTO THE Northern COUNTRIES.
CHAP. I. The Author imbarking at Copenhagen in a Vessel belonging to the King
of Denmarks Northern-Company, and of his arrival at Christiania in Norway.
IN the year 1647. Iredrich the third of that name, King of Denmark, out of the
care of his Subjects, and advancement of their Trade, Erected two Companies in
Copenhagen (the Metropolis of his Kingdom) one of them for Islande, the other
for the North: which last, having observed the advantage of their Traffic into
Norway, prevailed with those who were concerned in their Patent, about the end
of February 1653. to represent to his Majesty the profits would probably accrue
if they carried their Trade up further than as yet they had done; and that they
should return doubtless with several Commodities which at present they wanted.

The King having received their Petition, was pleased Graciously to consent,
and the Company thereupon immediately caused three Ships to be Equipped in order
to that Voyage.

Being at Copenhagen at that time, and understanding his Majesty had commanded
those who were to make that Voyage, should take the stricktest and most exact
account of all the Coasts and Places they came at, and report them with all
possible curiosity, that thereby the Voyage might be every way beneficial, I
was encouraged to address my self to a Friend of mine who had a principal
interest in that affair, and to desire his Mediation to the Company, that I
might be received, and go as Surgeon to one of those Ships.

Being provided with all things necessary, within six days we Embarked, and
with a fair South-East wind set Sail, Coasting by the Shore as far as Katgat
(by the French called Trou de chat) which is a Straight dividing the German
Ocean from the Baltic Sea; a place very dangerous to pass in respect of the
Rocks, and containing in length forty Leagues from Elsenore to Scagerhort.

When we were put off of Maestrand (which is a small Port about thirty Leagues
from Copenhagen) we were surprised with a fierce Wind from the North, and
driven ten Leagues back again, which forced us to make for a Harbor, and
retire under the Shore to Schllot, where we lay at Shelter under the Castle,
though it appeared to us but an old uninhabitable heap of stones, abandoned for
several years, and considerable for nothing but the Eminence of the
Neighboring Promontories.

Having lain there at Anchor two days complete, the third before Sunrise by
the benefit of an Easterly Wind, we weighed again to prosecute our Voyage.

We had not Sailed above four hours before we were interrupted by a
North-North-East Wind which drove us from the Coast of Gottenburg, upon the
Shore of Jutland, upon which there being multitude of Sands, we were forced to
sound every moment: Sailing in this manner, a sudden Gust of Wind carried us
into a place where we found but three fathoms and a half Water, where we had
undoubtedly struck, had not the dexterity of our Pilot turned our Ship, and by
the advantage of a favorable Blast, carried us in half an hours time into
another place where we sounded fifteen Fathoms and upward, which obliged us to
keep the Sea with a side Wind as well as we were able, least otherwise we
should have been forced back as before.

We had not gained above two Leagues from the place where we had like to have
struck, before we fell into a turn of Waters, which in spite of the Wind stopped
our Vessel on sudden, as if we had cast Anchor, which constpained us to furle
all our Sails but the Mizen, and gave us twelve hours employment to disingage
our selves, which notwithstanding we could not have been able to have done, had
not the Wind Veer'd to the South-South-West, and given us opportunity to make
use of the rest of our Sails, and steer along the Coasts of Bahu.

Having Sailed in this manner some Days and Nights at our Ease, we discovered
about eight in the Morning, the Promentories of Christiansand, a little Town
famous for the convenience of its Port, from whence the next Night we arrived
at Christiania.

CHAP. II. Particulars of the Country about Christiania, the Manners and
Customs of the Pesantry in Norway.
BEing entered into the Port of Christiania, we immediately went a Shore, in
order to the delivering of Letters we had to two Merchants which were resident
there, and Members of the Company, who understanding by them that our design
was for advancing our Trade into the North, and by the King of Denmarks
consent, received us very kindly, and treated us magnificently.

One of those Merchants finding I was a stranger, recommended by one of the
chief of the Company, to show me as much of the Country as was possible at that
time, commanded one of his Servants, who spoke French, to accompany me two or
three Leagues into the Country, and accordingly being each of us mounted on
Horseback, early the next Morning we marched together to Wisby, a great
Village some three Leagues from Christiania built betwixt two Mountains, the
houses of Wood, without any Iron Work or Windows, the light coming in a top at
a kind of a Lanthorn made of turf and sods of Earth.

The Peasants of Norway are plain hearted, hospitable, given much to Fishing,
their principal Commerce being in Herrings, Mulletts, Codds, Stock-sish, and
other sorts both Salt and Dry; they are generally Slaves to the Gentry.

The Women are most of them handsome, but frickand; they love Strangers, are
good Houswives, Spin all their own Cloth, and look to their Cattle, of which
they have great quantity, as in France; They have great store of Game, as Elks,
Staggs, Roe-Bucks, Wild-Goats, Boars, Dear, Rabbets, Hares, all kind of Fowl,
besides Otters, Beaver, Lynxes, and wild Catts of several Colors.

Norway is a Mountainous Country for the most part, incapable of Corn so much
as for Bread, though they have of it good store, but Transported from other
Countries by means of their Navigation; however the scarcity of Arrable is
abundantly recompensed in the plenty of their Pasture, and multitude of Woods.

CHAP. III. Their way of Hunting the Elkes. The Ridiculous Opinion af the
Virtue of their Claw, the Power and Authority of the Norwegian Nobless.
IN our return from Wisby to Christiania, we were met by a Gentleman and his
two Servants going a Hunting with their Dogs at their Heels. The Gentleman
knowing the person who was with me, asked him if we would divert our selves,
and see the Hunting of an Elke, which we accepted, and marching with him about
a quarter of a League, we met one of the Gentleman's Huntsmen with ten or twelve
Country-fellows which conducted us about three quarters of a League further
into a great Wood, so thick, we were forced to leave our Horses with one of his
Servants, and go in on foot.

The Game being prepared the day before by his Servants, we had not passed two
Pistol shot into the Wood, when we saw a large Elke running before us and fall
down on a sudden without any noise of a Gun, nor indeed shot; the strangeness
of the sight, caused me to inquire of my Guide what might be the reason, and he
told me it was a sort of Falling Sickness peculiar to that kind of Beast, from
whence among them it had its denomination, Elend, (as they call them) being as
miserable with us. This Creature was about the bigness of a large Horse, bodied
like a Stagg, but broader, its Legs longer, his foot large and cloven, his
head large, and Velvet; Were it not for this Distemper it would be no easy
matter to take them, which I perceived by this Gentleman, who when he had
killed this in its Fit, undertook another, and ran it two full hours without
any effect, nor had he ever taken it, had it not fallen down with the same
Disease as the former, after it had slain three of his Dogs with its fore feet;
which put the poor Gentleman into such a fume, he would Hunt no more that day.
He sent for a little Chariot to a Farm-house he had about half a League off, to
carry home his Elke to his own house, which was built all antique, as the rest
of that Country are, to which he would needs have us bear him Company, and
entertained us handsomely when we came there.

The Gentleman understanding by my Camerade I was a Stranger, recommended by
several of the Norway Company at Copenhagen, obliged him to give me (as a
Testimony of his Friendship) the two hinder feet of the Elke he killed last,
and to let me know it was a Sovereign remedy against the Falling Sickness,
which which when he delivered I could not but smile, and desired him to let the
Gentleman know I wondered much the Foot having the virtue he mentioned, the
poor Elkes could not cure themselves, seeing they had them always about them.
The Gentleman reflecting upon what I said, fell a laughing himself, and told me
I had reason, he told me he had tried it many times upon People in that
Distemper, but without any benefit; and ingeniously confessed he looked upon
that virtue, but as pretended, and a mere popular Error.

The next morning early, having broken our Fast with the Gentleman, we gave him
thanks for our Entertainment, and taking our leaves we arrived at Christiania.

Having in the precedent Chapter spoken of the Manners of the Peasants, I shall
in this, give the Gentry this Character, They are Wise, Wary, and yet Brave;
they possess all the great Offices of that Kingdom, are Sovereign in their
particular Territories, Tyrants to their Tenants, good Soldiers both by Land
and by Sea, and addicted to Travel.

CHAP. IV. The Authors going on Board again at Christiania; his arrival at
Bergen in Norway, with some particulars of that Town.
HAving stayed four or five days at Christiania, we took our leaves of our two
Merchants of the Northern Company, who confirmed our Orders, and wished us a
good Voyage. Being reimbarqued we weighed Anchor, got out of the Port, and
pursued our Journey by the favor of a North-East Wind, which which continued
as far as Stafanger, where we were taken with so great a Calm, that (not able
to advance) we were obliged (to entertain our selves, and pass away the time)
to betake our selves to Fishing. The Coast of Norway abounding so plentifully
with Fish of all sorts, w^ took them in such Multitudes, as made us keep Lent,
though at another time of the year.

The Calm having continued us in that place five entire days, on the sixth at
Night, we were befriended with a fresh Gale from South-East, which in no long
time carried us to Bergen whither we were to go, and discharge our selves of
such Merchandise as was designed to that place.

Being entered into the Harbor (which is one of the best in Europe) and being
come to an Anchor, while they were unlading. I took a view of Town, which is
abont the bigness of Abeville, part of it built high upon the Rocks, and part
of it on the Shore. It Is now considerable principally for its Trade, though
anciently an Archbishopric, but since the Reformation in those parts, that is
abolished, and the Bishops Palace is given to three Hans Towns, Hamborough,
Lubech, and Bremen, as a Storehouse for their goods, and several privileges
confirmed to them by the King of Denmark.

This Magazine or Storehouse is called the Cloister, and the Factors which
inhabit it Monks, though they are not tied to any habit, nor observe any Laws
but celibacy, which when they are not able to keep, or are otherwise inclined
to marry, they are obliged to quit and betake themselves to some other, but yet
with power reserved to Trade and Correspond with their Brethren as they think
good. Their chief Traffic is in Herrings, Mullets, God, and Stoco-fish, which
is round and dry, and sold in great quantities in Muscovie, Swede, Poland,
Danemark, Germany, Holland, and other Countries,

CHAP. V. The Authors reimbarking at Bergen, and his arrival at Dronthem.
AS soon as they had unladen the goods consigned to that place, I went aboard,
and in half an hours time the Wind being come about gently to the Southwest,
our Master Weighed, and making what Sail was convenient, we cruised toward the
Coast of Dronthem, where half our Lading was to be delivered to the
Super-intendant of the Silver and Copper Mines, to make provision of Beer and
Bread for the use of the Miners.

We had not passed above half the way, before the Wind increased so fast upon
us, that in fifteen or sixteen hours we came up with the Store, but in an
instant it abated, and we found our selves becalmed.

There being nothing more tedious to the Seamen then a Calm, not knowing how
to employ themselves, they fell again to their old recreation of Fishing, and
took such quantity of a sort they call Klipen-fish, they were constrained to
Salt great part of them, which stood us in good stead afterward.

This Fish is a kind of Mullet, but bigger then that they take in Newfound
Land, which by reason it keeps close under the Rocks, is by the Germans called
Klippe-fish, as much as to say in that Language, Fish of the Rocks.

Having been becalmed for some days, a West South-west Wind arose, which
assisted very well for our gaining of Dronthem, where we arrived about three
days after.

CHAP. VI. The Authors departure from Dronthem to take a view of the Silver and
Copper-Mines, which belong to the King of Denmark.
AS soon as we were landed, we went to deliver our Letters to the Intendant
General of the Mines, and made it our request he would order our Grain to be
received as soon as was possible; but he told us his Officers were all at the
Mines, for some of whom he must send on purpose before it could be received,
which when I understood, I entreated our Master I might be permitted to go
along with the Messenger, and he granted my desire.

The next Morning betimes the Messenger and I were both of us on Horseback,
and rode together as far as Steckby, a great Town about six Leagues from
Dronthem, where we judged it best to take up, as well because Night was coming
on (though but three a Clock) as that we were to pass a great Wood full of
Woolfs and Bears, and Lynxes, which being very fierce, made our Travel in the
Night more dangerous then ordinary.

The next Morning by Sunrising we left Steckby, pursuing our journey to the
Mines. About Night we arrived at the forges, where according to the custom of
the Country, we were entertained with Tobacco, Strong Water, and Beer, with
all which we were forced to debauch. I found there a Commis, who having waited
upon a Norway Gentleman in France, spoke good French. I told him how my
Curiosity had invited me to see the Mines, I desired his favor to assist me in
seeing them, which he promised me next day, and after two hours smart drinking
we went to bed.

CHAP. VII. Particulars of the Silver and Copper Mines in Norway.
THE next Morning by break of day the Messenger with whom I came, departed with
a Commis for Drontham, having left me in charge with one of the Master Miners,
who being to follow the day after, was to bring me along with him. As soon I
was up, I went out to find out my Commis which spoke French, who had provided a
good breakfast as well for himself and me, as for the Master Miner my
Governor; and whilst we were at it, the Commis desired the said Master that he
would carry me down into the Mines, and let me see them work.

When we had broke our fast, we passed about fifty paces from the Forges, which
are built upon an high Mountain near the mouth of the Mine; upon the Edge of it
is an Engine called a Crane, which is turned by two men by the help of two
Wheels, one going into one, the other into the other, and turning them about,
they drew up great pieces from the Mine, sometimes in Ore, sometimes in Earth,
as they do your Square-stone and Pot-Earth at Paris.

The Master Miner and I put our selves into a Tub of Wood, hoop'd about with
Iron, and Ropes fastened to them, in which we were let down into the Mine, above
fifty fathom deep.

Being come down I could not imagine my self any where but in Hell, there being
nothing to be seen but dark dismal Holes, great Fires, and the Miners like so
many Devils, clad all of them in black Leather, with a hood of the same stuff
over their heads, in fashion of what our Priests wear in Winter, it was cut
sharp toward the bottom, and the other broad end fastened over their Nose (to
preserve them against fumes) and an apron of the same.

Their work in these Mines is several, some cutting and chizelling the Ore,
others probing with their instruments, as well to find out the Copper Veins, as
to discover the Water, which sometimes lying hid in the ground, upon the least
passage, break out with so violent an Eruption as would drown them all, were
they not exceedingly careful.

The Master Miner who accompanied me down, perceiving I was affrighted, and
surprised with a strange chilness besides, rung the Bell to give notice above
to draw us up again which they did in almost as little time as we went down,
and then returned to the Forges, where we found my French Interpreter attending
us at Dinner.

After Dinner the Commis caused three Horses to be sadled for himself, the
Master Miner, and me, to go see the Silver Mines, about two Leagues beyond,
where being arrived, we alighted at the Intendants house, who received us very
kindly, presenting each of us with a good glass of strong Waters, he having
drank first a brimmer to bid us welcome, and after that he treated us with
Tobacco and Beer.

Having treated us in this manner, he conducted us to the Forges which are
about a quarter of a League from his house, much of the same nature with the
Copper Forges, with several people at work, some separating, some washing, some
melting, others refining, and others coining for the service of his Majesty.

From the Forges we passed to the Mine, which is in a Mountain over against
them, into which I went down with the Master, as I did into the Copper Mines. I
found no difference betwixt them, the holes, fires and habits, with the manner
and time of working being exactly the same; that is to say, in the Spring and
Fall they work three hours in the forenoon, and three in the afternoon, in
summer four before dinner, and four after; the rest they rejoice, dancing to
their Ho-boys Violins, and other Instruments, as it was my fortune to see them
the first night I came to the Copper Forges; during the Winter quarter they
work not at all, but are paid as when they work, at the rate of five shillings
a day.

Having seen all the Silver Mines, we returned to the Intendants lodging, where
we supped and lay. The next Morning having broke our fast, we took leave of our
Intendant, and mounting on Horseback, we dined at the Copper Mines, from
whence, having taken leave of my Commis which spoke French, the Master Miner
and I departed in our journey to Dronthem.

CHAP. VIII. The Entertainment the Author received of a Northwegian Peasant, in
his return from the Mines to Dronthem.
WE had not trsvelled above two Leagues and a half, before we were overtaken by
the Night, and forced to take our selves to the house of a Countryman of the
Master Miners acquaintance, which was not far off, who to speak truth, received
us very handsomely, considering his condition, giving us for a Supper a brace of
Pheasants: and a hunted hare which he had killed after an hours chase, (which
is free in that Country to all People) besides Beer, Tobacco, and Strong Water
when we came in.

After Supper we fell a smoking again like Dragons, and drank Strong Water
for a better or a worse, and continued our Frolic till it was well near
Morning.

The poor Peasant seeing the Master Miner had made himself drunk to do him an
honor, was so transported with the kindness, he thought he could do no less
then be as drunk as his Guest, to which purpose having sufficiently soaked it,
a pallat was laid in the middle of the room, they laid upon it, and I laid my
self by them in expectation of day.

The Sun was up, and the Master Miner and his Bedfellow in a most profound
sleep. My design being to be at Dronthem that Night, I caused the Horses and
breakfast to be got ready, and then with much ado waked them; we sat down, fed
as heartily as we could, and then taking leave of our Host; we got on
Horseback, and managed the business so well, we got to Dronthem before Night.

CHAP. IX. The Author goes on Board again at Dronthem. The Mariners constrained
to buy a Wind, and the danger of Sailing in the Northern Sea.
TWo days after, having unladen what was there to be delivered, and received
what provisions the Intendant General had Orders to procure us, the Wind being
favorable, we went on Board, and some few hours after, set Sail in order to
our Voyage.

For some days togethep we Sailed very happily, till we came under the Arctick
Circle, where we were suddenly becalmed, not far from the Coasts.

Being informed that the People which inhabit about the said Circle, as well as
they which live about the Coasts of Finland, are for the most part Sorcerers,
and dispose of the Wind as they please, we caused our Sloop to be prepared, and
some of our Seamen went on Shore to the next Village they could meet with, to
purchase one for us. They inquired for the best Necromancer the Town did
afford; and having addressed themselves to him, they told him whither they were
bound, and desired him to furnish them with a Wind would carry them to
Mourmanskoimore. He told them he could not, and that his power extended no
further then the Promontories of Rouxella; which place being a considerable
distance, and not far from the North-Cape, they thought good to take him along
into their Ship, and make their bargain with him there. To which end they made
bold with a small Fisher-boat they found there, and putting him and three of
his Camerades into it, they conveyed them a board, where we bargained with him
for a pound of Tobacco, and ten Crowns in Silver, for which they fastened to a
corner of our foremast Sail, a piece of Linen Cloth about a foot long, and
four fingers broad, in which having tied three knots, they told us that would
do, and then entered into their Skip to return.

They were no sooner out of the Vessel, but our Master untyed the first knot in
the Ragg, and immediately we had a West South-west Wind, the pleasantest in the
World, which darried us and the Ships of our Company, thirty Leagues beyond
Maelstroom before we had occasion to unty another.

This Maelstroom is the greatest Whirlpool in all the Norwegian Sea, in which
many Ships perish by coming too near it before they are aware; for which reason
such as know the danger, and are better acquainted with the Rode, stand off
eight or ten Leagues higher into the Sea, to avoid a great number of Rocks, and
other turnings of water which lie out six or feaven leagues from the Shore.

The wind vering and coming about to the North, our Master opened the second
knot, and it became favorable again as sar as the Mountains of Rouxilla, where
we had no fooner doubled the point, but our Compass varied on a sudden, and
the Needle went back above six points, which made us conjecture there were
Loadstones in those Mountains, whether there were or not, this I am sure, had
not our Pilot been expert, we had mistaken our way.

Supposing the rest of our Ships in the same condition, our Pilat laid by his
Compass, and hanging out a flag upon his Mizen, he gave a signal to the others
to follow him, that place being very well known to him, in respect he had made
several voyages thither with the Dutch, who sail only by their Sea-Chart when
they come in that place.

Two whole days and nights we continued in this perplexity, after which being
got at some distance from the Mountains, our Needle returned to its Center,
which gave us to understand we were not far from the Cape, but the wind
beginning to slacken, our Master untied the third knot, which was the last he
had.

CHAP. X. Their great danger in a Storm.
THe last knot being untied, it was not lon^ before there arose a North
North-West wind, so furious and violent it seemed to us as if the whole Heavens
were falling down upon our heads, and God by a just vengeance intended our
extermination for the sin we had committed in giving car to those Sorcerers;
for not being able to keep up our sayls, we were forced to abandon our selves
to the mercy of the waves, which hurried us with so vehement an agitation, we
expected nothing but to broken in pieces and drowned.

Being not above 12. Leagues from the shore, and with much labor scarce able
to keep the Sea, yet we could not imagine the power of the storm could have
driven us thither in spite of our teeth, but we reckoned without our Host, for
the third day about noon there arose so fierce and sudden a storm, as blowed
us among the Rocks, and dashed us presently upon one of them, about thirty
Leagues upward of the Cape, and four from the Shore. The whole Ship fetched a
great skriek, and every man fell to his prayers, believing that day would be
the last of our lives. The truth is, I nor none of the rest were ever more in
danger, all expecting when our Vessel should split. But by extraordinary
providence the greatness and sorce of the waves disingaged us, and threw us
near a Pistol-Shot off of the Rock, without any considerable prejudice more
than a small hole in the Keel, which took a little water, and some few boards
loosn'd and splinter'd, which kept us close to our Pump, and gave us constant
employment.

The fourth day the Storm being abated and the sky clear, not seeing the rest
of our Company, we were much troubled, believing them cast away, however that
hindered us not from following our voyage, the wind being in some measure
favorable to it.

Finding our Ship leak, and our labor in pumping great and continual, it was
thought best to make for some convenient Harbor, where we might Caulk, and
refit, but the North Sea being full of Rocks all along upon the Coasts, and
their Crceks and Ports by that means inaccessible, we were constrained to keep
out two days longer at Sea, before we could put in security. But the fourth in
the morning we were got upon the Coasts of Werdhus a Castle the Danes have
built, in which they have a Garrison and a Commiss. to receive all Duties from
such as pass or repass from Archangel in the White Sea, which Officer permitted
us very civilly to pass without sending aboard us, knowing us to be Danes by
our flag, and the salute we gave him when we passed by the Castle, and entered
into the Sea of Varanger, where we came to an Anchor, about half a League from
the Town.

CHAP. XI. The Authors arrival at Varanger in that Laponia which is under the
Dominion of the King of Denmark.
AS soon as we were entered we put our Shallop into the Sea, but there being
none in our whole Crew that had any knowledge of the place (which appeared very
savage and horrid) seven of us beside the Master, well Armed, ventured a little
way up, to see if we could find any place more commodious, or any Inhabitants
that could give us their assistance.

Having passed about half a League, we came into a Town well Inhabited, with a
good Harbor the Town was called Varanger; the people were amazed to see us
come in in that equipage, staring and gaping upon us with admiration.

Our Master knowing they spoke the language of the north, which he understood
very well, demanded civily if they would permit him to bring our Vessel into
the Harbor and repair it.

Being informed we were Merchants and our business fishing for Wall-Rus (which
is Seahorse with us) they offered both their Port and assistance which we
accepted, and having viewed the Port, we returned to our Vessel, and weighing
immediately, we put in, and fell a lightning, discharging our selves of our
Ballast (which was Sand) with some chests of Tobacco, and certain Balls of
Linen cloth, which we carried to Barter with the Natives when occasion was
offered.

When we had unladen, we took our Cloth and Tobacco and put them into a Caban
near the shore, which our Master and the Commissioners for the Merchants caused
to be made fast and secured.

CHAP. XII. Of the manners Customs superstitions and Habits of the Danish
Laplanders.
TO create a good intelligence with these people, which as I said before were
Laponians, we made them a present of some pieces of Tobacco in the Roll, which
they received with as much joy as if they had been wedges of Gold, and to
requite us they requiteus with such things as they had, which indeed was a sort
of dried Fish they eat in stead of Bread; the flesh of Elks (which is an animal
to b^ found only in Laponia, Boranday, Samojespi^^ and Siberia) Bears and other
Wild-Beast; which we had never seen before. They gave us likewise a certain
fresh Fish boiled up without salt, which they dipped some of them in the oil of
another Fish, others in a sharp liquor they used instead of their drink. But
none of us approving their Ragous, we were glad to betake our selves to the
provisions we had brought with us which was honest Biscuit and salt Beef, which
we presented them; but they no sooner put them in their mouths, but they spit
them out again, with as much abomination as we had done theirs, however in
complasancy they drank of our bear and strong waters, but not with the gust and
delight they swill down their own, which they make of fair water,
Juniper Berries, and another berry like lintels, (whose name I have forgot) of
which sort they have very great plenty, growing as the Juniper does) among the
leaves of a plant like our Fearn but thicker and higher, and what I could never
find in any Herbalist. They have a kind of strong water too which they distill
with a Limbeck of Copper in balnio Mariae, putting in a certain grain which
gives it the same strength and intoxication as ours, and their ordinary drink
is not for that inferior to our wine.

These Laplanders (though they are Lutherans by prfession, and have their
Priests to instruct them) yet they are strangely deluded by the Devil, being
most of them Witches, and so superstitious, if they meet any Creature they
fancy unfortunate, they will run back to their Cabanes and not come out again
all that day. If when they are fishing, they throw their Nets, and draw up but
one Fish, they look upon it as a dangerous Omen, home they go, and no more
fishing for that day.

The Men and Women are low, but strong set, and active, their face broad, flat
nosed, and tawny, but not so much as others more North, their eyes are little
like Hogs eyes, their eyebrows large and reaching almost to their Temples;
they are heavy and stupid, without any civility, very lascivious especially the
women, prostituting themselves to all comers, as often as they can do it with
security from their husbands.

Their habit is various, sometimes of a coarse sort of cloth, but generally of
Elks skin with the hair on the outside, their stockings of the same, their
shoos of a fish skin with the scaleson, like slippers without hinder quarter or
Ears. Their heads are dressed like the Norwegiens, their hair in two plats, one
hanging upon one shoulder, the other upon the other, a Hood or Coife of coarse
Canvas over it, which is all the linen they wear; others a piece of fur a
little broader than ones hand, which they tie behind their heads, ala
Egiptienne.

The men's clothes are all of Elks-skin, dressed with the hair outward; the
chief of them is a Wast-coat made short, to the middle of their Thighs; with a
pair of Breechees of the same, their Stockings are all one, with a sort of
Boots made of the skins of Fish, so cleverly that though they seem clumsy and
great, the seams are not easily to be found. Many of them there are who wear no
Boots, but Shoes like the women; upon their heads they have a kind of round
Cap, like our Seamen, made of Elks-skins with the hair upon it, lined at the
edges with a piece of a Fox skin, sometimes white and sometimes gray. Their
houses are much at the same rate with the inhabitants of Christiania, having no
other light but what comes in at top.

They have no Beds to ly upon at night, no more than the rest of their
neighbors, the Moscovian Laplanders, Borandians, Samoiedes, Siberians,
Zemblians, Islanders, and other people of the North; they display themselves
fairly in the middle of the room upon Bear-skins, where they ly higgledy
piggledy, Master, Mistress, Children, men and Maidservants altogether without
any scruple, and when they rise in the morning, they return the skins to their
old places very orderly.

Every house has belonging to it a great black Cat, of which they make great
account, talking and discoursing to it as it were a rational Creature. They do
nothing but they first communicate with their Cat, as believing she assists
them highly in all their enterprises. Every night they go out of their Cabanes
to consult their dear puss; nor can they expect a blessing upon their sports
either Hunting, Fishing, Fouling, etc. unless their good Angel goes along with
them, which though I have seen many of them, and all have the figure of a Cat,
yet by the dreadfulness of their looks, I did and do still think they can be
nothing but Devils.

CHAP. XIII. The Authors departure from Varanger toward Mourmanskoimore.
HAving unladen our Vessel the next day after our arrival at Varanger, the
people of the Town were very helpful to us in the turning and refitting of it,
for the Master finding it in a much worse condition than he imagined, he
desired the inhabitants to find him out wood that might be proper to repair it,
which they did upon a Mountain not far off, and brought it to him when they had
done.

The Commiss. for the Merchants percieving it would take up some time before
our ship could be fitted, thought it convenient to pass higher into the
Country, and see if they had any thing there, to barter for his Commodities:
with this design he made choice of me and two others to bear him Company, and
the next morning (the 12 of March) we took our Tobacco and linen cloth to
traffic, our biscuit and salt meat for our provant, and with three of the
Natives (as well to carry our provision as to conduct us) we advanced thorough
Woods, Mountains valleys, etc. till about four a clock in the evening, at which
time we described two great and fierce white Bears m king toward us, which
gave us no little apprehension.

Our Convoy percieving our fright, advised us not to be troubled, telling us if
they should make at us, we had no more to do but to stand to our Arms and they
would be gone; and for experiment sake we fell to fitting our flint, and priming
our pan, which they no sooner percieved but (either affrighted with the
flashing of pan or the smell of the power) away they ran, and we heard of them
no more, about an hour after coming down a Mountain, we discovered about a
dozen houses at a good distance from one another, and a little farther two
herds of creatures like Stags, which our Guides told us were Elks.

Being got to that Town, they brought us to a Cabane where we reposed our
selves being much tired by the length and troublesomness of our journey, and
the weight of the Luggage we brought along with us. The first thing we did, we
presented our Landlord with a piece of Tobacco, which pleased him exceedingly,
and he told us he had not had such a present in nine Months before, and to
recompense our kindness, he gave us some of his Aqua-vitae, a piece of fresh
Elks flesh, and dried Fish, which we distributed to our guides, and feasted
them, whilst we made shift with our own provisions; after which we laid our
selves down upon certain large white Bear skins and went to sleep according to
the mode of that Country.

CHAP. XIV. How we were drawn by the Elks in Laponia and some particulars of
that Beast.
HAving got up the next morning we desired to know of our Host if he had
nothing to truck against our cloth and Tobacco: he told us he had skins, both
Wolf, Fox, White Squirrel, etc. and his Neighbors had more which he believed
they would willingly Barter. We desired to see them and they brought them out
to us and with them four suits made of Elk-skin to keep us from the cold, of
which they gave us some for our Tobacco, and some for our Cloth.

There being no more traffic to be had there, we entreated our Landlord to
furnish us with Elks to carry us farther into the Country, which we no sooner
proposed, but stepping out of the door, he took his Horn, and blew for the
Elks, which came to him forthwith, to the number of fourteen or fifteen. He
took six of them harnessed them, and then put them into six Sledges, made in
the fashion of a Gondela, supported by six little Rafters, fastened to a piece
of wood about two foot longer than the Sledge; we put our Commodities into one
of them, and having paid in Tobacco two of our Guides, and dismissed them, we
retained the third (who had been in the other Laponia under the Government of
the Duke of Muscovie, and understood their Language well, as also the Country
and Language of the Killopes) to conduct us as a Guide.

Having placed our selves every man in his Sledge in the Lapland habits which
we had bought of the Natives, we were each of us covered with a Bear-skin,
having, them fastened us to with a large thong of Elk-Leather to our Chariot,
they gave us two glasses of Aqua vitae a piece, and then put a short Battoon
(with an Iron-pike at the end of it) into every ones hand, to ease our selves,
and prevent being turned over at every stone or stump of a Tree we came at.

When we were just ready to depart, our Landlord to whom the Elks did belong,
mumbled out certain words into the ears of every one of them, telling them as
(we supposed) whither they were to carry us, upon which they gave such a
spring, we thought we had had so many Devils in our Sledges, and at that rate
they carried us over Mountains and Valleys out of all beaten Roads, till about
seven a clock at night, at which time they brought us to a large
Country-Village situate among the Mountains near a great Lake, and then
stopped at the fourth ho use we came to, stamping all of them with one of their
feet as it were to give notice of their arrival. The Master of the house taking
the alarm came forth with his servants to unty us. One of them brought a
Juniper Can of strong waters, out of which he gave each of us a litttle cup
(made of the wood) full, to drink, and refresh our selves before we alighted,
understanding by our Guide we were in no little disorder, as being not
accustomed to so swift and violent a conveyance.

These Creatures both Male and Female have their horns something loftier then a
stag, more crooked, shaggy, and not so many little horns, they are of the same
color with a Stag, their Slot cloven, and as large as a good Ox. They feed
altogether upon Moss, which is very plentiful all over the Country. The
females are milked as our Cowes, of which the Inhabitants make very good Butter
and Cheese. They fasten these Elks to two poles tied fast to the Sledges with
thongs of Elks-skin, not unlike our harness for our Coaches, with which they
draw them with incredible swiftness, carrying them directly to the places
appointed, without any trouble to govern or guide them.

CHAP. XV. The Authors arrival at Mourmanskoimore, with some particulars of
that Country.
BEing alighted from our Carriages, we went into the House which we found like
the rest of that Country, very little, low, and covered with the bark of Trees,
having no light but what came in at the top of the house as in Norway.

These Laplanders have their habits something longer than those from whence we
came, they are made likewise, of the skins of Elks, with the hair outward; the
women are in the same dress, their hair breided as the other, with a round
Bonnet upon their head, of the same skin with the rest of their clothes.

We gave the Master as soon as we came in a piece of Tobacco in the Roll about
the length of two fingers, which he recieved very kindly we gave every one of
his Neighbors another, for our better security, as percieving them more savage
than any we had seen; after which we supped upon the provisions we brought with
us, and our Guide upon his dried Fish, and Elk flesh baked without salt.
Inquiring of him how many Leagues we had come that day, he told us about
thirty, and that we were in the Country of Mourmanskoimore, in which the
Inhabitants speaking another Language than they did in Varanger, we could not
understand them a word.

After we had supped, we laid our selves down fairly upon their bears kins,
according to their mode, and went to sleep, having before trucked our clothes
for theirs, which were something longer, and a hundred Squirrels skins (which
they had ready by them) for some of our Tobacco.

CHAP. XVI. The Authors Voyage into the Country of the Killoppes, and their
manner of living.
THE next day being the 14. of May, we desired our Interpreter to acquaint our
Host that we would have him provide us Sledges to go up farther into the
Country, which he did, and the Neighbors came to help us; bringing their
Aqua-Vitae along with them, to drink with us before we departed.

They put six Elks into six Sledges, into one of which we put our goods, and
mounted the rest our selves, after which they covered and fastened us as before,
and having whispered their directions into the Ears of their Elks, away they
went with a vengeance; hurrying us along almost full speed till two in the
afternoon before we came near any House, and about three they brought us to a
little Village of some eight houses, built upon a high Mountain near a great
Wood, where they stopped on a sudden, and made us believe we were at our
journies end, but no body coming to us, we were forced to bait our Elks upon
the Moss, (which was there in good store) our selves upon our salt meat and
biscuit, and our Interpreter upon his Fish, making bold now and then with a
Bottle of Strong Water our last Landlord had given us.

Having rested a Matter of an hour, our Guide (who understood to make an Elk
march as well as the best of them) had much ado to persuade ours any farther;
that being the place (as it seemed) to which they were directed, which put the
poor man upon a great many odd Ceremonies, going five or six times alone into
the wood, and then back again, still whispering into their Ears at his return,
and all would scarce do, at length they were good natured, and went on, but not
with that speed and alacrity they came thither.

We asked him how it came to pass we found no body in that Village, and he told
us in those parts it was no wonder; that we were now in the Country of the
Killopes, which are a sort of Laplanders less civilized than any of the rest,
changing their quarters very often, to avoid the Company of strangers, and
living wholly upon hunting without any Communication with other people.

Following our journey, we went down a high Mountain about nine at night, and
percieved four Kiloppes returning from hunting in four Sledges drawn with Elks
like ours, but as soon as they saw us they made another way, at the bottom of
the Mountain we entered into a great Wood, and being got about the middle, we,
heard strange yellings and Cries, but saw nothing.

Being out of the Wood, descending another Mountain, we percieved a Village to
which our Cattle carried us, and took up our Lodgings as they pleased
themselves, where being refreshed with our own provisions, we went to sleep as
before.

CHAP. XVII. The Authors arrival in the Muscovian Lapland, their Trade, Manners
and Customs.
AS soon as we had shaked our ears next Morning, we inquired of our Interpreter
how many Leagues we had marched the day before, and he told us at least forty
(which are about a hundred and sixty such as are betwixt Paris and Lions) every
one of their Leagues being more than a German League, which make four times as
much as a League about Paris, and are between six and seven miles of ours, a
Horsman very well mounted not being able to ride above five of them in a day;
and he told us moreover we were then in a part of Laponia which was under the
Czar of Muscovy.

As we were drinking with the Inhabitants, and smoking of Tobacco, we caused
him to ask if they had no Commodities to barter, and they replying they had
Furs, we desired to see them, and they fetched them imediately. There were
White, Black, and Gray Foxes and some Sables, but not so well colored as are
taken in Borenday, Samoiessia, and Syberia.

The Commodity fitting us well, we exchanged our Tobacco for them and pleased
them no less, having concluded our bargain and all things mutually delivered,
we fell a drinking helter skelter together in which debauch we found they were
not so savage as some others we had seen, though very rude in their
conversation, commiting such things in our Company, as Civility will not suffer
me to mention.

It growing late, and we desirous to pass on in respect we had certain Rolls of
Tobacco, and some cloth remaining, we caused him to desire our Host to furnish
us with Sledges, and he having provided as many as we had occasion for, we got
in and departed about noon, and ran on till about six at night through very
dangerous, and a man would have thought unpassable places, without seeing
either Horse or Man, about half an hour after, going up an high Mountain, upon
a little turning we percieved two Cabanes under the Rocks, which our Guide told
us were the retreat of two Killoppes, who as soon as they saw us ran away with
their Wives and Children. Three hours longer we marched before we discovered
another, but then on the side of a little Hill we saw a fair Village built upon
the Banck of a River, at which we arrived about eleven at night: and there our
Elks were our Quarter Masters, and disposed of us in the middle of the Town
where we were well enough received, our Landlord causing a good Fire to be made
in the middle of the Room, bringing us for our supper, a proportion of
Strongwater, dried Fish, and a piece of salted Elk, which was something
wonderful to us, in respect the Inhabitants all the way we had passed thither,
had not used any Salt, and there it was plentiful. He gave us Milk likewise and
salt Butter very good, and doubtless it would have been much better had we had
any Bread to have eat with it; but our store was spent that very Morning, and
we should have been put to it, had we not had the good fortune to light there,
our Interpreter must have made shift with dry Fish alone, not being able to
endure any Salt, having supped, we betook our selves to our Bears-skins as
usually.

CHAP. XVIII. The Authors arrival at Kola, the situation of the Town, the
manner of their buildings and other particulars.
THe next day being the sixteenth of May, there being no more Traffic in that
Town, we passed the River which was about the breadth of the Seine.

Being wafted over to a little Village on the other side of the Water, we went
to the best house we could find, to see if they could furnish us with Sledges
to Kola, and being supplied by them, we arrived there about noon.

It is a small Town, or large Country Village built among the Mountains, near a
small River distant about ten Leagues from the North-Sea. On the East side
there are great Forests, on the West, the Country of Mourm anskoimore, and on
the South very high Mountains. Their houses are built very low, for the most
part of Wood covered over very beautifully with Fishes bones, and at top a kind
of an open Lanthorn to let in the Light, the whole Town consisting but of one
Street.

The Inhabitants are generally (like most of the Muscovites) Morose, diffident,
and so extravagantly jealous, they shut up their Wives from the sight and
conversation of all Strangers. Our Landlord took all our cloth off our hands
and gave us in lieu two Lynxes skins, spotted with Black and White like
Leopards, three dosen of White Fox, half a dosen of Vietefras, which we called
Gloutons, and is a Creature not unlike a Badger, but with a longer and ruffer
Fur, of a reddish black, with a tail like a Foxes, besides some few Ermins.

Having some few Else of Linen cloth remaining, more than he had Commodities
to truck for, he bargained with us, to furnish us with Provisions for our
journey back, and Sledges to the Town where we passed the River, and in the
mean time he treated us well according to the manner of that Country. After
supper we betook our selves to our Bears skins, and took our quarters upon the
Ground.

CHAP. XIX. The Author leaves Kola in Order to his return to Varanger; the
pleasant Funeral formalities among the Muscovian Laplanders.
THe next morning (having told him we would be gone very early, our Host had
prepared our Provisions according to contract, which was biscuit, a sort of
spice bread, Elks Flesh baked with salt, with a barrel of Aqua-vitae, and our
goods being made up, there came two of his Neighbors (hearing we had Tobacco
left) to inquire if we would barter for any more skins; having told them we
would, and they fetching them to us, they proved a dozen of Frmines, two dozen
of White F^x, and four Lynxes, but not altogether so fair as what we had from
our Landlord.

The bargain being made, they delivered our ^kins, and we our Tobacco,
reserving only five Rolls both for our own use, and to discharge our expenses
in our return (...) Varanger, as being a Commodity more necessary in that
Country for Travelers, than Money, the Laplanders prizing an Inch of Tobacco
more than a Crown in Silver; upon which consideration the Kings of Denmark
Sweden, and the great Duke of Muscovy have laid great imposts upon it in those
parts, and established their Offices upon the Frontiers to collect them.

Our Trade being finished, we were obliged to debauch in Strong Water with our
Merchants till two a clock after dinner, at which time we desired our Host our
Sledges might be got ready to reconvey us to Varanger, which he willingly
granted, and having disposed our goods into one of them, and our selves into
the rest, after a Styrrup Cup of Aqua-vitae, we took our leaves, and our Elks
carried us (as if they also had had their dose) with more expedition (in my
judgment) than any before, in so much as about seven we were got to the
Village on the banck of the great River I mentioned before, which we passed,
and repaired to our old quarters, where we were very kindly received by our
Landlord, in hopes (as we conceived) he should have a good lunchen of Tobacco
to accommodate us again for our return. He gave us at first dash a good dish of
strong waters, and then asked us if he should provide us with Sledges, we told
him not that night, for being weary we desired to repose till next morning,
there being never another Town within any reasonable distance.

Our Landlord having given us a large dram of the Bottle, he asked us if we
would go along with him and see the Funeral solemnities for a Neighbor of his,
who had dyed four hours before, which in curiosity we readily accepted.

Being entered into the House, we saw the Corpse taken up by half a dozen of his
principal Friends upon a large Bears skin, and laid upon a wooden Beer, the
Corpse was wrapped in linen, with the Face uncovered, and both its hands: in
one of them they had put a Purse with a certain sum of money in it, to pay for
his admission into Paradise; in the other it held a Pastport or Ticket signed
by a Priest which was to be delivered to Saint Peter, to certify the honesty of
the man, and how proper he was to be received, by his side they had laid a
barrel of strong waters, with a proportion of Dried Fish and Elk-flesh, for his
repast by the way, in respect his journey was like to be long, after which they
lighted several roots of Firr-trees like so many Torches, and then fell a
houling and crying with so many strange postures and gesticulations, one would
have sworn they had been mad.

All being ready, they took several turns about the Corpse in Procession,
demanding the reason of his Death; whither his Wife was not kind. Whether he
wanted any thing; whether he was hungry, or a dry; whether he had had any
disaster in his sports; whether his clothes were out of repair, still squaling
and limping with several distortions of their bodies, and all the while a
Priest standing by, sprinkling the Corpse with Holy Water, and the Mourners
doing the same.

I should have told that Saint Nicholas being in great Veneration among them as
well as the Muscovites, (are both Nicolaitans in their Opinions) they had
placed an Image of him by the side of the Corpse instead of a Crucifix.

This Saint Nicholas is not the Bishop in the French Calendar whose Festival we
keep, but one of the seven Deacons mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles; they
had carved him in the habit of a Pilgrim, his hood hanging loose behind his
head: a long loose Gown with a large Gyrdle about his Waste, and his Staff in
his hand.

CHAP. XX. The work and employment of those Laponian women, with other
particulars of that place.
Tired with the noise, and weary of the whole Ceremony, we withdrew to our
Lodging, where we found our Landlady at Liberty, having forsaken the Hole where
her Husband had disposed her at our arrival.

As soon as she saw us, supposing her good Man was among us, she was retireing
to her Kennel; But our Guide and Interpreter letting her know he was safe at
the Funeral, and not like to come home yet, she plucked up a good heart, and
adventured to stay.

The first thing she did she star'd round about her, and then fixing her eyes
on each of us by turns (as she had been picking a Mate) she considered us all
for some time, and as it seemed not thinking a miss of us, she civilly sat
down, mumping, and brideling, making many signs of her approbation and
friendship, and in heat of blood as a great Complement showed us her work which
was a Cap or Bonnet she was imbroidering with Tynsel, one thread upon another
very handsomely.

The employment of those soeminine Laplanders, is nothing generally but making
clothes for themselves, their husbands and Children, all of them embroidered
with Tynsel at the bottom, which being softer then ordinary, they draw with
their Teeth as fine and as long as any of our Wyer-drawers, and all with the
prettyest grace imaginable; they are most of them handsome; well shaped and
acceptable enough were their nofes not a little Camus'd too much. The jealousy
of their husbands is terrible to them, and they dread the effects of their
fury, otherwise they are good natured, and would prostitute upon occasion
without any great scruple: upon which consideration the wary husbands desire
them to retire, when any strangers come near.

While our Host was b^^^ed about the obsequie, of his Neighbor, and doing him
his last honor, we drew out our provisions, and presented our Landlady, the
good woman received them kindly, tasted them and liked them very well,
especially the spic'd-Cake, she took two good soups of our Srong-water, and
exit, being in a bodily fear her husband should surprise her in our Company,
which would have cost her a cudgelling if she had escaped with her brains.

He returned at length, and we were obliged to take a Pipe, and another Dram
with him; after which we went to Suppet, and he gave us of his delicats, Elks
Flesh and Salt butter, which we eat with Bread, only our Guide having no fancy
to any thing with Salt, contented himself with his dried Fish and a lunchen of
Bears Flesh our Landlord gave him, and he broiled it upon the Coals.

All the Houses in this Town are like the rest of that Country built of Wood,
and covered with sods of Earth, but adorned both without and within with the
bones of Fishes, very curiously disposed.

After supper we went to our lodging, which as formerly was upon Bear-skin
spread upon the floor, where having displayed our selves, we fell asleep, and
passed the night in as much ease and security as any in our lives.

CHAP. XXI. The Author in his return met a Muscovite Laplander going a hunting.
THE eighteenth of May very early in the morning, our Host having provided us
Sledges, and our Merchandise being put into one, we took up the rest our
selves, and departed; our Elks carrying us with no less swiftness, then those
our Host had furnished us last from Kola, so that in about two hours time, we
were advanced above six Leagues.

Passing between two Hills, into a Valley, we saw a Laplander going a hunting,
He made toward us, sliding along upon the Snow as fast as we without sinking
in the least. His Pattins were made of the Bark of a Tree, about seven foot and
a half long, bending almost to a Semicircle, but four fingers broad, flat at
the bottom, and a hallow place where he put his Foot and tied his Shoes to it,
his Habit was Elks skin dressed with the hair on. His Cap, Mittans, Jump,
Breeches, and Boots all bordered with Tyncel, and tied about the wast with a
Gyrdle of the same In one hand his Bow, in the other his Dart, with his Quiver
of Arrows at his back, and his beloved Catt at his heels.

CHAP. XXII. The Authors return to Varanger; the dexterity of the Laplanders in
throwing their Darts, shooting with their Bows, and other particulars.
OUr Laponian Huntsman having kept with us about half a League, he left us at
the foot of a Hill, we marching one way, and he another, by the expedition we
made, we arrived at Varanger about nine at night, having taken the same way,
and met the same conveniences we found as we went, without any injury or
accident whatever.

The Laplanders (though very poor; Brutish and for the most part Sorcerers) are
very faithful notwithstanding, not at all given to nimming or stealing which is
the principle of their virtues; they are dextrous in throwing their Darts, they
will hit a Crown piece thirty Paces off, and stick a man through and through,
with such strength and activity do they fling them, and with their Bow they
will hit any Beast in what part soever they please.

They have no great Maw to the Wars, nor natural affection to the other World,
insomuch as when the Kings of Denmark, Sweden, or the great Duke of Muscovy
want men, and make their Levies in these Countries they betake themselves to
the Woods, believing the wild Beasts less inhuman then mankind to it self.

They have Foul, as Geese, Hens, Ducks, and others, which they feed not with
Juniper Corn, but with another Grain of which they make their Beer, but of
nothing more plenty than Fish.

The most part of the Wild-Beasts in Lapouia are white, as Woolfs, Foxes,
Hares, and others, even their Crows are white, to as high a degree as our
Swans without any black about them but their Beak and their Feet.

The Fish which they dry to serve them instead of Bread are large and of the
length of betwixt two and three French Eeles, without any Bones besides that of
the Back, which the Physicians call Spina dorsi, the marrow of which they call
Raff, and is well tasted, substantial and thick.

The Fish they boil, and eat by it self, are of all other sorts; the dishes and
Vessels they use are of Copper or Wood, and and though they hate salt, and use
none of it at all, yet they boil all their meat in Seawater, and it goes down
very well.

Their Dogs are small, the biggest not above a foot long, and a span high,
their hair the length of a Finger, of a darkish Red, shagged and staring like
Brissels, their Ears are exactly like a Woolfs, their head and muzzel like a
Bats, which they hunt like Cats, and eat them when they have done, upon which
account, they are in high esteem among the Laplanders, though they be
ill-favored, dull, and their Tayls curling like a Pig.

They have a kind of wild-Foul among them of a Pearl-colour'd gray, about the
bigness of a Goshawk; their eyes red and sparkling, their head like a Cat,
their beak like an Eagle, their Feet and Talons like the same, with which they
seize and secure their prey, both Hares and other Game.

CHAP. XXIII. The Authorr sailing out of the Sea of Varanger, the continuation
of his Voyage and other particulars.
THe day we arrived at Varanger our Master began to caulk, and the next had
finished, and our Ship being once again in good order, he caused our goods to
be be put on Board. While we staid, we treated the Inhabitants with
Strong Water and Tobacco, lest they should obstruct our departure, and hinder
our Wind; but they were so far from that, that about five days after being the
26. of May (as if in recompense of our kindness) there arose so pleasant and
convenient a Wind to carry us out of that Sea, we took the advantage, weighed,
and were under Sail about seven at night.

The wind increasing, to avoid the Rocks in the middle of the passage into the
main Ocean, we came to Anchor near the Shore over against the Isle of Wardbus,
from whence the Commiss of the Castle perceiving us, and knowing who we were,
came with his Shallop on Board us, and having treated him well and civily,
after some hours he took his leave and departed.

The next day being the 27. the Sun appearing with his rays about one a Clock
in the night, we weighed again, standing directly for the main Sea, which by
the assistance of a fresh Gale, we might probably gain, steering N. N. E. with
full Sail, and as much pleasure as we could wish.

We had not Sailed three times four and twenty hours, before the night forsook
us quite, the Sun continuing always in our sight either behind, before, or on
one side of us.

The last of May we discovered the Mountains called Spite Bergen, but being
obstructed with a North wind which blew very hard, not able to keep the Sea, we
were forced to leave them to the N. N. E. and steer our course E. S. E. to make
the shore if we could, and secure our selves there.

For three days and nights we were in no little danger, much incommoded by the
Ice, which being broken and separated by the agitation of the Tempest, came
upon us in great pieces, dashing with that violence against the Poup and sides
of our Ship, we looked every moment to have been broken in pieces.

The fourth of June, at due East, we descryed high Mountains, and directed our
course to them, to put our selves if possible under the protection of a certain
Promontory which we discovered. But the wind blowing hard again at the North we
were glad to steer toward the Coasts of Boranday which we reached in few
hours, and put into a Bay which we found there, very convenient to shelter us
against the winds, and furnishing us with twelve or thirteen fathom water.

We were at Anchor no sooner, but we saw two Ships within Musket Shot from us,
and we perceived them to be ours, which had left us in the storm on the
otherside the North-Cape, and we supposed had been cast away: we were very glad
we were mistaken, and gave them the signal of our arrival by shooting off three
Guns, and hanging out our great Flag upon our Poup.

To express the joy they also conceived at the news of our welfare, they
believing us drowned in the tempest that parted us, they not only re-saulted us
with their Cannon, but hung out all their Flags and decorations, and we the
like, desiring on both sides to put out our Shallops and come on board one
another, but the wind was too high, and we were forced to stay till it abated,
which it did about four and twenty hours after.

CHAP. XXIV. The meeting of the Danish Ships which came out of Denmark with the
Author, their separation by Storm, and an account of their adventures.
THE great desire our friends in those two Ships had to know whether that
Tempest had carried us when we were parted, caused them each of them to put out
their Longboat to come aboard us, which they did with great satisfaction on
all sides: they gave us over for lost, as we had done them, and concluded we
should never have met again.

They gave us a relation how they were driven by the Wind upon the Coasts of
Juhorsky not far from an Island, but not being able to come to an Anchor by
reason of the Rocks which they discovered in their sounding coming once within
two Fathom and a half water, they were forced suddenly to vere, and (by the
favor of an E. N. E. wind) to keep the Sea as well as they could, which they
performed with no little trouble, till at length after three days contentions
with the Seas and the weather they came into the Bay where we found them, under
the Promontories of Boranday, about eight or nine Leagues from an Island called
Kildomovia.

We gave them on our side an account of the dangers we had run, how we were
forced into the Sea of Varanger, and driven to an Anchor before the Town, to
refit our Vessel, and put it into a condition to Sail having escaped sinking so
narrowly: we told them likewise our transaction in the Danish, Swedish, and
Muscovite Lapland, the trade we had had, and all our other adventures.

CHAP. XXV. The resolution the Danes took to Trade in Boranday, and the Authors
going along with them.
THE story of our success made them take up a resolution to go thither, and see
if they could find any that would traffic with them.

In order to this we held a Counsel, in which it was unanimously conluded that
one of our Masters, one Commiss, two sub-Commisses or Factors who understood
the Northern and Russian Languages, with twenty Seamen and my self, all well
Armed and provided for several days, should undertake the design.

All things being decreed, and every thing ready they furnished us with two
Shallops to put us on Shore, which being done, we got on the top of a little
hill to see if we could discover any houses. Finding none, we marched toward a
mountain about half a League off from the top of which we discovered some two
or three flight-shot from us about 5 or 6 persons among the Bushes coming
toward us, but as soon as they perceived us away they ran in such halt we
quickly lost the sight of them.

However we followed their track so well observing which way they pointed their
flight, that about two hours after going down the Mountain, we saw in a Valley
some few houses, and making toward them we found thirty or forty persons armed
with Arrows and Darts, ready to receive and sight us upon occasion, supposing
by the greatness of our Troop, we were come to do them some injury, upon which
we stopped our Career, and called a Counsel whether we had best go back or
advance, seeing the Inbabitans were bold and courageous and we in no necessity
to provoke them.

One of the Sub-commisses offered himself to go toward them alone, to let them
know we were Friends and Merchants, desiring nothing but Trade with them, if if
they had any thing convenient for us, or we for them.

The Proposition being generally approved, he advanced toward the Natives with
two Rowls of Tobacco, and a little Barrel of Aqua vitae.

Being got within distance of hearing, and being heard, one of them called out
to him in the Moscovian Language to know what we were, and what was our design,
our Envoy told him we were Merchants, Friends, and that our desire was to have
their Friendship, and be admitted to Trade with them, if they liked our
Commodities. Being satisfied with the Answer, he satisfied the rest, and made a
sign to us to come on, and we did as they desired.

CHAP. XXVI. The Statue, Habit, Buildings, and Manner of living of the
Barandians, with other particulars.
WHen we came near them, I was amazed to find them much less than the
Laponians, their Eyes of the same bigness, deepness, and color, that which we
call the White, being of a Reddish Yealow, their Face flat and broad, their
Head exceeding large, their Noses Camus, their Complexion as swarthy as
possible, and their Legs like so many Mill-posts.

The Clothes were first a pair of Breeches as straight as could be made, then a
a Wastcoat or Jump which came down to their Knees, their Stockins and Caps of
white Bears skin with the Hair outward, and their Shoes of the Bark of Trees.

Their Houses are all built and covered with Fish Bones, very low their fashion
Oval, without any light but what comes in at the door, which is not much unlike
the mouth of an Oven.

These people live wholly by Fishing and Hunting, they cat all their meat
without any thing of Salt; their dry Fish serves them for Bread, their Drink is
fair Water, in which they Infuse their Juniper Berries, which gives it a
sharpish but pleasant Tincture, especially if drank in a Cup of the same Wood.

The Women are as ill-favored as the Men, their Habits and Recreation the
same, going in the same manner with their Husbands a Fishing and Hunting. In
short they have no Religion, and little more Humanity than Beasts.

We swapt with them all the Tobacco and Strong Waters we had carried with us
for our Provision, for Woolf, Foxes, and some few Ermine Skins they delivered
to us. Having more skins thy were willing to barter, we desired them to go
along to our Ships, and they should have what they pleased, which they
accepted, and having fetched what they had, they all of them marched along to
the Sea side; they were no sooner in sight of our Vessel, but they admired it
exceedingly. We gave the sign to have Boats sent us, and immediately each of
our Ships sent two: the Commiss. I, and the Sub-Commiss. (who ventured to the
malone and gave us the opportunity of being acquainted with them) went all
three of us into one of them, taking him that invited our Sub-Commiss. to a
Treaty, and another Borandi^^e with us who spoke the Muscovian Language very
well, all the rest remained on Shore.

CHAP. XXVII. The entertainment the Danes gave them on Board, and the Authors
voyage into Boranday.
BEing come a Board, our Master being acquainted with the story of our
adventures, and how savage and brutish the Borandians were, to sweeten and
cajole them, that they might be serviceable to us, he gave each of them a piece
of Tobacco about the length of a finger, and a Cup of strong waters, which they
took extreme kindly, and having some skins fell to barterring immediately. We
asked them whither if we went higher up into the Country, we might expect any
traffic they replied yes we might, but all their Commodities would be nothing
but Furs, and we telling them we desired no more, they assured us we should
find enough of that nature which would be exchanged for our Tobacco and
Strong-water, and that if we would satisfy them for their pains, they would
conduct us as far as Siberia: we agreed to give each of them two Rolls of
Tobacco, and four pints of Strong-water, to conduct us backward and forward,
promising something supernumerary, if by their means our journey turned to any
considerable account; in short all things were agreed, only they pressed that
we should pay for the Sledges and Elks we used by the way out of our own purses
besides, which being but reasonable the Master consented.

The bargain being made, and a cup of wine given to each of them to confirm it,
we put them again into our Shallop, and set them a Shore, they had engaged to
prepare things withal speed for our journey, and they were as good as their
word: for no sooner were they on land, but away they ran about their business,
and in eight hours time returned with Sledges, Elks and every thing convenient
for our journey.

Whilst we were in this manner treating those on Board, the other Ships caused
strong Water and Tobacco to be sent on Shore to barter with those which
remained, expecting the return of their Camerades, not being to be persuaded
themselves into our Shallops, for fear they should never come back again: which
obliged all our Masters by way of insinuation to cause certain small Barrels of
Aqua-Vitae to be carried to them and drank out among them: which they received
so thankfully, as in token of their gratitude, they desired our Company to go
along with them, and take such entertainment as their Houses and conditions
would afford, but this Offer was made only by signs, for no body understood
their Language.

Our two Borandiras being come back with Sledges and as many Elks, we asked why
they brought no more, and their answer was, there were no more to be gotten.
Observing them larger then in Laponia, we inquired if they were stronger, and
were told they were. That the Laponia Elk could draw but one man, and these
would draw two, and accordingly each of the Sledges were made to carry two:
which being reported to our Masters, it was in Counsel resolved that our
Commiss. the two Sub-Commissioners, (that spoke Russ very well) my self, and a
Sea man out of each Ship should go along with these two Borandians and Trade.
Upon this design they loaded one of the Elks with Tobacco, Strong water,
Silver and some Gold, in all to a considerable value. I was placed with the
Commiss. one of us at one end, the other at the other, with our Faces upon one
another, one of the Sub's was placed in the same manner with one of the
Borandians, the other with the other, two of our Seamen together, and the third
being alone, had the rest of the Room filled up with Barrels of Strong-water,
and Tobacco, and in this posture we set out.

These Elks carried us with as much (if not more speed) then those in Lapland,
so that for eight hours together we were hurried over Mountains, through Fields,
and Valleys without seeing either Person or House; at length coming near a
great wood of Firr-Trees, we could perceive five or six about an hundred Paces
from us, near one of which we baited our Elks upon the Moss, and refreshed our
selves with Biscuit and salt meat, and our Borandians with dried Fish dipped in
Oil, which was provided on purpose for them, they not enduring our Bread or
Salt. Our Drink was out of a Spring hard by, after which we took a dram of the
bottle and away to our Sledges again, continuing our course three hours longer,
and then at the bottom of a great Mountain we could perceive several Houses
hard by one another, where it was designed we should repose that night. When we
were got to them, we found them so little we were forced to divide and quarter
in two several Cabanes, which we did very contentedly, whilst our Guids
unharnessed our Elks and turned them to Grass.

CHAP. XXVIII. The consequence of the Authors voyage into Boranday, and some
particulars of the Natives.
HAving reposed for six or seven hours upon Pallats of Bears-skins, which our
Landlord had spread upon the ground for our entertainment, we got up and
inquired if they had nothing to truck, upon which they produced several
Woolf-skins, white Foxes, two dozen of Ermins, about three hundred Squirrels,
and seven pair of Sables. They would not meddle with our Tobacco, as not being
so sweet toothed and well bred as their Countrymen upon the coast, living only
upon hunting. In Summer their diet is fresh meat boiled or broyl'd upon the
Coals. In Winter nothing but dry meat, which they provide in the Summer by
drying it in the Sun upon a Wheel or on the top of their Houses, which are
built very low, covered over with branches of trees and Turfs of Earth, without
any light but what comes in at the door, which as aforesaid is like the mouth
of an Oven.

These Borandines (as our Guides told us) change their Quarters as often as the
Killopes, they live brutishly without any Religion, and are more stupid then
any we met with, They are as ill-shaped as their Neighbors. Their Shoos are of
the Bark of a Tree, their Stockings, Breeches, Capps and Coats (which come down
beneath the Calf of their Legs, and girt about with a Girdle about four
fingers broad) are all of white Bears-skin with the hair outward. The Women are
not discernable from the Men but by their Hair, which is braided and hangs down
upon their Shoulders. They are as nimble and skilful at hunting as their
Husbands. Their Arms are only a pointed Stick of a certain hard-wood which
pierces any thing, a wooden Bow, the String made of the Rind of a Tree, a
Quiver of Arrows at their Backs, and a Stone that cuts like a Rasour at their
Gyrdle.

Our Trade being finished, our Guides having provided our Sledges, and each of
us taken a good draught of Strong-water, we mounted and away running on nine or
ten hours together before we saw man or house, at length we perceived three or
four Houses, and our Guides persuaded our Elks to make to them, where though we
found no body, we made bold to repose our selves, and refresh our Cattle, whose
Diet was nothing but Moss, and at that place they kept a plentiful Table.

We eat and drank such as we had, and were as merry as Beggars, when we had
done (after three hours relax) we mounted again, and continued our Voyage as
industriously as we could.

CHAP. XXIX. The Author meets a Borandine-Lord with two of his Servants coming
from Hunting, with a description of their Clothes.
AFter fifteen hours travel (without other intermission then once to feed our
Elkrs and repose our selves) having seen neither House nor Man in all that
time, we perceived three Hunts-men before us, and made up to them; one of them
was habited a la Muscovite in a long Robe down to his Heels, with a Girdle
about his Wast four fingers broad of Woolfs skin the hair outward, it was as
white as Snow, and at the point as black as Jett; he had a Bonn et round (like
a Seamans) of Black Fox, his Breeches and Stockings of Elks-skin, and his Shoos
of Fish-skin, like the Inhabitants in Varanger. The other had the Vests of the
same fashion of White Bears, the hair outward, and their Shoos of Fish skin:
they had each of them a dozen of Bears-skins, Woolfs-skins, White Fox, some
Ermins, and very fair Sable, as I have seen; He that was in the White
Woolfs-skin, carried nothing but a dozen of White Crows, and seven Sables
hanging at his Girdle.

Being got up with them, one of our Guides stopped on a sudden to speak with
the chief of them, and presently alighting from his Sledge, put him in his
place with one of our Sub-Commissioners, at which my Commiss. and I were very
much surprised. In this manner he went along with us above an hour and we could
see never a House; at length from the top of an high Mountain we could see the
Sea on our left hand, and at the bottom several Houses, standing near one
another like a small Town. Our Elks carried us to them directly, and we
alighted to repose in the House of that Lord whom our Guide put into his place;
we knew him to be a person of more than ordinary authority, by the
officiousness of the Inhabitants, who ran immediately to our assistance, and
helped us out of our Sledges with all the readiness imaginable. The Towns name
was Vizzora.

The Lord swopt with us for our Tobacco and Strong Water, and gave us in lieu
all the skins he had got except his Bears-skins which we would not meddle with,
and his Sables which he durst not part with, they being prohibited by the great
Duke of Muscovy (whom they call the Czar) who preserves them for himself, no
body daring to sell any of them in all his Dominions, but by license from
himself, or his Commissioners (resident in all places where he has Magazines)
under great corporal penalties, so that if they sell any at any time, it is with
great caution and privacy, and they who buy them are obliged to keep it close,
for if the Commiss. or Governor of those places where all Merchandise is
searched, do find any Sables which have not been sold by the Duke himself, his
Officers, or his License, not only they but all the goods that Merchant has
are confiscate without redemption. The Borandine Lord, having dispatched his
own business, and trucked all he had himself, knowing we had a mind to more, he
sent two of his Servants quite through the Town to give notice that if they
desired to part with what skins they had, if they carried them to us, we would
give them Tobacco and Strong-water for them, and that their Master had dealt
with us for all he had. Being glad of the opportunity, they repaired all of
them with their Furs, and we bought what we thought fit.

Having no less than fifteen hundred skins of all sorts, we inquired of our
Landlord if he could not provide us a Boat to send one of our Seamen with our
Trade to our Ships; he told us he could, and caused ^one to be got ready, it
was in the fashion of a Gondelo, broad in the middle, and pointed at both ends,
all of wood, without either Iron-work or nail, in the midst it had a Mast of
Firr with a great four square sail (fastened to it) of Linen made of the Rind
of a Tree, and Tynseld very handsomely: the Cordage was made of the Rind of
Trees also, there were two Anchors belonged to it, made of a heavy kind of wood
which carried it presently to the bottom, and Cables of the same with their
Cordage.

Having appointed us two men to go a long with our Seaman, and seeing them
ready to depart, he carried us a side, and showed us thirty pair of Sables,
which we bought of him for ready money, at a pretty good rate, and were not at
all sorry for it; had not we had the luck to have borrowed his Boat, and he
seen it immediately to be dispatched to our Vessels where he knew no Searcher
could come, we could not have tempted him to part with them, as knowing very
well if he were discovered he should not only be obnoxious to corporal
punishment, but he and his generation sent Slaves into Siberia, where they
might remain long enough before they returned.

Our Scaman and his two Borandine Camerades being departed, our Commiss. and
the two Sub-Commisses. fell in a drinking with him and our Guides. I and the
two other Seamen took that opportunity and went to view the Town. We admired it
exceedingly being situate betwixt two Mountains about a league high either of
them. The Houses were built of Fish-bones very artificially, the Roofs of the
same, but stopped in some places with Moss, and covered with Flags of Earth, so
close no wind could come in but at the doors (which are like the mouth of a
Furnace) and a top the House where there is a hole or window left for light to
come in. We saw several of their Women and Children at work, some of them
making of Netts (of the Rind of Trees) for their Fishing, others Sails for
their Boats, of a kind of a sine Mat, others Axes, Swords, pointed Darts, and
Arrows of the Bones of Fishes. Others making of Clothes of Bears-skin sowed
together with thread made of the Rind of Trees, with needles of the small
bones of Fish, they were all of them ugly, little, flat nosed, and swarthy as
Devils.

CHAP. XXX. The Authors departure from Vitzora to go to Potzora, and his
Traffic there.
BEing returned to our Company, our Commiss. and Sub-Commiss. upon Consultation
resolved to send back one of our Guides with the Sledges and Elks, and to take
the convenience of the water to pass to Potzora, which was accordingly
performed. Our Landlord and two of his Servants in complement went along with
us, and Coasting along the Shore by the favor of a Westerly wind, in fifteen
hours we made Potzora, which is a small Town upon a little Sea called by that
name; we repaired immediately to the Castle to pay our respects to the
Governor, who in truth is no more than a Factor or Agent for the great Czar;
all the Governors belonging to that Duke being no other in those parts. There
being few of the nobility in Muscovy, which in my judgment is the reason they
are so rude and unpollished, a thing inconsistent with the education of the
nobles.

The Governor was a Muscovite, his habit cloth betwixt a Violet color and a
Red, he treated us indifferent well, with Hydromets of an excellent sort (not
much unlike our Spanish wine) strong waters and spice-bread. Having the charge
of the Czars Magazines of Sables we asked him if he would deal with us for any,
he told us he would, and demanding what we would buy, we replied all he had, if
we might have them at reasonable Rates; whereupon he carried us to his
Warehouse, and showed us five Zimmers (which are fifty pair) of which two
Zimmers were the best I ever saw, being naturally black as Jet, for which
parcel we paid him 500 Ducates, which amount to three thousand French Livers,
and for the other four hundred Ducates, which was as much as eight hundred
French-Crowns.

Having paid him for what we had, and seen them marked with the Grand Dukes
Seal, he would needs give us a treat, to which purpose he dispatched two
Shallops to get fresh-Fish, he killed a young Elk, and with some Foul his
Servants had got abroad, he made us a magnificent Feast, both of Flesh, Fish,
and Muscovian Biscuit. We sat eight hours complete at the Table, and by that
time the fumes of the Hydromet and Strong Water we had drank being got up into
our Heads, we were glad to draw off to our Bears-skins which were all the beds
we could get.

Having slept six or seven hours, we got up, drank a Cup of Strong Water, and
then went into the Town with a little Officer the Governor sent along with us,
who carried us where we found two thousand Squirrel-Skins, four dozen of
Ermins, five hundred Fox-skins (the most of them as white as Snow, and the rest
black) six-Woolfs-skins, two hundred Martins, of a kind of an
Ash-coloured-Grey, which cost us (all of them) four hundred Ducates in Copper
Money (which troubled us to carry about) after which we returned to the Catle
with our Merchandise, and packed them up in bails of Mats made of the Rind of
a Tree.

Having packed up our goods in this manner, we concluded to send one of our
Sub-Commisses with them to our Ships, to which end we entreated our Host the
Governor to accommodate us with a Boat to convey them, which he readily
granted, and two hours after our Officer departed with three Borandines the
Governor lent us, he having first engaged they should deliver them safe in our
Ships, and that paying him ten Ducats, and giving the men that carried them
some small proportion of Tobacco, he would satisfy the rest at their return.

Our Sub-Commiss. and his Camrades being gone, we fell a drinking pell-mell
with our brace of Governors, and the Governor of Vitzora took of his Cups so
liberally, I could scarce imagine where he disposed them. This debauch
continued full four hours and then we went to our rest.

CHAP. XXXI. The Authors departure from Potzora to go into Siberia his meeting
with five persons sent thither into exile by the grand Duke, the miseries they
endured, and his arrival at Papinogorod.
AS soon as we were up in the morning, our Commiss. entreated the Governor of
Potzora to furnish us with Sledges for our passage into Siberia: He provided us
seven, one for our Commiss. one for our Sub-Commiss. one for me, two for our
two Mariners, one for our Guide and the other for our Tobacco, Strong Water,
and the provisions he gave us for our journey, but our money the Commiss. took
along with himself.

Our Elks being harnessed, and put into the Sledges, he caused another to be
got ready for another Guide he sent along with us to the place where we were to
change our Elks, and deliver his; for all which we contracted to give him four
Ducates, but before we parted, each of usdrank five or six cups of
Strong Water to take our leaves, and having given the Governor of Potzora and
Vitzora thanks for their Civilities, we departed following the River through
very dangerous places, without keeping any beaten Road four hours together
without the sight of any living Creature but four white Bears the vastest that
ever were seen, which (as soon as they discovered us) ran away as hard as they
could; about two hours after, before we were aware, we were got to seven or
eight houses, but no body to be found in them, the inhabitants being all of
them gone a hunting.

We alighted from our Sledges, and went in to refresh, and in the mean time
five or six Men and Women with their Children returned from the Chase (which
had been for tunate that day. They brought along with them six Bears-skins,
four Woolfs, seven white Foxes, a couple of Ermins, and eight Sables. They were
much surprised to find us in their Quarters and had betaken them to their
heels, had not the Guide lent us by the Governor of Potzora overtaken and
assured them we were friends and Merchants passing to Papinogorod, and that we
would be their Chapmen for all the skins they had, upon his persuasion they
came back, but gaping and staring in the greatest admiration in the World' both
in respect of our habits (which were strange to them) our shape and our
language, of which they understood not one word no more than we did of theirs;
however by the help of our Interpreter we made a shift to barter with them, and
they furnished us with Elks to carry us to the Mouth of Papinogorod River.

Being got out of the River of Potzora about two hours, and following that
which carried us to Papinogorod, we descri'd coming out of a great Wood five
men clad in Bears skin after the fashion of Muscovia, each of them with a Gun
upon his Shoulder, his Bags by his side, and a short Sword in his hand like one
of our Huntsmen, making toward us, we caused our Sledges to stop, and our Guide
to inquire what people they were. One of them discerning we were strangers,
saluted us in Dutch, gave us the time of the day, and wished himself at as much
liberty as we. Our Commiss. (who was born in the lower Saxony) hearing him
speak Dutch, demanded his Country, to which the person replied, and our
Commiss. finding him of his aquaintance, alighted from his Sledge, took him in
his Arms, and having embraced, desired the occasion of his being there. The
person replied he was banished thither by the great Duke for hunting of Sables,
which is a punishment as ordinary in that Country, as sending to the Galleys in
France, some being banished for ten years, some for six, others for three, more
or less according to the quality of their offense, and after their time is
expired, they have their liberty and are free.

Their acquaintance, and my own curiosity fetched me also out of my Sledge, and
no sooner had I set foot upon the ground, but another of them came and embraced
me, and then in the French Tongue with a sigh, asked me from whence I came, and
whither I designed. I was much surprised, not knowing him in the least by
reason of his habit, his great beard, his bald pate, and the leanness of his
body, being nothing but skin and bone; he perceived I was at a loss, and told
me he was a Gentleman of Lorain Colonel of a Regiment of Horse for the Duke of
Muscovy, had seen and treated me often at his house in Stockholm, and had
endeavored to have persuaded me along with him to Mosco. The fair equipage in
which I had seen him, the respect every body showed him for his estate, his
command in the Army, and the bravery of his person, considered with the
pitiful condition he was then in, forced tears from my eyes in spite of my
teeth: I embraced him again, and desiring to know the reason of his disgrace,
he told me it was for a suspicion the great Duke had conceived of his fidelity,
and for that reason had banished him into Siberia. He told me he had, and was
yet to run through inexpressible dangers and miseriers (inevitable to men in his
condition) not only of hunger, and severity of the weather, but in perpetual
Hunting exposed to the capacity of Wild-Beasts, which for want of food did many
times attack those which Hunted them, for which reason they carried those Arms,
to defend themselves; and that besides all these miseries if they did not take
their appointed number of Sables, whether it was negligence or not, they were
never examined, but were sure of so many lashes upon their bare Flesh with
certain Girdles made of a thick and tuff skin, which were in tolerable to
bear. Our Commiss. his friend told him the same, and the rest (speaking all of
them good French and Dutch) confirmed it to be true; one of them had been a
grand Commiss. to the great Duke, another a Lieutenant General of all them
persons of quality, who after a sad relation of their sorrows, assured us
unanimously that if it pleased God they outlived the time of their sentence,
and were once again at liberty, they would never continue in any Country under
the power of the Grand Duke. To comfort them against their calamities, we took
out our Provisions, sat down altogether upon the ground, and treated them as
we could. We told them how glad we would be if we could be any ways
instrumental to their inlargment; for which they gave us thanks, but told us it
was impossible, in respect they were known to all the Governors in those parts
through which of necessity we must pass, and that if they were taken with us
they should be sure to die by the most exquisite tortures, and we unavoidably
loose our lives into the bargain. This they remonstrated with so much
frankness and ingenuity, it redoubled the grief we had already conceived
finding our selves unable to relieve them in so miserable an exigence. Having
staid and conversed with them full four hours, we thought it time to take our
leaves, and having presented each of them with half a pound of Tobacco, after
they had drank well of our Strong Water, and eaten of the Biscuit and spiced
Bread we brought from Potzora, and some of our salt meat, we bad them farewell,
beseeching God Almighty to give them power to overcome all they were to
encounter, and hoping to see them again in their former splendour and condition,
we mounted our Sledges, and posted three full hours before we discovered a
House; at length we perceived five or six, to them we went, and in them we
found about a dozen persons, we asked if they had any. Furs they would part
with, they told us yes, and having shown us several we bought them, partly for
ready money and part for Strong Waters, of which those people are very
licquorish.

We followed our journey by the direction of the River, observing Cabbins on
both sides of it, in some of them few, in others several People, of all of them
we bought what we could get, sometimes for Money, sometimes for Strong-water,
only their Sables they would not be tempted to sell, apprehending they should
be found out by the Governor of Papinogorod (whither we were going) who fails
not to search all Commodities that enter or pass out of the Town, least any of
those Sables should be conveyed away by Stealth.

We passed the Mountains which part Boranday from Siberia, they are very
unpleasant and troublesome by reason of the wildness of the Country,
uninhabitable both for the sterility of the Soil, Snows which are perpetually
upon them, and the vast quantity of Bears and White Wolfs which gave us no
little fear during our Travels in those parts, expecting to be set upon by them
every moment, but we perceived they were no less fearful of us, flying us upon
all encounters, some this, some that way, and all in great Consternation, which
we attributed much to the glittering of our Arms, by which we conceived they
took us rather for Hunts-men then Merchants.

After much labor to our Elks, and tediousness to our selves, after twelve
hours fatigue we descended the Mountains, and came into a Village belonging to
Siberia, whose Inhabitants were all clad in Bears-skin, the hair on the
outside, but some linen about them, and plated Boots, which made us believe
them of better quality then their Neighbors which we had left. And indeed they
received us more civilly enquiring who we were, whence we came, and whither we
were bound. We Eat and Drank with them of such as we had, and they produced
what their Town would afford, which was Bears-flesh and Wolves Salted, with a
sort of Spice-bread, and aqua vitae: What Skins they had we bought with ready
Money all but their Sables: and then having a desire to rest our selve; for
some time, we entered into one of their houses (made after the Laponian
fashion) and lay down upon Bears-skin about five or six hours, and then getting
up again, we drank our Mornings draught together in aqua vitae, mounted our
Sledges, and away for Papinogorod, where in about twenty hours time we arrived,
having baited once or twice by the way to give our Cattle their necessary
repast upon the Moss.

CHAP. XXXII. The Reception of the Danes at Papinogorod by the Governor, and
the Authors among the rest.
THE Governor of Papinogorod hearing of our arrival, sent for us to the Castle,
to understand what we were, from whence we came, and what was our business.
Upon his Summons we went to wait upon him, and after usual Salutations (our
Sub-Commiss. speaking the Muscovian Language very well) we gave him
satisfaction in every thing he desired.

When he understood we were Danish Merchants come thither only to buy Furs, he
treated us very civilly, and in Testimony of his great respect for us, and that
he looked upon us as Friends, he sent into his Wife to come forth and salute
us, which immediately she did, bringing along with her (according to the
custom of the Muscovits) a Bottle of Strong-water in one hand, a silver Cup in
the other, and her Maid at her heels, with a piece of spic'd Bread upon a
Trencher. The way of her saluting us was by bowing of her Head, and then
undoing the wrist-band of her Smock on the right Arm, she let it unfold, and
slide down upon the ground, which our Commiss. (knowing the mode) very readily,
and much like a Gentleman took up and kissed, and after him our Sub-Commiss.
and my self, then holding up her right Arm She folded it up again with her
left, and when 'twas done calling for her Cup and her Bottle, She began a
Noggen to each of us, and then presented her Spice-Bread. She kept still
standing at the end of the Table by her Husband, where after She had
entertained us for some time, She returned to her Quarters, and we fell a
drinking with the Governor, at length it grew late, and we were laid upon as
good Beds as that Country will afford.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Danes and the Authors Traffic in Papinogorod, the
situation of the Town, with the habits and manners of the Sibeberians and
Muscovites.
SIx or seven hours we reposed in the Governors house before we arose, and he
no sooner heard us stirring, but up he got and came to us to our Chamber, with
a bottle of Aqua-Vitae after him, which one of his servants brought in his
hand. He himself took a Brimmer, and saw it go round, after which he asked us
if we would buy what skins he had, which our Commiss. promised if they were
liked, and desired to see them; being brought to us, we quickly struck a
bargain, and paid him his money. When he had sold all his own, he sent for some
of the Townsmen he knew were provided, and told them they might deal with us,
and he would give them permission; upon which Complement we thought our selves
obliged to the the other bottle.

Whilst our Commiss* and Sub-Commiss. were employed in driving their bargain, I
took the opportunity to walk out into the Town. Its situation is pleasant
enough, thoughin a little Moorish-Plain environed with very high Mountains;
just by the Town there runs a fair River, excellently well provided with Fish.
The Houses are but ill built, low, of Wood and Earth crammed in betwixt the
Rafters. It Is paved with nothing but pieces of Wood fitted as well as they can,
and lying as close as they can make them.

The persons of the best quality in that place, have their Breeches and
Stockings, and a long Robe down to their anckles with their Sleeves very
straight, all of Cloth, but one of one color, and another of another. Upon
their Legs they have thin Leather-Boots, some Blew, some Red, some Yellow, with
Iron Plates at the Heel and the Toe, after the mode of the Polander.

Upon their Heads they had Cloth-Caps faced some with black Fox, others with
Squirrel, some with Ermins, and some Sables, according to their Fancy or
Estate. The women were very handsome, fair and plump, their Hair a kind of
yellowish brown, their fashion extreme well for Muscovites. As their Husbands,
so their Robes come down to their anckles, for the most part of Red, Violet
color, or Blew, made like our Juste-au-Corps, lined with white Fox, or Sables,
their Sleeves are large and hang down, being fastened to their Robes, the length
of their Smock-Sleeves is incredible, five Else of a very fine Cotton Linen is
nothing for one of them; upon their Heads they wear a kind of an Oval-Cap,
their Hair breided, and tied up at the ends with Ribbonds which they let hang
down upon their Shoulders. Their Shoes are made of a Russian Wood, about their
wastes they wear a Girdle of Pearl of no inconsiderable bigness.

The Natives of Siberia, are not much different from the Samojedes, Borandines,
and other Northern people, either in their manners, habit, or manner of living.

All the Muscovites are Nicolaitans in matter of Religion, they are grave,
strong, swift, dexterous at their Bow, not at all contentious, their Laws being
founded upon pure Equity. They are severe punishers of Treachery,
Prevarication, Thievery, and Murder, and yet they are very ignorant, techy,
drunken, clownish, and jealous, to that point, they make their Wives run and
skud away into their Chambers upon the sight of a stranger, where they are to
continue Prisoners till they give the word of Command in short their Slavery is
such, they dare not testify the least friendship or civility for a stranger;
nor do think their Husbands are kind, if they be not every day about their
bones with agood Cudgel or Girdle.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Authors departure from Papinogorod toward the Ships, his
passage through Samoijesia, with their manners, Customs, Vestments, etc.
HAving bought what we could (which was a great quantity of Woolfs-skins white
Fox, black Fox, Lynxes, Sables, Ermins,, and Squirrels) with the other we
bought at Potzora, we filled one of our Sledges, and had a good many to spare.
Having store of Tobacco and about 5000. Ducates remaining, our Commiss. and
Sub-Commiss. were willing to dispose of them for more Furs, and therefore
resolved to return to our Ships through Samoijesia. To that end they bought of
our Host the Governor of Papinogorod, as much strong water and other provisions
as would last us for twelve days. Our bargain being struck, both for provisions
and Elks, and the money paid, we were forced to have another debauch with him of
ten hours long, after which we slept eight more: and then, our Sledges being
ready, our goods and provisions packed up, and put into one of them, we got in
our selves, and taking leave of the Governor we departed.

About eighteen hours we were upon the march, buying skins as we passed as far
as the Riphean Mountains, which in our entrance into Samoijesia, we crossed in
six hours more. Samoijefia is a desert Country, full of Juniper, Pine-Trees,
and Firr; it abounds in Moss, in Snow, Woolfs, Bears, Foxes, all white, which
we met every moment, and they gave us no little apprehension.

At the bottom of the Mountain called Stolpohen (from whence the River
Borzagane springs) we saw eight or nine Houses and made toward them, both to
rest our selves, and refresh our Elks, with the Inhabitants of which we fell
immediately a trucking our strong-water for their Woolf, Fox, (white and black)
Beaver, and Otter-skins, beside which they had two Limmers of Sables which they
would not be drawn to part with by all the peswasions and protestations our
Boran dine Guide could make, that they need not fear; that we were Merchants
passing to our Ships, and would not go by any place where there was danger of
being searched. But nothing would do, they would not hearken till we made them
drunk, and then they parted with them freely, the vapors of the strong-water
having more effect upon them than all our Borandins Rhetoric. For that night
we made a shift with one of their Cabanes, and lay higglede-pigglede with the
Wife, Husband Barns, Servants, Cattle and all. Five or six hours after, I
awaked at the noise the Master made to get up his Family, and as soon as they
were up, they went all out of Doors.

I had a Curiosity to see what they did, and watching them a while, I saw them
clap themselves down upon their knees, on the other side of the House, holding
up their hands, and make several signs of adoration to the Sun, which they
believe to be God.

The Samoides are thicker and shorter, then either the Laponians or Borandines.
Their Head is larger, their Face broader, their Nose bigger and flatter, they
have little or no hair, and are of a duskish and earthy Complexion. Their
Vestments for the men, are a Round Bonnet frizled as it was made of Lambskins,
their Breeches and long Robe of white Bears-skin which reaches below their
knees, they are tied under the Belly with a Girdle four fingers broad, their
Stockings and Shoes of the same Leather, with the Hair outward, and under
their Shoes a kind of a Pattin made of the Bark of a Tree in the sashion of a
Gondelo, which went all along under their feet, and served to carry them with
strange swiftness over the Snow, which on those Mountains lies very thick; In
stead of a Cloak, they have a black skin, with the four feet hanging to it,
by-which they carry it more frequently upon the left Shoulder than the right;
and upon their Cloak they carry their Quiver.

The women in this Country are more ill-favored than the men. They are very
laborious, take great pains to learn their Children to Hunt, upon which they
live altogether, and upon nothing else. Their Habit is like the Men's, only
their Robe something longer, and no Cloak upon their Shoulders; they have the
same cover for their heads, they have only one tuft of hair twisted and tied at
the bottom with a Ribbond (made of the Rind of a Tree) which hangs down upon
their backs: they go a hunting Armed with their Bow and Arrows like the Men,
and are every way as dexterous.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Author departs from Boranday to go to go to Nova Zembla,
where he saw a Troop of them worshipping the Sun, and two others paying their
devotions to a wooden Idol they call Tetizot,
HAving passed through Samojesia, and being returned into the Country of
Boranday toward our Ships that expected with impatience, we got on Board as
soon as we could, and two hours after we set Sail for Nova Zembla. In twenty
hours time we arrived at a place where we saw about thirty persons with their
Quivers at their Backs, upon their Kneeson the shore worshipping the Sun. Our
Masters and Commissioners called a Counsel to consider which way we were to
accost these people whom we looked upon as more Savage and unciviliz'd than any
we had met. The result was we should set out three of our Shallops with ten men
a piece in them, well Armed in case of opposition, among which I was commanded
to make one; we coasted along the Shore till we came within half a quarter of a
League of them, when the Natives (till then upon their Knees) leaped up upon
their Feet, made a great Cry, and having shot all their Arrows against us,
fled away like hunted Deer, but they shot too far off to do us any harm

Being got on Shore as we could, we made with all speed toward the place
whether we supposed they were ran, with intentions if possible to have seized
upon some of them, but we were disappointed of our design, they having got out
of our sight, and we not able to guess which way they were gone, however we
marched toward the Mountains, found them all covered with Snow, and having
passed them, advanced into the Plains; upon the Stump of Trees newly cut down
we saw several Images of Men Carved vevery coarsly, and before one of them near
a League from us we could perceive two of those Savages upon their Knees,
(their Bows and Arrows laid by them) paying their devotions. When they
discovered us, they rose up in a fright whipped up their Arms and away in the
same have and apprehension as they had done whom we had surprised on the Shore
in their adoration of the Sun.

We made what speed we could after them, to have taken them if possible, but
they were too nimble and got into a wood of Firs before we could come near
them. returning to our Ships, we saw at a great distance two more at their
Idolatry, worshipping another Statue of the same called by the Natives Tetiz^t,
into which the Devil enters and delivers our his Oracles, as our Master of the
Ship told us.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Disease called the Scurvy, with which the Author and most
part of the Danes in that Voyage were surprised.
I Had not been on board above seven or eight hours before I was surprised
with a violent pain in my head, and a disposition to Vomit, which continued
three or four hours, after which I was taken with a soarness in my throat which
hindered my swallowing, I had a great swelling in my Amants, accompanied with an
Ebullition of my blood, and a strong itching all over my Body, my Gums were
inflamed, and bled very much, my Teeth so loose I expected they would fall out
every moment, nor could I endure to eat any thing that was hard. My Body became
very weak, and Feavorish, my breath short, with a very ill Savor, besides a
great drought, for the cure of which I frequently drank Oxierat. Fifteen hours
after finding my distemper continue and considering it proceeded in part from a
great cold I had upon me, and my eating of salt meats, which had irritated my
petuitary glandule, and envenum'd it in such sort that the Rheum infected my
other humors, I resolved instead of Oxierat, to drink Aqua-Vitae mingled with
fair water, I made also a Syrrop of Liquorish, of which I took the quantity of
a spoonful every hour, gargling often sometimes with Aqua-Vitae, sometimes with
Vinegar to refreshmy Gums, and rubbed my teeth with honey of Roses. Most of our
Ships Crew being troubled with the same distemper, used the same remedy, and it
was so effectual to us all not one of us miscarried.

Those of the other Ships were not exempt, they had the same disease as well as
we, in so much the Chyrurgions of their several Ships were put to it to cure
them; the method they took was by Phlebotomy and purging, but that made them
rather worse than better, in so much that in one of their Vessels there dyed
two Seamen, in the other three, and a Sub-Commiss. and all in six days time;
doubtless more of them had followed had not, they followed my Counsel, which
was to leave their bleeding and purging (which in that distemper are mortal)
and betake to my remedy. I remember in the year 1670. in the Winter the
violence of the cold put many people in Paris into the same distemper, the
Physicians took it for a kind of a Plague, and thinking by bleeding and
Purgation to recover their Patients, sent many of them to the Grave.

When I was in Algier, several people were troubled with the Scurvy, those that
were infected had their Amants swelled as if they had had a piece of Flesh in
their Mouths, and all the Symptoms I have mentioned before, engendered as
beforesaid by a sharp defluction that vitiated the rest of the humors but
especially the blood, in the same manner almost as it is in the French Pox,
there being a sort of it so like; among the Indians they have the same name,
and are called Pieans. For which reason I took the same way of curing the
Scurvy as they do the Pox, as is to be seen in my History of the State of the
Kingdom of Algier, Couque, Titican, etc. as also in my Treatise De lue Venerea.

CHAP. XXXVI. Our Fishing for the Sea Horse, with the relation how two of our
Mariners were drowned by the motion of one of their Tails.
HAving continued fifteen or sixteen days at Anchor upon the Coasts of Zembla
for the convenience of our sick, all of them being recovered except some few,
the weather coming fair, our Masters resolved to weigh and stand off toward
Voygat in order to our Fishing for the Seahorse: accordingly we put about
three Leagues to Sea, cruising up and down the Coasts at that distance, and
sending out our Shallops with their hooks and Hatchets, and eight men in each
of them to see what they could catch.

Three days we were before we saw any thing, at length we saw two great Fishes
(one of them with a Horn of a considerable length) which our Fishermen put
themselves into a posture to take, and being got within a stones cast of them,
they threw out their Hooks, some on one side, some on the other with long lines
fastened to them for the purpose and then came back again with all speed to our
Ships.

Being got on Board our Ships, and perceiving the Fish swimming above water
(which is a sign it was spent) by little and little they dragged it toward the
Vessel, which it suffered without reluctance, the loss of blood having rendered
it weak, and then falling to with our Axes, we cut of its head which we kept,
but threw the body into the Sea, as being unfit either for Victual or Oil. Our
fishing for the Seahorse is only for its teeth, which is useful as Ivory for
all kind of curiosity, and sells much dearer in respect of its whiteness (which
is far better of the two) and lasts longer before it turns red.

The Horn of this Seahorse, was full ten foot long, very heavy, wreathed like
a Snail and as big as the biggest part of a man's Arm, tapering from the head to
the point which was as sharp as a needle.

One of our Shallops coming too near the other Fish before they threw out their
Irons, finding her self struck she gave such a frisk with her Tail, that
hitting the Boat, it turned it over, and before their Camrades could possibly
relieve them, two of them were drowned, which troubled us much; how ever the
Fish was taken and lost her head, as that we took had done before. I went to
see it three or four hours after, found it had no Horn, but the want of that
was well recompensed in her Teeth, which were much the fairer of the two.

Four days and nights we were cruising up and down after we had taken these two
before we met with any more; and just as we were removing to some other place,
we discovered four of the same sort, in appearance much bigger than those we
had taken. Upon which we slackned our Sail, let down our Shallops, with our
Iron-mongers, and such other people as were necessary for that employment, and
in a short time they had catched three of the four: the other escaping, that
our Fishermen brought on board our Ship had no Horn, nor indeed the other two.
Ten or twelve hours after we saw five more, we put down our people with their
Irons, their Hooks and their Hatchets, and what else was necessary for the
purpose to try what they could do in our Shallops, especially with one of them
which we had observed to have a horn: but in spite of all the diligence could
be used we could take but two; three of them got off, and that with the Horn
was one of them. Some three hours after we perceived three more, of which our
Officers catched one, whose Head was so big each of its great teeth weighed
near thirty pounds.

Two days after we discerned seven or eight of them, and one with a Horn, we
set out all our Shallops immediately, and were so fortunate in the enterprise,
we took five of them, and that with the Horn was one of the number: it was
brought to our Ship, but the Horn was neither so heavy, so big, nor so long as
the other.

Having kept our station five days after, and discovered nothing, a N. N. W.
Wind rising on a sudden, we took the opportunity and made all the Sail we
could to Voygat, hoping to pass it by the benifit of that if it were possible,
but being got about five and twenty Leagues into that Sea, we durst venture no
farther by reason of the Mountains of Ice which stopped up the passage into the
Tartarian Sea, into which if by this passage an entrance could be found it
would shorten the Voyage to the East Indies three parts in four, which is
imported by the Name, Voygat in their language signifying shorter cut.

CHAP. XXXVII. The boldness of the Bears upon the Mountains of Voygat. The
taking of several Birds which the Danes call Pingoins.
WE had not been above five or six hours at Anchor, before one of our Sea men
being on Shore about his necessary occasions, a great Bear came behind him, and
patting him with his foot struck him clear over; without doubt he had been
devoured, had not we spyed it by accident, and shooting at it from on Board,
killed it dead upon the place, and rescued the poor Mariner from the greatest
fright he was ever in in his Life. Not long after there came to one of our
ships two Bears which attempted to have got in we cut off the paws of one of
them with our Hatchets as it was clambring up the sides of it, and the other we
shot. Being all staring, and employed about the execution of them two; a Sea
man from behind us cried out as if he had been mad, and not without reason, for
three more having come swimming toward our Ship one of them had got up, and
boarded us, but snatching up our Oars, Poles, and what other engines we had
ready, we belabored him so about the head, we quickly laid him asleep, and
killed the other with our Guns. we thought then we were safe, and should be
troubled with them no more, but we reckoned without our Host: for four or five
hours after we were alarmed by eight or ten more advancing upon the Ice, and
(when that failed) throwing themselves into the Sea, and swiming toward our
Ships, which made us stand to our Arms, and when we saw them within distance,
we fired so succesfully upon them, scarce one of them escaped.

These Creatures coming down from the Mountains in such great numbers (as if
they looked upon our being there as an Invasion, and were got together on
purpose to repel us) gave us some apprehension, and was partly the cause we
weighed Anchor, and returned from whence we came.

Having Sailed above twelve hours to disingage our selves from that straight
with the favor of an Easterly wind, and yet with great difficulty by reason of
the ice, we came to a Anchor under a pleasant Island, all delicatly green by
the verdure of the Moss, the Fir-Trees, and the Juniper. Some of our Seamen
going a Shore, saw a sort of foul which could scarce fly for their fat, giving
us an account of it at their return, I was commanded out (with forty more taken
out of all our Ships) to go on shore and try what we could catch of them, and
indeed in no long time partly with our Guns, and partly with our Cudgels, we
brought about threescore of them along with us when we returned.

These Birds (which our Masters told us were called Pingoins) are no higher
than Swans, but much thicker; they are as white as they, their neck as long as
Gooses, their head bigger, with a red sparkling Eye a bout the breadth of a
shilling, the beak is yellowish and sharp, the feet broad and firm like a
Gooses. They have a kind of a purse about a foot long which begins under their
beaks, and continues all along their necks to the very breast where it inlarges
to such a degree it will hold a full Pottle. In this it is (when their bellies
are full) they lay up their Cud, to have it ready again when their Stomachs
require.

Before we could eat them we were forced to skin them, it being extremely hard,
and the Feathers not to be pulled out of it but with very great difficulty. The
Flesh is good, has the same taste with a wild-Duck, is very fat, and made us
very good Cheer.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of a Zemblian which had like to have been taken by us; of
another and his Wife taken in their Canoe, with their manner of building.
HAving continued at Anchor two days and nights near this Island where we took
our Pingoins, the wind coming favorably about to the E. S. E. we weighed, and
stood to the N. N. W. and a while after (having cleared our selves of the
strait) the wind changing we were obliged to change, with it, and steer our
course upon the Coasts E. N. E. toward the height of the Cape, where in thirty
hours time we arrived near the place in which we saw the Zemblans adoring the
Sun.

His Majesty of Denmark, having given it in Charge to our Masters and Commiss.
if they found any people in Zembla, they should endeavor to take some of them,
that by them he might gain information what was done in that Country, we came
to Anchor in that place, and sent out our Shallops to discover, to this purpose
thirty men were commanded on shore in four Shallops, and in one of them my self.

We had scarce left our Ships, but we descryed about half a League from the
Shore a Zemblane in a Canoe, who perceiving us make toward him rowed with might
and main to clear himself of us, and having gained the Shore, he whipped his
Canoe upon his Shoulder, clapped his Bow and Arrows in it, and taking his Dart
in the other hand, away he ran (like the Philosopher) with his whole estate at
his Back. We got to shore as soon as we could, and followed him upon the Spur
up a little Hill we observed him to climb, but being nimbler than we, we could
not possibly reach him; we returned to our Shallops as wise as we went, much
troubled he had given us the Slip; as we were rowing toward our Ships, we
descried two Zemblans a good way at Sea, rowing like mad toward the Rocks and
the Promontories to hide themselves from us, as soon as they perceived us. We
no sooner discovered them, but we made after them with all speed, and though
they used all the strength and Art they were able to have got to a Rock, we
reached them before they came there, and having taken them, they made the most
horrid and dismal yell, I ever heard in my life. We brought them to our Vessel,
and drew them up with Ropes in their Canoe, which was made in the fashion of a
Gondelo, fifteen or sixteen foot long, and two foot and a half broad made of
fish-Ribs very artificially, covered without with Fish-skins sowed together,
which made the whole Canoe from one end to the other not unlike a purse, in
which the two Zemblans were enclosed to the wast, in such sort that not a drop
of water could get into it, and they might expose themselves in the greatest
Storm without any danger in the world. We perceived they were Man and Woman,
made all the Caresses, and signs of amity to them we could think of to tempt
them to show us their habitations, but unable to prevail any thing upon them,
we took provisions for ten or twelve days, and about thirty of us went a shore,
well Armed, and divided into two parties, we marched about an hundred paces
from one another, till at length getting under the Rocks, we hid our selves in
the holes, clapping Sentinels upon the Trees to discover if any Savages were to
be seen that we might take some of them, and be carried to their Houses.

CHAP. XXXIX. The taking of another Zemblane and his Wife, their Habits, Arms,
and manner of living.
IT was not much less than eight and forty hours we were thus upon the watch,
when one of our Sentinels gave notice he discovered two of the Zemblans coming
down a little Hill toward the Sea. We disposed our selves immediately with
what advantage we could, six of us remained in the Cave where we were, five and
my self removed farther off into another, and in a quarter of an hours time
they passed betwixt our Ambuscades without perceiving any thing of us; one of
our party gave the Signal by firing of a Gun, as well to give the other the
alarm, as to stop the Zemblans and make them look about them, it succeeded as
we desired, and Whilst they were in a maze we leapt both parties from our
Ambushment, encompassed them so they could not escape and took them.

Their Vestments were of the skins of Pingoins with the Feathers upon them.
They consisted of very strait Breeches which reached no lower than the knees, a
Wastcoat of the same, the sleeves reaching no farther than the Elbows, the rest
of their Arm being naked; Their Wastcoats were cut with a Peak, before and
behind like a Tail, their Caps upon their Heads were like Sugar-Loav's, their
Boots were of the skin of a Sea-Calf, of a reddish brown color, the hair
outward.

Though they were both habited alike, we could discern one was a Man and the
other a Woman. The Man was about twenty years old, a broad Face like those we
had taken before, of a swarthy brown, his nose big and flat, his eyes little
and drawn toward his Temples without either Beard or Hair, his Quiver was full
of Arrows at his Back with a hatchet of Fish-Bones, which he carried upon his
Shoulder with one hand, and his dart in the other.

The woman was about twenty years old, her hair in two breids hanging down upon
her Shoulders, she had blew streaks all along her Chin, and three or four upon
her forehead, on her ears and under her Nose holes had been made, and blew
stones hanged in them in little Rings made of the small bones of Fish. Those in
her Ears were as big as Filbeards those in her nose were like Pease, and to
defend her jewels she carried a Dart in her hand.

We used all the Artifice we could to have prevailed with them to show us their
quarters, but nothing would do, and we were forced to carry them on Board,
where we put them to the other two we had taken in the Canoe: we could perceive
they knew one another presently, though their habit was different, the first we
took not being clad in Feathers, but in the skins of Sea-Calfs, with the hair
outward, their Wastcoats being made of two skins sowed together, with their
Tails hanging down one before, and another behind as low as their Thighs, and
their Drawers were very strait. The eldest was about fifty years old, with a
round Chest-nut colored Beard, but no hair on his head. His Lady was about
thirty, her Ears and nose pierced (like other persons of her quality) and laden
with blew stones her Hair was platted in two Locks hanging upon her Shoulders,
with blew streaks upon her Chin and her Forehead, in short there was never a
Barrel better Herring, one as rich and ill favored as the other, both little
trubs like the Samojedes, Laplanders, Borandians, and Siberians, their voice
was shrill and squeaking their breath stunk abominably, which we imputed to
their Diet, eating their meat without Salt, or else dabbling their Fish in the
Oil of another sort of Fish. They drank nothing but water, we could never get
them to touch a piece of bread, to eat a bit of our salt meat, or salt Fish,
nor swallow one drop of Beer. We tempted them a little with our strong water,
but the smell of Toboccco they abhorred.

All their work was wrought with thread made of Fish-skin, their needles with
which they sowed, of the small bones of Fish, the end of their Darts and
generally all their tools of their bigger bones,

The wood of their Darts and their Bows were very heavy, of a kind of a red
Brown, but their Arrows were much lighter, of a Whiter Wood, and they shot
them with great dexterity. To make the women complete they both of them wadled
like Ducks.

CHAP. XL. Our departure from Zembla in Order to our return. Our arrival in
Greenland, the Whale-Fishing, and the way they make Oil of them.
THe year being far spent, and the latter end of August already come, the days
began to shorten, and we had half an hour night, besides the cold increasing
upon us, it was judged best (having a fair N. N. E. Wind) to weigh Anchor and
stand to the S. W. we had not sailed many hours before the wind came about S.
S. E. which forced us to our former Northern course, to gain the Coasts if we
could, which we did, and by the favor of that wind sailed by them as far as
Greenland, where being catched with a W. S. W. wind, we were obliged to cast
Anchor again near a great number of French and Dutch Vessels which lay near the
shore a fishing for Whale, which Fishing is much after the rate of the
Seahorse. Having struck it with their Irons, they draw it gently toward the
Shore, and when it is dead, cut it all into Mamocks, for the fat, which they
melt in great Kettles to draw out the Oil, not far from certain Cabanes which
the Fishermen build for that purpose upon the Coast.

This happened very luckily for our Zemblians, their Stomachs were almost lost
for want of oil, for two days together they had had none to dip their Fish in,
because it grew scarce in the Ship, and we were forced to abate their allowance
of oil with the Fish we gave them to eat.

I saw them order one of their Whales, and stood by till they had done. They
drew out of her as much Whale-bone as weighed three hundred and fifty pound
weight, which they reserved for the Taylers for Busks and bodies for the Ladies.

CHAP. XLI. The Authors departure from Greenland, three Suns appear to him at
Sea; by a violent Tempest the Ships are driven upon the Coast of Island.
HAving continued two days upon the Coast of Greenland, a N. E. wind arising,
we weighed Anchor in persuit of our journey, keeping half Sea over, and steering
W. S. W. All the first day the wind was favorable, and held so till about five
next morning, at which time turning quite contrary to E. S. E. we descern'd
three Suns in the Firmament one above another, so clear and conspicuous, we
could not tell which was the right, and more toward the South we found the sky
begin to thicken, and lower, upon which our Master told the Pilot we were in
danger of a Storm; in that apprehension we took down most of our Sails, and
gave our Companions a Gun as a signal they should do the same, after which we
fell to prayers, expecting submissively the pleasure of God.

Not many hours passed before we were overtaken by a strong S. S: E. Wind, a
violent Rain, and such dreadful claps of Thunder, we thought the World had been
at an end. The Sea on the other swelled and raged exceedingly, so as we were
able to keep up none but our Mizain Sail, our Sail yard was very low, and two
of our Sea men were forced to keep our long Boats on Board by the Ropes they
had fastened to them on purpose; and indeed we had much ado to manage our Ship.

Having been tossed in this manner all that day and night, without any
abatement in the Wind, our Master commanded up one of the Seamen to the
Scuttle, to see if he could discover any land, that we might know where we
were. Our Seaman after he had looked about him some time cried out to us that
he discovered W. N. W. of us a great fire, which our Master concluded must
needs be Hecla, a Mountain in Island, and though we had no busi^^^^ (...) yet
the Wind continuing (...), and the S^o^^^^ bartering our Ships, and obstructing
our Sailing, we resolved to make thither, and see what shelter we could find;
accordingly steering our course that way, we arrived upon the Coasts in not
many hours, and all that Night (lying under that Mountain) we heard most dismal
and strange noises like the shooting of great Guns, we saw great Fires and
flames rising out of it in abundance.

The multitude of Rocks we found upon that shore, and the fierceness of the
Sea, made us afraid to come too near; but by the skill and diligence of our
Pilot we came to an Anchor under Cape Hori without any inconvenience. One of
the ships of our Company whose Pilot was not altogether so dexterous or
experienced as ours, within a small distance of us ran his Stem against a Rock,
brake a piece of it off, and the whole Vessel was in no little danger of
dashing to pieces, the third came off well, and had no more harm than we.

CHAP. XLII. The Authors going on shore, his arrival at Kirkebar; his Voyage to
Hecla, the danger he ran there; the mavelous effects of two Fountains which
spring out of that Hill, and other particulars.
HAving put on Shore with our Master, our Commiss. and others to the number of
fifteen (part out of our Vessel, and part out of the rest) we advanced to Hori,
(which is a Town about a League and an half from the Sea) and from thence to
Kirkebar (a little Town or a great Village which you will, in that Island) we
found in Kirkebar a Commiss. and seven or eight Danish Merchants, who were
amazed to see us there. They told us they were very glad to see us, and that
the day before they had had such an Earthquake they thought the whole Island
would have sunk into the Sea. They treated us with good wine, good bread, and
good fresh meat. They have great plenty of Cattle in that Island, which (by
reason of the sweetness of the Pasture ground with which it abounds) the
Inhabitants are forced to feed by measure, least they should otherwise burst
themselves, which would certainly happen if they suffered them to eat what they
would, as in other Countries they do.

Our Master, our Commiss. and some others desiring to see farther, and
intimating it to the Commiss. of Kirkebar, he caused Horses to be got ready for
them. I told them I had a mind to be of the party and they received me into
their number; eight of us took Horse (leaving the rest who were not so curious)
and departed in the Company of two of the Commiss. of Kirkebars Servants, and
two Islanders (sent along as Guides) with a Horse-load of Provisions. Two days
together we traveled over Mountains, craggy, and unfrequented ways toward
Hecla. Being arrived within a League and half of it, we found the ground all
covered with ashes and Pumice Stones, over which we were forced to march to the
bottom of the Mountain.

The sky being serene, and no flames to be seen from the Mountain, we took a
resolution to go up to the top of it, but our Guides (to divert us) gave us to
understand that if we passed any farther, we should run a great hazard of
sinking into holes the Fire had made, from whence there would be no possibility
to recover us upon which the whole company being discouraged, changed their
minds and were returning as they came, but I told them if they would have
patience, and stay till I came back, I would venture alone, and give them an
account; they promised they would, and one of the Merchants we found at
Kirkebar (who in curiosity had come with us) undertook to bear me Company.

We presently alighted, giving our Horses to our Guides (who staid with the
Gentlemen) and marched over the ashes and Pumices (mid leg deep) toward the
top, where we saw a great quantity of Birds flying up and down as black as
pitch, and they were Crows and Vultures which build there.

Being got about half a League up the Hill, we found it begin to tremble under
our feet, and heard a strange crashing and rumbling within, which argued a
hollowness, and gave us no little fear of sinking into it; at the same time
round about us, on this side, and on that we perceived great chincks, out of
which flames and sparkles came forth, and noisome, and stinking of burned
Brimstone, which frighted us so, we were glad to get back again as fast as we
could for fear of being swallowed. Being got about thirty paces back, a cloud
of Ashes brake suddenly out of the Mountain (so big and thick it obscured the
Sun) and fell upon us in such manner, we could not see one another, and that
which frighted us the most was to see every moment new gusts of Fire and
Ashes break out fresh and fall upon us like hail, with a continued noise and
rumbling under us, which made us try out most rufully as if all the infernal
^uries had designed to overvvhelm us, expecting every moment when the Earth
should open and swallow us, to prevent which we made use of our heels, and
ran down again as fast as our legs could carry us, to avoid the danger into
which our curiosity had brought us.

Our fear added such vvings to our feet, and gave us such agility of body, that
in a quarter of an hour we had not only got the Mountain, but recovered our
friends who attended us, and could not forbear laughing to see the pickle we
were in, our fear and the ashes together having rendered us as black as if we
had been plunged in a Barrel of inck. But their laughter was quickly over, when
they saw us fall down at their feet as if we had been dead, our spirits and our
speech failing us; to recover us they rubbed our Temples, pulled us by the
Noses, and gave us Vinegar to smell to.

After sometime being come to our selves we took each of us a Cup of Sack,
which recovered our senses, and then we departed, coasting along about a
hundred paces from the Mountain, toward two Fountains, one of them so hot it
perpetually boiled, the other so cold it turned every thing put into it into
stone.

We saw a Pumice stone about the bigness of a Hogshead, which had been thrown
from that Mountain a little before, whilst we were admiring how it should be
possible, one of our Guides told us he had seen much greater, and among the
rest one which ten men were not able to move he told us moreover besides the
Fire, Flames, Cinders, and Ashes we had seen, it throws out sometimes scalding
hot water, sometimes flames, sometimes Fire, and sometimes nothing but stones,

After the expense of three full hours, we arrived at the Fountains (which are
not distant from one another above thirty paces) and coming first to the Cold I
put in a switch I had in my hand, and having pulled it out again, was much
surprised to see the end which had touched the bottom metamorphosed into Iron,
and full as heavy. From thence we went to the hot spring, in which (at about
ten paces distance) we saw a multitude of Foul as big as Dydoppers (most of
them red) playing and skipping together upon the surface, with which we were
much pleased, and stopped for some time for fear of interrupting them, but when
at length we approached, they all disappeared, and then retiring again, they
began to show themselves as before; which it seems is their way when no body
disturbs them, but as soon as any thing comes near them, down they go all of
them to the bottom of the Fountain, which by the report of our Guides is little
less than sixty fathom deep.

From these Fountains we pointed toward the Sea, and being come within half a
League of it, we could hear a certain noise as it were bemoaning and lamenting
some disaster, which our Guides would fain have persuaded me (as they had done
other people) were the Complaints of the damned whom the Devil torments,
refreshing them sometimes Civilly upon the Ice in that place, after they had
dry roasted in the flames of Hecla.

We all concurred in a curiosity to see that Ice (there being none besides
there about all the Island) we no sooner came near it, but I perceived the
imaginary yells and Lamentations of the damned, proceeded from that Ice and
nothing else by the agitation of the wind and the water, and a perpetual
concussion one piece against another, or all of them against the Rocks.

These Ices (if we may take the word of our Guides) do constantly come about
the latter end of June, and disappear the fifteenth of September, which was
within two days after we were there.

Foom thence we departed in our return to Kirkebar, where we arrived three days
after, and from thence to our Ships, in which we found the Governor of the
Island accompanied with the Bishop of Scalhoult who were come to see them upon
the news of our arrival, and that we had been at Zembla.

CHAP. XLIII. The habitation, manner of living and superstition of the
Islanders, with other particularities.
FOr the most part the Islanders have their habitations in holes cut in the
Rocks, but some of them have their Cabanes, as they have in Laponia, some made
of the bones of Fishes, some of wood, covered over with Turffs of earth, their
Cattle and themselves being Chamber-Fellowes, and under one Roof: The men are
very homely, the women little better, swarthy most of them as the Norwegians
are, their Coats are generally Canvas, but some of them, are in Sea-Calfs-skin
with the hair outward.

Their manner of living (like the rest of the Northern Countries) is very
natural; their lodging is upon dried herbs with skins thrown over them, and
one bed of that kind serves the whole Family.

Their whole employment is Fishing. They are very slovenly, rude, brutish, and
most of them Sorcerers, worshipping the Devil (which they call Kobalde) who
appears to them often in humane shape: they have another Idol of wood, cut most
hideously with a Knife, which they show but s^ldome for scar it should be
stolen or demolished by certain Lutheran Priests which are there to instruct
them in the doctrine of Christianity, and endeavor to rescue them from the
slavery of Satan.

They have most of them Trolles (as they call them) which are certain familiars
attending and serving them faithfully, giving them notice of any accident or
distemper impending; when they sleep these Familiars awake them to go a Fishing
if the weather be fair, and if they go at any time without encouragement from
them, they may swear all the time and catch as much Fish.

They are so exquisite in the art of Magic, they will show such strangers as
are curious what is done in their houses in their own Countries; they will
inform them Whether their Fathers, Mothers, Relations, or Friends (which they
desire to be assured of) be living or dead. They sell Winds also to any body
will buy them to go whither they please. The Commiss. of Kirkebar (and others
beside him) told me very gravely (as he had meant I should have believed him)
that those who are a Fishing at the Foot of Mount Hecla upon a day in which
there happens a Battle in any part of Europe, do constantly see the Devils
coming and going into that Mountain with men's souls upon their backs, like Bees
fetching and carrying Honey upon their Thighs.

If it falls out any of their friends are dead, and they are concerned to know
what is become of them, applying themselves to these Sorcerers, the defunct
presently appears very melancholy and out of humor assures them for certain
he is dead, and with the Devil (who he must confess is none of the best
Masters) desires them not to trouble themselves any more for him, for he is
settled in Hecla, and till they come, to him can enjoy them no more.

The Fields in Island (though fair and full of pasturage) cannot produce wheat
or any other grain proper for bread, in respect of the extreme coldness of the
place, by the means of a sharp North-East wind with which they are perpetually
infested.

CHAP. XLIV. The Authors departure with the rest of the Danes from Cape Hori.
Their arrival at Copenhagen and the present made by the Northern Company of two
Sea-Horses Horns, which were accepted for Unicorns.
THree days after we were arrived from our journey to Hecla to our Ships which
was the 22th of September, a N: wind blowing favorable for us, we weighed
Anchor and departed, steering our Course S. S. E. Having sailed for some days
indifferently well, on a sudden we were surprised with a smart Gale from the
N. N. W. which drove us upon the Coast of Norway, where (knowing the
Promontories of Talso, which is a little Town upon an eminence with a very
strong Castle, about four Leagues from the Sea) we were overjoyed, as hoping
ere long our Voyage would be at end. But we reckoned without our Host, for we
had not been twelve hours upon the Coast, but the wind changed with the Moon,
and forced us again to Sea, to avoid the Rocks, and the danger of being driven
back, nor indeed could all the care and pains we could take prevent our running
back above forty Leagues; after the Storm was over, we happened to be calmed
which retarded us for some time; in the interim we perceived to the S. S. W. of
us a great Seilon which affrighted our Seamen very much, and obliged them with
all speed to slscken their Sails, and bring them to the Masts, least otherwise
it should break upon us, but it came not within two Leagues of us, at which
distance we discerned it to fall. These Seilons are a kind of black thick
Clouds in the fashion of Pillars, which are many times visible at Sea, and if
at any time they fall upon a Ship, it destroys it by the abundance of water
wherewith it fills it, and sinks it down right to the bottom, if it breaks
perpendicularly over it. The Calm being gone, we were beholding to a N. E.
wind, which in ten days time finished our Voyage, and brought us into Copen
Hagen Road, where after we had saluted the Castle, we came to an Anchor, and
putting out our long-Boats, got on shore as soon as we could.

We had scarce got into the Town, before his Majesty (having notice that we had
brought three or four Zemblanes along with us) commanded us to Court, being
impatient to see them. We obeyed his command, and attended with them; as soon
as he saw them he fell into great admiration, both of their habit, and shape of
their bodies. He gave order to the Governor of the Castle to take them into his
Care, to see they wanted nothing that was necessary, and that they be taught
the Language of his Country as well and conveniently as was possible; after
which (having made us give him a relation of the several Countries we had seen
and of the manners and customs of the people) we were permitted to take our
leaves, and to wait upon the Masters of the Company to give them an account of
our negotiations, with which they were very well satisfied, and caused our
ships to be brought to Christian Haven (where their Store Houses are) to be
unladen there.

One of the Principals of the Company was ordered by the rest in all their
Names to present his Majesty with the two Sea-Horses Horns which we brought
home with us, which his Majesty received as a most inestimable present,
supposing they had been Unicorns Horns, of the virtues of which so many Authors
had written. He ordered them presently to be laid up among the best of his
Rarities, promised the Company to do them what benifit he could, and presented
the bearer with a Chain of Gold with his Picture hanging at it, and forgave him
his Customs besides.

CHAP. XLV. Vulgar Error about the Unicorn and the virtue of its Horn.
BEing upon the Subject of the Unicorn, whose Horn is so precious for the great
Virtues which are attributed to it, I shall say it is a very difficult thing to
know what Creature the right Unicorn is, there being several Animals the Greeks
call Monoceros, and the Latins Vni-Cornis; as among four footed Beasts,
several Asses wild Oxen, and the Bull in Florida. Among Serpents, there is the
horned Aspic and the red Salamander. Among Fish the Pirassocpi, the Sea-
Elephant, the Sea- Horse, the Caspile, and Vtelef. There are likewise of them
among the Fouls, and among infects that kind of Beetle (which is frequent in
Flanders, England and Picardy) called the flying Unicorn, besides other
Creatures of different species which are found in great numbers in the Indies.

Some will have this Unicorn to be a Land Creature, some a Water, and some an
Amphibium, as living in both.

Pliny says that the Unicorn is exactly like an Ox spotted with white, only
the foot is firm and round as a Horses.

Munster will have it like a three-year-old- Colt, of a Weesel color, the head
like a Stag, the legs slender, and feet cloven, with his Horn in the middle of
his Forehead, about two cubits in length.

Marcus Paulus the Venetian affirms it to be like an Elephant, of the same
shape and color, only a little less, and the Tail like an Oxes; the head like
a Pigs, but so weighty it hangs always toward the ground.

Philostratus describes it in the head like a Dragon, with a Horn (but of no
great bigness) in the midst of it, wreathed like a Snail, it has a beard on its
Chin: a long neck, feet like a Lion, the rest of its body like a Stag, and the
skin like a Serpent.

Hesiodorus represents it so swift, it is not possible to be taken by all the
Art the Huntsman can use.

Lewis Paradis reports, that when any of themare taken, they feed them with
Peace, Lintels and Beans. That they are as tall as Irish-Greyhounds, but not so
slenderly made their hair of the color of a Beaver very smooth, the neck thin,
the legs and feet and tail like a Hind, the head short and lean, the mouth like
a Calf, the eyes large, the ears small and betwixt them a Horn very slick, of a
dark brown color without, and about a foot in length.

Thevetus; maintains the Unicorn to be as big as an Ox at six Months old, with
legs and feet like an Ass, eared like a Rein Deer, and bears its Horn upon the
top of its head.

Lewis de Barthene will have it like a Bay-Horse, only the feet cloven, and a
Horn in the middle of his forehead.

Volnesius affirms the Rhinoceros to be the right Unicorn, Garcius the Camphur,
and John Corbichon the Egliceron

Albertus says the true Unicorns Horn is a hand and a half broad at the
bottom, and ten foot long. Lewis Barthenus will have it three fathom. Munster
three Cubits. Marcus Paulus two, Lewis Paradis a foot and half. Nicholas the
Venetian a a foot, and Cardan but three fingers long.

Pliny represents the Horn black: Solinus purple: Paradis of the color of
Rhubarb newly broken: Albertus of a Stags color, and others are as obstinate
that it is whiter then Ivory.

When I consider the discrepancy in the opinions of all Authors about this
Vnicorus horn, some describing it one way, and some another, I am persuaded my
self they have treated of it either out of Envy, or emulation to make
themselves admired, and the learned Baccius confirms that persuasion, asserting
that such Authors are not to be credited, as knowing nothing of that Creature
but by hearsay, no body having ever seen it, any more than a Phoenix.

As to the virtue of this Unicorns horn suppose it as is reported, and those
they would put upon us were right, I am assured it has no more than in the Horn
of a stag, Goat, or a piece of Ivory, which is many times used to stop the
spitting of blood, Emrades, and looseness, which they cure by a restringent
virtue (or rather a convenient malignity) that restringency caused by the
Earthiness of their substance) stopping and choking up the passage in the Veins
and Arteries, becomes rather a poison than a Cordial, like the stone of a
certain Counselors Clerk made up of Sulfure and Vitriol, which cast into
twenty Buckets of River water gave it a tincture and quality proper as he
pretended for all kinds of diseases; as many Mountebanks do now with their
powders of precious stones, Pearls, and Gold, which they cry up for great
Antidores, whereas all experienced Physicians do know they are but cheats and
if they give ease at any time it is more by the virtue of the thing in which it
is given, than any propriety of its own; and the reason they give is because
nothing that is incapable of receiving nourishment, can be capable of giving
it, as pearl, precious stones, and Gold; which if endued with any nutritive
faculty, rich men would never die of hunger as long as they lasted, nor any
Famine happen to them, as it did in the Siege of Jerusalem forty years after
the death of our Savior, as Josephus affirms in his History of the Jews, quite
contrary to the sentiment of Gabriel de Castagne and others of his Cabal, who
maintain that Gold taken in wardly is one of the greatest antidotes in the
world, though in truth it is poison rather, as may be proved by the smell and
steam of it, which so frequently kills the Miners as they are at work.

And as a further evidence that the horn of an Unicorn has no virtue in it, and
therefore is no Cordial, it has neither taste nor smell more than a bone, and by
consequence no more virtue.

CHAP. XLVI. The Authors reflections upon an Error in our Geographers in the
placing of Greenland and Zembla, with Observations upon such as have writ about
Voygat, and the Samojedes.
AT my return from those Northern Countries, there having fallen into my hands
several Geografical Charts, of sundry eminent and much celebrated Authors, I
was amazed to see how as it were unanimously) they were mistaken in the
position of Zembla, which they place much nearer the North Pole, than really it
is, and N. E. of Laponia though indeed it is more inclining to the North. They
divide it likewise by the Sea from Greenland, and put it at above twelve
hundred Leagues distance from it, when as indeed those two Countries are
contiguous, the Coasts of Greenland butting upon the Coasts of Zembla, so as
did not the great quantity of Snow, and the violence of the Cold render those
borders uninhabitable, the passage would be very easy by Land from Greenland
to Zembla, and from Zembla (passing the Patenostres Mountains) to enter into
Samosespia; from thence into Tartary, or Muscovy as one pleased.

I was amazed likewise to see they had described the Strait called Voygat not
above ten French Leagues in length whereas it contains above five and thirty
Dutch Leagues, which is six times as much; again they would persuade us that
through that strait our Ships might pass into the great Tartarian Ocean, which
is a a mistake, though they indeed do affirm that in the time of Prince Maurice
of Nassau a Dutch Vessel passed that way into that Ocean, but it is a manifest
error, that strait being bounded (as I said before) by the Patenostres
Mountains, the least of which is above half a League high, and the tops of
them* covered with perpetual Snow which never dissloves. And of this I can give
a positive Testimony having been my self in that strait, under those Mountains
in the dog days (which is the hottest time in the year) and found it very cold,
the winter continuing all the year in those parts, as the Summer does about the
Magellan Straits near the Antartick Pole.

As the Countries remote toward the South, are called incognitae: so the
Countries in the same distance, might have the same appellation; yet though to
us they are unknown at present, I do not question but if we had occasion to go
farther, we should discover Countries well peopled and inhabited, which we
might call new Worlds, according to the example of Christopher Columbus,
Magellan, and others who have called their discoveries by that Title, following
therein sentiments of Democritus Epienrus and Metrodorus, who maintain there
are several Worlds, contrary to the Doctrine of Hermes Trismegistus and Plato,
who affirm there is but one which God created according to his own pleasure, of
which no man can give an account, either of its end, beginning, height, depth,
or middle: though our Geographers tell us other things in their Planisphers,
proposing the Artick Pole for the Top, the Antartick for the bottom, and the
Equator for the middle. To which Strabo dissents, asserting the middle of the
World to be the Mountains Parnassus in Greece. Berosus, the Mountain Arrarat in
Armenia, and several others will have it Jerusalem.

I would fain know of our Geographers where they place the old Zembla; I am of
opinion if they had been in the new, they would confess there was no other.
That New Holland, West-Friezeland, and Cape d'Hyver are in the Straits of
Voygat, and not on the other side in the great Tartarean Ocean as they have
placed them. And he (that in his relation of the State of Muscovy speaks of the
Samojedes) if he had been among them, and had any conversation there, would not
have described them eaters of strangers, and that the Grand Duke sent his
Criminals thither, to be devoured by them which is utterly false; Though their
Bodies are ill favored, and their wit dull, though they have no knowledge of
God, nor fear of torment in the other World; (believing their souls and bodies
die together) though they seem the miserablest people of the Earth, living in
Summer upon Bears, Woolfs, Foxes, Crows, Eagles, and other wild Creatures
which they hunt first and then eat in their Cabanes broild upon the Coals, and
subsist in the Winter upon nothing but Fish dried in the Sun in the Summer
time, unless by accident they kill some of those Bears, who (having nothing
left by the Snow in the fields) come home to their Cabanes to devour them.
Notwithstanding all these inconveniences, they are naturally hospitable,
receiving strangers like themselves, without doing them any injury; for, though
they appear cruel and barbarous, they are honest and sincere, which is very
much considering they are Neighbors to the worst people in the world, which
are the Tartars, and Tingorses, with whom they have as great traffic and
conversation on that side, as they have with the Siberians, Borandines, and
Laplanders on the other.

FINIS.

