THE PICTURE OF THE Council of State, Held forth to the Free People of England
BY Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, M. Thomas Prince, and M. Richard Overton, now
prisoners in the Tower of LONDON, For bearing testimony to the Liberties of
England against the present Tyrants at WHITE HALL, and their Associates.

OR, A full NARRATIVE of the late extrajudiciall and Military Proceedings
against them.

Together with the Substance of their several Examinations, Answers, and
Deportments before them at Darby-house, upon March 28 last.

The second Edition, with many large Additions by the Authors themselves.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

THE PICTURE OF THE Council of State: Held forth to the Free People of England,
by Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, Mr. Thomas Prince, and Mr. Richard Overton.
The Narrative of the Proceedings against Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn thus
follows.
ON Wednesday the 28 of March 1649, about four or five a clock in the morning,
my lodging at Winchester-house in Southwark, was beset with about 100 or 200
armed men, Horse and Foot, one of which knocking at my Chamberdoor, I rose and
opened him the door, and asked him who he would speak with, and what he would
have? He replied, he was come to take me prisoner; whereupon I demanded of him
to see his Warrant; he told me he had one, but had it not here, but as soon as
I came to Paul's I should see it; I told him, if he walked by the rules of
justice, he ought to have brought his Warrant with him, and to have showed it
me, and given me leave to have copied it out, if I had desired it. But diverse
of the foot Soldiers rushing into my room at his heels; I desired him to
demean himself like a Gentleman, and not with any incivilities affright my
children and family; for if it were nothing but my person he would have, I
would but make me ready, and go along with him without any more ado, whither he
would carry me; for his power of armed men was beyond my present resisting, or
power to dispute: so I desired him and another Gentleman with him to sit down,
which they did; and when I was almost ready to go, I demanded of him whether it
would not fully satisfy his end, in my going along with him and one or two
more of his company in a boat, and I would engage unto him as I was an English
man, there should be no disturbance to him by me, or any in my behalf, but I
would quietly and peacebly go with him wherever he would have me: but he told
me no, I must march through the streets with the same Guard that came for me: I
told him, I could not now dispute, but it would be no great conquest to lead a
single captive through the streets in the head of so many armed men, who neither
had made resistance, nor was in any capacity to do it; and coming down stairs
into the great yard, I was commanded to stand till the men were marshalled in
Rank and File, and two other prisoners were brought unto me, viz. my Landlord
Mr. Devennish's two Sons, but for what they knew not, nor could imagine; So
away through the streets the armed Victors carry us, like three conquered
Slaves, making us often halt by the way, that so their men might draw up in
good order, to encounter with an Army of Butterflies, in case they should meet
them in the way to rescue us their Captives from them; so coming to Paul's
Church, I there meet with my Comrade M. Prince, and after embraces each of
other, and a little discourse, we see our acquaintance M. William Walwin
marching at the head of another Party as a captive; and having understood that
our being seized as Prisoners, was about a new address by way of Petition to
the Parliament, entitled, The second part of Englands new Chains discovered;
We could not but wonder at the apprehending of M. Walwin about that, he having
for some months past (that ever I could see or hear of) never been at any of
our meetings, where any such things were managed: But Adjutant General Stubber
that was the Commander of the Party, coming then to view, I repaired to him,
and desired to see his Warrant, by virtue of which his men forced me out of my
bed and habitation, from my Wife and children; and his Warrant he produced,
which I read, he denying me a copy of it, though both there and at White Hall I
earnestly demanded it as my right: the substance of which, so near as I can
remember, is, From the Committee, commonly styled the Council of State, to
authorize Sir Hardresse Waller, and Colonel Edward Whaley, or whom they shall
appoint, to repair to any place whatsoever, where they shall hear Lieut. Col.
John Lilburn, and M. Prince, M. Walwin, and M. Overton are, them to apprehend,
and bring before the Council of State, for supposition of high Treason, for
compiling, etc. a seditious and scandalous Pamphlet, entitled, The second part
of Englands new Chains discoverd. And for so doing, that shall be their Warrant.

Signed, John Bradshaw President.

And in the same paper is contained Sir Hardresse Wallers and Col. Whaley's
Commission or Deputation to Adjutant General Stubber to apprehend Mr. Walwin
and my self; who with his Officers, dealt abundantly more fairly with us, then
I understand Lieut. Col Axtel dealt with Mr. Prince and Mr. Overton; From which
Lieut. Col. if there had been any harmony in his spirit to his profession,
abundance more in point of civili^^, might have been expected, then from the
other, though he sell much short.

But when we were in Paul's Churchyard, I was very earnest with the Adjutant
General, and his Ensign that apprehended me (as I understood by the Adjutant
he was) that we might go to some place to drink our mornings draughts; and
accordingly we went to the next door to the School house, where we had a large
discourse with the Officers, especially about Mr. Devenish's sons; we
understanding they had no Warrant at all to meddle with them in the least, nor
nothing to lay to their charge, but a private information of one Bull their
Fathers tenant, between which parties there is a private difference; we told
them, we could not but stand amazed, that any Officer of an Army durst in such
a case apprehend the person of any Freeman of England, and of his own head and
authority, dragging him or them out of his house and habitation, like a
Traitor, a Thief, or a Rogue; and they being ashamed of what they had done to
them, at our importunity, let both the young men go free. So away by water we
three went to White hall with the Adjutant Genesis where we met with our friend M.
Overton. And after we had staid a: White hall till about 4 or 5 of the clock in
the afternoon, we were by the foresaid Adjutant carried to Darby-house, where,
after about an hours stay, there were called in Lieut. Col. Goldegue, a
Coalyard keeper in Southwark, and as some of good quality of his neighbors do
report him to have been no small Personal Treaty man; and also Captain
Williams, and M. Saul Shoemaker, both of Southwark, who are said to be the
Devils 3. deputies, er informers against us; and after they were turned out, I
was called in next, and the door being opened, I marched into the Room with my
hat on; and looking about me, I saw diverse Members of the House of Commons
present, and so I put it off; and by Sergeant Dendy I was directed to go near
M. Bradshaw, that sat as if he had been Chairman to the Gentlemen that were
there present; between whom, and my self, past to this following effect.

Lievt. Col. Lilburn (said he) here are some Votes of Parliament, that I am
commanded by this Council to acquaint you with; which were accordingly read,
and which did contain the late published and printed Proclamation or
Declaration, against the second part of England New Chains discovered, with
diverse instructions and an unlimitted power given unto the Council of State, to
find out the Authors and Promoters thereof, After the reading of which, M.
Bradshaw said unto me, Sir, You have heard what has been read unto you, and
this Council having information that you have a principle hand in compiling
and promoting this Book, (showing me the Book it self,) therefore they have
sent for you, and are willing to hear you speak for your self. But I saw no
Accuser, prosecutor or witness brought face to face, which were very strange
proceedings in my judgment.

Well then M. Bradshaw, said I, If it please you and these Gentlemen to afford
me the same liberty the Cavaliers did at Oxford, when I was arraigned before
them for my life, for levying war in the quarrel of the Commonwealth, against
the late King and his party, (which was liberty of speech to speak my mind
freely without interruption) I shall speak and go on, but without the liberty
of speech I shall not say a word more to you.

To which he replied, That is already granted you, and therefore you may go on
and speak what you can or will say for your self, if you please; or if you will
not, you may hold your pyace and withdraw.

Well then (said I) M. Bradshaw, with your favor, thus. I am an Englishman
born, bred, and brought up, and England is a Nation Governed, Bounded, and
Limited by Laws and liberties: and for the Liberties of England, I have both
fought and suffered much: but truly Sir, I judge it now infinitely below me,
and the glory and excellency of my late actions, now to plead merit or desert
unto you, as though I were forced to fly to the merit of my former actions, to
lay in a counter-scale, to weigh down your indignation against me, for my
pretended late offenses: No, Sir, I scorn it; I abhor it: And therefore Sir, I
now stand before you, upon the bare, naked, and single account of an
Englishman, as though I had never said, done, or acted thing that tends to
the preservation of the liberties thereof, but yet, have done any act that did
put me out of a Legal capacity to claim the utmost punctilio, benesit, and
privilege that the laws and liberties of England will afford to any of you
here present, of any other man in the whole Nation: And the Laws and Liberties
of England are my inheritance and birth right. And in your late Declaration,
published about four or five days ago, wherein you lay down the grounds and
reasons (as I remember) of your doing Justice upon the late King, and why you
have abolished Kingly Government, and the House of Lords, you declare in effect
the same; and promise to maintain the Laws of England, in reference to the
Peoples Liberties See Their Declarations of the 9 of Feb. and the 17 of March
1648, in which they positively declare, they are fully resolved to maintain,
and shall and will preserve and keep the fundamental Laws of this Nation, for
and concerning the preservation of the lives, properties and liberties of the
people, with all things incident thereunto; but they of late years were never
so good as their words; nor I am confident never intead to be they having
turned their backs upon common honesty, upon the Lord their strength, and made
lies and falsehoods their refuge and fortress, and therefore believe them no
more; for I will make it good they are worse then the King was, whose head they
have chopped off, for a Traitor, and Tyrant and thereby have condemned
themselves, as deserving his very punishment.
and Freedoms: And amongst other things therein contained, you highly commend
and extol the Petition of Right, made in the third year of the late King, as
one of the most excellent and gloriest Laws in reference to the people
liberties that ever was made in this Nation, and you there very much blame, and
cry out upon the King, for robbing and denying the people of England the
benefit of that Law; and sure I am (for I have read and studied it) there is
one clause in it that says expressly. That no Free man of England ought to be
adjudged for life, limb, liberty, or estate, but by the Laws already in being
established and declared: And truly Sir, if this be good and sound Legal
Doctrine (as undoubtedly it is, or else your own Declarations are false, and
lies) I wonder what you Gentlemen are; For the declared and known Laws of
England knows you not, neither by names nor qualifications as persons endowed
with any power either to imprison or try me, or the meanest Freeman of
England; and truly, were it not that I know the faces of diverse of you, and
honor the persons of some of you, as Members of the House of Commons that have
stood pretty firm in shaking times to the interest of the Nation; I should
wonder what you are, or before whom I am, and should not, in the least honor
or reverence you so much as with Civil Respect, especially considering the
manner of my being brought before you, with armed men, and the manner of your
close sitting, contrary to all courts of Justice, whose doors ought always to
stand wide open. M. Bradshaw, it may be the house of Commons has past some
Votes or Orders, to authorize you to sit here for such and such ends as in
their Orders may be declared: But that they have made any such Votes or Orders,
legally unknown to me, I never saw them. Its true, by common Fame you are
bruted abroad and s^iled a Council of State, but its possible common Fame in
this particular may as well tell me a lie as a truth; But admit common Fame do
in this tell me a truth, and no lie, but that the House of Commons in good
earnest has made you a Council of State, yet I know not what that is, because
the Law of England tells me nothing of such a thing; and surely if a Council of
State were a Court of Justice, the Law would speak something of it: But I have
read both old and new Laws, yea all of late that it was possible to buy or
hear of and they tell me not one word of you, and therefore I scarce know what
to make of you, or what to think of you; but as Gentlemen that I know, I give
you civil respect, and out of no other consideration: But if you judge your
selves to be a Council of ^t^^e, and by virtue thereof think you have any power
over me, I pray you show me your Commission, that I may know the better how to
behave my self before you. M. Bradshaw, I will no^ ^ow question or dispute the
Votes, or Orders of the present single House of Commons, in reference to their
power, as binding Laws to the people; yet admit them to be valid, legal, and
good; their due circumstances accompanying them: yet Sir, by the Law of England
let me tell you, what the House Votes, Orders, and Enacts within their walls,
is nothing to me, I am not at all bound by them, nor in Law can take any
cognizance of them as Laws, although 20 Members came out of the House, and
tell me such things are done, till they be published and declared by sound of
Trumpet, Proclamation, or or the like, by a public Officer or Magist^ate in
the public and open places of the Nation; But truly Sir, I never saw any Law
in Print or writing, that declares your power so proclaimed or published; and
therefore Sir, I know not what to make more of you then a company of private
men, being neither able to own you for a Court of Justice, because the Law
speaks nothing of you* nor for a Council of State, till I see, and read, or
hear your Commission, which I desire (if you please) to be acquainted with.

But Sir, give me leave further to aver unto you, and upon this Principle or
Averment I will venture my life and being, and all I have in the world; That if
the House had by a Proclaimed and declared Law, Vote, or Order, made this
Council (as you call your selves) a Court of Justice, yet that proclaimed or
declared Law, Vote, or Order, had been unjust and null, and void in itself; And
my reason is, because the House it self was never (neither now, nor in any age
before) betrusted with a Law-executing power, but only with a Law making power.

And truly, Sir, I should have looked upon the people of this Nation as very
fools, if ever they had betrusted the Parliament with a Law-executing power,
and my reason is, because, if they had so done, they had then chosen and
empowered a Parliament to have destroyed them, but not to have preserved them
(which is against the very nature and end of the very being of Parliaments,
they being by your own declared doctrine, chosen to provide for the peoples
weal, but not for their woe, First part Declarat. page 150, 266, 267, 269, 276,
279, 280, 304, 361, 382, 494, 696, 700, 716, 726.) And Sir, the reason of that
reason is, because its possible, if a Parliament should execute the Law, they
might do palpable injustice and m^^e administer it, and so the people would be
robbed of their intended extraordinary benefit of Appeals; for in such cases,
they must appeal to the Parliament either against it self, or part of it self;
and can it ever be imagined they will ever condemn themselves, or punish
themselves? nay, will they not rather judge themselves bound in honor and
safety to themselves, to vote that man a Traytot, and destroy him, that shall
so much as question their actions, although formerly they have dealt never so
unjustly with them? For this Sir, I am sure, is very commonly practiced now a
days; and therefore the honesty of former Parliaments in the discharge of
their trust and duty in this particular, was such, that they have declared, the
power is not in them to judge or punish me, o^ the meanest free man in England,
beeng no Member of their House, although I should beat or wound one of their
Members nigh unto their door, going to the House to discharge his duty; but I
am to be sent in all such cases to the Judge of the upper. See 5. H. 4. 6. and
11. H. 6. chapter 11. See also my plea against the Lords jurisdiction before the
Judges of the Kings Bench, called the Laws Funeral, page 8. 9. and my, grand
plea against the Lords jurudiction, made before Mr. Maynard of the House of
Commons; and the four imprisoned Aldermen of London's plea against the Lord
jurisdiction, published by M. Lionel Hurbin, 1648.
Bench, unto whom by Law they have given declared rules and direction in that
particular how to behave himself, which be as evident for me to know as
himself. Now ^i^, if reason and justice do not judge it convenient that the
Parliament shall not be Judges in such particular cases, that are of so near
concernment to themselves, but yet has others that are not of their House,
that are as well concerned as themselves; much less will reason or justice
admit them to be judges in particular cases that are farther remote stom their
particular selves, and do merely concern the Commonwealth; and sure I am, Sir,
this is the declared Statute Law of England and does stand in full force at
this hour, there being, I am sure of it, no Law to repeal it, no not since the
House of Commons set up their new Commonwealth. Now, Sir, from all this I
argue thus, that which is not inherent in the whole, cannot by the whole be
derived or assigned to a part.

But it is not inherent, neither in the power nor authority of the whole House
of Commons, primarily and originally to ^^ecute the Law, and therefore they
cannot derive it to a part of themselves.

But yet Sir, with your favor, for all this, I would not be mistaken, as
though I maintained ned the Parliament had no power to make a Court of Justice;
for I do grant they may erect a Court of Justice to administer the Law,
provided, that the Judges consist of persons that are not Members of their
House; and provided, that the power they give them be universal; that is to
say, to administer the Law to all the people of England indefinitely, and not
to two or three particular persons solely, the last of which for them to do is
And therefore I aver, that the High Court of Justice that sat upon Duke
Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, etc. was no Court of Justice, but in the eye of
the Law murdered those Noble men; for which Bradshaw and the rest of his fellow
Judges are not in the eye of the Law so excusable as was Empson and Dudly, that
Sir Edward Cook speaks of in the 2. part. Ins^it. fo. 51. and 3 part, f. 208.
and 4. part. Inst. fol. 41. 196. 197. 198. who yet lost their lives as
Traitors, for subverters of the fundamental Laws of England.
unjust, and altogether out of their power. And therefore Sir, to conclude this
point; It being not in the power of the whole Parliament to execute the Law,
they can give no power to you their Members to meddle with me in the case
before you; For an Ordinary Court of Justice (the proper Administrator of the
Law) is the only and sole Judge in this particular; and not you Gentlemen, no
nor your whole House it self. And therefore, if you be honest men, and will be
as good as your words, oaths and promises, (which are to maintain the Laws, in
reference to the peoples Liberties) I challenge at your hands the benefit of
the Law, and not to be past upon otherwise in any kind.

For with your favor, Mr. Bradshaw, the fact that you suppose I have committed
(for till it be judicially proved (and that must be before a legal Judge that
has cognizance of the fact) or confessed by my self before the Judge; it is
but a bare supposition) is either a crime, or no crime: a crime it cannot be,
unless it be a transgression of a Law in being, before it was committed, acted
or done; For, where there is no Law, Romans 4. 15. See the 4. part of the L.
Cooks Institutes, chapter 1. High Court of Parl: fol. 37. 38. 39. 41. See also my
printed Epistle to the Speaker, of the fourth of April, 1648. called the
Prisoners plea for an Habeas Corpus, p. 5 6. and Englands Birthright, p. 1. 2.
3. 4. and the second edition of my Epistle to Judge Reeves, p. 11. 12. 13. 14.
15. and M. John Wildmans Truths Triumph, p. 11. 12. 13. 14. and Sir John
Maynards Case truly stated, called The Laws Subversion, p. 9. 13. 14. 15. 16.
38.
there is no Transgression And if it be a Transgression of a Law, that Law
provides a punishment for it, and by the Rules and method of that Law am I to
be tried, and by no other whatsoever, made ex post facto.

And therefore, Sir, if this be true, as undoubtedly it is; then I am sure, you
Gentlemen, have no power in Law to convene me before you for the pretended
crime laid unto my charge; much less to fetch me by force out of my habitation
by the power of armed men: For Sir, let me tell you, The Law of England never
made Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Captains, or Soldiers, either Bailisss,
Constables, See the Petition of Right, in the 3. C. R. and my Book called the
peoples Prerogative, p. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. and 56. etc. Yea, I say, that is
the General take away by Martial Law, the life of Laughorn, etc. now in time
of Peace, the Courts of Justice being open, he murders him or them, and ought
to die therefore.
or Justices of Peace: And I cannot but wonder that you should attach me in
such a manner as you have done, considering that I have all along adhered to
the Interest of the Nation against the common Enemy (as you call them) and
never disputed, nor contemned any Order or Summons from Parliament, or the most
irregularest of their Committees, but always came to them when they sent for
me, although their Warrant of Summons was never so illegal in the form of it;
and I have of late in a manner de die in diem, waited at the House door, and
was there that day, the Votes you have read, past, till almost twelve a clock;
and I am sure there are some here present whose Couscience I believe tells
them, they are very much concerned in this Book row before you) that saw me at
the door, and stared wishfully upon me as they went into the House; and I
cannot but wonder there could be no Civil Officer found to summon me to appear;
but that now, when there is no visible hostile enemy in the Nation, and all the
Courts of Justice open, that you (that have no power at all over me) must send
for me by a hundred or two hundred Armed Horse and Foot, as though I were some
monstrous man, that with the breath of my mouth were able to destroy all the
Civil Officers that should come to apprehend me; Surely I had not endeavored
to fortify my house, against you, neither had I betaken my self to a Castle,
or a defenced Garrison in hostility against you, that you need to send a
hundred or two hundred armed men to force me out of my house, from my wife and
children, by four or five a clock in the morning, to the distracting and
afrighting of my wife and children: Surely I cannot but look upon this
irregular, unjust, and illegal hostile action of yours, as one of the fruits
and issues of your new created Tyranny, to amuse and debase my spirit, and the
spirits of the People of this Free Nation, to fit me and them for bondage and
slavery: This being the very practice of the Earl of Strafford before you, as
M. Pym in his declaration against him, does notably observe. And Sir, give me
leave further to tell you, that for diverse hundreds of men that have often been
in the field with their swords in their hands, to encounter with hostile
enemies, and in their engagements have acquitted themselves like men of valor,
and come out of the field conquerours; for these very men to put themselves in
Martial Array against four Mise or Butterflyes, taking them captives, and as
captives lead them through the streets, me thinks is no small diminution to
their former Martial Achievements and Trophies: And therefore to conclude
this, I do here before you all, protest against your power and Jurisdiction
over me in the case in controversy; And also do protest against your Warrant
you issued out to apprehend me; And against all your martial and hostile acts
committed toward me, as illegal, unjust, and tyrannical, and no way in Law to
be justified: Further telling you that I saw most of the Lord of Strafford's
arraignment, and (if my memory fail me not) as little things as you have
already done to me, were by your selves laid to his charge, as acts of Treason;
For which I saw him lose his head upon Tower Hill as a Traitor: And I doubt not
for all this that is done unto me, but I shall live to see the Laws and
Liberties of England firmly settled, in despite of the present great opposers
thereof, and to their shame and confusion: and so M. Bradshaw I have done with
what I have now to say.

Upon which M. Bradshaw replied, Lieut. Col. Lilburn, you need not to have been
so earnest, and have spent so much time in making an Apologetical defense; for
this Council does not go about to try you, or challenge any jurisdiction to try
you, neither do we so much as ask you a question in order to your trial, and
therefore you may correct your mistake in that particular.

Unto which I said, Sir, by your favor, if you challenge no Jurisdiction over
me, no not so much as in order to a trial, what do I here before you? or what
do you in speaking to me? But Sir, seeing I am now here, give me leave to say
one word more, and that is this; I am not only in time of peace (the Courts of
Justice being all open) fetched and forced out of my house by multitudes of
armed men, in an hostile manner, and carried as a captive up and down the
streets, contr^ry to all Law and Justice, but I am by force of Arms still kept
in their custody, and it may be, may be intended to be sent to them again, who
are no Guardians of the Law of England, no nor so much as the meanest
Administrators or executors of it, but ought to be subject to it themselves,
and to the Administrators of it, (as is clear by the Petition of Right, etc.)
yea the General himself. And truly, Sir, I had rather die, then basely betray
my Liberties into their martial fingers (who after their fighting for our
Freedoms, would now destroy them, and tread them under their feet) that have
nothing at all to do with me, nor any pretended or real civil offender in
England. I know not what you intend to do with me, neither do I much care;
having learned long since to die, and rather for my Liberties, then in my bed.
Its true, I am at present in no capacity effectually to dispute your power,
because I am under guards of armed Masketiers; but I entreat you, if you will
continue me a prisoner, that you will free me from the military Sword, and send
me to some Civil Gaol; and I will at present in peace and quietness obey your
command, and go. And so I concluded, and was commanded to withdraw, which I
did; and then Mr. William Walwin was called in: and while he was within, I gave
unto my Comrades Mr. Prince, and Mr. Overton, and the rest of the people, a
summary account of what had past between me and them: And within a little time
after Mr. Walwin came out again, and Mr. Overton was called in next: And at Mr.
Walwin's coming out he acquainted us what they said to him, which was in a
manner the same they said to me; and all that he said to them was but this,
That he did not know why he was suspected. To which Mr. Bradshaw replied, Is
that all you have to say? And Mr. Walwin answered, Yes. So he was commanded to
withdraw.

And after M. Overton was come out, M. Prince was called in, and after he had
withdrawn, they spent some time of debate among themselves, and then I was
called in again; So I marched in Suitable to my first posture, and went close to
M. Bradshaw, who said unto me to this effect: Lieut. Colonel Lilburn, this
Council has considered what you have said, and what they have been informed of
concerning you, and also of that duty that lies upon them by the command of the
House, which enjoynes them to improve their utmost ability to find out the
Author of this Book; and therefore to effect that end, they judge themselves
bound to demand of you this question: Whether you made not this Book, or were
privy to the making of it or no?

And after some pause, and wondering at the strangeness of the quesion, I
answered and said, M. Bradshaw, I cannot but stand amazed that you should ask
me such a question as this, at this time of the day, considering what you said
unto me at my first being before you; and considering it is now about eight
years ago since this very Parliament annihilated the Court of Star Chamber,
Council board, and High Commission, and that for such proceedings as these See
the Acts that abolished them, made in the 16 C. R. printed in my Book called
The peoples Prerogative, p. 22. 23. 24. 25.
. And truly, Sir, I have been a contestor and sufferer for the Liberties of
England these twelve years together, and I should now look upon my self as the
baseft fellow in the world, if now in one moment I should undo all that I have
been doing all this while; which I must of necessity do, if I should answer you
to questions against my self: For in the first place, by answering this
question against my self, I should betray the Liberties of England, in
acknowledging you to have legal Jurisdiction over me, to try and adjudge me;
which I have already proved to your faces you have not in the least: And if you
have forgot what you said to me thereupon, yet I have not forgot what I said to
you. And Secondly, Sir, If I should answer to questions against my self, and so
betray my self, I should do that which not only Law, but Nature abhorrs: And
therefore I cannot but And well might I; for M. John Cook and M. Bradshaw
himself were my Counsel at the Lords Bar, against the Star Chamber, the 13 of
Feb. 1645. where M. Bradshaw did most excellently oppen the Star Chamber
injustice toward me; and at the reading of their first Sentence, he observed
to the Lords, that that Sentence was felo de se, guilty of his own death; the
ground whereof (said he) being because M. Lilburn refused to take an oath to
answer to all such questions as should be demanded of him, it being contrary to
the Laws of God, Nature, and the Kingdom, for any man to be his own Accuser:
whose words you may more at large read in the printed Relation thereof, drawn
up by M. John Cook, and my self, p. 3. But he that condemned it in the
Star Chamber, now practices it in the Council of State: but the more base and
unworthy man he for so doing.
wonder that you your selves are not ashamed to demand so iilegall and unworthy
a thing of me as this is, and therefore in short, were it that I owned your
power (which I do not in the least) I would be hanged, before I would do so
base and un-Englishman -- like an Action, to betray my Liberty; which I must of
necessity do, in answering questions to accuse my self: But Sir, this I will
say to you, My late Actions have not been done in a hole, or a corner, but on
the house top, in the face of the Sun, before hundreds and some thousands of
people; and therefore why ask you me any questions? Go to those that have heard
me, and seen me, and it is possible you may find some hundreds of witnesses to
tell you what I have said and done; for I hate holes and corners: My late
Actions need no covers nor hidings, they have been more honest then so, and I
am not sorry for what I have done; for I did look well about me before I did
what I did, and I am ready to lay down my life to justify what I have done:
And so much in answer to your question.

But now Sir, with your favor, one word more, to mind you again of what I
said before, in reference to my Martial imprisonment: and truly Sir, I must
tell you, Circumstantials of my Liberty, at this time, I shall not much
dispute; but for the Essentials of them I shall die. I am now in the Soldiers
custody, where to continue in silence and patience, is absolutely to betray my
Liberty: for they have nothing to do with me, nor the meanest free man of
England in this case: And besides, Sir, they have no rules to walk by, but
their wills and their swords, which are two dangerous things; it may be, I may
be of an hasty choleric temper, and not able nor willing to bear their
affronts; and peradventure they may be as willing to put them upon me, as I am
unwilling to bear them: and for you in this case to put fire and tinder
together to burn up one another, will not be much commendable, nor tend much to
the accomplishment of your ends: But if, for all this, you shall send me back
to the Military Sword again, either to Whitehall, or any other such like
garrisoned place in England, I do solemnly protest before the Eternal God of
heaven and earth, I will fire it, and burn it down to the ground, if possibly I
can, although I be burnt to ashes with the flames thereof; for Sir, I say
again, the Soldiers have nothing to do to be my Gaolers; and besides, it is a
maxim among the soldiers, That they must obey (without dispute) all the
Commands of their Officers, be they right or wrong; and it is also a maxim
amongst the Officers, That if they do not do it, they must hang for it:
therefore if the Officers command them to cut my throat, they must either do
it, or hang for it. And truly Sir, (looking wishly upon Cromwell, that sat just
against me) I must be plain with you, I have not found so much Honor, Honesty,
Justice or Conscience in any of the principal Officers of the Army, as to
trust And truly, I am more then afraid honest Capt. Brav has too much
experience of this in Windsor Castle, who though he be but barely committed
thitther into safe custody, yet (as I from very ^^od hands am informed) the
Tyrannical Governor Whichcock, Cromwels creature, does keep him close
prisoner, denying him the benefit of the Castle air, keeping not only pen and
ink from him, but also his friends and necessaries; with which cruelty etc. he
has already almost murdered and destroyed the honest man: in whose place were
I, and so illegally and unjustly used, a flune, (if possibly I could) should be
the portion of my chamber, although I perished in it.
my life under their protection, or to think it can be safe under their
immediate fingers; and therefore not knowing, nor much caring what you will do
with me, I earnestly entreat you if you will again imprison me, send me to a
Civil Gaol that the Law knows, as Newgate, the Fleet, or the Gate House, and
although you send me to a Dungeon, thither will I go in peace and quietness,
without any further dispute of your Authority; for when I come there, I know
those Gaolers have their bounds and limits set them by the Law, and I know how
to carry my self toward them, and what to expect from them; and if they do
abuse me, I know how in law to help my self. And so Sir, I have said what at
present I have to say. Whereupon Mr. Bradshaw commanded the Sergeant to put me
out at another door, that so I should no more go amongst the people; and
immediately Mr. Walwin was put out to me; and asking him what they said to him,
I found it to be the same in effect they said to me, demanding the same
foregoing question of him, that they did of me: to which question, (after some
kind of pause) he answered to this effect, That he could not but very much
wonder to be asked such a questions however, that it was very much aga^st his
judgment and conscience to answer to questions of that nature, which concerned
himself; that if he should answer to it, he should not only betray his own
Liberty, but the Liberties of all English^en. which he could not do with a good
conscience; And he could not but exceedingly grieve at the dealing he had found
that day; That being one who had always been so faithful to the Parliament,
and so well known to most of the Gentlemen there present, and that
nevertheless he should be sent for with a party of Horse and Foot, to the
aff^ighting of his Family and ruin of his credit; And that he could not be
satisfied, but that it was very hard measure to be used thus upon suspicion
only: And that if they did hold him under restraint from following his
business and occasions, it might be his undoing, which he conceived they ought
seriously to consider of.

Then M. Bradshaw said, He was to answer the question, and that they did not
ask it as in way of Trial, so as to proceed in Judgment thereupon, but to
report it to the House. To which M. Walwin said, That he had answered it so as
he could with a good conscience, and could make no other Answer, and so
withdrew.

And after he came out to me, Mr. Overton was next called in again, and then
Mr. Prince; so after we were all come out, and all four in a room close by
them, all alone, I laid my ear to their door, and heard Lieutenant General
Cromwell (I am sure of it) very loud, thumping his fist upon the Council Table,
till it rang again, and heard him speak in these very words, or to this effect:
I tell you, Sir, you have no other way in (...) with these men, but to break
them in pieces: and thumping upon the Council Table again, he said, Sir, Let me
tell you that which is true, if you do not break them, they will break you; yea
and bring all the guilt of the blood and treasure shed and spent in this
Kingdom, upon your heads and shoulders; and frustrate and make void all that
work that with so many years industry, toil and pains you have done, and so
render you to all rational men in the world, as the most contemptible
generation of silly, low-spirited men in the earth, to be broken and routed by
such a desp^cable contemptible generation of men as they are: And therefore,
Sir, I tell you again, you are necessitated to Reader, Observe I pray that this
40 headed Tyrant called the Council of State, are under an oath of Secrecy; so
that if the Cromwellitish Faction plot there the ruin and destruction of the
Nation, or all the honest men in it, the rest that do not consent with them,
must not reveal it. But the more unworthy men are they amongst them that
profess to be lovers of their Country to take such a wicked oath of secrecy.
break them. But being a little disturbed by the supposition of one of their
Messengers coming into the room, I could not so well hear the Answer to him,
which I think was Colonel Ludlow's voice, who pressed to bail us; for I could
very well hear him say, What would you have more then security for them? Upon
which discourse of Cromwell's, the blood ran up and down my veins and I heartily
wished my self in again amongst them, (being scarce able to contain myself)
that so I might have gone five or six stories higher then I did before, yea, as
high as I intended when I came to their door, and to have particularly paid
Cromwell and Haslerig to the purpose, for their late venom, not only against
me in the House, but my whole Family; Haslerig saying (as I am informed) in the
open House, There was never a one of the Lilburns Family fit or worthy to be a
Constable in England; though I am confident there is not the worst of us alive
that have served the Parliament, but he is an hundred times more just, honest
and unspotted then he himself, as in due time I shall make it appear, by Gods
assistance (I hope) to his shame. But the fair carriage of the Gentlemen of the
supposed Council to me at the first, took off the height of the edge of my
Spirit, and intended resolution; which (it may be) they shall have the next
time to this effect: Y^u your selves have already voted the People, under God,
the Fountain and Original of all just Power; and if so, then none can make
them Laws, but those that are chosen, empowered and betrusted by them for that
end: And if that be true, as undoubtedly it is, I desire to know how the
present Gentlemen at Westminster can make it appear they are the Peoples
Representatives, being rather chosen by the Will of him, whose head as a Tyrant
and Traitor they have by their Wills chopped off, (I mean the King) then by the
People: whose Will made the Borough towns to choose Parliament men, and thereby
robbed about nineteen people of this Nation of their undubitable and inherent
right, to give to a single man in twenty for number (in reference to the whole
Nation) a Monopoly to choose Parliament men* dis-franchising thereby the other
nineteen: And if so in any measure, then upon their own declared Principles,
they are no Representative of the People, no nor was not at the first. Again,
the King summoned them by his Writ (the issue of his will and pleasure; and by
virtue of that they sit to this hour, and so are rather his Parliament, then
the Peoples. Again, the King by his Will and pleasure combines with them by an
Act to make them a perpetual Parliament (one of the worst and tyrannicallest
actions that ever he did in his life) to sit as long as they pleased; which he
nor they had no power to do in the least; the very constitution of Parliaments
in England being to be once every year, or oftener, if need require. Q^aere.
Whether this Act of perpetuating this Parliament by the Parliament men
themselves, beyond their Commission, was not an act in them of the highest
Treason in the world against the People and their Liberties by setting up
themselves an Arbitrary power over them for ever; which is the greatest slavery
can be exexcised upon the sons of men: Yea, and thereby razing the foundation
and constitution of Parliament it self: And if so, then this is null, if at the
first it had been any thing.

Again, if it should be granted this Parliament at the beginning had a legal
constitution from the people (the original and fountain of all just power) yet
the Faction of a traiterous party of Officers of the Army, has twice rebelled
against the Parliament, and broke them to pieces and by force of Arms culled
out whom they please, and imprisoned diverse of them and laid nothing to their
charge, and have left only in a manner a few men, (besides 12 of themselves
viz. the General, Cromwell, Ireton, Harrison, Fleetword, Ri^h, Ingalsby,
Haslerig, Constable, Fennick Walton, and Allen Treasu^er;) of their own Faction
behind them that will like Spanel-doggs serve their lusts and wills; yea some
of the chiefest of them, viz. Ireton, Harrison, etc. yea, M. Holland himself,
stiling them a mock Parliament, a mock power at Winsor, yea it is yet their
expressions at London; And if this be true that they are a mock power and a
mock Parliament; then,

Quere, Whether in Law or Justice, (especially considering they have fallen
from all their many glorious promises, and have not done any one action that
tends to the Universal good of the people, and absolutely degenerate into pure
tyrany, and thereby, have lost the essence and soul of authority, and are
become but a dead and stinking Carkess) Can those Gentlemen sitting at
Westminster in the House, called the House of Commons, be any other then a
Factious company of men traitorously combined together with Crumwel, Ireton,
and Harrison, to subdue the Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms of Ergland; (for no
one of them protests against the rest) and to set up an absolute and perfect
Tyranny of the Sword, will and pleasure, and absolutely intend the destroying
the Trade of the Nation, and the absolute impoverishing the people thereof, to
fit them to be their Vassels and Slaves? And if so, then,

Quere, Whether the Free-People of England, as well Soldiers as others, ought
not to contemn all these men's commands, as invalid and illegal in themselves,
and as one man to rise up against them as so many professed traitors, thieves,
robbers For Magistacy going beyond its bounds and limits, and setting up their
wills and lusts are no more Magistrates but Bears and Wolves, and so may be
resisted; for these three things out of the Parliament and Armies Declarations
I will prove to be good and sound doctrine, consonant to reason and scripture,
viz. first that all Magisteriall power in England what ever, are at most but
Officers of trust and expressly bound up with this limitation, to be exercised
for the good and well fair of the trusters; Secondly, that it is possible that
all, or any, of the several Magisterial trustees may forfeit their or its
trust; Thirdly, that in case of forfeting the Magisterieal trust, the trusters
the people are disobliged from their obedience and subjection, and may lawfully
do the best they can for their own preservation, and their Magistrates
punishment.: See the first part of the Parliaments Declarations, page 81. 150.
201. 207. 264. 267. 270. 276. 304. 492. 494. 629. 690. 694. 696. 699. 700. 701.
726. 728. See the Armies book, Declaration page 26. 34. 38. 39. 40, 41. 60.
61, 62 66. 141. 143, 144. See also King James opinion betwixt a Real King and a
Tyrant, in his speech to the Parliament 1609. See my Book called, The Out-crys
of oppressed Commons page 16. 17. 18. and regal Tyranny; page 32. 33, 34, 35.
etc. 59 60. 61, 62. but to behead the King for Tyranny and Treason, who was
fenced about with the Letter of multitude of Laws, puts this out of all
dispute.
and high way men, and apprehend, secure and bring them to Justice in a new
Representative, chosen by virtue of a just Agreement among the pecple, there
being no other way in the world to preserve the Nation but that alone; the
three forementioned men, viz. Cromwell, Ireton, and Harrison, (the General
being but their stalking Horse, and a Cipher) and there traiterous faction, For
the greatest Traitors they are that ever were in this Nation, as upon the loss
of my head l Ioh. Lilburn will by law under take to prove and make good before
the next free and just Parliament to whom I hereby appeal.
having by their wills and Swords, got all the Swords of England under their
command; and the disposing of all the great places in England by sea and land,
andalso the pretended law executing power, by making among themselves (contrary
to the Laws and Liberberies of For the people being in reason, justice and
truth, as well as by the Parliaments late votes, the true fountain, and
original of all just power, they ought not only in Reason, Right, and Justice,
choose their own law makers, but all and every of their law executors, and to
obey none what soever but of their own choice, and it is not only their right
by reason and justice; but Sir Ed. Cook in his second part Institut.
(published for good Law by this present house of Commons) declares and proves
Fol. 174. 175. 558. 559. that by law it was and is, the peoples right to choose
their Coroner, Justices, or conservators of the Peace; as also their high
Sheriff and Verderors of Forest; and says he there expressly for the time of
War, there were likewise Leaders of the Countries Soldiers of Ancient time,
chosen by the Freeholders of the county: but it is true, the chiefest of these
things were expressly taken from the people, and invested in the King by the
Statute of the 27. Hen. 3 chap. 24. and therefore Kingly government being
abolished, the right is returned into the people, the king or fountain of
power, and cannot be exercised as a new devise by the Parliament although they
were never so legally and Justly chosen by them without a conference with them
thereupon, and a power deputed to them for that end as Sir Edward Cook
declares in the 4 part of his Institutes chap. High Court of Parliament. Fol.
14. 34. therefore I do hereby declare all the present Parliaments Justices,
Sherifs etc. to be no Justices, Sherifs etc. either in law or reason, but mere
tyrants, invadors and usurpers of their power and authority; and may very well
in time come to be hanged for executing their pretended offices.
England) all Judges, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Committee Men,
etc. to execute their wills and tyranny, walking by no limits or bounds, but
their own wills and pleasures: And traitorously assume unto themselves a power
to levy upon the people what money they please; and dispose of it as they
please, yea, even to buy knives to cut the peoples throats that pay the money
to them, and to give no account for it till Doomsday in the afternoon; they
having already in their wills and power to dispose of Kings, Queen, Princes,
Dukes, and the rest of the Childrens Revenues; Deans and Chapter lands, Bishops
lands, sequestered Deliquents lands, sequestered Papists lands, Compositions of
all sorts, amounting to millions of money; besides Excise, and Customs; yet
this is not enough, although if rightly husbanded, it would constantly pay
above one hundred thousand men, and ^urnish an answerrable Navy thereunto: But
the people must now after their trades are lost, and their estates spent to
procure their liberties and freedoms, be sessed about 100000. pound a month,
that But says there own Oracle, Sir Ed. Cook in the 4 part of his instutes
chap. High Court of Parliament. Fol. 14. 34. It is also the Law and custom of
Parliament, that when any new device is moved on the Kings behalf in Parliament
for his aid or the like, the Commons may answer, that they tend^ed the Kings
estate, and are ready to aid the same, only in this new device they dare not
agree without conference with their countries; whereby it appears (says he)
that such conferences is warrantable by the law and custom of Parliament, and
this was do^e in the Parliament of the 9. Ed. 3. nu^b. 5 but the present
Parliament assume unto themselves the regal office in the height, and
therefore ought not to be their own carvers in reference to the peoples purses,
but ought to demand and obtain their consents (especially in time of peace)
before they levy either 90000 pounds per month, or any such like new device
what ever; and therefore I know neither law equity or reason to compel the
people to pay a penny of it; unless they have a desire to bring themselves
into the same condition in reference to the present Parliament that the
Egyptians were to Pharaoh, when Joseph was so hard hearted as to make the
Egyptians to pay so dear for b^ead-corn, that it cost them all their money, and
all their cattle, yea all their lands and also themselves for his slaves. Genesis
47. 14. 15. 16. etc. for which tyranny God plagued him and his posterity by
making them slaves to the Egyptians afterward.
so they may be able like so many cheaters and and State thieves, to give 6. 8.
10. 12. 14. 16000. pounds apeice over again to one another, as they have done
already to diverse of themselves, to buy the Commonwealths lands one of another,
(contrary to the duty of Trustees, who by law nor equity can neither given or
sell to one another) or two or three years purchase the true and valuable rate
considered, as they have already done, and to give 4 or 5000l, per annum over
again to King Crumwell. with ten or twenty thousand pounds worth of wood
uponit) as they have done already out of the Earl of Worcesters estate, etc.
Besides about four or five pounds a day he has by his places of Lieut.
General, and Colonel of Horse in the Army (besides the extraordinary
advancement of many of his kindred, that so they might stick close to him in
his tyranny) although he were at the beginning of this Parliament but a poor
man, yea, little better then a beggar (to what he is now) as well as other of
his neighbors.

But to return, those Gentlemen that would have had us bailed lost the day, by
one vote as we understood, for all their wicked oath of secrecy, and then about
12. at night, they broke up, (a fit hour for such works of wickedness, John 3.
19. 20. 21.) and we went into their pretended Secretary, and found our
commitments made in these words, our names changed, viz.

These are to will and require you, to receive herewith into your custody, the
Person of Lieu. Col. John Lilburn, and him safely to keep in your Prison of the
Tower of London, until you receive further order, he being committed to upon
suspicion of high Treason, of which you are not to fail, and for which this
shall be your sufficient Warrant; given at the Council of State at Derbyhouse
28. day of March, 1649.

To the Lieu. of the Tower of London, Signed in the name, and by the Order of
the Council of State, appointed by authority of Parliament. Jo. Bradshaw.
President.

Note that we were committed upon Wensday their fast day, being the best fruits
that ever any of their fasts brought out amongst them, viz. To sinite with the
fist of wickedness. For the illegallity of this warrant, I shall not say much,
because it is like all the rest of the warrants of the present House of
Commons, and their unjust Committees; whose Warrants are so sufficiently
anatomized by my quondam Comrade M. John Wildeman, (though much degenerated)
his Books, called Truths Triumph, and the Laws subversion, being Sir John
Maynard's Case truly stated; and by my self, in my late plea before the Judges
of the Kings Bench, now in print, and entitled The Laws Funeral, that it is
needless to say any more of that particular; and therefore to them I refer the
Reader.

But to go on: When we had read our Warrants, we told Mr. Frost, we would not
dispute the legality of them, because we were under the force of Guards of
armed Musketeers: So some time was spent to find a man that would go with us
to prison; Captain Jenkins (as I remember his name) being Captain of the Guard,
and my old and familiar acquaintance, was prevailed with by us, to take the
charge upon him, who used us very civilly, and gave us leave that night (it
being so late) to go home to our Wives, and took our words, with some other of
our friends then present, to meet him in the morning at the Angel Tavern near
the Tower; which we did accordingly, and so marched with him into the Tower;
where coming to the Lieutenants House, and after salutes each of other, with
very much civility, the Lieutenant read his Warrants: and Mr. Walwin, as our
appointed mouth, acquainted him that we were Englishmen; who had hazarded all
we had for our Liberties and Freedoms for many years together, and were
resolved (though Prisoners) not to part with an inch of our Freedoms, that with
struggling for we could keep; and therefore we should neither pay Fees nor
chamber-rent, but what the Law did exactly require us; neither should we eat or
drink of our own cast or charges, so long as we could fast: telling him, it was
our unquestionable right by Law, and the custom of this place, to be provided
for out of the public Treasure, although we had never so much money in our
pockets of our own, which he granted to be true; and after some more debate, I
told him, we were not so irrational, as to expect that he out of his own money
should provide for us: but the principal end of our discourse with him was, to
put words in his mouth from our selves (he being now our Guardian) to move the
Parliament or Council of State about us, which he has acquainted us he did to
the Council of State; who, he says, granted, the King or former times used to
provide for the Prisoners: But I say, they will not be so just as he was in
that particular; although they have taken off his head for tyranny, yet they
must and will be greater Tyrants then he; yea, and they have resolved upon the
Question, that he shall be a Traitor that shall but tell them of their Tyranny,
although it be never so visible: But let me tell them, that saying of Mr. John
Cook their Solicitor general, in his Book, called the Kings case stated, is
most true, That in condemning the King for tyranny, they have already past
Sentence against themselves when they tyrannize. But I say, and will make it
good upon my life before competent Judges, that they are greater Tyrants then
the King was, and the Ringleaders of them better deserved his punishment of
loss of their heads, then he did; for he never made such professions of
Liberty and Justice to the People as they have done, but always maintained the
people had no share in Government; and that for his misgovernment he was
accountable to none but God: and yet I will justify it, their actions are as
wicked as his: yea, I will maintain it, that the cruel tyrant Duke D'Alva so
much mentioned in Edmond Grimstons general History of the Neather-Lands, lib.
9. who with his High Court of Justice, or Counsel of State, put above eighteen
thousand to death under pretense of Justice in less then five years, fol. 435.
462. was more excusable then the Leaders of these men: Yea, bloody Qu. Mary (in
comparison) was a Saint to these men, who never went about to burn or hang the
Martyrs, but for transgressing a Law in being; yea, and let them enjoy open
trials according to Law: but these men would hang us for Traitors, although we
have transgressed none of their Laws; yea, and in the night, contrary to Law,
in a close room examine us against our selves, without producing face to face
either prosecutor, accuser or witness, yea, or so much as laying any crime
unto our charge, our chiefest Adversaries being our Judges. Wherefore, Hear O
heavens, and give ear O earth.

So now I have brought the Reader to my old contented lodging in the Tower;
where, within two or three days of our arrival there, came one M. Richardson a
Preacher amongst those unnatural, un-English-like men, that would now help to
destroy the innocent, and the first promoters in England (as Cromwels beagles
to do his pleasure) of the first Petition for a personal Treaty, almost two
years ago, and commonly style themselves the Preachers to the seven Churches of
Anabaptists: which Richardson, pretending a great deal of affection to the
Commonwealth, to Cromwell, and to us; and pressed very hard for union and peace
(and yet by his petition since this, endeavors to hang us) telling us, men
cried mightily out upon us abroad for grand disturbers, that sought Cromwels
blood for all his good Service to the Nation, and that would center nowhere,
but merely labored to pull down those in power, to set up our selves: And
after a little discourse with him, being all four present, and retorting all he
said back upon those he seemed to plead for, before several witnesses, we
appealed to his own conscience to this effect, whether those could intend any
hurt or tyranny to the people, that desire, and earnestly endeavoures for many
years together, that all Magistrates hands might be bound and limited by a just
law and rule, with a penalty annexed unto it, that in case they out-stripe
their rule, they might forfeit life and estate therefore, and that all
Magistrates might be chosen by the free people of this Nation by common
consent, according to their undubitable right, and often removed, that so they
might not be like standing waters, subject to corruption; and that the people
might have a plain easy, short, and known Rule amongst themselves to walk by,
administered in their own Countries; but such men were all we; and therefore
justly could not be styled disturbers of any, but only such as sought to rule
over the people by their absolute Wills and pleasures, and would have no bounds
or limits but their lusts, and so sought to set up a perfect tyranny, which we
absolutely did, and still do charge upon the great men in the Army, viz.
Cromwell, Ireton, Haselrig, Harrison etc. and are ready before indifferent
Judges to make it good. And as for seeking our selves, we need no other
witnesses but some of our present adversaries in the House, whose great
proffered places, and courtship by themselves and their Agents some of us have
from time to time slighted, s^^rned, and contemned, till they would conclude to
come to a declared and resolved center, by a just Agreement of the People;
there being no other way now in the world to make this Nation free, happy or
safe, but that alone. And as for Cromwels blood, although he had dealt basely
enough with some of us in times bypast, by thirsting after ours, without
cause; of whom (if revenge had been our desire) we could have had it the last
year to the purpose, especially when his quondam Darling, Maj. Huntington,
(Maj. to his own Regiment) impeached him of Treafon to both Houses: yet so deer
was the good of our Native Country to us, to whom we judged him then a
serviceable Instrument to balance the Scots, that we laid all revenge aside,
hoping his often dissembled Repentance was real indeed; and Mr. Holland himself
(now his favorite) if his 1000. or 1500. l. per annum of the Kings Lands, that
now he injoys, did not make him forget himself, can sufficiently testify and
witness our unwearied and hazardous Activity for Cromwels particular
preservation the last year, when his great friends in the House durst not
publicly speak for him.

And whereas it is said we will Center nowhere, we have too just cause to
charge that upon them; the whole stream of all our Actions (as we told
Richardson) being a continued Declaration of our earnest desires to come to a
determinate and fixed center: one of us making sufficient propositions to that
purpose to the Council of State at our last being there, and all our many and
late proffers as to that particular, they have hitherto rejected, as no ways
consistent with their tyrannical and selvish ends and designs: and given us no
other answer in effect, but the sending our bodies prisoners to the Tower: and
therefore we judged it infinitely below us (as we told him) and that glorious
cause, the Peoples Liberties and Freedoms, that we are now in bonds for) and
for which we suffer, to send any message but a defiance by him or any other to
them. Yet to let him know (as one we judged honest, and our friend) we were men
of reason, moderation, and justice, and sought nothing particularly for our
selves more then our common share in the common freedom, tranquillity, and
peace of the land of our Nativity: We would let him know, we had a two fold
Center, and if he pleased of and from himself to let our Adversaries know, we
were willing our adversaries should have their choice to which of the two they
would hold us to.

And therefore said we in the first place, The Officers of the Army have
already compiled, and published to the view of the Nation, an Agreement of the
people, which they have presented to the present Parliament; against which we
make some exceptions, which exceptions are contained in our Addresses: Now let
them but mend their Agreement according to exceptions, and so far as all our
interest extends in the whole Nation, we will acquiesce and rest there, and be
at peace with them, and live and dye with them in the pursuance of those ends;
and be content for Cromwell and Iretons security, etc. for the blood of war shed
in time of peace at Ware, or any thing else; and to free our selves that we
thirst after none of their blood, but only our just Liberties (without which
we can never sit down in peace) That there shall be a clause, to bury all
things in oblivion, as to life and liberty, excepting only estate; that so the
Commonwealth may have an account of their moneys in Treasurers hands, etc.

Or secondly, if they judge our exceptions against their Agreement (or any one
of them) irrational, let them choose any 4 men in England, and let Crumwel and
Ireton be 2 of them, and take the other 2 where they please, in the whole
Nation, and we 4 now in prison, will argue the case in reason with them, and if
we can agree, there is an end, as to us, and all our interest; but in case we
cannot, let them (said we all) choose any 2 membes of the House of Commons, and
we will choose 2. more, viz. Col. Alex. Rigby, and Col. Henry Martin, and to be
final umpires betwixt us: and what they, or the major part of them determine,
as to us (in relation to an Agreement) and all our interest in the whole land,
we will acquiesce in, be content with, and stand to without wavering: and this
we conceive to be as rational, just, and fair, as can be offered by any men
upon earth: and I for my part, say and protest before the Almighty, I will yet
stand to this, and if this will content them, I have done; if not, fall back,
fall edge, let them do their worst I for my part bid defiance to them,
assuredly knowing, they can do no more to me, then the Devil did to Job; for
resolved by Gods assistance I am, to spend my heart blood against them, if they
will not condesend to a just Agreement that may be good for the whole Nation;
that so we may have a speedy new and as equal a Representative as may be,
chosen by those that have not fought against their freedoms, although I am as
desirous the Cavaliers should enjoy the benefit of the Law, for the protection
of their persons and estates, as well as my self. I know they have an Army at
command, but if every hair on the head of that Officer or Soldier they have at
their command were a legion of men, I would fear them no more then so many
straws; for the Lord Jehovah is my rock and defense, under the assured shelter
of whose wings, I am safe and secure, and therefore will sing and be merry; and
do hereby sound an eternal trumpet of defiance to all the men and devils in the
earth and hell, but only those men who have the image of God in them, and
demonstrate it among men, by their just, honest, merciful and righteous
actions. And as for all those vild aspertions their saint-like Agents have
fixed upon me of late, I know before God none is righteous no not one, but only
he that is clothed with the glorious righteousness of Jesus Christ, which I
assuredly know my soul has been, and now is clothed with, in the strength of
which I have walked for above 12 years together, and through the strength of
which, I have been able at any time in all that time, to lay down my life in a
quarter of an hours warning. But as to man I bid defiance to all my Adversaries
upon earth, to search my ways and goings with a candle, and to lay any one
base Action to my charge in any kind whatsoever, since the first day that I
visibly made profession of the fear of God, which is now about twelve years;
yea, I bid defiance to him or them, to proclaim it upon the house top, provided
he will set his hand to it, and proclaim a public place, where before
indifferent men, in the face of the Sun, his accusation may be scand; yea, I
here declare, that if any man or woman in England, either in reference to my
public actions, to the States money, or in reference to my private dealings in
the world shall come in and prove against me, that ever I defrauded him, or her
of twelve pence, and for every twelve pence that I have so done, I will make
him or her twenty shillings worth of amends, so far as all the estate I have in
the world will extend.

Courteous Reader, and deer Countryman, excuse I beseech thee my boasting and
glorying, for I am necessitated to it, my adversaries base and lying
calumniations putting me upon it, and John Lilburn, that never yet changed his
principles from better to worse, nor could never be threatened out of them, nor
courted from them, that never feared the rich nor mighty, nor never despised
the poor nor needy, but always has and hopes by Gods goodness to continue
semper idem.
Paul and Samuel did it before me: and so I am thine, if thou art for the just
Freedoms and liberties of the land of thy Nativity,

From my rejoicing captivity (for bearing witness against Tyranny in
whomsoever I find it) in the Tower of London April 3. 1649

Postscript.
Courteous Reader, I have much wondered with my self, what should make most of
the Preachers in the Anabaptists Congregations so mad at us four, as this day
to deliver so base a Petition, in the intention of it against us all four; (who
have been as hazardous Sticklers for their particular liberties, as any be in
England) and never put a provocation upon them that I know of, especially,
considering the most, if not all their Congregations, (as from diverse of their
own member I am informed) sprotested against their intentions openly in their
Congregations, upon the Lords day last, and I am further certainly informed
that the aforesaid Petition the Preachers delivered, is not that which was read
by themselves amongst the people; but another of their own framing since, which
I cannot hear was ever read in any one of their Congregations: so that for the
Preachers viz. M. Kiffin, M. Spilsbury, M. Patience, M. Draps, M. Richardson,
M. Constant, M. Wayd the Schoolmaster, etc. to deliver it to the Parliament in
the name of their Congregations; they have delivered a lie and a falsehood, and
are a pack of fauning daubing knaves for so doing, but as I understand from one
of M. Kiffins members, Kiffin himself did ingenuously confess upon the Lords
day last, in his open Congregation, that he was put upon the doing of what he
did by some Parliament men, who he perceived were willing and desirous to be
rid of us four, so they might come off handsomely without too much loss of
credit to themselves: and therefore intended to take a rise from their
Pettition to free us, and for that end it was, that in their Petition read in
the Congregations, after they had sufficiently bespattered us, yet in the
conclusion they beg mercy for us; because we had been formerly active for the
Public. Secondly, I have been lately told, Some of the Congregationall
Preachers are very mad at a late published and licensed Book, sold in Popeshead
Alley, and the blue Anchor in Cornhill, entitled, The vanity of the present
Churches; supposing it to be the Pen of some of our Friends, and therefore out
of revenge might petition against us: I confess, I have within a few hours
seen and read the Book, and not before; and must ingenuously confess, it is
one of the shrewdest Books that ever I read in my life, and do believe it may
be possible they may be netled to the purpose at it; but I wish every honest
unbyassed man in England would seriously read it over.

April 4. 1649. John Lilburn.
I Shall desire to acquaint the Reader, that when the Title page of the
foregoing Book was first set, there was an absolute determination to have
reprinted all our Examinations together; but for some weighty reasons the
intentions are altered; and because I understand that the fury, rage and
bloud-thirstinesse of Cromwell, Ireton, Hasterig, and Harrison is most at me,
right or wrong to destroy me and have my blood, I am determined, by Gods
assistance, to fill their hands as full with my own pen, as all the brains I
have can fill them; and to make them pay a valuable price, if possibly I can,
for every hair of my head. And in order to my future intentions, I shall here
annex my Outcryes against the Bishops, when they had like to have murdered me
in the Fleet, being printed at Amsterdam 1639, entitled

A CRY FOR JUSTICE: OR; An Epistle written by John Lilburn, To all the grave
and worthy Citizens of the famous City of London, but especially to the Right
honorable Maurice Abbot, Lord Mayor thereof,
The most miserable and lamentable complaint of that inhumane, barbarous,
savage and unparalleled cruelty and tyranny, that is causelessly, unjustly, and
wrongfully exercised upon me J^hn Lilburn a faithful Subject to my Prince,
Country, and a Prentise of this Honorable City, though now a most deplorable
close prisoner in the common Gaol of the Fleet. 1639.
MOst Honorable and Noble Lord, The chief cause wherefore God the wise
Governor of Heaven and Earth, did appoint Magistrates, was for the good of the
sons of men, and that they should do Justice betwixt a man and his neighbor,
and that they should hear the grievances of the oppressed, and deliver them
from the cruelty of their oppressors.

That wrong, violence and injustice that I have suffered, would be now too long
to relate in particular: but it being so insupportable, made me to publish it
abroad unto the view of the world, to the perpetual infamy of my tormentors,
the chief of which are the traitorous, bloody, murdering Prelates.

The story of my former misery and wrongs you may, if you please, read at large
in three several Books of mine now in print, and published to the view of
England, Scotland, Ireland and Holland. They are called My unjust Censure in
the Star Chamber, My Speech at the Pillory, and My mournsull Lamentations. I
have not seen them since they were put in print, because the Prelate of
Canterbury wrongfully detains well nigh two thousand of them from me: but there
are still many thousands of them behind; and I doubt not but some, who pities
my afflicted estate, will convey some of them unto your Lordships hands: In the
last of which I have proved, that I am more cruelly dealt with, then bloody
Bonner dealt with the poor Saints and Martyrs in Queen Marys days, and that I
am denied that which in England was never yet denied to any Traitor that ever I
read of. And in it I accuse William Laud the Prelate of Canterbury for High
Treason; the which I did a year agone before Sir John Banks Knight, and will
still venture my life upon the proof thereof, if I may have a Legal
proceeding. One ground of my accusation is this; the, Parliament Laws and
Statutes of this Land, as the 25 and 37 of Hen. 8. and the first of Edw. 6. and
the first and 27 of Elizabeth, does enact to this effect, That whosoever goes
about to set up or challenge any foreign or domestic Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, but what does immediately flow and come from the Imperial Crown,
is (ipso facto) a Traitor, and ought to die without the benefit of Clergy, as
more at large in them you may read. Now the Bishop of Canterbury and the rest
of his merciless brethren, about four years agone, in the Censure of that
Noble Doctor Bastwick, (now of late much degenerate) there in their open Court
at Lambeth, renounced the King and his Authority, and said, They were not
beholding to him for their Episcopal Jurisdiction; for they were made Bishops
by Jesus Christ, and consecrated by the holy Ghost, and they had their thrones,
and were before Christian Kings, and they held the Crowns of Kings upon their
heads; and their Maxim was, No Bishop, no King. And if this be not treason,
then I think there was never any committed: And this, with much more to this
effect, Doctor Bastwick does declare in his answer to Sir John Banks his
Information (as you may read in the tenth and eleventh pages thereof.) And for
this (most Noble Lord) was I, against all Law and Justice, laid in irons for a
long time together, in a most inhumane manner, and locked up close prisoner for
these twelve months together, against all Law, and to the violating of the
Subjects Liberty: for by Magna Charta, and other Statutes of this Land, which
are still in force, but only the execution of them is thrown in the kennell,
neither the Lord Keeper, nor any others ought to commit any of the Kings
Subjects close prisoners, unless either for Felony or Treason, and only in
case of an extraordinary crime; and then they must forthwith bring them to
their trial: But by close imprisonment the Law does not mean that the Kings
Subjects should be locked up in rooms; much less, that their friends should
not be suffered to come to speak with them, and bring them victuals to preserve
their lives, as grave Judge Cr^ok, not long since, in his Speech at
Westminster Hall did prove, when he pleaded for the Subjects Liberty. But
contrary to the Parliament Laws, yea, and the practice of Heathens and Pagans,
I am locks up close all alone, and cannot be suffered to come to a just trial;
but am kept up so close, that my friends and acquaintance that bring me relief
(I being long since deserted of my Kindred) are not suffered to come at me, but
are sent away with that they bring me, with all the abuses, reproaches, and
revilings that possible may be, by my Keeper. And one that came unto me he has
beaten, and others he has threatened to kick if they come any more to me; and
to others of them he has most fasly and slinderously reviled me, calling me
Rebel and Traitor, telling them that no victuals should come at me: so that I
am forced daily, in regard of barbarous cruelty, to cry out aloud at my iron
grate, to the prisoners and strangers, to let them know the height of my misery
wherein I live: and yet no redress can I have, but daily more and more cruelty
is exercised upon me, and many grievous threats from bloody murdering Morry my
keeper, who threatens to hamper me, and lock my head and legs together for my
complaining: This he did the last Lords day at night, and also offered to beat
me with his keys, in so much, that at ten a clock at night I was forced to cry
out to the prisoners of it. And in this most miserable condition do I remain,
though I have been dangerously sick almost these eleven months, which many
times has brought me even unto deaths door; and in regard of my exceeding
extremity of pain in my head, by reason of my long closeness ever since
Candlemass Term was twelve months, and my cruel torments besides, I have been
constrained (for to get a little ease of my extreme pain, which in sudden fits
takes me for two or three hours together) to be tied to a constant course of
Physic usually once in fourteen days, and sometimes oftener: And though of
late I had a little liberty to walk once a day in the common prison yard; yet I
am now deprived of it by the Warden for complaining of my keepers cruelty, and
his shameful abusing me, and my friends which did but come to look upon me;
with whom this was my greatest discourse, that I had tied my self by promise,
before I could get that little liberty of walking, that I would not talk with
any Friends; therefore I desired them not to be offended, for I durst not talk
with them: Yet because they came but to see me, I was deprived of it; and also
they that looked to me in my sickness and weakness kept from me; so that now
in my weakness I have none to look to me. In my Grievous and mournful
Complaint already published, I have a little touched the Wardens galled
conscience for his cruel oppressions: wherefore he in revenge (it seems)
intends to murder me, lest I should by my just complaints make it cost him as
dear as the salving up of his wickedness did, when he was last called to an
account; for I have heard the prisoners with open mouth proclaim it, that for
making his peace, he gave to the Barl of Bohon ten thousand pounds, and to the
foreman of the Jury one thousand pounds; for which his conscience being
troubled, he revealed it upon his death bed: And also to an Officer five
hundred pounds to raze out some things which were upon record: yea, I have
heard the poor Prisoners proclaim it aloud, that he cozens them of above seven
hundred pounds a year which belongs to them; and allows them but a small
pittance, upon which they are not able to live; and some of them have several
times in the open Chapel cried out to the Gentlemen prisoners, that they are
ready to starve and perish for want of food; yea, so great has been the
barbarous cruelty of the Warden to the poor, that (if the Prisoners reports may
be believed) poor men here have been forced, for want of food, to eat their own
dung: And this had been my own condition, in likelihood, had not God raised up
some compassionate Friends, that were mere strangers unto me before my
sufferings; some of which, through all difficulties and reproaches from my
Keeper, have brought me food. And though the poor have not by the Wardens means
the tenth part of their due, yet to lessen that small means which the poor
hitherto has had (some of which have nothing else in the world to live upon)
he has of late added unto them so many more, (some of which are men of able
estates) which he has put upon the charity, contrary to their Orders,
purposely to starve the poor indeed: yea, he has by force put upon the charity
Henry the Hangman, who is under-Turn-key, and has forty pound land a year, as
he himself confesses; and whose vailes besides, as I have heard the prisoners
say, are some times better worth then three shillings a day; and this* the
warden has done for him, because he is so officious and ready in beating and
abusing the poor distressed prisoners, that cry out of the wardons cruelty; and
not only the poor prisoners, but also some of those that come to visit and
relievethem, some of which he has beat, and threatened to kick others.

I have heard the prisoners affirm that the revenues of the Fleet has been
cast ^p to be above threescore thousand pounds a year; oh therefore the height
of cruelty not to be paralelled, I think amongst the savage, and barbarous
Heathens and Pagans, and which mightily cries unto your Honer, now in our
Sovereigns absence, for the welfare of the City, betimes to be looked unto,
and with the assistance of the Noble Lord Protector, to examine out the truth
of things, that poor oppressed men may have speedy redress of their wrongs; the
greatest part of which, arises by reason of the wardens greatness with the
Bishop of Canterbury and the Lord Keeper, so that they dare not for fear (as I
have heard some of them say) complain of him.

Besides my Lord it is notoriously known, that John Morry my upper keeper has
been arraigned at Newgate for murdering a prisoner here in former times, and I
think here are other fresh things against him, if poor prisoners might be heard
and have justice, which would bear another indictment, and at least manifest
him to be too too bloody a man to have the keeping of poor innocent men; For
some in this prison, as it is here reported have been secretly poisoned and
lost their lives upon it, and others with eating garlike, and like antidotes
have expelled it, and are yet living here to justify the same; and my dogged
under keeper has been a hangman; whereupon the prisoners at their fallings out
with him, do say this verse to his face (vix) Morry the Irish peddler, and Harry
the hangman of Cambridge-Shiere, and by these two bloody* men, from both of
which I have received unsufferable wrongs, my Adversaries intend I shall be
killed in a corner.

Because of my untainted innocence, they dare not bring me to a legal public
trial to the view of the Kingdom; wherefore I am forced by reason of
intolerable cruely injustice and wrong, to cry out unto your Honor, as I have
often done at my grate, murder, murder, murder; therefore hear O Heavens,
and give care O Earth, and all ye that hear or read this my just complaint and
lamentation, bear witness to future generations, that I cry out of violence,
wrong, injustice, cruelty, and inhumanity, that I suffer from the traiterous
Bishop, and the unjust Lord Keeper, old Sir Henry Vain, and their bloody
Jaylours, which do and will execute their commands, be they never so unjust and
unlawful. And how that for my zeal and courage for my God and his truth and
glory, and for my ardent love to my Prince and Country, and for my strong
desire and endeavor for the prosperity and flourishing estate of this renowned
City, the Metropolis of England, I am like to lose my life and blood by
murdering cruelty in close Imprisonment; Therefore, oh all ye brave and worthy
Citizens, save, help and rescue me a poor distressed and greatly oppressed
young man, from the devouring paws of devouring Lionish men.

Now my Honorable Lord, I come to make my humble supplication unto your self,
which is this; that you would be pleased to take my most deplorable condition
into your grave and serious consideration, and after your consultation about
it, with your worshipful brethren the Aldermen of this City, acquaint the
honorable Lord protector that noble and courteous Earl of Northumberland, with
it (who in part knows it already) but alas alas, I am long since deserted of my
kindred and friends, so that I have none that dare follow my business for me;
wherefore I am like shortly to perish in my great distress unless your Lorships
be pleased in this particular to do something for me.

I desire from your Honors neitheir silver nor gold, for alas at present it
would do me no pleasure; for had I all treasure in the world to buy me
victuals, and want a stomach when I should have them, they would nothing avail
me: and yet so lamentable is my condition, by reason of my long closeness and
painful sickness; so that all the favor I desire is but the one of these two
things. First that if I be thought to be an offender; that then I may be
forthwith brought to a public trial, and suffered with freedom to plead my
own just cause again the Bishops, and the Lord Keeper, and old Sir Henry
Vaine's illegal and unjust censure of me which was only upon this ground:
because I refused to take an illegal and unlawful inquisition oath, which he
the Lord Keeper tendered to me; which as I told him to his face in the
Star Chamber is against the Statute Laws of this land; yea against the
petttion of right, enacted in the 3 year of our Sovereign King Charles; yea I
told him and proved it to be against the Laws of God and man, and contrary to
the practice of the Heathens and Pagans; (as you may read in the Acts of the
Apostles) yet this was the only ground wherefore he and old Sir Henry Vane,
etc. censured me to pay 500 pound, and to be whipped; for there was no witness
brought against me face to face, only there was read two false oaths made by
one Edmond Chillington (now a Lieut. in Col. Whalyes Regiment, and one of the
principal men that lately caused the Soldier to be shot to death at Paul's)
whom the Bishop hired, by giving him his liberty out of Newgate prison for
swearing those two false oaths, and doing them other wicked service of the like
nature.

My Lord for my own part I desire no mercy nor favor nor compassion from the
greatest of my enemies, but only the benefit of my Sovereigns Laws, which as
I am a faithful and loyal subject to my Prince and Contry, I do according to
my privilege earnestly crave and beg not fearing by reason of my unspotted
Innocence the rigor of Justice; for my innocence is such that I fear neither
death nor hell, men nor Devils, hanging nor burning; for I assuredly know that
when this my miserable life is ended I shall go to my God of glory to be a
posessour of an immortal Crown of glory.

In the second place, if they will not let me have a speedy and legal trial,
then therefore in regard my keepers are such murdering, poisoning and starving
fellows, that I have just cause, in regard of their cruel bloody threats and
inveterate malice at me, to fear that they will either secretly by poison, or
else by other wicked cruelty put me to death. I humbly and earnestly desire,
that I may be turned over to Bridwell, Newgate, either of the Countors, or any
other prison about this City, where my friends may be suffered to come to me
and relieve me, and look to me in my weakness and great distress; for I am
necessitated with speed to take physickagain to ease the extremity of pain
which I endure in my head; if my Friends according to law and humanity might be
suffered to come to look to me. And for my safe imprisonment, if I may be
removed I will put in sufficient security either to the L. Protector, or your
self for my forthcoming at all times to answer whatsoever the greatest or
capitallest of my enemies shall at any time object against me.

Now, my Lord, I have a little acquainted you with my grievous and just
complaint, the particulars of which I offer to justify and prove, it being
such an example of cruelty which is lawlesly and unjustly exercised upon me,
which I think cannot be paralleled in any Nation in the world, where morality
and humanity are professed.

Oh therefore, as you are the Noble Governor of this Renowned City, and a
Magistrate of good report, make me some powerful and speedy help against the
cruel Warden, whose lawless, unjust, and uncontrollable oppressions are so
great (not only to me, but also to many other poor prisoners) that I think no
Prison in the world is able to parallel those just complaints that poor
distressed men are able justly to make against him; the chief of which arise
from the Bishop, old Sir Henry Vane, and the Lord Keeper's bearing up the
Warden in all his cruelty, for executing with tyranny and rigor their unjust
and unlawful Commands upon th^se they commit hither to be tormented in our
cruel Fleet Purgatory; which if any of the oppressed do but offer to speak of,
the Warden and his Officers do labor by lawless cruelty to murder them.

Therefore it behooves you, my Lord, and my Lord Protector, now in our
Sovereigns absence [being then gone against the Scots] to hear the cries of
poor distressed, and too too much oppressed prisoners, and to ease them
according to justice and right, of their intolerable burdens.

For my own part, my distresses and miseries are so great, that I protest
before the God of heaven and earth, that I had rather embrace present death,
then still endure the piercing bitterness of my oppressing forments: yea, I
had rather choose to be banished into the howling and dolesom wilderness, and
left among the Lions, Dragons, Bears and Wolves, those devouring and ramping
wild beasts, then to be as I am, in the custody of the lawless, murdering
Bishop and Jaylors.

O therefore, if there be any bowels of mercy and compassion in you, most Noble
Lord, pity the deprorable condition of me a poor distressed innocent young man,
and a Prentice of this Honorable City: And with you, my Lord, I have had
occasion to speak face to face about my Masters business; and the last piece
of service that I did him was in your Honors House. O that I were with you
again, that I might with mournful solicitations solicit you for some speedy
redress; which for our Christ his sake I beseech you let me shortly have, lest
the continuance in my present and constant misery, cause me to publish this in
print, proclaiming it aloud to other Nations, to the public view of all men,
that so they may know my miserable condition. But if I can but have any
redress I shall be ready at your Honors command to do you any service that I
am able; and in the interim, I shall with willingness sit down in peace and
silence. So committing you and all your brave Citizins to the keeping of the
Almighty Protector, desiring him to guide your Noble heart uprgihtly to execute
Justice and Judgment in your great place, in these tormenting, oppressing and
bloody times; that so your good name for equity and justice may be had in
perpetuity in future generations. So for the present I humbly take my leave,
and rest,

Your most miserable distressed, and cruelly oppressed poor Suppliant, JOHN
LILBURN.
All of this I subscribe with my own blood, which is already almost shed with
cruelty: And for the safety of my life, since I was whipped, to the number of
above 500 stripes with knotten whip-cords in less then an hours space, I have
been forced to be let blood four times.

And because in my most cruel condition I am not suffered to have either pen
or ink, neither of which I make use of in the writing of this, I am forced to
send it very ruggedly to your Honor, and to crave pardon for those literal
faults that you shall find in it.

JOHN LILBURN.
From the Fleet, the oppressingest and cruellest prison (I think) that is in
the world; the middle of this fifth Month, called May, 1639.



Courteous Reader, I shall desire thee to cast thy eye seriously upon this
ensuing Letter of mine and my fellow-prisoner, Mr. Richard Overton, which we
wrote to the General the 27. of April 1649, in the behalf of Captain Savages
Troopers: the Copy of which is as follows.

The Copy of a Letter written to the General, from Lieut. Col. Jo. Lilburn and
M. Rich. Overton, Arbitrary and Ari-stocratical prisoners in the Tower of
London, the 27 of April 1649, in behalf of Mr. Robert Lockier, tyrannycally
ordered to be murdered by the Council of War: M. George Ash, M. Joseph Hockley,
M. Robert Osburn, Mr. Matthew. Heyworth, Mr. Tho. Goodwin, all of Captain Savage
his Troop in Col. Whaley's Regiment; who by the said Council were adjudged to
cast lots for their lives, and one of them to die.
In which it is by Law fully proved, that it is both Treason and Murder for any
General or Council of War to execute any Soldier in time of Peace, by
Martial Law.
May it please your Excellency,
We have not yet forgot your Solemn Engagement of June 5. 1647, whereby the
Armies continuance as an Army was in no wise by the will of the State, but by
their own mutual Agreement: and if their standing were removed from one
Foundation to another (as is undeniable) then with the same they removed from
one Authority to a another; and the Ligaments and Bounds of the First were all
dissolved, and gave place to the Second; and under, and from the head of their
first Station, viz. By the will of the State, the Army derived their Government
by Martial Law; which in Judgment and Reason could be no longer binding then
the Authority (which gave being thereto) was binding to the Army: for the
denial of the authority is an Abrogation or Nulment of all Acts, Orders, or
Ordinances by that Authority, as to them: And upon this account your Excellency
with the Army long proceeded upon the Constitution of a new Council and
Government, contrary to all Martial Law and Discipline, by whom only the Army
engaged to be ordered in their prosecution of the ends, to wit, Their several
Rights, both as Soldiers and Commoners, for which they associated; Declaring,
agre^ing and promising each other, not to Disband, Divide, or suffer themselves
to be Disbanded or Divided, without satisfaction and security, in relation to
their Grievances and Desires in behalf of themselves and the Commonwealth, as
should be agreed unto by their Council of Agitators. And by virtue, and under
color of this Establishment, all the extraordinary Actions by your Excellency,
your Officers, and the Army have past: Your refusal to Disband, disputing the
Orders of Parliament; Impeachment and ejection of Eleven Members; your First
and Second March up to London; your late violent Exclusion of the major part of
Members out of the House, and their imprisonment without Cause declared, etc.
which can no way be justified from the guilt of High Treason, but in the
accomplishment of a righteous end, viz. The enjoyment of the benefit of our
Laws and Liberties, which we hoped long ere this to have enjoyed from your
hands: Yet when we consider, and herewith compare many of your late carriages
both toward the Soldiery and other Free-People; and principally your cruel
exercise of Martial Law, even to the Sentence and execution of Death upon such
of your Soldiers as stand for the Rights of that Engagement, etc. And not only
so, but against others not of the Army; we cannot but look upon your defection
and Apostacy in such dealings, as of most dangerous consequence to all the
Laws and Freedoms of the People.

And therefore, although there had never been any such solemn Engagement by the
Army, as that of June 5. 1647. which with your Excellency in point of duty and
conscience ought not to be of the meanest obligation. We do protest against
your exercise of Martial Law, against any whomsoever, in time of peace, where
all Courts of Justice are open, as the greatest encroachment upon our Laws and
Liberties that can be acted against us; And particularly, against the Trial of
the Soldiers of C. Savages Troop yesterday, by a Court Martial, upon the
Articles of War, and sentencing of two of them to death^ and for no other end
(as we understand) but for some dispute about their pay: And the reason of this
our Protestation, is from the Petition of Right, made in the third year of the
late King, which declares, That no person ought to be adjudged by Law
Martial, except in times of War; And that all Commissions to execute
Martial Law in time, of Peace, are contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the
Land. And it was the Parliaments complaint, That Martial Law was then
commanded to be executed upon Soldiers for Robbery, Mutiny, or Murder. Which
Petition of Right, this present Parliament in their late Declarations of the 9.
of Feb. and the 17. of March, 1648. commend as the most excellentest Law in
England, and there promise to preserve inviolably, it, and all other the
Fundamental Laws and Liberties, concerning the preservation of the Lives,
Properties, and Liberties of the people, with all things incident thereunto.
And the Exercise, of Martial Law in Ireland, in time of Peace, was one of the
chiefest Articles for which the Earl of Strafford lost his head; The same by
this present Parliament being judged high Treason. And the Parliament it self,
neither by Act nor Ordinance, can justly or warrantably destroy the
Fundamental Liberties and Principles of the Common Law of England: It being a
maxim in Law and Reason both, that all such Acts and Ordinances, are ipso
facto, null, and void in Law, and binds not at all, but ought to be resisted,
and stood against to the death. And if the supreme Authority may not presume to
do this, much less may You, or Your Officers presume thereupon; for where
remedy may be had by an ordinary course in Law, the party grieved shall never
have his recourse to extraordinaries. Whence it is evident, that it is the
undoubted Right of every Englishman (Soldier or other) that he should be
punishable only in the ordinary Courts of Justice, according to the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm in the time of Peace, as now it is; and the
extraordinary way by Court Martial, in no wise to be used.

Yea, the Parliaments Oracle, S. Ed. Cook. Declares in the third part of his
Institutes Cap. of Murder, that for a General or other Officers of an Army, in
time of Peace to put any man, (although a soldier,) to death, by color of
Martial Law, it is absolute murder in that General, or Council of War
(...). Therefore erecting of Martial Law now, when all Courts of Justice are
open, and stopping the free current of Law, which sufficiently provides for the
punishment of Soldiers as well as others, (as appears by 18. H. 6: Chapter 18, 19.
and 2, and 3. Ed. 6. Cha. 2. 4, and 5. P. and M. Chap. 3. and 5. Eliz. 5. and
5. Jam. 21.) is an absolute destroying of our Fundamental Liberties, and the
razing of the Foundation of the Common Law of Eng(...) the which o^t of duty
and Conscience to the Rights and Freedoms of this Nation (...) we value above
our lives) and to leave You and all Your Council without all ex(...), we are
moved to present unto your Excellency; Earnestly pressing, you well to
consider what you do, before your proceed to the taking away the lives of
thosemen by Martial Law; least the blood of the Innocent, or the blood of War
shed in the time of peace, (and so palpable subversion of the Laws and
Liberties of England) bring the reward of just vengeance after it upon you, as
it did upon the Earl of Strafford of old: for innocent blood God will not
pardon, Genesis 9 5. 6. 1 Kings 2 v. 4. 5. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. and what the
people may do (in case of such violent subversion of their Rights) we shall
leave to your Excellency to judge, and remain

Sir, Your Excellencies humble Servants, John Lilburn. Richard Overton.

From our Causeless, unjust, and Tyranical Captivity in the Tower of London,
April 27. 1649. POST SCRIPT.
And that for the present General or his Council to put any man to death in
time of peace by Martial Law, is not only Murder, but Treason, is undenyably
proved in Capt. John Ingrams Plea, and M. William Tompsons Plea, and M. Joh^
Crosmans Plea; all of which are printed at large in Lieut. Col. John Lilburn's
Book, called






FINIS

