THE LIFE OF Cornelius Van Tromp, Lieutenant-Admiral of Holland and
Westfriesland: CONTAINING Many Remarkable Passages relating to the WAR between
ENGLAND and HOLLAND. As also the SEA FIGHTS, AND Other Memorable Actions of
this Great Man, from the Year 1650. to the Time of his Death.

LONDON, Printed by J. Orme, for R. Clavel, J. Sturton and A. Bosvile in
Fleetstreet, and J. Cater in Holbourn. MDCXCVII.

THE Author's Preface.
THE World is so earnest after the Even^s of the Present War, that it has
hardly Leisure enough to read the several Accounts which are continually
printed on that Subject: And this takes up all our Thoughts so much, that we
have scarce Time to reflect on past Transactions. I must confess, we have
Reason enough for this; for what is past cannot effect us much, because it can
neither add to our Misery, nor better our Condition.

But, the War, wherein Europe is now engaged, is of so great a Consequence,
that, according to the Turn of Affairs, every one must have their Hopes or
Fears, either to expect a Happy Change in their Fortunes, or to dread the
contrary. Yet though we now seem wholly taken up with the present, there are,
however, some Histories of former Times capable to excite the Curiosity of the
Public, because what is past may enable us to argue on what is to come, and to
draw Consequences accordingly.

The following History, of Van Tromp, is of this kind; and what the States have
performed under the Conduct of that Great Man, and sometimes, by themselves,
and against Two formidable Powers; we may reasonably conclude, that now, since
the said States and England are united, nothing can be able to oppose them at
Sea, provided they will be but unanimous and act in Consort:

The manner of the Deliverance of the United Provinces in 1672. from the
Slavery wherewith they were threatened, next to the Favor and Assistance of
Heaven, through the wise Conduct and Valor of the Prince of Orange, now King
of England, and by the Victories which the Admirals of this State have obtained
over both the Fleets of France and England, then joined together, gives us very
good Reason, likewise, to conclude; that there is nothing we may not at this
Day expect from these two Potent States, since they have both put themselves
under the Conduct of that Prince, who commands their Armies conjunctly, and
since their Naval Forces are united against the Common Enemy.

We are therefore persuaded, that this Work will not now be unseasonable, but
will have the good Fortune to be well received by the variety of Events, of
which we have hitherto had but a very imperfect Account; because that few
Historians have made it their Business to treat at large of Matters relating to
the Sea. Herein you will find exact Relations of many bloody Engagements
performed in most Seas, and which have been often followed by Descents on the
Territories of those that have had the wors^ of it. Herein you will see, how
Victory has been disputed between the most powerful, as well as most numerous
Fleets, and the greatest Admirals that ever fought on the Ocean. In a Word, you
will have a full Account of what England and the Provinces have hitherto been
capable of executing at Sea, and when they have been the single Combatants.

But we will leave the Reader his full Liberty to make what Reflections he
shall think fit, and content our selves with the Performance of a Faithful
Historian, by giving you a plain Relation of Matters of most Importance in the
Times we shall mention, and particularly of what concerns the Great Cornelius
Van Tromp, whose Life we here present you. We have also been obliged, by the
bye, to touch a little upon the most remarkable Actions of the Famous Martin
Van Tromp, and several other Admirals, whose Memories will always be dear to
Holland, on the Account of the great Reputation they acquired, as well as for
their Zeal shown for the Service of their Country.

It will also be necessary to acquaint you, That we have not been able (to
preserve both the History contained, and the Succession of Years entire) to
avoid relating several Events, which seem to have but an indirect Tendency to
Cornelius Van Tromp's Life, because we would fill up the Chasms wherein he was
not employed, nor commanded the Naval Forces of this State in chief, or else
was in the Service of the King of Denmark.

And, to make the History the more acceptable by Variety, we have inserted the
Epitaphs of most of the Hero's of this Republic, whose Names we had occasion to
Mention, as so many Monuments, which contain the most important Actions of
their Lives, and which are not to be found elsewhere; whereby the Care which
the United Provinces have taken to reward their Merit, and make their Glorious
Memory Immortal, will be sufficiently evident.

We have also added the most considerable Letters which the several Admirals
have written, as so many eminent Proofs to authenticate the Actions we relate,
and which will show, that we have made this our inviolable Rule and Standard,
Not to write any thing with Flattery or Falsehood, but to give a Body of Truth
to this Work.

THE LIFE OF Cornelius Tromp, Lieutenant Admiral of Holland and of
West-Friseland. The First BOOK.
THERE is no Flourishing State in the World but must acknowledge it self to be
supported chiefly by two main firm and solid Pillars: I mean, 1650.
Wise Ministers of State, and Great and Experienced Commanders, who Constitute
the Primary Cause of it is Grandeur and Exaltation. The former of these by their
admirable Skill form out into Regular designs in the Council Chamber those
Secret Maxims that Policy Dictates to every Nation as the most adapted to their
peculiar Genius and condition, whereby they may best Govern themselves, grow
powerful and become formidable to their Neighbors; and the others are those
Hero's that in order to put in Execution what was Resolved in the Cabal of
State courageously lead on the Armies, fight the Enemies, and gloriously obtain
Victories: all which duly considered, what honors ought not to be rendered to
the Memory of those great men after their Deaths? Certainly it is not only just
to give them in some sort a new life by the Recital of their noble Exploits,
but it is likewise of great use to others, to render them Recommendable to
Prosterity by a History of their worthy Actions, since it is the surest and most
Expeditious means to move those who read it to a like Course of Virtue, and to
excite them to follow the Steps of those Illustrious Hero's that have
generously Sacrificed their own private repose, and spilt their best Blood for
the Glory of their Country. 'Twas upon this consideration that the Greeks and
Romans, not to speak of the Nations that preceeded them, took such great care
to commit to writing the lives of their Brave men, and were so accurate to
Paint them out to us in such lively and natural Colors, that even to this day,
at that vast distance whenever we Read their story, we are apt to fancy, we see
themselves before our Eyes. But if those two Renowned Nations took such a
Religious care to consecrate the Memory of their great Captains to Immortality,
what ought not Holland to do, to Immortalize that of its Famous Admirals? If
ever there were any State that has made a noise in the World, and made it self
formidable by Sea, is it not this powerful Republic which has done more in
this respect, than all other States put together besides? It would be but
needless here to repeat the History of it is first rise, and of it is progresses
since, and to enter into so long and particular a Narration as that would
require, to prove a truth so generally acknowledged. Neither as to the History
of our Admirals, is our Age the first that has employed it is writers upon so
noble a Subject, our Ancestors have led the way, and set us worthy Patterns how
to acquit our selves of this Just duty. And accordingly emboldened by their
Example I venture to Compose the History of one of those Hero's, who without
tarnishing the glory of the others may be said to have been one of the greatest
and most Renowned Commanders that ever appeared on the Ocean, a Hero whose very
name was a terror to his Enemies; That was descended of a Father who had been
present in above Fifty Sea Battles in which he either Commanded in chief, or
had at least one of the principal Posts of Authority, whose good Conduct and
undaunted courage had much contributed to make Holland one of the Richest and
most flourishing States of Europe; and who at last after gaining so many
Triumphs and Victories, died with Sword in hand for the advantage of his
Country; a Hero, in fine, that always followed the glorious foot steps of his
Illustrious Father, who was as much beloved by his own Seamen and people, as
he was dreaded by his Enemies, and who in a supreme degree possessed all the
virtues of a great and accomplished Captain.

We shall say nothing of the first years of the life of Cornelius Tromp, whose
History we design here to write, because there usually happens nothing to men
in that time of infancy that much concerns or is much worth the Curiosity of
the public.

It will be enough only to remark to you that having been as 'twere wholly
nourished and brought up at Sea from his most tender youth, scarcely was he
arrived to a Capacity of Commanding but he was made Captain of a Ship which
employment he discharged with so much Courage and Ability that gave the World a
certain prognostic, he was destinated to exercise those of greater importance.

One of the first occasions in which he was employed, and of which doubtless a
particular Relation will be acceptable, was in the War the States were obliged
to make against the Corsairs of Barbary. For those Pirates taking daily a great
Number of Dutch Merchant-Ships, bound either to Spain, or for diverse other
ports in the Mediterranean; the States at length tired out and vexed with so
many losses, gave order to John de Galen, Famous for his brave Actions, to Join
himself to the Commander de Wild, and to the Capt. Tromp, and Van Velsen, to
go before Sally, and to Block up that Port by Sea, in order by that means, to
put a stop to the Course of it is Piracies.

He had orders to Convoy by the way, as far as Cadiz, all Merchant-Ships going
into France or Portugal, and to steer away from thence toward Sally.
Accordingly Setting sail and being come into those Seas, he was informed by
Captain Vries who was Cruising there, that no Corsair had yet appeared in those
parts, because those Barbarians were at Intestine Jars about the Government,
and that they of the old Town had taken up arms against those of the new; but
that notwithstanding the differences among themselves, they were unanimously
inclined to hearken to a Treaty of Peace whenever it should be offered to them
by the States General, because they stood in much fear of their power. And in
effect, de Galen was no sooner arrived thither, but a Negotiation was presently
entered into to draw up the Conditions of the Treaty.

In order to which, it was first agreed upon, that as soon as the Moors should
have put up a White Flag in the Fort, de Galen should put up the like upon his
Main-Mast-Top, for a Signal that the Deputies of Sally, might safely come on
Board the Admiral. At which Signal accordingly four Moorish Deputies came
thither, whom de Galen received in the Captains State-Room, with great
Civility. He that was the principal amongst them, said that the Princes both of
Old and New Sally, had expected with great impatience the arrival of the
Holland Fleet, in hopes of coming to a Treaty of Peace with them, to which they
were entirely disposed, and so much the more upon Consideration, that they had
formerly lived in good Correspondence with them before they had thrown off the
Yoke of those of Morocco; for that it was surprizingly strange, they should
whilst they were yet slaves, have preserved Peace with a free Nation as were
the Dutch, and that now since they were come out of Slavery into Liberty, they
should fall out with the same people, but that the cause of all those unhappy
Hostilities that had happened since between them, were to be attributed to some
of their Chiefs; and that, in a word, they Earnestly desired, that such
Reasonable Conditions might be proposed, that might be the foundation of a
lasting Accommodation; to satisfy which desire of theirs, our Admiral proposed
to them the following Articles, viz.

1. That all Christian slaves of what Nation soever that had been taken on
Board any Dutch Ships, should be Released without Ransom and without any wrong
done to them.

2. That for the Future no Ship belonging to the States, should be stopped upon
any pretense whatsoever.

3. That no Corsair Ship should be suffered to go out of Sally, without giving
in first sufficient security, that none of the Sates Ships should be molested
by them.

4. That such Dutch Ships as had been taken by the Corsairs of Algier or Tunis,
and brought into their Ports to be sold, should be Restored into the hands of
their Respective owners.

5. That it should not be lawful to retain any Native Subject of the united
Provinces, as a slave, nor to sell him as such within the Countries under their
Jurisdiction, but he should be immediately set at Liberty.

6. That the Hollanders should Trade freely and safely with them.

7. That no Merchandises Imported or Exported by the Hollanders should pay any
higher Duties, than those of the Moors themselves.

8. That if it so pleased their High and Mightinesses, the Sates, their Allies
should likewise be included in the same Treaty. And lastly that this Treaty
should in all points be observed as firmly and inviolably as the Treaty before
made between the said States and the King of Morocco. It was likewise thought
fit by the Council on our side, that Captain de Uries should take Boat and go
into Sally, to push on with so much the more Vigor the Negotiation of the
Peace.

In the mean while in spite of all the vigilance of our men in guarding the
Avenues of the Port, one of their Corsairs, slily gliding in along by the
Ramparts, stole into the Town. On the other side, Captain de Wild, was ordered
to go with his Ship to Mamore a little sorry Town about 500 paces from the main
Sea, situated at the mouth of the River Subus, and twelve Miles distant from
the Town of Sally, with design to stop up that passage from the Enemies, and to
hinder them from watering there. He was received there by the Governor with
great demonstrations of friendship, and after he had performed the Orders he
had Received, he returned again to his Station before Sally, where he was
extremely surprised to see the Treaty of Peace broken off.

For the Moors were so far from consenting to Release the Prisoners without
Ransom, that they would not endure to hear it moved, and those of Aribal were
so refractary as to make a difficulty likewise of accepting the other Articles
of the Treaty. Which obstinacy in those Barbarians had like to have provoked
the Hollanders to show their Resentment by the last extremities; however, they
could not forbear replying to them in such high Terms as sufficiently testified
how deeply they were incensed at their proceedings. But with all this Huffing,
they were not able to gain upon the Moors to make them alter a whit of their
Resolutions, nor yet by several other Negotiations by Letters, which produced
no effect.

In the interim our Admiral had advice, that there had appeared about Cape St.
Vincent seven French Privateers looking sharp after Merchant Ships: Upon which,
de Wild, Tromp, and S^^ert, were ordered to sail away toward Cadiz, to Convoy
the Ships that were in that Rode, till they were out of danger, and then to
make back again to observe those Privateers; all which did not interrupt the
Negotiations of Peace before Sally. But still the Moors would not abate an ace
of their pretensions concerning the Ransoming the slaves that were to be set at
liberty; nay, on the contrary, they were so insolent as to threaten our Fleet,
that if they would not agree with them upon their own Terms; that they would
send away all the Dutch slaves they had in their power, either to Algier, or
elsewhere. This Menace made the Officers of the Holland Fleet, who were then
all present, to yield to those Barbarians, that the slaves should be ransomed,
at the Price they were first bought for. And as to the rest of the Arti^^es
there was all likelihood they would have been agreed to, if the Moors had not
changed their minds on a sudden, and started abundance of New difficulties
against the advancement of the Treaty, upon occasion of some advice that was
come to them from Tetuan, which gave them hopes to compass the destruction of
the Holland Fleet, which was this: Nine Algerine Corsairs that put in for
Refreshment there, had signified to them, that they had a design to surprise
and seize one of the Dutch Ships that were riding before Sally. Admiral de
Galen's Ship, was in most danger, and most exposed, because he was often all
alone. The noise of this enterprise being confirmed by de Vries, put the Dutch
Commanders upon more Circumspection in observing the Enemies. The other Ships
of the Fleet tackt and stood back toward the Admiral, and used all the
precautions vigilance could inspire them, to avoid a surprise. In the mean
while, they beginning to want fresh Water, Tromp was detacht away, to fetch
them some from La ^ache, and returned not till Nine days after. During these
transactions, de Vries came back on board the Admiral, with Letters, and
brought with him a Spanish Merchant. But de Galen thought not fit to make any
answer to these Letters, because he knew well enough, that the Prince of South
Sally was set out some ^ays before toward Fez, and that the Prince of North
Sally was likewise to follow him in two or three days, in order to make their
Treaty with the K. of Morocco, to whom the most part of Barbary had newly
submitted, and who most favorably received those that were most forward to
range themselves under his obedience: However de Galen desired the Spanish
Merchant at his return to Sally, to let those people know from him, that if
they offered to send away any of the Dutch slaves to other places, as they had
threatn d, that he would immediately break off the Treaty, and never enter into
any Negotiation with them any more.

As Soon as the Princes of Sally were returned from Fez, they presently sent to
give the Fleet notice of their arrival, signifying withal, that there was
nothing they more heartily desired than a Peace, and that they passionately
longed to see the Treaty already begun, brought to a happy Conclusion. At the
same time, Captain Blok, who was dispacht out of the Texel to go to Sally,
arrived there with orders to De Galen from the States, to go away for the
Coasts of Bourdeaux or Rochel, to Convoy the Merchant Ships that were to go
back from thence toward Holland. De Galen in pursuit of those Orders, went on
board the Ship called the Rose, leaving at his departure the care of the
Conclusion of the Treaty at Sally, to Captain de Wild, and other Captains of
the Fleet, who after many contestations on both sides, concluded it at length
on the 9th. of February 1651, upon the following conditions.

1. That the Governors and Princes of the two Towns of Sally, 1651. A Peace
concluded between the States of Holland and those of Sally.
engage for themselves and their Descendants, to cause to be set at liberty all
the Slaves taken on Board any Vessels belonging to the United Provinces, that
are at present under their power, according to the List already drawn, or that
shall be afterward drawn up of them, provided they on their part, pay their
respective Ransoms at the price they were first sold for, each one by name, and
in the order they shall be set down in the List signed on both sides; and that
it shall not be lawful in any wise to raise their price for the profit of those
concerned with them, and much less to hide and conceal them, or send them away
elsewhere during the time their Friends are to be allowed to get up the Money
necessary for their Ransom, which shall extend to the space of three Months
after the Date of the present Treaty.

2. That no Corsair Ship shall be permitted to go out of Sally, till he have
given good and sufficient security not to molest any of the Subjects of the
United Provinces, nor to meddle with any of their Ships or Effects, against
whose liberty it shall not be lawful for them to make any attempt.

3. That if any of the Subjects of the United Provinces being on board other
Ships, shall happen to be taken by any of the Corsairs of Sally, it shall not
be lawful to sell them, but they shall immediately be set at liberty.

4. That the above said Governors and Princes of Sally shall not suffer the
Pirates or Corsairs coming from Tunis, Algiers, Tripoly, or any other place in
Turkey, to bring in any Prises thither taken from the Subjects of the United
Provinces, to fell them either directly or indirectly, in any wise whatsoever;
or at least when any of these prises shall fall into their power, the prisoners
that belong to them shall be set at liberty.

5. That the Impost laid upon Merchandises Imported or Exported shall not be
augmented, but continue at the same rate at which they are paid at present.

6. That the abovesaid Governors and Princes of Sally, and all their Subjects
shall permit all Dutch Merchants there inhabiting, as likewise such as from
time to time shall come thither from the United Provinces, to enjoy a freedom
of Trade and good Correspondence, and shall demean themselves in all things as
good Friends and Neighbors of the States General.

7. That it shall not be lawful for the abovesaid Governors and Princes of
Sally, either directly or indirectly, to grant any Commissions to the Pirates
or Corsairs of Barbary or Turkey to be made use of against the Ships of War of
the United Provinces, or under what pretense soever, to insult any of their
Merchants Ships.

8. That the Ships of the States General shall not attempt any thing against
the liberty of the Ships of Sally, or endeavor to seize them, upon any
pretense whatsoever, but on the contrary, shall show them all sort of
Friendship and Good Will.

9. That it shall not be lawful for any of the Pirates of the Towns of Sally
when they are out in Course, and meet any Merchant Ships belonging to the
States to take out of them any strangers of what Nation soever, but on the
contrary they shall be obliged to show them friendship, and shall render them
all manner of good Offices.

10. That the whole shall tend in all points to preserve the Friendship and
Alliance m^de between the States General of the United Provinces, and the King
of Morocco.

After this Peace, Holland had some grounds to hope she should enjoy many long
years of Repose, and after having by that laid open to her self the Commerce of
the Levant, she might fill her Coffers with new Riches. But Fortune that seems
to have made it her business to keep this Republic in a perpetual agitation,
made her soon perceive, that the Peace she had newly concluded with those
Barbarians, was designed only to prepare her for a much more bloody and
dangerous War.

England at that time had erected her self into a Republic, Asylum abroad, and
implore the Succor and Protection of France and of the United Provinces: And
the unexperienced youth of King Charles the II. having swelled the daring and
ambitious humor of the Protector Cromwell beyond all bounds, as seeing himself
Arbitrary Master of that potent Nation over which he Lorded it with an Empire
more Absolute than that of any Crowned Heads, Holland had reason from thence,
to dread some very fatal Consequences. For that new Republic grown insolent
with the many advantages she had newly gained against the Family of the
Stuarts, thought there was left nothing else in the world capable to stop the
career of her Ambition; and was so wonderfully increased in power, that she
begun to grow insupportable to her Neighbors, and particularly to the United
Provinces, who saw themselves upon the point of coming to a Rupture with her.
But in regard the late long War they had had with Spain had not yet given them
time enough to recover their strength, they chose rather to temporize a while
with England, than to embroil themselves hastily in a new War. And therefore
employed all sort of means imaginable to divert that Storm, by hastening to send
Ambassadors into England. Accordingly the Heers Cats, Schaap, and Vander-perre
were dispatched to London in that quality, who were received there with great
Honors, but yet in such a manner as promised nothing less than a happy issue
of their Negotiation.

In the mean while; Holland was no longer able to keep silence after the many
bloody outrages she had received from the English. For her Merchant-Ships had
suffered and daily suffered losses that were reckoned to amount to some
Millions, by the Prizes taken by the English Privateers, to the number of near
two hundred Ships. Yet Holland had thitherto suffered all those cruel
Hostilities without complaining, and would not perhaps have come to an open
Rupture for them: So much did she dread the dismal consequences of a War that
had no other ground but Ambition, if her too great patience had not at length
been pusht to the last extremity. But that which seemed an unexampled piece of
Hardship imposed by the English on the Dutch, was that they pretended, they
ought to be permitted even in the midst of a profound Peace, to visit not only
the Merchant Ships of the States, but their Men of War too, under pretense they
carried Contraband Goods to their Enemies. And besides, that, they had
forbidden them to traffic into that part of the Islands called the Antilles,
under their Dominion. Notwithstanding all that, the States sent Orders to their
Ambassadors, to try all amicable ways to come, if 'twere possible, to an
accommodation: but when they saw there was no hopes of Peace, they took at last
a resolution to arm, for the security of their Commerce. Then the English made
no difficulty to declare openly to our Ambassadors, that the Empire of the Sea
belonged to them, that they would always oppose the Hollanders keeping a Fleet
there, because that was a Right belonging to them, which their Ancestors had
gotten by dint of Sword from other Nations; And therefore that they would never
suffer any other Flagg to appear upon the Ocean, but that of their own
Republic.

However, this Declaration hindered not the Naval Army of the United Provinces,
being then ready, from disposing it self to set Sail under the Command of
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, who was promoted to that High Office in the year
1637, in the room of the Sieur Dorp, who quitted the Service. But before they
set out, Tromp desired the States to give him directions how he should behave
himself toward the English concerning the honor of the Flagg, of which they
have in all times been extremely jealous. The States asked him how he had
behaved himself in that point in the time of King Charles; Tromp replied, that
when any English Vessels happned to meet them toward Callice or near the
Coasts of England, especially if the English were strongest, the Hollanders
used to salute them with some discharge of their Canon, and by lowering their
Flag; upon which, the States left the matter to his discretion, to act therein
according as his prudence should direct him; ordering him to do nothing to the
disadvantage of the Nation, or prejudicial to the Glory of the State; And that
he should defend their Vessels from all manner of attempts against any that
should attack them: And that however, to avoid giving any new matter of
jealousy to the English, he should endeavor not to go near their Coasts.

But a Tempest and contrary Winds hapening to arise, Tromp was forced to quit
the Coasts of Holland and Flanders, and much against his will, to make toward
the English Coast, to save his Fleet, and to preserve it from a fatal
Shipwreck, but he quitted it again as soon as possible he could, and made
toward Callis. A while after being informed that Seven Dutch Merchant Ships
Richly Laden were coming from the Streights, and that two English men of War
and some Frigates were in quest of them to take them, Tromp changed his Course
to go to their assistance. And in his way near Dover, on the 29th. of May, he
met Robert Blake Admiral for the Parliament of England, having under his
Command a Fleet of about 28 Capital Men of War and Frigates, that put to Sea the
5th. of May to go a cruising upon the Coasts of the Low Countries. Tromp seeing
him disposed himself to pay the usual Honors to the Banner of England, and
likewise ordered a Boat to be ready to carry one of his Captains on board the
Admiral to Compliment him. But Blake who was in the James carrying 82 Guns and
700 Men, not minding all those marks of Submission, or at least making as if he
perceived them not, made three Canon Shots one after another at Tromp's Ship,
called the Brederode, carrying 54 Guns, and 250 Men, who answered not the
English Admiral till after the third Shot: And then 'twas, that the Fight began
to grow hot, and Bloody, the two Fleets continuing to Canonade one another for
four full hours, and then were parted more by the obscurity of the night, than
for having satisfied the eager desire they had to fight.

The two Naval Armies then Sheering off into the main Sea, fell to work each of
them to repair their losses, and together together the vessels shattered and
scattered in the fight. The Hollanders having hung out lights during the
darkness of the night, discovered next morning at break of day, the English
Retreating toward Dover. The Captains Tuinemans and Sipke Fokkes, being cut
off from the Rear of the Fleet, were forced to yield to the Enemies, after a
long and vigorous resistance. But Fokkes's Ship having all her Masts shot by
the board, and leaking extremely, as being shot through and through in many
places, was quitted again by the English as soon as they had Plundered her, for
fear she should sink under them; but yet as much mauled as she was she made a
shift to get to the Dutch Fleet again the same day. Bla^e's Ship was so
battered, that she could keep the Sea no longer, but was fain to be towed with
much ado into the Downs. It is certainly said, that if Tromp had had Sea room
enough during the fight, the English would not have come off at so Cheap a rate
as they did.

After such an Action as that, which was to be looked on as the Preludium of a
Bloody War, which was ready to break out between the two States, Tromp being
willing to Justify himself, and to show that he was not the Aggressour, nor
had not passed his Orders, Writ the following Letter upon it to the States.

High and Mighty Lords,
SInce my last of the 20th Instant, after having Cruized before the Meuse,
Wielengen, Ostend, and Newport, till the 24th. we were forced to weigh Anchor,
because of the Boistrous Weather, and the Tempest growing still more furious,
several Captains came aboard the Admiral, to inform him what Anchors, and
Cables they had lost, some of them having but two left; and because the Wind
continued to grow more violent, we Resolved for the preventing of a greater
disaster, to make toward the Coast of Dover. We got into the Downs at one a
Clock, when I immediately dispatched away Captain Theyssen of Flushing, and
Captain Allen, to Compliment Bourn, who was then Riding there with a Squadron
of the English Fleet under his Command, and to desire him from me, to take no
Alarm at the sight of the Hollanders upon the Coasts of England, because it
happened only by an unexpected effect of the Tempestuous Weather, and to assure
him, they had no other design there than to refit their Vessels in order to
return as soon as they could, toward the Frontiers of the State, and that the
Orders we had from the States General concerned only the security of our Trade
and Fishing, and maintaining the Glory of our Nation. Bourn having heard this
Message, made answer thereto with some Compliments he charged my two Officers
to make me, desiring them withal, to return me his thanks for my
advertisement. The 29th. of the same Month, we unmoor'd with a Wind blowing
fresh at North-East, steering our Course toward Callice, with design to go and
Cruize upon our own Coasts, to refurnish our selves with Anchors and Cables. We
met in our way, the Captain Van Saanen of Amsterdam, coming from the Streights,
with Captain Huntbuyt, who informed us, that being come along with Seven
Merchant Ships valued at above 50 Tuns of Gold, they had left them at Anchor
right against Fiverly, not far off from 12 Men of War belonging to the English
Parliament. And how that the abovesaid Van Saanen, having likewise met on the
22d. of May, near to Goudstart, an English Frigate that would needs have obliged
him to strike to her, against which he defended himself about two hours, till
at last she was forced to quit him; all these Circumstances had obliged him to
make to the Fleet, to give them notice in what danger the Merchant Ships were.
This made me Resolve to go to their assistance, and to Rescue them out of the
hands of the Enemies, according to the 7th. and 8th. Article of my Commission.
In our way we met 15 of the Parliaments men of War, or Frigates, upon which I
presently lowered my Sails, and struck my Flag, in order to pay the Honors due
to the Banner of England. Being come within Cannon shot, the English Admiral
let fly a shot at me, to which I made no Answer; he then gave me another, to
which I Answered, upon which he let fly a whole Broad side at me, which made
so great Havoc on board me, that several of my men were Wounded, and some of
them had their Arms or Legs shot off. I then likewise discharged a Broad side
at him, yet was not able all this while to discover what the English meant by
this, so great a silence there was kept on both sides. And thus the two Fleets
came all on a sudden to be Engaged in a general Battle. In the mean while Major
Bourn being come out of the Downs with a Squadron of 12 men of War, or Frigates,
whereof the first carried from 60 to 70 pieces of Cannon, and the others from
38 to 50, came and fell thundering upon our Rear. So the Fight being begun at 4
in the afternoon, lasted till 9, and was not broken off but by the obscurity of
the Night. Then we made out into the Main Sea, and the Ships of both Fleets
tack't about toward their Admirals, to refit themselves. We remained all the
Night, hanging lights out in every Ship. The 30th. in the Morning, we
discovered the English Fleet to the Leeward, making toward Dover. We have lost
two of our Ships that were in our Rear, viz. Those Commanded by the Captains
Tuynemans of Middleburg, and Sipke Fokkes, of Amsterdam, this last having had
all his Masts shot do unclose by the Board. The Master and other Officers
reported to us, that they were taken by three of the Parliaments Ships about 9
a Clock at Night, who after they had taken out of her the Captain and
Lieutenant with about 14 or 15 men, put a great many English on board her, but
they being afraid she would sink under them, after they had Plundered her,
quitted her. They reported likewise, that Captain Tuyneman's Ship was taken an
hour before theirs. We design now to Cruise along the Channel, to seek out our
Merchant Ships coming from the Streights, and to Convoy them all together home
to our own Country.


At the same time Tromp dispatched away an Express into England, with the Copy
of his Letter to the States, to be delivered to our Ambassadors there. And to
make it appear more Authentic, he caused it to be signed by all the Officers
of the Fleet. But it happened, that their High and Mightinesses Ambassadors,
having left London because of the thick Fogs that usually infect the Air there,
were gone then to Reside at Chelsey, and the Express being stopped, Tromp's
dispatches were not delivered to them.

The English Admiral Ship, leaking on all sides, and very much shattered, had
much ado to get into the Downs. There Blake Buried his Dead, in the Number of
which were his Master and several other Persons of Note, to whom he caused very
particular honors to be rendered; which done, he put Pen to Paper to inform the
Parliament of all that had passed. Whereof here follows the Copy.

Most Honorable Lords,
Admiral Blake's Letter to the Paliam^nt.
I have written to you the present dispatches, to inform you of what past
yesterday between the two Fleets. Upon the advice Major Bourn gave me, that
Tromp appeared toward the Souther-sand with a Fleet of 40 sail, I used all
possible diligence to get up with him. Yesterday we discovered him below Dover
Rode, and being come within 3 miles of him, Tromp unmoored with an Easterly
Wind, which made us think he endeavored to avoid us, because of the dispute
about the Flag. About two hours after, the Dutch Fleet changing it is course,
tackt about, and stood right toward us, Tromp being at the head of this
motion. We put our selves into a line of Battle, not doubting but Tromp's
intention was to Engage. When the two Fleets were come within Musket shot of
one another, I made a shot at his Flagg, which I Repeated three times: After
the third shot, Tromp let fly at us a whole broad side. In the mean while
Major Bourn coming out of the Downs brought a new Squadron of men of War to the
fight, which ceased not till Night put an end to it; and then our Ships not
being able to keep the Sea any longer, because of the great quantity of Masts
Sails and Cordage we had lost, it was Resolved by the advice of all the
Captains, to come to an Anchor at 3 miles off the Ness, where we kept hard at
work all night in Refitting our Ships. The next Morning at break of day, we
discovered the Dutch Fleet about 4 miles from us, making toward the Coast of
France. We Judged fit in a Council of War, to keep the Weather gage of them, to
prevent a surprise, in case they should Charge us again, that so at the worst,
we might have nothing else to do but to cut the Cables of our Anchors. As yet
we have not been able to discover whither they are steering, nor what damage
they have sustained. But however we are assured, that one of their Ships is
sunk, and that we have taken another from them of 30 guns, with two Captains.
The first of these Ships having her Main Mast shot by the Board, and leaking on
all sides, Captain Laarsons was fain to quit her. We had in this fight 6
killed, 9 or 10 Mortally wounded, and 25 less dangerously; among which number
are my Master, one of his Mates, and some other under Officers. The Admiral
Ship received in her sides, and masts, about 70 great shot, and in her sails
and Rigging, almost an infinite Number, I having been engaged with the Main
body of the Enemies Fleet for about four full hours. Notwithstanding which, our
happiness is to be admired at, that we received no more damage, and we have
reason to hope, that the protection of God will favor our Arms, if a War
should once break out between the two Nations. The Hollanders are the
Aggressours, and watch all occasions to come and affront us, and Brave us upon
our own Coasts, as Experience has newly shown us.


The News of this Fight being brought to England, so wrought upon the Mobb,
that they made an insurrection, and went all in a fury to Chelsey where the
Dutch Ambassadors were lodged, with design to have sacrificed them to their
Resentments, if the Parliament had not provided before hand against the
mischief, by sending them a body of Horse to Guard all the passages about their
lodgings, with strict command, to let no body go in or out. And besides
preventing by that means any disorder, they designed by the same Expedient, to
cut off all ways of Correspondence from the Ambassadors.

In the mean while there was nothing to be heard but Complaints and Murmurings
from all parts. For the Country people in Kent and Suffolk were so alarmed at
this news, that many of them deserted their houses, and others came and
Complained to the Parliament, Representing to them what great danger their
Coasts were as being the most exposed to an Invasion, and putting them in fear
that the Hollanders would come and Ravage the whole Country. Upon which, Oliver
Cromwell, then General of all the Forces of England, and who was the Primum
mobile of that Infant-Republick, immediately set out toward the Maritime
places, as well to appease the peoples disturbed Spirits, as to inform himself
of the particulars of the fight. Some Regiments were likewise detached from the
Army, and ordered to march toward the Sea Coasts, which were Quartered at
Greenwich, Gravesend, Sandwich, and Dover.

Cromwell having carefully Examined into all the reports of the Battle, was
very ill satisfied at it, and so much the more because Captain William
Brandley, and Captain Dennis Bond, both English Men that were in Dover Castle
at that time, agreed together, as well as the Dutch Captains, Tuynemans and
Sipke Fokkes, who were prisoners, that it was their opinion, that Blake had
made three shots at Tromp, before he offered to defend himself. After such a
discovery as that, Cromwell returned to the Parliament at London, and at his
arrival, all was pacified, and the unruly Mobb quietly laid down their arms.

However what had past, left no Room for any to doubt, but that a War would
thereupon break out between those two potent Republics, though both parties
endeavored to excuse and Justify themselves of any blame in the matter,
because they were loath to pass for the Authors of the sad-disasters that must
needs ensue thereon. For the English pretended, that the Dutch were the
Aggressors, but they maintained the contrary. Tromp having writ a Letter to the
States with all the Circumstances of the Fight, as we have already seen, caused
likewise a more exact information to be drawn up of the whole matter of Fact,
which was signed by Forty Dutch Officers of the Fleet. It contained the whole
account of that action, and of all it is particulars; and all the Captains
unanimously agreed in their report, that Tromp had no other design in this
Expedition, than to maintain the freedom of Commerce, and that he intended to
pay the honors due to the English Flag, but that Admiral Blake had made three
shot at him with his Guns, before he made any at him, till at last his Patience
being pusht to the utmost extremity, he found himself obliged to answer him in
the like Language, at the third discharge.

On the other side all the Captains of the English Fleet, being likewise called
together by the Admiral's command, drew up a Manifesto, by which, after they
had related all the Circumstances of the fight, they pretended to prove, that
Tromp came up to the English Fleet, only to dare them, though he against all
sense, thought to excuse himself under the specious pretense of coming only to
the assistance of the Dutch Merchant Fleet, when it was well known they had
already weighed Anchor, and past by the Saturday before, in sight of Admiral
Blake, who never made the least offer to attack them. That Tromp with a very
Criminal boldness coming to an Anchor before Dover, never made offer to salute
the Castle, though the Castle had discharged three Guns, at three different
times, to give him notice of his duty; but that yet Tromp out of contempt,
dissembling that he perceived it, remained in his post all Night, and next day
till Noon, without striking his Flag. And to add the more weight to this
Manifesto, the English added some Articles of the orders that Tromp had given
the Captains of his Fleet; which the English had gotten information of from the
two Dutch Captains they had taken prisoners. They contained among other things,

I. That the Chiefs or Captains of Squadrons already Equipped, or to be
hereafter Equipped, had Express Orders to take care to preserve the vessels
belonging to these Provinces, and not to suffer them to be visited; without
comprising therein, the disputes that necessarily happen at Sea concerning the
passports and Evidences that every Ship whatever she be, is obliged to show at
the first demand, according to the Marine Treaty concluded with the K. of
Spain, the 17 of December 1650. That they should defend them from all manner of
Attempts, and Endeavor to re-take them from those who should have taken them,
by employing for that effect their whole force against the Aggressor, for the
service of their Country, and Act in all things conformably to their
Commission, and to the Customs of Seafaring men.

II. That if in fighting against any Foreign Ships whether to defend
themselves, or other Ships belonging to the State, they should happen to take
them, they should be obliged to carry them into Holland, with a very exact
information of all passages between them, to be presented to the Admiralty of
the place from which the Victorious Ship set out.

III. To these Articles, they added besides, that every Chief, or Captain
should keep his Guns and his Arms always in readiness, and should tack about
toward the Admiral, and the main body of the Fleet, upon sight of any Foreign
Man of War. That he should take good heed to the Signal of War, and mind
whether it were offensive or defensive, that by protecting the States Ships and
not suffering them to be visited, they might be the better able to pursue their
Respective Voyages by Regulating themselves by the Flag, which being red, and
fastened to the Top Gallant of the Admirals Main Mast, should be understood to
betoken War, at the sight of which, every man should strive to do his b^st, in
order to gain some advantage upon the Enemy. That if they took any of their
Ships, they should carry it under the Admirals Flag; but that as soon as the
bloody Flag should be taken down, all acts of Hostility should cease.

IV. It was moreover expressly forbidden them, to pay any salutes with their
Guns, by way of honor to any, unless upon very good grounds; that however, if
they chanced to come near any Foreign Man of War, which they were under a kind
of an Engagement to salute, because it concerned the honor of the United
Provinces so to do, they should in such cases, use great Circumspection,
especially if the Chiefs or Captains of such Foreign Ships should have first
saluted the Lieutenant General, or him that commands in his place, but above
all, they were to take care, it might be done without damage.

Likewise when any of the Ships of the Fleet being sent a cruising to Sea,
should discover any Foreign Ship; or, that she got Intelligence that Warlike
preparations were making any where, and that Ships were gathering together, to
compose a Fleet, then the said Ship was to get the exactest information
possible, of the Number of their Men of War, and of their Arms, Guns, and Men,
that she should take good notice, which way they steered, and whether in their
passage, they offered to commit any act of Hostility. That in this case, they
should give the Admiral advice of it with all the diligence imaginable, who
thereupon, was to give the following Orders, viz. That scouts be sent to all
parts of the Seas, that all the Ships of the Fleet should repair to the
appointed Rendevous, where they should consult together what design the Fleet
so discovered might have, what course they steered, and into what Harbor they
would enter, whether into one of the ports belonging to the States, or some
other. And if it should happen, they had failed at first to use all those
precautions, that then they should let off a Great Gun for a Signal; that so
every one taking notice it was an Extraordinary Signal, and Judging from thence
of the importance of the business, might return answer thereto, each of them
likewise, with a Gun Extraordinary; after which every one of them should be
obliged to make to the place whence the first Gun was fired, that all the
Captains of the Fleet meeting together on board the Admiral, might take such
Resolutions as should be most convenient for the time, and for the good of the
State.

From which Articles and Instructions of Tromp to his Officers, though the
English pretended to draw invincible proofs, that the Hollanders were the
Aggressors in the late bloody attempt upon their Fleet, yet the Dutch on the
contrary, pretended it was visible from thence, that their main Aim was only to
secure their Trade, and defend the Glory of their Nation, in case they were
attackt, but that they had not the least design to be Aggressors against the
English.

After this Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, whilst he was Cruising below Bullen, writ
a Letter to Admiral Blake, dated the 2d. of June, in which he entreated him to
release the two Capt. of his, he had made Prisoners, and who were already
carried to London, and to order the Restitution of Captain Tuyneman's Ship.

But Blake as yet red hot with Resentment, for what was so newly past between
them, and being much surprised, that after the Rough Compliments between them
in that Rencounter, Tromp should presume to Write to him upon such a Subject as
that, in very great indignation, made him the following Answer.

SIR,
NOthing ever surpised me more than yours of the 2d. of June last, in that,
Blake's answer to Tromp.
tho you affect with so much vanity, to pass for a Man of Honor, yet it is no
way visible, that you maintain that Character by any of your Actions. The Cruel
attempt you lately made against the Parliament of England's Fleet, whose ruin
you had conspired, is an evident proof of this: That Fleet, I say, to which you
were in duty obliged to pay your Humblest Respects and Submissions, since you
have not refused to pay them in several other Rencounters. That Act of
Hostility you have so lately committed, is so much the more Criminal, because
there was no occasion given you from England, to engage you to proceed to such
an extremity, since you were pleased to do it in a time when your Ambassadors
were flattering our Commonwealth with new hopes of Peace and Union, and
pretended to solicit with much earnestness a speedy conclusion of a Treaty of
Mutual Alliance and Confederation. That is the Brave Exploit upon which at
present you found your glory, and for which you frame an unjust Apology, as
pretending you did nothing else but defend your self. But God in whom we put
our greatest hopes, having made your designs serve to your own destruction, we
have taken some of your Ships, which you now are pleased to redemand with as
much confidence, as if the action lately ^ommitted had been no act of
Hostility, as it appears in your Writings, by your affecting to give it another
name. In fine, I thought not fit to give you any other answer, but this, That I
am persuaded, you will find the Parliament of England very ill satisfied with
your Conduct; because they cannot but regard with horror the Innocent Blood of
their Subjects that has been spilt; and on the other side, that after all, you
will find your self constrained, always to give them the marks of an entire
submission.


In the mean while, the States Ambassadors, were at London endeavoring to
Renew the Negotiation for a Treaty, and having for that purpose, demanded
Audience of the Parliament, it was granted them. It was their business then, to
endeavor to appease their exasperated Spirits, and thereby to put a timely
stop to the dismal consequences of the War that was ready to burst out between
these two Formidable Powers, which was a Task of no small difficulty. However,
they employed their industry and parts in it to the best advantage they could,
and accordingly on that Subject, made the following Speech to the Parliament.

Most Honorable Lords.
WE expected nothing less than the fatal disaster which has lately happened. The
Dutch Ambassadors Audience of the Parliament and their Speech to them.
And if what Public Fame says, of a Sea fight between the two Fleets, prove
true, this disgrace is so much the greater and more afflicting to us, because
our Men are looked upon as the Authors of it. All those stories that are
whispered about concerning this matter, are already looked upon by the people,
as the mournful presages of the ruin of two States that have hitherto been
ever linkt together in a strict Alliance, and now by this fatal blow, see
themselves at the eve of a Bloody War. We are so sensibly concerned at all the
false Rumors that are spread abroad to the disadvantage of our Nation, that we
will call God to witness, that the States General were so far from contributing
to the late unhappy recounter, that they had not the least knowledge of it, and
desire nothing so much as Union, Peace, and an inviolable Friendship with
England. However it is not impertinent to the matter in question, to let you
know, that it may be observed from the Letter written to us by the Admiral of
Holland, that the true Cause of that action was very different from what it is
reported to have been: And what is more, Tromp declares in that Letter, in
express terms, and he repeats it three times, that he had not received any
other Orders from the States, than only to defend the Merchant Ships belonging
to the States, from the oppression of those who might be capable to disturb the
freedom of their Commerce, and to Cruise upon the Frontiers of the State
without going far from Ostend and Newport; from whence it is as clear as the
day, That the States General of the United Provinces never had any thoughts to
attempt any thing that might be capable to break the strict union that has
always been between England and Holland. And if any thing has happened contrary
to the sincerity of their intentions, they who shall be found to have violated
the Rules, and passed the Bounds that were prescribed them, ought to be
Responsible for it.

According to the Orders given us by their High and Mightinesses, to endeavor
a Treaty of Alliance, we presented some days ago to your Commissioner, a
Memorial, in which we propose means, not only for composing the differences
about Commerce, but likewise for the securing of it, and rendering it more
flourishing. And we desire nothing else at present but to see them brought to a
speedy and happy conclusion. And indeed who could believe, that a Treaty that
is at present the firmest support of good and well disposed people, and the
most solid foundation of the Reformation, should be interrupted by the
capricious humor of a few ill intentioned persons? It is a Natural Law
acknowledged by all the World, That, in Private Affairs, if an Attorney or
Proctor; or in Public Affairs, if a Minister of State, offers to pass the
Duties of his Office; or if a General of an Army, without any Order from his
Sovereign, Ravages and lays Wast the Countries of his Allies, or like a wild
unruly Beast that has broken his Chains, runs about the Fields and does all the
mischief he can, then in such a case, it is but Justice to hold the Sovereigns
blameless, and to charge the ^rime upon those who are the true Authors of it;
and especially if the Sovereigns disavow the Fact, as there is reason to
expect, the States will do in the case now in debate. However there is no
doubt, but that it would be a thing altogether unheard of, and condemned both
by Divine and Humane Laws, to go about to commit any acts of Hostility, without
hearing first what reasons the Adversary had to allege for himself. It Is a
Maxim universally received by all Nations conducted by the light of Reason,
That when any mischievous fact is committed, the examination of the crime,
should precede before Sentence be given; But likewise, if the Party offended
receive ample satisfaction, ought he not to lay by his Resentment? And it is
not to be wondered at, if all Nations naturally avoid War, and are inclined to
Peace, since War is a horrible Monster that causes a thousand unhappinesses and
feeds upon nothing but innocent Blood. Some holy Fathers of the Church have
very truly and pertinently said, That men ought to have War in abomination,
even when Justice or Necessity it self obliges them by force to take Arms, but
especially Christians, who ought to have learnt to be sparing of the Blood of
other people as well as of that of their own Subjects. Experience shows us in
natural things, that when the most excellent Wines come to corrupt, they change
into Vinegar most extremly sharp. So likewise if these two Nations that have
for so many years been united together, in Religion, Commerce and Liberty, and
whom the Neighborhood of the Sea, the Glory of Arms, and their known valor
have rendered yet more inseparable, should come once to break that Union, what
else must be expected thence but their common Ruin? Would not they be then
like th^s^ Sons of the Earth, that destroyed one another, as we are told in the
story of Cadmus? And will not even our Religion be thereby exposed to contempt;
and will not our common Enemies draw from our troubles new matter of triumph?

Truly our sense in this case differs nothing from that of some of your
Writers, who have very judiciously compared our two Republics to two Earthen
Vessels floating on the Sea, with this Motto, Si collidimur fragimur, i. e. If
we fall foul on one another, we shall certainly break. That is an Emblem that
admirably well shows that a perpetual Peace ought to render them inseparable.
For if a well cemented Union might once be settled between these two Nations,
what felicities are there they might not enjoy? By that, we shall see Religion
firmly established, the Sea open to us, Navigation free, and the Enemies of the
two Nations put out of all power to hurt them, Peace and Tranquillity secured,
and what is still more to be desired, the Blessing of Heaven entailed upon us.
In fine, to conclude, we therefore most earnestly beseech you, that you would
order a Copy of a Relation of the late fight as it really passed, to be
delivered to us, and to permit us to send it to the States General of the
United Provinces, that by examining carefully the relations of both Parties,
the truth may the more easily be detected; That in the mean while, all
Hostilities may cease on both sides. That the Negotiation for a Treaty of
Peace, may not be broken off on this occasion, That so by remedying the
misfortunes lately happened, we may at last effect the conclusion of a solid and
durable Peace, which we passionately wish for, and which we pray God the
Sovereign Arbiter and Lord of Peace, to be pleased to grant us.


After this discourse, the Ambassadors retired, and were guarded home to their
Lodgings by a Party of the English Guards. The Parliament seemed to them to be
extremely divided, and to waver much in their Resolutions about so weighty and
Nice a Point, but yet without positively declaring, which of the Admirals they
judged to have begun the Fight. The major part of the Members maintained, that
the English Admiral had right on his side, but Tromp was not of that opinion.
The rest of the Parliament being stirred up by the secret practices of the
Spanish Faction, said, that the Hollanders had by the late action given an
evident proof of their Treachery; That the Republic of England had reason to
be much alarmed at it, and to look upon it as an assured presage of their
future Ruin. Yet there were several Members of that Illustrious Body, whether
moved by some private interest, or by a principle of friendship, that were more
inclined to an accommodation with the Hollanders than to a Rupture, in the
number of which, were these Gentlemen, viz. Mildmay, Vane, Pembrook, and
several others: But Cromwell who was in the highest degree of his fortune, of
which he made his Idol, was the only man that had the secret of working upon
the spirits of that Nation. His Party was backed by Harrison, Whitlock,
Bradshaw, St. John's, Harrington, Fleetwood, and Mr. Scot, who fomented the
Jealousies and lying stories that the hatred the people had conceived against
the Hollanders had lately produced, nay, and they had blown up the flame to so
great a height, that they reported, that Tromp was come to London with a design
to make a general Massacre of the people; but his enterprise not taking effect,
he had commanded those of his Fleet, to put all the English they met with to
the Sword; and that besides, he had given orders to all his Captains upon pain
of Death, that at the approach of any English Man of War, if they found
themselves in danger of being taken, having got all their Seamen upon the Deck,
they should clap a lighted Match into their Powder-room, as well to destroy
their Enemies by blowing them up into the Air, as to take from them all hopes
of any Booty. The Sieur Nieuport who was sent some weeks before, as well to
carry some Papers to the Ambassadors concerning their Negotiation, as to tell
them several things by word of mouth that were entrusted with him by the
States, run great danger of his life, because he was taken for a Spy. In a
word, the mutual hatred between both Nations was risen to that high degree of
bitterness, that there was reason to fear they would never be reconciled more.

The Ambassadors well observed, that Cromwell acting like an able Politition,
used great dissimulation with them, and that besides, other motives that
actuated him, he was further influenced by his own private Ambition. He
appeared the first days of the contest very moderate toward them, and wholly
inclined to lay, by some gentle expedient, the Storm that was newly risen, but
yet at the bottom, he was of the same mind with the Parliament, or to speak
more properly, 'twas he that underhand spurred them on to Revenge, and he that
persuaded them to employ all their Forces to destroy the Hollanders. The
Ambassadors having then discovered the Parliaments design, and that they were
fitting out a formidable Fleet to Sea, on which were to be embarkt 4000
Soldiers, resolved to present a second Memorial to the Council of State, which
was conceived in these Terms.

The Memorial presented to the Council of State, by the Dutch Ambassadors.
The Ambassadors of the States General of the United Provinces having protested
on Monday last before this August Council, and called God himself to witness
their Innocence, and the Justice of their Cause, declaring that the Fight
between the two Fleets did not happen by any premeditated design of their High
and Mightinesses: They have judged it expedient for the better clearing of that
point, to put into your hands a Copy of Tromp's Letter, by which this Republic
may evidently see, that their High and Mightinesses gave him no other
Commission than to cruise on the Frontier Seas of their own Dominions, without
passing any farther, for fear of giving jealousy to their Neighbors. And
therefore the said Ambassadors come again to day, to give you new assurances
upon their having received by yesterdays Post, all the informations given in
from the 22d to the 29th of the last month, New style, concerning the Battle in
Question, by which it appears still more clearly, That the States had no hand
in that action, directly or indirectly, declaring themselves ready to conclude
a strict Alliance that may be capable to unite the two Republics by eternal
and inviolable friendship. It is certain, That is their last and most sincere
intention.

Moreover, the said Ambassadors pray the Council of State to be pleased to give
them a speedy Answer, such as they in their prudence shall think most proper,
in the present juncture, to prevent the mischievous consequences of some more
dismal Accident. Neither will it be unseasonable, to acquaint the Council that
the Sieur Newport sent from their High and Mightinesses to their Ambassadors
for business concerning their Negotiation, is upon his departure to repass the
Sea, if the Council of State will please to grant him a Passport, as we pray
them to do, and that he may have leave to choose one of the States Ships that is
now in the Thames, or elsewhere.

The Sieur Newport having expedited his affairs, waited only for a Passport to
be gone, but he found great difficulty to obtain it, which retarded his
departure for several days. He got at last out of London with much ado, and
came to Gravesend, thinking to embark there. But at that time, the English, by
showing fresh marks of their resentment, rekindled those flames which were
thought to be half extinguished, and made appear by their slighting the
instances of the Ambassadors, and by new acts of Hostility, that all those
troubles would soon degenerate into an open War. The Channel was full of their
Privateers, who took without any distinction all manner of Ships that came in
their way, without excepting even those that belonged to France or Spain. All
the Dutch Ships that were in the Thames, were likewise stopped the 13th of June,
and their Captains went to Chelsey, to make their Complaints of it to the
Ambassadors, who were extremely surprised at all these new attempts, and
thought it thereupon necessary to present yet a Third Memorial more, which they
did the very same day, in these following Terms.

Another Memorial presented by the Dutch, Ambassador to the Council of State.
We having on the 3d and 6th of this Month clearly made appear to the Council of
State, as well by Writing as word of Mouth, taking God, that knows the Hearts
of Men, to witness, That the Bloody Battle that was lately fought between the
two Fleets of the two Republics, happened without the knowledge, and against the
will of the United Provinces, so are we more and more confirmed both by Letters
and Expresses, that our Masters have been sensibly grieved at this Combat, and
that farther, upon the Advices we have given them, they have applied themselves
with all care imaginable, to seek out Remedies that may be able to quash all
these growing Troubles in their Birth, and timely stop the blood of so
dangerous a wound. 'Twas for that effect they have called a solemn and General
Assembly of all the Members of the State, in which we not at all doubt, but
with the assistance of Heaven, they will find out the true means to renew again
that ancient Friendship and Union that has always reigned between the two
Nations, and that they will remove all the difficulties that seem at present to
render them irreconcilable, which will be an assured advance toward the
Conclusion of the Treaty already begun. Their High and Mightinesses desire it
with so much the more Passion and Earnestness, because it so highly concerns
the Welfare and repose of the two Republics, and will effectually stop the
fountains of Christian Blood that has been shed. This is what at present
flatters the hopes of so many Nations, and especially of the Protestants, so
that we entreat you both by the Sacred Bond of Religion that unites us
together, and by the Sweet Liberty we equally enjoy, That nothing may be done
with too much precipitation, for fear the Remedies that may be afterward judged
proper for our reconciliation, coming too late, may prove ineffectual. We also
pray you, as soon as possible without delay, to answer favorably to our last
demand, which we solicit with so much the more earnestness, because we are
informed, that the Ships and Mariners of our Nation are taken, and stopped by
your orders, on the High Seas, or in your Harbors, the one by pure force, and
the other after Fighting. The Parliament at last answered them in such a manner
as might well be expected after what had lately passed. The Parliaments answer
to the States Ambassadors.
And here follows the Tenor of their Answer.

The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, reflecting upon all the proofs
of benevolence and sincere Friendship, they have often given to the States
General of the United Provinces, even from the first beginning of the troubles
of this Kingdom, having omitted nothing of what might conduce to the
maintaining a perfect Correspondence between them and it, and render their
union much more strict than ever before, find themselves at present hainously
offended by an unexpected attempt, which is an act of Hostility committed upon
the Coasts of England against the Fleet of the Republic, after a mature
deliberation, and examination of the Writings which their Excellencies the
Ambassadors of the United Provinces have put into our Hands, we have thought
fit to make them the present Answer.

Tho the Parliament were inclined out of a principle of affection and
tenderness, to receive favorably the expressions contained in the abovesaid
writings, tending to represent the late Fight between the two Fleets, as a
thing that hapened without the knowledge and against the will of their High and
Mightinesses, yet upon due reflection made thereon, it appears, That the
Resolutions of the States; and the Conduct of their Admirals do no ways agree
with all those protestations, especially in a time whilst a Treaty of Alliance
was managing, which they themselves had sought for, and which had been
Negotiated by their own Ambassadors. Besides, what could be the scope of so
formidable an Arming of 150 Ships of War, made by them without any occasion for
it, was it not for the design which has now lately broken out? Which is nothing
else but the effect of a real jealousy, even by the confession of the
Ambassadors themselves, at the same time they pretend to excuse themselves of
it; and according to the Tenor of the Commissions their High and Mightinesses
have given to the Chief Commanders of their Naval Armies, there are but too
many reasons that persuade us to believe, that the States do thereby but aspire
to Ravish from England by force of Arms, her ancient Prerogatives, and the
Rights she has over the Seas; and that further, they aim at nothing else but
the destruction of our Fleet; which is our Barrier, and our securest Rampart,
and by that means to expose this Commonwealth to an Invasion, as they intended
to do by the late attempt. Upon which, the Parliament think themselves
indispensably engaged with the assistance of Heaven to exact speedy
satisfaction for the outrages done to the Nation, and to put themselves in such
a condition that the like may happen no more for the future. And yet they do
all this with design however to appease if possible the Troubles that have
lately risen between the two Nations, by all ways of Humanity and moderation,
if God who by his Wisdom and Almighty Power, is able to do all things, shall
please to furnish us with more proper and efficacious means for that end, than
have been hitherto employed.

This Answer, together with that proud and haughty way the English have with
them, begun to give new alarms to Holland, and make her fear the Consequences
would be fatal. It was a very sensible Vexation to the States, to see
themselves upon the point of coming to a Rapture with that New Republic, whose
happy progresses in her beginnings had made them conceive fair hopes, that she
would let her Allie Holland share with her in the prosperities she enjoyed by
the good Correspondence and strict Friendship which was like to Reign between
them. The Merchants were almost out of their Wits at it, by reason of the great
loss they daily suffered both of their Ships and Goods, which unhappily became
a Prey to the English Privateers. Which obliged the States, before the
Negotiation already begun was quite broken off, to dispatch another
Extraordinary Embassage to London, being willing to appease all disputes by
Amicable ways, if it were possible to find out any means to do it, and it being
necessary for that purpose to make choice of some person of great Merit, they
cast their Eyes upon Mr. Pauw, Lord of Heemsted, Pensioner of Holland, one of
the ablest Ministers, even by the Testimony of Foreigners themselves, the
Republic ever had. He set out from the Hague, the 25th. of June, on his way to
the Brill, and at 6 a Clock at Night the same day he got on Board a Dutch Man
of War; the 28th. he arrived at Gravesend, and sent notice of his arrival to
the States Ambassadors, and to the Parliament, who were not a little surprised
at it. The Ambassadors came presently to him, to inform him of all that had
passed. The 30th. Mr. Heemsted was Conducted to London with the Ceremonies
usual at the Entry of Ambassadors. He was received at the Tower, by three
members of Parliament, and Conducted thence by them to the House appointed for
his Lodging attended by a very fine Train of Coaches of many great Lords and
persons of Quality. He presently demanded Audience of the Parliament, which
being granted him the very next day, he there pronounced a discourse in Latin
whereof here follows the Translation.

Most Honored Lords,
The Speech of Mr. Heemsted Ambassador Extraordinary to the Parliament.
THe Public Testimonies and Authentic proofs of a sincere and cordial Amity
which the States of the United Provinces and their Subjects have always shown
to the British Nation, and especially toward the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, whose Government is at present so happy and
flourishing, are so well known to all Christendom, that no body doubts of them,
any more than they do of the ardent passion they have had, to render it
perpetual, firm, and unmovable. But because, by reason of the inconstancy of
worldly things, there often happen unlucky accidents and disorders in Humane
life, that change the State of affairs, and seem to cover over its face with a
thick and sable Cloud that obscures for a time that agreeable Union, and happy
mutual Benevolence, there is need of a great deal of precaution to stop its
mischievous Consequences; above all, if it be considered, that when such kind
of troubles are timely stifled in their birth, and that unhappy
misunderstanding started by them comes once to cease, it may be said, they
serve more to strengthen and confirm that mutual Union, than any way to weaken
or dissolve its Bonds.

It Is for this design, that my Mrs. the States General of the United provinces,
have been pleased to send me in Quality of their Ambassador extraordinary to
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, though otherwise they had no
reason to doubt either of the Prudence or of the Capacity of the Ambassadors
they had here already for Affairs of high importance. I am therefore sent, to
assure the Commonwealth of England from them, of the sincere and inviolable
desire they have to see its Government continue in that Peace, Happiness and
Prosperity which at present it enjoys, and to offer it at the same time, all
the services they are capable of. And I can give you this Testimony of them
with the more assured fidelity, because having always been present in their
assemblies, and coming now but newly out of them, I have been an Eye witness of
the zeal and ardent passion they have, to contribute all that lies in their
power, that may possibly conduce to the maintaining a firm and solid Friendship
between the two States, and to prevent all that may shake it. And therefore
'twas with great Astonishment, and with a very sensible Regret they heard of
what has past between the Admirals of the two Republics; and for fear that
fatal Rencounter altogether unexpected should cause some new mis-understandings
and raise new Jealousies, or that by putting a stop to the present Treaty, it
might make it impracticable to come to a conclusion of a Renovation of the
Ancient Amity that has always been between the two Nations, the States, my Mrs.
judged it necessary I should come hither, because having been always present at
all their deliberations by reason of my Employment, I was best able to
Represent to the Commonwealth of England, the naked truth, and all the
Circumstances of that Action, as they have been related to them, in order to
the rasing out all suspicions that might be capable to distemper or destroy the
good intelligence and true Amity that is between the two Nations, and remove
all obstacles that might, hinder the conclusion of the Treaty already began.

Moreover I protest and declare in the presence of the Parliament of the
Republic of England by virtue of my Credential Letters; and in the Name of the
States General, my Mrs. that they never had any thoughts to attempt any thing,
or give order, that any thing should be attempted that might give any just
cause of Umbrage to the Sovereign power of this Commonwealth, to break or
weaken the Union and good Correspondence that has been so long cultivated
between the two Republics, or under what pretense soever, to sow any discord
between them. But rather on the contrary, I can say, that the States have been
moved by their own inclinations, and by the sentiments of a real Friendship,
carefully to study out all that might conduce to the hastening the conclusion of
a strict and inviolable Alliance between the two Nations. It Is true a very
considerable Fleet was Equipped in Holland, but at the same time there is no body
but knows, the States were forced so to do by the continual complaints of their
Subjects, and that they gave notice of it to the Parliament. And they published
beforehand, that this arming was for no other end than for the liberty and
security of Commerce, which was much endamag'd and interrupted by many very
sensible Losses the Subjects of the United Provinces daily suffered of their
Ships and Goods; and certainly, it is but natural to make use of the means that
force and necessity put into our hands, to protect oppresed innocence: But they
thoughr of nothing less than a fight, to create new troubles between the two
Nations, and Revive the disputes that were already terminated. But things being
so, and there happening by accident a fierce Battle between the Fleets of the two
Nations, the States General have thought fit to Communicate to the Parliament
of England an exact and faithful Relation of all that passed, such as they
have received from their Admiral, authorized by the Testimony of all the
Captains and other persons worthy of Credit: namely, that Admiral Tromp came
toward the Fleet of this Republic, more by necessity than out of any
premeditated design, and that after he had paid his Civilities to Major Bourn,
as he was pursuing his voyage, he fell into the presence of Admiral Blake
before he was aware; that presently he ordered an advice Boat to be made ready,
to send some Officers of the Fleet to Compliment him, but that Blake answering
him with Civilities of a quite contrary nature, let fly all his Guns at him,
and that then Tromp discharged his, more to defend himself, than to offend the
Aggressor. This was the cause of an Engagement, in which, the Capricious humor
of Fortune had more share than any design of Council premeditated, and swelled
up with Ambition, so that it being begun about a mistaken point of Honor, and
not continued by our men out of any principle of animosity, the States General
pray the Commonwealth of England, to be persuaded, they had no hand in that
Action, but to take it for an Event of pure chance, and of the inconstancy of
Worldly affairs, and that accordingly they would be pleased to recall their
Orders and Commissions, and to let all Acts of Hostility cease that now disturb
Commerce, and the States on their part, are ready to consent to the same, and
always to employ all possible means to facilitate an Accommodation.

They are very sensible, that all Christendom is deeply concerned in so great
an affair as this, and especially the reformed Churches of all Europe, who all
equally wish and desire, that our troubles may be stifled in their Birth, as
being persuaded, that discord arising between Neighboring States of the same
Religion, may not only draw after it the Ruin of that Commerce that makes them
Flourish, but likewise awaken the drooping hopes of both their secret and open
Enemies, who would not fail to take occasion thereupon, to foment some new
Plots in some Province or other of this Commonwealth which would afterward
break out, and so passing from one to another, we should see our States become
the bloody Theater of a War. To prevent therefore and put a stop to the Course
of so great mischiefs, I have Orders without further delay, to Represent to
you, and employ all my industry that some assured means may be agreed upon on
both sides to accommodate the differences about what has past, and for the
taking such just Measures for the future, that there may never happen the like
accidents again between the two Fleets; and that so thereby the Greatness and
Glory of the Parliament of England may be secured from the danger of all sorts
of attempts against it.

Since then the States General openly declare to the Parliament the ardent
passion they have to see the two Nations perfectly United together and their
differences entirely composed, and that the propositions on both sides may at
last terminate in a strict Alliance, all the favor I desire of the Parliament,
is that they would please to give order to their Commissioners, and to the
Council of State, to give me speeddy Audience, and to labor jointly with me
for the Conclusion of the Treaty, in order to terminate the principal business
that is the foundation of my Negotiation, as well as of that of the other
Ambassadors In extraordinary, of the States.

In the mean while, I acknowledge my self infinitely obliged to the Parliament,
that they have been pleased to grant a Ship to Mr. Nieuport to repass the Sea,
and go into Holland; I will add here, that being a Member of the State, he has
had order to remain with me, to assist me with his Council, till my return,
which I dare be confident, the Parliament will not take ill; and that they will
be pleased favorably to accept my most humble services which I present them.

Mr. de Heemsted going the next day to the Council of State, Mr. de Heemsted's
Speech to the Council of State.
made them the following Speech, which he pronounced in French. Since it has
pleased my Lor^s, the States General of the United Provinces besides the
Ambassadors they have already here, to send me extraordinarily in the same
Quality to the Parliament of the Republic of England, to whom I had the Honor
yesterday in a full Assembly, to declare the Subject of my Embassage, and the
sincerity of the intentions of the High and Mighty Lords, my Mrs. I thought my
self indispensably obliged to appear before this August Council, as well to
present them my Credential Letters, as to assure them for my own particular,
how much I tender the prosperity they enjoy in the management of those great
and important affairs entrusted to them by the Commonwealth and which they
discharge with so much Wisdom and Prudence. And as I have already declared to
the Parliament, so I Reiterate again here, that the States General desire
nothing so much as the Continuation of a good, and intimate Correspondence, and
the Renewing of a durable and solid Friendship with England, of which they had
in several Rencounters given very signal marks. It is Certain, the States, my
Mrs. wish nothing more heartily, than to see the Treaty of Peace brought to a
Conclusion, and the Union between the two Republics, thereby Re-establisht and
Corroborated, and all Subjects of hatred and misunderstanding that might be
able to disturb it, thereby entirely dispelled. Gentleman, it is the Aim of the
Enemies of the Reformation, by Divisions, not only to weaken but totally to
ruin the two Republics, but the two Nations having received so many great
marks of the blessing of God, as well by their partaking in the true Religion
of which they are the trusty Guardians, as by the prodigies that have appeared
in their foundation and establishment, in several parts of the World, whither
they have so happily advanced Commerce in spite of all the dangers of the Seas;
the States, my Mrs. Judge it absolutely necessary to maintain Religion, and
strengthen our Republics which cannot be effected otherwise than by a happy
Complication, and an agreeable confusion of their Riches and common Interests;
that will be the true means with the assistance of Heaven to prevent all that
may be capable to trouble their happiness and felicity.

Upon which considerations the States General were so extremely surprised at
the news of what past lately between the two Naval Armies, and at the mutual
jealousy the two Nations have conceived thereupon, That they thought it most
highly important, to depute me extraordinarily toward the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, and toward this Venerable Council, to represent to
them the true State of things, so much the rather, because having the honor to
assist in two Assemblies, namely that of the States General, and of the States
of Holland and West-Friesland, I have a full knowledge of their most secret and
most weighty Affairs, and that by consequence, I am able to assure them, that
there never was any Project formed, any Resolution taken, nor any Commission
given directly or indirectly, to offend the Republic of England, and to give
them any just Cause of Jealousy, and much less, to go and attack their Fleets:
But rather on the contrary, it was ordered. That wheresoever our Men should
meet with those of that Nation, they should treat them as true Friends; tho in
the fatal rencounter we have newly mentioned, things happened quite otherwise, of
which I gave yesterday a Relation ample and particular enough to suffice at
present, because it is not convenient to be so often Renewing the Memory of
past things that ought to be buried in eternal oblivion, in the mean while,
finding by the last answer given to our Ambassadors, that you pretend
satisfaction for what is past, and assurances for the future; and besides the
States, my Mrs. Judging it Requisite first to remove all preventions and
mistaken prejudices concerning what is past; and that the two Republics should
endeavor to find out means to secure them against the like accidents for the
time to come, that the Treaty of Alliance already in good forwardness be
without interruption, carried on, that besides, the surest means imaginable be
provided to prevent all suspicion and distrust, and that a standing order be
established according to which the Naval Armies on both sides shall be obliged
to Regulate themselves, concerning which points I have received the necessary
instructions from my Mrs. I entreat you Gentlemen, to be pleased to name some
of your Illustrious Body, to treat with me out of hand concerning the affairs
in Question. I must add to all I have just now asserted, that the States never
had any thoughts to dispute with the Republic of England, that Grandeur and
Sovereign power that distinguishes it with so much Glory from all the other
Republics of Europe; Heartily wishing besides, that by the Union of two such
potent States as England and Holland, the two Republics may contribute to the
mutual preservation of one another, be secured against the Conspiracies of
their Enemies, and assure to themselves a firm and lasting Peace. In the mean
while I pray you to give order by your Wise Conduct as soon as possible, that
the mischief caused by that unfortunate Rencounter, may not be increased by new
Hostilities committed against the Ships of the States; but rather that you
would straightly forbid the same, without staying till the sore be grown
incurable, and till by that, we awake the drooping hopes of our Enemies; being
persuaded, that we shall find out effectual means to reconcile us, to the shame
and confusion of those that are jealous of our prosperity and common fe^icity.
I shall be most sensibly obliged to this August assembly, if they will please
to give me a speedy answer, that so without losing time, I may fall to work
upon a business of so great advantag^ and importance, recommending my self in
the mean time with all possible respect, to your Benevolence.


June 24.
Two days aft^r, the Mr. of the Ceremonies gave notice to (...) ^^eemsted, that
the Parliament had ap^^^^ (...) ^^mmissioners to Treat with him. And (...)
^^^^ence being thereupon entered into, Mr. ^^^^s^ed begun with declaring to the
Commissioners. That the States had never given any cause of Complaint to the
Republic of England, but rather all the demonstrations of a true and sincere
Amity; that their intention could not be doubted of, since it was Notorious,
that it had been always such in time past, and should be so for the time to
come, that if there had happened any thing that seemed contrary to that
intention, it ought not to be imputed to the States, as an offense proceeding
from them, nor any occasion taken upon that account, to attempt any thing
against their Subjects, but that generously forgetting on both sides what was
past, Provision ought to be made for their mutual security, by giving the
necessary Orders to prevent the like accidents for the future; unless the
Parliament should think it fitter to name Commissioners on both sides, to make
a through scrutiny into the Business in dispute, and above all, to enquire who
was the Aggressor. That their High and Mightinesses in case Tromp should be
found to have begun first, would not only disown his Conduct, as contrary to
their Orders, but would cause him to be severely punished, but that if on the
contrary, Blake should be convinced of having been the Aggressor, the
Parliament was likewise obliged to Chastise him; so that by that proceeding it
would be known, not only what was the real intention of their High and
Mightinesses, but an assured way would thereby be laid open, to pacify all
troubles, after the Example of several other States and Republics, who have
successfully practiced the like Expedients. That their High and Mightinesses
never had the least thoughts of making any encroachment upon the Grandeur of
the British Nation, in any way to Diminish it, but that after the late unhappy
Rencounter, they had given new Orders, that for the future, at the approach of
any of their Fleets, or Ships of War, the same honors should be rendered to the
Parliament in the point of the Flag, that had been usually paid to that Nation
during the preceding Reigns, hoping by that means, both Parties would have
reason to rest satisfied; that the Treaty of Alliance about which, the States
Ambassadors had declared the intention of their Mrs. in several Conferences,
might be at length continued and that it would please the Council likewise to
declare their intention that the differences being once known, the obstacles
that hindered an accommodation might be removed, and a happy conclusion of an
Eternal Alliance and inviolable Friendship might be obtained; that an end might
be put to all Acts of Hostility, and a Restitution be made of all the Ships and
effects belonging to persons that were Innocent in the matter. That for that
end, he prayed the Council to be pleased to declare their Resolution concerning
the points abovementioned, and principally concerning the continuation of the
Treaty that was begun, the Cessation of Hostilities, and the Releasing of the
Ships and Persons seized, and so much the rather because they had not delayed a
moment to inform the Council of State of the good intentions of their High and
Mightinesses.

This Conference passing the 24th. they had a second the next day, which was
followed by a third the 27th. of the same Month in which Mr. Heemsted
pressingly demanded a positive answer, adding to what he had already advanced
the following propositions. viz.

That the States were still in the same mind, to live in perfect Union with the
Republic of England; that upon that consideration, they had promised their
protection to the English Company in Holland, in case the troubles should
happen to increase, that he on either side that had transgressed his Commission
in the late fight near Dover, should be obliged personally to answer for it,
that it might be no cause of a Rupture between the two Nations; that in order
to pacify all things, Commissioners should be appointed on both sides, to make
a strict enquiry into all that had past, and that they who should thereupon be
found guilty, should according to the Maxim, of all other States, be punished,
as Authors of the Misfortunes and Calamities of the people, that the Ships of
War on both sides, being ordered when they meet one another at Sea, to behave
themselves as formerly they used to do, there would happen no more disputes for
the future about that Subject, that when a perfect Union should be once
established between the two Republics, very great advantages would undoubtedly
result from thence for their mutual defense and preservation. On the 29th. the
Council of State having examined all these Reasons, The Council of States
Answer.
gave the following answer to Mr. Heemsted, viz. That he might well enough see
what was the intention of the Parliament, by the answer given to the three
Memorials of the other Ambassadors, before his arrival, since nothing had been
proposed since, neither by him nor any other, that was capable to make the
Parliament change their Resolution; that if the attempt made by the Holland
Fleet, as much by surprise as it was had succeeded according to their hopes, it
might have been said, that the Commonwealth of England would have seen it self
plunged into the greatest disasters imaginable, and that therefore it was not
reasonable, after they had been so miraculously preserved, they should expose
themselves again to the like disgraces for the future. That they could not
suffer themselves to be any longer amused under the specious pretense of an
Examen, or by Examples not pertinent to their Case, of what other States may
have done; but that rather they were resolved to employ those means which
necessity and the Nature of the Fact Require to be used; that besides, they
could not consent to the Conclusion of a Treaty of Alliance, till they had
received satisfaction about the point in Question, and that as to the
demonstrations of a sincere and real Friendship from their High and
Mightinesses, which their Ambassadors so much boasted of: The English on their
side likewise had no less reason to value themselves upon the Authentic proofs
they have given of the like to the Hollanders, either in general or particular;
and that in a word, they could not change any thing in the Answer they had
already given them.

Mr. de Heemsted having received this Answer, demanded on the 1st. of July a
new Conference, in which he Renewed his instances, by declaring, That there
never had past any thing on the States side that was capable to give any just
cause of jealousy to the English; That they had proposed an assured way, to
prevent all sorts of Contestation, and to discover the truth, but that they
would not follow it, and that a Manifest injustice was done to his Mrs. That it
was very easy to Judge of that by the refusal the States had made to their
Subjects, notwithstanding the pressing solicitations used by them for that
purpose, to grant them any Letters of Reprisal; that lastly to show, they were
wholly inclined to Peace, they had promised their Protection to the English
Company at Rotterdam; that if the English persisted to Reject all the
favorable means to procure an Accommodation, it would cause a great
Consternation amongst the people of Holland; That in fine, he therefore prayed
the Council of State, to be pleased to propose some other means themselves, and
in the mean while, to forbid all Acts of Host^l^ty, and to Release the Ships
that had been taken.

After this last Conference, Mr. de Heemsted seeing they neglected to give him
an answer; delivered another writing to the Council of State, by which he
Represented the Eminent danger that threatened the two Republics, by the
mischiefs that would undoubtedly follow upon their Refusal to accept the means
he had proposed, adding, that he desired them to propose some other of their
own if it were possible, that might be more effectual.

The Parliament could no longer Recoil, Articles proposed to the Dutch by the
Parliament.
but at last proposed the following Articles as a ground for the
Re-establishment of a Peace: viz.

1. That the States General of the United Provinces should be obl^ged to pay to
the Republic of England, a compensation toward the indemnifying them for the
losses they had sustained by the Arming of the Holland Fleet, and by the
attempt they had lately made upon them, of which the particularities should be
reported at large, in time and place.

2. That presently after the payment of the said sum, the Parliament should
surcease all Acts of Hostility against the Hollanders, and all Ships seized
since the last troubles, should be released.

3. That these two Conditions being first agreed to, and put in Execution, they
would proceed to a Treaty of Alliance which should straightly Unite the two
Republics together, render their interests common, and their Friendship
perpetual, and inviolable, and that for this effect, the Parliament would be
always Ready to accept all just and reasonable ways proposed to them.

The Ambassador of the States being astonished at such an answer, demanded on
the 6th. of July a new Conference, wherein he Represented, That their High and
Mightinesses had been obliged to make an Extroardinary armament, and to be at
Excessive Expenses for the Reasons he had already mentioned; that their
Subjects had suffered considerable damages by the taking of a great many
Holland and French Ships; that the States and their Merchant Subjects still
felt the losses that had been caused to them, that if they would needs stand
upon the point of indemnifying, they needed only to compare the losses of the
one Nation with those of the other, to be convinced, that the States General
had been the greatest sufferers, which would be easy to demonstrate, provided
the business were not spun out to too great a length, by an over Captious
discussion; That if the said Commissioners would on their side make a just and
Reasonable estimation, It would then plainly appear, that the true intention of
their High and Mightinesses is to terminate things by an amicable way. As
concerning the Treaty of Confederacy, between the two Republics, and the
mutual assistance they might afford one another upon occasion, in case their
common Enemies should go about to attempt upon their liberty, the States other
Ambassadors had sufficiently before explained the intentions of their Mrs. upon
that Subject, being always ready to pursue the said Treaty, if it would be
consented to: That if the said Commissioners should think fit to render that
Treaty more ample and Authentic, it would be a very agreeable thing to him,
and that he passionately desired they would please to give him all possible
instruction imaginable thereupon. That moreover, he thought it would be highly
important if not very necessary, that orders should be given to the two Fleets
not to come near one another, and that they might not come to any new
Engagements, as 'twas to be feared they otherwise would; And that besides that,
he insisted, that they would without delay release the Ships that were seized,
that so their Spirits being once calmed, the two Nations might be ^indly
disposed of themselves, and without any Constraint, to the concluding of a
firm, solid, and unmovable Alliance, that in fine, He waited with the greatest
impatience for a favorable answer to all he had j^st then proposed, that so
being animated with the hopes of a happy success, he might employ his industry
with the States to endeavor to find out proper means to effect an
Accommodation; that he desired it the more earnestly, because he was obliged to
obey the Orders of his Mrs.

The Council of State, made answer, The Answer of the Council of State.
that having maturely Examined the writing delivered by Mr. de Heemsted
Ambassador Extroardinary from the States General of the United Provinces into
the hands of the Commissioners, and having found nothing in it that answered
clearly or directly to the last proposition made to his Excellency by the
Parliament the Council demanded of him a speedy and positive answer, at least
to the first Article, which being granted, they would apply themselves to the
fixing a moderate and Reasonable sum, that so after that, they might proceed to
the Execution of the second Article, by the restitution of the Ships seized,
and the suspension of all acts of Hostility; And that as for the third Article,
it should be taken care of afterward more at Leisure.

The 7th of July, the Sieur de Heemsted demanded another Conference in
pursuance of the orders he had received from his Masters, adding, that if the
Republic of England would not openly declare themselves, he would demand his
Audience of Leave, and that with so much the more Justice; because instead of
an Accommodation with which they had flattered themselves, the Parliament had
given orders to their Fleet, to destroy the Dutch Herring Fishery, and to sink
all Holland Ships, whilst to the Northward they were watching for our Ships
that were returning from the Indies. He represented therefore in that
Conference,

That whilst he was busied in answering the Writing that was delivered him by
Mr. Oliver Fleming from the Council of State, he had with much displeasure been
informed, that the English Fleet was put to Sea, in order to some enterprise;
That he had likewise received Letters, by which the States his Masters had
ordered him, that since he had used all his endeavors to no purpose, to obtain
a Cessation of acts of Hostility, he should demand his Audience of Leave, in
order to return with all diligence into Holland, to give the States an account
of his Negotiation. And therefore in Obedience to the Orders of his Mrs. he
damanded, he might be permitted to take his leave of the Council of State, the
next day, and might for his Transportation make use of the man of War commanded
by Captain John Verbaaf, in which he came into England. That the said Captain
might be provided with a Passport, that he might not be molested in his way by
the Parliaments Ships: Adding, that because the other Ambassadors had
signified to him, that they had likewise order to retire, he desired they might
be permitted to take their Audience of Leave at the same time, and to provide
themselves with Ships necessary to transport their persons and Equipages. The
Council of State answered, That they were obliged first to make their Report to
the Parliament who were to sit the next day, or the Tuseday following after the
Memorial was delivered from the States Ambassador Extraordinary to the
Commissioners; And that till then they could give no other Answer to the said
Ambassador. But that on the 8th of July Mr de Heemsted presented to the Council
of State, two Memorials: The first of which was conceived in these Terms.

The Ambassador Extraordinary of the States, Mr. Heemsted's first Memorial.
having seen the Answer given by the Council to his last Proposition, has
thought fit to declare a new that he intended as soon as he came back into
Holland, in consequence of the Overture made to him for that purpose, to apply
his whole endeavors to find out some proper means for the Reuniting the two
Nations, and dissipating all the Umbrages that seemed then to render them
irreconcilable, that having at length attained to that happy Union so necessary
for their common Security, there might be nothing able to disturb them: And as
that Resolution was full of sincerity, and aimed only at the tranquillity and
happiness of the two Republics, so it was accordingly expedient, to prevent by
a diligent execution, some Evils that otherwise would grow incurable, if they
were not stopped in their very Source, That upon this consideration, he
requested, the Council would be pleased to order, he might be speedily
dispatched, by granting him his Audience of Leave, and the necessary Passports
for his Ship that waited for him at Gravesend; and that being persuaded, That
the Council of State would have regard to his Quality and Character, he dared
to flatter himself, they would render him the same Honors at his Audience of
Leave as were done him at his Entry, and for which he was very much obliged to
the Council. The other Memorial imported, The second Memorial.
that the Ambassador Extraordinary of the States found it necessary to
Represent to the Council, That if they thought it fit, after he should have
made his Report to their High and Mightinesses, he desired his Secretary, or
some other trusty Person, might come back to London, to maintain a
Correspondence together, whether by delivering or receiving to and from the two
States, all that might any way conduce to the re-establishing a strict Alliance
and perfect Union between them: And that in order thereunto, it would please
the Council, to Grant the necessary Passport for the security of that Person;
That he should also have permission to stay at London so long as the
Parliament, or the States should think fit; or else that the Council would name
some person themselves, whom they thought fit to receive the Letters that
should be written to that purpose, and to solicit their Answers. But they made
no Reply to this last Proposal, how equitable soever it appeared, as being
jealous that under that Covert some Dangerous Intelligence might be carried on
against them in favor of the pretensions of the Family of the Stuarts. The
three other Ambassadors presented likewise to the Council of State the
following Memorial, on the 8th of July. That since the Ambassadors of the
States General had Orders by the last Letters they received, to Retire without
delay, to go and give an account of their Negotiation to the States their
Masters, they therefore prayed the Council, they might be permitted to take
their Audience of Leave of that August Assembly, and that accordingly Ships
necessary for their Transportation and that of their respective Equipages,
together with Passports for their security might be granted them; adding, that
there were some Ships of their Nation ready for that purpose, as Captain de
Boet, and three other Ships of Dort.

The Republic of England fortifying every day more and more their Authority,
began to render themselves insupportable, by their excessive Pride and
Haughtiness. For Sweden and Denmark, several Princes of Italy, the Hanse-Towns
of Germany and other Free Cities of Europe were forced to acknowledge their
up-start Government. And they troubled themselves not much about the States
Ambassadors, as the scornful disdain they showed of all their Remonstrances was
a visible proof, so that no body was surprised at all to see with what facility
they granted them their Audience of Leave. They consented that two of their Men
of War should Convoy them, and two other Ships Transport their Equipages. And
so the next day the fear Ambassadors were conducted to their Audience, and Mr.
de Heemsted made the following Discourse, in the name of them all.

The States General of the United Provinces have sent their Ambassadors
Extraordinary to the Parliament of the Republic of England, Mr. de Heemsted's
Speech at his Audience of Leave.
to endeavor by all sorts of ways to induce them to renew the ancient Amity
between the two Nations, and to confirm more straightly their Alliance. They were
followed a little while after by Mr. Nieuport a Member of the States of Holland
and Westfriesland who was sent to clear some difficulties, and to give a more
Authentic proof of their Good Intentions concerning the Treaty of Confederacy.

In fine, it pleased their High and Mightinesses some days after, to make yet
another Extraordinary Deputation, and to make choice of me for that, with
Express Order to come and give the Republic of England, new, more particular
and stronger Assurances of a faithful and sincere Amity, in order to dispel
all Umbrages and all Subjects of misunderstanding, and to prevent all Obstacles
that might hinder the Execution of so laudable a Design.

For that effect, it was proposed. That an enquiry should be made by some
judicious persons on both sides, into the Action that lately passed between the
two Fleets, and which happened not by any premeditated design, but by pure
accident, that so according to their Verdict, satisfaction might be given to
the Party offended. For we Protest before God, and before Men, and in presence
of the Parliament of the Republic of England, That the States our Masters
never had it in their thoughts, to offend this Republic, and much less to
commit any act of Hostility against it. But that they were more disposed by a
sense of a true and sincere affection, to contribute to the maintaining a
stable and good understanding and inviolable Peace between them.

But since unfortunately in spite of the steps that have been made, and the
pains taken, to pacify all these Troubles, the two Ambassages have proved
ineffectual, and frustrated of the hopes they had with so much justice
conceived, and that, by new Disputes that have arisen and caused great losses;
and that besides, the States are threatened with new Hostilities from the
Parliaments Fleet, without having had the least notice given them of it: The
Ambassadors thought themselves obliged in prudence to prevent the Storm, and to
retire into their own Country, as well to go and give an account of their
Negotiations, as to take new Instructions from the States their Masters. For
this end, we present our selves all together before this August Assembly to
give them notice, That we have received order to retire, and are upon the point
of our departure.

We have already represented to the Council of State what things are necessary
for our departure, with Respect to the Juncture of time and our Character, and
we wait their Answer.

In the mean while, it is not only our Duty but a point of Justice to entreat
you, that all our Ships that have been brought into the Ports of England, or
been stopped there before the publication of any Declaration of War, without any
offense given by any of the Masters of the said Ships, may at last be released
with all their Men, that they may pursue their intended Voyages, without being
molested in any manner whatsoever; and that all be done according to our
ancient Friendship, and the Law of Nations practiced among Christians. We hope
the Justice of the Sovereign Republic of England will not refuse us a demand
so equitable as this.

Moreover, we Implore the Protection of Heaven, and beseech God, the Author of
Peace, that he will please of his Goodness to inspire the Parliament of this
Republic with such Sentiments as may induce them to a Speedy Reconciliation
with the States of the United Provinces, for the maintenance of the Reformation
whose firmest support, and most solid foundation has always been Peace, in the
Bosom of which it Flourishes, and quietly enjoys Prosperity, and which, on the
contrary, if our Troubles should continue any longer, would see it self brought
to an inevitable Destruction, and plunged into the greatest Miseries. We still
pray God to be pleased to avert the Course of the Mischiefs and Calamities that
accompany War; and to pour forth his precious Blessings upon the two Republics.

And as we are ordered to retire forthwith into Holland, we shall accordingly
take leave of this Illustrious Assembly, with all imaginable thanks for the
kindnesses we have received from them, in full confidence, that they will not
refuse us the things we have already demanded of them, and which are every
where granted to Ambassadors, in regard to their Character, for the security of
their Persons.

Lastly, we recommend to you the Dutch Merchants residing at London, or
elsewhere within this Kingdom, that their Goods and Persons may be taken into
the Protection of the Parliament.

These were the steps made by the States Geneneral of the United Provinces, to
prevent a Rupture with England, by which, all the world may judge, how great
the Power of that new hatched State was, tho scarcely yet fledged, to make them
so Courted by a Nation that at that juncture, more feared than loved them, and
how great and presumptuous their pride was too, in refusing such fair offers
and venturing to engage in a War with so potent an Enemy, as the States of
Holland, when their own settlement at home was so unsecure. But the flames were
blown up on both sides, by the secret friends of the Stuarts, and by the
Emissaries of those Nations that envied to both people, both their Religion,
and above all, their formidable Power at Sea, and their flourishing and
universally extended Commerce; by some of whom, out of the same malicious
principles, the same fire, that was but raked up for a while, in Embers, was
rekindled, and set a burning with a more pernicious violence than ever, to the
manifest increase of a Third Power, that tho before, it durst scarce peep out
at Sea, has since appeared a formidable Enemy even upon their own Element, to
those Redoubted Masters of the Ocean, and has had the insolence for a while by
its dextrous managing of intestine Factions among us, to Brave both our Fleets,
till like Capaneus defying Jove, its Marine Forces were at length by the
magnanimous Russel and his Valiant Copartners, the Dutch Admirals,
Thunderstruck, and in a manner quite driven off the usurped Main, daring never
since to appear on it otherwise than only as Rovers, and sculking Pirates.

On the 11th of July, that is to say, four days after the English Fleet set
sail for the North Sea, to go and destroy the Dutch Fleet of Herring Busses,
and to watch for their Ships coming back from the Indies, the Ambassadors
departed London, The Dutch Ambassadors depart.
and on the 13th near Schouwen, met with Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, to whom Mr.
de Heemsted gave a Memorial containing an account of the Forces of England; he
likewise informed him, that Admiral Ayschew, who but a little before had given
chase to a Merchant Fleet of about 30 or 40 sail between Callis and Swartenes,
homeward bound from St. Hubes, and Portugal, was then in the Downs, with a
Squadron of 21 Men of War, where he might be easily attackt and Beaten.

Tromp having received Express Orders from the States, who found themselves
obliged to make use of Reprizals, not to spair the English any longer, but to
do them all the mischief he could, resolved to go and attack Ayschew. Vice
Admiral Evertsz, had the Command of the Van, with a Squadron of 21 Ships of
War; Lieutenant Admiral Tromp Commanded the main Body of the Fleet, consisting
of 30 Ships; and Rear Admiral Florisz, the Rear, composed of 28 Men of War. But
there happening a Calm, and after that a contrary Wind, it was impossible for
them to execute that project. Tromp therefore steered his Course toward the
North, in search of Blake. Ayschew kept close in the Downs, whilst Blake with a
Fleet of between 66 and 68 Sail, having discovered before Boeknes, the
Herring-Fleet, under the Convoy of 12 Ships or Frigates carrying from 22 to 30
Guns, caused them to be attackt by a Squadron of 20 men of War that composed
his Vanguard: The Fight was sharp, and lasted above three whole hours, till at
last the weaker was forced to give way to the stronger. Captain Venhuysen, and
all the Herring Busses excepting four fled away; Ten of them were taken,
whereof two sunk, after they had made all the resistance imaginable, and
another was at last quitted by the Enemy. Blake joined five of them to his
Fleet, and sent three of them to Inverness, with his wounded Men; but those of
the Dutch were conducted to the Texel.

The States to Varnish over their Arms with all the Color of Justice they
could, published a Manifesto, setting forth the Reasons why they had declared
War against the English; and they did the same on their side against the
Hollanders. We shall repeat neither of them here, because they are to be found
in several places, and that it is easy to guess by what has been said, what
were the contents of them: And because our design is, to insist only upon
relating the Bloody Battles that were fought between these two potent
Republics, and in which the Hero's of this History, the two Tromps, Father and
Son, had the most share.

The English had already seized upon the Isle of Inseith, where the Hollanders
used to water, and these, latter advancing toward the Coasts of Scotland,
arrived near Fulo and Fairhill, where they espied Blake, who was watching for
our Ships coming back from the Indies. The two Fleets were disposing themselves
for a Fight, when in the night between the 5th and 6th of August, the Sky grew
dark by little and little, and soon after there appeared certain presages of a
violent Tempest: Tromp distressed by a dreadful Tempest.
For the wind having long been shifting about, turned at last to the N. N.
West, and blew with so much impetuosity, that our Sails were all rent and torn
in pieces, and the Waves rolled through them, and so went and spent themselves
against the Rocks of Hitland, throwing their Foam up to the very Heaven. Thus
the Fleet being as 'twere buried by the violence of the Sea, in most horrible
Abysses, rose out of them only to be tossed up to the very Clouds. Here the Masts
were beaten down into the Sea, there the Deck was over-flown by the prevailing
Waves: Here the Tempest was so much Mistress of the Ships, that they could be
no longer governed, and on another side, appeared all the doleful forerunners
of a dismal Wrack. And the Darkness increasing the danger, and the confused
cries of the Mariners redoubling the common fear, both together made the
saddest and most frightful spectacle, that was ever seen.

When the day was come, the disorder was clearly discovered: Two Ships were
found ramed in between two Rocks, and the Shattered Relics of three Fireships,
that were separated from the Fleet by the violence of the Waves, left no manner
of Room to doubt of their being lost. But Providence that presides over all
Events sweetened these Evils to our men, by the happy arrival of three Indian
Ships, and of several others that were coming from the Islands called, the
Antilles, who unexpectedly fell into our Fleet, whereof some put into
Schalloway, others made to the South-West of Hitland, some others to the West,
and the rest to the North of the same Island. In the mean while Tromp went
before, sailing toward, the Meuse, with a Fleet of 39 sail, and one of the
Ships come from the Indies; And in the Latitude of Scotland, he discovered
Blake with 62 Great Ships much less damaged then his own, because that by a
great happiness for him, the Tempest having driven him to the Northward of
Hitland, he found on that side, more Shelter, as soon as Tromp espied him, he
disposed himself to stay for his coming up to him, with intention to present
him battle. But Blake either being loath to lose the Weather-Gage, or for some
other Reasons unknown, would not accept it. Soon after, observing that Tromp
was sheer'd off into the main Sea, in order to pursue his first intended
course, he likewise fell down toward the Meuse, having done nothing with his
so potent Fleet, but scattered the Herring Fishers, destroyed their Convoy, and
taken two Zealand Ships that were cruizing in those Seas, and which fell by
chance into his Fleet, but who had first destroyed him two of his Frigates. The
rest of the Holland Fleet after they had spent some weeks in refitting, entered
happily into the Vlie and the Texel at the beginning of September. Whilst Tromp
was out at Sea, the States General resolved to set out another Fleet, besides,
both to secure their Merchant Ships, render Navigation more Free, and put
themselves into a Condition the more powerfully to oppose the English. This
Resolution taken, they were next to seek for a Man Recommendable for his
fidelity and Experience to vest with the Command of it. The States of Zealand
cast their Eyes upon Michael Adrian de Ruiter, De Ruiter Refuses to to go Sea,
but at length Consents.
well known by his great Reputation, but he having no inclination to go any
more to Sea, had resolved to pass the rest of his days in Peace and Repose.
Some members of the State having represented to him, that his Country then
stood in pressing need of his Service, he answered them, that his intention was
to live in Tranquillity, and to meddle no more with any Sea affairs. But they
pressed it to him again, telling him, that such a man as he, that had given so
many Signal proofs of his Bravery, and of his Zeal for his Country, ought not
now to refuse at a dead lift, to give it the last marks of his steadfast
affection that were desired of him, especially since, he would be only obliged
to go as 'twere a roving. So that at last he let himself be persuaded, and went
on Board the Ship called the Neptune, carrying 28 Guns, and 134 Men. But the
Fleet that was to assemble at Wielingen, was forced to stay some time for
several Men of War which were at the Texel, and other Ports. De Ruiter being
embarked on board the Neptune, put to Sea, and arrived on the 10th. of August
at the Fleet which was then but 15 sail of Men of War, and 2 Fireships. Some
days after having received a Reinforcement of 7 men of War and 2 Fireships, he
set sail toward the Strait of Callis, according to the Order he had received
from the States for that effect. His Commission was, to Convoy along the
Channel the Merchant Fleet that was then in the Texel, ready to set sail to the
Westward, and afterward to Cruize about the Channel to pick up the Ships that
were coming from diverse parts of Europe, and Conduct them into Holland. For
that purpose Order was likewise given to the Merchant Fleet in the Texel, to
speed away to Wielingen, to endeavor to join the Fleet of Men of War, or at
least to go and seek them out toward the Strait of Callis, or in the Channel.
In the mean while De Ruiter received advice by two Boats laden with Dutch
Prisoners that had been taken on board some Ships that were stopped before the
Rupture, but were discharged by the Parliament, that passing by near the
English Fleet between the Isles of Wight and Portland, they found it 46 sail
strong, of which about 12 were of a prodigious bigness. De Ruiter, writ word of
it to the Admiralty of Zealand complaining of the piteous condition in which he
found the Ships of his Fleet, and Representing to their High and Mightinesses,
that he needed greater Forces, to form any enterprise, and to attack the Enemy
pursuant to the Orders he had received. He kept himself sometimes below
Swarteness, and afterward Cruizing along the Channel, he advanced as far as
the Cingles. During all which time, he sent out from day to day, several light
Frigates to inform themselves of the Countenance of the English, and to look out
for the Texel Fleet. On the 21st. of August, 8 Men of War, and 50 Merchant
Ships, under the Command of Gideon Verburg joined De Ruiter Westward of
Graveling; the same day he writ another very pressing Letter to the States, in
which he desired them to send him some Ships of bigger Force, and better
appointed for War, because those he had were very ill Equipped, being not
furnished with half their Compliment of Guns and Men, especially those of the
Province of Friesland. The following days he passed the Strait of Callis with
the Merchant Fleet, and pursuing his way along the Channel, he advanced as far
as the Latitude of Plymouth; but being near the Coast of France, on the 26th.
of August, about 2 a Clock in the afternoon, the Wind at North-East, he
perceived a Fleet of 45 sail to the Northward of that of Holland. De Ruiter
imagining presently thereupon, that it was the English Fleet Commanded by
Admiral George Ayschew, watching for the Dutch Merchant Ships, tackt about, and
stood directly toward Admiral Ayschew, the English Fleet was composed of 40
Men of War, whereof 12 as we have said, were of an Extraordinary bulk. For
there were two of them of 60 Guns each, and 8 from 36 to 40, and besides them 5
Fireships. De Ruiter's Forces consisted of 30 small Ships of War, and 6
Fireships. The greatest of those Ships had not on board above 30 Guns,
excepting 2 of them, namly the Peace, and the Ostritch that carried each of
them 40, and that were Equiped by the care of the Indian Chamber of Amsterdam,
for the Service of the State; and the others had not half their Compliment of
Men; besides which disadvantage, de Ruiter was hampered with a Merchant Fleet
of 60 sail, who were the principal mark at which the English levelled their
designs. Some days before, de Ruiter had put all things in order, and divided
his Fleet into 3 Squadrons, the first of which he himself Commanded, the second
was under the Conduct of Vanden Brock, in quality of Vice Admiral; and the
third was under that of Verbaas in quality of Rear-Admiral. To each Squadron,
he had joined 2 Fireships, ordering them to keep themselves in readiness upon
the approach of the Enemies, to go and set fire to the biggest of their Ships.
And for the Merchant Ships, be placed them along the Fleet in such a manner as
they might be most secure. About 4 a Clock in the afternoon they began to
Fight. De Ruiter Engages Admiral Ayschew.
De Ruite^ was in the main Body, Vice Admiral Vanden Broek in the right Wing,
and Rear-Admiral Ve^baa^ in the left. The Fight was fierce, and bloody. De
Ruiter Fought twice through the English Fleet, and if he could but have gained
the Weather-gage of which the Enemies had the advantage, it is to be presumed,
he would have entirely defeated them, especially, if the Dutch Fireships that
had the Wind against them, could have come up with them. He found him self
Engaged for some time with but 6 or 7 of his Squadron, between the English
Admiral and Vice Admiral. The Rear-Admiral Verbaaf with the rest of the Fleet
found themselves to the leeward, and some of his Ships performed their duty
very ill, whilst the rest coming to Grapple with the Enemy, Fought in every
respect with a Bravery that has few Examples.

The Night parted the Combatants, when the English making their way into the
main Sea, escaped to the Northward. It was impossible for de Ruiter to follow
them, because many of his Ships were much endamaged, and that he had a Merchant
Fleet besides to guard, whose Ships were scattered about here and there. The
Event of that Fight extremely surprised de Ruiter, considering the inequality
of his Forces to those of the Enemy; which made him cry out, That when the Arm
of Almighty God was pleased to favor the Arms of the weaker side, by inspiring
them with more than ordinary courage, the Victory was always on their side. And
this work, added he, was carried on by God himself, for reasons that are hidden
from us.

The Hollanders loss, according to their own report, was so very small, that
it is hardly to be believed, they having lost none of their Ships, and having
had but 50 or 60 men killed, and about as many wounded; whereas on the English
side, it is pretended according to the most faithful account, there were above
a 1000 killed or wounded, and two or three of their Ships lost.

The Memory of the remarkable Action done on this occasion, A Remarkable Action
of a Dutch Captain.
by one Douve Aukes a Native of Friesland, Captain on board the Ostritch
belonging to the East India Company, is worthy to be transmitted to all future
Ages: For that brave man, finding himself encompassed by the Enemies, and
having fought till his Sea men dispairing to save themselves, would needs have
forced him to yield up the Ship, taking up a stick with a lighted Match at the
end, made offer to set fire to the Powder, crying out as loud as he could
possibly strain his Voice, Take courage, my Boys? take courage, I will show you
the way, and when you are able no longer to resist the Enemy, I will deliver
you from prison, with the stick I hold in my hand; And he swore to them at the
same time, that he would in earnest set fire to the Powder, if he heard them
speak any more of yielding. Which undauntedness of their Captain, or rather the
panick fear of an assured death, put such fresh courage and vigor into those
cowardly wretches, that they promised him from that moment, an inviolable
obedience, adding, that they would fight to the last drop of their blood, and
thereupon every one of them returning to his former post, and the brave Douve
giving the Signal, he with but 24 Guns, attackt an English Ship of 40, and
letting her come up just close to his side, he fought her so to purpose, that
he sunk her with all her men; another Frigate of 50 Guns coming up likewise to
him, was also sunk, and after that again, a third coming to assault him, was so
belabored, that she had much ado to hold up above water long enough to save
her self in the first English port she could reach. It is reckoned, there were
in the two first Ships that perished above 800 persons, very few of which were
saved. After the Battle, de Ruiter spent all the night in repairing the
damages, the Ships of his Fleet had suffered; and that the Merchant Ships that
were dispersed from him during the Fight might be able the better to rejoyn
him, he put up lights in four different places on Board his Ship. The next
morning at break of day; the Hollanders having discovered the English Fleet at
about 2 miles distance from them, de Ruiter Summoned all the Captains on Board
him, to a Consultation, in which 'twas resolved, to pursue the Enemies till
Noon, with design, in case they stopped not, to send back the Merchant Ships into
their own Country. They tackt then about to stand toward the English, which
was continued till after Noon, to endeavor to draw them to a Battle, but not
being able to bring them to it, toward the Evening the Merchant Ships were
sent away under the Convoy of two Men of War, the rather because they were
assured, there were no more Enemies to be met with to the Westward.

The day following de Ruiter calling together all the Officers of the Fleet,
told them, De Ruiter proposes to go and attack the English in their own
Harbors.
it was certain, that Admiral Ayschew was retired with his Fleet to Plymouth,
after the Fight, to repair his damages there; and that for his part, he was of
the mind, that 'twere best to go and attack him there, whilst he dreamt of
nothing less than that, and whilst most of the Captains of his Fleet might be
perhaps a shore to refresh themselves; that he flattered himself by the Divine
protection, to be able totally to destroy them, before they should be in a
condition to come themselves and attack him with fresh Forces; that the last
Fight sufficiently showed their small courage, and their weakness, and that
therefore it was easy to Judge from thence, that if they were attackt now
whilst they were still in that disorder and consternation, they might be
entirely defeated without any great trouble; that they had Triumphed over them
even whilst they had yet a Merchant Fleet of 60 sail to guard, though they were
much superior to them in strength, an^ had the Weather-gage, not to mention
the Cowardice of several Holland Captains that were wanting in their duty; That
those who were in the Number of these last would meet with a fine occasion to
repair their lost honor; that their Country and the Victors would thereby
acquire immortal Glory, which would be so much the brighter, and carry the
greater sound, because they would have defeated the Enemy upon their own
Coasts; that such a loss as that would be very sensible to them: That the
Justice of the cause for which the States had armed out that Fleet to Sea, and
the Bravery of those who Commanded it, gave him already very hopeful presages
of a Victory, and that in fine the Enemies would have the shame to see the
shattered relics of their last Engagement totally ruined and destroyed in
their own Harbors. All the Officers applauded this Speech of de Ruiter, and it
was concluded in the Council, to put this resolve in Execution with all the
Expedition imaginable. But when they were just going to attempt it, the night
before, which was on the 30th. of the Month, the Wind changed to the South
South East, and turned afterward quite to the South. And then the Fleet was
got within two miles of Goodstart, and was driven so fiercely by the Wind that
they were forced to quit that project, De Ruiter by Cruizing before Goodstart,
had alarmed all those Coasts, and constrained Ayschew with all his Fleet to
shut themselves up in their Harbors. At which time receiving advice from
diverse parts, that Admiral Blake past on the 30th. of the same Month near
Bevezieck with a Fleet of 72 sail, to the Westward, with a design to make
toward him to give him Battle, he thereupon judged it more Expedient for him
to keep to the Westward of the English Fleet, because he found himself too weak
to hazard a second fight.

The 22d. of September following, as he was still cruising, he was assailed
hard by Sorles, by a furious Tempest that lasted three days together, and on
the 3d. day the Wind being appealed, he would fain have given chase to a
Squadron of 25 of the Parliaments Ships, and that very evening he found himself
already advanced within a mile of the English, with some Ships of his Fleet,
but the biggest of them remained still scattered to and fro. The same night
another fierce Wind arose, and again dispersed the Ships of his Fleet, so that
he mist his blow. For what care soever de Ruiter could take all the time he was
cruising in the Channel, to get his Ships together in a Body, yet he could
never effect it. One morning he found them so very much scattered, that there
were several of them that were three miles distant one from the other; and he
was so much in wrath at it, that he could not forbear signifying to his
Captains, that he was unhappy to have to do with Men that heeded not his
Orders. Besides that, his Fleet began to be in want of many necessaries, and
that which was most vexatious for de Ruiter, was that he saw himself in danger
suddenly to be attackt by the whole power of England; upon which, having held a
Council of War, it was there concluded, that since the Enemies were every where
much stronger than they, it was to be feared, that being informed of their
weakness, they would take their time to come and overwhelm them; and that
therefore to avoid that Misfortune, it was requisite they should with all
diligence pass the Strait of Callis, in order to go and meet Vice Admiral de
Wit, The junction of de Ruiters Fleet with that of de Wit.
who was coming that way with fresh Forces. On the 28th of the same month,
advice was brought of his arrival, and on the 2d of October, the two Fleets
joined one another between Dunkirk and Newport.

The States had it seems thought fit to let Lieutenant Admiral Tromp rest a
while, and to give the Conduct of their Naval Army, Reasons that moved the
States to appoint de Wit Admiral instead of Martin Tromp.
that is, of all the Ships that were left of it, that were still in a condition
to keep the Sea, after the Tempest of which we have spoken, to Vice Admiral de
Wit, in hopes that this latter would perhaps have better luck than Tromp had in
his last expedition; and because many of the fickle Mobb begun to murmur at
Tromp, and because he had not been so fortunate in his last undertakings, as
they expected, to look upon it as a Judgment upon him, for being the cause of
that Great War.

The States Commission to de Wit imported, that he should go and join de
Ruiter. Blake had likewise received orders from the English Parliliament, to go
and join Ayschew, who was retired to Plymouth after the loss of the last
Battle, that they might endeavor to hinder the Junction of the two
Holland-Fleets; but the Wind proving contrary to them, it was impossible for
them to oppose it. Vice Admiral de Wits Fleet being 45 Sail strong when he
joined de Ruiter, after their Junction, it was resolved with all possible
diligence to sail away to the Westward. De Wit who had the chief Command of the
whole Fleet, sent for the Captains that had served under de Ruiter in his
absence, and carefully enquired of them in what condition their respective
Ships were, and what necessaries they wanted, and found, that 10 of the Ships
of that Fleet were disabled either by the late Fight or Tempest; so that it was
thought requisite to send the said 10 Ships, and 5 Leaky Fireships that had
lost most of their Sails and Rigging, back into Holland, with Orders to come
and rejoyn the Fleet again so soon as they should be refitted. The Neptune that
de Ruiter went in was one of that number, which obliged him to Remove into the
Lovisa.

But we shall leave that Fleet for a moment, to entertain you with the Relation
of one of the first Actions of the Hero that is the principal Subject of this
History.

The States fearing their Commerce in the Levant might be disturbed by the
English, sent into the Mediterranean Vice Admiral Catz with a Fleet of 14 Men
of War. Vice Admiral Catz sent into the Mediteranean.
He arrived the 7th. of July in Legorn Road; and Appleton who for fear of the
Hollanders, put out a little before from Smirna, with a Squadron of 7 or 8 Men
of War, was already arrived behind the Basin of Legorn, where he had cast
Anchor.

Catz, willing to execute the Orders given him by the States, notified to the
Governor of the place, That his Commission obliged him to Fight and attack all
English Ships wheresoever he found them, but he had thitherto suspended the
Execution of his orders in Confidence, that the Governor would not suffer the
Ships to be unladen, for that if he offered to permit it, he should be obliged
to oppose it by attacking them. The Governor made answer, That the Ports of
the Great Duke of Tuscany his Master were open in general to all the World.
After some contestations, the English at last unladed their Ships without any
opposition from Vice Admiral Catz, Catz is recalled from the Mediterranean, and
de Galen sent in his place.
which gave occasion to the States, as ill satisfied at his Conduct, to recall
him, and to send in his room, John de Galen, a Man of great Reputation for
having signalized himself in diverse Rencounters.

De Galen then went by Land to Legorn, and producing his Commission to the
Fleet, it soon appeared what he was capable of, by the attempt he made upon the
English Ships coming from the Levant, whilst on another side Captain Salingen
kept Appleton blockt up. The 6th of September, de Galen discovered them between
Elba and Monte Christo, and immediately used all the diligence imaginable to
get up to them. That Fleet consisted of 4 Men of War, and 4 Merchant-Ships
under the Conduct of Commodore Bodley. And the States Fleet under the Command
of de Galen was 10 Sail strong of Men of War, of one of which, Cornelius Tromp,
who was then but a private Captain, had the Command.

The English seeing it was impossible for them to escape, threw themselves into
a Half Moon, and put themselves in order of Battle, between the two Islands
just-now mentioned: Whilst de Galen going personally to every Ship of his
Fleet, did all he could to encourage the Seamen with the hopes of the Riches of
the Levant, that was likely very soon to be their prey. The Captains at the
same time burning with Ambition to signalize themselves, and to get tho it were
but grinning Honor, at 3 a Clock in the afternoon, James de Boet the Dutch
Reer-Admiral begun the attack, A Fight between Bodley and de Galen.
and the Fight growing very hot on both sides, would yet have proved much more
Bloody, if a Calm had not hindered the two Fleets from a Close-fight, and coming
to Board one another. However they continued firing at one another till the
beginning of the Night: When de Galen whose Ship had most of her Rigging
endamaged, that his Fleet might not be scattered, and lose one another in the
dark, hung out lights all night in two different parts of his Admiral Ship,
viz. a double one in two Lantherns, upon his Poop, and another in a single
Lanthern, above his Mainmast Top.

The English kept themselves along by the Flatts toward Monte-Christo; where
at Break of Day de Galen went with design to visit them, but finding himself
weakened by the absence of 3 of his Ships which the Tide had carried away to the
Leeward, it was impossible for him to execute his enterprise. In the mean while
the English Merchant Ships taking this opportunity to cheat the greedy Dutch
that had counted without their Host, of their desired prey, got out to Sea, and
escaped; and then Bodley being not able to recoil any further for fear of
running upon the aforesaid Flatts, threw his Ships again into a Half Moon, and
stood firmly to receive the Hollanders, who were now but 7 Sail. De Galen
coming up with Bodley gave him a Broadside, which he answered with another.
And after he had received 7 Cannon shot between Wind and Water, and was weakened
by the loss of 17 Men killed and 27 dangerously wounded, and had escaped the
Flames three times, and had almost all his Sails and Rigging torn to pieces,
yet he went for all that, and attackt another that was one of the biggest and
strongest Ships the English had. Rear-Admiral de Boet who was in the Union,
having attackt Bodley at his Prow, shot down his Mainmast close by the Board,
which tumbled into the Sea. Wartsworth an English Captain seeing him thus
disabled, advanced to take his Post, but Rear-Admiral de Boets's Seamen finding
opportunity to favor them, Boarded him, and in a moment made themselves
Masters of the Phoenix Frigate which he Commanded. But Bont and Swaart were not
so fortunate, for tho they had grappled Bodley on each side they found so much
resistance that they were forced to retire well mauled after a long and Cruel
Fight, and the loss of both their Captains. Cornelius Tromp puts into the Road
of the Isle of Corsica, to repair his damages in the Fight.


The English Admiral seeing himself thereby disengaged, thought it best to fly
while he might, and make the best of his way. But de Galen and some other Dutch
Captains pursued him. Cornelius Tromp on the other side, who had signalized
himself in the Fight, made it sufficiently appear by his undaunted bravery what
might one day be expected from him; his Ship as well as de Boet's having so
extremely suffered, that they were fain to put into the Road of the Isle of
Corsica to repair their damages.

After the Battle, de Galen took a very partiticular care of his wounded Men,
and caused the broken Masts to be pieced up, and all the Ships of his Fleet to
be repaired, that they might be in a condition to give a second Battle to the
English the next day. But they for fear of being pursued, retreated, towing
away their Vessels without hanging out any lights all the Night. When day was
come, they were descried near the Isle of Elba, and making their way with all
diligence, they were got already near Porto-Longone, before the Dutch could
reach them. The Hollanders coming to an Anchor likewise in the same Harbor,
designed to besiege them there, but the Governors Secretary John Ba^t^sta
Brancattio, came to them and declared to them from his Master, that he would
not suffer any acts of Hostility to be committed upon the Coasts of his
Catholic Majesty, adding, that in that case he would fire at the Aggressor.
And to show he would be as good as his word, he had placed a strong Guard over
a Battery of five pieces of Canon that was planted on the side of the Shore.
Captain Tromp and Captain Blok going a shore to Compliment Brancattio, Bodley
permitted them likewise to go on Board him, and entertained them there with a
great deal of Civility and kindness. They drunk together Admiral de Galen's
health, and when they went away, they were honored with a Salute of five Guns.

A little time after the Fight, the same honors were done on Board the Dutch
Admiral, to Captain Hoyen Cox, who came thither from the English. But for all
these mutual Civilit^es that past betwixt them, each party was never the less
watchful to seek their advantages, and to repair their battered Ships with all
the diligence imaginable, with design to get them as soon as possible, into a
condition to be able to enter upon new enterprises. De Galen having a mind to
render the last duties to his Dead, The Governor Brancattio permitted him to
bury them near to a Fountain which Frederick Barbarossa had caused to be built
of white Marble, for the refreshment of his Ships when coming from
Constantinople, with a Naval Army he landed on the Coasts of Italy. The Bodies
of the Vice Commander, Jonge Hoen, Jans^ Bont, and Swart, were interred near
the seven Fig Trees under the Rosemary, attended by 40 Musketeers, who paid
several Vollies of Shot to the honor of the Memory of those brave Captains,
who newly died in the bed of Honor, for the service of their Country. After
these Funerals were over, de Galen considering it would be but to lose time in
vain, to stay any longer in that Harbor, resolved to weigh Anchor in order to
sail toward Legorn, thinking thereby to draw the English out of the secure
Post in which they then were.

After having related what passed in the Mediterranean, we shall return to the
Ocean. The States Fleet Commanded by Vice Admiral de Wit, after the departure
of the 10 Ships that were detacht from it, consisted of 64 Men of War, and that
of the English under the Conduct of Admiral Blake was composed of 68. But the
Ships of these latter were incomparably much better furnished for the War, than
were those of the Dutch. De Ruiter, after he had well examined all things,
found so great a difference between the Naval Army of Holland, and that of
England, that he saw there was an utter impossility to be able to attempt any
thing without exposing the Fleet of the United Provinces to an inevitable
Ruin. De Wit slights de Ruiter's sage advice, and rashly fights the English.
But de Wit was of another mind, and as soon as ever he came to Sea, affected to
let the World know, he had great designs in his Head. His advice was, to go and
attack the English in the Downs, and according to that project, de Ruiter was
to lead the Vanguard; But the English having gotten ready sooner than de Wit
imagined, appeared all on a sudden at Sea, the 2d of October, and coming up
directly to him with a fair wind, his surprise was so great, that he had not
time so much as to call a Council of War, besides, that he was in no readiness
for a Fight, because that many of his Ships having been scattered here and
there by a Tempest that had happened the day before, had not yet time to get
together again.

A fight between the English and Dutch between Callis and Dover. Octber 2. 1652.
Vice Admiral de Wit seeing there was no flying back, sent by an Advice-Boat, to
exhort all the Captains of his Fleet, to do their duty in their respective
places. The fight begun at three a Clock in the Afternoon, and was fought at
the entrance of Callis-strait. De Ruiter had the Vanguard, de Wit the main Body
of the Fleet, and de Wild Commanded the Rear. And Evertz attended besides with
a Body of Reserve, to be ready to give assistance to those that should have
need. The two Fleets piercing one into the other plied one another hotly with
the Thunder of their Cannon; the English loss being most in Men, and that of
the Dutch in Sails and Rigging. De Ruiter and de Wit did wonders, The Dutch
Worsted.
but for all they could do, in a little time they were so roughly handled, that
they had much ado to turn themselves. De Ruiter had a great many killed and
wounded; he had received four shot between Win^ and Water; the Main-yard of his
Ship was over-turned to the left side, and his main and mizzen Sails, as well
as his Rigging were all torn to pieces. Some Captains following his example,
signalized themselves, whilst o^h^^s gave all the marks of a shameful
Coward^ce; and several kept at a great distance behind, ^ill night coming on
and parting the Combatants, they could get together again by favor of the
darkness of the night, in order to renew (...) ^gain the next day, if the wind
and opp^ (...) ^^ved favorable to them. But the (...) ^^ceived in the night a
Re-inforcement of 16 Great Ships which Admiral Ayschew brought from the Downs,
whereas the Hollanders found themselves weaker by 20 Ships, through the
Cowardice of many Captains, who stole from the Fleet by favor of the darkness.

Notwithstanding all these disadvantages, Vice Admiral de Wit was still
obstinately bent to attack the English, and was for that purpose, making
toward them, when perceiving, that he should be but very slenderly backed, he
made a stop, In the mean while the Weather falling to a Calm, de Wit called
together all the General and Under Officers of his Fleet to a Council of War,
to deliberate about the present State of affairs. De Ruiter and Evertz that
were in joint Command with him, maintained, that 'twas a great Rashness, to
expose the Fleet to so imminent a danger; because their Ships were so much
scattered one from the other, that it would be four a Clock in the afternoon,
before the forwardest, and Dusk of night before the backwardest of them could
come up with the body of the Enemies Fleet; that the English had received a
considerable Reinforcement, whereas the Hollanders on the contrary were grown
weaker. That the former had a great advantage by their Fireships, whereas they
could make no use of theirs; that their Fleet was very ill manned, and a great
many of their men sick and wounded, that two of their Ships had lost their
Fore-Masts, that the Mainmast of the Ship called the Prince William, was quite
disabled, and many other Ships much endamaged; and in fine, that there would be
no manner of tolerable reason to be alleged in excuse of so great a fault as
it would be at that time, to put the States and the Government in imminent
danger of ruin, by so rashly exposing their Fleet. All these reasons were too
evident to be rejected; and therefore they tackt about to get away from the
Enemies, only 7 Ships that were kept back by a contrary Wind, were forced to
lag behind, and endure the Force of the English Admiral and his Squadron who
had the Weather-gage of them, till the Dusk of Night, hut without any great
damage. The D^tch Fleet then having thus made a Retreat under the favorable
covert of the Darkness, Vice Admiral de Wit who affected to show courage out of
season, called another Council of War, and proposed, that the Fleet should keep
to the leeward, but all the Officers smelling out his design, Unanimously
maintained, that it 'twas not at all advisable to stand another attack from the
English, because they were too weak to cope with them, and it would he too
great a hazard to venture it, but that it would be much safer to Retreat with
all the sail they could, toward Goree, to recruit themselves, and to wait the
Orders of the States.

It was impossible for de Wit, to oppose that Resolution, and so much the more
because he plainly perceived, that many of his Captains were resolved to lie
still, and be bare spectatours of a Fight to which they were no ways
consenting, and that of all the whole Fleet there were but 15 Ships that he
could trust upon, so suspicious to him was the fidelity of all the rest, so
that there was no other way lest for him to take, but to make as fast as he
could from the Enemy, which at last, though much against his stomach, that
Bully-Admiral was fain to resolve upon; yet terribly fretted he was, to see
himself so deserted at a time when his foolish Ambition flattered him, that he
might have gained immortal Glory to himself and a great Triumph for his
Country. So the Fleet made all the sail they could for Holland, and the English
pursued them till noon; but seeing 'twas but in vain, they tackt, and stood
another Course. The same Evening the Dutch came in sight of the Isle of
Schouwen, and on the 13th. of October got into Helvoetsluys.

The shameful Cowardice of the Captains that had fled in such a Rencounter as
that, was so much the more Criminal, because there was not so much as one ship
lost in the Fight out of the whole Fleet. For one Ship that had all her sails
and rigging shot away, yet got away in that sad condition, into the Meuse, and
all the rest that had been battered, made a shift likewise to save themselves.
It will not be impertinent to insert by the way the relation of a very
Remarkable action. Broer Jaap, Captain of the Ship we told you, was so
miserably mauled, being Grappled with an English Frigate, had his Mizen-Mast and
Bolt-sprit, and part of his Ships Head shot away; upon which, seeing himself in
such a miserable and helpless condition, he leapt into a Boat and relinquish'h
his Ship to the discretion of the Enemy. But a Gunner A remarkable action of a
Gunner.
of the same Ship took up a lighted match and went down into the Powder room,
crying out? my Comerades, is it possible, you should yield! Let us rather put
fire to the Powder, and so we shall all be set at liberty; Which bold and
desperate Resolution so frighted the English that had Boarded her, that they
imediately quitted the Ship, and left the Mr. quietly to Conduct her into the
Meuse.

The States General, to remedy all these disorders, took a Resolution, after
they had well informed themselves of the particulars of all that had passed, to
punish those that had shown any symptoms of Cowardice, and accordingly they had
began to make an exact inquiry into the Behavior of those Officers, but soon
let it fall because on one side the Number of the Criminals was too great, and
on the other the favor of powerful interceeding friends prevailed over the
severity of Justice.

Though the English had had some disadvantage in the Mediterranean, yet were they
not for that a whit the less venturous to endeavor to retakethe Phoenix which
they had lost, and which young Tromp then was in, because his own Ship called,
the Maiden of Enkuisen was so battered in the Battle of Elbaa and Monte
Christo, that she was hardly able to keep the Sea. And they effected that
enterprise with so much the more ease, because the Hollanders having taken some
fresh Codd, were gotten into a debauch, and thought themselves secure enough in
Legorn Road, to dispense with keeping of a good Guard.

Bodley and Captain Cox being informed of their Frolicksome security manned out
three Boats with 30 armed Seamen each, who were furnished with bags of Meal to
throw in the Dutch men's Eyes. A bold enterprise of the English.
Being thus provided, they set out in the evening, and though the Darkness for a
while made them lose one another Company, yet they got together again at break
of day, and clapped the Frigate a board, dividing themselves into three Companies:
The first of which had Orders to cut the Cables, the second to Govern the
Sails, and the third, to shut down the Seamen under Deck, and to kill all they
met in their way. Captain Tromp hearing the alarm, Tromp in danger of being
drowned.
got presently out of his Bed, and fired his Pistols two or three times at the
English that were already Mrs. of the Frigate; but finding it was too late to
save her, he endeavored at least to save himself by leaping out of the Window
of the Captains Chamber into the Sea, where he swum till a Dutch Boat came and
took him up. The English having thus regained their Ship, without losing any
time, made sail immediately away toward Naples, and were pursued by two Dutch
Men of War, but in vain, the Phoenix being a very Nimble sailor.

There were 8 Seamen killed in this Rencounter, and those that were wounded
were set ashore at Naples. Notwithstanding this, the English were still much
weaker than the Dutch in the Mediterranean, For besides the 14 Men of War
Commanded by de Galen, the Dutch Consul at Legorn had hired 11 more, though it is
true, that de Galen's Squadron were much endamaged by the late Fight, and the
others could not quickly be got ready for want of Seamen.

After the unfortunate expedition of Vice Admiral de Wit, the States began to
cast their Eyes again upon Lieutenant Admiral Martin Tromp who was as much
beloved of the Seamen for his mild Temper; as de Wit was hated by them, for his
Cruelty; besides that there was no body that would offer to go about to
parallel the merit of the former with the great Capacity of the other. It Is
true, some seemed not very well satisfied with the last excursion Tromp had
made, but however the Major part were of opinion, that as things were, they
could not be without him.

Thereforeat the beginnig of November. the States took a Resolution, The Command
of the Fleet given again to Martin Tromp.
to give him the Command of the Fleet that was then Equipping. Vice Admiral
Evertsz, de Wit, de Ruiter, and Rear-Admiral Florisz were named to Command
under him: But de Wit falling sick was put ashore, and de Ruiter substituted
in his place.

This Fleet was composed of about 73 Men of War, besides Fire Ships and other
smaller vessels and Tenders. Besides which, there were 300 Merchant Ships that
were joined to the Admiral's Flag, which Tromp had orders to Convoy as far as
Cape St. Lazar. He then put to Sea with this so potent Fleet, and made toward
the Strait of Callis. Between Dover and Folstan, he discovered the English
Fleet under the Command of Admiral Blake. A fight between the Admirals Tromp
and Blake.
And so the two Fleets coming up one with the other, begun about noon, to fire
at one another, and about three in the afternoon, came to a full Engagement.
When Tromp was advanced pretty near Blake, this latter who had the Weather-gage
of him, gave Tromp a broad side, who answered him vigorously with another,
Captain Batten that Commanded the Ship called the Rose and Crown, carrying 44
Guns followed the English Admiral so close, that Tromp Grapled him and run
against him with so much violence that the Head and Bolt-split of the Ship
Brederode were broken to pieces with the shock. Whilst Tromp was Grapled on one
side with Batten, Achson coming up to his assistance brought the Ship
Bonaventure to his other side; which is so much the more Remarkable because the
Captains of those two English Ships had sworn to Blake either to bring him the
Dutch Admiral, or else at least to sink him to the bottom of the Sea. Achson
advancing to the head of Tromp's Ship let fly a Broad side that raked his Deck
fore and aft, killed his Secretary by his side and did a great deal of other
mischief on board the Dutch Admiral. But yet Tromp keeping still an undaunted
presence of mind, endeavored by his discourses, to revive the palled spirits
of his men by inspiring into them a love for their Country; while things were
thus passing, one of Tromp's sailors contemning all danger, taking hold of the
Cables of the Rose and Crown, vaulted into her through a shower of shot, and
climbing up to the Mainmast Top Gallant, pulled down the English Flag and put
up the Princes in its stead; for which Heroic Action he had a Gratification
given him by the States of 500 Dutch Livers; At length Batten after he had lost
above 60 men, and was quite disabled, yielded his Ship; and on the other side
Evertsz coming to a close Engagement with Achson, handled him so roughly that
he was fain to quit the Bonaventure.

Blake being attackt by de Ruiter, lost his Masts, and the Captain de Haas, and
de Liefde falling likewise upon him, attackt him on both sides so that he was
forced to quit the Fight, and retire very much battered and disabled, to Dover.
The night at last parted the Fray, but those that were Engaged the furthest
amongst the English Ships left not of shooting till toward 9 a Clock. The
particularities of this Battle may be seen in the following Letter written by
Tromp to the States.

SInce my last of this Month, Martin Tromp's Letter to the States.
we have used all possible diligence to make toward the Downs. And on the 9th
sailing between Callis and Dover, we perceived a Fleet. We set sail at 2 a
Clock, the Weather being Calm; the English after our Example, unmoored
likewise, being 52 sail strong, great and small. At one a Clock, the Wind that
was North-West changed to the West. In the Evening about 5 a Clock, we cast
Anchor and the Eng^^sh Fleet did the like to the Westward of Dover. That night
we had a storm; at 10 in the morning the Wind was North-North West. Some of our
Ships of War, and Fireships were scattered from us. At Noon, we set sail, the
English did the same, and we strove to get up with them. At 1 a Clock some of
our nimblest sailors began to Fire at them, about 3 a Clock we arrived at the
Singels with design to prevent the Enemies, but Blake drawing toward us, we
made up directly to him, which as soon as he perceived, he did what he could, to
get the Weather-gage of us, in which he succeeded, but we Exchanged in passing,
each of us a Broad side; and the Ship called the Rose and Crown, carrying 44
Guns, and about 200 men Commanded by Batten, followed him very close, upon
which, we fell foul upon with so much impetuosity, that our Bolt-sprit and the
point of our Ships head were broken with the shock. At the same Moment, another
English Captain, named Achson who Commanded the Ship Bonaventure, carrying 30
Guns, having likewise attackt us on the other side, we fought for an hour
between them both, till at last the Rose and Crown having 60 Men killed, and a
great many wounded, and two Captains killed, was forced to yield her self.

Our Vice Admiral Evertsz having attackt the Bonaventure on her other side, we
were four Grapled together, and the Bonaventure likewise yielded. We took
possession of the Rose and Crown, after having taken above a 100 men out of
her, and put in 60 of our own men instead of them. We had in our Admiral's Ship
3 men killed, and 21 wounded. Vice Admiral Evertsz took likewise possession of
the Bonaventure, and the Night having put an end to the Fight, we cast Anchor,
and gave order to our Master that kept our prizes, to do the same. About 9 a
Clock we still heard the noise of the Firing of our Rears. About the Dusk of
night, Captain Juinbol's Ship fell on fire, by what accident we know not, and
perished with a great part of her men, but the rest were saved. We spent all
the night in repairing our Ships and our damages.

On the 11th. of the aforesaid Month, in the Morning the Wind being
West-North-West, we perceived 2 Ships to the Westward, to which we gave chase.
Captain Van Sanen, took one of them, which proved an English Ship of 14 Guns,
laden with Figs coming from Condat. We called all our Captains on Board us, and
their men in the mean while, helped to repair our Ship, and all the other Ships
in the Fleet that had need of it. We had but very few men killed and wounded.
Some of our Ships are scattered from us, and we know not which way they have
steered. And about one a Clock, we were got in a readiness to weigh Anchor,
with a design to go and seek out the English, either at Dover, or toward the
Downs. We accordingly advanced for some time, and then the Night coming on, we
were forced to come to an Anchor, Dover bearing North-East from us. On the
12th. at 10 a Clock; Captain Sentson brought in to us one of the Parliament
Ships, called the Hercules, carrying 26 Guns, which had on board her 80
Vagabonds that had saved themselves upon that Coast, she was bound from
Portsmouth for London, in order to join the other Men of War that were there,
designed to be sent into the Mediterranean. At the same time some of our
strayed Ships found the way back to us again. We used all possible industry
clapping on all the sail we could, to make toward the Downs, but found it
impracticable to do it. The 13th. in the Morning, the Wind being at North
North-East, we weighed Anchor, and stood toward the Coast of France, and came
to an Anchor in the Rode of Bullen, where we received the dispatches of your
High and Mightinesses, dated the 7th. of this Month. As soon as we shall get
all our Fleet together again, if the Wind and opportunity permit, we will go
and make another attack upon the English, according to our Orders. We have
gotten an account from our Prisoners, of the present condition their Men of War
are now in, which we have set down in the Memorial hereto annexed, but we know
not whether their report may be relied on. We impatiently expect our Merchant
Fleet, as also the Men of War and Fire Ships which lagg'd behind us when we
came away; and for that effect, we have sent out our best sailors a cruizing
along the Strait of Callis, to hasten them back, etc.

In all propability Tromp in that Action would have entirely destroyed the
English Fleet, if they had not timely retreated into the Thames; and if he
could have procured any good sounders, he would have gone to seek them out even
in that their place of refuge, but wanting that necessary help he was fain to
content himself with the taking of the Ships, the Rose and Crown, the
Bonaventure, the Hercules, and another little Ship of 14 Guns, taken by his
Cruizers, etc. However the Dutch Merchant Fleet passed the Strait of Callis
about the 15th. of the same Month, and happily pursued their designed Voyage.

The English dissatisfied at Blake.
In the mean while great Complaints and Murmurings begun to break out at
Westminster, they being much dissatisfied there at the weak resistance^ Blake
had made in the last Engagement, and if he had not had the affection of the
Officers and Seamen of his Fleet, he would undoubtedly have incurred a disgrace
from his Mrs. and the Mobb would have carried their resentments much further;
But Policy being dextrous in covering the failings of great Men, hushed them all
up in silence. Oliver Cromwell however, going to Spit-head, where the Fleet then
lay at Anchor, caused several Captains to be seized in order to fine them in
punishment of their Cowardice. Ayschew having been deserted by Blake charged
him with the loss of the Battle, and openly protested, he would serve no
longer: The Parliament to appease him, ordered him a Gratification of 300 l. in
Sterlin besides 180 l. that had been assigned him before upon the Revenues of
some Lands in Ireland.

Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, after he had cruized some time in the Channel, to
wait for the Ships that were to come from Holland, arrived at the beginning of
February near the Isle of Rhee, to Convoy 250. Merchant Ships that were there
assembled from diverse parts of Europe; and after having staid there 7 days he
set out with that Fleet to Conduct them home to their own Country; but toward
the end of the Month, as he came near Portland, he descryed the English Fleet
under the Command of Blake, upon which he stood directly toward them, and came
up with the Enemies about 10 a Clock in the forenoon, which gave occasion to
another Fight which was so much the more bloody, because Blake on the one side
burnt with desire to regain by a Victory his lost reputation, and Tromp on the
other, was inflamed with no less passion to preserve the glory he had won, and
the vast riches of which he was the Conductor.

The two Fleets were scarcely advanced within Cannon shot of one another,
Another Cruel fight between Tromp and Admiral Blake.
but Tromp tackt about upon Blake, who presently began to play upon him with
all his Artillery, though without doing Tromp any great harm because he was at
such a distance from him: But this latter forbearing to fire till he came
within Musket shot of his Enemy, let fly at him a broad side, and then tacknig
about nimbly, he fired a second at him on the same side, and then flanking him
again on the other side, thundered off a third at him with so great success,
that there were nothing but cries and groans to be heard on board of Blake, who
fought after that only in retreating and sheering away as far as he could from
Tromp who ceased not to pursue him. After this Preludium, the two Fleets
intermixing one with the other, the Battle grew so furious, that there was
little else to be seen but Masts overturned into the Sea, and splinters flying
on all sides, Sails rent in pieces, and Masts and Cables cut short in sunder;
in one place, the Enemy was boarding our Ships, and in a moment after, were
chaced off again, where they were seen to be blown up into the Air with the
Deck they stood upon; And on another side, was seen a Ship swallowed up by the
Waves with several hundreds of Men, and the Sea turned red with humane blood,
and covered over with dead bodies, and floating pieces of shattered Ships,
which yet instead of dismaying the Combatants, served only to inflame their
Courage the more, and flesh them on the more cruelly to mutual and implacable
slaughter: And the Complaints and Lamentations of the miserable wounded
wretches, instead of mollifying their hearts with any sentiments of pity, and
inspiring them with abhorrence for such cruelty, rendered them but the more
bloody minded, and the more violently excited them to fierce and remorseless
Revenge. Bullen and its Mountains on one side, and Portland on the other, were
terribly shaken with the thundering noise of their dead-doing Guns; and in a
word, it may be said, that never was there any fight seen more cruel and
obstinately bloody then that. de Ruiter had dreamt the night before, that a
Bird came and perch't on his hand, but flew away as he was going to take her,
so that seeing the English draw near the next day, he cried out, There Is the
Bird I dreamed of; he found himself Engaged with a great English Ship carrying
44 Guns, and 270 men, called the Prosperity, which fired most terribly at him,
which put him in such perplexity, that he thought the best way to shelter
himself from her fury, would be resolutely to board her: And accordingly his
Seamen readily presenting themselves for the Enterprise, with a great deal of
courage and undauntedness, they leapt into the Enemies Ship, but were so hotly
received there, that they were forced to retire again; but yet de Ruiter not
despairing for all that, to carry her, at last, cried out to his men, My Boys?
That touch was worth nothing, I pray you, my Lads, once more Courage. Upon
which, giving another assault, they won the Ship, but de Ruiter, being
afterward over powered by the Enemies Numbers, and deserted by the rest of his
Squadron, was much against his will, constrained to let that be tamely taken
again from him that had cost him so dear.

He found himself once encompast with above 20 sail of the Enemies, but at
length Vice Admiral Evertsz coming in to his relief, he by his undauntedness,
forced his passage through that great Number; after which, being seconded by
the Captains, Kruik and Swers, he fought a long time against 7 Great English
Men of War, among whom was Vice Admiral Pen, who was fain to retire very much
battered to the Isle of Wight; there was another like wise disabled, all his
Masts and rigging being shot away close by the board; there came up besides 4
or 5 English Ships more, and attackt afresh de Ruiter, and his assistants,
Kruik and Swers, who for all that, defended themselves till evening, without
receiving any other succor than that which their own great courage was able to
furnish them.

Lieutenant Admiral Tromp pierced through and through the English Fleet which
took up about a mile in extent, thundering at all that opposed his passage.
Captain Kruik signalized himself every way; for his Ship, called the Ostritch,
fought on still some time longer against several English Ships, sunk one of
them, and defended her self as long as she had any men left, but at last the
valiant Tromp observing she had lost all her Masts and rigging to the very
Hull, and was ready to sink, Is it possible! cried he in a passion, to his
followers, There should be any Captains in the States Fleet so Cow-hearted, as
to suffer so brave a Man to be over whelmed by Numbers? And gave order at the
same time to de Wild to go and rescue him. In pursuance of which, he had
already fastened a Harser to his Ship to tow him away, but the Calm hindered him,
so that all he could do, was only to save some of the Seamen that threw
themselves on board him, whilst the Ostritch was left swimming in a manner as
much in blood as in water, and especially upon the Deck there was nothing to be
seen but a most horribl^ spectacle of dead and wounded Men, there being
reckoned 80 of the former, and of 40 young Seamen of Schiedam, all under the
Age of 20 years, there were but 3 left alive. The English had already boarded
her to pillage her, but being afraid, she would sink under them, they quitted
her, till the same Enemies finding her again next day without any soul in her,
they carried her to Portsmouth.

Captain Port having attackt a great English Man of War, sunk him, but two more
falling in upon him a moment after, he received several shot between Wind and
Water, which obliged him to call Swers to his assistance, who presently
advanced to the head of Ports Ship at the instant when the two Englishmen were
battering both his sides. And so the 4 Ships being Grapled to one another, de
Port's Ship was overturned and sunk together with an Englishman, but most of
the Men were saved by Swers. At the same time Port was cruelly wounded in the
Reins by a splinter, and was seen though thrown down on his back on the Deck to
Wave his hanger in his hand to the last and to encourage his men, till the
Waves swallowed up both him and his Ship. Swers likewise on his part had so
severely handled an English ship that had attackt Port that he was also sunk,
but almost at the same time his Ship was attackt by 4 other English, and sunk.
He and some of his Men were saved by the Enemies, and carried to London after
the fight; but understanding perfectly well the Spanish Tongue, he made himself
pass for a natural Spaniard, so that shuffling himself in amongst the Domestic
servants of the Spanish Ambassador, he found means to get a passage into
Flanders, and from thence into his true Country. This was the same Swers that
was afterward made Vice Admiral of Holland, of the College of the Admiralty of
Amsterdam, and who gave many signal marks of his Courage and Ability. Captain
Kleidyk of the Brill, received almost at one and the same time, the fire of 3
Great English Men of War, and being already reduced into a very pitiful
condition, Regemorter a Zealand Captain came in to his Aid, and cleared one of
his sides, then Kleidyk began to take a little breath, and sunk one of the
English Ships that lay against the other side of him but soon after, his own
Ship underwent the same fate, yet he saved himself and his men after a most
wonderful manner, for throwing themselves into the English Ship that lay
against the side of Regemorter, they leapt at the same moment from thence on
board Regemorter who was just then killed with 30 or 40 of his men. Kleidyk
then being got thither, took the Command of the Ship, and spoke with so much
courage to his people, that they begun to fire afresh at the English Ship, and
that, with so much success, that it was disabled and soon after buried in the
Deep. Captain Munick's Ship, of Amsterdam was taken about the same time, and
toward evening they burnt her.

Captain Aart Van Nes, following close after Tromp, found himself in the midst
of the Enemies, where he gave signal proofs of his undaunted Courage. He would
have Grapled an English Ship that had the disadvantage of the Wind, but she
letting fly at him a broad side, made him glad to sheer off; after which, he
attackt another which he furiously battered. He fought likewise for some time,
against the two English Vice-Admirals of the Blew and White Flaggs; and
afterward when he saw de Ruiter surrounded by 4 or 5 English Men of War, he
flew in like lightning to his assistance, with Captain Balk, in which place
they fought on both sides with an unconceiveable obstinacy, till at last the
English letting go their hold, and tackt to the West, and then Van Nes turned
his to the East because all his Cartridges being discharged, he wanted Respite
to charge new ones, besides that his Foremast was so shattered, that there was
no piecing it up again. Rear Admiral Florisz was for a good while, enclosed by
6 English Ships, and fought valiantly, till Tromp came and rescued him. De
Wild, and the other Captains Vander Zaen Kemper, etc. Signalized themselves.
Likewise Captain Scholte Wiglemo after a long fight, was blown up into the Air
with all his Men. Some say, that being Grapled by two English Ships, and seeing
no hopes of saving himself, he had the Courage with his own hands, to set fire
to his Powder, that he might destroy the Enemies at the same time he was going
to perish himself. There were likewise some other Ships on both sides that were
sunk. About 4 a Clock in the afternoon, Tromp was much surprised to see 26 of
his Captains desert the Admiral's Flag, and to retire out of the fight, whilst
on the other side, several of the best English Frigates were detach't, to go and
fall upon the Merchant Ships which were under the protection of his Squadron.
It was presumed, the English intended to unmast them, that being not able to
follow the main body of the Fleet, they might with the more ease make
themselves Mrs. of them; but Tromp took care to prevent the Enemies design, by
speeding to their assistance, and chacing from them the English Frigates. This
first days fight ended not till night. It was found, that Tromp had made that
day 800 Cannon shot from his Ship alone, and that one single Brass Gun that was
toward the poop, had been discharged 70 times.

The Holland Fleet wandered about here and there during the obscurity of the
night, every vessel endeavoring to repair each one their Respective damages,
and to recover themselves into a condition to maintain a second fight. The next
day being the 1st. of March, Admiral Tromp put up a White Flag, and called
together on board him the principal Officers of his Fleet, and exhorted them to
acquit themselves worthily of the duty they owed to their Country, and to fight
like men of Honor and Courage. The English followed them close at the heels
and the Battle begun again next day at 10 a Clock in the morning, about 3 miles
to the North Westward of the Isle of Wight. The English had the Wind, but
coming near them, we could not find they had any inclination to come to a close
fight, they contenting themselves only with shooting at our Masts, Sails, and
Rigging, as they had done the day before. Tromp had drawn up his Fleet into the
form of a Crescent, to be the better able to cover the Merchant Ships; and the
English came up six several times, to endeavor to cutoff those Ships from the
main body of the Fleet, but were always repulsed.

Tromp was ravished with Joy, to see some of his Captains fight more
courageously that day then they had done the day before. Captain Van Nes kept
so close to Tromp, that he could easily call him to his assistance in case of
need. De Ru^ter also gave upon this occasion, New proofs of his bravery; for
after he had received his orders from the Admiral, he engaged so far amongst
the thickest of the Enemies, that he was many times in danger of being oppressed
by them, and after noon, he was so grievously battered, that he was not able
any longer to move either forward or backward upon which, Tromp Commanded
Captain Du^n to assist de Ruiter to get off, and go out of the Battle. Almost
at the same time, the Admiral was informed, that the Merchant Ships were
standing to the South-East-Ward, upon which, Captain Van Nes was detatcht away,
to Command them by Tromps order, to stand to the East-North Eastward in order
to make toward the Strait of Callis. Van Nes performed his Commission, and bid
them at the same time clap on more Sail; but happening to come too late, and they
having neglected to execute the orders given them, the English took their
opportunity to Snap some part of that Fleet together with two Men of War of
which they made themselves Mrs. of which one that was Commanded by Le Sage,
yielded not till after a very stout Resistance. Of the Merchant Ships, there
were 12 taken, others were defended by the Men of War, and part of them saved
themselves in Havre de Grace, as did likewise two Men of War that had lost
their Masts. At the coming on of the night, an English Ship took fire, and then
the fight ended.

In the mean while, some Captains sent word to Tromp, that they wanted Powder,
and were not in a condition to make any longer resistance, upon which, Tromp
ordered them to keep by the Merchant Ships, and to make as fair a show as they
could with their presence, to make the Enemy believe, they were there to defend
them; and then all things were disposed to be in a readiness for a third fight.
The next morning at break of day, the English were seen to come on again to
charge them. Upon which, Tromp having put all things in order for that purpose
advanced toward the Enemies Fleet, with more Courage and Resolution than any
Forces he had to fight them. For at most he had but one poor Squadron under his
Flag that had any Ammunition left, whilst the Rest were unprovided of all
things. At 10 of the Clock in the morning, the two Fleets came up with one
another, and commenced a third Battle, which was very obstinate and Bloody, yet
without any great advantage to the Enemies. The English Vice Admiral of the
Blew Braved for some time the Dutch Admiral, thundering continually at him with
his Guns, but he forbearing to fire till he came up almost close to his side,
gave him then first one Broadside, and after that another, so much to the
purpose, that he was forced to retire. But whilst on one side, the Valiant
Tromp signalized himself, many of his Captains basely deserted him on the
other, and betook themselves to a shameful flight, besides several others that
were constrained to it by pure necessity, for want of Powder. Toward the
Evening, the English took some more of our Merchant Ships. Captain Van Ness, at
the beginning of the fight, advertised them by order from the Admiral, to clap
on all the Sail they could, and make toward the strait of Callis; but those
orders were neglected; Tromp sent to them, the Fisc^l, or Treasurer of his
Fleet, to press them to make the more have, but all in vain, it being
impossible with all that could be done or said, to make them to go forwards; so
that some of the Enemies Fregats appearing in the evening, came and fell upon
the main Body of that Fleet.

Van Ness did all he was able, to defend them, More Dutch Merchant Ships taken.
but they falling into confusion and disorder, one part of them blindly threw
themselves among the Enemies Men of War, whilst the others falling foul upon
one another, knocked themselves to pieces. And for the Dutch Men of War that
were there, they alas, could give them no assistance for want of Powder, so
that a considerable part of those Merchant Men fell into the hands of the
English.

At the approach of the night, Blake made a show as if he would have come on
again to charge the Dutch Fleet, but Admiral Tromp keeping himself in a posture
ready to stand the shock, the English Admiral retired, steering his Course
toward the Coasts of England, whilst the States Fleet made sail quietly
without being pursued, toward the Coasts of Flanders, and came to an Anchor on
the 3d of March, within three Miles to the Northwestward of Dunkirk, from
whence they got into the Harbors of Holland and Zealand. These three
successive Battles as the Dutch would needs flatter themselves, cost very nigh
as dear to the English as the Dutch. Its true the Hollanders confess they lost
24 Merchants Ships, but the English reported them at London to be above 40.
These Dutch Men of War, viz. the Great St. Luke, the Ostrich, the Amity, and
the Golden Cock were taken and carried into Plymouth and Dover; The Crown, the
Angel Gabriel and Keidyk were sunk, and Schelten Wiglemo blown up. Among the
Captains that were kill^d, were reckoned Balk, Van Zaanen, Port, Spanhem,
Allart, Sipke Fokkes and Regemorter, Schey, Van Zeelst, and Swers were made
Prisoners. The number of men killed was about 600, and that of the wounded
somewhat more. De Ruiter having lost all his Masts, and most part of his Men,
was forced to retire before the end of the Battle.

On the side of the English, the Rainbow, the Saturn, the Sampson, the Rose,
and Captain Button's Ship were sunk, and the Charles Burnt, as was likewise the
Fregat called the Fairsax, but that was done by the English themselves at
Chatham, because she was not in a condition to be made fit for Service again.
The Marmaduke, the Merlin, the Pheasant, the King David, the Greyhound, and the
Seven Brothers were so miserably battered, that they never appeared at Sea
since. The Admiral, the two Vice-Admirals, and the Rear-Admiral had likewise no
reason to boast of any better Treatment. De Ruiter took from them the Ship
called the Prosperity. The number of men killed and wounded of the English,
according to the accounts given in Holland, amounted to about 2000 Seamen and
Soldiers, among which were reckoned the Captains Mildmay, Barker, Bale, Hall,
Kirby, Dakirs Broadbridge, Jeffew, and Button, killed, and Back, Day, Taduel,
Lawson, and some others wounded; to which, they add, that the number of the
maimed was very considerable.

But letting alone those relations as less authentic, it will be much more
pertinent to our purpose, to insert here the Letters of the two Admirals, by
which the truth of things will best appear, and which party had the advantage,
and besides, the Curious will be glad to read such Original Narrations as
those, because in them are many Circumstances reported, that are not to be
found in the Body of any History of those times. Accordingly we shall present
you with a true Copy of the Letter sent by Admiral Blake upon this Subject, to
the Speaker of the Parliament at Westminster.

The Almighty power of God in which we put all our trust, Admiral Blakes Letter
upon the Subject of the Sea Battle that lasted three days
has newly given his Servants real marks of his Blessing, by the Defeat of the
formidable Fleet of Holland, we having beaten them in three successive Battles,
given three several days one after another, so that a great number of Prisoners
are fallen into our hands, the others are dispersed, and part of them chased
into places out of the reach of the pursuits of the Victors. God be praised,
that he has been pleased to honor his children with his Protection, by
disarming their Enemies. Ever since the 10th of this month, he has given us
assured presages of his assistance, by sending us favorable winds. Our Fleet
was right against Portland, and much perplexed for fear the Enemy upon sight of
us, should have made away farther from us. Two days before, we were at Prayers,
and on the 18th, we perceived, that God was going to inform us, where they
were. The Text that day was taken out of the 2 Chronicles. 20.16. in these words. To
morrow go ye down against them, etc. And the Chapter was scarcely expounded,
but even before break of day, we discovered the Enemies Fleet; upon which, we
immediately set Sail, to make to them, and the Enemy did the same by us, and
scarcely were the two adverse Fleets met, but they engaged in a Battle. We had
at first the disadvantage, because the Enemies had the weather-gage, and that
the major part of our best Ships could not come up to us. Which was the cause,
that our Admiral-Ship, the Triumph was ^orced all that day to endure the
greatest fire of the Enemies, whilst the others at the same time were in no
less peril. But God was our Sovereign Protector, for tho our Ship had already
lost half her men, yet the courage of the rest gave us still great hopes, and
much allayed our grie^ for the loss of the others. But more could not be
expected from them than it pleased God they should do, (...).
and which our Enemies doubtless have sufficiently experienced. The first day
we took from them three Rear-Admirals, and one Vice Admiral, and a little
after, we sunk them 3 Ships; the others are now at Portsmouth. The 2d day we
burnt or sunk 8 or 10 more of them; The 3d day, they began to give way, and
betake themselves to flight. Their losses are so much the greater and more
sensible, in that we took from them above 40 men of War and Merchant Ships. We
Boarded them in the sight of Tromp, he not being able to oppose us. Captain
Lawson Grappled a great Ship and took her, but he was very much battred. Marten
and Gaver took also two Ships, so that we have taken several, and our Enemies
will be forced to own their loss to be great. We have lost several Officers
recommendable for their Merit and Valor, as likewise 5 or 6 Masters of the
first ranks much lamented for their good conduct and great fidelity, besides a
great many other brave men that were in the Fleet. But we have lost never a
Ship except one which we sunk our selves. Our Admirals behaved themselves with
an unexampled bravery. Admiral Blake was wounded in the Thigh, but we hope he
will not be much incommoded by it. He would hardly be persuaded to go down into
the Ship, to be dressed, and never quitted his Post during the whole fight. In
fine, we observed, that every day as long as the Battle lasted, the Arm of the
Almighty God favored our Arms, being bound to acknowledge, That it is he that
gives the Victory, and not the great number of Ships, or the strength of Armies.

This Letter seemed very edifying by the great show of Piety that appeared
throughout it, but it must be observed, that this was the style of the English
in Cromwell's time, that able Politician covering himself usually with the Cloak
of Religion to make his Ambitious Projects take effect, and the way to make a
man's Court with him, was to affect a great show of Devotion. The same Character
now reigns in France, where people are obliged to appear Bigots, to make their
Fortune, the Princes humor of late being turned wholly that way.

Here follows now the Letter Written to the States upon the same occasion, by
Tromp.

High and Mighty Lords,
THis Battle that has lasted 3 days together begun the last of February at 9 a
Clock in the morning, Tromp's Letter to the States about the same fight.
and ended not till the 2d. of March, when the Night parted the Combatants. It
was, given in that extent of Sea that is between Portland, and Swartness or
Bullen. The English had about 69 or 70 sail of Frigates and Men of War, and we
70 Men of War, and 150 Merchant Ships. I cannot yet give your High and
Mightinesses all the particulars, because most of the Captains hardly had time
the 1st. of March, to come on board the Admiral.

They have informed me, that de Ruiter's Squadron which fell upon the Enemies
Rear, took some Ships from them, whilst several others on both sides, were
sunk. As for our Van guard of which I had the joint Conduct with Rear Admiral
Florisz, we attackt that of the Enemies under the Command of Blake. The fight
was fierce and obstinate, and the Victory very wavering, so that neither of the
Parties had any cause to brag of any advantage they had. This was the success
of the first days fight. About 4 a Clock in the afternoon observing that the
English had detacht a Squadron of their nimblest Sailors, to go and fall upon
the Merchant Fleet, with design to burn them, we quitted the Fight, to hasten
to their assistance. After the Action was over, I sent for the General Officers
of the Fleet, Evertsz and De Ruiter, on board the Admiral, whilst Florisz was
left to take care those Ships of the Fleet should be repaired that had need of
it. We therefore consulted upon the present State of Affairs, whether it would
be advisable for us to leave our Merchant Ships to their shifts, to go and
attackt the Enemies once more, since we were to weak to spare a detachment of
Men of War strong enough to Convoy them; and besides that we had some grounds
to fear, the English might have still some body of reserve toward Callis, or
whether it would not be better, to defend them, by making them keep close by
us, and so in a fighting posture to wait the Enem^es charge. And because we
were in want of Powder, order was given to husband it well, and not to make one
shot unprofitably. We discovered to the Eastward at a good distance from us,
the Ship called the Ostritch so terribly battered and disabled, that she had
nothing left but her Main, and Mizzen Sa^ls, whereupon, I ordered de Wild to
go and take her, and bring her to the Fleet. As soon as we had got together all
our Sh^ps both Men of War and Merchants, we stood to the North-West, and
toward evening we had a great Calm. But de Wild not being able to bring off
the Ostritch, the English carried her away next day to their Fleet.

That day about 11 a Clock, the Enemies came and charged us again. They had
posted in the Wings of their Fleet, five or six of their best Sh^ps, to
Endeavor to intercept some of our Ships. We fought all that day till the Dusk
of N^ght. Capta^n le Sage of Zealand, and le Bruin, Van Zeelst of Amsterdam,
and some Merchant Ships were separated from the Fleet. Toward evening several
Captains came and Complained, that they had no Ammunition left, upon which,
because I had on board the Admiral a great many Bullets, 8 pounders, I
distributed them amongst those, who had Guns of that Bore. We still pursued our
Course the Wind at West-North-West, and every one endeavored to repair their
respective Ships as well as it was possible.

On the 2d. of March, the English attackt us again with a great deal of vigor;
and we had hardly fought two hours, but half of our Ships had spent all their
Ammunition. we fired some guns for a signal to them to come on board us, which
they did. I placed them in the main body of the Fleet, and charged them to make
show as if they wanted nothing, telling them, that they which still had any
Ammunition, should take care to defend them; so that I made a shift to maintain
the fight till night, defending them all that while with not above 25 or 30
Ships that were still provided with Powder and Bullets. Two hours after, Blake
having assembled all his Forces, made show as if he would fall upon us once
more. When I saw that, I took in my Sails, and let him know, I was ready to
begin again with him; upon which, after the Vanguards of the two Fleets had
charged one another for some time, the English at length sheer'd off, to Sea
ward, and Blake being out of Cannon shot, came no more at us. Vice Admiral
Evertsz coming then to me, told me, they wanted Powder and Bullets. When night
was come, we hang out Lantherns, continuing all the while our former Course
with a North North East Wind. Blake likewise hung out his Lanthenrs, being to
the Leeward. Toward midnight, we lost sight of the Enemies lights; and the
next morning we perceived Callis bearing South-West of us at about 2 miles
d^stance, without seeing any English at all. I am persuaded, they are retired
toward the Isle of Wight to repair and resit their Ships, etc.


The success of this Battle made so great a noise at London, that they made no
difficulty to publish abroad that Tromp, Evertsz, and de Ruiter were totally
Routed, and that 100 Merchant Ships, and 50 Men of War of the Dutch were taken
or sunk; nay, and this noise was Echoed over all Europe; and was carried into
France, Sweedland, Denmark, and to render what they affected to speak of it,
the more credible, the Parliament appointed an Extraordinary Thanksgiving day
to be kept on that occasion; and what seemed fully to Authorize so great a
Triumph, and exalt the glory of Blake, was, that the Prisoners were led in a
Drove to Canterbury, under the Guard of a Troop of Horse, and that in all the
places through which they passed, they affected to ring the Bells, thereby to
make that defeat to appear the more signal and incontestable; tho the Dutch at
the same time no less confidently pretended, that the Action did not pass
altogether so much to the advantage of the English, that they ought to have
attributed to themselves all the Glory of it, since, say they, excepting the
Merchant Ships that fell into their hands, the Hollanders had not much less
right to pretend to the Victory than their Enemies.

But though the Arms of the United Provinces had received some Check on the
Occean, The Great Duke of Tuscany ill satisfied at the Conduct of the English.
yet they were Victorious in the Mediterranean; that which had passed in the
attempt made for the recovery of the Phoenix had so offended the Great Duke of
Tuscany, that he looked upon such a violence committed in his Ports, to be an
intrenchment upon his Sovereignty, so that he Commanded the 6 English Men of
War, either to go out of that Harbor in which the Hollanders had kept them
besieged almost 8 Months, or else to restore them their Frigate again. Appleton
who Commanded those Ships in chief held a consultation with Bodley who had
another Squadron of 8 men of War and one Fire-Ship at Porto Longone. They
resolved then, that as soon as Bodley should have weighed Anchor, Appleton
should slip out of Legorn in order to go and join him, and to attack the
Hollanders with their United Force. On the 12th. of March at the Dusk of night,
the Dutch begun to discover Bodley's Squadron, and the day following, four of
his Ships came nearer, followed by the rest that appeared to be still at about
4 or 5 miles distance from the former.

The Forces of the Hollanders consisted of 16 Men of War and a Fire-Ship,
besides 6 or 7 Merchant Ships that came from the Streights, to whom the Dutch
Commanders declared, That if they would take part with them in the Battle, they
should share with them in the Booty. As to the Forces of the English, they were
reduced to two Squadrons, whereof one was of 6 and the other was of 7 Men of
War, besides a Flute and a Fire-Ship. According to the project concerted
between Bodley and Appleton, this latter was not to come out of Legorn, till
Bodley had begun the fight. Bodley accordingly detacht out 3 of his Men of War
and a Fire-Ship, to go and brave the Hollanders, who seeing Appleton offered
not to stir out, thought it necessary to use a Stratagem, by making as if they
would go out against Bodley, and in effect they tackt about after him, but
keeping their Eye still upon the Harbor, being impatient to see Appleton weigh
Anchor; who thinking the Hollanders would indeed have pursued their way, to
make up to Bodley, ventures at length to come out with his Squadron of 6 Men of
War, which the Hollanders no sooner perceived, De Galen attacks the English in
the Mediteranean.
but immediately veering back, they fell all on a sudden upon him. De Galen
attackt the Bonaventure carrying 40 Guns, and 180 men, and without giving him
time to make ready for a defense, he fired at him several broad sides, one
after another, so thick, that at last a Bullet chancing to penetrate into her
Powder-Room, she was blown up into the Air with all her men, except 6 or 7
Seamen that were saved. That disaster extremely discouraged the English, and
raised the courage of their Enemies.

Appleton Commanded in the Ship called the Leopard, carrying 54 Guns, and near
200 men. He was attackt by the Ships the Sun and the Julus Caesar, who battered
him in a most terrible manner.

Tromp the Son who was then advanced to the Office of a Rear-Admiral, Cornelius
Tromp made Rear Admiral.
Commanded in the Ship called the Moon, vacant by the death of Captain Bont,
who was killed in the fight of Monte Christo; he attackt the Samson, carrying
40 Guns, and 130 Men. He fought with so much the more valor, because he still
remembered the affront he lately suffered in the Phoenix; so that coming to
Board her, after he had grapled her, he powered into her so great a number of
Seamen, that she was forced to yield. But in the mean time there was a Dutch
Fire-Ship, that slipping along cunningly by the other side of the English Ship,
under the favorable covert of a thick smoke, and grapling her, the flames
overrun her with such Rapidity, that they penetrated into her Powder-Room, and
blew her up. But the men in her had better luck than those in the Bonaventure,
the most part of them being saved by the Dutch Boats.

The Ship called the Levant Merchant was attackt by the Captains, Form and de
Ham, who likewise boarding her, forced her to yield at Discretion, after the
fight, she was carried into Legorn. The Ship called the Traveller being attackt
by de Vries and Boutebotter, was also constrained to undergo the same
Treatment. Amidst these Transactions, an English Fire-Ship was played at the
Dutch Rear-Admiral, to burn him but de Gal^n espying her coming, sunk her with
his Cannon.

The Ships called the Sun and Julius Coesar, battered Appleton's sides, who
seeing himself deserted by Bodley, defended himself like a man in despair, and
obliged the Aggressors to retire. But Captain de Boet having at last grapled
him, encouraged the other two to come on and charge him again; so that Appleton
seeing no less than three Enemies upon him at once, despaired of saving
himself, and in that humor was going to set fire to the Powder, but his men
having hindered him from executing that horrid design, he was forced to yield
the Leopard which he Commanded, having 80 men killed, and 60 wounded.

Of 6 Ships of which Appleton's Squadron was Composed, there were 5 destroyed
or Mastered, there was but one left, called the Marie, which making use of her
sails instead of her guns, saved her self by flying toward Bodl^y, who with
his Squadron of 8 Ships, though he had the Weather-gage, did nothing during the
whole fight, but make some discharges with his Guns against the Dutch Captains,
Sybrant Mol, Rijkhoven, Slortz, Oosterwout, Roodhaas, Govertsz, and Viotnhoven:
But as soon as he heard of the defeat of Appleton, he put up all his sails, and
betook himself to flight. Tromp would have given him chase with some of the
Ships that were least endamaged, but the night coming on, he stole away by
favor of the darkness, and so escaped the pursuits of the Victors.

De Galen mortally wounded in the fight.
But the Glorious advantages the Dutch had thus newly gained, were traversed by
the loss of him that had the most contributed thereto, and who had managed that
Action with all imaginable Conduct and Prudence. This Valiant Man being on
board in his Post, had his right leg shot off by the second Cannon ball that
was shot at his Ship, but yet that his men might not be discouraged, he for
some time concealed his hurt; till the Mrs. chief Mate of his Ship, being the
first that perceived it, represented to him, that he lost so much Blood that he
would be in evident danger of his life, if it were not instantly stopped. He was
therefore carried down into the Hold, where his Leg was sawed off below the
knee; and a glass of Wine being presented him to fortify his heart, he drunk
it of as briskly as if he had felt no harm, after which, he lay down, saying
these words: The English King-killers shall pay for all. He was hardly dressed
but he would needs be carried up again to be a spectator of the rest of the
fight, but he was so extremely weakened, that his people would not obey him in
that point. All that he could do then in the pitiful plight he was in, to
satisfy that desire of Glory that accompanies all Hero's to their last gasp,
was to encourage his men by his discourses; and as soon as he heard, the
English had betaken themselves to flight, he Commanded his men without losing
of time immediately to hoist up all their sails, and to pursue them, but they
being got already a great way off, the night put a stop to the intentions of
the Victors, who were forced to return to an Anchor in the road of Legorn.

The English lost in this Action, 6 Men of War, of which one was sunk, 3 were
taken, and 2 burnt. And they had 286 men killed, 293 wounded, and some made
Prisoners. The Hollanders loss amounted to 123 men killed, and near as many
wounded, and one Ship called, the Madonna Della Vignia was also lost.

Admiral de Galen De Galen dies.
being carried to Legorn, the Great Duke of Tuscany did him all the honors
imaginable, sending him presents of all that was capable to give him any ease
or refreshment, till the day of his death, which was on the 23d. of March. He
was 48 years old, and was as much lamented for his Merit, and the Great
Experience he had in Marine affairs, as for the great and signal Services he
had done to his Country. His Body was transported into Holland, and interred
the 13th. of December in the new Church at Amsterdam. The States ordered a
Magnificent Tomb to be erected, Is intered in Amsterdam.
to immortalise the Memory of so great a man; Upon which his Figure is placed
lying on his back with his Arms and Armor, having his head piece at his Feet.
Below the Tomb upon a Table of White Marble, His Tomb, and Epitaphs.
there is represented a description of the Battle which we have just now
related. And underneath are written in Golden Letters upon black Marble, the
following verses, composed by that famous Dutch Poet J. V. Vondel.

Hier Legt in it graf van eer de Dappre van Galen,
Die eerst ging buit op buit Castilien ashaalen;
En met en leeuwenhert, naby't Toskaner strand,
De Britten heeft verjaagd, veroverd en verbrand.
Which may be thus Englished.

The Stout de Galen here in honors bed is laid,
Famed for the Rich Booties he on the Spaniards made;
Who with heart undaunted attackt the English Fleet,
And near the Tuscan shore; gave them a sore defeat:
And took and burnt their Ships, to serve him for a light
Down to the Gloomy shades, and so bid us good night.
Above the Tomb there is an Oval Table of Black Marble, flourisht all round
with Flaggs, Standards, Streamers, Pikes, and all the Arms used in Sea Fights.
And thereupon is Engraven the following Latin Epitaph in Letters of Gold.

Generosissimo Heroi Johanni a Galen, Essensi.
Qui ob res saepe fortiter and feliciter gestas, Sexies uno anno Duinkerkanorum
Praedatoriam Navem captam, and a Barbaris opima spolia Reportata, Ordinum
Classi in Mari Mediterraneo praefectus, memorabili praelio ad Livornam, Deo
Auxiliante, Anglorum navibus captis, fugatis, incendio and submersione deletis,
Commercium cum dicti Maris Accolis restituit, Idibus Martii An. 1653, and
altero pede truncatus, nono die post victoriam, Annos natus 48, obit, ut in
secula per Gloriam viveret, Illustris. and praepot, Foederat. Belgii Ordinum
Decreto Nob. and Pot. Senatus Archithalas. qui est Amstelodami.

M. H. P.

Which we have rendered in English thus.
To the most Generous Hero John de Galen of Essen.
WHO for his many courageous and successful Exploits; for having in one year
taken six Dunkirk Privatiers, and brought away many rich spoils from the
Barbarians, being afterward made Admiral of the States Fleet in the
Mediterranean, having in a memorable Battle near Legorn, by the help of God,
taken, put to flight, burnt and sunk the Ships of the English, restored
Commerce again with the inhabitants of those Coasts; on the 15th of March 1653.
And having lost one of his Legs, he expired on the 9th. day after the victory,
aged 48 years: And that he might live by his Glorious Fame, to all succeeding
Ages, By order of the Most Illustrious and Mighty States of the United
Netherlands, the Senate of the Admiralty of Amsterdam have erected to him this
Monument.

When Bodley was got back to London, Appleton charged him with the loss of the
Battle, with so much the more grounds of probability, because the Captains of
the States Fleet that were returned to Amsterdam, gave a noble Testimony of the
Bravery of this latter. The Subject of Appleton's Complaint, was, That Bodley
had not performed his promise, but had basely left him to be a Victim to his
Enemies; but that difference was not decided.

The Council of England being grown somewhat more sensible of the complaints
made by the people of Great Britain, The English Council incline to Peace, but
hindered by Cromwell. Cromwell's Letter to dissolve the Rump Parliament.
upon the Subject of the differences that had caused the War with the
Hollanders, began to be a little more inclined to Peace: But Cromwell's
intrigues defeated their purposes, he out of a pretended zeal to the Common
Good, taking upon him to assemble a new Parliament, holding frequent
Conferences for that purpose with the Chief Members of the Council of War
assembled at St. James's. And in effect, pursuant to the Resolutions taken
there, he was so daring as to write a Letter soon after, to Dissolve the
Parliament, which was published throughout all the three Kingdoms. The substance
of it imported, That the great prosperities that England had enjoyed for some
years past, by its Conquests and the Battles which its Armies had won for the
security of the people of the three Kingdoms, being a very sensible token of
the Blessing of God, they had been guilty of so heinous an ingratitude as not
to behave themselves thankfully to him for the same: For that wickedness, and
all manner of Vices were so increased, that they were seen to domineer with so
much insolence, that a general Subversion was to be feared of all the affairs
of the Government; and that therefore the necessity of the time was so
pressing, that it required speedy Remedies; That it was not to be doubted, but
that the over long sitting of Parliaments was an inexhaustible Fountain of
Troubles and Disorders in the State. That the Peace and Quiet of the
Commonwealth was best secured by making a fit Choice and Election of Members to
serve in Parliament, that were good men fearing God, to succeed in the places
of others at certain limited times, that so a free power might not degenerate
into a Tyranny. That all things ought to be regulated as might best conduce to
the common good and preservation of the people, by discharging them of Taxes
and burdensome Impositions, and by making Religion flourish, and propagating
the Gospel every where; That provision ought to be made for the Pastors; and
that Liberty of Conscience ought to be granted to all, except to the Popish
Religion, and Idolatrous Superstitions.

The Queen of Sweden, writ almost at the same time, Queen Christina of Swdens
Letter to the States to Mediate a Peace.
a Letter to the States General, to offer them her Mediation in the Differences
between the two Republics: It contained, in substance, That she had heard with
a very sensible displeasure, by the reports that were spread abroad about them,
in her Capital City, of the Disputes that had newly kindled a War between
Holland and England; That she thought her self obliged, in consideration of the
common friendship she had with them both, to propose some means to reconcile,
if possible, the two Nations; That the Sieur Appleboon that was her Envoy at
the Hague, would wait the States Answer concerning the mediation she offered
them; adding, that she had also made the same offers to the Republic of
England.

The laudable Cantons of Swisserland were likewise no less concerned at all
these disorders, than Queen Christina. And therefore writ also to the States,
to offer their Mediation.

The States of Holland on their side, who desired nothing more then Peace, writ
a Letter to the Parliament of England, which was made public, which imported,

That God, the Just Revenger of Crimes, seeing they were come to their full
ripeness, The States Letter to the Parliliament of England.
had doubtless stirred up England and Holland to employ all their forces to
their own mutual ruin, and common destruction, whilst their Confinity in
Religion and Government, and their neighbour^ood to the Sea, secured motives
rather to engage those two Republics in an inseparable Union, and to link them
so stra^tly together as to oblige them to assist one another; That the sworn
Enemies of the Reformation were ravished with joy, to see two Allies of the same
Faith thus Remorseles^y to shed Christian Blood; and that they who never could
resist one of the Republics, now flattered themselves with the hopes of
destroying them both; That it would be impossible to resist them, if the Party
of the two that should prove Victorious, after they had so vainly exhausted all
their strength should be afterward suddenly assailed by a new Enemy, being
reduced into an impotent condition, and deprived of the succor of its former
Ally; That was no Victory more unhappy than such a one as was gained over an
Ally, without whose assistance one could not be without a notable weakening of
ones self: That if the English would seriously reflect on considerations o^
such high Importance, there was no doubt, but things might be soon brought to
an accommodation; but since they found that such equitable sentiments as those,
made no impression on their minds, they were resolved, to wait from the hand of
God the event of all things. The Parliament assembled at Westminster, having
Read their High and Mightinesses Letter, sent an Answer to the States General,
and another to the States of Holland. The first of which intimated, That the
Sincere Amity of which the English had given sufficient proofs to the
Hollanders at all times, was well known to all the world; That besides that,
they might rely upon the Passion they had, to re-establish the ancient Peace
and Amity between the two Nations; That the Parliament were not inclined to
continue the War with an Ally which the ties of Religion ought to render
inseparable from them; but that rather they were ready to do any reasonable
thing in order to stifle these troubles in their beginning, that so they might
amicably come to an accommodation.

The Letter which the Parliament of England writ to the States of Holland, was
to this effect, viz.

THat since the happy Revolution that had changed England into a Commonwealth,
The Parliament of England's Letter to the States of Holland.
they had extremely well considered, how important it was straightly to unite
themselves with a Nation, the least difference with whom, might draw after it
very mischievous Consequences, because in regard of Religion, the two
Republics were so dependant one of another, that they ought to be inseparable.
That if they came to a Rupture with them, it was much against their wills, that
the Parliament consented to the effusion of Blood that was so dear to them,
being fully persuaded, that the Enemies of the Reformation had conspired their
common ruin, by making use of their own Arms to destroy them: That if Mr. De
Heemsted's proposals to which they had yet made no answer, because of his hasty
departure, had been debated in their Assembly; the Peace would be at present
concluded. That the sincerity and ardent passion the Parliament testified for
the renewing of a Peace, fully justified to the world, that it was never their
intention to have any hand in so ruinous a War. And that their present Conduct,
and the Protestation they now made; that they were ready to renew the
Negotiation for a Treaty upon the same Foot as before, sufficiently manifested,
what their Sentiments were in that matter.

At the same time, Mr. Appleboon presented a writing at the Hague, to the
States General in the Queen of Swedland's name, which was to this effect: That
her Majesty did not so much as pretend to penetrate into the bottom of their
Affairs, having no other end in so pressing an occasion, but to manifest the
sincere desire she had to mediate a Peace between the two Republics, so much
the rather, because her Majesty, and particularly the late King her Father had
always lived in perfect good intelligence with the United Provinces; That 'tw^s
to be feared, if they too obstinately persisted in a War with England, it would
prove a fountain of irreparable mischiefs: That her Majesty offered her
Mediation, and that if the States thought fit to accept it, he would wait for
the necessary instructions to enable him to make a more particular Overture of
it to the Plenipotentiaries.


The States General made answer to the Parliaments Letter: That the inclination
they always had had for Peace, and for maintaining a strait and inviolable
Union with England, was well known to the Council of State, nay, and to all the
wo^ld: And that they were ready on their side to use all sorts of reasonable
means, to put a stop to the dismal consequences of so fatal a War, and
disposed, to send Plenipotentiaries with full power, for that purpose, to any
Neuter place that should be agreed upon.

The Parliament having discontinued their sitting, there was nothing left at
the Helm but the Council of State, and Cromwell remained the sole Arbiter of
all the Affairs of the Government, who replied to the Letter of the States
General: That the change that had newly happned in England, had not at all
changed the just inclinations the Nation had for Peace: That the offers the
last Parliament had made by their Letter to the States General, and to the
States of Holland to renew Mr. de Heemsted's Negotiation, and pacify the
Troubles between the two Nations were approved by the Council of State; That if
they would prevent the Obstacles that might happen in the way, there was
grounds to hope for a perfect union and perpetual good correspondence between
England and Holland; and that the project of it would without contradiction be
the sooner advanced, if the Disputes about chosing a neuter place for the
Ambassadors of both Parties to treat in, did not drill on the Negotiation to
too great a length; especially considering that affairs were then in such a
posture as would admit of no delays: And that as soon as their
Plenipotentiaries should be arrived thither from the Hague, the Council of
State would be ready to enter into Conference with them, with a promise, to
neglect nothing that might conduce to the facilitating of an accommodation.

Upon all these fair appearances, the United Provinces dispatched away Mr. de
Bevering, and Mr. de Nieuport, Ambassadors from the States of Holland, Mr.
Vander Perre, from those of Zealand, and Mr. Jongstal, from the States of
Friseland. Whilst they were thus flattering themselves with Peace, the States
were minded to reward the merit of those that had signalized themselves in the
last Battle. Lieutenant Admiral Tromp had a chain of Gold valued at 2000
Livers; The Vice-Admirals de Wit, Evertsz, and de Ruiter had each of them one
of 1500 Livers; and the other Officers, were gratified by the Council of the
Admiralty, every one according to their deserts. But the Captains Lueas,
Albertsz, Reinier, Sikkema, Look, Hansbek, Ewood, Heironymus, Allard, Jansz and
others that had behaved themselves Cowardly, were punished.

The United Provinces hoping quickly to see an end put to the troubles that had
kindled that War, begun to retrench a part of the vast expenses they were by it
obliged to be at. The Fleet being ready to sail, Tromp thought fit, to divide
it into 5 Squadrons. The first was under his own Conduct, and had de Wild for
Vice Admiral, and Vander Abel for Rear-Admiral; the 2d. was to be Commanded by
the two Brothers, John, and Cornelius Evertsz, the first as Lieutenant, and the
other as Vice Admiral, and by Captain Kemp, as Rear-Admiral; The 3d. was to be
under the Conduct of de Wit, as Lieutenant Admiral, having Captain Lapper for
Vice Admiral, and Kleidyk for Rear-Admiral; The 4th. was to be Commanded by de
Ruiter, as Lieutenant Admiral, having Captain Van Oven for Vice Admiral, and
Hartman for Rear-Admiral; And lastly the 5th. was to be under the Direction of
Florisz, as Lieutentant Admiral, and was to have Kampen, for Vice Admiral, and
Jaarsveld, for Rear-Admiral.

The English Fleet was divided into 3 Squadrons; The First under the Red Flag,
was Commanded by the Admirals Dean and Monk, who were to be together in the
Ship called, the Resolution; the two others under the Blew. Flag, were
Commanded by Vice Admiral Pen, and Rear-Admiral Lawson. Their whole Fleet
consisted of 105 Men of War, among which were 26 Frigates newly built. There
were in it 16269 men, and 2840 Guns. Lieutenant Admiral Tromp having received
the chief Command of the Fleet, was not at all satisfied at it; having by
writing, declared to the States General, Admiral Tromp's Compl^i^ to the
States, and his Reasons Contradicti^g the par^^^ reports ^^posed on the people
in Holl^^^, concerning their succes^ (...) the W^^ and pla^^ly con ^sing their
great losses.
and to the States of Holland, the reasons he had to Complain, which were, that
the States best Ships had been burnt or sunk in the precedent Battles, whilst
on the other side, they had neglected to repair those Ships that might have
been made fit for further service; That it was none of his fault, that greater
advantages had not been obtained against the English, that however he would
obey the orders of the States, but that he was so far from doing it willingly,
that on the contrary, he should be very joyful to see the Command of the Fleet
given to any man else but himself, adding, that when mischiefs and losses
should come to be talk of, which he but too well foresaw would happen they
should have nothing to say against him. But no answer was made to any of his
Complaints.

Yet his discontent was so much the better grounded, because he was obliged to
put to Sea, with a great Number of small vessels ill provided for War,
accompanied with a great many Cowardly and unexperienced Officers, whereby it
was to be considered, he must needs not only expose his life, but likewise that
great Reputation he had gotten by so many brave Exploits. But time would not
then permit the States to Redress so many grievances at once. It Is True, that
at the instances made by the States of Holland, a Resolution was taken to build
30 new men of War of sufficient bigness to withstand the English, but that was
a work required time; and in the mean while, Tromp was fain to make shift with
those sorry ones he had already, for want of better, which at that Juncture
were not to be had.

The Orders he had from the States General, imported, that he should Convoy
toward the North of Scotland, a Fleet of 200 Merchant Ships bound for France
and Spain, and should Conduct back those other Ships that should be arrived in
that Sea from diverse places.

The Admirals Dean and Monk, who as we have said, had the joint Command in
chief of the English Fleet, being informed of these Orders, resolved to be
beforehand with Tromp, by attacking him before his Junction with the Zealand
Squadron, and other Ships designed for his Re-inforcement; but they came a day
too late, so that a few poor Fishermen were forced to bear the brunt of the
displeasure they had conceived for so unluckily missing their blow. There were
54 of them then in Terreer Road newly came from Zerikzee, of which 47 were
destroyed; and of two Ships that served them for Convoys there was one that had
but 4 Guns, and yet defended her self so valiantly that the English Frigates
were forced a while to let her alone, but at last being attackt by a great man
of War, she was forced to yield. Monk and Dean were informed by the Prisoners
taken on that occasion, of the State of the Dutch Fleet, and then they put them
a shore, upon promise they should never serve against the English, after they
had used all their flatteries they could, to no purpose, to court them into the
service of England. The two English Admirals writ the following Letter to the
Parliament, to inform them of what had past.

The Letter of the two English Admialrs to the Parli^ment.
SInce our last, we saw our selves just upon the point of a Bloody Battle, but
God having Ordered it otherwise, was pleased to permit Tromp and de Wit to
prevent us by steering away to the Northward, with a great number of Merchant
Ships, as well to Convoy them that way, as to Reconduct the Ships they should
find there, coming from France, but especially those returned from the
East Indies. In the mean while, we doubt not but you have heard of the new
prosperities which it has pleased God to heap upon us, having put us in a
Condition, to strike terror into the heart of the Enemies Country, by a
descent upon their Coasts, which was followed by several advantages, and
chiefly by the taking of 50 Fishing vessels newly come from Zerikzee. We have
put all the Country in Alarm, for fear we should make an irruption, and that we
should make use for that effect, of the vessels we have taken from them.
However, it is a great mortification to the Poor Inhabitants of Zerikzee, and a
great loss to the whole Country, because they used to furnish Fish to the Towns
of Amsterdam and Rotterdam. We flatter our selves with the hopes, we shall
quickly meet with Tromp. May it please God to favor the desires of those that
pray for us. It Is true, the English had begun to carry the Terror of their
Arms to our Coasts near the Texel and the Helder, but having landed some men,
they were received with so much courage and Resolution, as made them have
little stomach to venture again upon such another attempt. The 13th. and the
14th. of May, the English Fleet saild toward the Coasts of Zealand, and on the
15th, the two Fleets came within 5 miles one of another, yet without meeting
together. Our Merchant Fleet consisting of 300 sail having fetched a Compass
about Scotland, by the greatest happiness in the world was already safe arrived
into our Ports, without seeing any Enemies by the way. Tromp having Convoyed
our Merchant Ships to the Northward as far as Hitland, and not finding those
there that were to come from France, and which he had Orders to Conduct home,
returned toward the Coast of Holland, about the end of the Month; and entered
into the Meuse, where he received a Re-inforcement of 17 Men of War and one
Fire-Ship brought him by Rear Admiral Florisz from Zealand, upon which he went
to Goree to take the Admiral Ship, the Brederode which was there repaired,
having been extremely endamaged in the last fight.

On Witsunday, Tromp had a Conference with three Deputies of the States
General: The Result of their Consultation, was that Tromp should make toward
the Downs of England, in hopes to meet there with some of the Parliaments
Ships. On the 4th. of June they discovered some of them to the Northward, upon
which holding a Council of War, it was resolved that de Ruiter with his
Squadron jointly with Rear-Admiral Florisz, should steer to the Southward,
whilst Tromp with Vice Admiral de Wit should move to the Northward, that so by
shutting up the Enemies Squadrons within the Downs, they might attack them with
the greater effect. But the English, especially Bodley, who was returned with a
Squadron of 8 men of War, and 8 Merchant Ships, from the Mediteranean, were
come to an Anchor under the Castles of the Downs, of which Tromp had had
advice; Bodley to escape him, had removed to the Westward, so that Admiral
Florisz coming thither first, found no more but two little Ships that were
retired under the Cannon of the Castles of Dover, and the Downs, the Dutch
begun then to Cannonade them briskly, to which they returned as vigorously; But
the Hollanders at length getting nearer Dover, found in that road 5 small
vessels, of which three were taken, though they had at the very first sight of
our Ships, cut their Cables, to escape, the fourth fled, and the fifth which
was a Frigate retired quite under the Castle.

The English fired most terribly from the Castle of Dover upon the Hollanders,
but Tromp answered them so vigorously, that all the Inhabitants of the Country
were alarmed at it, knowing not where to fly, and durst not stay in their
Houses which they saw unroofed by the Hollanders Cannon balls.

After that Expedition, Tromp advanced toward Swartness, where being informed,
that the English Fleet had appeared near the Vlie, he thereupon resolved to go
in search of them, and on the 24th. having discovered them over against
Newport, he made up directly to them. The Dutch Fleet was then composed of 98
men of War, but all of them much smaller, and nothing near so well provided for
War, as those of the English. The Wind was North-East, and the English had the
Weather-gage. The two Fleets having remained some time in presence of one
another, without any offer made by the English, to attack the Hollanders, Tromp
did all he could by Luffing to get up to them; when he came nigh them, the
English began at length to cast their Fleet into a line of Battle, and divided
it into three Squadrons. They at first made a Motion with design to enclose the
Dutch within a Crescent, but when they saw the others observe them very
narrowly, and seem resolved to stand them, their Squadrons joined again, and
advanced within Cannon shot of their Enemy; and then Monk and Dean gave the
signal for Battle and so the two Fleets engaged about 11 a Clock before noon. A
cruel fight between Tromp and the Admirals Dean and Monk.


The Wind being North West favored De Ruiter's Squadron, so that he taking
advantage of that opportunity fell upon the English, and got the Weather-gage
of them, and then the two Fleets most vigorously charged one another Admiral
Dean was killed by one of the first shot that flew from the Hollanders; Admiral
Dean killed
Monk seeing him fall, covered the Body with his Cloak, and endeavored to
encourage the Sea men. The fight was furious, and bloody, particularly between
Lawson's and de Ruiter's Squadrons; For this latter fought with such Courage
and obstinate eagerness, that he consumed most part of his Powder, then Tromp
came into his assistance, which Monk perceiving, he advanced with his main
strength, and fell upon the Dutch Admiral, which redoubled the fury of the
Fight, and the Courage of the Combatants.

Lawson at the head of 9 or 10 Frigates, advanced with intent to intercept the
Captains Vander Zaan, and Joost Bulter, of Groningen, who made great
resistance, but at length Bulter's Ship, called the Camel, having received 4 or
5 shot between Wind and Water, was forced to yield, and presently after sunk:
Bulter who was wounded in the middle of his Body with a splinter, died with his
drawn hanger in his hand, and was swallowed up half dead by the Waves with part
of his wounded men; the rest of the Ships crew saved themselves on board Vander
Zaan, who ran great hazard of being involved in the same misfortune as Bulter,
being likewise surrounded by the Enemies, but at last he made his way through
them by sinking one of their Ships. Tromp made all imaginable efforts to
grapple the English Admiral, but never could get near enough to him. While they
were fighting, the wind happening quite to fall, the English White Squadron was
by that means separated from the rest of their Fleet; the Hollanders willing to
improve that opportunity, advanced with design to intercept it, whilst the
English on the other, did all they could, to rejoin their Forces, but before
they could effect it, the Dutch pressed close upon the English Blue Squadron,
and with broadsides made their way through the English Fleet.

The Victory having a long time Wavered, begun then to declare it self for the
Hollanders, who making their Enemies give way, pursued them, but a great
disorder happening in their Fleet, the English knew so well to make their
advantage of it, that they gained the Weather-gage of them, which gave life to
a second Engagement no less bloody than the first, and which caused the
destruction of the most part of the Ships that composed both the Fleets. About
9 at night another English Ship was burnt, but they continued still fighting
till the night parted them; And then the English stood to the Northward, and
the Hollanders to the Southward; but unfortunately, when the Enemies were
already retired out of Canon shot, as Captain Van Velzen was firing off his
last shot, his Powder took fire, and blew up his Ship with almost all his Men,
hardly 55 escaping of the whole Ships Crew.

The whole night was spent in repairing the damages received in the Battle, and
mending up as well as possible, the Ships that were most battered. At break of
day, next morning, the two Fleets found themselves not above a mile distant one
from the other. Lieutenant Admiral Tromp put out the usual signal to call his
Officers on board him, at whose arrival, he with much vexation heard the ill
news, that most part of the Ships of his Fleet wanted Ammunition, by which they
were disabled to stand a second Battle. It must be confessed, that if Tromp had
been seconded as he ought to have been the day before, by some Captains in his
Fleet that failed in their duty, and were false to the fidelity they had sworn
to their Country, the English had been so well reduced to reason, that they
would hardly have had any mind to begin a new Battle the next day. Vice Admiral
de Wit had so small a Quantity of Powder and Bullets left, that it would hardly
serve him three hours firing: and de Ruiter had less than he: And besides, a
great many other Ships were much weakened by the great Numbers of Men they had
killed, and sick. Notwithstanding all these disadvantages, Tromp was in the
mind to venture a second Battle, as thinking, if he were worsted to retreat
toward Wielingen, to take in necessary Provisions and Ammunition. But before
the second Fight begun, Tromp Writ to the States the following Letter.

High and Mighty Lords,
Martin Tromp's Letter to the States.
THe 12th. Instant we perceived the Enemies hovering about Newport. Our Forces
consisted of 98 men of War, and 6 Fireships, and those of the English of
between 95 and 100 sail, amongst which were reckoned 77 or 80 large Men of War,
or Frigates well manned and provided. The two Fleets engaged in Fight about 11 a
Clock before noon, and ended not till night which separated the two Parties,
who both stood off to Sea about 9 a Clock. We lost that day Captain Joost
Bulter, whose Ship was sunk with part of her Men, the other being saved by our
people. Captain Velzen's Ship was blown up, there being but 5 of her men saved.
This day all the General and Subalternate Officers of the Fleet came on board
the Admiral, and were informed, that the most part of them had so little
Ammunition left, that it is impossible for us to be able to stand a second
Fight. Among others, Vice Admiral de Wit has not for above three hours
spending, and de Ruiter has less than he. However, we have resolved to attack
the Enemies this day, and to retire to Wielingen, and fight our way thither
retreating, if the English ^^esist to Fight so long. In fine, we pray your High
and Mightinesses, that we may be Rein^^^ted, and may receive the Ammunition
necessary, and that it may please you, to send Deputies into Zealand to remedy
all things, etc.


Lieutenant Admiral Tromp had done all he could from the first appearance of
the morning, A second Battle fought the 13th. of June.
to tack to the South-East, to be able to get the Weather gage which the
English had, that so he might the more successfully force his way into the
middle of their Fleet. About 8 a Clock the Van-guards of the two Fleets began
to fire at one another at a distance; but Tromp pursuing his design, had
already about 10 a Clock got Dunkirk at the South-South Eastward of him, and
was in hopes to get up to the main body of the English Fleet, and to intercept
a good part of their Ships. But they were no sooner engaged, but their happened a
Calm, which was the cause, that the Hollanders found themselves to the
lee-ward, and the English had the Weathergage; which opportunity they
improving, came Thundering about 11 a Clock upon the Dutch Fleet, with so much
the greater advantage, because Blake had reinforced them in the night with a
Squadron of 28 great men of War which he had brought from Portsmouth. Tromp
thereby found himself obliged to close up the Rear of his Fleet, to endeavor
as well as 'twas possible, to sustain the shock of the Enemies. Tromp, De Wit,
De Ruiter, and some others fought with an unparalled bravery; But unhapily
from the very beginning of the fight, a disorder having happened in the Dutch
Fleet for want of Experience in the Officers, they began to give way, and at
length were part of them taken, and part sunk; nay, the Confusion was so great
among them, that some of them quitted their Fireships after having set fire to
them themselves, who endeavored to palliate their infamous Cowardice, by
pretending, they had received several shot between Wind and Water. However,
though the valiant Tromp saw himself thus deserted by his Rear-guard, yet he lost
not his courage for that, but possessing still the same presence of mind, and
being animated by Reflections upon his past glory, and by the hopes and
unextinguishable passion he had, still to maintain it to the last, grapled
Vice Admiral Pen, boarded him, and power-d so many men into his Enemies Ship;
that he had already made himself Master of her, when 13 English Frigates tacking
about upon him, so cruelly handled him, that they forced him to let go his hold.

The Enemies likewise in their turn, grapling afterward Admiral Tromp, powered
in so great a Number of Sea men, on board him that his men were forced to fly
all under Deck. Upon which, Tromp seeing himself over powered with Numbers,
thought there was no other Remedy, but to set fire to some barrels of Powder,
which he did so effectually, that in an Instant as by a clap of Thunder, the
Enemies were blown up Pell Mell into the Air, and their bodies were seen to
fly about half burnt, and rent to pieces. Yet this blow did not so much
discourage the English, but they came on and charged him afresh; and he had
certainly been lost, had not de Wit and de Ruiter, espying the great danger he
was in, come up without losing time and disengaged him about 7 a Clock in the
Evening.

Captain Schellinger's Ship being much battered, and deserted by most of her
Sea men, fell into the English Fleet, and was soon after burnt to Ashes. The
Ship Westergoo, being surrounded, by three English men of War, that furiously
battered her on all sides, was forced to yield just when she was ready to sink;
a little before that, Captain Verburg's Ship having had her Helm shot away,
fell into the Enemies hands, and after a vigorous resistance, was at last
constrained also to yield. Tromp and the other General Officers fought till
within night, when the English made off to Sea, steering Northward; but the
Hollanders made for Ostend, where they arrived about midnight, and cast Anchor.

The next morning the English appeared again; But because there were many Ships
in the Dutch Fleet very much shattered, and that wanted both Provision and
Ammunition, Tromp with the advice of the other General Officers, thought it
best to retreat with the whole Fleet toward Wielingen, where being arrived he
writ the following Letter to the States General.

High and Mighty Lords,
YEsterday at 11 a Clock before noon, Martin Tromp's Letter to the States
concerning the last Battle.
I writ my last Letter just when I was using all my endeavors to gain the
weather-gage, in order to fall into the middle of the Enemies Fleet, But a Calm
preventing us, the Enemies gained it, and came up and attackt us. The Fight
broke not off till toward Evening. There happened some disorder amongst some
Ships of the Fleet, caused doubtless by the Ignorance and want of Experience of
the Sea Officers, which was the reason that the nimblest English sailors coming
up with them, easily intercepted them, and either took or sunk them. So that
according to the report made to us this morning on board the Admiral, we hear,
that the Captains, Verburg, Schellinger, Laurensz, Duin, Fietersz, and
Westergoo, are fallen into the hands of the Enemies. If there were any more
taken or sunk, it is more than I know yet, because I have been able to know
nothing but by the report of others, and because the thick smoke arising from
the Canon, hindered, me from discerning what past in the Fight; But however, I
am sure we have lost the Captains abovementioned. It is possible they might
lose us in the night, and may be gotten into some Harbor, though against Order.
The Pilot Vander Heyden, being just now come hither, has delivered us the two
Letters from your High and Mightinesses, dated the 9th. of this Month. he
reports, he met 17 of our Ships before Schowen, and that he spoke with 4 of
them. Our Ships are in a most pitiful Condition, and want both Provisions and
Ammunition. The two Fleets are still in presence one of the other, and the
English with the Reinforcement they have received are now 100 sail strong of
Men of War. By the advice of all the General Officers of the Fleet; we have
resolved to retire to Wielingen, to wait there for the Deputies of your High
and Mightinesses, to come and give Order, that the Fleet may receive the
necessary Ammunition, and a considerable Reinforcement, to enable them to make
head against their Enemies. For otherwise, Humanely speaking, if all the things
I have spoken of, be neglected, nothing else can be expected but shame and
confusion to the States, and misfortune to their Arms, considering the mighty
power of their Enemies. Our Admiral Ship, the Brederode has received several
shot between Wind and Water, and tho we have had her calkt as well as possible,
yet she leaks still so much, that in the night the Water gained upon us, in
spite of all our Pumps, above 5 foot in height, however till at present we have
made a shift by the help of many hands to keep her above Water; but if after
all, we find our labor lost, we shall be obliged to run her ashore behind
Ramekens, etc.


Tromp, and the rest of the General Officers of the Dutch Fleet being come to
Flushing, into the presence of the Deputies of the States, The complaints of
the General Officers of the States Fleet.
they all unanimously declare'd, that it was impossible for them, to continue
their Services, unless the Fleet were re-inforc'd with a considerable number of
Great Ships, well appointed and furnished for War; And so much the more, because
there were in the English Fleet above 50 Men of War, the least of which was
better than that in which Admiral Tromp sailed, whereas on the contrary, there
were reckoned above 50 Ships in the Dutch Fleet that were unfit for Service,
etc. De Ruiter made no scruple to say, That he intended to go no more to Sea,
The remarkable Speech of Vice Admiral De Wit, in the Assembly of the States.
The English Besiege the Dutch in the Texel. Three Dutch East India ships, and
several other Merchant men taken by the English.
unless the Fleet were re-inforc'd, and made more numerous, and were better
Armed than it had been before: And Vice Admiral De wit being afterward present
in the Assembly of the States, added to all those Complaints, these words: Why
should I keep any longer silence? I am here before my Sovereigns, and am free
to speak; and I can say, That the English are at present Masters both of us,
and of the Seas, etc.

The States General therefore endeavored to remedy all those Disorders, and to
repair all the losses they had lately sustained, as well as 'twas possible, in
so pressing a juncture. But in the mean time, the English Fleet held the Coasts
of Holland, as 'twere besieged, after they had stopped up the mouth of the Texel:
Which obliged the States to prevent any descent from them, to post some Troops
in the Isles, and on the Coasts. During which Distress, 3 Ships returning from
the East Indies, richly Laden, unfortunately fell into the hands of the
English, as did likewise two others coming from Portugal, and 3 more from
Swedeland, whereof 2 were Burnt, and the rest taken. And toward the straits of
Callis, Captain Wight likewise, was taken with 4 Ships laden with Salt.

About that time the United Provinces began to feel the Effects of new Troubles
raised by a Faction formed among the Mobb, Tumults in Holland upon the late bad
success.
which being always accustomed to measure things only by the Event, attributed
the Cause of the Disasters of the State, and of the destruction of Commerce, to
their Governors. For Trading was interrupted, and the Artificers and
Handy-craft People knew not which way to subsi^t any longer. The Town of
Enkuisen had a great hand in all these Disorders. The Townsmen being
desperately enraged, to see the Sea shut up against them, and their Fleet that
was ready to sail out to go a Herring-fishing, on which in great measure
depended the Prosperity of all the United Provinces, to be thus Coopt up, and
forced to lie idle in their Ports.

The murmurings of the people were risen to that height, that 'twas impossible
to stop them. For they loudly complained, that none of them could tell how to
get their living any longer, what Trade soever they took to; That if they had a
mind to oppose the English, why did not Tromp come back from Zealand? Why were
not the Enemies driven out of the Harbors of the Texel, who without control,
took daily from them Ship after Ship, whilst they saw themselves besieged, and
threatened with an inevitable Series of Mischiefs, etc.

The Magistrates of that Town, thinking to put a stop to the fatal Consequences
of all those Disorders, would needs have Recourse to force of Arms, and sent
for some Troops which in Boats approacht the Town: But the Mobb the more
fiercely enraged at that, got together in such multitudes, that they carried
all before them, and seized upon the Townhouse, the Gates, the Ramparts, and
all the Stores of Warlike Ammunition. Which done, they put up upon the Towers,
the Princes Colors, as designing by that, to revenge the slight the Government
had of late put upon his Authority: They then proceeded to Depose the
Magistrates, and fired several Vollies of Shot from their Muskets, upon the
Soldiery that was embarked in the Boats. The Deputies from the States, and the
Sieur Brederode, who were sent from the Hague, to appease, if it were possible
this popular Commotion, were constrained to stay without the Town-Gate. And if
the Gentleness and Moderation which they used had not at last prevailed over
the Fury and Insolence of those rash and headstrong Mutiniers, they would have
been in great danger of being overturned with their Coaches off from the Cawsey
into the Sea.

So Bold an example opened a door to the licenciousness of other Factious
Spirits, which was so much the more dangerous, because the Affairs they meddled
with, were both Nice and Important.

The War against the English was not heartily undertaken, said they, The
Subject heads of the peoples complaints.
and yet the Subjects of the United Provinces were daily more and more
impoverished thereby. They further alleged, that the interruption of Commerce
both within and without the Country, presaged already great misfortunes to
them, their Numerous Inhabitants being able to subsist no longer, being
deprived as they were, of traffiking with the neighboring States. That if they
had Forces, they ought to be employed, to free the Sea from the Yoke of a Power
that claimed to it self the sole Dominion of it; That they had reason to fear
the worst that could be imagined from the cruel Injustice of their Neighbors,
if after having lost so much Blood, they should fall to so low an ebb of
strength as to be unable to resist the Enemy; That their Merchant Ships were
taken in view of the Texel, and the Seamen made the Innocent victims of
Cruelty; That their Ships were so ill Equipt, that they were not able to resist
the full manned, and well appointed Ships of the English; State-Holders, who
had the only secret harmoniously to accord and reconcile so many jarring
Tempers, and different Spirits; That a Power composed of so many Heads was but
a monstrous Hydra, from whence sprung all the disorders that troubled the
Repose of the State; That the sensible decay that had lately happened in all
their Affairs, was a manifest consequence of the plurality of their Governors;
That the inequality, or subordinate dependence of the one upon the other, kept
the Power of the State in a due Aequilibrium; That none of them could pretend
to be ignorant, that they were all beholding for the sweet Liberty they then
enjoyed, to the House of Nassau; That that Illustrious House had been always
the most firm and solid pillar and support of their Peace and Happiness: That
they had reason to thank God, for that they had still left so worthy and
hopeful a Sprout of so Noble and Precious a Blood: That the United Provinces
never had any reason to Complain of the moderation of their Government: And
that therefore, they could not comprehend for what reason the lawful heir of
that August Family was not put into possession of the Offices and Dignities
which his Predecessors had justly merited for him and his Descendants, by so
many Brave and Glorious Actions.

This was the substance of the peoples discourse, who were animated by the name
of Orange, which they repeated, every moment, without paying any deference to
the Orders of the States. And the Drummers that beat up for raising of Seamen,
without making use of the old accustomed Terms, In the name of the Prince of
Orange, were ill handled by the people; so that at last the Government was
obliged to publish an Ordinance to put a stop to those Commotion; and at the
same time another was likewise set out, to forbid the carrying of any
Provisions to the English Fleet that lay before the Texel and the Vlie.

In the mean while the English did a wonderful deal of mischief upon the Coasts
of Holland, but were partly punished for it by the loss of 3 of their Ships
that run a Ground upon the Sands of the Coast; they had also some Boats overset.

Amidst all these Transactions, the Hollanders wrought with all the diligence
imaginable upon the Fleet, in order to Repair and Reinforce, and Man, and
Provide it sufficiently to be in a capacity to put again to Sea. But because
most part of the Ships were equipt in Zealand, they were in extreme pain to
study out a means, how those that came from Zealand should join with those that
were in the Texel, since the English were Masters of its entrance, and kept
the Coasts of Holland besieged. However Tromp after six weeks stay in Zealand,
put at length to Sea the 6th of August, with a Fleet of between 80 and 90 Sail,
with a resolution, as soon as he had joined Vice Admiral De Wit's Squadron, to
make up drectly to the English, to give them Battle, and chase them if
possible, from the Coasts of Holland.

About that time the States General of the United Provinces, to encourage their
Officers and Sea men of the Fleet, the more heartily and warmly to bestir
themselves in the Service of their Country, by the hopes of Reward, published a
Declaration, which was Read on Board every Man of War, and was as follows.

The States Declaration for the encouragement of their Officers and Seamen.
The States General of the United Provinces have thought fit for the greater
encouragement of their Officers and Seamen vigorously to perform their
respective Duties in the Service of their Dear Country, to Declare; That
whosoever shall Board any of the Enemies Ships, and shall take it, shall have
the Ship with the Men and all that belongs to her for his free Booty; That he
who shall Board the Chief Admiral, shall have not only the Ship and all her
Equipage to himself, but a Recompense besides, of 10000 Livers; and for the
Ships of the other Admirals, 6000 Livers, and for those of the Subalternate
General Officers, 4000 Livers a piece; Those who should have the Courage with
their Arms in their hands, to venture to go and pull down the Flag off from the
Mainmast of the Enemies Admiral Ship, shall receive a 1000 Livers recompense,
and for those of the other Admirals 500 Livers each. For the Flag of a
Foremast 150 Livers, for that upon the Poop 150, and for those of less
consideration, 50 Livers a piece. And moreover, we give express notice by these
presents to all Captains and other Sea-Officers, that in case any of them with
his Ship shall offer to depart from the Admirals Flag, without the consent of
the Lieutenant Admiral of the Fleet, shall be punished with Death without
Remssion. Given at the Hague, the 4th of the Month of August New Style, 1653. A
few days after, they published another Ordinance, by which they granted certain
fixed recompenses, to those who should be maimed in the Service of their
Country, which were as follows.

livers pen. deni. For the loss of both Eyes, 1066 23 3 For the loss of one
Eye, 840 00 0 For the loss of both Arms, 1066 13 3 For the Right Arm, 0333 06 6
For the Left Arm- 0266 13 3 For both Hands, 0933 06 6 For the Right Hand, 0266
13 3 For the Left, 0240 00 0 For both Legs, 0533 06 6 For one Leg, 0240 00 0
For both Feet, 0333 06 6 For one Foot. 0160 00 0

The recompense of those that were only lamed was left to the discretion of the
Colleges of the Admiralty. There was also a Regulation made, Note that a Liver
is 20 d. and a Denier, the 12th part of a Penny.
by which those who were incurable, and consequently incapable of getting any
part of their subsistence, were allowed a Pension each of them of a Crown a
Week.

The Holland Fleet then being got to Sea, arrived the 7th of August toward the
Evening, to the Northwards of Gravezande; on the 8th at break of day, they
sailed near to Zandwoort, and advanced about 8 a Clock the same morning near
Egmond. Their advanced Guard detacht some of their best Sailers, to advertise
Tromp, that the English Fleet were but 5 Miles from him to the North-Eastward,
and soon after they begun to perceive them. About a 11 a Clock, the English got
the Weather-gage, the wind being West-North-West. However Tromp thought it best
to tack about to the South-South-West, to make away from the Enemies, with
design to draw them after him, and entice them to quit the Texel, that
Vice Admiral De Wit taking advantage of their withdrawing, might the more
easily get out of the Harbors there, with the rest of the Fleet. The light
Frigates of the English took that day some of the Dutch Ships that being
sluggish Sailers lagg'd behind the rest. The Van-guards of both Fleets being
come near one another, A fight near Katwyk between the English and Dutch Fleets.
began to play at one another with their Guns. Trump stood the assault of the
English without Flinching, and so the two Fleets engaged in a general fight,
which was terrible and bloody. The English Fleet was 120 Sail strong. Here
follows the Letter written by Tromp to the States about it.

High and Mighty Lords,
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp's Letter to the States.
MY last was dated yesterday at 8 at night, before Scheveling; the wind was then
South-West. We sailed all night along by the Coasts, and arrived to day at 8 in
the morning near Egmond. A little time after, some Captains detacht from our
Advanced-Guard, came on Board the Admiral, to tell us, they had discovered the
English Fleet before the Texel, at about 5 miles distance to the North and a
quarter Eastward from us. We immediately tackt about to make up to them. About
a 11 a Clock, the wind turned to the West-North-West, and the English had the
advantage of it: upon which, we thought fit to draw back, to oblige the Enemy
to draw likewise out from the Texel, to facilitate thereby the coming out of
the rest of the Fleet under the conduct of Vice Admiral De Wit. But having in
the Fleet some very sluggish Sailers, which some of the Enemies light Frigates
fell fiercely upon, several of them were taken. The English are 120 sail
strong, great and small ships* we stood them, and engaged in a general Battle
that lasted till the beginning of the night, without any advantage, God be
thanked, that we could perceive, they got over us. They have still the
Weathergage. Time will inform us, how affairs will go to morrow. We pray God to
be pleased of his Clemency, to make all succeed to his great Glory, and for the
Good and Advantage of the State. If we had received the Reinforcement from the
Texel, we should have reason to flatter our selves, humanely speaking, with
some hopes of driving away the Enemies from our Coasts. However, we will do all
that Men of Honor and Fidelity to our Country, shall be able to do in such a
rencounter as this, etc.


The day following, the Wind was so high that it was impossible to renew the
Battle; which extremely favored the Hollanders. For by that means Vice Admiral
De Wit had time to come out of the Texel, being hastened by the Deputies of the
States, who upon advice of the two Fleets being come in presence of one another
before Egmond, made him use all the diligence imaginable. He came out then
about midnight by the Spanish Hole, conducted by 4 Sounders, who went before
him in Boats, having each of them an open Lanthorn with them; and so he arrived
at the place of Battle.

On the 9th. of August at 6 a Clock in the morning, Tromp being right against
Scheveling, approached the Enemies, being backed by some men of War of the Van
guard, and fired at them some broad sides, but finding himself too weak, he
retired toward de Ruiter's Squadron, and stood to the North North-East. And
the Wind being again grown fiercer, it was impossible for the two Fleets to
engage, upon which, the Dutch Fleet approached again to the Meuse. The Wind
turning afterward to the North West, the English had the Weather-gage, and
pursued the Hollanders.

About noon, de Wit begun to appear with a Reinforcement of 27 Men of War, and
4 Fireships. The two Fleets joined about 5 in the afternoon, in sight of the
Enemies Fleet, they not being able to hinder them. Tromp being then 106 sail
strong, advanced directly toward the Enemies, who at first seemed to fly,
only out of design, as afterward it proved, to get more convenient Sea room;
Tromp pursued them all night with a Wind North-West, and a quarter West, and
the day following being the 10th. of August, the two Fleets met again before
the Meuse over against Heide and Scheveling.

The last and fatal fight between Tromp and the English.
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp led the right Wing, de Ruiter, the left, Evertsz the
main Battle, and de Wit and Rear-Admiral Florisz, the Rear-guard. And so the
Fleet being divided into 5 Squadrons, fell as soon as it was Morning, upon the
English. There never was any thing seen so cruel and so bloody as the beginning
of that fight. One would have said at first view, that the Sun being covered
with a thick smoke, endeavored to hide his face, that he might not be the
spectator of so horrible a slaughter. The noise of the Canon much louder than
that of Thunder made all the neighboring shores to tremble, and flying from
thence to spend it self in the Downs, was redoubled thence by Echo's, and
became much more frightfull. And the Sea being tinged all over with the blood
of so many Butcheries, swallowed up with equal greediness both Men and Ships.

Tromp had already the first time pierced into the English Fleet with so much
success, that he had some reason to flatter himself with the hopes of a
Victory; and coming on a second time, and falling upon the biggest of the
English men of War, there the undaunted Courage of that Great Admiral, and the
bravery of his Seamen, were seen to shine forth in their full Glory: For
sometimes he went into the Captains Chamber, and taking up a Telescope, he took
a view of all the Squadrons of his Fleet, and observed whether every one did
his duty or no, and thence returning again upon Deck, he went and encouraged
his men, and used all the Rhetoric he could to inspire them with love for
their Country. However, after all, being engaged a great way within the very
heart of the Enemies Fleet, he found himself overpowered by their Numbers, and
deserted by his own Ships, at which, conceiving a mortal resentment, he uttered
these words: Will any thing be done or no? I must it seems perish! No body
comes in to my assistance; Must I alone this day, be the Victime of the
Enemies? His Ship being covered with a thick Cloud of smoke was not to be seen
any longer, and in the mean while the English Rear-Admiral followed by some
Frigates, approaching to him, there flew from the third of that Rank, Lieutenant
Admiral Tromp killed in the Battle.
a fatal ball that struck him on the left Temple, as he was giving order about
his Guns, and laid him for dead at the feet of his Lamenting Seamen.

So mournful an accident pierced them to the Quick, that to revenge the death
of so valiant a man, and that it might not be said, the Author of so terrible
an Action went unpunisht, a Common soldier of the Admiral Ship, advancing upon
the Deck, shot the Captain of the aforesaid Frigate in the cheek, and felled him
dead with a musket Bullet, as he was making Bravado's with his drawn hanger in
his hand. Lieutenant Admiral Tromp being carried immediately into the Captains
Chamber, was laid upon a Pillow, and some moments after, gave up the Ghost,
after he had exhorted his Seamen, to fight like men of Courage and prayed God
to take into his protection all that were under his Command. Some report, He
dies.
that at the approach of death, he addressed these words to his men? I have
finished my Course, have good Courage.

In the mean while, the Ship, Brederode was engaged within the main Body of the
Enemies Fleet; and because every one attentively looked out to see whether the
Bloody Flagg which was the signal for coming on board, appeared upon the
Admirals Poop, the Chief Officers of the Dutch Fleet, found by that, they were
Commanded on board the Admiral. Where being come, and being informed of their
great loss, upon a consultation held thereupon, they all resolved, that to
prevent the Seamens being discouraged, the death of the valiant Tromp should be
concealed; and recommended to the Captain on board the Admirals Ship, that he
should keep to the Orders Tromp had before given, and keep up same Flag. After
which they all hastened back every one to his respective Ship, and continued the
fight.

Upon this fatal blow, it appeared what a desperate and undaunted resolution
are able to make men do: For all the Captains of the Fleet were so sensibly
touched at the loss of their Admiral, that breathing nothing but rage and fury,
they pierced three times through and through the Enemies Fleet, fiercely firing
at and battering all that opposed their passage; but as an addition to the
unhappiness of that unfortunate day, Vice Admiral Evertsz's Ship, who after
Tromp's death had the chief Command of the Fleet, was so miserably shattered
and disabled, that to avoid falling into the hands of the English, they were
forced to carry her off into the Meuse, having on board her 70 men killed or
wounded. De Ruiter who was in the Ship called the Lamb, carrying about 40 Guns
and 150 men, was exposed to the greatest fire of the Enemies, fighting with so
much Courage, that he made his way through the midst of the English Squadron;
but he found himself at length so extremely weakened, that he had hardly half
his men left, 43 of them being killed, and 35 wounded: His mizzen mast, his
main yard, and in General, all his rigging except of his Poop was shot away,
and of Ammunition he had but 700 pound of Powder and very few Bullets left, so
that seeing himself reduced into so pitiful a Condition that he was no longer
able to keep the Sea, he was at last forced to be towed away into the Meuse by
Captain Aldertsz de Hoorn.

The English Admiral being grappled by two Fireships, his Ship was in an
instant all in a flame, and some of his men began already to fly out of her;
they which were about Captain Peacock were at the last extremity; and Captain
Bitter was completing their destruction by plying them with frequent
broad-sides, but that one of the Fireships happening to be too slowly pusht
forward, gave time and occasion to the English to take new Courage, and briskly
to employ their Guns again, and beat off their Enemies. The English Ship, the
St. Andrew, having been furiously battered by the Guns of Vice Admiral Florisz,
was so terribly mauled and shattered, that it was ready to sink, being half
consumed with the flames, had not two other Ships come in timely to her aid,
and rescued her from the Eminent danger she was in. Captain Grave perished by
fire with a great many of his Seamen. As for Captain Haas who Commanded the
Ship called, the Rose and Crown, being attackt by 3 English Men of War, he
defended himself vigorously, till such time as his Masts and all his rigging
being shot away close by the board, his vessel half burnt, and many of his men
killed, he thought fit to retreat, and as much shattered and disabled as he
was, made his way through the Enemies, and got likewise to Goree.

Hoyen Cox, whom we have several times mentioned upon occasion of the Ship
Phoenix, and Captain Zanger, fought against one another with so much courage
and obstinacy, that both their Ships, viz. The Phoenix and the West Kappel were
sunk. Schatter finding himself engaged with the Van guard of Monk's Squadron,
made head against them alone, and if his Ship, the Golden Dolphin had not at
last been sunk, being pierced through and through as she was with Bullets, he
would doubtless have made the Enemies pay somewhat dearer for her loss: But
however fortune being willing in some sort to recompense desert, had compassion
of so many brave men, and permitted a Frigate to pass by his side, as he was
just ready to be swallowed up by the Waves, and happily to save him and all his
men. But Captain Vanger was more unfortunate then those Prisoners, his Ship and
all his men sinking in an instant into the deep.

We ought likewise to allow an honorable place in the list of those that
signalized themselves in this fight, to de Wild, and to the Captains
Marreveld, Swart, and de Kampen. About 2 a Clock in the afternoon, both the
contending parties begun to make out into the wide Sea. The Dutch had broken
four times quite through the Enemies Fleet, so that there was nothing to be
seen almost but masts tumbled into the Sea, and several Ships on fire both of
the one and other side, amongst which there was one English Ship that was blown
up, and some others that were sunk. Schevelin, Heide, Katwik, Nordwyk,
Zandvort, and all the whole Coast were Witnesses of this bloody fight, and of
the bravery of two such formidable Nations. By favor of a Western Wind, the
two Fleets approacht the Coasts of Holland, however the Enemies were observed
to use all their endeavors to retire, and the Dutch thereupon were persuaded
to believe, they had some disadvantage; so that finding the English stood to
the Northward, they resumed the courage to pursue them, after they had received
a recruit of 30000 pound of Powder and other Ammunition proportionable, which
was brought them by some Fishing vessels. The Wind rising higher, the two
Fleets by favor of the Tide, approached toward Gorce, and continued firing at
one another till 11 a Clock at night. At last the Wind chopping about to the
South-West, drove them insensibly toward the Texel. The Hollanders routed.
The English having made a tack to the Westward, set sail, whilst 20 Dutch
Captains detaching themselves from the body of their Fleet, shamefully deserted
the line of Battle, and steered away for the Texel. The Moon then shone so
bright, that the English perceived it; which made them conceive new hopes, and
encouraged them to give the Dutch another on set, upon which, Fifty more of the
Ships of the Holland Fleet that had suffered most, fled away to the Northward,
whilst a good part of the rest threw themselves cross the Sand-banks! crying
out? all was lost

After so fatal a rout, 30 other Ships that were least endamaged, came out of
the Rear guard and advanced against the English. And Rear Admiral Florisz
endeavored with those feeble and shattered relics of so potent a Fleet, to
cover the Admiral Ship the Brederode, which was in so much the more danger of
falling into the Enemies hands, bccause she was so cruelly shattered, that she
was incapable of making any Resistance. Yet her preservation was so much the
dearer, and the more important for that the loss of the Battle depended
thereon. The last new Encounter of this horrible Fight, lasted three full
hours. Vice Admiral de Wit let fly several broad sides at the Cowardly
deserters to stop them, if possible, but seeing all in vain, he rallied
together into one body the rest of the Ships of the Fleet, by leaving the
Main-sails but half displayed.

That unexpected firmness and resolution so much surprised the English, that
being advanced as far as right against the Lordship of Brederode, they put up
all the sail they could, and steered away toward the Coasts of England,
quitting those of Holland with much regret, and sore against their Wills, as
thinking they had won Glory enough, and that it would be too much to expose
both it and their Fleet, in the shattered condition they were in, to prosecute
their Victory too far, and that after they had been at home and recruited, they
might insult as they pleased over their vanquished foes, before they could
recover themselves of this last fatal blow. In their retreat, they set fire to
some of their Ships that were so shattered and mauled, that they were not able
to get them back into their Ports. By favor of the night, the flames were seen
from far, and the Sea was enlighted with them almost as much as if it had been
by the Sunbeams at Noon day. The next morning, Vice Admiral de Wit, found
himself before Wyk, disengaged from all his Enemies, and sailed away with the
rest of the Fleet toward the Texel. The loss of the Dutch in this Battle, The
loss on the Dutchside.
according to their own account, amounted to no more than 9 men of War burnt or
sunk, most of whose men were saved by the English, because they sunk amongst
their Squadrons, so that by that means, they made above 700 Prisoners. The
Admiral Ship, Brederode and 3 other Ships were extremely shattered. There were
50 that had endured the hottest of the Enemies fire, and 30 others that were
not so much exposed. The Number of their dead were reported to be but 500, though
it is more probable 'twas 5000, and that of their wounded, 700 men.

The English are said to have lost, the Phoenix, The loss of the Englsh side.
the Oak, the Hunter, the George, the Prosperity, the Tulip, the Portland, the
Dragon, the Laurel, the VVillaim, and the Golden Cock. besides which, to
facilitate their retreat, they are reported to have burnt 8 more that were not
able to keep the Sea. Monk having been very severely handled, was one of the
first that went out of the fight. Amongst their dead, whose Number was said to
amount, to 600, were Reckoned, Rear-Admiral Graves, the Captains Peacock,
Edmond, Chapman, John Tailour, William Newman, Hoyen Cox, and Crips. The
Number of their wounded was said to be little less than 2500, amongst whom were
reckoned Vice Admiral Lawson, the Captains William Reus, Holland, Joseph Cubit,
John Stokes, and some others. The Ships that had most suffered, as the Triumph,
the St. Andrew, the Assurance, and the most considerable Frigates, were sent
into Yarmouth, Dover, Harwich, and Solbay, or to Chatham on the Medway. And 40
sail more, which were the rest of the English Fleet, came to an Anchor about 6
miles from the Coasts, to take in a fresh supply of Provisions and Ammunition.

Whilst the Dutch thus by palpable falsities endeavored to cover their defeat,
and indeed, to make it none at all, and to attribute the greatest loss to the
known Victors; The English were not behind hand with them, but ascribing to
themselves the whole Glory of that Memorable Engagement, loudly proclaimed the
defeat of the Hollanders all over England, spreading aboard a report that a
Squadron of 24 English men of War kept the miserable shattered Relics of the
Holland Fleet besieged before the Texel, and that 30 more fresh Ships were
sailed out, to reinforce them, and to assist them to Complete their
destruction. And to render this representation of their Victory so much the
more probable, they affected to publish a list of about 50 Dutch men of War
taken, burnt, or sunk in that Fight: And Monk had a chain of Gold, and Pen and
Lawson, each of them a Silver Medal, as an honorable acknowledgment of their
Service in obtaining so signal a Victory.

The Hollanders on the Contrary, pretended the Victory was on their side,
because said they, they had obliged the English to quit their Coasts which they
had kept besieged for several weeks space, which was the end for which they
fought, which exc^se was the more plausible, because it was well known, that
the English retired to their own Coasts, the night after the Battle, though it
was only to make a speedy return with a powerful recruit of Ammunition and
Shipping, as it would soon after have proved, to the greater terror of Holland,
and perhaps to the utter destruction of their Sea power, before they could have
had time to find means to recover themselves, if kind Providence, minded to
reserve them for greater things, had not by a sudden turn of the Government in
England, diverted their impending fate, and procured them a speedy Peace with
that Nation.

The order and solemnity observ^d at the Funea l of Lieutenant A^^iral Tromp.
The Body of Lieutenant Admiral Tromp being sent on shore near the Helder, was
carried in a Coach to the Hague, and thence conveyed by Water, to Delft the
5th. of September, and buried in the Quire of the old Church there. The order
and solemnity observed in paying the Funeral honors to a Hero that was justly
accounted the Prime Sea General of his Age, and whose loss was resented by the
States as a very sensible detriment to his Country, was this. The Guards of the
States of Holland, to the Number of 400, marched before, trailing their pikes
and Colors, with the muzzles of their Muskets turned downwards, and their
stocks covered with black cloth; After them followed 4 trumpeters, accompanied
with a Herald armed Cap-a-Pee, who represented the Admiralty; next them were
carried the great Admiral Flag, the little Standard, the Coat of Arms, the
Gantlets, Headpiece, Spurs of Knighthood, and the Sword. And immediately
before the Body was led the Funeral Horse laden with all the Arms of the
deceased, and covered over with a large Mantle of black Cloth, the corners of
which were held up by some Sea Captains.

After the body, marched the Commissioners of the Admiralty, followed by the
three Sons of the deceased Admiral, his Sons-in-Law, and others of his near
kindred; after them went the States General, the Council of State, the States
of Holland, the great Council, the Court, and the Chamber of Accounts of
Holland, accompanied by the Magistrates, the Ministers of the Ecclesiastical
Council, and the Burghers of the Hague. In this manner the Corpse was conducted
to the Boat, amidst the Tears and Lamentations of the people, to be conveyed to
Delft, where he was received by 4 Companies of Burghers in Arms, and Buried in
the Church there, and honored at his interment with a farewell salute of 3
Vollies of Musket shot.

But the States General, to Immortalize his memory, and leave a lasting
Monument to Posterity, of the most valiant Hero that ever appeared upon the
Ocean, and whose name alone had made their Enemies tremble, granted the sum of
10000 Livers, for the erecting him a stately Tomb.

This Monument being made according to the directions of the famous de Kampen,
Master Architect to the States, was placed upon a high Pedestal, the Pilaster
of which, as also the raised work going round them, are of white Marble, and
the middle of Touchstone. The principal part of that Pedestal jetts out in a
square form, and bears upon its fore side, an Enchased Table of white Marble
containing an Admirable description of the Battle that cost Martin Tromp his
life. On both sides, on the right and left, are to be seen several Ornamental
works in Relief, or raised work, of white Marble, representing Crowns of
Laurel, Garlands of Fruits, and flowers, and Garnitures of Sea-shells.

Upon this Pedestal lies the Statue of the Admiral in complete Armor, with the
head resting upon a piece of Cannon, the Body upon the Helm of a Ship. Behind
the Body there is a square Table of Marble, in which is enchased a Plate of
touchstone, on which is engraven in Golden Letters, the Epitaph we shall
afterward recite. Underneath upon the same piece of Marble, are several pieces
of raised work, representing several little Cupids, of which two are the most
remarkable, which stand in the middle behind the Admiral's Statue, one of them
holding the Arms of the States General, and the other those of the States of
Holland and Westfriesland, having before and behind them several Cornets,
Battle-Axes, Pikes, ancient Bucklers, and other sorts of Roman Arms. On the
left hand toward the Admiral's Feet, there is a Helmet garnisht with Plumes of
Feathers, placed upon a Marble Cannon. Above those Armorial pieces, we have
spoken of, there is a flying Cupid holding a Naval Crown, and above him another
having his arms extended, with a scroul in which are written these Latin Verses.

Vrbs Phoebi Cineres jactat, sed Currus Honores,
Ingreditur quoties, egrediturque Mari.
Of which we have endeavored to represent the sense in English, thus,

From Phoebus's City burning Ashes rain,
Whilst his bright Chariot Honors does dispense;
Each time he baths himself in the Liquid Main,
And being refreshed, retires again from thence.
There are likewise several other little flying Cupids to be seen playing upon
Hauboies, or blowing Trumpets. On each side of these Base Reliefs there are
plates of Touchstone plain and unwrought, and upon the two extremities of the
Tomb, are represented most part of the Arms of the Ancient Romans, upon white
Marble. All this great work is enclosed with beauty a fair square of white
Marble that encompasses it round, the top of which is adorned with the
Admiral's Arms most artfully engraven upon white Marble, and enriched and
augmented with the honors done him by Lewis the XIIIth. of France, when he had
gained that famous Battle against the Spaniards near the Downs in the Year
1639. Tromp's Epitaph.
On each side of the Arms, there is a Triton, blowing a Sea-shell for a
Trumpet, whose bodies are represented as overgrown with Moss and Sea-shells.
And they are each of them accompanied* with a Dolphin, who terminate the
extremities.

Here follows the Epitaph we before mentioned, in Latin.

Aeternae Memoriae.
Qui Bativos, Qui Virtutem, ac verum laborem amas, Lege ac Luge.

Batavae Gentis decus, Virtutis Bellicae Fulmen, heic jacet, qui Vivus nunquam
jacuit, and Imperatorem stantem debere mori exemplo suo docuit. Amor Civium,
Hostium terror, Oceani stupor, Martinus Harperti Trompius, quo nomine plures
continentur lauds quam hic lapis capit sane angustio^; Et cui Oriens and
Occidens mare materia Triumphorum, Vniversus Orbis Theatrum Gloriae fuit:
Praedonum certa pernicies; Commercij faelix Assertor; familiaritate utilis, non
vilis, postquam nautas and milites, durum Genus, paterno, and cum efficacia
benigno rexit Imperio; Post 50 Praelia, quorum dux fuit, aut pars magna, Post
insignes supra fidem Victorias; Post summos infra meritum Honore^; Tandem Bello
Anglico tantum non Victor certe invictus X August. Ann. Aerae Christianae
MDCLIII. Aetat. LVI. vivere ac vincere desiit. Foederati Belgij Patres, Heroi
optime merito.

M. P.

That is to say, To Eternal Memory. You that love the Netherlanders, Virtue and
True Labor, Read and Weep.
The Ornament of the Holland Nation, the thunderbolt of Military Valor, he
that living never reposed, and taught the World by his own Example, that a
Great General ought to die standing, reposes here. The love of his Countrymen,
the terror of the Enemies, and the astonishing wonder of the ocean, Martin
Harpertez Tromp, in which name alone are more praises included, then so scanty
a Marble is able to contain; to whom both the Eastern and Western Seas were a
Subject of Triumph, and the whole world a Theater of Glory: The certain
destruction of Pirates! the happy Assertour of Commerce; Familiar enough with
his men, to be useful to them, and to be beloved, but not to be despised by
them: After he had, with a Command gentle and mild, and tempered with a
Paternal tenderness, efficaciously governed his Mariners and Soldiers,
otherwise a Rough and headstrong Race: After 50 Sea-Battles, in which he had
either the Supreme, or a very considerable Command: After many famous, and
almost incredible Victories: After he had received the greatest Honors which
yet were below his Merits; At last, in a War against the English, being though
not quite a Victor, yet so near one as to remain unconquered, he ceased at once
to live and to vanquish, on the 10th of August, in the year of our Lord, 1653,
New Style, and in the 56 year of his Age. The States of the United Netherlands,
have as to a Hero most highly deserving from them,

Erected this Monument.

On the lower part of the Tomb, are written these following Dutch Verses,
composed by that famous Holland Poet, J. V. Vondel.

Hier Rust de Zeehelt Tromp de Dappere Besschermer
Der Zeevaert en der Zeeten dien van'tvrye Land,
Dat's man's gedachtnis bewaart in korstig Marmer.
Zo levendig gelijk Hy stierf voor Hollandes strand;
Beluid nied moordyeschrey en Dondren van Kartouwen,
Daar Groot Brittanje in Brand al't water vich te kleens;
Hy hiest zich Zelv' in it heart der Burg'ren witehouven;
Dat Held verduurt de praeht van Graf en Marmersteen.
The Sense of which in English Prose is this:

Here lies the Hero of the Sea, Tromp that valiant Defender of Navigation, in
the Service of this Republic. It Is to the Momory of that Great Man, which is
preserved by the power of Art, in this curiously wrought Marble, as fresh and
lively as he was himself, when he lost his life before the Coasts of Holland,
lamented by the Tears of the People, and by the Thundering noise of the Cannon,
whereby all Great Britain was set on fire, and the Sea became too narrow for
him. He has engraven himself in the hearts of his Countrymen by the love they
bore him, and has erected himself there such a solid Statue as will out-last
this stately Tomb, and the marble it self of which it is composed. Here is
likewise another Latin Epitaph, which Professor Thysius composed at the same
time, and which was designed to have been made use of, but was not, for some
Reason unknown to us; However to satisfy the Curiosity of the Reader, we will
insert it here.

Qui Patre viro fortissimo, ac Hemskerkana quoque ad Gades Expeditione inclyto,
quique and ipse Patriae vitam impendit, Genitus, ab ipsa statim Adolescentia
per discrimina multa ac maria, vary tractus and exercitus, captusque aliquando
and ob maritimarum rerum singularem scientiam ipsis etiam hostibus aestimatus;
sed inter and minas autem promissa horum ingentia, fidus semper Patriae, ac
constans, Libertati ac Patriae redditus, huic juvandae totum se dedit, and
tandem ad praefecturam Maris admotus, quam septendecim fere annorum non tam
spacio, quam admirandis successibus nobilem fecit, post Duinkerkanorum vim
saepius, imprimis ad Mardicum, fractam, post Hispanorum magni Terroris Classem
repressam, post tandem in Cantii litore dissipatam, gestaque alia, vi hostium
ac manu plerumque minor, sed virtute, animo, ac usu, semper major, interritus,
invictus, tandem maritimo cum Anglis Bello, Republica praeter expectationem
nuper illigata, dum neque hostibus parcit, neque sibi, Publici egregii bono
devotus glande plumbea percussus victor occubuit, and insignem Hostibus Cladem
ac Terrorem, majorem ^urbato mari Se^uritatem, Patriae Ingens desiderium sui
sibi Gloriam nominis Immortalem, se Rei Nilitiaeque Navalis Peritiae, Fidei pro
Republica, Prudentiae, Fortitudinis, Magnanimitatis, ac Constantiae
Nobilissimum, exprimendumque posteris exemplum reliquit. Hoc Monumentum
ingentium meritorum ergo, Foederatorum Belgarum Ordines posuere. Which in
English is Thus,

Here lies he, who being descended from a Father who was a most valiant man,
famous likewise in the Victorious Expedition under Admiral Hemskerk near the
Straits of Gibraltar, and who also himself lost his life in the Service of his
Country, was even from his Blooming Youth, variously engaged, and exercised in
many dangers and many Seas, and sometimes tho when taken Prisoner, he was for
his singular knowledge in Marine Affairs, highly esteemed and courted by the
Enemies themselves, yet amidst all their high threats, and mighty promises,
remained always faithful and constant to his Country; and being set at liberty,
and restored to his Country, entirely dedicated himself to its Service and
Defense, and being at length promoted to be Lieutenant Admiral at Sea, during
almost 17 years space, in which he exercised that High Office, made it Famous
and Renowned, not so much for the number of years he held it, as for a Series
of most admirable Successes. And after having often broken the Forces of the
Dunkirkers, but especially at Mardyke; after having first represt the
formidable Fleet of Spain, and afterward entirely defeated it upon the Kentish
Coast; after several other Brave Actions, wherein, tho he were most commonly
inferior to the Enemies in Force and Numbers, yet was ever superior to them
in Valor, Courage, and Experience, and always undaunted and unconquered: At
last the Republic being of late unexpectedly engaged in a Sea War with the
English, whilst he spared neither the Enemies nor himself, but was wholly
devoted to the public good, the most Glorious Cause he could espouse, being
struck with Musket Shot, he fell a Victor, leaving great Loss and Terror to
the Enemies, a greater security to the disturbed Sea, a sensible regret and
sorrow for his loss, to his Country, to himself an immortal and most glorious
name, and in his person, a most Noble and Heroic Example, most worthy by all
Posterity to be imitated, of incomparable skill in the art of Navigation, and
military Naval conduct, of Loyalty to the Republic, and of Prudence,
Fortitude, Magnanimity and Constancy; in acknowledgement of which vast Merits,
the States of the United Netherlands have erected to him this Monument. And
indeed that valiant Man may be said to have ma^e his Fortune in Arms, without
any other Support or Backers than his own personal Merit and Bravery. He was
born at the Brill, in the year 1597, and was but 9 years old when he began to
go to Sea, with his Father, Captain Harpert Martin Tromp, with whom he was
present at the famous Battle fought near Gibraltar under the Conduct of Admiral
Hemskirk. Some time after, following his Father again in a Cruise he made
toward Cape Verd, or the Coast of Guiney, where being attackt by an English
Privateer, his Father lost his Life in the Skirmish, and after so sensible a
loss, the Ship being taken by the said Privateer, young Tromp was constrained
to serve the Captain as his Cabin Boy for about two years and a half, but
afterward, he found means to disengage himself. From that time forward, he got
some Employments. In the year 1617 he was made Quartermaster under Captain Mooy
Lambert, and afterward Pilot or Master of the same Ship. After having made a
Voyage toward the Straits, in a Merchant Ship called the Tuchthuys; he was
taken by the Turks, but by the particular favor of the Bassa of Algier, he was
released. In the year 1622, he was made a Lieutenant under Captain Bagyn, and
after a little while, removed into Captain Jonge Boes's Ship in the same
Quality. Two years after, Prince Maurice made him Captain of a little Frigate
which carried but 40 men, so that having run through all manner of Sea
Employments, there was nothing done remarkable at Sea during the ensuing years,
but he was present at it, giving every where signal proofs of his Great Virtue
and Conduct.

In the year 1629, De Hein who had made himself famous by taking some Spanish
Galleons laden with Silver, being made Lieutenant Admiral of Holland, put again
to Sea in the Ship called the Green Dragon, which was a very fleet Sailer, but
was soon after unfortunately killed by Tromp's side. The Testimony he gave of
Tromp is altogether remarkable. He had, said he, known many brave Captains, in
whom he had however still found some failing or other, but in Tromp he
professed he never had observed any thing but what was great and virtuous, and
therefore judged him to possess all the happy Qualities necessary in an
Admiral. The Ship that Heins was in, was, as we have said, a very good Sailer,
but after he was dead, it was by favor given to another and not to Tromp, at
which, he was so sensibly displeased, that out of mere indignation he quitted
the Sea, and retired into the Country, where he exercised an employment that
only at a distance related to Marine Affairs.

In the year 1637 Lieutenant Admiral Dorp having quitted the service, Prince
Frederick Henry, upon the recommendation of the States of Holland, gave the
Command of the Fleet to Tromp, in quality of Lieutenant Admiral, with a
provisional Commission only for one year: which time being expired, the Prince
granted him a Continuation of it with a more ample Commission. In the sequel,
he got a great deal of Honor, and signalized himself in diverse Battles which
he fought against the Dunkirkers, the Spaniards, the Portuguese, and the
English, so that he was looked upon by all the Nations of Europe, to be the
ablest and most valiant Sea Commander of the Age in which he lived. He was so
tenderly beloved by the Seamen, that both the Captains and Mariners used to
call him their Father, and Tromp out of a Reciprocal love to them, used to call
them likewise, his Children. But there was nothing so admirable in him as the
Moderation, and cool and sedate Temper of blood which he showed in the greatest
heat of a fight in which he Commanded. For he appeared as quiet and composed
when he gave his Orders, as if he had been at home in his own house under safe
shelter from all dangers.

But to recontinue the thread of our Discourse, de Ruiter's Ship which was quite
disabled to keep the Sea any longer, was carried out of the fight by Captain
Aldertsz, and arrived about the Dusk of Night, before the Meuse. The next day
two Gentlemen came on board the Admiral, and delivered him a Letter from the
States of Holland in which their High and Mightinesses demanded of him an
account of the success of the Battle, and of the destiny of their Fleet. De
Ruiter answered the States, and in few words related to them all the
Circumstances of the Battle according to the best knowledge he had of them. The
day following he entered into the Meuse, where Vice Admiral Evertsz came to him
from Goree, and brought him a Letter from the States General, by which he was
Ordered to remove into Evertsz's Galleot, and to go along jointly with him, in
search of the Fleet. Pursuant to which, they sailed along by the Coast, and
found Captain Taneman to the Northward of the Meuse, whose Ship being already
sunk 14 Fathom deep under Water, showed nothing but the very Tops of her M^sts.

At about 2 miles from Scheveling, they found Captain Swart at Anchor, who
Commanded a Ship fraighted by the ^ast-India Company. De Ruiter and Evertsz
then Rowed off further into the Sea, to learn what news they could of the
Enemies Fleet. The 13th of the same Month, they came toward the Texel, where
they found the Holland Fleet to be 84 sail strong of Men of War, besides 12
more that were in the Meuse, at Goree, or* in Zealand, so that, if they gave a
true account, the Dutch lost in all but 9 Ships in the whole Fight, as has been
already said.

The States General of the United Provinces being willing to persuade all
Europe, that it was not without some grounds, they gloried to have gained
considerable advantages in that Battle, since they had thereby freed their
Coasts and Harbors from the oppression of the English, who had a long time held
them straightly blocked up and besieged, used all possible care to make their
interrupted Commerce flourish again. For that design, they assembled a great
Fleet of Merchant Ships, bound part of them to the North, and part to the
Westward; besides which, there were several others bound homewards from the
Indies, and from diverse parts of Europe, which waited in the Sound, or in the
Ports of Norway, for a Convoy.

Vice Admiral de Wit to whom the chief Command of the Fleet was then given, set
sail the 10th. of September, with a Fleet of 40 sail, Composed of the Ships
that had suffered the least damage in the last fight. 70 Merchant Ships from
the Texel, and 100 more from the Vlie came out and joined him. On the 30th of
September he arrived with this Potent Fleet near little Holms, where he met 5
East India Ships, and a great many other Merchant Ships coming from the Sound
under the Convoy of 14 Danish Men of War, who unmoored upon his approach, and
joined themselves to the Admiral's Flag. Besides these, there joined him above
160 more, coming from Mardon, and other Havens. And over and above all those,
there came to him from time to time re-inforcements of several men of War, from
Holland, which Augmented his Fleet at last to the Number of 76 sail of Men of
War, which together with the Merchant Men, made up a Fleet of 400 sail; who all
came happily into the Texel or the Vlie at the beginning of November, without
meeting any English, though they were then at Sea with a Fleet of 50 sail of
strong Men of War. The States having resolved to keep their Fleet out at Sea
all Winer, the Men of War that were to compose it kept about the Texel, to take
in Provisions of Victuals, when a furious Tempest arising, had like to have
destroyed them. The Fleet then consisted of 76 Men of War, as we have said,
besides two Flutes laden with Ammunition and Provision. As Soon as the Wind
began to freshen, they set sail toward the Main Sea, and came to an Anchor
within 2 miles and a half to the Eastward of Kykduin. The Wind freshning again
on the 9th. of November, before day, blew afterward so fiercely and with so
much violence, from the West-North-West, turning sometimes full to the
North-West, that several Ships were driven upon their Anchors, and others
having cut down their Main masts run into the Texel, without considering the
great danger they thereby exposed themselves to. The night following the
blustering Weather still continued, and the next day grew so furious, mixed with
a fierce storm of hail, that Vice Admiral de Wit and 10 other Ships of the
Fleet were thereby driven from their Moorings, several perished, and others
were stranded upon the Coasts.

On the third day the Tempest abated a little, when of so potent a Fleet there
remained but 47 Ships, 23 of which had had all their Masts and Rigging blown
away close by the board. But such a disaster as that had been in some measure
more supportable if it had not been unhappily followed by the sad news of the
loss of 12 or 13 men of War that had likewise perish't together with a Fleet
laden with Ammunition, and several Merchant Ships, and a great many people with
them. There were some Ships all whose men were drowned without so much as one
Person escaping: And they which were left were so endamaged, that when the
Weather grew calm, they were forced to return into their Harbors to repair and
resit themselves. Neither did the English Fleet come off at a much Cheaper
rate, for after being very roughly used by the Tempest, the Parliament thinking
them incapable to keep the Sea any longer, ordered them to put into their Ports
to be disarmed.

About that time there was spread abroad in Holland a Lamentable report of the
deplorable condition into which the Dutch prisoners in England were reduced,
and the cruel treatment reported to be used to them there, which excited a most
raging and furious resentment in all people at such supposed barbarity. Their
Number was about 900, who were said to be most of them shut up in the then old
decayed, unfinish't and uncovered College of Chelsey, between four bare walls,
in the wide fields, exposed to the open sky, and to all the rigours of the
season, laid only upon straw without any thing to cover them: so that many of
them not able to endure that misery died. Nay, and 'twas affirmed further, that
the hard-heartedness of the English proceeded so far against those poor
wretches, as to forbid those of the Dutch Nation that lived at London, to
assist them as they had before done 'till toward the end of the Month of
August, having expended from the beginning to that time above 500 l. Sterlin in
relieving them, so that coming afterward to want that charitable assistance,
many of them languish'd to death. Some of them looking upon the peril of an
inevitable death as the lesser evil of the two, preferred it before so many
sufferings, and endeavored to make their escapes, though with the evident hazard
of breaking their necks, by clambering over the Walls, but when any of them
were perceived so attempting, the Soldiers would not fail most mercilesly to
shoot them, or else to run them through with their swords. But it must be
considered indeed that this was the cruelty of a then lawless people, and no
worse than what they had used to their own Countrymen, and their own natural
Prince, and his most faithful servants, and so is the less to be wondered at,
and not imputable to that nation in more regular times. However notwithstanding
all those cruelties, some stole away from the vigilance of their guards, in
spite of all the exactness they could use, and amongst the rest, Captain
Schellinger who was one of those unhappy captives, found means to escape and to
get into Holland, where he made a dismal Relation of all those inhumanities.
But soon after, the Prisoners on both sides were exchanged.

During the last expedition that the Vice-Admirals de Wit and de Ruiter had
newly made together, the States of Holland had been deliberating upon the
choice of a fit person worthily to supply the place of Lieutenant Admiral,
vacant by the death of the Incomparable Tromp: And their opinions were so
divided thereupon, that they knew not well what to determine in the matter.
Vice Admiral de Wit, they knew well enough to be a man that had given signal
proofs of his Courage, and to be one of them that ha^ some pretension to aspire
to so great an Employment, but when they considered his odd humor, and that by
a certain rude and Imperious way he had of Commanding, he had raised no small
aversion to him in the Minds of most of the Captains and Seamen, the States
were fearful to repose so great a trust entirely in him. On the other side,
they were sensible enough, they could not make choice of another which was no
more than his equal, and much less of one that was inferior to him, without
giving him an Extraordinary cause of Jealousy, and indeed without doing him a
manifest injustice; and yet, that if they should not admit him to that
Employment, it was to be feared, that the dissension that would undoubtedly
arise upon that occasion amongst the General Officers of the Fleet, might draw
after it most pernicious and disastrous consequences, whenever they happened to
come to an Engagement. At last therefore after having judiciously weighed an
affair of such high Importance, they thought fit to make choice of a Person as
Recomendable for his Merit, as his Birth and noble Extraction, who was
descended from the ancient and illustrious house of Wassenaer, whose Valor and
great Capacity in Marine affairs was known to all the World; And that was Mr.
Opdam, Colonel of a Regiment of Horse, and Governor of Heusden, whose Father
likewise formerly exercised the same Employment. Besides Mr. Opdam, they
proposed likewise Lewis of Nassau, natural Son to Prince Maurice; but both
their inclinations having been preconsulted in the case, they both declined it
with an obliging excuse. However, Pensionary de Wit, and some other Members of
the State, to whom their High and Mightinesses had left the care of that
affair, managed it so well, that on the 22d. of September, Mr. Opdam was
elected Lieutenant Admiral, under certain conditions.

The States of Holland being likewise convinced that the providing of a
sufficient Number of able General Sea Commanders was a thing that contributed
very much to the gaining of a Naval Victory, Mr. Opdam Chosen Lieutenant
Admiral. The States resolve upon a new promotion of General Sea-Officers. De
Ruiter made Vice Admiral of Holland.
and that the United Provinces might reap very great advantages thereby,
decreed, about the Month of November, that in every College of Admiralty of
their province; there should be established a Vice Admiral, and a Rear-Admiral
according to the Laudable Custom practiced in the College of the Meuse. De
Ruiter was not forgot in this Rencounter; for the very same day when that great
man expected to have perish't by the terrible Tempest he suffered near the
Texel, he was constituted Vice Admiral of Holland in the College of the
Admiralty of Amsterdam. Rear Admiral Florisz was advanced to the Dignity of
Lieutenant Admiral of the North; Captain Verbaaf was elected Rear Admiral of
the Admiralty of Rotterdam; Cornelius Tromp made Rear Admiral of Holland.
Cornelius Tromp Eldest Son of the late Lieutenant Admiral of that name, was
also created Rear Admiral of the Admiralty of Amsterdam, and Cornelius de Boet
was made Rear Admiral of the Admiralty of the North.

The States were willing by this promotion, not only to show young Tromp some
token of their acknowledgement for the great services done by his renowned
Father, to his Country, but likewise in part, to recompense his own Personal
deserts, he having upon several occasions given them very signal marks of his
Extraordinary Courage, and especially in the fight at Legorn, under the Command
of Admiral de Galen. As for Vice Admiral de Wit, he was placed in the Admiralty
of Rotterdam, that he might hold the principal Rank between the two other
Vice-Admirals.

About the end of this year there happened a Great Revolution in England. For
Cromwell by his subtle contrivances, Cromwell makes himself protector in
England, etc.
and secret practices, made himself the sovereign Arbiter of all the Affairs of
the Government, under the title of Protector of the three Kingdoms; so that
seeing himself thereby possessed of more force and power than any one of the
Kings that had Reigned before him, his next thoughts were wholly taken up with
seeking out and employing the most proper means to secure his new dignity, and
to maintain himself in that supreme and boundless Authority he so boldly had
assumed, to which, Judging the Friendship and Good Correspondence of the United
Provinces to be absolutely necessary, he began underhand to Court them to a
Peace: To which the States of Holland were so much the more inclined, because
they were in some consternation at their late losses, and knew well enough that
England at that time was in a condition to come again upon them with greater
force than ever, and perhaps totally to crush their Sea power, and give a
mortal stroke to their already agonizing Commerce, before they could furnish
themselves with a sufficient recruit of strong and defensive Ships, (which must
be a work of time, and of peace,) to oppose such a rough Enemy with whom
nothing was to be got but a fruitless and heavy loss both of Blood and
Treasure, the Prodigious expenses of that War together with the daily and vast
losses sustained by their Rich Merchants, being a burden too insupportable for
them to bear much longer. And besides, the Domestic troubles in their
Provinces increased day by day so much upon them, upon that occasion, that they
thought nothing but a good Peace with England would be able to appease them, by
restoring Tranquillity and their usual Freedom of trade to their people.

Besides that, another powerful reason prevailed much with them at that time
to influence them to a Peace, which was to prevent those growing Factions that
aimed at the Election of a Captain General, or a stadtholder, which they were
afraid would have forced them against their wills, to be Honest, Just and
Grateful to the Illustrious and August House of Orange, which they had no Mind
to be at that time, nor perhaps never would if the Terror of the French Arms
afterward, and the imminent destruction of the State, had not unanimously
inspirited the people to put more Generous and public minded patriots at the
Helm, who restored this almost overturned State to its pristine stability and
prosperity, by restoring to them the necessary assistances and services of that
most Noble and Ancient house, which were always the very vitals of this
Republic, and by rendering to the princely Heir of it, those Honors,
Dignities and Emoluments, which merits never to be cancelled or superannuated,
had made as inseparably necessary for the Common good, as indispnesibly due to
him. Having then, as we have already said renewed the Negotiation for that
purpose, the year before, upon these weighty considerations, they now pressed
it on with so much earnestness, that after many obstracles, A Peace concluded
with England.
the Treaty was concluded and signed at Westminster, ^^th. of April: The
Articles of which we shall not here repeat, because they are to be f^and in
several other Books.

THE LIFE OF Cornelius Tromp, Lieutenant Admiral of Holland and of
West-Friesland. The Second BOOK.
England and Holland were thus in vain consuming all their Forces by such a
cruel War as that of which we have above related the principal Events, the
Corsairs of Barbary, being secured by these troubles from any power able to
Curb their Excursions, ranged about without control, and made all Europe feel
the smart of their outrageous Pyracies, so that the Commerce of the Christians
to the Levant was so miserably interrupted, that there was nothing to be heard
of in those parts, but the continual losses of the Merchants trafficking that
way. Nay, and the Insolence of those Barbarians was advanced to that height,
that not contenting themselves to Pyrate upon the Mediterranean, they
impudently ventured to appear upon the Ocean, and make Excursions as far as the
Coasts of Portugal; And showed themselves near the Cape St. Vincent, with
Fleets some times of above 20 sail of Men of War well mounted and appointed for
service, and keeping the Mouth of the Streights shut up, they snapt up all the
Merchant Ships that came thither from the four corners of the World, who by
that means fell as 'twere into those Rovers Mouths.

For the redressing of all these mischiefs, after the Peace was concluding with
England, the Admiralty of Amsterdam sent de Ruiter into the Mediterranean with
5 men of War, partly to Convoy outward some Merchant Ships, and partly to
Conduct others homewards at his return. He therefore set out from the Texel,
the 17th of June, with 14 Merchant Ships, accompanied by the Captains, Brakel,
Verburg, Ooms, and Pietersz. In his way, he joined Rear-Admiral Tromp with the
Captains, Vander Hulst, Verveen, Huiskin's and 6 Merchant Ships, that sailed
out of the Texel, two days before him; And proceeding from thence together as
far as Ayamonte, they took leave, and parted one from the other.

De Ruiter past the Streights steering his course toward Legorn, where he
staid, upon the instant solicitation of the Dutch Merchants there, about the
space of a Month, to wait the coming in of some more of them. During his stay
there, the Captains Verburg and Ooms, saild away for Venice, to convoy from
thence 5 Merchant Men. De Ruiter having unmoored from Legorn, set sail toward
the Island of Minorca, and from thence proceeded to Alicant, Cartagena, and
Malaga, where he was informed, that there were arrived at Cales, 2 Zealand men
of War Commanded by the Captains Mangelaar and Water Drinker, who were ready to
return for Zealand as soon as some Merchant Ships of that Province should have
taken in their freight. Upon which advice, he left the rest of his Squadron at
Malaga, to convoy thence the Wine Fleet, and setting Sail the 29th. of
September, he arrived in the beginning of October in the bay of Cadiz, and
Anchored there.

At his arrival, the Dutch Consul, and chief Merchants of his Nation came on
board him, and with a sensible displeasure delivered him some Letters from
Sally, which related with how much inhumanity the Sid treated the Hollanders,
upon the taking of a Flute from them near Mamora called the Hound, by Rear
Admiral Tromp, and the Sid highly incensed thereat, having by way of reprisal,
seized 3 Merchant Ships of Amsterdam full freighted, had imprisoned all the
Masters and men in the said Ships, and threatened to make them slaves, unless
the Flute and her Cargo were speedily restored. In the same Letters it was
intimated, that the Prisoners passionately desired, that de Ruiter would come
to Sally, in hopes they should obtain their Liberty by the influence of his
great Experience, and the acquaintance he had formerly made with the Sid. De
Ruiter accordingly being willing to prevent those growing troubles, and the
mischievous consequences they might draw after them, set sail the 6th. of
October, accompanied with the Captains, Mangelaar and Water Drinker, and
arrived in Sally road the 10th. of the same Month. The next day he received a
Letter from the Dutch Consul, informing him, how that the Sid, extremely
provoked at the Hostility committed by Rear Admiral Tromp, had sent for him
into his Palace, and had demanded of him an indemnification for the Ship and
her Cargo that was taken, telling him that as Consul of the Dutch Nation, he
was respo^sible for the damages done by the Dutch men of War, Adding, that
after he had answered all those complaints as well as he could, he had promised
the Prince of Sally, to write to Tromp to come himself in person to that road,
to justify himself and to pray him in the mean while not to suffer the Cargo
of the said Ship to be meddled with; that having accordingly written such a
Letter, Tromp thereupon came to Sally road accompanied with Captain Huiskens,
from whence he had notified to the Sid by a Letter,

THat the Ship he had seized, Tromp's Letter to the Prince of Sally.
having refused to send a Boat on Board him, though he had put out a White Flag;
that upon that refusal he was confirmed in the Opinion he had, that she was an
Algerine, he had taken her with so much the more reason, because all her men
deserted her, and run away to shore after they had taken with them all that was
most valuable on board her; And that if the Prince of Sally, thought himself
offended by that proceeding, he might Complain to the States General, who were
accustomed to do Justice to every one, concluding his Letter with this
protestation, that he had no Commission to do the least wrong to any of the
Subjects of Sally. That after the reading of that Letter, the Sid answered, he
could give no credit to it, for that he could not believe, that Rear-Admiral
Tromp would have dared to venture upon any such attempt upon those of Sally,
without Express Orders from the States so to do; Adding, that on the other
side, if it were true that he had acted as he had done without the Consent or
Privity of his Masters, he had no occasion to wait their Orders for the
Restitution of the Prize in Question to its right owners. De Vries likewise
informed de Ruiter withal, that the Prince of Sally's answer could not be
carried on board of Tromp, because the Sea was then so very rough, that no Boat
durst stir out of the Port, so that Tromp not being able to stay any longer
there, hoisted sail, and went away for Cales. He reported likewise that the Sid
two or three days before his departure, had caused the Master of the Ship
called the Tiger to be seized and imprisoned with all his Men, after he had
given leave to two other Ships of Amsterdam, to unmoor.

Vice Admiral de Ruiter sent likewise the same day a Letter to the Prince of
Sally, De Ruiter's Letter to the Prince of Sally.
which was to this effect: That upon his arrival at Cadiz, he had with much
displeasure heard of the difference caused by the taking of the Flute, called
the Hound: and how that in Consequence of it, The Master of the Ship, Walishsz
with all his Men had been seized; which News had obliged him with all diligence
to come before Sally, to assure his Highness, that their High and Mightinesses,
the States General had no other design than to preserve and maintain the Treaty
of Peace concluded with Sally; And if there had happened any thing prejudicial to
it, by the seizure of a Vessel through mistake the States having nothing so
much to heart as Peace would be sensibly concerned at it: That for his own
particular he was extremely sorry, that the Orders of the States his Masters
would not permit him to leave his Ship, and go ashore to kiss his Highnesses
hands, and wish him a long and happy Reign; as undoubtedly promising himself
withal, that if he could but have the advantage to tell him his reasons by
word of Mouth, that he would be fully satisfied with them, and would thereby be
induced gladly to renew the Friendship that had so long continued between the
United Provinces and the people of Sally; and in fine, since necessity engaged
him to stay on board his Ship, He prayed the Sid, to be pleased to give leave
to the Consul de Uries, and to Walishsz, the Mr. of the Ship that was seized,
to come to him to inform him more amply of all things, that so he might be able
to write of them more at large to his Highness.

The Reading of this Letter that was translated into Spanish, so
extraordinarily satisfied the Prince of Sally, that he immediately consented,
that the Consul should go on board the Admiral. He likewise at the same time
ordered 30 Sheep, 14 Bullocks, and some other Refreshments to be got ready, to
be presented to Vice Admiral de Ruiter, by two Deputies; and some days after,
sent him a Letter, expressing, The Sid's Answer to de Ruiter.
That he had secured himself by way of Provision, of the Ship Tiger, till the
Vessel taken by Rear Admiral Tromp should be restored; But that however, he
gave full liberty to all other Dutch Ships, to go out of and come into his
Ports, for that he was resolved to continue to entertain a perfect good
Correspondence with the United Provinces, etc.

Affairs were there upon that foot, when De Ruiter was forced by a sudden
Tempest, to weigh Anchor, and sail away from Cadiz, from whence he returned
back into Holland with a Merchant Fleet that had put themselves under his
Convoy, and arrived at the Texel about the end of the Month.

The States General of the United Provinces being desirous to free the Sea for
the Yoke of the Corsairs of Barbary, Sally, gave order to de Ruiter, to pass
again into the Mediterranean, with a Squadron of 8 men of War, and 2 Advice
Yachts. His Commission which was signed the 29th. of June, Imported, that he
and the other Captains of his Squadron, where or whenever they should happen
to meet any of the Corsairs of Barbary, and especially them of Tetuan, Algiers,
Tunis, or Tripoli, on this side the Kingdom of Candy, giving chase to any Ships
belonging to the States Subjects, they should attack them, and sink or burn
them, if possible; That all Voluntary Renegado's found on board any of the
Corsairs should be punished with death; But the others that turned so from
their youth, or were forced to become so by necessity, especially if they had
rendered any services or good Offices to the Christian slaves, and seemed to
Compassionate their misfortune, should be spared, and distributed into the
States Ships; that the Turks and Moors should be publicly sold, and the Money
arising by their sale, should be laid up: That the Christian slaves should be
set at liberty, and put ashore, if they desired it, or else entertained in the
Ships, and entered into pay according to their respective Capacities: That he
should likewise go again and Anchor before Sally, in order to enter into a
Negotiation for renewing the Treaty of Alliance and Amity concluded in 1651,
between the States General of the United Provinces, and those of Sally.

Accordingly, on the 18th of July Vice Admiral de Ruiter, sailed out of the
Texel with 8 Men of War, and 55 Merchant Ships bound for France, Portugal,
Spain, and other places in the Mediterranean; and on the 3d. of August, he
arrived in the bay of Cadiz, with a Fleet of 44 sail; on the 7th. he past the
Streights, steering his Course toward Malaga, Cartagena and Alicant, into
which places, some of the Merchant Ships entered. The rest of them quitted de
Ruiter near the Isle of Formentera, which they had chosen for their place of
Rendezvous, in case they should come to be separated by any accident. De Ruiter
departed thence with design to go before Algiers, sending the Captains, de
Wild, Sweers, and Zaalingen, before him, to see what Ships they could discover
riding before that Town, so famous for its Pyracies.

On the 30th. he began to come in sight of it, and coming up with the Captains
he had sent before, they reported to him, that they had been so near the Town,
that they had seen people walking on the Cawsey, and discerned 5 Ships in the
road, and 6 or 7 within the Mole. The same night de Ruiter advanced with his
Squadron, within Cannon shot of the Town, and Anchored in 42 Fathoms depth of
Water. The 2 Yachts, the Pearl, and Fortune were already prepared for an
Enterprise; and the better to deceive the Corsairs, de Ruiter Commanded all his
Captains, to put up English Colors. Upon which, those Barbarians showed
themselves upon some small vessels near the shore, but durst not come very near
the Hollanders. Then the Dutch Captains being all summoned on board the
Admiral, a Council of War was held; wherein it was resolved, that in the night
by favor of the Land Breezes, they should make sail, to Conduct, if it were
possible, their Fireships back by 3 men of War, up to the Brigantines to burn
them, but so great a Calm lasted all the night, that it was hard to know on
which side the Wind was. The next Morning it continued still Calm, and the
Dutch perceived that the 5 Brigantines that were in the Road the day before,
were then retired within the Mole, so that it was not difficult to Judge by the
Countenance of the Turks, that they were upon their guard.

Malaga; which accordingly was put in Execution about noon. As the Dutch drew
near that place, they discovered some Corsair Ships, to which they gave chase;
and on the 17th. of September, they took a Tetuan Brigantine manned with 20
Moors, whose Captain was a Spanish Renegado named Arnando Dias, who had done a
great deal of mischief to the Christians, and had caused very great losses to
them, having in about 12 years time, made near 2000 slaves whom he had all
cruelly sold, and amongst them, as 'twas credibly related, some of his own near
kindred; and bragged several times, that he would treat his own Father after
the same manner, if he fell into his hands; And therefore according to his
Execrable merits, he was immediately hanged up upon a Topmast.

On the 9th. of the same Month, de Ruiter continued on his Course, and arrived
two days after, in the bay of Gibraltar; the day following, weighing Anchor, he
repast the Streights, and steered his Course toward Cadiz, with design to make
for the Coast of Barbary. On the 27th. he discovered 2 Corsair Ships at the
mouth of the Streights to the Eastward, and another to the South-West-ward. De
Ruiter gave chase to this last, as appearing to be the biggest of them. The
Corsair made away as fast as she could, directly toward Arzila, a little Town
in the Kingdom of Fez about 12 Leagues from Tangier. And it proved to be the
Admiral's Ship of Algier, that was taken from the Hollanders but the year
before, and by the Dutch was called the Wheel of Fortune, but by the Turks,
named the Golden Palm Tree. That Ship was full as big as de Ruiter's own
Admiral Ship, and carried 38 Guns, and 250 men, amongst whom were 50 Christian
slaves that were forced to serve on board her.

De Ruiter chased her as far as into the very Haven of Arzila, where with much
ado she made a shift to save her self, after having lost many of her men in the
fight, and principally her Captain who lost his life in the Skirmish. The Dutch
Fleet continuing on their Course, came and Anchored in the road of Sally, on
the 1st. of October, after they had taken one Turkish Ship and a Tartan, and
stranded a Renegado Corsair. De Ruiter, at his arrival saluted the Town with 9
Guns, the great Castle answering him with 5, and the little one with 4, after
which, according to his Commission, he endeavored to enter into a Negotiation
with the Deputies of Sall, in order to appease the differences they had with
the United Provinces; but he being delayed several days without being able to
do any thing, and in the mean while receiving advice, that the most part of the
Turkish Pirates kept the passage of the Streights shut up, and returned daily
from thence to Algiers with Prizes, he thought it was not necessary for him to
stay in Sally road with all his whole Squadron; but calling thereupon a
Consultation of his Captains on board him, it was resolved, that de Wild, and
Rear Admiral Verveen, and Captain Zaalingen, should sail away toward the
Streights, to give chase to the Corsairs. And accordingly they unmoor'd with
the New Moon, steering toward Cadiz, whilst on the other side, Captain Vander
Zaan kept out a cruizing with two Men of War more. De Ruiter in the mean while
staid with two of the ships of his Squadron, before Sally* to pursue the
Negotiation of the Treaty. In the midst of which Transactions, on the 16 of
October he discovered between Sally and Mamora 3 Sail making toward Sally, but
were kept back by the Calm Weather; Upon which, de Ruiter weighing Anchor,
accompanied by Captain Adelaer, advanced with design to cut off their passage,
the Corsairs having perceived them, made back as fast as they could, to the
main Sea again, the Wind being then North-North-East, de Ruiter used all
possible endeavors to get up with them, but night coming on, he lost sight of
them; However, some hours after having discovered them again, he boarded one of
them about 3 in the Morning, by the assistance of Oars, notwithstanding the
Calmness of the Weather. At his very first firing, the Turks got into their
Boat, and fled away, leaving no body on Board but two Portugueses that were in
the Ship. She was a very good Sailer of about 90 Tuns, that was taken by the
Turks near the Isle of Madera. The 2 others were Corsairs of Algiers, whereof
one carried 26, and the other 16 Guns, who made their escape by favor of a
fresh gale of Wind that soon carried them out of Reach. The next day toward
Evening, de Ruiter returned into Sally road again. In the mean while, the
Negotiation for a Treaty having been brought upon a good foot by the Deputies
on each side, the Turks stood firm to their Pretentions, which were, that they
should receive an indemnification for their Ship that was taken, till at last,
after several Conferences, the Treaty of Peace was concluded, and renewed on
the 22d. of October upon the following Articles, A Peace renewed ^ith Sally.
viz.

1. That His Highness, Sid Abdala, Ben Sid Mahumad Ben Bukar, Prince of Fez,
Lord of South and North Sally, should without delay restore to his former
Liberty, Consul David de Uries who was arrested for some misunderstanding that
happened to fall out.

2. That his said Highness should immediately give orders for the Releasing of
the Ship called the Tiger, and the Galliot de Ruiter, seized at Sally, and
likewise their Cargoe, as much as was yet remaining of them, or the Equivalent
of the profit arising from them, as likewise for the setting at liberty all the
Pilots and Mariners belonging to them.

3. That two men taken in a small Dutch Ship, called the Arms of Hinlopen, and
sold at Sally, should be presently freed out of slavery, and set at liberty.

4. That the States General of the United Provinces on their part should cause
to be restored to his Highness, that which had been seized, which should be
still in nature, or the profits which arose from the Ship, called the Hound,
taken near Mamora, by Rear Admiral Tromp the year before, upon the refusal the
said Ship had made, to render the usual salute, and show her Passports.

5. That their High and Mightinesses, to Indemnify his Highness for the loss of
the abovesaid Ship, should remit to him the full enjoyment of the Flute, called
the White Falcon, taken at Sea by those of Sally, and seized and detained to
that present day.

6. That the losses and damages caused to the Subjects of both parties by the
differences lately arisen between them, shall be rendered Common, and forgotten
on both sides.

7. That under this Common annulling of the losses and damages on both sides,
should not be comprehended the lawful right of Pilot Warebout, concerning the
Confiscation of his Ship and her lading, which the Administrators of Sally, had
engaged to pay according to the account that had been delivered in of them,
which should subsist till it were fully paid.

This Treaty was signed for the States General, by Consul de Vries, and Gilbert
de Vyant, Fiscal, or Treasurer of the Fleet, and lower, by Vice Admiral de
Ruiter, and sealed with his seal. On the Prince of Sally's side, it was signed
by Ibrahim Duque, and Aly Cordevees.

After this business thus dispatched, they proceeded to treat about the choice
of a signal by which the two parties might know one another Reciprocally when
they met at Sea. After which several Articles were drawn up in writing, in
order to render the Ancient Treaty of Peace the more firm and inviolable* but
because 'twas impossible for de Ruiter to make any longer stay before Sally, as
being obliged to return back again to the Streights, that project could not
then be finished only he promised, next year to come again to Sally, to pursue
the Execution of it and to put it to a finishing stroke. De Ruiter then having
appeased all things and secured the Peace on that side, unmoored from Sally the
2d of November, and sailed toward the Streights, and on the 10th. of the same
Month came to an Anchor in the road of Cadiz. Two days before the Captains
Vander Zaan, Bosch, and de Wild, had given chase to 3 Turkish Corsairs, one of
which being pursued by Bosch was stranded on the Coast to the Southward of
Larache, a small Town in the Kingdom of Fez about 6 miles from Arzila, from
whence being got off, she was taken. She proved a Flute of Lubeck called, the
Fortune, taken before by the Algerines. De Wild chased another which was a
Frigate of A^g^ers, carrying 30 Guns, and 250 men, which likewise run a ground
to the Southward of Larache, the Moors having quitted her, and fled away there
were found on board her 25 Chris^ian slaves who were freed thereby from the
y^ke of those Barbarians, and 7 Renegado's whose lives were spared, because
though it was in their power to have saved themselves with the Moors, they
refused to do it. But it being impossible to get the Frigate off from the Coast
which she was run upon, she was burnt. The third of these Corsairs being more
fortunate than the rest, saved her self by her swift sailing.

About the 15th. of November, de Wild and Zaalingen attackt an Algerine
Frigate, called the Shepherdess Commanded by a Christian Renegado of Amsterdam,
named Leendertsz, who defended himself vigorously had above 120 Moors killed on
board him, which so discouraged the others, that they begun to think of
yielding; but about 30 Christian Renegado's would not hear of laying down their
Arms, till the Hollanders had promised them by Oath, to grant them their lives.
Nay some of those wretches were so desperately bent, that they were already
gone down to clap fire into the Powder room to blow up themselves together with
the Hollanders that were entered upon the Deck, had they not been persuaded from
that dismal enterprise by fair words. There were found likewise in this Corsair
32 Christian slaves, whereof 17 were Dutch Men; 124 Moors or Turks were sold to
the Spaniards, 28 Christian Renegado's were condemned to the King of Spain's
Galleys, for Term of life; but the Captain Leendertsz was saved by the favor
and at the request of the Christian slaves, because of the Gentleness and
humanity he had used toward them, as likewise were two other Renegado's, one
whereof was Mounikendam, and the other, a Polander.

On the 20th of November, the Captains Vander Zaan, Bosch, and Adelaer, gave
chase again to a Brigantine, and a great Turkish Corsair, called, the Golden
Eagle, the last of which was chased upon the Coast near Arzila, where she was
believed to have been stranded, but having had nothing but the handle of her
Rudder broken, she slink'd away from the danger, and got out into the main Sea
again. Vice Admiral de Ruiter having divided his Squadron into 3 parts, set
sail toward the Streights Mouth, followed by de Wild, de Zaalingen, and
Adelaer, with design to cruize there against the Corsairs; he gave Orders at
the same time, to Rear-Admiral Verveen, and Cuptain Vander Zaan, to convoy to
the Northward of Cape Verd 3 Merchants richly laden, and bound for Amsterdam,
because he had heard, that Commander Colart was cruizing off of that Cape, with
4 or 5 French Privateers, and took indifferently all Ships he met with, without
having any respect to their Banner. The Captains, Sweers and Bosch had orders
to return to Sally, as well to reconduct thither one of the Prince of Sally's
Deputies, and de Vries, the Dutch Consul, who had been forced by the ill
Weather to stay on board of Sweers, as also to take in some Letters from the
Consul for the States. De Ruiter having chosen the Mouth of the Streights to be
the Rendezvous of all the Ships of his Squadron, sailed on the 29th. of the
same Month, toward Arzila, and having a far off descried two Ships at Anchor,
resolved to make up to them, upon the report made to him by Captain Leendertsz
late of the Corsair called the Shepherdess, That they were the Golden Eagle,
carrying 26 Guns, and 250 Men to which before he had given chase, and the St.
Catharine carrying 20 Guns, and 200 Men all Turks. Those Pirates had Anchored
very near the Town. De Ruiter charged them vigorously with his Artillery, and
the Infidels defended themselves with much obstinacy, till at last the St.
Catharine, being shot through and through, and leaking on all sides, sunk to
the bottom of the Sea: Then having grapled the Golden Eagle, he made himself
Master of her, and after the fight, carried her to Malaga. Out of those 2
Corsairs, there were 20 Christians delivered out of slavery, 50 Turks or Moors
made Prisoners, and all the rest of their Men either escaped to shore, or were
killed.

Vice Admiral de Ruiter, after he had brought the Corsairs of Barbary to their
duty, and freed the Sea from their Robberries, came on the 15th. of March, to
Anchor in the Road of Malaga, Amsterdam, dated the 29th of December of the
preceding Year, by which they testified themselves to be very well satisfied
at his happy Expedition into the Mediterranean, and Commanded him by virtue of
an Order from the States General, immediately upon the reading of that Letter,
to get all the Ships of his Squadron together, and to return with all diligence
into the Ports of the United Provinces, without having regard to any other
Consideration, how pressing soever it were; permiting him however to stop 8 or
10 days at most in Cadiz road, to wait for the Spanish Gallions, that were to
come thither, and to take under his Convoy, a great Number of Merchant Ships
richly laden and homewards bound for Holland. Having then set sail in Obedience
to those Orders, he arrived to an Anchor in Cadiz Road the 20th. of that Month,
and sailed away again from thence on the 15th. of April. The Spanish Gallions
arriving at Cadiz 2 days after him, about 22 sail of Merchant Ships joined
themselves to the Admiral's Flag. with whom happily continuing his voyage
homeward, he arrived in the Texel the 2d of May, after having met in his way,
Withorn Comadore of a Squadron of 7 English Men of War who were looking sharp
after the Merchant Fleet laden with Silver, which he had the charge of
Convoying. But Withorn f^nding himself too weak to attack him, stood away of to
Sea, being desperately vexed that he had mist so fair a hit. De Ruiter gained in
this Expedition so much the more honor, in that he took 6 great Turkish
Corsairs, and 2 Brigantines; sunk or burnt 3 more of their vessels, and got off
and saved one of them, that was run ashore; delivered at the same time a
considerable Number of Christian slaves from the servitude of those Barbarians;
pacified the troubles that were arising with those of Sally, and at length
terminated so many happy successes by Convoying home prosperously into his
Country, a vast Treasure in spite of the vigilance and avidity of the English.

About that time, a War arose in the North between Charles Gustavus King of
Swedeland, and John Casimir King of Poland, which prepared new affairs for the
Hollanders, and gave great Umbrage to the States General of the United
Provinces, who looking upon those Troubles as likely to cause a great
interruption, if not a ruin to their Commerce on that side, thought fit to
contribute to the preservation of Dantzick and of Prussia, on which Swedeland
might easily at that time seize, unless they timely opposed it. The States
therefore knew of what great Consequence it was, to keep the Sound open, to
have a free passage into the Baltic Sea when they pleased, resolved, to Equip
out a Fleet, and to give the Chief Command of it to Lieutenant Admiral Opdam.
But whilst that was preparing, not to lose time, they Ordered De Ruiter, and
Vice Admiral Florisz, and Rear Admiral Tromp, to get all the Men of War
together that were ready, and to sail away into those parts before the Grand
Fleet. Most part of those Ships were Equipt at Amsterdam, and some of them in
North- Holland; and some Regular Troops were put on board them, to succor
Dantzick, in case it should be besieged by the Swedes. De Ruiter then having
divided his Fleet into 2 Squadrons, whereof that which bore the Admiral's Flag
was under his own Conduct, and the other, under the Command of Vice Admiral
Florisz, set sail the last day of May, and on the 8th. of the next Month, came
to an Anchor near the Sound; where as soon as he was arrived, he went on shore
at Elsenore, accompanied by Tromp and Florisz, and thence went on to Copenhagen
to confer with their High and Mightinesses Ambassadors there, who were at that
time Mr. Van Beuniegen, Pensioner of Amsterdam, Amerongen, and Van Viersen:
After which, they were all three to make a visit to the Chief State Minister of
the Kingdom, to the Chancellor, and to Admiral Lindenhout, and then returned
again on board their Fleet; which in the mean while entered the Sound, in
expectation of new Orders, and of a reinforcement with Admiral Opdam. The 13th.
of the same Month, 2 fresh men of War, four on the 16th. and afterward several
more joined the Admirals Flag, and reinforced the Fleet. On the 27th. 3 Men of
War more were discovered approaching the Sound, which proved to be Admiral
Opdam, Captain Van Nes and Kuiper, who joined the Fleet the same evening. The
Orders Lieutenant Admiral Opdam received from the States on that occasion,
Imported, That he should secure the Commerce of the North; That he should
defend and Protect by force of Arms, the States Merchant Ships against, all
that should attempt upon their liberty; impowring him besides to Free the
Baltic Sea from the oppression of all those that should offer to disturb its
Navigation. Afterward he received new orders to go and Anchor with all his
forces in the Road before Dantzick, to prevent the Swedish Fleet from blocking
up the passages of it, and to facilitate the going in and coming out of the
Dutch Merchant Ships, by taking them into his Protection; And in all other
things, to regulate himself according to the Commission he had in general, to
oppose all manner of attempts. Mr. Opdam going likewise presently ashore,
speeded away to Copenhagen, where he had a Conference with the States
Ambassadors, after which he had Audience of the King of Denmark, and received
all imaginable honors from the Grandees of the Court. And his Danish Majesty
being willing to give some marks of the concern he had in the laudable
intentions of the States his Masters, in sending him for the Protection of
Dantzick, honored him with the Collar of the Order of the Elephant, which was
carried him the 19th. of July, by the Viceroy of Norway, after he was returned
on board his Fleet.

Vice Admiral de Wit putting out likewise from the Meuse, with several men of
War more, came and joined the Fleet, which afterward setting sail, arrived at
Copenhagen on the 29th. of the said Month, and the next day, the States
Ambassadors, advising them to continue on their way, they set sail again to
enter into the Baltic Sea, so that 6 days after, the whole Fleet came to an
Anchor in Dantzick road, being 42 sail of Frigates and men of War,; viz. 7 of
Rotterdam, 24 of Amsterdam, 7 of North- Holland, 2 of Zealand, and 2 of
Friesland.

At the arrival of this Potent Fleet, the Castle of Termund, which is at the
Mouth of the Vistula in the Gulf of Dantzick, saluted them with several Guns,
and immediately after, some Eminent Persons came in a Galliot from the Town on
board the Admiral, to salute him, and to let him know the Joy the whole regency
was in at his arrival. Mr. Fabricius Pensionary of the Town, and famous for his
great learning, Complimented Lieutenant Admiral Opdam, from the Magistrates,
and invited him in their name, to be pleased to come ashore into their Town;
and the public rejoycings and other transports of joy which all the People
showed upon that occasion, lasted several days. The States had had notice given
them some time before, as from the King of Sweden, that his said Majesty had
formed a design to block up the Town of Dantzick, and afterward to besiege it,
and that he prayed their High and Mightinesses to be pleased to suspend their
Commerce during that time, and to forbid all Merchant Ships belonging to their
State, to go thither to take in any freight. But the unexpected arrival of that
Fleet broke all the designs of Swedeland, and though it was sent out for no other
end but to free the Baltic Sea from the Yoke of that power, yet it was strong
enough to make all the fair hopes that Crown had conceived of Compassing so
great an Enterprise as that vanished to into smoke, and that without any
effusion of blood. On the 1st. of September following there appeared likewise
at Sea, a Fleet of 9 Danish Men of War under the Conduct of Admiral Lindenhout,
which came also and Anchored before Dantzick. They had the same design as had
the Dutch Fleet, which was to defend that Hanseatick Town and the Freedom of
Navigation. In the mean time, the States Deputies, Slingeland, Van Dorp, de
Hubert, and Jabrandt being entered into a Negotiation at Elbing with the King of
Swedens Plenipotentiaries about a Treaty of Alliance, the Dutch Fleet that
continued still before Dantzick Contributed much to advance it, so that it was
concluded and signed on the 1st. of September, on both sides.

The States knowing the abovesaid Treaty with Swedeland, was upon the point of
being conclu^ed, thought fit to recall Lieutentant Admiral Opdam with 30 of the
biggest Ships of War of the Fleet, and to leave Rear Admiral Tromp in his
place, with a Squadron only of 12 o^ the lightest Ships. And the Letters that
contained this order were delivered him at Dantzick, at the beginning of
October.

The Danish Squadron was already sailed away ever since the 25th. of September,
for Copenhagen, whither the King of Denmark had recalled it, as being ill
satisfied at the Treaty Concluded with Swedeland without his privity. In fine,
on the 6th. of October, the most part of the Troops that were on board the
Fleet, were removed, and distributed into the 12 Ships that were to stay in the
road; only 280 men which there was no room to place there, entered into the Town
by the Magistrates leave, and toward the Evening, the Fleet sailed away. But
before his departure, Lieutenant Admiral Opdam received a present from the
Magistrates of a very fine Silver Ewer with a crossed handle, valued at 600
Crowns.

Not long after the departure of the Grand Fleet, Vice Admiral Tromp received
likewise orders from the States, to quit the Baltic Sea, and to return into
Holland, with his Squadron. So that having landed 1200 Musketeers he had on
boa^d his Fleet, they were placed in the Town to help to guard it, together
with those that had been sent thither before. After which Tromp writ the
following Letter to the States, to give them Advice of his departure in
pursuance of their Commands, and of the taking of General Coningsmark.

Rear Admiral Tromp's Letter to the States.
SInce it has pleased their High and Mightinesses, to let me know their
Intention, by their Letter of the 9th of October last, by which, they order me
to put the Troops embarked on the Fleet into Dantzick, to help to preserve that
place, and afterward to set sail with my Squadron back for Holland; in
pursuance of that Order, we put out from that Road the 30th. of October, having
the day before received General Koningsmark, who was brought in a Flute, and
two days before that, another vessel; there being in both those vessels about
200 Scotch Soldiers. The affair passed in this manner: Tbe Soldiers that were
in the first of these Ships revolted against their Officers, saying they were
inrol'd for the Service of Dantzick and not for the King of Swedeland; they
were by the ill weather forced to Anchor near Heel, where they constrained
their Officers and their Pilot, to carry them to Dantzick. Being come into the
Vistula, they reported, that General Koningsmark lay at Anchor in the same
place, upon which Advice 3 Galliots were sent toward him, who attackt him
before noon, so that he was made prisoner in sight of our Fleet. The same
Evening I went with the Governor of the Town, to visit him in the Fort,
Termund; and he told us, he came from Stetin, with design to go to Pilau. There
was in this Rencounter, one man killed, and 5 wounded. To report the misfortune
of General Koningsmark with its principal Circumstances, you must know, that at
his departure from Stetin, there was a ship which had on board her, 130 Scotch
Soldiers, that set sail at the same time with him, steering her course toward
Pilau; but a Tempest, and a contrary Wind having kept them back 10 days upon
the Sea, the Ship being over laden with soldiers, fell a Leaking so very much
that she could no longer keep the Sea, which obliged the soldiers to take arms
against their Officers, and the Master of the ship, whom they forced at length
to Land them at Dantzick, where they informed the Magistrates whereabouts
Koningsmark lay at Anchor. Upon that Report, they presently manned out 3
Galliots which were detacht against him on the 20th. of October, about break of
day, and between 9 and 10 a Clock before noon, attackt his ship, just when
General Koningsmark was busied in hearing of a Sermon. The preacher perceiving
the Enemies, gave notice of it to the General, who thereupon Commanded the
Pilot to cut the Anchor-Cables, and with all possible haste to make all the
sail away he could: But the Pilot answering him, that it was impossible to do
it, he gave Orders to his men to do every man his best to defend themselves;
But before they could get into a posture of defense the Enemies boarded him,
Koningsmark retiring into the Master's Cabin, demanded Quarter, which was
granted to him and all his Men. So that this General, as great a Commander as
he was, yet for want of skill in the Art of fighting at Sea; that skirmish
being perhaps the first of that kind he ever was in, was forced to yield
himself at the discretion of the Victors, who carried him prisoner to Dantzick.

But to return again to the States Fleet, Lieutenant Admiral Opdam entered on
the 6th. of November into Helvoetsluys with a part of the men of War that
composed the Fleet, and the rest of them almost at the same time got into the
Vlie; and some weeks after, Rear-Admiral Tromp followed with his Squadron.

Whilst the States General were endeavoring with so much success to pacify
the troubles of the North, the Christian French and Portuguese Privateers, and
the Turkish Pirates domineered in the Mediterranean, exercising without
control all sorts of Robbery; so that the Hollanders Trading suffered
extremely from them by the continual losses of their ships: Which obliged the
States to sen^ de Ruiter thither before Winter, with a Squadron composed of the
ships Commanded by the Captains, Brakel, Kampen, and Oms, who were to be joined
by de Wild, and Vander Zaan, who were then toward Cadiz, as likewise by the
Amsterdam men of War that were in those parts, in case de Ruiter stood in need
of more considerable Forces for the Execution of his designs. He therefore set
sail the 24th. of December, having under his Convoy a Merchant Fleet of about
80 sail, bound for France, Portugal, Spain, or the Streights, January, he
arrived at Cadiz, where he Anchored the 28th. of the same Month, he set sail
again, and past the Streights, with 5 Merchant ships; two days after meeting
with de Wild, and Vander Zaan, between Gibraltar and Malaga, he showed them
the States Order for them to join his Admiral Flag: On the 19th of February, he
arrived in Legorn Road, with 9 Merchant ships, whilst the rest separating
themselves from the Squadron, steered their Course toward Malaga and Alicant
whither they were bound. On the 26th. unmooring again, he was informed by a
Hamburgher, that 2 French Privateers, had appeared in those parts, and that
three more were Equipping at Thoulon.

The losses the Privateers had caused to the Hollanders for several years past,
in the Neighboring Seas, and especially in the Mediterranean were very great,
and sensible. For when the Sieur Boreel, Ambassador from the United Provinces
arrived at the Court of France toward the end of the year 1650, there were
already 168 Dutch Merchant ships taken by French Capers, since which, they were
reckoned to have taken 160 more, so that the whole Number of all those prizes
amounted to near 328 Ships which the Privateers of that Nation had taken,
Detained, Pillaged, or Confiscated without any other grounds than th^se of a
manifest usurpation. These damages were reckoned at above 30 Millions of
Livers. France even then in those early days, when she was so miserably torn
and rent with intestine divisions, yet begun to make her Neighbors feel some
effects of her Ambition, and in a time when one would have thought she had more
need of Courting the Amity of the United Provinces, yet took a hank to attempt
upon their Liberty by all those injustices; which ought to have been a warning
piece to the Hollanders, and an assured presage for the time to come, to have
made them fear much greater injustices from her afterward whenever she should
become Absolute Mistress of her then discontented people; what instances soever
the States General could make to obtain satisfaction for so many damages, the
Kings Council, and the Commissioners of the Admiralty took a Resolution to
Restore nothing; so that what great justice soever the Ambassador Boreel had on
his side, to solicit the release of them in the name of the States, and in
spite of all the diligence he could use for that end, he never was able to
obtain any thing, the indulgence shown by the Court to those Privateers its
Subjects, was so great that it encouraged them so extremely, that there was no
possibility of obtaining the release of any one Prize. Whereupon, the States
General being at length wearied out with making so many fruitless Complaints,
and apprehending lest their over great Patience might ruin their Commerce and
their Subjects, they resolved at last to free themselves from all those
Robberies by force of Arms, and to make use of reprisals. And accordingly they
Ordered de Ru^ter to attack the French Men of War that came out of the Ports of
Provence to make excursions in the Mediterranean, and to do all he could to
take or sink them. De Ruiter then had been informed, as we have said, by a
Hamburger, that 2 French Privateers that had Plundered him were still roving
about those Seas. And on the 28th. of February at break of day, he discovered 2
ships near the Isle of Corsica, at about 3 miles distance from him, which
seemed to look sharp after him, but when they came nearer within about a Mile
of him, they begun to find they had to deal with men of War, and not with
Merchant ships, which made them betake themselves to flight. However, about
noon the ships of both Parties met between Gorgona and the Island of Corsica,
without firing so much as a Gun on either side. Then de Ruiter Commanded the
Captain of the biggest Caper to enter into his Boat, and come on board him; but
the Captain contented himself to send his Lieutenant whom de Ruit^^ detained,
sending word to the Captain again that if he refused to obey his summons, he
would immediately board him, and would make him suffer the punishment due to
his obstinacy: At this second Command he entered into the Boat, and came on
board the Admiral. Whilst de Ruiter and de Wild kept close to the great Caper,
the Captain Ooms, and Vander Zaan gave chase to the other, and likewise
Commanded the Captain to come on board the Admiral, which he having done,
Vander Zaan detained him likewise. So that the 2 Privateers seeing there was no
hopes to escape, drew in their Guns out of their port-holes, and throwing down
their Arms, submitted themselves to the Clemency of the Victor. They were 2
Swedish Ships which some time before had been presented to the French King, but
were afterward Armed out by some Private Persons, and employed in the Pyrating
Trade. The biggest of them called the Queen, had on board her 230 men, and 32
guns, whereof 30 were brass, the lesser which was called the Hunter, carried
182 men, and 28 guns, whereof 18 were brass. The French Seamen that were on
board them, were Conducted in 3 Barks, to Marseilles, but the Captains and
Lieutenants were kept by the Hollanders, and their ships carried to Cadiz.

The news of the taking of these 2 Privateers made a great noise in France, the
Court there looking upon it as the most hanious attempt that de Ruiter could
have committed in time of profound Peace. And Cardinal Mazarine who then had
the chief management of all the Affairs of the Kingdom, pretended to make it
pass for an outrage that deeply wounded the Glory of his Master, and was a
cruel stroke at his Grandeur, and at that deference the United Provinces ought
to have for it. They gave out, that those ships were the Kings, and that it was
an intolerable piece of Boldness, to offer to attackt and seize them. And
therefore in revenge, Express orders were sent to all the Harbors in the
Kingdom, immediately to seize all Ships, Merchandises, and effects belonging to
the Hollanders; which was executed accordingly. The Haughty and Imperious
manner with which the Court of France treated the United Provinces on such an
occasion as that, surprised them so much the more, because the King having at
first imputed that pretended Hostile attempt wholly to De Ruiter, believed he
had done it without the knowledge or consent of his Masters, who expected
nothing less, than to see their Subjects to be ill treated by the confiscation
of the ships and goods they had in that Kingdom. And that way of proceeding
seemed so much the harder upon them, in that the French Court had pass^d to the
Execution of it without any warning given to the States, or desiring to know of
them, whether they approved or disapproved of that Action of de Ruiter, and
without so much as suffering their High and Mightinesses, after having so often
reiterated by their Ambassadors so many great and just Complaints of the
damages they suffered by the French Privateers, to do themselves Justice. The
States of Holland, though they had the greatest interest of any of the
Provinces, in a Commerce with France, were for entirely forbidding all Trade
with that Kingdom; after they had seized and stopped all French ships and effects
in Holland, and all the other Provinces. But the States General not being so
much concerned at what past in France, as the Province of Holland, That
Resolution was let fall, and came to nothing. All that they could do, was only,
to prevail with the States General, to Summon Deputies to the Hague, from all
the Colleges of the Admiralty, to Consult, about Arming out a Fleet of 48 men
of War, which they resolved to put out to Sea; with Orders, to give private
notice to all Pilots and Masters of Merchant ships, to avoid the Ports of
France. The States writ also to Mr. Boreel their Ambassador in France, to
represent to His Majesty the injustice that was done them, in order to obtain a
discharge of the ships, and Merchandises, that were seized; as likewise all the
Insupportable Robberies Committed upon their Subjects for several years
together by the French Privateers; without forgetting the 2 Capers taken by de
Ruiter. But Mr. Boreel had prevented these Orders of the States before he
received them. For immediately after the abovementioned Resolution of the
Court, he demanded Audience of the King, in Order to Represent to him his
Reasons. Which being granted him, He Remonstrated very fully and at large, That
it had been but fit before his Majesty had proceeded any further, to notify to
the States General of the United Provinces, his Mrs. the reasons that induced
the Court to take Resolutions so prejudicial to them, that the said States on
their side, might enter into Consideration how to give his Majesty all
agreeable satisfaction on that Subject. After which, he excused de Ruiter, as
far as the Information he had been able to get of the matter, would permit, and
according to the reports that were spread abroad of his late Enterprise, and of
that attempt which was the Subject of the Courts Complaint. He passed on next
to the damages the Subjects of their High and Mightinesses had suffered for so
many years, by the continual depredations which the French Privateers had
Committed, and continued still to Commit upon their Merchant Ships,
notwithstanding the so often repeated instances to the Contrary, in the Court
of France, and always in vain. He added, that in the space of 9 years, as we
have said, there had been about 328 Merchant Ships belonging to the States
Subjects, Taken or Plundered; He made mention likewise of 58 sentences given
against French Privateers, which he had still in his hands, without ever having
been able to get any of them put in Excution, through the fault of the Courts
of justice that were too indulgent to those Privateers, which made them so
insolent and seditious, that they had ventured even to attempt upon the
Authority of his Majesty's Commissaries at Thoulon, by driving them away like
miserable wretches; that the Dutch Consul named, de la Fleur, who resided at
Thoulon, was attackt in the streets by those villains, who charged him with
unmercifull blows, and would doubtless have Assassinated him, if he had not
found means to escape out of the reach of their fury, with great hazard of his
life; and all that, without any other Reason, than because he had delivered
into the hands of his Majesty's Commissioners, the sentences rendered against
them, in Order to get them put effectually in Execution. In fine, he entreated
the King, that sufficient time might be granted him, to inform the States his
Masters, of the Subject of his Majesty's Complaint; and that in the mean while,
he would be pleased to suspend the Execution of the Orders that were given to
seize the Ships and effects of his Nation; as not at all doubting, but that the
States would give his Majesty all reasonable satisfaction.

The King having heard him very quietly, made him this Answer: I have sent
Orders to ^r. de Thou, who is on his Journey to Holland to demand Reparation
from the States for the Hostile attempt committed by de Ruiter, and when I
shall have received satisfaction thereupon, I know what I have to do concerning
your demand: But at present I have nothing to Answer to it. Mr. de Thou arrived
at the Hague, the 25th. of April, and in the first Audience he had of the
States General, he loudly Resounded the Complaints of his Master concerning the
taking of the 2 Privateers, demanding, without offering to speak of other
things, they should be forthwith restored without any further delay, and that
de Ruiter should be severely punished. To which they answered him, that as to
what concerned the taking of the said two ships, and the Conduct of the States
in that matter, they pretended to give him such a reasonable explication
thereupon as should make it so clear to him, that he himself would attribute
all the Justice to the States. In the mean while, the States of Holland among
other propositions made there, had Voted in the Assembly of the States General,
that to oblige the French King to submit to reason, it was necessary to forbid
all Commerce in any of the Merchandises of France; to stop and seize all Ships
and effects belonging to the French, and to take all their Ships they could
meet with at Sea. That further it would be requisite, to Augment the Fleet they
had resolved to Arm out, with 12 Ships of War more, to render it the more
Potent. In Consequence of all which Resolutions, an Ordinance was publish d
signed the 26th. of April, by virtue of which, all the Ships, Merchandises,
Moneys, Effects, Letters of Exchange, and Debts, which should be found to
belong to the French in the Province of Holland, were to be seized and
Confiscated. After which, the States General, at the solicitation of the
States of Holland, published another Ordinance dated the 11th of May, by which
they forbad the importation of Salt, Wines, and Fruits, and all other
Commodities of the growth of France, and all Merchandises of their Manufactures.

In fine, there was a great deal of reason to fear, that these growing troubles
would quickly degenerate into a cruel War between the Crown of France, and the
United Provinces: But those two powers reflecting seriously upon the mischiefs
and Calamities such a War would assuredly bring upon the people on both sides,
France became more tractable and peaceable; And Holland having no other end
than to preserve Peace with that Crown, it was at last agreed on both sides,
that the Ships and Effects of both Nations should be mutually released; that
the two Ships the Queen and the Hunter, taken by de Ruiter should be restored,
and that for the future, such proper measures should be taken, as might be
effectual to prevent the happening of any more like disorders.

During these intervening transactions, de Ruiter, lying at an Anchor, in Cadiz
Road, Received on the 7th. of April, a Re-inforcement of 6 Men of War,
Commanded by the Captains, Verveen, Vander Hulst, Sweers, Kampen, Schatter, and
Adelaar. So that having then under his Conduct a Squadron of 12 men of War, he
resolved, to go again before Sally. In Order to which, he had beforehand
written in the Month of January preceding, to de Vries, Consul of the Dutch
Nation for the Coast of Barbary, residing at Sally, that he intended, in
pursuance of the Orders of his Masters, to come to Sally again at the spring of
the year, to put a finishing hand to the Treaty of Peace already begun the year
before; and that therefore for that effect, he charged him in the name of the
States, to give notice of it to Prince Sid Abdala, and to dispose all things in
such a manner, that at his arrival, they might proceed on both sides to the
speedy Execution and Completing of it without any delay. He accordingly
arrived before Sally, on the 18th of April, two days after 4 Ships he had
detacht out of his Squadron to give chase to the Corsairs, had rejoyned him:
And hearing at his arrival, that the Treaty was already concluded, he went back
and Anchored again at Cadiz.

In September, Vice Admiral de Ruiter received Letters from the States General,
and from the Admiralty, with orders to cruize upon the Coasts of Portugal, to
join the Fleet of 13 men of War which the States were sending that way under
the Command of Lieutenant Admiral Opdam. For the differences the United
Provinces had had with France, having engaged them for their security, to Arm
out that Force, they were willing to make use of it after they were appeased to
bring Portugal to reason, that it might not be said, they had been at all that
great expense for nothing. The States pretended by the way of Arms, to force
the King of Portugal, to make Reparation for all the Hostilities Committed by
the Portugueses upon their Subjects in Brasile and other places; For which
effect, they gave notice to de Ruiter: that whilst he was waiting for
Lieutenant Admiral Opdam's Fleet, he should cruize against the Portuguese Fleet
that was to come from Brasile, and against all other Ships belonging to that
Nation, and should endeavor to take them, in order to facilitate thereby an
Accommodation with that Crown, and force it to give an account for all its
usurpations; which obliged them likewise, to send some Deputies along with
Lieutentant Admiral Opdam, into Portugal; adding, That if the Portuguese Ships
offered to make any resistance, de Ruiter should fight them, and do his best to
take, or sink them.

The Fleet designed for the Ocean, under the Command of Lieutenant Admiral
Opdam; sailed then out of the Meuse, the 5th. of September Consisting of 12 Men
of War, 1 Advice Yacht, and 1 Flute laden with Provisions. They came to an
Anchor on the 25th. in the mouth of the Tagus near Lisbon. The same day the
Sieurs Ten Hove and de Wit, Envoys from the States, going into a Yacht, went up
the River, and two days after, were admitted to an Audience of the Queen Mother
who then held the Reins of the Government, assisted by some Grandees of the
Kingdom, during the minority of the King her Son. The Envoys then Represented
their Grievances, and demanded restitution of all that had been taken from the
States in Brasile and elsewhere, and an indemnification for all their losses.
But the Portugueses after some Conferences, answered, that they were resolved
to Restore nothing? No, not so much as one foot of Land. So positive an Answer
as that put an end in an instant to their Negotiation. Some days before, that
Court had put out an Order, to forbid all the Dutch Ships at Lisbon, and St.
Hubes, to stir out of those Ports till further Order. In the mean while, the
States Envoys set on work the Dutch Consul, named Vander Hoeve; who used all
imaginable ipmortunities at the Court of Portugal, to obtain a Liberty of
Commerce, since as he alleged, the States Fleet had not yet Committed any Act
of Hostility against the Portugueses, Representing to them at the same time,
that the seizure and stoppage they had newly made of the Dutch Ships, was like
to be the Plreudium of a world of Mischiefs.: But with all he could say, he
could obtain nothing of them but a few fair promises without any effect. The
Envoys therefore seeing they did but lose their time there to no purpose,
Demanded their Audience of leave: But Answer was made them, that the Queen was
so indisposed that she was not in a Condition to give them Audience at that
time. Upon which, they delivered to Pedro Vierra de Silva, the Secretary of
State, a Letter sealed up, telling him withal, that they were very sensibly
troubled, they could not take leave of the Queen in the usual Form, by reason
of her Majesty's indisposition, and that therefore they prayed him to deliver
her Majesty that Letter, which in substance imported, that since they had used
all the means they could, to terminate the differences between the two Nations
in an amicable manner without any success, they had Order from the States their
Masters, to declare War against the Crown of Portugal, as accordingly they did;
after which going again on board their Yacht, they joined the Dutch Fleet the
23d. of October, where they informed Lieutenant Admiral Opdam of all that had
passed. On the 26th. of the same Month, de Ruiter's Squadron joined the
Admirals Flag, and the Fleet by that Junction, was reinforced to the Number of
27 or 28 men of War. During the time that Lieutenant Admiral Opdam continued on
the Coasts of Lisbon, some Portuguese Ships or other vessels laden with their
Merchandises were taken; but the Booty taken off of Roxont was much more
considerable; For in the night time, a Part of the Portuguese Fleet of about 40
sail coming from Brasile Laden with Sugar, fell into the Dutch Fleet, and tho
the darkness of the night favored their fight, by stealing them from their
Enemies fight, yet 20 of them were taken. There were still 44 more with their
Convoy that remained behind, being kept back by a Tempest, against whom the
Hollanders for some days cruiz'd, watching for their coming, but seeing they
appeared not, and being uncertain whether they were not already gotten into
some safe Port, they took a Resolution to prevent Winter, by retiring home to
their own Country, before the Stormy Weather came in. And accordingly, they
arrived in Holland with all their Prizes at the beginning of December.

The year following, de Ruiter was sent again to the Coast of Portugal, with a
Fleet of 22 Ships of War; Portuguese considering of what great Consequence it
was for them, to preserve their Sea Forces, and how dangerous to hazard them in
a Battle, kept their Fleet within their Ports, being persuaded, that Winter
would, as it did last year, force the Hollanders to quit their Coasts; so that
de Ruiter was able to do them no other harm that Expedition, than only to
interrupt their Commerce, and alarm their whole Country.

We have above related, what means the United Provinces used, to break the
designs of Swedeland, in the year 1656, and to free Dantzick, and the Baltic
Sea from the oppression of that Power. That War which had made the States so
uneasy, and put them to so much expense, was followed by another much more
bloody and dangerous. For Frederick the III. King of Denmark, seeing the
Swedish Monarch Employed with his whole Forces in prosecuting the War he had
with Poland, and considering, that was a fair occasion for him to strike in,
and Revenge his Father, Christiern the Vth's Quarrel, who about 15 years before
was oppressed by his Arms, and had part of his Dominions taken from him, he
without any hesitation, declared himself, being inflamed on one side, with the
desire of Revenge, and on the other, put forward by the secret allurements of a
certain Foreign Power. And accordingly marching his Army into the Country of
Bremen under the Command of General Bilde, he attackt and took several places
belonging to the Swedes. But Fortune that had gone along with his Arms in their
happy beginning proving afterward Jadish to him, deserted him to that degree,
that he soon saw himself at the point of losing all his Dominions. For Charles
Gustavus, King of Swedeland, Quitting Poland immediately upon that News, came
hastening to the Assistance of what more nearly concerned him, and fell with all
his forces into Hostein belonging to Denmark, so that by that Diversion, he
forced General Bilde to Quit the Duchy of Bremen, and to retire to
Fredericksode. But that place being situated upon the little Belt that
separates the Isle of Funen from the Firm land of Jutland, was soon reduced
under the obedience of Swedeland. King Gustavus stopped not the Career of his
Conquests there, but passing his Army which was almost all Horse, over the Ice,
he entered the Isle of Funen, where he put to the Sword all that opposed his
Triumphant Arms: In that passage, the Ice happening to break in a certain place,
2 Ensigns and the King of Swedens Coach were swallowed up. Odonsee, the Capital
Town of the Island yielded without resistance, and the Town of Nyburg was also
taken.

King Charles Gustavus being eager to carry the Terror of Arms his yet further,
Consulted with his Generals, to resolve, whether it were practicable for him to
pass his Army over the Ice, to enter into the Isle of Zealand. But they being
now to pass the Grand Belt, which is an Arm of the Sea about 4 hours march
over, that Enterprise seemed to them extremely Rash and Dangerous, because if
the Ice should happen to break, the whole Army would be in hazard of being
swa^lowed, or if any part of it should be so happy as to escape, they would be
shut up in that Isle till the spring time. But Gustavus, who was a Courageous
and Daring Prince, was willing to prove Fortune that had so far accompanied his
Arms, and resolved to attempt that undertaking* which he looked upon as what
would Complete all his Labors. In the mean while Sr. Thomas Meadow Ambassador
from the Protector Cromwell, at the Court of Denmark, desirous to put a stop to
the Conquests of that Prince, dispatched a Courier to Funen, with Letters in
which he made him some overtures for Peace. King Gustavus observing, that the
Courier had past upon the Ice over the Grand Belt on horse back, concluded, it
would be strong enough to bear his Army, and therefore fin^ing, that the cold
Augmented, instead of abating, he advanced the very next morning without
Remaining any longer in suspense, toward the Isle Langeland, and from thence
into the Country of Laland, where the Town of Naskou was reduced to his
obedience. From thence he carried his Arms into the Isle of Falster, where he
took the Fort Royal, Nikoping, after which, having crossed the Belt, he entered
into the Isle of Zealand, that is to say, into the heart of the King of
Denmarks Dominions, and immediately got possession of the Town of Wisburg, and
was just ready to march at the head of his Army, before Copenhagen, when the
Ambassador from the Court of England arrived, to present him a Mediation for a
Peace. At his first interviews with him, King Charles Gustavus finding himself
in the midst of so many Prosperities, refused it, but at last, growing more
tractable, he consented to a Project of Peace that was drawn up and Concluded
at Toustrup the 28th. of February, and on the 8th. of March following, after it
had been more amply examined, it was ratified at Rotschild. That Treaty was
altogether disadvantagious to the King of Denmark, and to the United Provinces,
because it was therein agreed between the two Princes of the North, to shut up
the Sound, and suffer no Foreign Man of War to pass into the Baltic Sea.
Besides, the King of Denmark by reason of the Conquests Gustavus had newly
made, to yield up to him the Propriety of a good part of his Dominions, namely
Ho^land, Schoonen, Blecking, Bornholm, Bahus, and Drontheim. And though these
Conditions were very hard to Denmark, yet the Swede was not content with them,
but threatened to enter a second time into the Isle of Zealand, to besiege
Copenhagen, and to reduce the whole Kingdom under his obedience, if the King of
Denmark did not fully satisfy all points of the Treaty of Rotschild. The
Article of which that obliged them to shut up the passage of the Sound against
all Foreign Ships of War, caused new Umbrages, because the Danes would by no
means consent to it. Whereupon at last, the K. of Sweden being desirous fully
to gratify his Ambition, and push forward his great designs to their utmost
extent, made a descent in the Month of August, with a powerful Army into the
Isle of Zealand, and whilst his Troops were landing there, he made his Fleet
advance before Copenhagen, to form the siege of it; which was so effectually
done, that it may be said, that if the Hollanders had not timely succor'd it,
in all appearance, the Triumphant Gustavus would have reduced that Capital City
to his obedience, and put a Period to the Kingdom of Denmark, though formerly its
Mistress; so great a Vicissitude there is in the Fortunes of States and
Kingdoms!

The Affairs of the North being in that ticklish Condition, the States of the
United Provinces made serious Reflections upon what might happen in the Time to
come, and thought upon freeing the Baltic Sea from the Oppression of
Swedeland, by sending speedy and powerful Succors to the King of Denmark, who
was on the Point, otherwise, in all Appearance, to lose all his Dominions. For
the Security of their Commerce in the North, that supplied them with a great
part of their Riches, and with Naval Stores, and other Necessaries for Building
and Maintaining their Shipping, and Supporting their Sea-power; by which they
were enabled to carry on their Traffic all over the rest of the World, and to
secure indeed their all, both by Sea and Land, wholly depending upon their
brisk and timely Interposition, in that critical Juncture, suffered them no
longer to hesitate in their Resolutions. And therefore the States determined in
so pressing an occasion, to assemble all the Ships of War, that were in a
Condition to put to Sea, in order to form a considerable Fleet; the chief
Command of which was conferred upon Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam; the other General
Officers were, the Vice-Admirals de Wit, and Florisz. They embarked also on
Board that Fleet Thirty eight Companies of Regular Infantry, in all about Two
thousand Men, with design to throw some of them into Copenhagen, and the rest
into the Castle of Kronenburg, upon the Sound. The Fleet then being equipped
with an incredible Diligence, Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam set sail the 17th of
October; it was composed of 38 Ships of War, and six Flutes, laden with
Ammunition and Provisions, of four Fireships, and six Galleots.

About the end of the same Month, the Fleet arrived to the North-east of
Jutland: But in the mean while, the Castle of Kronenburg had surrendered to the
Swedes, on the 26th of September, after a Siege of three Weeks, and Copenhagen
it self was briskly pressed. The King of Denmark being then in Person in that
his Capital City, animated by his Presence, the Soldiers and Burgers, to make a
vigorous Resistance, flattering them with the Hopes of seeing themselves in a
short time delivered by the Hollanders: But the Swedes, as we have said, having
made themselves Masters of the Castle of Kronenburg, had shut up the Sound with
their Fleet, so that the Dutch Fleet was forced of necessity to open its way
through the midst of that of the Enemy's, which was near of an equal Force with
theirs, and to endure all the Fire of both the Castles, on each Side, that
defended and stopped up the Passage of that Strait. It Is true, the Danger was
very great, but the Attempt was glorious, since it aimed at no less than at the
Deliverance of a distressed King; who, after having lost all his Dominions, was
ready to fall himself into the Hands of his Enemies. The 3d of November, the
Dutch Fleet, by a contrary Wind, was obliged to anchor behind the Lap, at the
Mouth of the Sound. Wrangel, Admiral of Swedeland, had under his Flag Thirty
eight Men of War, which were mostly manned by English and Sco^ch Seamen; and
his Design was to dispute the Passage of the Sound, against the Hollanders. In
the mean while, Lieutenant Admiral Opdam, who waited for nothing else but a
favorable Wind, to advance, finding it on the 8th chopped about to the North, he
divided his Fleet into Three Squadrons, and set sail about Break of Day.
Vice Admiral De Wit led the Vanguard, Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam the main Battle,
and Vice Admiral Florisz commanded the Rear. About Eight a Clock before Noon,
De Wit's Squadron was gotten into the middle of the Sound, between the Two
Castles of Kronenburg and Elsenburg, whereof one is in the Isle of Zealand, and
the other in the Province of Schoneng. As soon as De Wit was come right against
those Fortresses, King Gustavus fired against him, A cruel Fight between the 2
Fleets of the King of Swedeland, and of the United Provinces.
all the Artillery of both the Castles; nay, and that Prince, who was in Person
at Kronenburg, fired with his own Hand the first Gun that was discharged at the
Dutch. However, the Dutch Men of War, gliding along directly in the Middle of
the Strait, there were very few Bullets that reached to do them harm, so that
they past through without much Loss. About Ten a Clock in the Forenoon the Two
Fleets engaged in a Cruel Fight, in View of the King of Swedeland, of the
Queen, and of the Princess his Sister, Wife to the Count de la Guarde, as also
of eldest Son of the Prince of Holstean Gollorp, and of several other great
Lords of the Court, who, being altogether in the Castle of Kronenburg, were
joint Spectators of that Bloody and Terrible Fight. The Swedes, at first, bent
all their principal Forces against the Dutch Lieutenant-Admiral, and his Two
Vice-Admirals, as thinking, if they could but disable the Generals of their
Enemy's Fleet, it would be no hard matter for them to gain the Victory over the
rest, when they should want Heads to command them. And, in effect, that
beginning did not succeed amiss to them, at first: For Vice Admiral De Wit,
after having signalized himself to the utmost, was mortally wounded; and his
Ship taken for want of Help; but he Dying, and the Ship sinking immediately
after, nothing remained to the Enemies but his Body. Vice Admiral Florisz
underwent the same Fate as De Wit, for as he was fighting with an unparalled
Intrepidity, he lost his Life with Sword in Hand, as likewise did the Captain
under him, and 36 of his Men: So that none of the General Officers were then
left but Lieutenant Admiral Opdam, to bear the whole B^^nt of the furious
Efforts of the Swedes, who ^^hav^d himself so courageously, that he qui^kly
^^^de them see, by a vigorous Resistance, that Fortune had chosen him to
revenge the Death of so many other brave Men. For, during Two long Hours
together, without any other Help, he stood the Fire of all the Guns of Seven
Swedish Ships, who hotly plied him all that Time with continual Broad-sides of
their Cannon. He had received several Shot between Wind and Water; which latter
had gained already Five or Six Foot deep in his Ship, and his Prow was on Fire:
His Masts, his Rigging and all his Sails were shot down close by the Board, so
that he was reduced into a very pitiful Condition, when Captain Van Nes
advanced one of the foremost, to his Assistance. Captain Kampen, likewise,
having forced his Passage through the Enemy's, with an admirable Courage, flew
in like Lightning to the Admiral's Aid; which Two Ships were extremely
shattered, and that of the Admiral run great Danger of being sunk or burnt. He
had on Board him Thirty seven Men killed, and about One hundred wounded; but he
triumphed over all those Disasters, by his great Bravery and wise Conduct. But
if the General Officers of the States Fleet happened to be ill treated, those
of the Swedes fared never the better for it: For Admiral Wrangel, and
Vice Admiral Bielkenstern, and several others, having their Ships shot through
and through, and all shattered, were forced to retire out of the Fight. Three
Swedish Ships were taken, and Eight sunk, or burnt. The Hollanders lost in all
that Action only the Ship Brederode, commanded by Vice Admiral De Wit, which,
as we have said, sunk, after she was taken. The Swedes, on their Side, had
above Two thousand Men killed, besides what were wounded and made Prisoners;
the Number of which latter was reckoned to be about Four hundred and fifty. The
Number of the Slain, on the Hollander's Side, amounted to near Four hundred
Men, and a great many they had wounded. Among the former, were counted the Two
Vice-Admirals, and the Captains Bruinsveld and Verveen. The Battle lasted 5 or
6 Hours, till the Swed^sh Fleet made away toward the Main Sea: For though they
had the Advantage of the Weather-gage, yet they suffered the Hollanders to
retreat, who were stopped from advancing toward them by a contrary Wind;
showing sufficiently by their Behavior, that they knew well enough, there was
nothing to be gotten by them, and that they could not venture to charge the
Dutch again, without running great Hazard of an entire Defeat.
Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam, seeing the Swedes were become immo^eable, by refusing
to renew the Fight again, got his Ships together, and sailed toward the Isle
of Huen. Toward evening, he met B^elk, the Danish Admiral, who by a North Wind
was hindered from coming to join the Hollanders, and share with them in the
Glory of that Fight. After that junction, the Fleet, came and anchored near the
Coast of Zeland, between ^l^enore and Copenhagen; and the Swedish Fleet retired
under the Canon of the Castle of Kronenburg: But King Gustavus, not thinking it
secure enough there, gave them Order to put into the Haven of Landskroon; which
is a Town in the Province of Schonen.

Honors done by the King of Swedeland to the Body of Vice-Admir^l De Wit.
That Prince being minded, after the Fight, to give the World some Proofs of his
incomparable Generosity, and of the high Veneration he had for those Great Men
that glory in spending their Blood for their Country's Service, commanded the
Body of Vice-Admi^al ^e Wit to be clothed with white Satin, and to be put into
a Coffin covered with black Cloth, and adorned with the Arms of the deceased:
After which he caused it to be embarked in a Galliot, painted with Black, with
Streamers of the same Color, and to be carried to Lieutenant Admiral Opdam.
The Bodies of the Two Vice-Admirals, De Wit and Florisz were afterward
transported into Holland, and buried at the Charge of the State, with all the
Honors due to their Memory, De Wit was interred at Roterdam, and Florisz at
Hoorn; and the States, to immortalize the Memory of their good Services,
ordered to be paid to the Heirs of each of them 3000 Livers, to be bestowed
upon a Piece of Marble, whereupon to engrave their Epitaphs. That of Vice
Admiral De Wit was as follows, in Latin.

Meritis and Aeternitati Wittenii Cornelii de With, Equit.
Qui Magnitudinem suam eidem Elemento debuit, cui praecipuam hactenus Hollandia
debet; totum Terrarum ambitum circumnavigavit, utramque Indiam, Nauta, Miles,
Praefectusque Nautarum ac Militum vidit; expugnato Speculatorio Navigio, cum
viribus ipse multo inferior, animo Major esset Argentiferae Classi Americanae
viam patefecit. Innumeras variarum Gentium Naves cepit, incendit, submersit:
Per omnes gradus Militiae Navalis eluctatus, Propraetor Patriae, Classis and
Expeditiones Maritimas XX. annos rexit. Decies quinquies Classibus collatis cum
Host conflixit, raro aequata clade; plerumque Victor, and Triumphator Praeliis
rediit. Restabat Magnus tot Belli facinoribus imponendus Dies VIII. Novembris,
Anno MDCLVIII. In Freto Maris Baltici supremum Virtutis opus edidit. Ibi primus
in Praelium ruens, Praetoriam Suecorum invasit, afflixit; dein Propraetoriam,
ac Praegrandes eorundem alias, armis, viris, animis instructissimas, sola
Propraetoria sua, rejecit, afflixit, submersit; donec a sociis undique
desertus, ab Hostibus undique circumfissus, discerpto Globis corpore,
Bellatricem animam Coelo reddidit. Corpus ipse Rex Hostis, Generosae
Fortitudinis Hostilis admiratione, splendide compositum in Patriam Remisit: Sic
Redeunt quos Honos ac Virtus Remittunt. Vixit ann. LIX.

In English thus.
To the Merits and Immortality of De Witten Cornelius de With, Knight.
Who owed his Greatness to that Element, to which Holland hitherto owes the
chiefest of hers; who has sailed about the whole Globe of the World, and seen
both the Indies, in Quality of Mariner and Soldier, and afterward of Captain
both of Mariners and Soldiers; after he had taken a Scout-Ship, called, the
Guard, as being superior in Courage, though inferior in Force, he opened a Way to
the taking of the Spanish American Plate-fleet. He took, burnt and sunk an
infinite number of Ships of diverse Nations; and having passed through all the
Degrees of Naval Warfare, he was made Vice Admiral, and had the Conduct of the
Fleet of his Country, and of their Sea-Expeditions, for the Space of Twenty
Years. He fought Fifteen set Battles with the Enemies Fleets, and came out of
the Fight seldom with equal Loss, but most commonly Victorious and Triumphant.
There remained but one Great and Fatal Day, to put an End to so many Heroic
Feats of War, which was the 8th of November, in the Year 1658. when he gave the
last Proof of his Valor, in the Strait of the Baltic Sea; where rushing
foremost into the Fight, he attacqued the Admiral of Swedeland, and disabled
him; and afterward fighting with the Vice Admiral, and several other great
Ships of the same Enemy's, extremely well provided with Arms and Courageous
Seamen, He, with his single Vice-Admiral's Ship, repulsed, disabled, and sunk
them; till, at last, being wholly deserted by his Companions, and on all Sides
surrounded by the Enemies, his Body being rent with Bullets, he yielded up his
Warlike Soul to Heaven. The King himself, his Enemy, out of an Admiration of
the generous Fortitude of so brave an Enemy, sent back his Body, magnificently
habited, and put up, into his Country. So Return all they whom Honor and
Valor send back. He lived LIX. Years.

The next Day after the Battle, the Transport Ships, laden with Troops and
Ammunition, went before Copenhagen, where Colonel Fuchler, who commanded the
Soldiers, landed them. So that the Hollanders may be said to have gained all
the Advantage of that celebrated Fight, because they executed their Design,
which was to succor that important Place. However, Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam
had Orders from the States, to winter with his whole Fleet at Copenhagen; where
his Presence, and the Assistance of the Soldiers and Dutch Seamen he brought
with him, contributed not a little to the Repulsing of the many violent
Assaults the Swedes made from time to time upon the Works of the Town.

In the mean while, the States, who laid nothing so much to Heart as the
Consequence of the Affairs of the North; and knowing of what great Importance
'twas, to keep an even Balance between Swedeland and Denmark, by hindering the
stronger of them to oppress the weaker, resolved to arm out, for that purpose,
a second Fleet, the chief Command of which was given to De Ruiter, who was
returning from Portugal. It consisted of Forty Men of War, on Board which was
embarked a Succor of Four thousand Regular Troops, commanded by Colonel
Killigrew.

On the 20th of May, Vice Admiral De Ruiter, set sail. Meppel, who was made
Vice Admiral of Holland, of the College of the Admiralty of the North, took the
Place of Vice Admiral Florisz, and embarked, by way of Provision, on the Ship
called the Orange-Tree, of North-Holland. De Ruiter divided his Fleet into
three Squadrons; the first was under his own Command, the second under Evertsz,
and the third under the Conduct of Meppel. The 10th of June he arrived at the
Mouth of the Belt, and some Days after, he joined Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam; so
that then the States Fleet was Seventy eight Sail strong of Men of War, Six or
Seven Fireships, and Ten Galliots, manned with One thousand three hundred
Mariners and Soldiers, besides the Four thousand Regular Troops that were in de
Ruiter's Fleet; and was mounted with Three thousand two hundred Guns.

In the mean while, the English, conceiving a Jealousy at the formidable
Forces the Hollanders had assembled toward the North, sent likewise thither a
Fleet of Forty two Sail of Men of War, under the Comman^ of Admiral Mountague,
who came into the Belt to observe their Motions. Opdam, not being able to
penetrate the Design of the English, put out a white Flag, and summoned on
Board him all the General Officers and Captains of his Fleet, and commanded
them to keep themselves in Readiness for a Fight, and not to forget their
Honor, and the Oath of Fidelity they had sworn to their Country. The next
Morning Admiral Mountague writ to Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam, and to Vice Admiral
de Ruiter, telling them, That he was come to endeavor to bring the Two Crowns
of the North to an Accommodation; that he was persuaded, their High and
Mightinesses Fleet had likewise no other Aaim but that, and therefore that it
would be convenient for them to act by Consent on both Sides, and to put in
practice all proper Means that might contribute to the pacifying of those two
Crowns, and to the maintaining a perfect Union between the two Republics.
Answer was made him, That the Dutch had no other Design neither, but that: Upon
which, the English Admiral set sail, and after noon advanced further into the
Belt. The Dutch perceiving it, unmoored likewise, and stood after the English,
to hinder them from cutting off the Danish, and some Holland Ships, that lay at
Anchor near Nyburg, by separating them from the Body of the Dutch Fleet. But
the English making off into the Main Sea, retired to Kallundburg, and the
Hollanders toward the Isle of Rouse; where the Danes came and joined them. In
the mean time, while the Ambassadors of the States, that came with de Ruiter's
Fleet, were negotiating a Treaty of Peace between the Two Crowns at Copenhagen,
the English interrupted it by their underhand Practices, in proposing a
Cessation of Arms for Three Weeks; which extremely troubled the Hollanders, and
obliged de Ruiter to write about it to the College of the Admiralty of
Amsterdam, intimating to them, That the English, as far as he was able to judge
by their manner of Proceeding, seemed ill intentioned, notwithstanding all
their fair Protestations, and that he believed, they turned Affairs in that
manner, with Design to favor Swedeland. Three Days before the Term prefixed
for the Suspension of Arms was to expire, which was on the 10th of July,
Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam's Fleet, in conjunction with the Danes, making
together about Thirty seven Sail of Men of War, set sail directly for
Copenhagen; which the Swedes kept besieged with a Fleet of Thirty three Ships
of War; but at the Approach of the Admiral of Holland, they retired, without
daring to stand a Fight; which much surprised Opdam, who expected not to be rid
of them at so cheap a rate.

English Ministers that were endeavoring, with those of Holland, to mediate an
Accommodation, considering, it was not necessary the two Mediating Powers
should have such numerous and formidable Forces toward the North, only to
counterbalance Swedeland, proposed that they might be diminished. But the
States suspecting there was some Mystery in the Matter on the English side,
ordered, That but 20 of their Ships should be recalled, causing private Notice
to be given to Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam, not to send them away neither, till a
like number of the English were gone before them. But all those Precautions of
the States became in short time needless, by the Revolution that was ready to
happen in England, by the Intriegues of General Monk, whose Aim was, to pull
down Cromwell's Party, in order to restore King Charles to the Throne. For
Admiral Mountague, who held Intelligence with Monk, burned with an impatient
Desire to quit the North, with the English Fleet, and to hasten home to the
Assistance of King Charles's Party; and seeking all the Pretenses he could
think on to promote his speedy departure, he gave out, That, for want of
Provisions, his Fleet was able to subsist no longer abroad, and so setting Sail
on the 5th of September, he returned back to the Coasts of England.

Vice Admiral de Ruiter having weighed Anchor the same day, moved, and cast
Anchor again at Amak near Copenhagen, from whence he went ashore and went to a
Tent set up between the Town and the Swedish Army, where the States
Ambassadors, and those of Sweden and Denmark were in Conference about a Peace.
But Affairs going quite another way than toward an Accommodation, Hostilities
were begun again. In the mean time Lieutenant Admiral Opdam having written to
the States, to desire leave to return home because of his indisposition, he
accordingly set sail at the beginning of November, with a Fleet of 20 sail of
Men of War, and a great Number of Merchant Ships, accompanied with the
Vice-Admiral's Evertsz and Meppel. De Ruiter then being left in the North, to
Command in chief in the absence of the Lieutenant Admiral, joined his Fleet
with that of the Danes, Commanded by Admiral Bielke, and having taken on board,
a good Number of Troops, both Horse and Foot, steered directly toward the Isle
of Funen. To attempt a descent there, and if it were possible, to drive out the
Swedes from thence. On the 8th. of November, he advanced as far as before the
Town of Nyburg, situated in the East part of Funen, upon the Belt. Tho a great
body of Swedish Horse appeared upon the Coast to oppose a descent, yet Marshal
Schak and other General Officers resolved to fall upon them, notwithstanding
the night was coming on. But that Undertaking was not so well backed as it
should have been, because there was no body that was well acquainted with that
place. In the mean while, the Swedes having raised some batteries, begun to
fire upon the Dutch Fleet, and they fired no less briskly again upon the
Swedes, and upon the Ramparts of Nyburg. The next morning before day, the
Officers, Soldiers, and Seamen that had passed the night in Boats, and suffered
much by the cold, came back again on board the Fleet, without having done any
thing, because it was so very dark that they could not see the Coast. After
this attempt, the General Officers resolved to weigh Anchor, and to draw
toward Kortemunde, another Town in the same Isle, where they arrived on the
10th. about noon.

De Ruiter thereupon, gave order immediately to Evertsz, de Wild, to Rear
Admiral B^akel, and to the Captains, Van Amst^l, and Aldert Machysz, to join
him, and to draw up in a line of Battle, in Order to Batter the Town with their
Artillery, so that soon after, it was seen all in flames, and the Swedish Horse
was forced to scamper here and there, not knowing where to shelter themselves.
De Ru^ter observing that disorder, without losing any time, posted 4 men of War
more in such a manner, that their guns swept all the plain Country clear, and
galled the Flank of the Swedish Cavalry. In the mean time the Danish Admiral
Bielke, and Vice Admiral Held coming to de Ruiter, prayed him to be pleased to
go to Marshal Schak, to endeavor to persuade him, upon that fair opportunity,
to put in Execution without delay, the descent he before had designed to make,
because it was already 2 a Clock in the Afternoon. After several deliberations,
the Danish and Holland Troops chosen to form the Van guard, entered into Boats,
which landed them within Pistol shot of the Town Bridge. The Swedes had
retrenched themselves in two different places and had raised Forts from the
Town to the Bridge, having posted on one side, 2 Regiments of Horse, and on the
other 3. Whilst the Dragoons were left in the Town, to defend that. At the
approach of the Danes, the Swedes fired hotly upon the Boats, and killed some
of the Hollanders. De Ruiter being in Person in one of those Boats, seeing the
danger, cried out? My Boys; Have Courage, advance, and march up to the Enemies:
Or else you are all lost men! That discourse so extremely revived the fallen
Courages of his followers, that a French Gentleman, named Fleury de Cusan, Lord
of Buat, and Captain of a Troop of Horse in the States service, who came in the
Fleet in Quality of a Volunteer, hearing those words of de Ruiter, leapt
presently out of the Boat with his drawn Sword in his hand into the Sea up to
the middle in Water, crying out, Friends, fol^ow me! Upon which, the Soldiers
and Mariners being ashamed not to follow his Example, leapt out likewise in
Troops, and got to Land, whilst the Men of War fired without intermission upon
the Town; so that advancing further, the Confederate Troops vigorously attackt
the Swedish Horse, who came to meet them to dispute their passage. There was
never any thing more bloody than that shock, nor was there ever any Courage
appeared so undaunted as that shown by the Allies in that Rencounter; so that
the Swedes being no longer able to endure so fierce and obstinate an attack,
quitted their ground, and retired in Confusion toward the Bridge. But the
Danes and Hollanders pursued them so close, that they entered with them into the
Town, set it on fire in two places, and then quitted it again. However, the
fire did no great damage, because it was quickly quenched by the diligence of
the Enemies. The day following de Ruiter detacht away 4 men of War, to go and
cruize between the Isles of Langeland, and Spro, and 3 more, to go and block up
the passages of Nyburg, in Order to prevent the Swedes from putting any
succors into Funen. In the mean while, a part of the Danish Horse had already
begun to disembark, and the next day, they all Landed.

Some days before the descent, King Gustavus Adolphus had entered the Isle of
Falster, at the head of a Body of Horse, to encourage his Troops by his
presence, and defend the Neighboring Isles from the Irruption of the Danes;
and before his departure, he seemed to the Ambassadors to be more inclinable to
a Peace than before. But all those fair appearances were but the pure effects
of a dissembling Policy that induced him to make all those advances, to gain
time, and to prevent the mischiefs threatened him by the Junction of the Danish
and Dutch Fleets; so that he was extremely surprised, when he was informed a
little while after, that the two Fleets were already at Sea. Upon that news, he
hastened away with all speed to Kotfoot, with a full Resolution, to throw
succors into Funen, where he foresaw, the Enemies designed to make a Descent.
But the Confederate Fleets having prevented his vigilance, he was much
astonished to hear at his arrival, the Extraordinary noise of Cannon and small
Arms, which put him into such a Transport of fury, that he Resolved to go
immediately in Person into Funen, to rouse up the drooping courage of his men,
and thereby prevent a blow that was likely to Ruin his fairest hopes, and cut
short the swift Career of his Conquests. But his Council more wise and
Considerate than he, dissuaded him from it, by Representing to him, to what
great and inevitable danger he would thereby expose himself, since there being
no other way for him to pass into Funen, but in a pitiful sorry boat, in which
he could hardly without a Miracle escape being taken by his Enemies. Having
therefore changed his resolution, he only sent thither General Steenbok, who
arrived there time enough to be a Spectator of the misfortune of his Party, and
to bear a share in the total defeat of the Swedish Army.

In the mean while, the Hollanders and the Danes, seeing Fortune begun to
declare for them, resolved, without any demurring, to push on their Enterprises
to the utmost, while Time was, and to prevent the Winter, which would soon
disable their Fleets from staying any longer at Sea. General Ernest Albert de
Eberstein was arrived at the Army of the Allies, ever since the 14th of the
same Month, with a Reinforcement of 4 German Regiments, 4 more of
Brandenburghers, 800 Polanders, and 1000 Danish Horse, besides Foot; he had
landed near Middlelvaart, in the Isle of Funen, and two Days after his Arrival,
he joined General Schak, near Odenzee. On the 22d the Danish Army, with all
those Auxiliary Troops, advanced within a Mile of Nyburg, where they arrived
about 11 a Clock, and discovered the Sweedish Army, under the Command of the
Prince of Sultsback, and General Steenbok, ready ranged in Order of Battle,
upon the side of a Mountain, in a very advantageous Place for them, since they
had the Town of Nyburg behind them, and tall Hedges, and a large deep Ditch
before them, which they had thick lined with Musketeers and Dragoons, well
retrencht. However, the Danes, put themselves likewise in Order of Battle.
General Eberstein commanded the Right wing, Marshal Tramp the left, and General
Schak the Main Battle, where were placed the Dutch Colonels, Killigrew, Kuik,
Meteren, and Ailua, with their Troops. The Fight was begun by the Danish Horse;
for Eberstein and Schak fell with all the Vigor imaginable upon the Enemies,
and broke through them, as far as the Hedges; but there they found so much
Resistance from the Swedish Musketeers and Dragoons, that it was impossible
for them to get any further: For the Swedes, adding Desperation to their
natural Bravery, not only repulsed their Enemies, but put them into such
disorder, that both the Right and Left Wing of their Army began to give way;
and further, they made themselves Masters of some of their Cannon; upon which
Schak, having sent Order to the Dutch to come up and charge, the Colonels,
Killigrew, Meteren and Ailua, putting themselves at the Head of them, led them
up, charging them to keep close together; the Right Wing of the Swedes did
their utmost to break them, but the Pikes having repulsed them, they were
forced, in a few Moments after, to quit their Post and their Cannon, and betake
themselves to Flight. The right Wing of the Swedes, having been thus driven out
of the Field, the Hollanders fell upon the Left, which they likewise broke, so
that the Victory, which seemed at first to have declared for the Swedes, then
forsook them. Upon which, the Imperial^sts, Brandenburgers, Danes, and
Polanders, taking Advantage of that Defeat, charged the Swedish Horse with so
much Vigor, that they forced them to retire into Nyburg, so that their Foot
being deserted by the Horse, was surrounded by the Polanders, who cut them
almost all in pieces. The Prince of Sultsbach, and General Steenbok, seeing the
Fortune of the Day lost, being loath to coop themselves up in Nyburg, fled
through a Wood toward the Seacoast; where, finding a Fisher-boat, by virtue
of large Offers of Money, they persuaded the Master of it to pass them over the
Night following into Zealand, accompanied only with two or three Servants.

Whilst the Land-Army of the Allies was engaged with the Swedes, General Sohak
sent to entreat de Ruiter, to advance with his Fleet before Nyburg, in order to
besiege it by Sea, in case the Allies proved victorious by Land. The 25th of
the same Month, the Swedes, having been constrained to quit the Fort
Knotshover, because it was laid flat by de Ru^ter's Guns, some Men of War of
the Fleet went and anchored so near the Town, that they could make the least
Guns they had bear to fire into it with effectual Execution: And the whole
Fleet, being thrown into a Line of Battle, fired ^o furiously into it, with all
their Guns, that so many Houses were beaten down by them, that the Swedish
Horse and other Soldiers that were retired thither, knew not where to fly for
Shelter; and that small Place was soon reduced to Ashes, by the continual
Broad-sides that flew from the Navy, that swept away Men, Women and Horses, and
made the Air most dreadfully echo with the lamentable Cries of an infinite
number of wounded People; and the Desolation was so great and so universal,
that very few Persons could escape from it. The Swedes therefore, having lost
all Hopes of being able to defend the Place any longer, sent a Trumpeter to the
Generals Schak and Eberstein, to let them know, They were ready to capitulate,
and to desire them to give order for the Cannon to cease Firing. But they
replied, They must expect no other Accommodation from them, but to surrender
themselves at Discretion. In the mean while, the Cannon played upon them
without Intermission, and a little while after, three Swedish Lords came out to
the Camp, with Offers to yield at Discretion. Whereupon, the Allies named the
Sieurs Alefeld and Tromp to go on their part into the Town, to treat with the
Swedish Generals, and a Trumpeter was sent on board de Ruiter, to desire him to
intermit Firing, in regard the besieged were treating to surrender at
Discretion. De Ruiter answered, That they must resolve to do it out of hand
then, or else he would reduce the Town to a Heap of Rubbish. Those Words were
followed with a short Cessation of Arms; but because the besieged made some
Demur in coming to an Execution of all those Offers, de Ruiter fired upon them
again more fiercely than ever, till by a Letter from General Schak, he was
informed, That the Swedes, had at last submitted to the Clemency of the
Victors, and that the Allies were infinitely obliged to him for having brought
things in so short a time, to so happy an Issue. Twelve Regiments of Swedish
Horse, making in all 3000 Men, were made Prisoners of War on this occasion. The
Prisoners of note, were 12 Colonels, and the Majors General Horn, Weyer and
Waldeck; and the Duke of Weymeren, and the Count Coningsmark, were taken
Prisoners in the Battle. That Victory was so complete, that there never was its
parallel known, since of all the whole Swedish Army in the Isle of Funen,
consisting of above 7000 Fighting Men, there escaped but two General Officers,
and some few Private Soldiers, that saved themselves in the Woods, when they
were defeated. And besides, it is worth remark, That those Troops, so defeated,
were the Bravest, most Faithful, and most Veteran, and Disciplined Soldiers of
all the Forces of the King of Swedeland. On the Danes and Allies side, there
were about 500 Men killed, among whom were reckoned 8 Officers of note, among
whom was Captain Hemmema. The Hollanders lost very few, though they bore the
greatest brunt of the Battle. All those happy Progresses were followed by the
speedy reduction of the greatest of the Danish Isles, except Zeeland, to that
before oppressed Crown, and that in less than 16 Days. Near 100 Pieces of
Cannon, and great store of Ammunition were taken, and 120 Standards or Colors.
About 2000 Swedes were killed, and 5000 made Prisoners. As for the Cavalry that
were taken, they were part of them distributed among the Danish, Imperial and
Brandenburg Horse. The Town of Nyburg was plundered by the Imperialists and
Poles, whilst the Hollanders kept still under Arms.

Funen being thus reduced under the Obedience of its rightful Prince,
Vice Admiral De Ruiter represented to General Schak, That it was impossible for
the Fleet to subsist any longer in those parts, because of the Dearness of
Provisions; adding, That the swift advance of the Winter obliged him likewise
to retire. And, accordingly unmooring, on the 28th of November, he sailed away
to Lubeck, with a Fleet of 120 Sail, great and small, to take in a Supply of
Provisions. The News of so many Advantages, gained by the Arms of the
Confederates, was like a stroke of Thunder to King Gustavus; for, after that
Time, he gave himself so much to Melancholy, that he was never after seen in a
good Humor: Nay, his Health was sensibly endamaged thereby. He retired into the
Castle of Knonenburg; where Reflecting upon the declining Condition of his
Affairs, he judged there was no other way for him to take to retrieve them,
than to reconcile himself with the United Provinces, as the only Power that had
broke his Designs, and interrupted the Course of his Conquests. And so
earnestly did he prosecute that expedient, that on the 9th of December, that is
to say, fifteen Days after the Reduction of Nyburg, the Treaty of Alliance
between Swedeland and the States was renewed, and signed by the Ambassadors of
both Powers; which Treaty was followed with the Conclusion of the Project,
formed before at Elbing with all its Dependencies; with this provisional
Condition, That the abovesaid Treaty should be of no Validity* and should not
be put in execution till a Peace were first made and ratified between the two
Crowns of Sweden and Denmark. Such were the first Fruits of the Conquest of the
Isle of Funen.

The 1st of December, De Ruiter, having Orders from the States to winter in the
Baltic, in order to take care to secure Copenhagen, came to an Anchor in the
Road of Trave-Munde, from whence he sailed next Day to Lubeck; where he took in
Provisions. On the 15th he steered away for Copenhagen, where Admiral Bielk,
coming on board him, presented him with a Golden Chain and a Medal of great
Value, from the King of Denmark. The King of Sweden having still considerable
Forces in the Isle of Zeeland, the Danes had some reason to fear some Irruption
from them, when the Time of the Ice should come; so that they reinforced the
Garrison of Copenhagen, and planted a greater Number of Guns upon the Ramparts
of the Town; and every Captain had his particular Quarter assigned him, that
they might be ready to oppose any Assaults from the Swedes; The Ice was broke
for 40 Foot round every Man of War; and the Danes, in the mean time, making
several Sallies against the Enemies, gained considerable Advantages over them.

1660.
This was the state of the War in the North, when de Ruiter, at the beginning of
the following Spring, having unmoored from Copenhagen, on the 3d of March,
1660. went and posted himself, with his Fleet before the Haven of Landskroon,
to block up its Passage, and hinder the coming out of the Swedish Fleet, which
was then about 50 Sail strong of Men of War. He had likewise at the same time
detached from his Fleet a Squadron of 16 Men of War, to convoy home some
Merchant-ships to Holland. Amidst those Transactions he heard the News of the
Death of Charles Gustavus, King of Sweden; which happened on the 23d of
February at Gottenburg, a violent Distemper, of not above 6 Days continuance,
having carried him off, in the 36th Year of his Age. The unexpected Death of
that great Prince revived the Hopes and raised the palled Courage of the Danes,
who, not without sufficient Cause, looked on him as the Scourge of their
Nation, by reason of his extraordinary Valor and Success.

In the mean while the Negotiation for a Peace, which the Plenipotentiaries of
the mediating Powers were endeavoring, was drilled on to a tedious length,
notwithstanding the frequent Conferences they had about it in the Tent, erected
for that effect between Copenhagen and the Swedish Army; which Delay was caused
by the Intrigues of the French and English Ambassadors at the Court of
Swedeland; for that they were so far from endeavoring heartily to bring that
Power to an Accommodation, that underhand they blew the Coals, and exasperated
Matters, by luring on that Court with the Airy Hopes of several Conquests. But,
However, at last, after many Obstacles, it was happily concluded on the 6th of
June. And four days after, the Swedish Army raised the Siege of Copenhagen; and
the two Northern Crowns thereby put an end to those Troubles that seemed to
have rendered them irreconcilable, and that had kindled the Jealousy, and
raised the Arms of so many Princes against the growing Power of Swedeland.

The States seeing Affairs were happily terminated on that side, sent Orders to
de Ruiter, that as soon as the Swedes should have restored to Denmark all the
Places they were obliged to restore by the Treaty, he should re-imbark the
States Troops, and return back with his Navy to Holland. But the King of
Denmark, considering the great Service he had received from de Ruiter, not
willing to let him depart, without giving him some Marks of his Acknowledgment,
would needs honor him with the Order of Knighthood, for him and his heirs, and
with Letters of Nobility, to which he added an annual Pension of 800 Crowns.
Pulchler likewise who Commanded the Land Forces, was gratified with an annual
Pension, a Golden Chain, and a Medal. And the other Officers received also
every one presents proportionable to their rank, and the merit of their
Services.

The War the United Provinces had with Portugal, August, to the extreme
displeasure of the Privateers of several Nations that made use of the
Commissions of that Crown the more securely to go a Pyrating after the Dutch
Merchant Ships.

In the mean time, the Corsairs of Barbary did so much mischief in the
Mediterranean, de Ruiter with a Fleet of about 20 men of War. For about the
space of 6 Weeks, he only sailed about the Mediterranean, Convoying Merchant
Ships, without discovering any Pyrate, but on the 26th. of February he gave
chase to a Corsair Ship of Tunis, called the Crescent, and forcing her to run a
ground upon the Coast, he delivered 40 Christian slaves.

Two days after, he went and Anchored before Tunis, where he Concluded a Treaty
of Peace between the United Provinces, and those Barbarians, and delivered 60
Dutch slaves more, who were Exchanged for the Turks taken in the Corsair called
the Crescent, which he had lately taken. But because there were some Articles
in that Treaty that displeased the States, de Ruiter, at his return to the
Coasts of Barbary in November following, caused them to be altered.

There was likewise a Treaty of Peace Concluded with the Algerines about the
end of the Month of March, in which likewise some change was made by the
consent of those Corsairs; but they soon after broke it.

Tromp and Captain Schey had likewise orders to go into the Mediterranean, with
a Fleet of 10 Merchant Ships; and on the 1st. day of January 1663, the two
Fleets having met and saluted one another, De Ruiter steered toward Alicant,
and Tromp toward Leghorn. Some weeks after, namely on the 17th of March, de
Ruiter having received order from the States, to leave the Command of the Fleet
that was to stay in the Mediterranean, to Tromp, and to return back himself
into Holland, accordingly left it to him, together with the necessary
instructions relating to what remained yet to be put in Execution; and at the
same time put on Board of Tromp the Fiscal Vyant, who had assisted at all the
Treaties that had been made with the Turks, that he might serve him for his
Counsel. But instead of being able to pacify the turbulent humor of those
Barbarians; the Algerine grew thereupon the more insolent. For because the
Ratification of the Treaty was not presently sent them, and that several months
had past, without their seeing either any one Dutch Man of War, or the promised
ransom for the Slaves of that Nation, they began to grow so much the more
impatient, because the Plague that then raged among them, sweeping away many of
the Dutch Slaves, deprived thereby their greedy Patrons of their Ransom too; So
that the murmurs of those discontented Barbarians, soon after broke out in new
Hostilities. For at the beginning of the Summer, they took upon them to visit
the Dutch Merchant Ships, and then under pretense they were laden with
Merchandises belonging to their Enemies, they pillaged them without Control.
And not long after they carried a Dutch Merchant Ship to Algiers, confiscated
her Cargo, and sold her Men for Slaves. The States hearing of all these
mischiefs Writ to their Consul there, Vanden Burg, to solicit the Restitution
of the Effects that were seized, and the Liberty of the Slaves those Barbarians
had newly made; But the Corsairs refusing to give any satisfaction, the States
gave Orders, they should be obliged to it by force of Arms.

Rear-Admiral Tromp therefore having begun to give them Chase, took several of
them, Christian Slaves. And among others, he took two Algerine Corsairs on the
10th of January, near Malaga, whereof one carried 18, and the other 20 Guns,
and had on board her 180 Turks or Moors, 25 Christian Slaves, and 5 Renegadoes.
These Prises caused great alarms at Algeirs, where the Barbarians gave out,
that their losses in them amounted to the number of 6 or 700 Turks, Moors or
Renegadoes, for which they demanded Reparation of the Dutch Consul. Offering to
make satisfaction for their own Hostilities; to Re-establish all things again
upon a good Foot, and to break the Treaty Concluded with the English: They
promised likewise, they would stay for the Money designed for the Ransoming of
the Dutch Slaves, and demanded earnest for it, thinking it was not yet too late
to obtain, a Ratification of the last Treaty of Peace. But the States being but
too well acquainted with the Perfidiousness, and Inconstancy of those
Barbarians, were so far from harkening to them, that they solicited the Kings
of France, Spain and England, to join their Forces with those of the United
Provinces, to Destroy them; since they exercised their Piracies no less upon
the Subjects of those Crowns, than upon those of the United Provinces. And the
States would fain have persuaded those Powers to have set out three several
Fleets, under the Flagg of each Nation, to go and Besiege their Harbors, Chase
them from the Sea, and utterly ruin their abominable and insupportable
Domination, without having any regard to any former Treaty of Peace or
Alliance. Which Project seemed very important and well contrived: But yet not
one of those three Princes could be persuaded to hearken to it.

The French King indeed highly praised it, and gave leave to the Dutch to erect
Magazines for that effect, both of Provisions and Ammunition, at Thoulon, or
Marseilles. The King of Spain gave Order, that the Dutch Men of War might have
free Ingress and Egress in and out of his Ports: And the King of Great Britain
resolved to send a Fleet into the Mediterranean, but it was more, to give new
Umbrages than to correspond with the design of the States, and many already
could see in the shuffling conduct of that Prince, certain presages of an
approaching Rupture of the Peace between him and the United Provinces. For at
the same time that he proposed to send a Fleet into the Mediterranean, to act
in concert with that of the States, he had on the other side given private
order to Captain Holms to sail to the Court of Africa to ruin there the
Commerce of the Dutch West-Indian Company, and to seze their ships and Forts.
The States therefore seeing there was little Reliance to be made upon the
assistance of any of all those Foregin Powers, in order to free the Sea from
the intolerable Robberies of the Algerines, Resolved to concern themselves no
further than for the preservation of their own Subjects, by sending another
Fleet into the Mediterranean, under the Conduct of de Ruiter, because
Rear-Admiral Tromp had not sufficient Forces to accomplish so great an
Enterprise. That Fleet was composed of 12 Ships of War, and one Flute laden
with Provisions.

They put to Sea about the beginning of May, and on the 19th of June, arrived
in the Road of Algiers. De Ruiter presently sent notice of his arrival to the
Divan, to remind them to pay him the usual Honors, and to Congratulate his
arrival. But they were so far from acquitting themselves of the Duty he
pretended from them, that they refused to let the Dutch Consul come on board to
speak with the Vice Admiral, and to send Hostages for the security of the
Credential Letters, which were to be presented to the Divan from the States;
for all they would do, was only to Grant a Passport by virtue of which the
Commissioners, Mortaigne, and Reyn^ld de Koeverden went into the Town: who in
the first Audience they had, demand the exchange of Prisoners, and the release
of the Christian Slaves at the rate they were first sold for, according to the
Conditions of the last Treaty of Peace, adding that as for other differences,
they should be adjusted by the Commissioners to be appointed for that purpose
on each side. All which was refused by the Divan, who pretended, before they
entered into any Conference about the Release of Prisoners, to know upon what
grounds they might be assured of a Peace. De Ruiter upon that, sent them a
Memorial that made a great noise amongst those Barbarians, because they would
by no means consent to any indemnification, nor to the Condition insisted upon
by the Dutch that no free Ship should be liable to be visited, which was the
Grievance of the Hollanders. So that that point was hotly disputed on both
sides in the Divan; But after all, the Algerines were obstinate, and would
absolutely reserve themselves a power, to visit all Dutch Ships, and to declare
for Lawful Prize all the effects they found in them to belong to other Nations.
In fine, the Conclusion of the Negotiation was this, That those Barbarians,
declared to de Ruiter, that if he would not accept their propositions, he would
not permit the Dutch Consul to retire on board him, till he had before hand
sent on shore 37 Turks or Moors that were Prisoners in his Fleet. Which demand
of theirs he thought fit to grant, to prevent the mischiefs that might
otherwise happen to the Dutch Consul and his Retinue, of which he had a fresh
Example in the Person of the English Consul whom those Pirates had cruelly
handled, after they had broken the Peace with England.

De Ruiter therefore plainly finding, that it was to no purpose to use any
gentle methods with them, Ju^g^d there was no other way to be taken, but to
reduce the Algerines to reason by force of Arms, and accordingly he declared
War against them the 4th. of June.

The next day, the Fleet unmoored, and went and Anchored on the 7th of the same
Month at Alicant, where de Ruiter Received a Letter with advice of the new
Troubles that Threatened the United Provinces from the English and with orders
to him, to u^e great Prudence and such Complaisant measures with the Ships of
War that Crown had in the Mediterranean as to give them no new causes of
Umbrage or dissatisfaction. And accordingly there were no Acts of Hostility
Committed between them at that time, but when the Captains of both Nations met,
they Reciprocally saluted one another with some Guns in a very amicable manner;
whilst the main Body of the English Fleet consisting of 13 sail of Men of War
under the Command of Admiral Lawson kept at the Mouth of the Straits.

Scarcely had England and Holland begun to taste of the fruits of Peace which
had cost so much Blood to the two Nations, but it was disturbed again by new
Hostilities as the Dutch pretend begun by the English, out of Jealousy at the
flourishing Commerce, and great prosperity of the United Provinces, which
prepared for de Ruiter, who was then busy in scouring the Mediterranean of the
Corsairs, new work in the Ocean, whither Rear-Admiral Tromp was already
returned. In the Months of May and June, news came to Holland, that the English
under the Command of Robert Holms, Committed strange depredations toward the
Isles of Cape Verd; and that in January before, they had taken a Ship called
the Spectacles, and a Yacht, called the Neptune, which belonged to the Dutch
West India Company. The English Ship that took the Neptune, the better to
deceive those she had a mind to attack, put up Dutch Colors. The same advices
likewise reported, that Holms had on the 31st. of the same Month, summoned the
Fort of Cape Verd situated in the Isle of Goe-rede, and that upon the
Governors refusal to surrender it, the English had by their Cannon forced him
to yield it, and had at the same time taken another Yacht called the Crocodile;
that the Evening before, they had taken two other small Ships. That Holms had
at first, promised the Subjects of the Dutch Company which were about 140 men,
to restore them the Ship called the Moon, to serve to transport them back into
their own Country, but that having seen a great quantity of Merchandises, put
on board it for Holland, he changed his mind, and told them, he had occasion
for that Ship himself, to transport his own Goods to Sie^ra Lions; But that
however, at last he had granted them a Portuguese Ship for their
transportation: That in the Month of July, the States had other fresher news,
concerning the Hostilities Committed on the Coast of Guinea, where Captain
Holms, with a Squadron of 14 English men of War, had seized all the places and
Forts belonging to the Hollanders, except the Castle del Mina, exercising all
manner of Cruelties toward the Men, as they pretended to make appear by the
following Letter written from the Castle del Mina, by General Valkenburg.

Ever since the English have endeavored to establish the Royal Company upon
this Coast, they have not only troubled themselves no further to contribute to
the preservation of the Peace before Concluded, but they have proceeded to
cruel Hostilities by Sea and Land against all of our Nation, and to drive at
the utter ruin of our Commerce. Those Fatal attempts begun by the arrival of
two of the King of England's men of War, and some others belonging to the Royal
Company, under the Command of John Stoats, who being overcome with the great
honor and beneficial civilities done him by the Hollanders, could not find in
his heart to execute any thing against them. But they stopped not there, for on
the last day of April, there appeared a Squadron of 2 men of War and 6 Frigates,
under Captain Holms 's Flag, and that of one Joseph Cubits, who being
afterward Reinforced to the Number of 14 men of War, have committed in the
midst of Peace all the Acts of Hostility they could have committed in the
middle of a Declared War, attacking both by Sea and Land, our places, and
taking from us by Force, the Fortresses, Tacorari, Cabo-Cors, Adia, and Ameabo.
They have also besieged Chama, and keep us here blockt up so close that very
hardly can we find means to send you a Letter. The losses caused to the Company
thereby, amount to several Tuns of Gold; And as to the Persons of the
Hollanders, especially those of Adia, after they had given them quarter, they
have treated them with all the rigor and barbarity Imaginable, cutting off
their Noses and Ears, to leave them afterward to linger out a miserable and
languishing life; and others throats they have cut, as if they had been so many
beasts. The dead Bodies that were buried in the Earth which God and Nature had
allotted them to enjoy repose and silence in, have been pulled out of their
Graves, and their heads cut off and fixed on Pikes tops as 'twere in Triumph.
And those who were dying, or already dead, had their Privy Members, Heads,
Arms, and Legs, cut off, and by an Excess of cruelty some had their Hearts
pull^d out. The Prisoners were most unmercifully treated with design to make
them Perjure themselves. The English have continued all these cruelties to this
very day, and say they still expect another Reinforcement of 6 great men of War
to drive the Hollanders from this Coast. Our men are still more severely
handled by the Natives of the Country who usually follow the Victorious Party.
The English assure us, we shall receive no succor, and scatter abroad writings
by which they promise a recompense to all that shall embrace their Party. We
will endea-l vour in so fatal a conjuncture, honorably to defend the place, in
hopes to receive a considerable succor from the United Provinces, by the means
of which all things may be re-established. This Letter was printed by the
States Order, and Copies of it sent to all Ships of War, and to all Frontier
places that had Garrisons in them. However, supposing all that dreadful
Relation true to a Letter, the English could cite for their excuse the
precedent set them before by the Dutch at Amboyna. But the truth was many had
been the wrongs the English pretended to have suffered both in persons and
effects from the Hollanders in several parts of the World, for which having
often demanded and received no satisfaction, they proceed^d to reprisals which
occasioned some Foreign Emissaries and Incendiaries, common Enemies to b^th
Nations, greedily laying hold of, used all the little Arts and Tricks
imaginable to represent all that was done on either side though never so trivial,
in the most dreadful Colors on purpose to exasperate the two Nations to
worrie one another like Wild Beasts till they were able to stand no longer,
that so a third might come in, and devour them both. For that the English set
on by the same pernicious instruments were not a whit behind hand with the
Dutch by rendering them as Odious on the other side by writings and manifesto's
stuffed with no less specious Complaints, appears by the following
Remonstrances presented against the Hollanders, to the English Parliament, and
by the Parliament presented to the King: Which we have likewise inserted, that
the Reader might see what each party had to say, and did actually allege for
themselves.

The Complaints of the English East India Company against the Dutch, set forth,
I. THAT the English East India Company strongly insist, to have an
Indemnification for all the Damages they have suffered ever since the Year
1656. valued at 14008000 l. for the Ships and Effects taken from them by the
Dutch, and 87000 l. for the Losses they have suffered, according to a modest
and just Supputation that had been made of them, with respect to their
Factories, that have been burnt or destroyed by the same Hollanders; most of
which had happened since the glorious Restoration of his Majesty. That they
complained likewise, That the Isle of Poleron had been possessed by the Dutch
for the space of 42 Years, against all sort of Justice, since the States had no
lawful Right to it, and had consented in the Treaties that had been made with
them, to restore it, and yet persisted to keep it by Force. They demand also,
to be Reimbursed the Charges for the two Ships that were sent the Year, before
to take Possession of the said Isle, which amounted to 23000 l.

II. The said Company complains also of the indirect means the Dutch use in the
Indies, to interrupt their Commerce, by affecting to declare War against all
those Places where the English settle any Factors for carrying on their
Traffic; and that under Pretense of that Declaration, they send Ships to
anchor before those Places, only with pure Design to destroy the Commerce of
the English, of whom they are extremely jealous; so that the Declaration of War
against those Places, is but a mere Juggle, by which the English really suffer.

III. That under Pretense of having made an Agreement with the Kings of those
Countries about the principal Commodities of them, they disturb the Commerce of
the English, and fire upon their Boats that Approach the Coast; telling them,
to excuse themselves from Blame, That they have already bought up all the
Commodities; when there is nothing so false.

IV. That when those Artifices fail them, they put an Arrest upon the English
Ships, both great and small, as is practiced among Enemies.

V. That they affect to publish aloud, That they are Sovereigns of the
Indian-Sea, and so under the Shadow of an Imaginary Dominion, affront the
Banner of England, to the great Contempt of his Majesty and dishonor of the
Nation.

The Turkey Company complain,
That since the Restoration of his Majesty, the Hollanders have taken from
their Merchants two Ships, valued at 110500 l. under Pretense of Letters of
Reprisal from the King of Spain; and that after the said Letters Patents have
been recalled by the King of Spain, in consequence of a renewing of Alliance
between the two Crowns: And that the Man of War that took them was both built
and equipped in Holland.

The Royal Company of Guiney represent,
I. That the Hollanders had done all they could, to drive their Merchants out
of the Coasts of Africa; that they likewise endeavor to destroy their
Commerce, by chasing their Ships from one Harbor to another, to interrupt
their Traffic with the Negroes.

II. They have persuaded the Negroes, to destroy their Slaves and Forts.

III. They have seized and arrested their Effects and their Barks.

IV. They have seized upon the Fort Cabo-Cors, of which they are still in
Possession, tho it of right belongs to the English.

V. That they have fired upon his Majesty's Flag, even then when they had no
other Design but to put our Merchants and their People on Shore, to go to our
Factories.

VI. That they have twice sent their Protestations to the English, to advertise
them to offer to sell no more of their Commodities on that Coast; and if they
refused, to threaten them, They would proceed to Hostilities, and declare the
English to be the Authors of the War.

The Merchants trading to Portugal, complain,
That a Dutch Man of War, called, The Sluis van Ulissingen, had attaqued and
seized The Brasilian Frigate, belonging to them, valued at 16000 l.

The Merchants of the Royal African Company complain,
That the Losses, they had suffered from the Dutch, amounted to at least 33000
l. That several of their Ships had been burnt or sunk, and some taken, and that
the Men of them had been either poisoned, or had had their Throats cut; that
some of them having escaped the Rope, had been chaced, like miserable Wretches,
up and down the Coasts of Barbary; four of which, by Divine Providence, got at
last into England: And that two of these last had testified the same in
Holland, and reproached them to the Face with it, who had so inhumanly treated
them.

For which offenses the Hollanders had never, to that present time, made any
Reparation to the English, though all those hostile Attempts had been fully
cleared and proved, by Oaths made before the Admiralty, and by the Complaints
put up to the States by His Majesty's Envoy Extraordinary; who demanded, at the
same time, satisfaction for them.

All which Losses, suffered by the East India Company, as well in Ships as
Merchandises, amounts to the Sum of 258000 l. For the Turkey Company, 110500 l.
For the Portugal Merchants, 160000 l. For the Private Merchants trading to the
Coasts of Africa, 33000 l. Besides the Losses of the Isle of Poleron, which,
according to the just Estimation that had been made of them, amounted to above
4000000 l.

Whilst these things were transacting, Advice was sent, in a Letter, from
England to Holland, to an eminent Person among the States, of all the
Preparations of War that were making in that Kingdom; which Letter was
conceived in these Terms.

EVer since the second of June, they have begun here, with all imaginable
Diligence, to hasten the Equipment of the Navy. The King, and the Duke of York
his Brother, have been in person, to visit the Ships in the Thames, giving
Order, with all speed, to equip out those set down in the following List. For
that end, they have raised a great number of Mariners, Fishermen, Carpenters,
and other Seafaring Men, to be employed in working, without Intermission, in
arming out the Fleet, of which the most considerable will most of them, be
ready next Week, as it is believed. The Magazines are provided with all things.
Those that are equipping at Portsmouth advance likewise apace, and will be
ready much about the same time. They have likewise begun this Week to kill
Beasts, and press Men, ^n which they meet with no great Trouble, because of the
Good Will of the Seamen to the Cause, who come in Troops to offer their
Service; so that the sixth Number of 10000 Seamen will be soon complete. They
have also chosen 25 new Captains, without any distinction of Religion, they who
have served under Cromwell, and are most of them Anabaptists or Presbyterians;
they give out, That the Fleet will be composed of 30 Capital Ships of War, and
that the rest shall be kept in Readiness, to be employed upon occasion, to form
a second Fleet. They say, Prince Robert, the Duke of Albemarle, and the Earl of
Sandwich are proposed for General Officers. The Ship that was designed to go
and fetch the Earl of Carlisle from Stockholm, is countermanded, and is now
with another Fregat at Tilbury-Hope, to stop all Dutch Seamen, and take the
choicest of them to serve in his Majesty's Ships; as also the 6 Ships, of which
I informed you in my last, which are equipt by the Royal Company. There is also
at Portsmouth a King's Ship of 36 Guns ready to sail with the first fair Wind,
hitherward, as is likewise another that is refitting. I am informed, That the
Advice Yacht, that brought the News of the Surrender of Cape-Verd, has brought
back the Governor of that Place, who is kept Prisoner somewhere in the Kingdom.

A List of the Ships that are equipping.
At Chatham, the Royal James, augmented with an Addition of several Guns, the
Royal Prince, the Royal Charles, the London, Henry, Matthias, Dreadnought,
Revenge, Portland, Elizabeth, Hampshire, Diamond, Ruby and Adventure. These
Capital Ships, the most of them carrying 3 Tires of Guns, are equipping with
all diligence. And, for want of Men they have taken a great many Watermen and
Fishermen off of the River, and pressed Seamen to arm out the Ships, and
provide them with all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions. At Woolwich they are
fitting out these Third Rate Ships, viz. the Dunkirk, the Henrietta, the
Plymouth, the Crown, the Anne, and the Assurance: And at Deptford, of the
Fourth and Fifth Rates, the Convertine, the Pearl, the Dortmuyen, the Hector
and the Dolphin. The most of these last have their Sails already spread, and
their Guns ready, whilst they are working with all Diligence in fitting out the
rest.

Affairs being in that State, and the United Provinces apprehending that all
those Squablings would quickly break out into an open War with England, began
to put all things in order: And it was resolved in the Assembly of the States,
That Notice should be given to the Ships bound Westward, to go round about
Scotland. The Zealanders likewise sent 2 nimble sailing Ships to Hitland, to
give warning to the Ships belonging to the State, to avoid the Harbors of
England, to prevent the falling of the Ships, coming back from the East Indies,
into the Hands of the English; and Rear-Admiral Tromp was sent out to Sea with
a Fleet of 23 Men of War, to cruise for them, and to secure their Retreat home.

In the mean while, Mr. de Goch set out the 17th of June, in Quality of
Ambassador from the States, toward the Court of England, to endeavor
amicably to appease and compose the Differences that threatened the two Nations
with a Rupture. He arrived on the 22d at London, and was received by the Master
of the Ceremonies, with great Marks of Friendship, and the very same Evening
had Audience of his Majesty at Whitehall; and after the usual Compliments,
their Discourse fell upon the Affairs that concerned the East and West India
Companies, upon which the King, among other Reasons, told him, That it was not
to be suffered, That the DutchWest-India Company only by the means of a few
Forts, and 3 or 4 Ships, without possessing elsewhere any Country within Land,
should pretend to render the Coasts of Africa inaccessible to all others, by
blocking up the Havens and the Mouths of the Rivers, against their Commerce,
and keeping them off, and driving them away from every Place. The Ambassador
replied, 'That all the Difficulties about that Affair were terminated by the
last Treaty; and that it ought to be examined whether the Dutch had done any
thing in contravention to it. After that he made his Complaints of the Hostile
Attempts of Captain Holms, in Guiney: To which the King made him the same
Answer he had done before upon the like Subject, That he had not the least
Knowledge of that, but that as soon as he should be informed of it, he would
act as he found convenient. After which he begun to speak of the great Naval
Preparations that were making in Holland. The States Ambassador justified
himself, by answering, That those Preparations were chiefly for the great
Convoys they were forced to allow their Merchant Ships, for the Security of
their Commerce; praying his Majesty withal, That he would please to give order,
as the States would likewise do, on their side, that nothing might pass between
the two Fleets, that might disturb the Peace, or alienate the good
Correspondence settled between the two Nations. The next day Mr. de Goch, had
Audience of the Duke of York, and in the Evening of the Chancellor; in which
they discoursed of nothing else but of the great Preparations for War, and of
the Affairs of the East and West India Companies. Some Time after, the States
Ambassador presented a Memorial concerning the extraordinary Naval
Preparations in England, and about the Hostilities committed by Captain Holms,
and the forbidding of the Importation of Dutch Commodities into the Kingdom,
under the Pretense of the contagious Disease that then reigned in Holland. The
King answered very largely to all those Points, in Writing; of which the
Substance was, That he had no Design his Fleet should commit any Act of
Hostility; That he had given no Order to Captain Holms to seize upon
Cape-Verde, or any other Forts belonging to the Hollanders, nor to attempt any
thing against the Subjects of the United Provinces; That they ought to have
more confidence in his Royal word, than in the Reports of Pilots and Mariners,
who were very often ill informed: That as what concerned his forbidding the
importation of Dutch Commodities, upon the account of the Contagion, he was
obliged so to do, for the preservation of his Kingdom, and of the health of his
Subjects.

In the mean while the French King by his Ambassadors at London and the Hague,
presented his Mediation in order to appease the differences that were ready to
kindle a War between those two Powers; which the United Provinces agreeably
received, but ^ngland refused: Which was the cause, that a little time after
the Ambassadors of that Crown returned home very ill satisfied. The States
laying nothing more to Heart, than the maintenance of Peace, and being very
sensible how dear the last War had cost them, were glad before they engaged
themselves in such another, to try all means possible to avert it. For that
effect, they writ a Letter to the King of England, to signify ^o him, that
they had no other Passion greater than that to preserve Peace, hoping his
Majesty would be of the same mind. The King made answer to the States by
another Letter, which was delivered them by the English Ambassador at his
return to the Hague, for he had made a step to London, to endeavor to
terminate the differences between the two Companies of the East and West
Indies. That Letter was full of protestations, signifying the great desire the
King had on his side, to maintain the Peace; But then returning to the
accustomed complaints, it was added, that he saw with great regret, that they
went not about to give any satisfaction to the English for their losses; and in
fine, concluded with a protestation before God and Man, that they would be
guilty of all the Inconveniences, and fatal Consequences that would follow, if
a speedy Reparation were not made.

The States, after the reading of that Letter, found well enough, that they
were no longer to flatter themselves, the Intention of the Court of England
being there clearly enough laid open to them, and without mincing of the
matter, the King foretold them a part of those disasters that were ready to
happen. In the mean while the English Navy was assembling with all diligence in
the Downs, and about the Isle of Wight; And some Dutch Advice-Yachts that were
sent out from time to time, to view and observe them were seized: Which
confirmed the States in the Resolution to have Recourse to nothing else but the
force of Arms.

Rear-Admiral Tromp being at Sea, as we have said, to Cruise upon the Watch for
the Ships that were expected from the East- Indies, had met them in the month
of August, at Fairhills near Hitland, and had conducted them into their
respective Ports, without seeing any English by the way. And four Merchant
Ships belonging to the West India Company, Bound for the Coast of Guiney were
ready to set sail; but it was not thought fit to let them go without a good
Convoy, because of the advice they had had, that Prince Robert with a Squadron
of 18 Men of War, was ready to set out for Guiney, whither he was going to
favor the depredations the English were making in those parts. The States in
regard of the Good Services they had received from the West India Company in
several occasions, were resolved to employ their Forces to protect them: And
for that end gave order to Captain Kampen with a Squadron of 10 Men of War, to
Convoy to Guiney the 4 Ships bound thither belonging to that Company. But
because they doubted not but that the King of Great Britain would construe that
Resolution for a new attempt on their side toward the Breach of a Peace, they
sent orders to their Ambassador at London to present his Majesty the following
Memorial thereupon.

The Memorial presented to King Charles II. by the States Ambassador's,
Concerning the Squadron of men of War sent to Guiney.
THE States General of the United Provinces having had advice from their
Ambassador at London, by their last Letters from him, That the King of Great
Britain, the Duke of York, and his Majesty's chief Ministers of State, had
testified some discontent at their arming out some Ships of War designed for
the Coast of Guiney, have thought fit for the taking away of all sort of
Umbrage to declare the Reasons that moved them to that extraordinary Arming.
Which are, That the States of the United Provinces having heard with much
regret, That some Nation among which were some Subjects of his Majesty,
contrary to his approbation, and his repeated Protestations that he had given
no order for it, had some time since, by some hostilities attempted upon the
Liberty of the Good Subjects of the State, and especially those in their
Countries in Africa, belonging to the West- India Company, and principally upon
the Coasts of Guiney, in seizing upon their Ships and Effects, and attacking in
the bosom of Peace, this State, by taking of the Forts and Places it
possesses: The United Provinces judging it their Duty to Protect their Good
Subjects in those Countries, as far as it should be in their Power, and to
secure them for the future from the like attempts, had resolved to send thither
a Squadron of 10 Men of War, and so much the rather because the West- India
Company is about sending thither four Merchant Ships richly laden, which it was
not thought fit to expose without a Convoy to the danger the others have
incurred, knowing that the Enemies they have in that Country, by means of a
Re-inforcement they have lately received, have sufficient Forces to make
themselves Masters of the said four Merchant Ships at their arrival there, as
they have done of the others. And that his Majesty may be fully assured of the
sincere intention of their High and Mightinesses, principally in what concerns
their maintaining of the Peace, and preserving of a perfect good understanding
between England and the United Provinces, the States were willing by this
Memorial, to let his Majesty know, That their Resolution is, to give Order to
him that shall have the Command of the said 10 Men of War, that in case he
comes to meet on the Coasts of Guiney, or any where else in his way, with any
of his Majesty's Ships, or with those of any other Ally of this State, he shall
not do them any offense against their liberty, tending to the interruption of
their Commerce, provided they have the same regards for the Subjects of the
United Provinces; upon which his Majesty may entirely rely. And forasmuch as
their High and Mightiness^s expect from the Justice of his Majesty, that his
Subjects, who without his orders and approbation, have committed all sorts of
Hostility out of his Kingdom, shall not be protected or supported in their
enterprises, and that it will please him to give his orders to that purpose, to
the Admiral of his Fleet that has been already sent into those Countries, or to
others that shall hereafter be sent thither; In that confidence, their High and
Mightinesses are assured, there will not happen on their part any mischievous
Rencounter between his Majesty's Ships and the States 10 Men of War, that will
be capable to disturb the Union and good Correspondence of the two Nations. On
the other side, may it please his Majesty, in order to the taking away all
cause of complaint and jealousy, by a Generous and equitable Resolution, to
assure their High and Mightinesses, of the Restitution of the Ships and Forts
that cause so great damage to the Subjects of this State, and to their
West India Company; which is what their High and Mightinesses expect from the
Friendship and Generosity of his Majesty. The States being glad to use all
imaginable precautions to prevent any attempts of the English against those
Ships, because they knew well enough from good hands, that the English-Fleet
was ready to put to Sea, gave order to Lieutenant Admiral Opdam, who was then
at Goree with a part of the States Fleet, to Convoy them the length of the
Channel. That Fleet that had been equipt with all diligence, was composed of 39
Men of War.

But it seems afterward, the Guiney Expedition was countermanded both by the
English, and the Dutch: For Prince Robert received other Orders, and the Ships
of the Company as well as their intended Convoy were detained by contrary Winds.

In the mean while, news came to the Dutch, That the English had appeared with
some Men of War before New Amsterdam, situated in New Holland, in the West-
Indies, and had taken it, and forced all the Colony to submit to their
Obedience, with so much the greater Facility, because the Hollanders had no
relief to hope for, and the English were ten to one, The Capitulation was
signed the 8th of September, under the following Conditions.

Articles of the Surrender of New Holland to the English.
1. WE consent, that the States General, or their West- India Company, shall
keep and possess peaceably all the Buildings and Houses except those which
shall be found within the Fort; And that they shall be permitted to transport
within the space of 6 months, all the Arms and Ammunition belonging to them, or
else they shall be paid for them.

2. All the Public Houses shall be employed to the same use as at present.

3 Every Private Man shall remain a free Burgher, and shall retain his Lands,
Houses, Goods, and Ships in what part of the Country soever they be, to dispose
of them as he shall think Good.

4. That if any of the Inhabitants have a mind to retire elsewhere, they shall
have a year and six weeks time granted them, for transporting their Wives,
Servants and Effects, and disposing of their Lands.

5. That if any of the Public Ministers there shall resolve to retire into
England, they shall be transported thither in his Majesty's Frigates, without
paying any thing for their Passage.

6. It is likewise freely granted to any person, to come freely from Holland
into this Country, to make Plantations here; and Dutch Ships may Anchor here
with all liberty, and return at pleasure, or send back their Ships laden with
all sorts of Merchandises into their own Country.

7. All Ships coming hither from Holland, or elsewhere, shall be freely
received here with their Merchandises, and as freely permitted to go away again
elsewhere, as was practiced before our arrival, and that for the space of six
months continuance.

8. The Hollanders here shall enjoy. Liberty of Conscience in Divine Service,
and Ecclesiastical Discipline.

9. No Hollander, nor any Ship belonging to him shall be forced in time of War
to take Service against any Nation whatsoever.

10. No Manathan, or Inhabitant of the Country shall be charged with Quartering
of Soldiers, till the Officers have fully paid and satisfified him for it
beforehand; and that too only when the Fort shall not be able to lodge all the
Soldiers within it; and then the Burgomasters shall be obliged to choose out
some houses for that purpose.

11. The Hollanders shall keep their ancient Customs concerning Inheritances
and Successions.

12. All Public Writings and Contracts concerning any ones Inheritance, or
Ecclesiastical Government, and the Diaconie, or Orphans Chamber, shall be
carefully preserved by those who have received them: And if there be any
Writings that concern the States General, they shall be sent to them upon
occasion.

13. The sentences that have been given here shall be firm and stable, without
being stopped by any new proceedings; But if any one think injustice has been
done him, and that he shall appeal to the States General; the contrary party
shall be obliged to answer his Grievances.

14. If any Hollanders dwelling here, shall desire to go into England, or any
other part of his Majesty's Dominions, to Trade there, or would traffic with
the Indians, upon his presenting for that effect a Petition to the Governor, a
Writing shall be granted him by which he shall be declared a Burgher of that
Place, and in that Quality he shall be permitted to trade there with all
Liberty.

15. All Subalternate Burghers, Officers and Magistrates shall be continued in
their Offices if they desire it, till the time prescribed for a new Election,
and then new ones shall be chosen, upon this Condition, that the new elected
Magistrates shall be obliged to take an Oath of Fidelity to his Britanick
Majesty before they enter upon their Office.

16. That if it appears expenses have been made for the Public, and means
found out to erect Funds designed for the paying them, those means shall still
subsist, and be put in execution according to the first project formed of them,
till all the said Charges be re-imburs'd.

17. All Contracts formerly made, and all Debts and Obligations, that concern
the Inhabitants of this Province, shall be exacted and prosecuted according to
the Customs practiced by the Hollanders.

18. That if it be certified, that the Amsterdam Company of the West- Indies,
owe any sum of Money to any one of this Country, it is agreed, that the enquiry
after the Ships and Goods designed for the United Provinces shall be continued
6 months and more.

19. All Military Officers and their Soldiers shall march out with the
Equipages Complete, Colors flying, and Drums beating; and if any one of the
Body of those Troops shall be minded to employ himself in planting, he shall be
allowed 50 Acres of Land; and if any one of them will serve in quality of
Servant, he shall be received as a free person, and shall afterward be made a
free Burgher of the Country.

20 That in case the King of Great Britain and the States of the United
Provinces should agree, that this Province should be restored to them, with the
good pleasure of his Majesty, it shall be redelivered to them upon the same
foot and under the same Conditions.

21. The Town of the Isle of Manathan shall have the Privilege to elect
Deputies who shall have their free Votes in all public Affairs as well as the
other Deputies.

22. They which shall have any Houses in the Fortress of Orange, may, if they
please, demolish the fortification, and preserve their Houses as it is
practiced in all open places in which there is no Fort.

23. If any one amongst the Soldiery, shall desire to go away for Holland, and
that the Amsterdam Company, or any other private Person be minded to charge
themselves with his transportation, they shall be provided with a free Passport
which they shall receive from Colonel Richard Nichols Deputy Governor under
his Royal Highness and the other Deputies, by way of Provision for the security
of such Soldiers and of the Ships that shall transport them as well as their
effects, against all Acts of Hostility from his Majesti^s Ships, or those of
any of his Subjects.

24. That the Copy of the Kings Patent to his Royal Highness and the Copy of
his Royal Highnesses Commission granted to Colonel Nichols, Signed and
Authorized by two other Deputies, and by Mr. John Winschrop, for true Copies
shall be deliverd into the hands of Mr. Stuyvesand, the present Governor, to
the end that on next Monday at 8 a clock in the morning, near the Old-Mill they
may be Sealed, as well as the Articles granted by Colonel Nichols, Lieutenant
Governor for his Royal Highness; and that two hours, after, the Fort, and the
Town, called New Amsterdam in the Isle of Manathan, shall be delivered into the
Hands of the said Colonel Richard Nichols, by the means of them whom he shall
Depute thereunto under his Hand and Seal.

New Holland had been possessed by the United Provinces above 60 Years, but
being joined on one side to New England, so near a Neighborhood of the two
Nations made them that they could not endure one another together, and was a
perpetual source of Jealousy and dispute; to prevent which, in the year 1663,
they agreed upon certain limits that were to separate them. But the Engli^h
broke that project under pretense they had received no Orders for so doing, and
whilst the Deputies from the Hollanders were at Boston busied in Regulating the
limits, the English fell upon some Villages belonging to the States, and took
them, publishing at the same time, that they knew no New Holland, but only a
New England, of which all the Country depended, so that they influenced many of
the Inhabitants to take Arms against the Government. The directors of the
West India Company made their Complaints of it, to their High and Mightinesses,
hoping they might come to an amicable Accommodation about it, but the result
made it* plainly appear, that the English intended nothing less than Peace.

In the mean while the King of great Britain had Advice from Vice Admiral
Lawson, and Captain Berkley at Cadiz, that Vice Admiral de Ruiter having
Anchored in the Road of that Town, had taken in Provisions for a year, and that
on the 5th. of October at 8 in the morning he weighed Anchor, with a Squadron
of 12 great Men of War, in order to make the best of his way in all appearance
toward the Coasts of Guiney, though he had given out that he was going to Sally.
And indeed the suspicions of the English in that point were not without some
foundation, for de Ruiter had received Express Orders from the States, to sail
toward Cape Verd and the Coast of Guiney; to reduce the English to reason, and
make them restore by force what they had unjustly usurpt.

Upon that news all the Dutch Ships were stopped in England, and Letters of
reprisal were granted; but all those Commissions granted in haste were
recalled, as well to show all Europe, that they would not be Aggressors, as to
gain time to Complete the manning of their Navy. It was thought more proper to
let loose the men of War and Capers upon the Hollanders as well to encourage
their pressed Seamen, and to get men enough to furnish their Grand Fleet, as
the more effectually to interrupt the Commerce of the United Provinces, by
taking their Merchant Ships that went to and fro in the Channel.

And because they knew, they in Holland expected about that time the return of
their Ships from France and the Streights, they thought it their best way to go
and meet them, and to endeavor to take them, before they let the Privateers go
out, who in all likelihood, would but have awakened the Hollanders, and made
them think the more of securing themselves. And this project succeeded well
with them: For the Merchant Fleet consisting of 113 sail, having quitted the
Coast of France, to pursue their way home along the Channel, was taken, and
carried into the Ports of England. But amongst so great a Number of Merchant
Ships, there being some Ships belonging to other Nations, they were redemanded,
yet all the rest remained in their hands. At the same time the King of England
in Justification of that proceeding, published the following Declaration

The King of Egland's Declaration about the taking of the Dutch Ships.
HIs Majesty having considered the Injuries, Affronts and Damages suffered in
the Persons of his Subjects, by the loss of their Goods and Ships, by the
West India Company, and other Subjects of the United Provinces, and those
losses amounting to very considerable Sums, for which no Reparation could yet
be obtained, notwithstanding the Complaints so often reiterated by his Majesty
to the States General for that purpose, which have had no effect, His Majesty
has thought fit by the Advice of his Privy Council, to grant Letters of
Reprisal against the Ships or Merchandises belonging to the States of the
United Provinces, or their Subjects, so that not only his Majesty's Fleet, and
Ships of War, but all sorts of Privateers shall have right by Letters of
Reprisal, or permission to be given him from his Royal Highness the Duke of
York Lord High Admiral of England, to arrest and seize all Ships and Effects
belonging to the States of the United Provinces, in Order to put them under the
Jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty, which shall be Authorized to Act
thereupon according to the Customs and Laws of Nations. And whereas several
Ships and Effects belonging to the United Provinces or their Subjects have been
already taken according to his Majesty's Orders, and are kept in his Harbors,
His Majesty, with the Advice of his Privy Council declares, that the abovesaid
Ships and Effects are Comprised in the aforesaid Letters of Reprisal, and that
they shall be proceeded against before the Admiralty according to the Customs
and Laws of Nations, till a final Judgment: And the Present Declaration shall
serve for warrant for all that the said Court of Admiralty shall do in that
matter. Dated at Whitehall December the 16th. 1664. The United Provinces seeing
themselves thus engaged in a War with England, and the Proper season for
putting out their Fleet to Sea being past, they thought however, that at least
they ought to put a stop as much as 'twas possible, to all those Hostilities,
and to provide for the security of their Subjects. Accordingly the States
prohibited all their Merchant Ships to go out of their Ports, and their Seamen
to take service under any Foreign Prince. They likewise rigorously prohibited
the going out of any vessels and exportation of any Ammunitions, and generally
of all materials serving to the building of Men of War, or furnishing their
Equipages. Then Mr. Van Beuningen was sent to the Court of France, Mr. de
Amerongen, into Denmark, and Mr. Ysbrands, into Swedeland, in Quality of
Ambassadors Extraordinary, to inform the Princes that were Allies of the State
of all that had lately passed, because the English by a fetch of their
dissembling Policy, endeavored in all those Courts, to make the Dutch pass for
the Aggressors, and to attribute all the wrong to them. They resolved likewise
to raise a fund of 14 Millions of Livers, as well for the building of 48 men of
War, as for Levying of some Troops, to Reinforce their Companies and their
Garrisons, for the raising of a Marine Regiment, and a new Regiment in reserve,
and lastly, for defraying the expenses of the fortifications of the Brill, of
Helvoet, of Maesland, of the Texel, and of the other necessities of the State.
The East India Company engaged to Equip 20 Men of War for the service of the
United Provinces. The Zealand Privateers received Letters of Reprisal, so that
the Capers in little time after took 30 prizes from the English. They also
appointed a day of Prayer which was celebrated the 21st. of January 1665, to
implore the Protection of Heaven against the Contagion then Reigning, and to
beg a Continua^ion of Peace and of the Prosperity of the Prove nc^.

de Goch, used all imaginable instances with (...) ^^ng of England, to
endeavor to obtain the r^ ^ng of the Ships which had been taken; But all in
vain. For the King made him Answer, That he had caused to be arrested in his
Ports; or to be taken at Sea, the Dutch Ships, upon the certain Advice he had,
that de Ruiter was sent to Guiney, to interrupt the Commerce of his Subjects,
and to seize on their Ships, and Merchandises, so that he intended to
indemnifie him for all those losses by the Confiscation of the goods that had
been taken; that for the same end, he would stop all Dutch Ships that should
come in his way, till he heard further news of de Ruiter, etc. The Duke of York
also declared, in Quality of Lord High Admiral of the Kingdom, that he would go
next spring to Sea, to maintain the Honor and Glory of the Crown.

And the Court of England was just ready to put out a Declaration of War
against the Hollanders; But that Turner and Walker two Famous Advocates of the
Court of Admiralty Represented to the King, that if he declared War at that
time, the Ships taken before the Declaration, could not according to the Law of
Nations, be confiscated, upon which, 'twas thought fit to defer it for some
time. However the Dutch Ships were declared Good Prize on the 6th. of January
1665. But when they came to the sale of them, the Commissioners of the
Admiralty were far from finding their account advanced by it, so little money
did they receive from it because besides that all the best of what was in those
Ships, had been imbezell'd, the charges of the Admiralty Court amounted to very
considerable sums.

The French begun likewise to resent the unsupportable Dominion of the English
at Sea: For they pretended to visit their Ships in the Channel, to see whether
they carried any Dutch Merchandises, and several of them were seized on that
pretense, and carried into the Ports of England, and sold according to their
value before any Plea could be put in for their release. About the end of the
precedent year, the English just as if War had been declared, had attackt the
Convoy of the Dutch Smyrno Fleetnear Cadiz, under the Command of Commadore
Brakel who was killed on that occasion after he had signalized himself, as
appears by the following Letter written upon that Subject to the Admiralty of
the College of Amsterdam, by Captain Van Meeuwen.

THe 26th. instant we unmoor'd from Malaga under the Command of Commadore
Brakel Captain Roetening, and Captain Kuiper of Zealand, with a Fleet of about
30 Merchant Ships great and small, steering our Course toward Cadiz. When we
were arrived near Cape Moly 3 Merchant Ships more joined our Flag, viz. one
Dutch one, and two Foreigners, we made all together toward the Mouth of the
Streights, and having past it on the 28th. with some Merchant Ships of our
Fleet separated from us; the same night being arrived within 3 miles of Cadiz
Bay, Commadore Brakel gave the signal to cast anchor; the next morning at break
of day, we set sail again, and some of our Merchant Ships were scattered from
us: The 29th. in the morning we met 8 or 9 English Ships, upon which Brakel
advancing toward their Flag, saluted it with some Guns, but the English
Admiral waiting his opportunity till Brakel came up side by side with him,
powered in upon him a whole Broad side. When we saw that, we repaid him his
change. But several Merchant men, contrary to the Orders of their High and
Mightinesses, and in contempt of their honor, and the Oath of fidelity sworn
to their Country, basely deserting us to Retire into the Road. We had not all
the advantage we had reason to hope for if we had been seconded; for without
difficulty with the Divine Protection, the English would have been beaten,
whereas on the contrary to our great regret, Commadore Brakel was killed, as
also two others, and some wounded in his Ship which has received some shot
under Water, and we are now busy in repairing her. Captain Roetening has
likewise had 2 men killed, and some wounded. As for my self, God be praised, I
have received no damage excepting some shot in my sails, and some of my Rigging
shattered. The English have taken 2 small Ships. The Pilot John Roelofsz who
was in the Ship King Solomon, was sunk after he had defended himself like a
brave Soldier: The Ship St. Mary, one of those we lost in the Night, was taken
by the English before the fight, as she was retiring into the Road, where we
arrived in the dusk of the Evening. The English keep the bay besieged. I could
wish I had received orders from their High and Mightinesses, to unlade some
Ships and take them into their Service; For then I should flatter my self with
the hopes, by the blessing of God, to chase them Quickly out of the Bay. This
Letter as well as another from Commissioner Giisbert T^mels written from Port
St. Mary the same day, viz. The 30th. of December, agreed together in all the
Circumstances of that Action: They were read in the Assembly of the States
General, who in Consequence of them, published on the 24th. of January, the
following Declaration.

AFter having maturely examined and considered the offenses and frequent Acts
of Hostility committed since some time on the part of the King of Great
Britain, A Declaration of the States General.
or his Subjects by usurping Countries, Towns, Fortresses, and Vilages, first
on the Coast of Guiney afterward in New Holland, and lastly by the taking of
several Ships in Europe; It has been resolved, that all sorts of English Ships
whether Men of War, or Merchants, shall be taken and seized by the States Men
of War, and brought into the Ports of the United Provinces, till his Britannick
Majesty shall have made Reparation for the Hostilities committed, or that some
Accommodation be made, and in Consequence hereof, the Colleges of the several
Admiralties shall be Ordered to send out immediately to Sea some light Frigates,
and to put in Execution the above said intention of their High and Mightinesses
by the General Officers and Captains of the Men of War under their Respective
Jurisdiction, or which depend of them, etc. In pursuance of that Declaration,
Express Orders were sent to the Colleges of the Admiralty to cause all
diligence to be used in endeavoring to forward the Equipages of the Men of
War, that they might be Completed by the next spring. The States on the other
side thought fit for very important reasons, to Create three new Lieutenant
Generals, or Admirals over and above those that were already honored with
those High Offices, and according to that project, Vice Admiral Me^wisz
Rortenaar, was elected Lieutenant Admiral of the College of the Admiralty of
the Meuse; Vice Admiral Michael Adriansz de Ruiter, was made Lieutenant Admiral
of the College of Amsterdam; and Vice Admiral John Cornel^us Meppel was Created
Lieut^nant Admiral of the College of West-Fries^and, for the North. Some change
was also made amongst the other Officers of the Fleet. For Rear-Admiral Aart
Van Nes was made Vice Admiral of the Admiralty of the Meuse, and Captain John
de Liefde was made Rear Admiral in his place, Rear Admiral Cornel^us Tromp was
Created Vice Admiral of the College of Amsterdam, and Captain de Wild
substituted in his place of Rear Admiral; Keort Siewersz Adelaar, Famous for
his Exploits against the Turks, and who afterward went into the Service of the
King of Denmark, was elected Vice Admiral of the College of West-Friesland for
the North, but he thanked the States for the Honor they intended him, and so
Rear-Admiral Volkert Schram was made Vice Admiral in his place; and Captain
Frederick Staghouwer had the Office of Rear-Admiral of the same College. The
Quality of Lieutenant Admiral of Zealand was likewise given to Vice Admiral
John Evertsz. But Mr. Opdam Lieutenant Admiral of Holland and West-Friesland
was named by the States, to Command in chief, in all the Sea Forces of the
States, in Quality of Lieutentant Admiral General, and Lieutenant Admiral
Kortenaar had order to take the place of Opdam, in case of his death or
sickness.

A little time before, some Deputies of the States had been sent to Muster the
inhabitants of the Villages near the Coast of Holland, beginning at the
Village, Ter Heide near the Hague, and so on to the Texel, and found their
Number to amount to 36000. In the mean while an Ordinance was published,
prohibiting all Subjects of the United Provinces to stir out of their Ports,
upon pain of Confiscation of their ships and Merchandises, in case they were
taken; And they likewise prohibited in particular the exportation of all sorts
of Ammunition and the going out of the ships designed for the Whale-Fishing,
and all sorts of Fishing about Greenland, and small Fishing, and the
importation of Herrings, and other salt Fish: which was done with intent
thereby to get up the more men to Complete the manning out of the Fleet, and to
prevent the Dutch ships from being taken by the English. And for the
Encouragement of the Seamen greater Recompenses were settled than ever before
upon all such who should make themselves Masters of any English man of War, or
of any of their Flags. For to that effect, there was an Ordinance published,
dated the 10th. of March, by which it was promised, That whatsoever ship of the
States should in a General Sea Fight between the two Fleets or in any
Rencounter, take any English ship, should have not only the ship so taken, with
all that belonged to it as a reward, but that over and above that, he that
should take the chief Admiral ship of the English should have 50000 Livers
Gratification;, for every other Admiral ship, 30000 Livers; for every ship of
other General Officers, 20000 Livers; for every other ship of War carrying 40
Guns, 10000, and for every other ship less considerable, excepting Yachts, 6000
Livers: That he that should bring away the Flag of the chief Admiral should
have 5000 Livers Reward, and for the Flags of the other Admirals, 2500 Livers;
for the Flag of a fore mast, 1250 Livers; for that of the mizzen mast, 750
Livers and for the Flag on the Poop 250 Livers. The Captains of the Fireships
that should burn any of the Enemies Ships, were to have for each of them so
burnt the 3d. part of the Sum promised to those who take an English man of War.
The same reward was Assigned for those who in quality of Volunteers, should set
out Fireships for the Service of the State. He that could sink or otherwise
destroy any of the Enemies Fire ships that were ready to endamage any of the
States men of War, was to have 6000 Livers Gratification, Those who out of an
Extraordinary affection to their Country should furnish out any man of War to
join the Flag of the States Fleet, to endeavor the ruin of the Common Enemy,
were to receive double the reward granted to the other ships of the State, both
for the English ships they should take and for their Flags, and that in
acknowledgement of their Zeal, their Fidelity, and their Bravery, There were
also particular Recompenses allotted to those that should rescue out of danger
any of the States Men of War that happened to be surrounded by the Enemies, and
ready to be burnt or sunk, and to those who out of a General fight, should take
any English man of War. Besides all which, there was granted to the Widows and
Children of those that should happen to be killed in the fight, double the sum
of their Husbands or Parents Wages; It was likewise Ordered, that the said
Recompenses should be granted, though the ships that had merited them should
happen to be sunk, or that they could not be brought back into their Ports. And
to second, and raise the Courage of the Great Men, and inspire honor into the
Cowards and run-aways, it was decreed, that those who should deliver up any of
the States men of War into the hands of the English should be Condemned in a
Council of War, and punished with death, without distinction, and without
remission; and that all Sea-Officers whether General or Subaltern, who should
quit the Flag without express order from the Admiral, should also be punished
with death, etc. A little while after, another Ordinance came out from the
States, bearing date the 17th. of March, allotting recompenses for those who
should be disabled, or maimed in the Service of the States, after the following
rates, viz.

Livers For the loss of both Eyes, 1500 For one Eye, 0350 For the loss of both
Arms, 1500 For the Right Arm, 0450 For the Left 0350 For the loss of both
Hands, 1200 For the Right Hand, 0350 For the Left, 0300 For the loss of both
Legs, 0700 For one Leg, 0350 For the loss of both Feet, 0450 For one Foot, 0200

As for other lamed Persons, the College of the Admiralty reserved to
themselves the care to allow them recompenses according to their discretion. It
was likewise ordered, that all those that were disabled from getting any thing
toward their subsistence should receive each a pension of a Ducatoon per week,
during the remainder of their lives, and the rest of the disabled men,
proportionably.

The States General thought fit also to advertise all the Neighboring powers,
that in case any of their Subjects should be met at Sea, armed out to prey upon
the ships of the United Provinces, under color of any Commissions borrowed
from the English, that if taken, they shall be punished as Pirates: And that if
any Hollanders, Subjects of the States should be found and taken on board any
English Privateers, they should be punished with death without remission, and
their Goods confiscated. The English and Scotch Captains that had been several
years in the States service in their Land Forces, having refused to take a new
Oath of Fidelity to them for fear of losing their Estates in their own Country,
were thankt for their former services, and transported home in one of the
States men of War.

In the mean while, the King of England having been a long time impatient to
declare War against the United Provinces, at last published his so long
intended Declaration for that effect, on the 14/4th of March, 1665. by his
Heralds, who proclaimed it by sound of Trumpet in the great Streets of
West-minster and London- It was conceived in these Terms.

WHereas, The King of England s Declaration of War against the States.
upon the Complaints of diverse Offenses, Injuries and Usurp^tions, committed by
the East and West India Companies, and other the Subjects of the United
Provinces, upon the Persons, Goods and Ships of our Subjects, to their great
Damage, which amount to very considerable Sums, instead of receiving the
Satisfaction so often demanded, we have found, that they have given Order to de
Ruiter, not only to quit the Project formed against the Corsairs of the
Mediterranean, in Consequence of the Union that had been proposed to us by the
States General, but also to attempt upon the Liberty of our Subjects in Africa,
by using against them all sorts of Hostility. After which, we gave Orders to
stop all the Ships belonging to the Subjects of the United Provinces; though we
never granted any Commissions to use Reprisals, or suffered any Proceedings
against the Ships so stopped, till we had a full Assurance, that de Ruiter had
put in execution the said Orders, by the taking or several of our Subjects, and
of their Ships and Merchandises. Finding at present bv these new Offenses and
Attempts, and by the Advices we have received of their Preparations for War,
and of their granting out Letters of Reprisal against our Subjects, that our
overgreat Indulgence, and all the other Remedies employed by us, to induce
them to entertain a true Amity with us, have been ineffectual, seeing they are
resolved by Force of Arms to maintain their unjust Attempts; we therefore have
thought fit, with the Advice of our Privy Council, to testify and declare to
the Face of the whole Earth, That the said States are the Aggressors, and ought
justly to be acknowledged such by all the World; so that our Fleets and Ships,
as well as all other Ships that shall receive Commissions from our well-beloved
Brother the Duke of York, Lord High Admiral of England, shall have Right, and
may, by virtue of them, Fight, Take, and make themselves Masters of all the
Ships, Vessels and Effects belonging to the Subjects or the United Provinces,
or to them that shall be bound for their Country. We also expressly forbid all
our Subjects (as we likewise advertise all other Persons, of what Nation soever
they be) to carry or Transport any Soldiers, Arms, Powder, Ammunition, or other
contraband Merchandises, into the Lands, Countries, Plantations, or Provinces,
belonging to the said States, for that such things, when taken, shall be
adjudged good Prize. And further, we declare, That every Ship, of what Nation
soever it be, that shall be found to have on Board her any Effects,
Merchandises, or any number of Persons belonging to the United Provinces, or
their Subjects, shall be declared good Prize, with her Lading: Also, That all
the Effects and Merchandises of what Nation soever they be (whether they belong
to us or Foreigners, it matters not) which shall be found in any Ships
belonging to the States, or to any of their Subjects, they all shall be
declared good Prize, unless the said Ships be provided with good Pass-ports,
granted to them by us, or our Dear Brother.

And that this our Declaration may be public, and all the World may have
perfect Knowledge of it, our Will and Pleasure is, That this present
Declaration be published with all the usual formalities, as it ought to be, etc.

As soon as this Declaration appeared, the States sent Copies of it into all
the Courts of Europe; which they directed to their Ministers there, to present
them to all the several Princes and Powers, and to make them take notice, at
the same time, what Losses and Damages they must expect from such a
Declaration, by the Interruption of their Commerce, since by that not only the
Merchandises, which should be found on Board the Dutch Ships, were to be
declared good Prize, but also all the Vessels belonging to them, if they were
laden with Dutch Commodities; or if they had on board them any of the Subjects
of the United Provinces. The French, and those of Hamburg and Ostend
sufficiently felt the Effects of it, since many of them, though they were going
toward Neuter-Places, were seized and carried into the Ports of England; from
whence they were not released till a long time after, and with much Difficulty,
and after great Expenses.

The War then being declared, the English Navy Royal, under the command of the
Duke of York, consisting of above 100 Sail of Men of War, great and small, set
sail the first Day of May, and two Days after, arrived before the Texel; a
little too soon, and before it was well complete. The cause of that great
Precipitation was, a false piece of News sent to White Hall by the Earl of
Ossory, Son to the Duke of Ormond, Viceroy of Ireland, That a certain Bark had
discovered, behind Hitland, a Fleet of 60 Sail, which they thought at first to
be de Ruiter's Fleet, with some Prizes: but on the 8th of the same Month the
English Fleet was saluted with a violent Tempest, in wnich some of their Ships
were scattered, and others very much damnified: So that seeing de Ruiter
appeared not, they were forced to return back into their own Ports, without
having made any other Progress than the taking of 7 Ships laden with Wine, with
another Ship that served them for Convoy, an English Prize, taken by the
Hollanders near the Ca^ibee Islands, and a Ship of Lisbon: But the Men of War
that were their Convoy, being nimble Sailers, escaped by the Favor of the
Night.

Whilst the English were busy in repairing the Damages done to their Fleet by
the ill Weather, the Zealand Fleet, consisting of 31 Men of War, having set
sail the 22d of May, at break of Day, joined that of Holland, under the Command
of Lieutenant-Admiral Opdam. After which junction, the whole Fleet kept on
their Course, being composed of 103 Men of War, 7 Yachts, 11 Fireships, and 12
Galliots, carrying 4869 Guns, and 21631 Men, and was divided into 7 Squadrons.

The first was under the Conduct of Admiral Opdam, Vice Admiral Vander Hulst,
and Rear-Admiral de Graaf. The second was commanded by Admiral John Evertsz,
Vice Admiral de Liesde, and Rear-Admiral Cornelius Evertsz. The third was under
the Command of Admiral Kortenaar, Vice Admiral Schey, and Rear-Admiral
Marceveld. The fourth was under the Conduct of Admiral Stellingwerf,
Vice Admiral Koenders, and Rear-Admiral Bruensveld. The fifth was under the
Command of Admiral Cornelius Tromp, of Vice Admiral Koeverden, and of
Rear-Admiral P. Salomonsz. The sixth was commanded by Admiral C. Evertsz,
Vice Admiral Bankert, and Rear-Admiral Bronsaart. And lastly, the seventh was
under the Conduct of Admiral Schram, Vice Admiral Staghouwer, and Rear-Admiral
Hourtuin.

That Fleet, one of the finest and most formidable that ever appeared on the
Northern Seas, seized and took, soon after, about 20 English Ships; the News of
which coming to London, put the Merchants almost out of their Wits, for
Vexation: Which made double Care and Diligence be used in Pressing of Men, and
arming out the English Fleet, so that at length it put to Sea again, consisting
of 107 Men of War, and of 14 Fireships or Advice-Yachts, and was divided into
3 Squadrons: Whereof the first, under a Red Flag, was commanded by the Duke of
York, Pen and Lawson. The second, being the White Squadron, was under the
Conduct of Prince Robert, Mings, and Samson. And the third, being the Blue
Squadron, was commanded by the Earl of Sandwich, Cuttins and Sir George Ayschew.

The Two Fleets were not long before they engaged in a Battle, that was cruel
and bloody, of which these were the principal Circumstances.

On the 8th of June, the English Fleet, A Fight between the Duke of York and
Admiral Opdam.
being refitted, put to Sea a second time, unmoored from Gunfleet Bay, near
Harwich, and came to an Anchor in Southwold Bay, as well to take in a new
Supply of Provisions as to be nearer hand to observe the Dutch Fleet, that was
expected on the English Coasts. The Wind being easterly, the English kept,
during the Night before Alborough, at about 5 Miles distance from the Shore;
about Midnight the Duke of York received Advice, That the Dutch Fleet, steering
toward the South-east, was making directly up to him, and was not above 6
Miles from him; upon which News, the English made all their laden Ships retire
toward the Shore; and the Dutch, on their side endeavored to get the
Weather-gage. The 12th of the same Month, the Wind being at East, the Dutch
were at about 5 Miles Distance from the English to the South-eastward, and then
the Wind, turning to the South-west, continued so all Night, and the two Fleets
met before Laystoff, at about 8 Miles distance from the English Shore. That
Night, a Dutch Fire-ship took Fire, by the Imprudence of him that commanded it,
who was got drunk; which Accident the English took for a happy Presage of
Victory to them. However, the Dutch Fleet, in spite of the Disadvantage of the
Wind, of which the English were Masters, during the whole Fight, fell upon
Prince Robert's Squadron that was backed by Vice Admiral Mings. The Duke of
York's Squadron formed the main Battle, and that of the Earl of Sandwich made
up the Rear. The Battle begun at 3 in the Morning. Admiral Opdam vigorously
broke through Prince Robert's Squadron, being followed by Lieutenant Admiral
Kortenaar, Lieutenant Admiral John Evertsz, Vice Admiral Cornelius Tromp,
Stellingwerf, Bastian, Senten, etc. The two Fleets engaged in straight Lines,
without throwing themselves into Crescents, and so reciprocally broke through
one another, remaining still in Presence one of the other, without rallying
presently to make a fresh Charge. The Wind was West, and the English were
toward the North-west, and the Dutch to the South-westward; the two Fleets
broke through one another the second time, at 6 in the Morning. And because the
Duke of York's Squadron kept still the Weather-gage, without engaging in Fight,
it was impossible for the Dutch to win that Advantage from them; but it fared
not in the like manner with that of Prince Robert, which was broken through by
the Hollanders. But the two Fleets having till then done nothing but canonaded
one another afar off, at length the Earl of Sandwich advancing, about one in
the Afternoon, separated the Dutch Fleet in two; and then the two Fleets coming
to a closer Fight, and firing at one another very fiercely, Admiral Opdam
boarded the Royal Charles, in which was the Duke of York in Person; and those
two Admirals thundered at one another so furiously, with continual Broad-sides,
that the Earl of Falmouth, and the Lord Muskerry, and Mr. Boil, and some of
that Princes Footmen, were killed by the Duke of York's Side, and he himself
was slightly wounded in the Hand, which was dyed with the Blood of Mr. Boil;
and just then, as they were distributing the Cartridges in Admiral Opdam's
Powder-room, an unlucky Shot coming, as is said, from a small English Ship,
Admiral Opdum blown up.
commanded by one Smith, afterward Sir Jeremy Smith, who in that nick of Time,
seeing the Duke's Danger, had unperceivedly stole under the Dutch Admiral's
Side, set Fire to his Powder and blew him up in a moment, with all his Men,
excepting only 5, about 3 in the Afternoon. Mr. Opdam had not as yet been
wounded when this fatal Disaster happened to him, but he perished on that
unhappy occasion; However, the Hull of his Ship, after having floated some
time, was towed off into the Vlie.

This sudden and unexpected Loss of Admiral Opdam, put the Hollanders in a
great Consternation, and extremely raised the Courage and Hopes of the English,
and that so much the more because till then the Victory seemed to waver and to
be uncertain for which Side to declare. And that dismal Accident was soon
followed by a second; for 3 Dutch Men of War, viz. the Marsseveen, commanded by
Captain Reus, the Tergoes, by Captain the Kruining, and Swanenburg by Captain
Kuiper, happened to be entangled together so strongly, and the two latter
imprudently falling foul upon the Prow of the Marsseveen, engaged themselves so
fast to her Foremast, that it was impossible to part them, though 200 of their
Seamen did all they could, with their Axes, to do it; which Disorder being
perceived by the English, they resolving not to lose the Opportunity of making
their Advantage of it, immediately detacht away a Fireship to burn them, which
accordingly fastening upon the Tergoes and Swanenburg, both new-built Ships,
presently set them on Fire, and the Flames swiftly passing to the Marsseveen,
reduced them all three to Ashes: At which Disaster, the Seamen leapt all into
the Sea, and the Fire soon after gaining to their Powder, the 3 Ships were
blown up into the Air. Captain Reus leapt into a Boat, but yet could not save
himself. In the mean while, at that Spectacle, the English cried out, You
Rogues, you Fellows, you must be killed. The Master, George Thomas, with some
others that could swim, saved themselves in a deserted Boat, and got to
Scheveling. At the beginning of the Fight Tromp, being seconded by the Captains
Tierk, H^ddes and Swart, so miserably battered the English Ship, called the
Charity, Captain Wilkinson Commander, that soon after she became an easy Prey
to Captain Haan, and 90 of her Seamen, leaping into a Longboat, were
afterward conducted to Harwich. In the mean time, the Duke of York, observing
that some Dutch Ships made show as if they had no great Stomach to come on to
charge again, sent Lawson, with some English Men of War, to attack them; but he
found so much Resistance from them, that having one of his Knees all shattered
to pieces, he was carried to Shore and died. Bastian Senten that commanded the
Ship called the Orange, finding himself alone among the Enemies, fought with
all the Bravery imaginable: For he had the Courage to board the Mountague, and
took her, and pulling down her blue Flag, he put up the Princes Flag in stead
of it, which he kept up above an Hour, according to the faithful Report of all
that were Spectators of so bold an Action: But the Mountague was afterward
regained by the Royal James of the White Squadron, where the Earls of
Marlborough and Portland lost their Lives; And at last, the Orange, after she
had signalized herself against Captain Smith that commanded the Mary, was burnt
and blown up, and her Captain Bastian Senten died of his Wounds. Admiral John
Evertsz stoutly attacked the Ships Speaker and Charles, that seconded the Duke
of York, and did them very much damage; and the Admiralship it self, commanded
by the Duke of York, was very near being burnt by a Fireship, had she not by a
dextrous and nimble turn avoided it. Captain Koenders likewise fought with much
undauntedness, as did also Stellingwerf. This latter had his Body cut off in
the middle with a Cannon Bullet. Lieutenant-Admiral Kortenaar said at the
beginning of the Fight, Methinks our Admiral falls a little too low, it is
impossible that way for us to get the Weather-gage; and he falling upon the
Royal Catharine, was shot above the Knee with a Cannon-Ball, and died
immediately. Cornelius Evertsz being hard by, and hearing of the Death of that
Admiral, gave Notice of it to John Evertsz, crying out, that it belonged to him
now to put up the Admiral's Flag; which he presently did; but having been in
all the Attacques that had been made, from 3 in the Morning till 7 in the
Afternoon, and having received 17 Shot under Water, had 13 Men killed and 40
wounded on Board him, and spent 14000 Pound of Powder, being no longer able to
keep the Sea, he retired toward the Meuse, and some Men of War, that had not
yet fought a Stroke, were so basely cowardly as to follow him against his Will:
Upon which, many in the Fleet mistaking the Departure of John Evertsz for a
Retreat, there were above 36 Men of War more, of the finest and best in all the
Fleet, that turned likewise Tail, and steered away for the Texel: Whilst
undaunted Tromp, after he had put up the Admiral's Flag, as thinking John
Evertsz was also killed, maintained the Fight still a considerable while
longer: But however, that unlucky Rout preceding, caused the Loss of many
brave Men, that were by that means left helpless, surrounded on all sides by
the Enemies, and for want of Assistance, either perished or were made
Prisoners. To all which Misfortunes, may be added, the Mutiny that arose among
the Men belonging to the Ships, Helversum, Charles V. and Nagelboom, etc. who
revolting against their Captains, basely forced them to yield to the English;
those Ships were commanded by Allert, Matthysz, Trelon and Boon, who had every
where given sufficient Marks of their Courage, but yet were forced, on that
occasion to yield to Necessity. One Captain Jenraan Poel, retired in the Night
toward Wyk, being impatient to be one of the first to leave the Fight, with
one of the finest Ships in the Fleet, called, the Delfland, crying out upon the
Coast, That the Brave Men were left behind, to be butchered, whilst the Cowards
ran away. The Night being come, and the English, being employed in giving Chase
to some Barks belonging to the Victuallers of the Dutch Fleet, those Cowards
were covered and secured in their lurking-Holes, by Tromp, who keeping fighting
still against the Enemies, had all his Sails and Rigging shot down, and
shattered to pieces. The Nagelboom being come to an Anchor before Petten, the
Captain would not desert her, though she were left dry; but the Seamen running
all away, wandered begging along the Coast like so many Rascals as they were, so
that the English coming up, took her, as they did several other very fine
Ships, that were lost to the State, by the mere Cowardice of the Seamen. The
Master of Kortenaar's Ship, Ate Inter Instra, instead of staying in the Fight,
basely deserted it, and was followed by a great many others, which yet, when
they were come into the Texel, had the Confidence to complain, That they had
been so much exposed, when they scarce had had the Patience to take any more
than a Glympse of the Enemy. Only Tromp, accompanied with a small number of
others, held out the Fight till the last, giving every where signal Proofs of
his undaunted Courage: He was five Times with Swartsz and Cornelius Evertsz
engaged in the midst of the Enemies, and furiously battered by their Guns on
every side, and buried, as 'twere under so thick a smoke, that the Seamen in
his Ship, openly ascribed to a Miracle the Preservation of his Ship and Person.
The valiant Tromp writ with a sensible Displeasure the following Letter to the
College of the Admiralty of Amsterdam concerning the unhappy success of this
Battle.

High and Mighty Lords,
MY last was of the 9th. of June, Tromp's Letter to the Lords of the College of
Admiralty of Amsterdam.
at 18 miles distance from the Texel. On the 11th. of the same Month we
discovered the English Navy to the Westward, and it being impossible for us by
reason of the Calm, to get near them, the wind being North East, we steered to
the East, South-East ward as much as we could, to gain the Weather gage, but a
Calm came on, which continuing all night, and next morning too, we could
attempt nothing; and finding the design of the English was to draw us upon the
sand banks to which we were pretty near, we resolved to tack about to the West.
On the 12th. it being still indifferent Calm, we found our selves to the East
North East, and the North Westward: Toward evening we came a little near one
another, the Wind continuing during the night, South and South South West, so
that we had some hopes of getting the Weather gage, but it chopping about to
the South East, both sides began to Cannonade one another. And the Powder of
the Powder-room of the Admiral Ship catching fire through carelessness, she was
blown up into the Air together with Admiral Wassenaar; which caused so great a
confusion among the Ships of the Fleet that they all betook themselves to
Flight by favor of the Enemies Wind; by which means some Ships falling foul
upon, and being entangled one with the other, were burnt or taken by the
English. At length after they had continued firing till the beginning of the
night, that disorder forced them to separate from the others. The next morning
we observed the Duke of York and the Earl of Sandwich following close behind us
we having then not above 10 or 12 sail about us, and because it was impossible
for us to rejoyn our other Ships, the Enemy followed us as far as before the
Tex^l, where the most part of our dispersed Ships came up to us again but
however we know not at present, how many we are in Number; and we fear many of
them are missing; time will quickly show us how all things will end. Lieutenant
Admiral John Evertsz is also missing. Lieutenant Admiral Kortenaar, and
Stellingwerf are dead. As for other private Captains, I know nothing of them,
but that Captain de Haan was taken by an English man of War of 46 Guns. We saw
that the Ships Marsseveen, Tergoes, and a Frigate of Amsterdam falling foul one
of another so entangled themselves together that they were burnt, as were also
some other Ships. The English likewise set fire to some other Ships besides,
because as far as we could see, they were unmasted and most shrewdly shattered.

Postscript.
We have lost together with our Ships our Barges and long Boats, which we
desire their High and Mightinesses may be prayed to remember. We have found in
our Ship 44 men wounded, and 18 killed, about whom I request their High and
Mihgtinesses would please to take Order.




The Winning of this Battle ought not to be imputed to the Bravery of the
English, since the greatest part of the ships they took in it, were delivered
them by the Rebellion or Cowardice of the Seamen, who received in England the
just reward of their infidelity by the miseries they were made to suffer there
in the Prisons. The Action of 85 Villains that surrendered to the English the
ship Charles the 5th. is a terrible and abominable Example of it. They were
some Soldiers who in the night of the Battle, joining with some insolent and
seditious Seamen seized of all the small fire Arms, nailed up the Cannon,
struck their Flag, spread their Sails, turned their Barges and long Boats a
drift to the mercy of the Waves, and in that condition waited the approach of
an English Fregat that was in chase of them, to which they Voluntarily yielded
themselves, after they had with their drawn hangers and cockt pistols presented
to their breasts forced the Captain and Officers that belonged to the ship, who
would have opposed them, to remain in silence, under pain of death, and to be
spectators of so detestable an Action without during to speak a word. The men
of the ships Helversum and Nagelboom, as also some Officers of the Fleet, of
whom we shall speak more amply afterward, did the like without having any
regard neither to their honor, nor to the allegiance they had so solemnly
sworn to their Country.

The English, (as the Dutch would have been in the same case, and as they
affected to do afterward, upon less occasions of Bragging than this,) being
proud of all these advantages, failed not to publish them with all the glorious
Circumstances imaginable. They Rung the Bells and made Bonfires every where,
and put every thing else in practice that might tend to add splendour and renown
to the Memory of so great a Triumph. 1500 Dutch Prisoners were carried to
Colchester; and it may well be judged by so great a Number what cruel and base
Cowardice the Captains were guilty of, who chose rather shamefully to leave
their Companions exposed to the Flames, or to a Lamentable shipwreck and
drowning, than to venture to snatch them from the devouring Jaws of death, by
receiving them on board them when they fled, so that they must have perished,
if their Enemies had not taken more Compassion of them then their own unnatural
Officers. Amongst those persons there was a Woman named Willemite Gerrets a
Native of Embden, that had performed the function of Gunner in the ship
Marsseveen, who being discovered, was released and set at liberty by King
Charles the second for the rarity of the adventure. She came afterward to the
Hague dressed in the habit of an English Woman, where she recited all the
adventures of her life, and how she was saved, and the pleasant discourse she
had with the King of England: And it appeared, that she had always carried her
self very honestly, and that she was present at the fierce Battle of Funen in
the North, no body on board the Marsseveen ever having discovered her to be a
Woman. Here follows an account of the losses on both sides in this fight.

On the English side.
The Duke of York Lord High Admiral of England, was wounded in the hand with
the splinters of the scull of Mr. Boil, and his face besmeared with the blood
of the Earl of Falmouth, the Lord Muskerry, and several of his Domestic
servants that were killed by his side by a chain-shot from Admiral Opdam's
ship. The Earl of Portland killed. The Earl of Marleborough killed. Rear
Admiral Mountague Samson killed. Vice Admiral Lawson; who feeling himself
mortally wounded, sent word to the Duke of York, that he was incapable of doing
any further service; who thereupon put Captain Jordan, afterward Sir Joseph
Jordan, in his place; And Lawson being carried to Greenwich upon the Thames,
died there. Captain Ableston of the ship Guinea killed. Captain Kirby of the
Breda killed. The ship called the Charity carrying 46 Guns, was taken by
Captain de Haan, and brought into the Texel, but many of her men first saved
themselves, and the rest were killed before. Besides these, it was computed
there were 800 men killed on board the English Navy, and a great number
wounded.
On the Hollanders side,
Lieutenant Admiral General Jacob de Wassenaar Lord Opdam, was unfortunately
blown up by a shot into his Powder-Room. Lieutenant Admiral Kortenaar, dead of
his wounds. Stellingwerf shot in sunder with a Cannon Ball. Schram killed in
the Fight. Captain Allert Matthysz of the Helversum being forced to yield
himself by his mutinous Seamen that refused to fight, was taken by the Bristol
Frigate. She carried 60 Guns. The ship Charles the 5th. commanded by Captain
Kuiten shamefully yielded up likewise to the English by the Rebellion of the
Seamen. She carried 54 Guns. The Delft Commanded by Captain Boshuizen taken by
the Breda. She carried 32 Guns. The de Ruiter Yacht, Captain Vogel Commander,
carrying 18 Guns, taken by the Dolphin The Young Prince Commanded by Captain
Halfhoorn, carrying 36 Guns, taken by the Martin. The Mars Captain Kats
Commander, carrying 46 Guns, taken by the Assurance. The Nagelboom, Captain
Boon Commander, carrying 52 Guns, taken by the Colchester. The Arms of Zealand
Commanded by Captain Twineman, carrying 44 Guns, taken by the Centurion. The
Swarte Bull, Captain Burger Commander carrying 36 Guns, taken by the ships Anne
and Ruby.
Ships burnt.
The ship Koeverden of 60 Guns, Commanded by Captain Kampen, burnt by the ship
called the Renown. The Prince Maurice, Simon de Wit Commander, of 50 Guns. The
Town of Vtretcht Commanded by Oudart of 44 Guns. The Swanenburg, Captain Kuiper
Commander of 30 Guns. The Tergoes of 34 Guns. The Marsseveen of 78 Guns. The
Orange of 75 Guns, being hampered all together were burnt or sunk.
Before we pass, any further, we will report here some remarkable Circumstances
relating to this fight.

The States after the Battle, being willing to provide against all Events had
sent Orders to the Fleet to keep the Sea, though they had had the worst, as well
to support the Reputation of their Arms, as to lessen the Glory of the Victors,
that would have made that retreat pass for a total defeat. And for that effect,
Mr. Witsen, Vrybergen, and Schrick being sent to the Texel, in Quality of
Deputies from the States, went out of the Port, and sent for Vice Admiral Tromp
on board them giving him Order to keep the Fleet out at Sea, and not to suffer
it to enter into any Harbors. But Tromp being grieved at the disasters that
had newly happened by the Baseness and Cowardice of the Officers and Soldiers of
the Fleet, and his heart being ready to burst with indignation at them, could
not forbear Answering, the Deputies that he could not execute their orders with
men that had so basely deserted him in time of danger, and upon whose Courage
or Fidelity so little reliance could be made. So that without minding the
Orders of the Deputies, the Fleet under the Conduct of Tromp and Cornelius
Evertsz entered into port, being in all about 60 Men of War, of which the most
part were but little endamaged. Admiral Wassenaar, or Opdam's ship, was, as we
have said, blown up; Kortenaar (...) but his ship was saved. However, it w^
(...) known yet what was become of John E^ (...) Stellingwerf and Schram. On
the 15th. of (...) the States Deputies took a review of the ships remaining in
the Texel, found all of them in general very little endamaged, and the most
part in good condition, having lost very few Men, and in a Word, more afraid
than hurt. The ships that were still in the Texel were 58 in Number, 7 that had
staid behind in the Road and 2 unmoor'd that were put in before. They had
advice that 18 were in the Port of the Vlie, and 16 or 17 in the Meuse, etc. So
that they found none were missing but those we have set down, of all the whole
Fleet.

In the mean while however, the murmurings of the People that were ill
satisfied at the success of the Battle and the Conduct of the Generals, were
grown to an extreme height, and already begun to threaten mischievous
Consequences. The first sparks of them begun to appear at the Brill, where John
Evertsz of Zealand had like to have lost his life. For being come with his Ship
into the Meuse, and Landing at the Brill, at his arrival the Mobb that judge of
things always by the success, laid all the blame upon him, and imputing to him
a great part of all the misfortunes that had happened and accusing him of
Cowardice, threw him into the Water, where he would certainly have been drowned
if he had not been rescued from the People by a good Number of Soldiers. But
they stopped not there, for that Rascality growing thereupon more insolent
endeavored, all they could to satisfy their unruly passion, and pusht on
their resentments to the utmost; so that in the night there appeared a great
many Boats filled with Troops of Mutineers and Women, passing the Meuse to go
and watch his coming to Maaslandsluis, where he was to come to go to the (...):
But they were deceived in their expe^^^^^^n, for that setting out at 2 in the
morn^^g he was conducted under a good guard, to Helvoetsluis, and thereby
escaped the danger of being made the Bloody Victime of an enraged people. Being
come to the Hague, he there gave an account to the States, of his Conduct, and
afterward appeared before a Council of War held at the Texel, who were
constrained by the force of truth, highly to applaud his Bravery and Conduct in
the Battle. That Council was composed of the following persons, viz.

Vice Admiral Tromp, Vice Admiral Cornelius Evertsz, Vice Admiral Koenders,
Rear Admiral de Liefde, Rear Admiral Bankert, Rear Admiral Bruinsveld, the
Captain and Commander Vander Hulst late Vice Admiral to Mr. Wassenaar or Opdam,
Captain Nicholas Marreveld, late Rear Admiral to Lieutenant Admiral Kortenaar,
Captain Peter Solomon, late Rear Admiral to Vice Admiral Tromp, Captain
Bronser, late Rear Admiral to Vice Admiral Cornelius Evertsz, Captain de Haan,
Captain Simon Blok, Captain Jacob, and Andrew Swart.

This Council of War then having drawn up an Indictment against those Officers
of the Fleet that first begun to fly, as Authors of the disasters and of the
defeat of the Fleet they were condemned, and accordingly the Captains John
Peitersz Onklaar, Anthony Evertsz, De Mar and Jacob Bruining were shot on the
13th. of June in the Fort of the Texel, in view of all the people, and on the
same day and in the same place, the Captains William Codde, Vander Burg, John
Vander Mariche and Apollonius Pool had their Arms broken at their Feet by the
Common Hangman; and Samuel Huisman and Jacob Vander Kams were degraded, and
the first of them made incapable of bearing Arms any more in the Service of the
State. Ate Inter Estra, Mr. of Lieutenant Admiral Kortenaar's ship, who had
Cowardly deserted the fight with the Admirals Flag, was condemned to stand with
a halter about his neck under the Gallows, and afterward to perpetual
Banishment. But if the States on the one side thought good to punish Criminals,
so on the other, they were as Zealous to Recompense the deserving. And
accordingly Captain De Haan that had fought so bravely, and taken the English
Ship called the Charity, received 10000 Livers reward. The States likewise were
pleased to honor the Glorious Memory of Lieutenant Admiral Opdam, who
unfortunately, perished in the Battle, by erecting to him a Stately Monument in
the great Church at the Hague whereon is inscribed the following Epitaph in
Latin.

Honori and Gloriae Herois Illustrissimi, and ex vetustissima Nobilitatis
Batavicae stirpe, per continuam, and legitimam Successionem prognati, D. Jacobi
Dynastae de Wassenaer, Domini de OPDAM, Admiral Opdam's Epitaph.

Foederati Belgii Archi-Thalassi, etc. Rebus praeclare Terra Marique Gestis,
non tantum in Atlantico Oceano, unde sparsa fugataque Lusitanorum Class,
magnaque onustus praeda, Domum rediit, sed and in Freto Baltico, ubi pulsis
Adversariis, and insigni Parta Victoria, laboranti Daniae succurrit, and simul
Majestatem Reipublicae asseruit, and stabilivit, ac eandem contra Vniversam
Anglorum Classem cum paucis fortissime dimicans, ac undique cinctus, ne sic
quidem cessit hostibus, sed magna primo edita strage incensaque demum Praetoria
sua navi Herculeo exemplo, flammis viam sibi ad superos paratam invenit. Anno
Aetatis LV. Illustrissimi and Potentissimi Foederati Belgii Proceres viro
fortissimo^ optimeque de Republica merito, Monumentum hoc posuere, Anno
Reparatae Salutis MDCLXVII.

Anno Aerae Christianae MDCLVII. Classis Foederati Belgii Ductu Dynastae de
Wassenaer, prope Ostia Tagi, Naves Lusitanicas Brasilia reduces invadit.

Anno Aerae Christianae MDCLVIII. Foederati Belgii Classis, ductu and auspiciis
Dynastae de Wassenaer, Fretum Balticum ingreditur, afflictisque Daniae rebus
salutarem fert opem, pulsa fugataque post acerrimum conflictum Adversariorum
Class.

The Sense of which in English is thus.
To the Honor and Renown of the most illustrious, descended from a most
ancient Stock of the Nobility of Holland, by a continued and lawful Succession,
Jacob Baron of Wassenaer, Lord of OPDAM,
Admiral of the United Provinces, etc. who after many brave Exploits both by
Sea and Land, not only in the Atlantic Ocean, wherein having scattered and put
to flight the Portuguese Fleet, he returned home laden with rich Spoils, but
likewise in the Strait of the Baltic Sea; where after he had repulsed the
Enemies, and gained a glorious Victory over them, he succored distressed
Denmark, and at the same time asserted and securely established the Majesty of
the Commonwealth, and at last, after having fought most valiantly with but few
Ships, against the whole Navy of England, and being by them surrounded on all
sides, yet even then did not flinch from his Enemies, but after having made
great Slaughter among them, and his Admiral Ship taking Fire, Hercules-like, by
the Flames found a way prepared for him to the Celestial Heroes, in the 55th
Year of his Age. The most Illustrious and Potent Lords, the States of the
United Provinces, have erected this Monument, as to a most valiant Man that has
highly well deserved of the Commonwealth, in the Year of our Lord 1667.

In the Year of our Lord 1657. the Fleet of the United Provinces, under the
Conduct of the Baron of Wassenaer, defeated the Portuguese Fleet, near the
Mouth of the Tagus, that was coming home from Brasil.

In the Year of our Lord 1658. the Fleet of the United Provinces, under the
auspicious Conduct of the Baron of Wassenaer, entered into the Sound, and
carried salutary Assistance to the desperate condition of expiring Denmark,
after having in a most furious Fight repulsed and put to Flight the Enemies
Fleet.

Great Honors were likewise paid to the Memory of Admiral Kortenaar, whose
Tomb is to be seen at Rotterdam, with the following Epitaph in Dutch.

Ter err van den onvergeliikeliiken Held Egbert Bartholomeusz Kortenaar
Admiral. Hebben d'Ed Mognede Heeren des Admiralteit de Maas dit Gedenkreken van
ziin dapperheld en roemruchtige dooddoen stellen. Admiral Kortenaars Epitaph.

De Held der Maas verminkt aan Oog en rechter hand,
En echter't Oog van't Roer de Vuist Van't Vaderland:
De Groote Kortenaar de Schrik van's Vyandre Vlooten.
D'ontsluiter van de Sond, leyt in dit graf beslo^ten.
Of which the Sense in English is thus.
Egbert Bartholomew Kortenaar Admiral. Their High and Mightinesses of the
Admiralty of the Meuse have caused this Monument to be erected to the eternal
Memory of his Great Courage and Glorious Death.
The Hero of the Meuse, after he had lost one Eye and his Right Hand, yet
however continues to Govern the Fleet by his good Conduct, and to support his
Country with his valiant Arm; The Great Kortenaar, the Terror of the Enemies
Fleet, he that opened the Sound, Rests enclosed in this Tomb.

A little while after the Criminals had been so punished, and the merit and
valor of those that had signalized themselves been rewarded, viz. on the 23d
of July, Vice Admiral Tromp was elected Lieutenant Admiral of the College of
the Admiralty of the Meuse, in the place of the Deceased Kortenaar in
acknowledgment of the eminent Bravery he had shown in the last Battle. His
advancement to that Office, rekindled a fresh the before damped zeal of the
Seamen who testified an extraordinary joy at it, by reason of the extreme
affection they bore him, which equaled that they always had for his Father.

In the mean while, the States being intent upon consulting the means how to
repair the ill success of their Arms, by new Forces, gave orders for working
with all possible diligence in all the Provinces near the Sea, to fit up the
Fleet again, and put it in a good Condition, and that so much the more
prestingly, because they knew the English Fleet was crusing in the Channel, to
watch for de Ruiter's return, which was daily expected. After the Death of Mr.
Opdam, they were much puzzled about the choice of a person fit to be entrusted
with the chief Command of their Fleet. Many of them cast their Eyes upon
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, but the obstinacy he had shown against the Orders of
the Deputies, when instead of keeping the Fleet out at Sea after the defeat, as
they had Commanded, he made it go into the Texel, gave grounds for some
misunderstanding, and caused a great many murmurings to arise, to the
disadvantage of his reputation. Yet on the other side, they put great
confidence in his undaunted Courage, and in the singular affection the Seamen
had for him; but those good thoughts were again over balanced by the suspicions
some predominant Members of the States of Holland then ha^ conceived of his
Conduct, because that being passionately devoted to the interest of the then
ungratefully contemned Prince of Orange, then excluded from all great
Employments, those Insolent and Ambitious Statesmen were afraid the
inclination he had for that Prince, might over-sway him against that Obedience
he owed to those Masters who he knew had usurped from him his Rights. But
however, the most judicious among them contested against all those seeming
specious reasons, with more solid proofs drawn from his incomparable great
Worth and Merit, not sticking to say without bogling, that they could not well
choose another to that high Preferment without doing him injustice. At length
after many debates and contrary Opinions thereupon, they resolved by common
consent to confer upon him that great Employment, Tromp chosen Admiral in chief
upon certain conditions.
but yet with these Conditions, that there should be three Deputies of the
States appointed to go along with him, with full Power over the Fleet, viz. Mr.
Huiens, Deputy of the Assembly of the States General for the Province of
Guelders, Mr. De Wit Pensionary of Holland and West-Friesland, that noted enemy
to the Orangian Family, and Mr. Borreel, Burger Master of Middleburg.

Lieutenant Admiral Tromp being thus promoted to the chief Command of the
Fleet, applied himself with all imaginable care to fill up with all speed the
Compliment of Seamen needful for the effectual manning out the Fleet, that it
might be ready to put to Sea again as soon as possible. But when all things were
just ready, and Tromp was already on Board his Ship called the Amity, with the
Deputies of the States appointed to attend him, De Ruiter returns from Guiney.
news came, that de Ruiter was arrived at Eems, which occasioned a change in
all the Resolutions that had been taken. De Ruiter gave notice of his arrival
to the States, by the following Letter,

High and Mighty Lords,
His Letter to the States.
AFter having made my salutes in general, this shall be to inform your High and
Mightinesses, of the safe arrival of the Fleet that under my Conduct, has made
so long a Voyage, which came in the 6th. Instant in the afternoon to the
Westward of Eems, with 5 English Prizes whereof 3 are laden most with Sugar,
and the other 2 are empty, one of which served us for a Fire-Ship in our way. A
Merchant Ship likewise came from the Caribee Islands, which retired under our
Convoy, etc. July the 19th. we approached toward the Isles of Fero, to get
intelligence of the English, but no body could tell us any News of them, the 21
we past to the Eastward of Hitland; on the 22d. in the afternoon, a Galliot of
Huisd^n came and joined us, who reported to us the unfortunate success of the
late Battle fought between the two Fleets, etc. On the 23d. we came near
Bergen, where we received a Confirmation of what had been related to us. We
pursued our way all along by the Coast of Norway, making all the sail we could,
and on the 6th. of August we came into the Westward of Eems, upon Advice that
the English Fleet kept near the Coasts of Holland, being by our inequality in
strength obliged to avoid them. And besides we had hardly 10 days Provision
left, nay, some of our Ships had not for above 5, and what is more they were
leaky, and the most of them much endamaged. Captain Sweers has lost his
Mizzen-mast and Bolt-sprit; the Ships of the Captains Pomp and de Hoen, leak on
every side, so that they were by necessity constrained to cut down their
Fore-masts, and their Prows; neither is Rear-Admiral Haakwants Ship in any
better Condition. In fine, we praise God for bringing us home in sa^ety. We
have brought Prisoners with us, the Governor of the Castle Cormantine Francis
Sullevin, and desire their High and Mightinesses to be pleased to prescribe us
an Order how to deal with him. We took 15 Ships in the West Indies, of which
the most part were burnt. We found only 7 Ships in Newfoundland, which we took
on the 16th. and 17th, of June, 3 of which were burnt, and 3 more were given
back to the Enemies, to serve to transport home 150 of them that were our
Prisoners, whom we released to be Conducted into Old or New England. We
unmoor'd on the 19^h. from St. John's Bay in Newfoundland, bringing off with us
an English Frigate of 18 Guns, which I took my self. I will stay near the Fleet
till further. Order, hoping to receive it quickly, that we may be able all of
us together to Regulate our selves according to it.


The particulars, and more remarkable Circumstances of de Ruiter s Voyage into
Guiney and to the West Indies, may be more fully seen in the following Relation.

A particular Account and Relat^on of de Ruiter's Voyage into Guiney and the
West Indies, in a Letter to a Person of Note.
SIR,
I Find my self indispensably engaged to inform you of the principal Events of
this Voyage, which was begun on the 1st. of October in the year 1664. At which
time de Ruiter, having received the necessary Orders for that effect, from
their High and Mightinesses, summoned on board all his Captains, and gave them
notice to furnish themselves with all necessary Provisions for their Men; after
which, the Fleet being composed of 12 Men of War, namely 6 of A^sterdam under
the Command of de Ru^ter himself, and 6 others under the Command of Vice
Admiral M^pp^l^n, unmoor'd from Cadiz, and past before an Engl sh Squadron of
Men of War, that was riding before a little Town called Rot^. About Evening,
turning about to the South-South-West-ward we pursued our way. On the 16th. de
Ruiter ordered every Ship to provide two scaling Ladders ready to mount to the
Assault with; and at the same time we were informed, that we were going toward
an Isle called Goede-ree, which the English had surprised from the Hollanders
some Months before. Upon which we all testified a great deal of Alacrity and
Resolution to go upon that enterp i^e. We arrived there on the 22d. of the same
Month, and sound there 9 English Ships, viz, 7 Merchant men, 1 of the King's
Frigates, and 1 small Yacht, that was employed to carry the Merchandises and
Effects of the English from one place to another. At our arrival, the Fort and
Castle had put up the English African Companies Colors. The English Ships
perceiving we were coming to attack them presently yielded at discretion. After
which Command was given to the Kings Frigate, to unmoor, and retire, which she
immediat^ly did. Then the other Ships Crews, gave Oath that they were freighted
for the English Company. Upon which, the Merchandises and Effects were seized,
and removed into our Ships: They consisted of diverse Stuffs, Muskets, Forked
Irons, Knives, Cloths and several Bales of Cotton. The Ships were released, but
the Effects were declared good prize, as belonging to the English Company. When
those in the Fort and Castle saw what passed they sent out a Barge with a White
Flag, to de Ru^ter's side, and surrendered immediately, to save their lives and
goods. Upon which the Troops on board our Squadron were sent on shore with
Banners displaved, who took possession of the Fort and Castle and put up there
the Princes Colors. The English Governor with his men were conducted into one
of the Ships, and ordered to retire where he best pleas^d. We were extremely
surprised when we found in the Castle 9 pieces of Cannon, and 4 Granado
Mortars, and in the Fort 12 pieces, with a Garrison of 150 men, and sufficient
store of Ammunition and Provision, and that yet notwithstanding all these
advantages they had surrendered without resistance. After the retreat of the
English, we made a detachment of 10 Soldiers and 2 Seamen out of every Ship,
making in all 136 men, with the Officers, whom we left in the Country to secure
it; And then we weighed Anchor and sailed away for Sierra Liona, where we
arrived the 4th. of December. We perceived in that place a horrible Comet
having the body turned to the East-South-East-ward, and the tail toward the
North-North-West. We discovered there a Lodgment which the English had made
defended by 2 pieces of Brass Cannon, and 2 of Iron, which we took; after we
had ruined the Lodgment. We found there a good quantity of Elephants Teeth, and
Forked bars of Iron, a great many other things, and likewise a Dutch Man, and 2
Children that were Prisoners there, whom we set at liberty; and after having
watered there, and supplied our selves with Limons, and other refreshments,
Vice Admiral de Ruiter fired the parting Gun, and sailed away, steering to the
South-West-ward. On the 5th. of January 1665, we came to an Anchor before
Tacorary, and the Castle of Witsen, which the English had likewise seized from
us, and summoned them by a Letter to surrender: But upon their refusal some of
our Ships approached, and fired upon the Castle, which did the same upon the
Hollanders. At the ^ame time without delay, we Landed against them all the
Soldiers in our Fleet, who at first met with a great deal of Resistance from
the Negroes, who killed and wounded many of them, out they betaking themselves
to flight soon after the descent, our men set fire to their Lodges. The English
upon that defeat put up a White Flag and demanded quater; after which they
yielded up the Castle, where we found 24 Men in Garrison, and 7 pieces of
Cannon. A little while after, discovering an English Ship at Sea, de Ruiter
Ordered her to be attackt, and after an hours fight, she was taken. She proved
a Ship caring 33 Guns, and 50 Men, called the Victory. The next day we blew up
the Castle of VVitsen, and set sail again toward the Castle of Soma belonging
to the Dutch West India Company, which saluted our Vice Admiral with some Guns.
The 7th. of January 1665, our Squadron Anchored in 6 Fathom Water before the
Castle del Mina, where Mr. Valkenburg Commanded, who likewise saluted us with
some Guns. We there unladed all the Booty we had made in the Isle of Goede-ree,
of which that Garrison stood in Great need, having of a long time received no
supply, nor having any hopes to receive any. On the 9th. of the same month, we
discovered another Ship at Sea, which was attackt and brought the same day into
the Fleet. She proved to be an English ship of 20 Guns, and 40 Men, called the
St. Martha; which after we had unladen, we converted into a Fire-ship for the
Service of the Fleet upon occasion. In that place we separated our selves for
some days, as well to go and take in fresh Water, as to unlade our ships. On
the 10th. we received Letters from the States, with orders to destroy all the
English ships we could find on the Coasts of Guiney and of the West Indies. On
the 6th. of February, we weighed Anchor, and set sail toward Cormantine,
possessed by the English, and situated some miles from the Castle del Mina.
After noon, we past by a place belonging to the English called Cabo Corso, and
near a Danish Castle, as far a as place called then Morea, but formerly Nassaw,
of which the Dutch are in possession, whither after de Ruiter had sent a
Letter, we continued our Course, and soon after past by the Fort Anamabo, and
toward evening came to an Anchor between Adia and Cormantine which are two
places possessed by the English. There we found an English Ship which upon sight
of us, made toward the shore, and all her men deserting her, retired into the
Castle. The next day, 500 Negroes, of the Castle Morea and del M^na, came on
board Vice Admiral de Ru^ter in their Canoes, well provided with Axes,
Firearms, and Colors after the Indian-Mode. Upon which all our long Boats and
Barges were manned out with Soldiers and Seamen, and Scaling Ladders were
prepared for an Assault. Captain Vander Zaan Commanded the Seamen and Count
Hoorn, the Soldiers. And so they Landed their Men in good order, to attack the
Castle of Cormantine. As soon as we were Landed the English blew up the Castle
of Anamabo, which encouraged us extremely; But alas, those happy beginings had
not the same successes afterward; For at our approach to Adia, the English on
the one side, and the Negroes on the other, that in great Numbers appeared on
the Coast, charged us so vigorously from their Lodges and Retrenchments, by
continually firing upon us both with great and small shot, whilst on the other
side, the Castle likewise thundered upon us with their Cannon that many of our
Indians Canoes were sunk thereby, and we forced to retreat with loss back to
our Ships: That day we made no other attack, but obliged our Negroes to retire
on board with us, with design the next day to make a fresh Assault, as we did
with more success. For in the Night some of the principal of the English
Negroes came on board Admiral de Ruiter, promising him to let us Land without
opposition. In answer to which welcome proffer we made them a present of a Tun
of Brandy, and some glasses such as the Negroes use; after which, they retired.
De Ruiter observing the good disposition they were in toward us, Resolved to
make his best advantage of it, and accordingly without losing time, ordered a
second descent to be made. Our Whites inclusively with their Officers were 750
Men, and our Blacks 500. The Negroes that held intelligence with us put up the
Princes Colors upon the Ruins of the Castle of Anamabo which had been blown
up a little before, so that we Landed without any resistance from the Negroes,
but yet not without a great deal of danger by reason of the Roughness of the
Sea. About noon we began to come near the Castle of Cormantine, whilst some of
our Ships getting in a line under the Castle as near it as possibly they could,
played hotly upon it with their Guns, and battered it to ruin with much
success. In the mean while our men marching up in a close body to the Negroes
that held still for the English put them to the Rout, and forced them to Retire
back toward their Commander named John Gabia, who having raised a Battery of 3
great Guns upon a hill, galled us extremely; But our Troops despising that
danger forced them at length to retire and leave their Cannon behind them, and
advanced just under the Castle. Our Negroes likewise fought with much bravery,
set fire on the English Negroes Lodges, and cut off the heads of as many of
them as they could catch, and carried them away with them, leaving their Bodies
in the Field of Battle, because we had promised them a fixed Reward for every
Head; but several of our Negroes were likewise killed and wounded. As soon as
they in the Castle perceived what Progress we had made, they put up a white
Flag, and demanded Quarter, so that we made our selves Masters of it with
little Loss. It was defended with 32 Pieces of Cannon, and a Garrison of 52
Men. The General of the Negroes, abovementioned, having several times
solicited the Governor to blow up the Castle, and being refused, was so
enraged at it, that he cut two of his Childrens, and two of his Nephews
Throats, and then stabbing himself several times into the Throat and Belly, he
threw himself down from the Walls of the Castle, which not killing him
outright, he crept behind a Rock, and was there found dead. We gave Quarter to
the English: After which, our Officers placed good Guards every where, and the
better to prevent any Insolences that might happen from the Soldiers, they
forbad them all sorts of strong Drink. But the next Day, as our Barges drew
near the Shore, to take in our Men, an infinite Number of Negroes flockt
together, from all pa^ts about the Castle, and flew fiercely upon all that
offered to stir out of it, cutting off the Heads of all that resisted them,
without any further Ceremony; so that we lost more Men that way than we had
done in the Assault. But our Men thereupon firing the Castle Guns upon them,
killed and wounded a great many Negroes, and put the rest to Flight; which so
terrified them, that a little while after, the General of the Negroes appeared
before the Castle, with a white Flag, demanding Peace, and free Commerce, which
being granted them, they retired. And then all our Men, but what were to be
left in Garrison, returned again on Board the Fleet. One Samuel Smith, of
Gravenweert, a native of Guelderland, and Merchant of Morea, was chosen
Governor of the new-taken Castle. And then, in mark of our Victory, all the
Guns were discharged both from the Castle and the Men of War. On the 12th of
February we unmoored from thence, and on the 13th came to an Anchor before the
Castle del Mina; where we were well received; so that after we had set all
things in order there, put on Board the Chests of Gold, and taken in a
Provision of fresh Water, we set sail the 27th of February, 1665. tacking about
to the Southward. On the 8th of March we passed the Equinoctial Line, and on
the third of April, in the Morning, the Wind being risen higher, we repassed it
again. On the 6th of the same Month Captain Byland died* and the next Day his
Body was committed to the Deep, in the Latitude of 1 degree and 4 minutes. On
the 30th of April, about Noon, we arrived before the Island of the Barbados,
where we found 40 English, which we forced ashore, after some Hours firing upon
them. We likewise fired so hotly upon the Castle, that we beat down the Walls,
and forced the English to run away in Troops. However, the Seamen belonging to
the English Ships, making at first some Resistance, we had some Men killed and
wounded on our side; but when we made up toward them, to grapple them, we had
like to have run aground, which obliged us to sheer off further from the Coast,
and then we cast Anchor; yet we continued to fire without Interruption, upon
them, till we shattered them all to pieces. From thence we sailed away to
Martinico, where we buried our dead Men: And after we had paid those last
Honors to them, we set sail again, and took diverse Prizes in the Islands of
Montferrat, Nevis, and Guadaloupe; forcing them every where to fly under the
Shelter of their Castles. Some we burnt, and some we sold at S. Martins and S.
Christophers Islands, and the rest, that sailed well, we carried home with us.
The 15th of June we arrived before Newfoundland, where we took 8 Prizes more,
seizing on their Merchandises and Effects, but burning the Ships. We found
there abundance of Salt Cod, and some English Bread; which came very
opportunely to us. And then unmooring, we set sail again. On the 9th of July we
coasted along the Isles of Fero, and on the 23d we arrived in the Country of
Bergen in Norway; where, by a Galliot that was cruising there to wait for the
homeward-bound East India Ships, we were informed of the unfortunate Death of
Admiral Opdam, blown up by a fatal Accident, and of the Defeat of the Dutch
Fleet, by the shameful Flight and Cowardice of several Captains; upon which de
Ruiter gave order to every Officer in his Squadron, to make the best of their
way back into their own Country, with all the sail they could. But the Calmness
of the Weather, or contrary Winds, forced us to luff. In our way, from time to
time, we spoke with some Barks, who informed us; That the English Fleet, being
80 Sail strong, was cruising before our Coasts; but we thank God, for having
made us take Care to avoid them, fince we were in no condition to have resisted
them, although we would not have failed to do our utmost to have done it.

On the 6th of August, 1665. we arrived with a contrary Wind, to the westward
of Eems, before Delfzyl; where we lie expecting fresh Orders.


A List of the Prizes taken, and of the Conquests made by Lieutenant Admiral de
Ruiter's Fleet, about the Coasts of Guiney, and elsewhere.
Three Ships laden with Sugar, and two empty ones; five in the West Indies,
most of which were burnt, and three sent back again with two hundred and fifty
English Prisoners, that were set at Liberty. A Frigate of 18 Guns, taken in S.
John's Bay. Francis Stillevin, or Sullevin, General of Cormantine, made
Prisoner. Two Castles in Guiney taken, and afterward blown up. Several
Merchandises and Effects taken about Cape Verd, or in other Places, and among
other things 16000 l of Elephants Teeth, A Mark of Gold is 8 Ounces.
682 Marks of Gold, amounting very near to the Sum of 229152 Livers, besides
what the Seamen plundered.
The News of de Ruiter's being come home, was brought to the Texel in the Night
between the 7th and 8th of August. And Pensionary de Wit writ to him the very
same Night, as soon as ever he had received News of him, to desire to know of
him by the same Courier, How many Ships, Dutch and others, were come with him
to Delfzyl, etc. advertising him, That the States had a consi^erable Fleet in
the Texel, of about 90 Sail of good Men of War, that would be ready to sail in
few Days. This Letter was delivered to de Ruiter about the beginning of the
Night, on the 9th, to which he immediately made answer, That he had 9 Men of
War still in his Fleet that were fit to do service, only they were very foul,
and wanted Sails, and to be new calkt. That the Men in them were in good
Health, but so extremely fatigued with so long a Voyage, that they would need
some Days Refreshment on Shore. That, as for himself, and the rest, both of the
General and Inferior Officers of the Fleet, they were in perfect Health, and
still in a Condition to do their Country Service, etc.

The Election of a Successor to the Office of a Lieutenant-Admiral, vacant by
the Death of Mr. Opdam, had a good while taken up the Council of State, and
many of the Members of the States of the Province of Holland had appeared about
the middle of July, wholly inclined to confer it upon de Ruiter, even whilst he
was yet abroad at Sea, so that at the News of his Arrival, without any longer
Hesitation, he was on the 11th of August chosen Lieutenant Admiral of Holland
and West-friesland; to have in that Quality the chief Command of the whole
Fleet, but yet under the Inspection of Mr. Huigens, Mr. de Wit, and Mr. Borcel,
as Plenipotentiaries of the States; as appears by the following Resolution.

After Deliberation thereupon had, it is thought fit, That under the
Super-intendence, Direction and Conduct of Mr. Huigens, The Resolution of the
States General constituting de Ruiter Lieutenant-Admiral in chief.
Mr. Pensionary de Wit, and Mr. John Boreel, Deputies and Plenipotentiaries of
their High and Mightinesses in the States Fleet, Michael Adrian de Ruiter,
Lieutenant-Admiral of Holland and West-friesland, shall command in chief during
the approaching Expedition; and that in this Quality he shall be obliged to
take the usual Oath, by virtue of the Resolution of the States General, on the
2d of this Month; having under him, for General Officers, Cornelius Evertsz,
Lieutenant Admiral of Zealand, Lieutenant-Admiral Cornelius Tromp,
Lieutenant-Admiral Meppel Tierk Hiddes, Lieutenant-Admiral of West-friesland;
the Vice Admirals, Van Nes, Vander Hulst, Bankert and Koenders; and the
Rear-Admirals, Deliefde, Cornelius Evertsz the younger, and Bruinsveld. That if
it shall happen by any unforeseen Accident, which God forbid, by Death or
Sickness, that Lieutenant-Admir. de Ruiter shall be no longer able to perform
his Office, Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp shall succeed him in the same Quality, and
shall enjoy the same Prerogatives, having the Super-intendence and chief
Government of the Fleet; and for that effect, as well the said
Lieutenant-Admiral de Ruiter, as the other General Officers shall give such
good Order to the Ships depending of their respective Squadrons, that in case
of any fatal Accident, as of Death, at the Hour of Battle, and when the two
Fleets shall be engaged together, they may show no manner of Consternation, or
surprise, but continue still to behave themselves with Presence of Mind, and a
constant and firm Resolution, keeping silence till the Fleets come to be
disingaged and rejoyn their Flag, or till some other favorable occasion; and
then they shall give notice of it to the General that is to succeed. And the
present Resolution of their High and Mightinesses shall be sent to the said
Lieutenant-Admiral de Ruiter, with order to him to go immediately to the States
Fleet, assembled in the Texel, to join himself with their Plenipotentiaries,
and to carry with him Lieutenant Admiral Meppel, and Vice Admiral Van Nes, as
likewise all other general Officers whom he shall judge fit to do Service in
the next Expedition, provided it can be done without incommoding the Service of
the Fleet, that is now riding at Anchor at West Eems; with the Design however,
and the Intention, that as well Lieutenant-Admiral de R^iter, as the said
Lieutenant-Admiral Meppel, Vice Admiral Van Nes, and other Officers, shall
submit to the Orders that shall be prescribed them by the Deputies of the
States. And for that end, this Resolution of their High and Mightinesses, shall
be sent to the said Deputies, to serve them for an Instruction, whereof they
are hereby ordered to cause an Extract to be delivered to every one of the
General Officers of the Fleet. And the said Deputies are hereby authorized, at
the same time to take care that the present Resolution be executed in all its
Parts, as far as it is possible, that the going out of the Fleet upon the
approaching Expedition may in no wise be retarded; and the Dispatches resulting
therefrom, shall be sent away without delay, etc. This Commission was
immediately carried to de Ruiter, who thereupon went from Delfzyl to
Grooningen, thence to Dockling, thence to Leeuwarden, from thence he passed to
Franeker, thence to Harlingen, and from thence he arrived on the 13th in the
Texel.

In the mean while, the Deputies, the next Day, signified the said Resolution
of their High and Mightinesses to all the General Officers of the Fleet in the
Texel. Who all professed to be well satisfied with it, and unanimously promised
to conform thereunto, except only Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp; who protested, That
he pretended not to serve under the Command of Lieutenant-Admiral de Ruiter,
and that he did not intend to go to Sea at all; since after he had taken so
much Care and Pains to get the Fleet into a good Condition another was put up
over his Head, to command above him. The Day following, as they were
deliberating in his Presence about the Departure of the Fleet, he renewed his
Complaints, though in very respectful, yet very resolute Terms; telling the
Deputies, That he prayed them to be pleased to discharge him from his
Employment, at least for that time, since he could not assist at that
Expedition so much against his Heart, without doing extreme violence to
himself. Adding, That in any other Occasions, he would never refuse to give all
desirable Proofs of his Zeal, and steadfast Affection for the Service of his
Country. The Deputies of the States having conferred thereupon with the
Deputies of the College of the Admiralty, represented to him, That his Honor
was in that matter no way touched or offended, and therefore earnestly advised
him to wave that needless and unseasonable Nicety, and to think only of doing
his Duty. But he continuing still obstinately to urge a Dismission from his
Employment, they at last answered him, That they had no Power to discharge him,
without offending against the Resolution taken by their High and Mightinesses,
on the 11th of that Month; but that if he would needs persist in his Intention,
he might solicit his Dismission himself, by a Letter to their High and
Mightinesses. However, that upon such an occasion, to do him a Pleasure, they
would join their own Instances to the States with his, by writing to them to
back his Request; but that in the mean while he was obliged to stay for their
Answer, or at least till their High and Mightinesses should send particular
Orders to their Deputies, directing them how they should regulate themselves in
such a Circumstance as that: And that though he should obtain his Discharge, yet
he could not in Reason withdraw himself till after the Arrival of
Lieutenant-Admiral de Ruiter, to the Fleet. After such an Answer, Tromp left
the Deputies, with a wavering Mind, whether he had best to write to the States
or not.

In the mean time, the Deputies, without minding any of those private Disgusts
and Differences, caused all imaginable Diligence to be used to get the Fleet
into a Readiness speedily to unmoor, as being convinced by Experience, that a
favorable, occasion to sail out, being once neglected, was not easily to be
met withal again, especially when they considered, they must be forced to stay
for an East Wind, to get out of the Harbors, and get the Fleet over the
dangerous Places.

The States of Holland having been informed by a Letter from Mr. Witsen,
ancient Burgo Master of Amsterdam, and from Mr. Pensionary de Wit, written from
the Texel, That Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, appeared unwilling to serve at Sea
under the Command of de Ruiter, signified their Thoughts thereupon to their
Deputies, in the following Letter.

Noble, Magnificent, Knowing, Wise and Circumspect Lords.
WE hear, with much Displeasure and Surprise, A Letter from the States of
Holland and West-Friesland, to the chief Deputies, about Tromp's refusal to
serve.
that Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp, in consequence of our Resolution, has taken
occasion to conceive Jealousy at the Election of Lieutenant-Admiral de Ruiter,
to command our Fleet in chief, making Difficulty to continue his Services, and
refusing to obey him, and rather choosing not to go to Sea at all this
approaching Expedition. Yet we are persuaded, that when he has seriously
reflected upon an Affair of so great a consequence, in which he is so highly
concerned to render Service to the Public, and to his Country, without making
any particular Reflections, disadvantagious to his Reputation, he will resolve
upon a wiser Conduct. But be it how it will, since the Service of our Country
is now the concern to which we ought to sacrifice all sorts of particular
Interest. We will, That you employ all possible Means and Ways to terminate all
things, and that, without having any regard to the Person of the said
Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp, whether he change his Mind, or persist imprudently to
press a Dismission from his Employment, the Departure of the Fleet may not on
that account be at all hindered, but rather the more hastily advanced, and put
in Execution, without losing Time or Opportunity. However, we shall expect your
Answer concerning the last Resolution that shall be taken by the said Tromp,
that we may be able to regulate our Deliberations accordingly; having in all
other Respects a full confidence in your wise Conduct, and in the Care we doubt
not but you will take to get our Fleet with all possible speed out to Sea. We
recommend you to the Protection of God, etc.


And the Intention of the States was accordingly executed; but Tromp, whether
he came to himself of his own accord, or were over-persuaded to it by his
Friends, conformed to the Will and Pleasure of the States.

In the mean while there arose a great Commomotion among the Seamen of
Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp's Ship, about weighing Anchor, which they refused to
do, but in the Prince of Orange's Name: And their Insolence transported them so
far, as to rebel against their Officers, who made a shift to appease them for a
while, with gentle Words; but the Tumult began again soon after afresh, when
the Cook came to serve them out their Victuals: For not being content with what
was given them, they ran with their Porringers, to the Captain's Cabin, making
a horrid Noise, till at last the Officers, taking notice who were the
Ringleaders of the Disorder, seized them, and put them in Hold, in order to
have them punished according to their Deserts; and a Council of War being
called to sit upon them, after having heard the Criminals, on the 11th of
August, condemned two of the most faulty of them, to be hanged, to serve for an
Example to all the rest of the Seamen and Soldiers. For that effect, two Bills
were put into a Dish, covered with a Napkin, whereof one had in it the figure
of a Gallows, and the other was a Blank, and they being made to draw for their
Lives, he that drew the Gallows was hanged on the Main Yard, and the other was
whipped, marked with the States Arms, and then turned ashore, as unworthy to serve
any more.

3 Days after, being the 14th of the Month, a great part of the Fleet put out
to Sea, and the Day after the rest followed them, to which the indefatigable
Care of Mr. Pensionary de Wit did not a little contribute, by the singular
Pains he took to see all the Parts of the Texel sounded, through which they
were to pass; where he found in some Places 4 Foot of Water more than the
Sounders ever found before, which in all likelihood happened by their
Carelessness, so that it was thought not impossible to get out at 28 Points of
the Compass. The Fleet was then composed of 96 Sail of Men of War, and 22
Fireships and Advice Yachts, and was divided into 3 Squadrons.

We shall here, by the way, desire you to take notice, That the Commander
Vander Hulst had been not long before made Vice Admiral by the States of
Holland, for the College of the Admiralty of Amsterdam, in the Place of Tromp,
who was raised to the Dignity of Lieutenant-Admiral of the Meuse, vacant by the
Death of Kortenaar, and that Cornelius Evertzen had been named by the College
of Zealand, to supply the Place of his Brother John Evertsz, in Quality of
Lieutenant-Admiral, who was dispensed with from serving in this Expedition.

When the Fleet was at Sea, the States Plenipotentiaries, in conjunction with
Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp, and the other General Officers, made a Regulation,
and established an Order, according to which, the Chiefs of Squadrons and other
Captains were to act during a Fight. It was there sp^cified, what Squadron it
was, that when they were right before the Wind, should keep to the Right or the
Left of Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp's Squadron; and in time of a Calm, which
Squadron should go before, which in the middle, and which behind; at what
Signal, and in what order the Squadrons, if it were thought fit, should tack
about; in what Order the Squadrons should make Sail in case their Fleet got the
Weathergage of the Enemies, to keep that Advantage; that every Captain should
keep a watchful Eye upon the Chief of his respective Squadron, without
recoiling before the Enemy, observing him always, unless he be forced to do
otherwise by extreme Necessity, upon default of which, he should be punished
with Death; that each Lieutenant Admiral should presently divide his Squadron
between his Vice and Real Admirals, to prevent all Surprise, and to be always
in a posture to fight, if the Enemies should on a sudden present themselves to
him; that every Captain should take care to keep at a fit distance and to gain
Sea-room enough, that their Ships might not fall foul on one another, nor be
incommoded with one another's Guns. That each Lieutenant-Admiral should
establish an Order in his Squadron, according to which, the Fireships s^all be
obliged to regulate themselves, and shall have always Frigates ready to save the
Men, when any Ship should happen to be burnt or sunk; in what manner they were
to govern themselves in case their Fleet should happen to have the Weathergage
of the Enemies, and they should come by the Lee, in order to preserve that
Advantage: What Squadron, if the fleet made to the left hand, should go before
or behind the other Squadrons, which should have the Disadvantage of the Wind:
What Order the Squadrons should observe, if the Dutch Fleet should make toward
the right hand, and the Enemy should be to the Leeward; at what Signal each
particular Squadron, and at what Signal the main Body of the Fleet should
attack that of the Enemies; or that every one should fall to boarding them:
That every one should observe his Rank and keep near the Chief of his Squadron,
whether there be any Enemy near or no, upon Pain of being fined 100 Livers, for
the first Default, 200 Livers for the second, and of being cashiered from his
Employment, for the third, whatsoever Excuse he could allege to justify
himself: That the General Officers should every Day detach out some of the best
Sailers and some Galliots, to go a scouting to discover the Enemy; and that as
soon as they hear any thing new they shall give notice of it to the States
Deputies, and to the Lieutenant-Admiral: That if any of the Frigates, detached
to go a scouting after the Enemies, should chance to make Prize, during their
Course, of any Merchants Ships that should be declared good Prize; that then
the Booty should be divided among the Ships of the Squadron from which the
detachment was made; that if the said Frigates should happen to take a Man of
War, they should not only remain Possessors of her, and of her Guns, but should
also have over and above that, the sum ordered by the Estates in that case, for
a Reward: That besides, if any one should have received a dangerous Shot in his
Ship, or by any other dismal Accident, find himself forced to quit the Enemy,
for want of Help, he should be obliged to put up a Flag upon the Poop* which
yet he should not do but at the last Extremity. In fine, that none should offer
to give Ch^ce to any of the Enemies Ships, ti^^ Li^utenant Admiral Tromp should
have given order for so doing, by firing a Signal-Gun, and that in such a
Rencounter those Ships that should happen to be nearest the Enemies Ships
should give them Chase: That upon the Discovery of one of the Enemies Ships,
two of the Dutch should be detached after it, if two, three; and if three, four
should be sent after them, and so proportionably for more, always taking care
to detach those Ships against them that should be nearest to the Ships they
should desire to give Chase to.

Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp was considered in that Regulation as the chief
Commander of the Fleet, and all was done in his Name, because
Lieutenant-Admiral de Ruiter was not yet come thither. Tromp also established
an Order concerning the general Rendezvous of the Fleet, in Case of Separation
by Tempest, or by the Darkness of the Night that should make them lose Sight of
their Flag. And that Order was regulated according to Times, Opportunities, and
the Winds that should happen to prevail.

Lieutenant-Admiral de Ruiter arrived in the Texel, the 16th of August, where
there were left three Frigates, to conduct him to the Fleet, but by a contrary
Wind he was detained till next day Morning, when he set sail accompanied with
Van Nes, who had taken the Oath in Quality of Vice Admiral of the Meuse, at the
same time that de Ruiter was sworn in the Texel, before the Deputies of the
States General, in quality of Lieutenant Admiral of Holland and West-friesland,
to command in Chief. He therefore went to the Mouth of the Spanish Hole, where
he went on Board the Frigate, Schiedam, carrying 25 Guns and 81 Men, and the
next Morning he arrived on Board the Ship called the Amity, then commanded by
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, where he was received by the Deputies of the States
with great Demonstrations of Kindness. Tromp likewise showed a great deal of
good Temper and Moderation toward him, by smothering in Silence a part of his
Resentments, which already gave the Nation great Hopes they would shortly be
perfectly reconciled.

Whilst things were thus passing on the Side of the United Provinces, the
English Fleet, under the Command of the Admirals, Mountague, Pen, and Allen,
had made an Excursion toward the North, to cruise there against the Ships
belonging to the Dutch East India Company, that were expected coming homewards;
but they having had timely notice of it by some Dutch Galliots, happily retired
into the Harbor of Bergen in Norway, to the Number of 10 Ships; and two more
belonging to the same Company went into Drontheim; and besides them, there were
60 Merchant-ships more richly laden, bound homewards to Holland. The Admirals
of the English Fleet, upon that News, were desperately enraged they had let
slip so rich a Booty out of their Chops, so that calling a Council of War, they
resolved to attack the Dutch in the Bay, whether they could get the Governor
of Bergen's consent or no, with Design and Hopes to take, or at least burn and
destroy their Fleet there. They sent therefore to the said Governor, named
Aleveld, to desire his Consent to their Enterprise, who being unprovided then
with Guns and Ammunition sufficient to resist them, held them off 3 Days with
fair Words, telling them, He durst not let them attempt upon any Ships in that
his Master's Port, without express Orders from his Majesty, to whom he would
send to know his Pleasure about it, conjuring them, in the mean time, not to
offer by any Hostility to violate the Liberty of his Master's Harbors. But
after 3 Days, during which he had supplied himself with Guns, Powder and all
other Necessaries from the Dutch Ships and elsewhere, having sent the English a
flat Refusal, they detached away Captain Tyddeman with a Squadron of 14 Men of
War with 3 Fireships and 2 Advice Boats who entered boldly into the bay,
without sparing the Danes their Allies any more than the Hollanders their
Enemies. The Circumstances of what passed in that occasion, are related in the
following Letter written by the General Officers that Commanded the Dutch
East India Fleet.

SIR,
THE English having had advice, that we were arrived here with a Fleet of 10
ships from the East Indies, were in an unconceivable vexation at it; so that
the day before yesterday they came and posted themselves between the two
Castles that defend the entrance of the Port, with a Squadron of 14 Men of War,
3 Fireships, and 4 Advice Yachts, making in all 21 sail, and fell upon our
Fleet with so much fury, that we were forced to stand up in our own defense,
and by the help of the Castles, and of some batteries we had raised on shore
against them with Guns drawn out of our ships we repulsed them with so much
success, that after a fight of about 3 hours and a half, they were forced to
cut their Cables, and shamefully betake themselves to flight. We are told for
certain, that whilst they were retreating 3 of their Ships sunk, whereof one
carried an Admirals Flag. It appears by the marks of their defeat, that they
were very severely handled, since 30 of their dead men were cast ashore by the
Waves, who were stripped by the Inhabitants, and 6 of their ships were so
battered, that they were forced to Anchor, at about 3 miles from hence, to
patch themselves up again as well as they could, being able no longer to keep
the Sea.

We had in this fight 25 men killed, and 70 wounded; and we lost the Merchant,
Mr. Peter de Sandvlied, after he had shown a great deal of Bravery. The Masts,
Sails and Rigging of our ships are extremely endamaged, so that they will take
us up several days time to repair them. We have reason to thank God for having
so powerfully protected us. A Merchant ship of Lisbon, Commanded by the Master
Ruth Maximilian, fought valiantly after the Example of our men, and so did
General Alefelt, and the Governor Van Steignon, who after he had done all he
could to divert the English from their design by fair words, without any
effect, have at last by the force of their Arms, and the powerful Rhetoric of
the Cannon of their Castles, maintained their rights, and the Protection they
had granted to strangers, so that all things succeeded to the honor of the
Victors. Three Months pay Extraordinary was granted on this occasion both to
the Seamen of our ships, as of those of the Merchants, by way of reward for
their good Service, who were employed either on board our ships, or else on
shore in managing the Batteries there erected for our defense; which is to be
paid by all the ships which are here and we hope you will not take that
proceeding ill from us, since it was put in practice only to raise the Courage
of the men in that pressing occasion, and to incite them the more vigorously to
repulse a bold and potent Enemy who came with a greedy and eager Appetite, to
seize upon so much riches, the loss of which would have been very heavily
sensible to you. The bearer of these dispatches can inform you more fully of
the other Circumstances of this Fight, because he was an Eyewitness of all
that passed in it. Upon the Advice we have had from several Persons, that past
last Sunday near the Enemies Fleet, about 20 miles to the Westward of
Schuitenes, we thought we had some reason to fear, they would attempt a second
charge upon us; which makes us put in practice all things that may tend to
secure our preservation; having for that effect, prayed the Governor to Order
the Barrier to be repaired that shuts up the Port, that so being shut up, we
may be in safe shelter from Fireships. We also have entreated him to repair
the works and Batteries, and put them into a better condition, as likewise to
cause some new works to be raised in convenient places, to plant Cannon upon.
And he has assured us, he will take care to have all things done that may
contribute to the security of the Havens of the King his Master; that we are at
present busied in transporting to shore 20 pieces of Cannon out of our ships
and 10 more out of the Merchants ships, which we can very well spare by reason
of the smallness of the Port, to be employed there in our defense; we will
likewise endeavor to make a Fire-ship if we can persuade one of our Merchants
to give us his ship for that use. All things being so Ordered, we hope under
the Protection of God sufficiently to provide for the security of so rich a
Booty as that entrusted with us, by vigorously repulsing the attacks of the
English in which we implore the assistance and blessing of God; and we promise
on our part to contribute thereto with all that shall lie in our power, etc.


The English lost in that attack, 2 Captains, with one of Mountague's Sons, and
3 men of War, whereof one stuck in the Rocks, out of which the Dutch took the
Guns, to employ them in their own defense. And the Wooden Posts that formed the
Barrier of the Haven were Reimplaced in Order to secure the Fleet from the
English Fireships. But they durst not venture upon another charge, but tackt
about toward their main Fleet, quitting the Rocks of Norway to make the best
of their way toward their own Country: And so by that means the Dutch ships
that were pregnant with immense Riches, the ships alone that came from the
East Indies, being valued at above 12 Millions of Livers, or one Million
Sterling, were delivered from the disasters, that threatened them. When Admiral
de Ruiter was arrived in the Fleet, as we have said, it was thought fit, by the
Advice of all the rest of the General Officers, that the States Deputies and
Lieutenant Admiral de Ruiter should remove out of the ship Amity, into the
Delfland, called formerly, the Great Spaniard, and that each Squadron of the
Fleet should make a detachment of 7 Frigates, or bigger Men of War, with some
Fireships, to form a 4th. Squadron for Admiral de Ruiter, who had to Command
it under him, Aart Van Nes, Vice Admiral of the Meuse, and Frederick
Staghouwer, Rear-Admiral of the College of the Admiralty of the North. They
likewise regulated the placing of the Flags, ordering, that Admiral de Ruiter's
Squadron should bear it on their main mast; that of Lieutenant Admiral
Cornelius Evertsz, on their mizzen-mast, the Squadron of Lieutenant Admiral
Tromp on the Poop, and that of Lieutenant Admiral Tierk Hiddes, on the Fore
mast.

All the World begun already to conceive great Hopes of so formidable a Fleet,
commanded by 2 of the greatest men of the Age, and directed by the Council of
the wisest Deputies of the State.

Things being in that Condition, there Remained nothing but to form some Noble
Enterprise that might raise the Glory of the Chieftains, and the Courage of the
Seamen that was palled by the ill success of the last fight. And accordingly
the Deputies, and Admiral de Ruiter with the rest of the General Officers of
the Fleet Resolved to sail toward the Coasts of England or Scotland, as
thinking they might meet at some advantage with the English Fleet, as they were
supposed to be coming back laden with the spoils of the Dutch East India ships,
or at least might succor these latter and rescue them out of the Enemies
hands. That project seemed well contrived, but a contrary Wind hindered the
execution of it, for growing more boisterous and turning quite opposite against
them, it was impossible for the Fleet to steer to the Northward; which at the
same time favored the retreat of the English. On the 25th. of the Month of
August, the Advanced guard of the Dutch Fleet having pursued two English Advice
Yachts, took them, and by their means were informed, that the English Fleet
consisting of about 70 sail of Men of War, had been cruizing some days upon the
Coast of Norway, to hunt after the East India ships; but that afterward
pursuing their course on the 18th. toward Hitland, they came to an Anchor in
the bay of Breezond, having left upon the Coasts of Norway a Squadron of 20
ships under the Command of Captain Tyddeman; and that on the 23d. having
unmoored from Hitland, they put out to Sea again. On the 25th. of the same
Month, the Advanced guard of the Dutch Fleet discovered an English man of War
of the white Squadron, so that they found by that, the two Fleets were pretty
near one another, yet without being able to see one another, or to discover
what course each other steered. During these transactions, the Dutch resolved
to sail with all possible diligence toward Bergen, in hopes to meet and maul
the small English Squadron in those parts; and accordingly on the 29th. the
Holland Fleet arrived upon the Coast of Norway, and heard there by the report
of some Galliots, that the English had attack the Dutch homeward bound
East India ships in the Port of Bergen, as likewise other Dutch Merchant ships
that were retired thither, but that, after a fight of 3 hours and a half, they
were forced to cut their Anchor Cables, and shamefully to fly away with
considerable loss and damage. So, that the Dutch Fleet had not only mist of the
English Fleet, but arrived too late before Bergen, to attach Tyddeman.

In the mean time the States Deputies received a Letter from Captain Bitter
that Commanded in chief the East- India ships; who signified to them, that
since the fight with the English, things there went very strangely: For that
Mr. Alefelt or Aleveld, General of the Danish Troops in Norway, and Mr.
Steignon, Governor of the Town and Castles of Bergen, who told the Dutch very
roundly, that if they expected they should continue their care to protect them
from the oppression of the English, they must pay them down on the nail the sum
of 100000 Crowns to satisfy them and the rest of the Officers and Soldiers for
the pains and hazard they had been at in their defense; and that when they
should have received that money, they would be ready to sacrifice their Lives
and Estates against all that should attempt upon the liberty of their Harbors
adding, that for the love they had to the United Provinces, they would act
freely with them and without any manner of dissimulation; That the English from
whom they had much more advantageous Offers, if they would accept them, were
but two or three miles from Bergen: And that the account they were to render to
the King their Master about observing a Neutrality was not the least bar to
them in that case; that therefore they expected the Dutch should immediately
satisfy their demand in ready cash or upon their default, they knew where to
furnish themselves, and in two days time would oblige them to make a serious
reflection upon the premises, etc.

Bitter added, that he had answered them that the Dutch Merchants there were
not in a condition out of their own Money to pay so considerable a sum; that a
recompense of such a value as that was the concern of the State alone, and that
no private Person ought to meddle with it. However he told his Masters that he
had endeavored to drill on the affair with them to what length he could, by
paying them 3000 Crowns in hand, and that they were making a Collection of 8 or
10000 Crowns more amongst the Merchant men come from Spain, which sum was to be
employed in fortifying the Castle where a great many men were already at work
for that effect, etc.

The States had named Lieutenant Colonel de Gent, the Colonels Dolman, and
Maregnault the Lieutenant Colonel de Santen, and Sergeant Major Wynbergen, to
Command the Troops on board their Fleet. And before the Deputies had received
Bitter's Letter, they had sent the first of those Officers to the Governor of
Bergen to compliment him in their Name, and to return him thanks for the
Protection he had granted to the Dutch ships in his Port, and to desire him at
the same time to continue it, and to order things so, that the Merchant Fleet
there might speedily be dismissed out of that Harbor, and sail out to secure
themselves under the Admiral Flag of the States Grand Fleet. Mr. de Gent was
accordingly received by the Governor with great marks of respect: Upon which
the Deputies having some reliance, writ to Bitter to use all the diligence he
could to get the Ships out of that Port, as being persuaded the Danes would not
offer to oppose their going; but withal assuring him, that if he feared they
would make any difficulty to let them quietly depart, that they might expect
all the assistance imaginable from the powerful Fleet that was so near at
hand, at their disposal. But alas the very noise alone of the arrival of that
Fleet upon the Coasts of Norway, made Affairs there change face immediately,
and after that the Dutch heard no more from the Danes of their demand of 100000
Crowns. On the contrary, they agreeably and obligingly consented to the
departure of their Merchant ships, but yet they refused to restore 41 pieces of
Cannon that the Hollanders had drawn out of their East- India, and other
Merchant ships, to be employed partly in the Castle, and partly in Batteries
raised on the shore, during the late fight with the English. For when the Dutch
redemanded them, the Danes answered, that they had need of them themselves for
their own defense against the English, whom they had incensed against them upon
their account; so that with all the Dutch could do or say, they could never
persuade them to part with them again.

After the East India and other Merchant ships had joined the Grand Fleet of
men of War, they unmoor'd from the Bay of Bergen, at the beginning of
September, and about 4 days after were saluted by so terrible a Tempest that
they were almost all entirely scattered one from another. And besides the loss
of two Fireships that were cast away, there were many Ships shrewdly
endamaged. Two East India Ships, viz. The Golden Phoenix, and the Fort of
Huningen, and 4 men of War, viz. the West-Friesland, the Groningen, the De
Zevenwolden, and the Hope, being separated from the Admiral's Flag, by the ill
Weather, fell into the hands of the English near the Dogger-Sand. And some days
after, the Ships, Huis te Swieten, the Cavaleer of Guelders the St. Paul of
Zealand, and the St. Paul of Enkhuizen, together with 3 Merchant Ships, 2 Fire
Ships, etc. were likewise taken, being drawn into the snare by the treachery of
a Pilot of Bremen, who being asked, whether he could tell any news of the
English? answered, that he had seen them pass by about 80 sail strong, and so
councelling them to steer to the East-South-East, cruelly betrayed the
Hollanders, by sending them into their Enemies mouths. However the Dutch grand
Fleet made a shift to get back about the 24 of September, and to come most part
of them to an Anchor, in Goree, without coming to any Action, except it were
Vice Admiral Van Nes, who fired some Guns upon some English Ships that would
have taken from him two East India Ships, but no fight ensued, because the
English thought fit to sheer off, and leave them to pursue their voyage.

A little time after, the taking of those Ships, the English Fleet steered away
homewards for their own Harbors, and on the 21st. at night the Earl of
Sandwich came to an Anchor in Solbay, with a Squadron of 18 men of War, two
East India Ships, and some other prizes taken from the Hollanders, as appears
by the Letter he writ from thence to General Monk, whereof here follows the
Copy.

May it please your Excellence,
A Letter from ^^e Earl of Sandwich, to General Monk.
I Hope my last, dated the 5th. of this month, was delivered you, by which I
informed you of the taking of the Vice and Rear Admirals of the Dutch
East India Fleet, 4 of their men of War, and 3 or 4 other Merchant Ships. Since
which on Saturday the 9th. Instant at night, we met 18 sail more most of which
were taken, and amongst them, a man of War of 70 Guns, another of 40, and some
West India Ships laden with Ammunition and Provisions for the Fleet. As for
this last rencounter I cannot yet tell you all the Circumstances of it, because
the Wind rising in the night, and the darkness redoubling, we were separated
one from an other. But God be thanked, that he was pleased to be so gracious as
to conduct me back to Anchor here last Night with a Fleet of Eighteen Sail,
having with me, the Royal Sovereign, 2 East India Ships, and some other Men of
War, taken from the Hollanders: We discover at present some Ships at Sea,
making all the Sail they can to come in hither, so that I doubt not but God
will grant them that Favor, supposing them to be some of our own; but yet I
cannot discern any of the White and Blew Squadrons, except only that of the
Rear-Admiral of the Blue Squadron. I have resolved to send the Great Ships with
the Prizes, into the River of Chattam, on the first Opportunity, and to leave
the most part of the small Frigates at Hartly-Bay, and Harwich. We have made
1000 Prisoners on board our last Prizes. I recommend your Excellence to the
Protection of God Almighty, etc.


Thus the English retired into their Harbors, laden with the Spoils of the
Hollanders. In which Transaction, it seems something strange, the two Fleets
should come so near one another without fighting, since their Vanguards were
sometimes near enough to have engaged; but it is thought the English intended
nothing less than a Fight, when they saw so fair an Occasion to make a Rich
Booty without it.

In the mean while, the Dutch used all imaginable Industry, to assemble their
Fleet before Goree, and to get them in readiness to go out once more in search
after the English, and to engage them, if possible, to a Battle. But a horrible
Tempest arising on the 29th of September, so endamaged most of their Ships,
that they were glad to retire again into their Ports. But however, de Ruiter,
in spite of all those cross and mischievous Accidents, unmoored on the 5th of
October following, from before Goree, to go into the Texel, and join the other
fresh Ships there, with Design after he had taken in a Supply of necessary
Provisions, to sail out with them toward the Coasts of England. And on the
11th the Dutch Fleet, consisting of about 90 Sail of Men of War, weighed
Anchor, with a Resolution, to go and attack the English, at Solbay, at Harwich,
in the Thames, or in the Downs; for which effect, the States Deputies had taken
care to detach away some Yachts and Galliots, to go out a scouting toward
those Places, and to get what Intelligence they could of the English, and to
spy out the Number of their Ships. And one of those Yachts and a Galliot,
being returned, met the Grand Fleet on the 12th off of Schoowen, and reported,
They had seen 23 English Ships behind the Banks of Harwich, and that some
French Fishermen had assured them, The English Fleet was not yet come out.
Relying upon that Report, the Hollanders appeared on the 15th between Yarmouth
and Laystoff, where they took a small Bark, and enquiring of the Prisoners
taken in it, how all things stood, they answered, That they knew nothing but
only that the great English Men of War had orders not to stir out, and that
there were none at all on the Northern Coasts; that the last week before there
died in London 9000 People of the Plague, and that several other great Towns in
the Kingdom were afflicted with the same pernicious Disease. The next Day, the
Fleet advanced toward Solbay, where they found no Ships at all. In the mean
while, all the Coast was in an alarm; and the People of Suffolk were up in
Arms, and had fired the Beacons all-a-long the Seacoast, to give notice to the
Inhabitants, that the Enemy was upon their Coast. On the same Day, 16 of the
King's Ships having had notice of the Approach of the Holland Fleet, unmoored
from Harwich, and retired into the Thames. On the 17th the Dutch were resolved
to make sail toward Harwich, across the Banks, but were hindered by a contrary
Wind; and therefore steered toward the Thames, where they saw 13 English Men
of War go in, which they could not possibly intercept, because our Men were
near 3 Miles off from the Body of the Grand Fleet. It was supposed, they were
the Ships that were come from Harwich. The next night, the Dutch Fleet anchored
at the Mouth of the River, and on the 18th they unmoored, and made off for the
Downs, thinking to block up the Passage thither, and to surprise the English
Ships they should find there. But that Project was broken either by contrary
Winds, or Calms, if it had not been for which they might have taken 5 English
Men of War and 3 or 4 Privateers, who by that means had time to escape.
However, the Fleet returned again to the Thames; and on the last Day of the
Month, the Lords Deputies, with the Admiral de Ruiter, went on Board the Frigate
Gornichem, and with 3 Galliots accompanying them, advanced a great way up the
River, followed at a distance by de Ruiter's and Tromp's Squadrons. About a
mile from thence they found the River very large and deep, and the next evening
after they had taken a View of all things, they returned to the Fleet. But all
those Precautions were but needless, because they were founded only upon the
Advice they had had, that an English Fleet, to the Number of about 60 Sail, of
stout Men of War, was ready to sail out of the Thames, with intent to give
Battle to the Hollanders, and chase them from the Coasts of England; which
proved false, for they offered not to stir out.

In the mean time Winter was coming on, and Mortal Diseases began cruelly to
rage in the Fleet; where 140 Seamen were already dead, 355 had been sent back
sick into Holland, and there were reckoned 970 more to remain still in the
Fleet. Lieutenant Admiral Tromp had 34 Sick on board him, besides 33 more he
had sent home before. On the 1st of November, all the General and Inferior
Officers in the Fleet were summoned on Board the Admiral, to give him a more
particular account what condition they were in, by whose Report it appeared,
That some Captains who had all their Men healthy and sound, but on the 27th of
the last Month, complained, that since that time they had had one with another
40 Men apiece sick on board them. And Lieutenant Admiral Tromp was one of the
most unfortunate in that Rencounter, having in two days time 50 Soldiers taken
sick in his Ship alone. Vice Admiral Bankert reported likewise, That the Day
before 20 of his Men had had the same Misfortune. So that every Captain
complaining in that manner of the number of sick Men they had on Board their
respective Ships, the Deputies, and the Generals of the Fleet, judged
thereupon, That it was impossible to remedy those Disasters, and that therefore
it was best for them to retire home, and that so much the rather, because the
English appeared not at Sea, and that the Tempestuous Weather, that coming on
with the Winter, would not permit them to stay any longer there. Pursuant to
which Resolution, 6 light Frigates, and 4 Galliots were detached away to go and
cruise for 3 Days at the Mouth of the Thames, both to advertise the Ships that
might have been sent from Holland to the Fleet, and to seek out the Ships that
belonged to the Flag, to give them notice of the Departure of the Fleet. They
thought likewise fit to order a Squadron of 18 Ships, whose Men were as yet all
sound, to keep the Sea three Weeks longer; the Command of which was given to
Sweers, who was made Rear-Admiral of the Admiralty of Amsterdam, upon the Death
of de Wild. He had Orders to cruise about the Dogger sand till the beginning
of December, and to do his best to go to meet the Ships bound homewards from
the East Indies, and that were expected back from Norway, in order to convoy
them safe home; and at the same time, to have an Eye upon the English
Merchant-Ships, coming out of the Sound, or from Hamborough, toward the
Thames, or that should come out of the Thames, to go toward the North,
commanding him to give them Chase, and to do all he could to burn them, sink
them, etc.

The same Day, viz. the 1st of November, afternoon, the Fleet set sail, and
tackt about, and stood to the Eastward. Lieutenant Admiral Cornelius Evertsz
led the Right Wing, Lieutenant Admiral de Vries the left, and the Squadrons of
de Ruiter and Tromp composed the Main Battle. The next Day de Ruiter put up a
White Flag upon his Mizzen Mast, and fired 3 Guns for a Signal to the Squadrons
to separate. The Lieutenant Admirals, Tromp, Evertsz, and de Vries answered the
Admiral, according to the Order settled for that effect, each of them with 7
Guns, Each Vice Admiral with 5, and each Rear-Admiral with 3. And then Admiral
de Ruiter replied to all those Admirals, again, at once, with 9 Guns; and so
the several Squadrons of the Fleet quitted one another about Midway toward
home; Tromp made toward Goree, and the Meuse, the Zealand Squadron toward
W^elingen, and de Ruiter sailed toward the Texel and the Vlie, whither also
went Lieutenant Admiral Hiddes de Vries, with the Friesland Ships.

The Lords Deputies of the States having quitted de Ruiter, landed on the 4th
of November in a Galliot at the Helder, and thence went to the Hague, where
they made their Report to the States General of what had passed in that
Expedition, for which they received the Thanks of their High and Mightinesses,
as appears by the following Writing.

Mr. Huigens, Mr. Pensionary de Wit, and Mr. John Boreel, Deputies
Plenipotentiaries of their High and Mightinesses in the States Fleet, have made
a Summary Report of the things that passed in the last Expedition, upon which
the States having deliberated, and taken into Consideration the Care and Pains
the said Plenipotentiaries have therein taken, as well as the Vigilance and
good Conduct they have shown by the tender Affection they have expressed for
their Country, by acting Night an Day, as far as God, and the State of Affairs
would permit them, with an indefatigable Zeal for the Good of the State, their
High and Mightinesses have consequently thankt them for it, and hereby declare
themselves perfectly well satisfied with their Admin^strat^on. The Dutch Fleet
then did nothing that Expedition, but cause some Alarms upon the Coast of
England, and all the Honor they gained by it was only that of having offered
Battle to the English Fleet, whilst they kept themselves within their Harbors,
as being debarred by a raging and pestilent Distemper from accepting it, and
having interrupted the Commerce of the English Merchants, by keeping the Mouth
of the Thames blockt up for about 16 Days together. In the mean while, the
Negotiation for a Peace was broke off; for the French King, who had offered his
Mediation, finding that the English had more Inclination to continue the War,
than to treat with the Dutch, and having some By-ends of his own upon the
Hollanders, taking a Pretense of Dissatisfaction against the English, because
their Ships daily appeared near S. Malo's and the Coasts of Normandy, firing
upon his Subjects, and committing several Attempts against them, contrary to
the Treaties of Alliance and Confederacy he had with the King of England,
recalled the Duke of Vernueil, the Count de Conings, and Mr. Courtin, his
Ambassadors from that Court, after having commanded them publicly to declare
to the King of England, which they accordingly did on the 15th of October at
Oxford; That the King of France their Master, seeing all the Propositions that
had been made to procure an Accommodation between the 2 contending Nations of
England and Holland were rejected by the English, his Majesty was resolved to
assist the Hollanders, according to the Treaty of Alliance he was engaged in
with them. To which the King of England answered coldly enough, That the French
King knew his own Interest, and so did the King of England know his too. So
that the French Ambassadors having demanded their Audience of Leave on the
10th of December, embarkt on the 23d of the same Month, at Dover, and arrived
the next Day at S. Valery. Hollis likewise, the English Ambassador in France,
was also recalled, and having had his Audience of Leave, he made show as if he
would depart, but yet took the Liberty to stay 6 Months after, in the Kingdom,
out of Paris, under Pretense of his Lady's being sick.

The French King having notified to the States, the recalling of his
Ambassadors out of England, they sent Order to the Sieur de Goch, their
Ambassador at the Court of England, to retire likewise immediately. For though
Sir George Downing, Ambassador to them from the King of England, were gone
from Holland ever since the Month of August, yet the States of the United
Provinces, in hopes to be able to pacify, in an amicable manner, the Troubles
that had newly kindled a War between the 2 Nations, had thitherto deferred the
Departure of the Sieur de Goch, but at last he took his Audience of Leave at
Oxford, and delivered at the same time to the King, the following Declaration
of the States; by which they represented to his Majesty the ardent Passion they
had for Peace, and the means that had been proposed to procure it. The Sieur de
Goch then departed, on the 26th of December toward Dover, where he embarked
upon one of the King's Ships, and on the 29th of the same Month he arrived at
Flushing, from whence he speeded away to the Hague, to make his Report to their
High and Mightinesses, of all that had past in his Negotiation.

The Letter or Declaration from the States, left by him with the King of
England was in these Terms.

SIR,
The States Remonstrance to the King of England, concerning the rupture of the
Peace.
THat we might give evident Proofs of our Desire and Inclination for Peace, we
were willing after the Rupture, to defer even till this Day, to recall our
Ambassador from the Court of England. And though we had already by just and
reasonable Offers, satisfied all the Complaints put up to us by Sir George
Downing, in a Time when we could hardly believe, that Matters would ever have
come to an Extremity; yet we have done still more, by leaving our Ambassador
in England, after the taking from us not only several Places, but some whole
Provinces belonging to the States in both Worlds, and the stopping the Ships of
their Subjects in the Face of all Christendom, and that without any previous
Declaration of War. By an effect also of an overgreat Confidence, neither did
we recall our Ambassador presently after your Majesty had recalled yours, in
hopes you would at last be pleased to make some Reflection upon the Mischiefs a
War would bring upon the two Nations. Your Majesty alone is Witness of the
advantageous Propositions that have been made you, in order to attain a Good
and Solid Peace. We have offered to conclude it as your Majesty should desire,
either that each Party should restore what they had taken from each other, or
else that if England should think that best for its Interests, each side should
keep and remain in possession of their Conquests, and that with this Advantage
for England, that those Propositions might have been accepted by your People at
a Time when the United Provinces as yet were ignorant what had been taken from
them in remote Countries. To which may be added, that it cannot be said, That
we flattered our selves with the Hopes of receiving any other Fruit from
thence, than a bare indemnification for the Losses the States have suffered,
incomparably greater than those of England. Notwithstanding all this, your
Majesty has not only refused to accept all these advantageous Conditions, which
may convince you of the sincere Desire the States have for a Peace. But
further, were not pleased to be satisfied with those other Proposals so
disadvantageous to the States, offered you by the Mediation of France, which
they never consented to. Besides, your Majesty would never make, or order any
one to make, the least Overture on your Side, of any Conditions upon which you
pretended to enter into Negotiation with the States: And though you have been
pleased to testify to our Ambassador, That you desired nothing so heartily as
Peace, yet you would never determine to make choice of any means by which it
might be attained, or explain your Mind clearly thereupon, either to him or to
the other Mediators. We are persuaded, there is no Christian Prince in Europe
who would not choose rather at all times to prefer the Sweetness of a good Peace
before the Mischiefs of a Cruel War, how just soever it may be; and we make
thereupon the same Judgment of your Majesty's Sentiments, since you exercise
the same Religion with us. But reflecting upon your Majesty's manner of dealing
with our Ambassador, in contempt even of those advantageous Propositions made
you by the French Ambassadors, though they were altogether contrary to the true
Interests of our State, in that you would never vouchsafe to make any advances
that might serve for a Ground for us to treat upon together, we thought then
that our Ambassador could no longer stay in the Court of England, without
Injury to the Reputation of the State; and therefore have thought fit to recall
him, and that so much the rather, because by recalling yours, has been pleased
to let us know you would not take it ill at our Hands. This shall not hinder,
but that we shall ever retain a sincere desire to come to a good Accommodation,
as soon as we shall have Opportunity to do it, in conjunction with our Allies.
In the mean while, we shall wait the time till it shall please God to inspire
your Majesty with such Sentiments as may dispose you to declare what your will
is, and what are the Conditions that may reconcile us, that we may stop and
prevent the Effusion of so much Christian Blood, which is now spilt, and still
ready to be spilt in this unhappy Quarrel. We can say, That we shall not be
responsible for it, since both before and since the Rupture, we have done all
we could imagine to be just and reasonable, and that could be expected from us,
and that we are still actually in the same Mind, and yet without ever having
been able hitherto to find out what your Majesty's Intention is upon that
Subject. We will therefore wait till you have more Inclination for Peace; but
yet it were to be wished, you would be brought to those good Thoughts of your
own accord, without staying till the Mischiefs and Disasters that are now ready
to afflict Christendom, inspire them into you. We pray God to avert them, and
to take, Sir, your Majesty's Sacred Person into his holy Protection.


French Ambassadors at Oxford, to the King of England, were soon followed by a
Declaration of War from that Crown. For Mr. Van Beuningen, Ambassador from the
States at the Court of France, had a long time before powerfully solicited
them to declare, by virtue of the Treaty of Alliance, concluded in the Month of
April, 1662. with the United Provinces; urging them out of Hand to unite their
Forces with those of the States against the King of Great Britain, the Violater
of the Peace. Upon which the Most Christian King, being easily Persuaded that
the best way for him to bend the King of England to a pliable Temper to him,
and to make his Ends upon both Nations, was to declare War against the English
in that Juncture, published the following Declaration.

The French King's Declaration of War against England.
HIS Majesty being informed, there was some misunderstanding between England,
and the United Provinces, gave order to his Ambassadors in ordinary, to employ
all imaginable care in his name, to endeavor to stifle all those troubles in
their birth, and having with displeasure heard, that things were carried to
that extremity as to come to a Rupture, his Majesty sent Extraordinary
Ambassadors to the King of Great Britain, to endeavor by new Instances to
pacify those two powers, and induce them to come to some Accommodations; but
his mediation had not all the success that was to be wished for. In the mean
while, the States General of the United Provinces strongly soliciting his
Majesty to execute the Treaty of a defensive Alliance concluded the 7th. of
April, 1662, between the States and his said Majesty, the King finding himself
thereupon obliged to perform his Royal Word, and the Engagements into which he
entered by an Authentic League in a time when England and Holland were as yet
in good understanding together, and out of all appearance of a Rupture; his
Majesty has declared, and does declare by these presents, signed with his own
hand, that he is resolved to assist the said States General of the United
Provinces, in pursuance of the said Treaty of a defensive League, and to join
all his Forces to theirs, in Order to Act jointly with them against the English
as well by Sea as by Land. And for that effect his Majesty Commands expressly
all his Subjects and Ships, to attack and fight the English, forbidding them on
pain of death to have any Communication, Beaufort, Peer of France, Great
Master, Chief, and Super-intendent General of Marine Affairs, and of the
Commerce of France; and likewise to the Marshals of France, to the Governors
and Lieutenant Generals of his Majesty, as well those of his Provinces, as of
his Armies, to Camp Marshals, Brigadeers, Colonels, Captains, and other
Commanders of his Troops, as well Infantry as Cavalry, French, or Strangers,
and to all other Officers to whom it appertains, to lend a hand to the
Execution of these presents, every one in his place, and his Jurisdiction. For
such is the pleasure of his Majesty. Who likewise wills that these presents be
published and fixed up in all his Towns, upon Sea, and elsewhere, in all the
Ports and other places of his Kingdom, where it is necessary, that none may
plead cause of Ignorance, and that to the Copy of them duly compared, the same
credit be given as to the Original.


In the month of February following, the United Provinces concluded another
strict Alliance with Denmark, in Consequence of which, orders were sent to
Funen, into Holstein, Jutland, and Norway, to lay an Embargo upon all Danish
Ships, and to forbid them to stir out of their Ports, that so by that means the
Danish Fleet might be the more expeditiously equipt and Armed out. The Articles
of that Treaty were.

I. THat each party should absolutely desist from all pretensions they might
have one upon the other. The Articles of the Dutch League with Denmark.
II. That all manner of misunderstanding in Norway should be laid asleep and
forgot. III. That the States General should engage to pay to his Danish Majesty
1500000 Livers per annum, as long as the War against England should continue,
of which the French should be obliged to pay 300000 Livers yearly for their
part: For which sum, the King of Denmark should engage on his side, to maintain
a Fleet at Sea of 30 Ships of War, of which some should be furnished with a
sufficient number of Regular Troops, to be employed in the Service of the
States, when they should need them.
That Treaty was a stroke of Thunder to the English, who were the more sensibly
concerned at it, because they had not heard the least inkling of it, till they
heard of its conclusion. For Dreyer the Secretary of the King of Denmark's
Embassy in Holland, was sent incognito by the Ministers of that Prince that
were at the Hague Mr. Catisius, and Mr. Klingenberg, immediately after the
Conclusion of the Treaty, to the King their Master, to present it to him and
get his Ratification, after which the Secretary came back again with all
expedition to the Hague. This politic silence was the cause, that the English
Resident at the Court of Denmark had not time to advertise the Merchants of his
Nation of it, so that all their effects were seized and confiscated throughout
the whole extent of the Kingdom. It Is true the Danes proceedings on that
occasion had some appearance of Justice and Equity, because the English from
the very time they made that Hostile attempt of which we have spoken, upon the
Port of Bergen in Norway, had not only seized on the Danes Ships and
Merchandises, but had likewise taken their men Prisoners, so that the Crown of
Denmark in that Rencounter seemed to do no more than to use Reprisals, had it
not afterward appeared, that they had dealt perfidiously in that matter with
the King of England, and secretly invited him to that Enterprise for which they
afterward declared War against him.

In the mean time the United Provinces, in order to facilitate the Arming and
manning out the Fleet, published on the 1st. of February an Ordinance,
forbidding all Merchant Ships, and Fishing vessels, to stir out of their
Harbors, upon pain of Confiscation of their said Ships and Goods: They
likewise forbad the great and small Fishery under the same penalties and the
Ordinance for forbidding the Greenland Fishery, was also renewed. But the
States however, declared that their intention in all those prohibitions, was to
find them subsistence all the year, without any alteration even after the Fleet
should be gone out, etc.

About that time, Tromp signified to the States that he should be glad if they
would please to change his Quality of Lieutenant Admiral of Holland and
West-Friesland, or of the College of the Admiralty of the Meuse into that of
Lieutenant Admiral of the College of the Admiralty of Amsterdam, which request
the States granted upon Condition he got the consent of both those Admiralties
thereunto: so that having obtained it, on the 6th. of February, he was created
Lieutenant Admiral of the College of the Admiralty of Amsterdam; and on the
24th. of the same month, Vice Admiral Aart Van Nes, succeeded him in quality of
Lieutenant Admiral of the Meuse, and Captain John Van Nes was made Rear Admiral.

In the mean while the English being sensible of the great Force of so
powerful a League, made very great preparations for War on their side, and
exerted as we may say the utmost of their efforts to make a vigorous
resistance: But because money was wanting they were forced to borrow 1250000 l.
Sterling more at great Interest, and besides to help toward the defraying of
the extraordinary charges of the War the two East- India Ships, viz. the
Phoenix, and the Fort of Huningen taken from the Hollanders were sold, which
yielded the sum of 1600000 l. And because the French King had first declared
War against England, the King of Great Britain who was no less Jealous of his
honor than the Monsieur, published likewise a Declaration against that Crown,
in the following Terms.

The King of England's Declaration of War against France.
WHereas the French under pretense of a defensive League concluded with the
States General of the United Provinces accuses us of having violated the Peace,
though all Europe be well enough informed of the contrary; And upon that
Ground, has declared War against us on the 26th. of January last, making
himself thereby the Aggressor and Infractour of the Peace which we have always
desired to preserve with the said States, on whose behalf the Ambassadors of
the most Christian King never offered any indemnification for the losses
suffered by our Subjects, nor given any Guarrantees for the security of their
Commerce for the future: We therefore trusting in the Almighty power of God,
and in the justice of our cause, and being likewise assured of the Bravery and
Fidelity of our Subjects, have thought fit for their Common security, to
declare, that we are resolved to carry on the War vigorously, by employing all
our Forces as well by Sea as by Land, against France, which has newly begun it
with us, against all the Laws of Justice. And to that end, we Command our Royal
Brother Lord High Admiral of England, and our Trusty and well beloved Cousin
and Councellor, George Duke of Albemarle, General of our Armies by Land, our
Lords Lieutenants of Counties, Governors of Provinces, and all other inferior
Officers and Soldiers, under their Commands as well by Sea as by Land, to
oppose all the Enterprises of the French King and his Subjects; And for the
more effectual putting in execution all manner of Acts of Hostility against the
said French King, his Ships, or Subjects, we hereby most expressly forbid all
our Subjects to hold any Correspondence with them upon pain of death, excepting
those who shall be forced so to do; to get their Goods safe out of the Enemies
Country. And whereas there are in our Kingdom, a great Number of the Subjects
of France, and of the United Provinces we hereby Declare, and give our Royal
Word, that all Persons of the said Nations, which shall submit to our
Obedience, without holding any intelligence with our Enemies, whatsoever they
be, shall be defended and protected in their Goods and Persons. And moreover,
we declare, that all French or Dutch Subjects, who out of love to our
Government or by reason of the Calamities they may be made to suffer in their
own Country, shall retire into our Kingdom for refuge, shall be favored with
our protection, as well in their Goods as Persons, and especially those of the
Reformed Religion, whose Interests we shall ever dearly tender, etc.


In the mean while, the French being, as they are always, diligent in making
their preparations, put out their Fleet to Sea at the very beginning of April,
consisting of 30 Men of War 12 Galliots, and 10 Fireships, who were joined
with 6 of the States ships under the Command of Gedeon Verburg, and Captain
Ooms. The Duke of Beauford Admiral of France, had orders from the King his
Master, to enter the Channel, and join the Holland Fleet. And accordingly
appearing upon the Coasts of England, he put them in alarm, and made a descent
in several places, and carried off a few sheep, and some other small Booty,
which was all the service he did the Hollanders whom he never joined, or the
harm he did the English, whom he nevea fought, save only that by sculking
about, and keeping the Enemy in fears however that he would join the Dutch he
caused the English to divide their Force and send a part after him where he was
not to be found, and so gave opportunity to the Hollanders to batter and
distress the other part, with their whole Force, and to obtain such an
advantage over the English, as they could never do when their Forces were
United. And the Hollanders paid dear for that advantage too: for under pretense
of their small services in that War, the French cunningly wheedled them to
build them a great Number of men of War, with which they afterward scourged
them at Palermo.

The English and Hollanders both, in so pressing an occasion, had great need of
Seamen, to perfect the Compliments of their ships; which obliged the English to
consent to the Exchange of Prisoners, man for man, which they would never be
persuaded to do before, by all the Instances and Solicitations the Dutch could
make for that effect. But because the Number of the Dutch Prisoners in England,
was much greater than that of the English, in the United Provinces, tho many of
the former perished by the Plague, Famine, and other Hardships they were made to
suffer, they drew them out by Lot, which they that got were delivered, and
those that met with Blanks remained in Captivity and Misery.

A little time after, viz. On the 1st. of May, War was likewise declared
against the English by sound of Trumpet, at Bergen in Norway, by order of the
King of Denmark.

In the mean while the English, having used all the diligence imaginable to get
their Navy Equipt, put it to Sea about the end of May, which consisted of 81
men of War, 21085 men, and 4460 Guns, and was divided into 3 Great Squadrons;
the first of which being the Red one was Commanded by Prince Robert and General
Monk. The White Squadron was Conducted by Sir George Ayschew, and the Blew one
by Sir Thomas Allen.

As soon as the Holland Fleet had advice, that the English Navy was at Sea,
they weighed Anchor on the 1st. of June, being then 96 sail strong of men of
War, and carrying 4716 Guns, and 20642 men, and was Commanded in chief by
Lieutenant Admiral de Ruiter.

And on the 11th. of June the two Fleets met, and fought that celebrated Battle
of 4 days, the memory of which ought to be preserved to all posterity, as well
for the unexampled Bravery of the English though overpowered by Numbers, because
divided in Force, as for the dear bought advantage of the Hollanders in it,
which yet was far from meriting the name of a Victory, though State policy
required it should be bragged of and proclaimed Abroad as one no less than of
the most Absolute sort. How the Dutch Reported of that Famous Action, may be
seen by the following Letters and Relations: whereof the first is A Letter
written to the College of the Admiralty of Amsterdam, by Hondius, Captain on
board Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, and dated the 12th. of June New style from
Goree, whither the Ship Hollandia in which he was, was brought in after the
fight.
ON the 11th. of June, at the break of day, being come to an Anchor to the
North-West-ward, and at 9 or 10 miles distance from Ostend, our Advanced guards
that were detached to go out to discover the Enemy, came back to the Fleet, and
brought us word, that the English Navy was to the Windward of us; and a little
after, we saw 10 of their scout-Ships, who as soon as they had viewed us tacked
about, and steered back to the North-west-ward to rejoyn their Grand Fleets.
The wind being turned to the South-West, and South-West and a Quarter to the
West, begun to grow high, and the Sea to swell. In the mean time, all was ready
for giving the English battle, and our Ships faced those of the Enemy that were
to the Wind-ward. After noon, we perceived the Enemies Fleet consisting of
about 70 men of War, making directly toward us. At that time, we were, as I
have said, still at Anchor; and because the Wind was high and the Sea was
somewhat rough, we thought the English had the Weather-gage, and would likewise
come and cast Anchor, but they instead of that, after they had faced our Fleet
a while, fell to rights upon us; which happening whilst we were busy in
unmooring, and had our Anchors yet but half up, we were forced to cut our
Cables in all haste, because the Enemy was already come within Cannon shot of
us. without losing time then we hoisted our Main-Sails and saluted the Vice
Admiral of the White, who was on our right hand, with some Guns; and then the
Enemy begun to fire likewise, they which were nearest us answering us each of
them with a broad side. Our Fleet, but especially the Squadrons of the
Lieutenant Admirals, Evertsz and de Vries, which according to the Order given
were to have been to the Wind-ward, were fallen to Leeward, and were the
hindermost of all the Fleet: But a little while after, upon a Signal we made to
them to follow us in their due rank, they advanced in good Order. The English
Admiral putting up a Royal Flag, attacked us behind; but he was so vigorously
charged by the Ships that followed us, that he was forced to tack about to the
Northward, which made him with some of his followers, fall into our Fleet,
which caused a great deal of disorder in the English Fleet. A Fiery Bullet from
the Enemies set fire to the Right side of our Gallery, which we had much ado to
quench. The Vice Admiral of the Red, observing that the abovesaid Admiral that
carried the Royal or Union Flag, whose Main mast was shot down, had tackt
about, would fain have followed him; but being already very much shattered, it
was impossible for him to do it. The Vice Admiral of the White having followed
the motion we made to the Southward, was about the distance of a Musket shot
from us, who being attackt by Solomonsz and de Haan, was extremely endamaged:
For his main sail was shot to pieces, so that seeing himself in such a pitiful
condition he fired some Guns without Bullet, to advertize his followers to come
in to his Assistance; but they making as if they heard him not, betook
themselves to flight, and left him in the danger. And then we thought we might
conveniently grapple him in Order to board him; But Captain Solomonsz Ship
falling foul just in that nick, upon ours, we were entangled for some time
together, but however soon after we got free of one another without damage. In
the mean time the aforesaid English Vice Admiral, making use of that
opportunity, was fled away, in Company with some other English Ships; which
being pursued by ours, were taken; And the Vice Admiral of the White was forced
to surrender himself to Captain Adriansz who had grappled him. During all the
time of the fight, we vigorously charged the English Navy together with our
whole Fleet, till at last our masts were shot close by the Board, and our
Mizzen and Fore-Masts tumbled into the Sea; so that our Ship being quite
disabled and out of a condition to make any more Resistance, Admiral Tromp
leapt into a Galliot, to go on board some other Ship, after he had recommended
to his Officers, that they would take care to save the Hull of his Ship by
carrying it into the first Harbor they met with, we were brought in hither to
day by the Asperen Frigate, etc.




Lieutenant Admiral Tromp having removed himself on Board the Vtrecht, writ
also the following Letter in haste, to the States, dated the 14th of June.

High and Mighty Lords,
TIll at present by the protection of God, we are Masters of the Victory.
Yesterday the English, to the Number of 30 men of War, Tromp's Letter to the
States, about the fight with the English in June, 1666.
betook themselves to flight, whom we pursued till the dusk of Night, and we
have forced the Admiral of the White Squadron, who Commanded the Royal Charles
to yield himself and Ship, which carries 90 Brass Guns. I was then on board
Rear-Admiral Sweers; but after we had taken her, we burnt her. The Enemies
Fleet is now coming up to us again, being Reinforced with 22 men of War, great
and small; 12 of our Ships that were scattered, are come in again to the
Admiral, so that we are still 70 sail strong, and what is more considerable,
God be thanked, is that they are all full of Courage. We flatter our selves
with the hopes by the Protection of Heaven, to bring things to a happy issue. I
beseech your High and Mightinesses to be pleased to excuse me for sending you
no more particulars, because time is now so precious to us.


Admiral de Ruiter being on board the Ship called, the 7 Provinces, writ also
the following Letter to the States dated the 14th. of June.

High and Mighty Lords,
SInce my last of the 10th. of this Month, we had a Calm all night, and on the
11th. in the morning, the Wind rising higher, turned to the South-West, which
induced us to hasten to go and Anchor between Dunkirk, and the North of these
Provinces. About 9 a Clock our Advanced guards gave us notice by the appointed
signal, that they had discovered the Enemies Fleet. At 10 a Clock the
mizzen-mast and Bolt-sprit of Colonel de Gent's Ship being blown into the Sea
by the violence of the Wind, we Ordered him to retire into the first secure
Harbor. At 11 we discovered the English Fleet making toward us whose Admiral
carried on his Mainmast top the Union Flag of England, and the Red Flag on his
Mizzen-mast top, and upon occasion for a signal he sometimes put up a third
upon his Poop, without any blew in it. The Lieutenant Admiral carried a White
Flag on his Mainmast, without any blew. There were 3 Vice-Admirals, and
Rear-Admirals that carried White and Blew Flags. The whole Number of the Ships
that composed their Fleet was 70 sail great and small. We expected their charge
at Anchor, because the Wind was so high and the Sea so rough that we could not
possibly weigh; so that when the English came within Cannon shot of us, we cut
our Cables, by which means we lost each of us an Anchor, and one or two Cables.
About noon, the fight begun by the Squadron of Admiral Tromp and Van Meppelen,
who were the foremost advanced on my left hand. The English had the
Weather-gage, and we were to Leeward, which gave us the more advantage to fire
our lower tires of Guns: After we had fought in that manner about three hours,
with almost equal loss on both sides, the English tackt about to the
Northward; and then the Vice Admiral of the White, and two or three other
English Ships were separated from the body of their Fleet, they being so much
shattered, that they were not able to follow them; so that the Captains, Vander
Zaan, Adriansz, and Van Amstel pursuing them close, took them. These are all
the particulars I know. About that time Admiral Tromp's Ship having lost her
Masts, I found by the hoisting of his Flag on board another Ship, that he had
been obliged to change his Ship. I perceived likewise, that a Ship of my
Squadron, Commanded by Captain Otho Treslong in which were the Prince of
Monaco, and the Count de Guiche, with their retinue as Volunteers, was all on
fire caused by some stopples; upon which, those Lords fearing the fire might
get to the powder-room, and blow up the Ship retired on Board my Son-in-Law
John Gelders Ship, from whence they came on board me on the 12 in the morning.

The English having as we have said, tackt about to the Northward, Admiral
Evertsz and de Vries went on and charged them again, whilst we were repairing
our damages. And the Enemies finding themselves to the Wind-ward of some of our
Ships, the English Admiral General followed by several of his Ships, and some
of the General Officers of his Navy, came to an Anchor, thinking to rally his
Squadrons, and to stop the holes of such of his Ships as had been pierced with
Bullets. But when he saw us make a tack toward him, he cut his Cables and
advanced toward us with much Resolution. We received him as we ought, and
having intercepted their Rear Admiral of the White, I sent up my Fire Ship to
burn him; but they shoved her off with Oars and Iron Leavers as they did
likewise another Fire-Ship of Zealand; however, near 200 of his Men, for fear
of the flames, leapt into the Sea, and Admiral Evertsz kept close to him till
the last shot he fired. In fine that English Rear-Admirals ship, called the
Injury sunk, but we know not whether any of the rest of the men that staid on
board her, were saved or no. She carried 54 Brass, and 20 Iron Guns, and 400
Men. The night parted the Fray, and we passed it in repairing our Ships,
charging our Cartridges, and casting out all encumbrances.

On the 12th. at break of day, the English having the Weather-gage came pouring
upon us again. The fight was furious and bloody, and the two Fleets having
broken through one another twice, at the third time, Admiral Tromp, and Vice
Admiral Vander Hulst, and some other ships of their Squadron, fell into the
main body of the English, where they fought most desperately. I seeing the
danger they were in, put a Red Flag for a signal, to the whole Dutch Fleet to
Advance and Fall upon the Enemy; which was put in Execution. Our Ships were
extremely endamaged by the stout resistance the English made. Captain
Solomonsz's Ship being fastened upon by an English Fire-ship, was blown up, but
most of his men were saved; and the ships of Vice Admiral Vander Hulst, and
Captain de Haan being both disabled were forced to retire into the next
Harbor. In the mean while the two Fleets broke through one another twice more
and the last time my main Topmast and Admirals Flag were shot down. Afternoon
the Enemies betook themselves to flight, and their Defeat continued all night,
they Retreating toward the Thames. On the 13th. of the same month, being
reinforced with a Squadron, of 20 light Frigates, amongst which were 3 or 4
great ships, they renewed the fight, but the night parted us. The Admiral's
Ship of the White, being ready to sink, we burnt her. Admiral Ayschew and his
men were saved by one of our Ships. This morning having called on board the
Admirals Ship, all the Captains of the Fleet we have resolved to pursue the
Victory, in hopes that God will bless our Arms with a Complete one. I cannot
yet be informed of the particulars of our Losses, any more than of those of the
Enemies. But I know very well, that whilst we pursued them, we could scarcely
count -- or 40 of their Ships together before they received a Reinforcement,
etc.


Ruth Maximilian, who was lately raised from the low degree of an ordinary
Sailer, to that of a Captain, for his signal Bravery in the Action at Bergen in
Norway, the year before, writ the following Letter to the College of the
Admiralty of Rotterdam.

Noble and Potent Lords,
I Shall inform your Noble Mightinesses of the most Remarkable Circumstances
that are come to my knowledge of the Battle, lately fought between the two
Fleets. On the 11th. Instant, at noon, we were riding at an Anchor near
Newport, when the Wind being grown high, and the Sea rough, the English Navy
consisting of about 58 sail came from the Westward, and fell upon us. It was
Commanded in chief by Admiral Monk. Lieutenant Admiral Tromp's Squadron was
posted to the South-West-ward, that of Admiral de Ruiter in the main Battle,
and that of Lieutenant Admiral Evertsz extended toward the North-East. The
Enemies begun their attack upon Lieutenant Admiral Tromp's Squadron, who was
obliged to cut his Anchor-Cables, and to bear the greatest brunt of their
assailing Arms. His Masts being shot down were tumbled into the Sea by the
violence of the Wind. Tromp's Squadron thereupon begun to give way, and to make
back toward the main Body of the Dutch Fleet, and then de Ruiter advanced to
support them, accompanied with some other ships. It Is true? The English had the
advantage of the Wind, but it being violent, their Ships being by it heaved all
on one side had much ado to play their Guns with any success, whereas we with
our lower Tires fired upon them with no small effect. At the beginning of the
night, we had already dispersed a part of their Fleet. In which their Vice
Admiral of the White was taken by a Ship of the Admiralty of Amsterdam, and the
Rear Admiral of the same Squadron run in great danger of being burnt to Ashes
by three Fireships, which yet wrought not the effect expected from them: For
having carried their Flames no further than his Poop, they were quenched, and
the Fireships repulsed; so that the ship escaped by favor of the night,
tacking away to the Eastward; however a good part of her Seamen seeing her
danger leapt into the Sea, choosing rather to perish in the Water than to be
burnt. There is reason to believe, that ship so shattered as she was sunk soon
after, because she was never heard of since. During the obscurity of the Night,
the dispersed ships of the Enemies got together again and we made a task to the
Southward. On Saturday morning, we perceived the English behind us, and made
up to them, but they without waiting for us, advanced to meet us withmuch
Resolution and Courage. And then the two Fleets broke through one another though
across the continual Fire of each others Guns. A Calm came on, and after that,
the Wind turned to the South, of which the English had the advantage. Our
Admiral having broke through the Enemies Fleet, got the Weather-gage of them,
so that he prevailed with the greatest part of his Forces over the English
Fleet, excepting only Tromp, who with 7 or 8 Ships of his Squadron was to
Leeward. He had changed his Ship, and was then in that called, the Province of
Vtrecht; he was very ill handled, as was also his Vice Admiral, and had like to
have been reduced to Ashes by an English Fire-ship. De Ruiter considering the
danger in which Tromp was, resolved to dis-engage him, and for that effect, he
ordered the greatest part of his Fleet to make a tack to the Southward, whilst
himself with his Rear fell upon the Enemies main body, making directly toward
Tromp, to assist him: The English seeing him come, opened themselves, and the
Admiral of the White advanced at the head of his Squadron, followed by two
Fireships, to stop de Ruiter, who observing the motion the Enemies had newly
made, tackt to the Southward, to rejoin, if possible, the rest of his Fleet,
which was tackt about to the Northward, with the same intention, so that the
English contented themselves with firing upon him at a distance with their
Guns, without offering to follow him. But methinks committed then a strange
fault. For it had been easy for them to have destroyed the few Ships de Ruiter
had with him, and Tromp's Squadron was able to make no more Resistance against
them, whereas in spite of their Cannonadings, the intended Junction was
effected. The matter passed almost in the same manner, as it did the year
before, for by the motion we made, two English ships were separated from the
rest, whereof one was sunk, to which I my self, without bragging contributed
the most, and the other was so shattered by de Ruiter, that the Enemies finding
her no longer able to keep the Sea, set fire to her. In the mean while, the two
Fleets being got together again, the fight was renewed, and we engaged together
three times more, firing perpetually at one another till the dusk of the
evening. And then the English losing Courage, did not think fit to charge us
any more, but tackt away to the Eastward, in the mean while we chaced them as
far as the Calm Weather, and the approach of the night would permit us. On
Sunday Morning, the Wind was fair, and the Wind turned to the East, and we
pursued the English again till 4 a Clock in the afternoon, the most part of
which retreated toward the West-South-West, in pretty good order; And then
they were reinforced, by Prince Robert s Squadron consisting of 20 Men of War,
coming from the Southward. In the mean time whilst we were chacing them Sir
George Ayschew's Ship Admiral of the White Squadron, called the Royal Prince,
carrying 92 Guns, was stranded at the mouth of the Thames and yielded to
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp without firing so much as a Gun, which after we had
taken out of her, the Admiral and his men we burnt. On Monday the 14th. in the
morning, the English having received a Reinforcement of a fresh Squadron, took
new Courage, and came and attackt us again. De Ruiter thereupon having summoned
all his Captains on board the Admiral Ship, Recommended to them their duty and
the honor of their Country, after which we renewed the fight again, and having
the Weather-gage we resolved to break through the Enemies Fleet, and by that
means, quickly to put them to the Rout. But the English Received us with much
Resolution and Bravery, and it may be said, that there and then it was, that
the Valor of all in General, and of every one in particular was seen to appear
in its full Luster. After the Fight, had been vigorously maintained till 4 a
Clock, our Fleet was divided into two Parts: For de Ruiter, at the Head of one
of them, made a Motion above the Enemies Fleet, whilst the other had order to
keep below them, with Design to enclose them. We had scarce past by the half of
the English Fleet, but we fell upon them, and broke through them, from the one
end to the other, with so much Fury that they were presently put to the Rout.
And then it was, there was a sad Spectacle to be seen of dead and wounded men,
and a terrible harvest of Masts mown down, and of Sails, and all sorts of
tackle tumbled into the Sea, as well on the one side as the other. About 6 in
the Evening the Enemies betook themselves wholly to flight, and we gave them
chase. Being advanced near Prince Robert, we boarded one of the Enemies Ships,
called the Havertuin, carrying 56 Guns, which yielded in sight of Prince
Robert, he not daring to come to her Assistance, but contented himself with
killing me one Seaman, and shooting of the Arm of another. And besides the ship
I took the same evening there were 4 more taken in my sight. In the mean while
the whole English Fleet was entirely dispersed, and every one of them sought to
save themselves by a nimble retreat! the Sea was covered with wandering
Vessels, the most of them steering Westward. Admiral Monk, and an English Rear
Admiral lost their main Masts, so that I doubt not but they will fall to day
into our hands; and so much the rather, that every one of them minding only
their own preservation before that of any one else, they were seen to scamper
about with precipitation without taking any care what destiny befell the rest.
In fine, we have all the reason in the World, to thank God for the signal
Victory we have newly obtained, and for having so powerfully protected our
Arms, to the destruction of our Enemies, etc.


These Letters, how Authentic soever they were, met with no credit in England:
And on the contrary, it was noised throughout all the Kingdom that they had
defeated the Enemies Fleet, and chaced the Hollanders as far as into the very
Havens of Zealand; Nay, that they had mist but little of taking Admiral de
Ruiter's Ship, (as indeed they had, had they minded their business, and Tromp
too;) that the Dutch had lost in that fight, 40 Ships, and at least 6000 men;
whereas the loss of the English was reduced to but 4 men of War, 3 Captains,
some few Seamen or Soldiers killed, and about 300 wounded; that their Fleet was
but very little endamaged, and would be fit to put to Sea again in 15 days at
furthest, etc. The people of Brabant, Cologne, and Hamborough were credulous
enough to believe all those false reports; But in a little time after; they
found by experience the vanity of those English Boasts by the great number of
the dead and wounded of which all the Harbors of Great Britain were full.
Their Great Ships were so miserably shattered, that the people were by public
prohibition Restrained from going into the Ports, though out of mere curiosity.
The Sovereign, the Royal Charles the Catharine, and several others were mown
close to their very Hulls; The Rainbow who saved her self by flying toward the
Coasts of Flanders after she had put her dead and wounded men on shore at
Ostend, retired by stealth though with much ado into Dover. Admiral Ayschew was
made Prisoner; Barklay, Mings, and Herman killed. Prince Robert, Monk, Allen,
and Smith having had their ships most grievously shattered, sought shelter in
the Ports of the Gunfleet, Norbay, etc. Thus because each party claimed the
Glory of that Action, and the Honor of the Victory, and that the English
proceeded so far as to publish a Relation Printed by Authority, of which the
whole design was, to prepossess peoples minds with an opinion, that they had
had the advantage. The States on their side, thought fit to undeceive the
Public, by an Authentic Relation, Authorized by the pretended faithful
Report of all the General and Inferior Officers in their Fleet. Which
Pensioner de Wit, and Vrybergen, Vander Houlk, Kann and Gerlacius, the Deputies
and Plenipotentiaries of the States, and who were no less fruitful in
invention than any of the English Courtiers, were appointed to draw it up: And
as soon as it was published, they sent copies into all the Courts of Europe to
let all Princes see, that the Bonfires, and other dissembling Rejoycings of the
English tended only to the unjust usurping to themselves a Triumph; all the
Glory of which if they might be believed, was due to the Arms of the States;
such as it was, we could not dispense with our selves from inserting it here at
length.

A Relation of what passed in the fight between the English Fleet, and that of
the United Provinces, which happened on the 11, 12, 13, and 14th of June 1666,
drawn up after a serious Examination, and according to the faithful Report
both of the General and Inferior Officers of the whole Holland Fleet on the
24th of the same month according to the order of the States General by the care
of their Pensionary De Wit, Mr. Urybergen, Mr. Vander Houlk, Mr. Kann, and Mr.
Gerlacius, Deputies and Plenipotentiaries of their High and Mightinesses, at
present at Wielingen, for the present Naval Expedition of the said States.
THe Holland Fleet having spent from the 1 of June to the 5th of the same month
of the year 1666, in getting out of the Texel by reason of several cross Winds
and Calms that hindered them, it was impossible for them because of contrary
Winds, to pursue their designed Course, and to go toward the Coasts of
England, according to the Orders they had received for that purpose, before the
8th. of the Month. On the 11th. in the morning, they with much ado got as far
as 7 or 8 miles to the East-South-East-ward of the North Foreland, which is a
part of England that extends between the Channel and the Thames whereby a South
West wind that blew very fiercely they were forced to Anchor. The English Fleet
being come some days before to Anchor in the Downs, unmoor'd from thence on the
11th. of June, probably upon the advice they had heard of the approach of the
Dutch Fleet. And about noon, the two Fleets met. That of Holland was composed
of 83 men of War, or Frigates, besides Advice-Boats, Fireships, and other small
Tenders on the Fleet. But it happened, that about an hour before the Battle, one
of the most considerable Ships of the Dutch Fleet, commanded by Colonel de Gent
having unfortunately lost her Foremast, and afterward her mizzen mast by the
violence of the Wind, de Ruiter Judging her in that condition incapable to
fight, sent her out of the Fleet in sight of the Enemies, to retire into
Holland: The said de Gent removed after that into the Ship of Captain Henry
Gotskens. As for the English Fleet, they were 80 sail strong as they were
counted by the Hollanders at the very time of fight. About 1 a Clock afternoon,
they begun to play their Guns. Some moments before, the Hollanders, had cut
their Anchor-Cables to make the more haste, and to Accommodate themselves to
the season, and the violence of the Waves which would not permit them to weigh:
The two Fleets being then met, they both of them made a tack to the South ward,
the Wind being then turned West-South-West. That motion was the cause that
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp and Van Meppelen, who were before placed in the Rear,
found themselves in the Van, and were forced to bear the brunt of the most
furious and terrible shock that happened during the whole fight, which they did
most valiantly. The fight being thus begun, the Squadron of Admiral de Ruiter
and of Lieutenant Admiral Van Nes, followed by their other Officers, fell
thundering upon the Enemies with an undauntedness, without Example. A little
while after, an English Frigate of the Blue Squadron, carrying 50 Guns, sunk,
after she had received a Farewell Broadside from de Ruiter. The Squadron of
Lieutenant Admiral Cornelius Evertsz and Tierk Hiddes de Vries had all the
difficulty in the World, to get to engage at first, because they were to
Leeward, and at a pretty distance from the Enemies. In the mean while, the two
Fleets charged one another vigorously, making always the same motion, which
lasted till 5 a Clock in the afternoon; when the English tacked to the
North-westward, as well to keep the Weather-gage, as to avoid the sand Banks of
Flanders. That motion engaged the Squadron of Lieutenant Admiral Evertsz and
Tierk Hiddes de Vries in a Bloody Fight, in which the undaunted Valor and
Courage of those two Generals were seen to shine with equal Luster. The English
being thus tackt about, the Dutch Fleet found means thereby to intercept some
of their biggest Ships which were presently boarded and taken by 3 Dutch Men of
War, and afterward carried into Holland. One of them called the Swiftsure
carried 70 Guns, most of them Brass, Commanded by Barkley, Vice Admiral of the
White Squadron, who lost his life there after he had Signalized himself against
Captain Henry Adria^sz's Ship carrying likewise 70 Guns; another called the 7
Wonders, of 60 Guns, was taken by Captain Vander Zaan's Frigate which carried 52
Guns; and the Third, called the Loyal George, of 44 Guns, fell into the hands
of Captain Andrew Swart, whose Ship called the Deventer, carried 66 Guns: All
those Captains belonged to the Admiralty of Amsterdam. And on the contrary, in
the first attack, there were two Dutch Ships burnt, viz. The Duivenvoorde of 46
Guns, and Commanded by Otto Van Treslong; the second called, The Court of
Zealand, had on board 58 Guns, and was Commanded by Captain Blok. We are
informed assuredly, that these two Ships were unhappily burnt to Ashes by some
stopples blown back on board by the force of the Wind, just at the time that
their own Guns were discharging. The Prince of Monaco, and the Count de Guiche
were Volunteers on board the first of these, who happily escaped the danger of
the Flames, by Retiring nimbly into the Ship, called the Little Holland,
Commanded by Cornelius Evertsz Van Gelder, Son-in-Law to Admiral Ruiter, who
received them afterward on board his own Ship. In the first attack, the Sails,
Masts, and in General all the Tackle of Lieutenant Admiral Tromp's Ship, were
so endamaged, that another Ship falling foul on him in passing by, all his
Masts were tumbled thereby into the Sea. Rear Admiral Van Nes's Ship came off
at a not much better rate, since almost at the same time his Mizzen-Mast was
shot by the board. Upon which those two General Officers were forced to remove
into other Ships for the security of their Persons. In which as soon as they
had put up their Flags they were seen again to renew the Fight, and to
Signalize themselves. Their unmasted Ships being carried out of the Fray, were
towed away into Holland. The English Fleet having advanced above the
Hollanders, their Chief Admiral followed by some Ships of his Squadron, cast
Anchor; but a little while after, seeing de Ruiter coming toward him, at the
head of the Dutch Fleet, he cut his Cables at his approach, so that they
engaged again afresh, and the fight was furious and very bloody on that
occasion, and yet, God be thanked, without the loss of any of the Dutch Ships;
whereas about 7 or 8 a Clock in the evening, a great English Ship of the Blew
Squadron carrying between 60 and 70 Guns, sunk within Musket shot of Admiral de
Ruiter. The two aforesaid English Ships sinking in the view of the Officers and
Sea men of the whole Dutch Fleet, I think there is no reason to doubt of it.
It Is true we are not sure whether any other English Ship perished that day, but
at the beginning of the night, the Rear-Admiral of the White, whose Ship was a
first Rate, having been vigorously attackt by De Ruiter, and some other Ships
of his Squadron, and being already very much shattered, de Ruiter sent out a
Fire Ship from his Squadron, which fastened upon her and set her on fire, but
the first Fire-Ship being put off, sunk, and the flames in the said Rear
Admirals were quenched? Then another Fire-Ship of the Zealand Squadron was sent
to burn her; and set the English Ship again in Flames, but that was likewise
Repulsed, and the fire quenched. A third Fire-Ship under the Covert of
Lieutenant Admiral Evertsz's Guns was once more sent to Try to repair the ill
success of the others, but was not a whit luckier than they, for fastening upon
the English Rear Admiral, he set Fire to him indeed, but a moment after, that
was quenched, and the Fire Ship was sunk with Cannon shot, so that according to
the Testimony of all the Dutch Officers which were present, and were
spectatours of that Glorious Action, the undaunted Bravery of that English
Rear-Admiral cannot but be Admired, which was so much the more Remarkable,
because some of his men having saved themselves by swiming, and got on board a
Dutch Ship, assured us, that near 300 of his men leapt into the Sea, at the
approach of the two first Fireships, choosing rather to perish by Water than
by Fire. The same Rear-Admiral performed likewise at the end of the fight, an
Action Glorious to him, but fatal to us, by a Cannon shot, that took away the
life of the Illustrious Cornelius Evertsz Lieutenant Admiral, whose good
Conduct and great Courage had made him to be Admired not only in that fight,
but in many other rencounters besides. The night then parted the Combatants, it
being impossible for us to see, by reason of the darkness, or the thick smoke,
whether the aforesaid Rear-Admiral, being shrewdly battered escaped away and
saved himself, or whether he sunk to the bottom of the Sea.

When the night was past, the English Fleet found it self on the 12th. of June
at break of day, having the Weather-gage, about half a mile off of that of
Holland, the Wind at West-South-West. The two Fleets made a motion, viz. The
Hollanders toward the North-West, and the English toward the South, with
design to follow one the other; But the English having the Advantage of the
Wind, disputed their Enemies passage, and without waiting any longer, advanced
to them, and fell upon them. The Hollanders, without changing their Course or
their Countenance, stood firm in Luffing, so that the two Hostile Fleets broke
through one another and began a most furious fight; yet there was not so much
as one Dutch Ship that was so unfortunate as to be lost in it, according to the
Testimony of all the Officers, both General and Inferior of the Holland Fleet,
given in to the said Deputies and Plenipotentiaries of the States. The Fleets
then having broke in upon one another in that manner, their Guns made strange
Havoc: For the most part of the Ships of the two Fleets had their Masts, their
Sails and Tackling either shot away, or shattered to pieces. And as each party
was endeavoring with all speed to repair their damages, there happened a Calm,
which produced a Cessation of Arms, so that the two Fleets floated about in
presence of one another, till about 11 a Clock before noon, and then the wind
rising, they charged again, and renewed the Engagement more hotly than ever.
The Hollanders had then the Weather-gage, De Ruiter having penetrated to the
very center of the Enemies Fleet, heard a most horrid noise of both great Guns
and Muskets which made him believe, that some of his Ships being surrounded by
the Enemies, were making their last efforts, and were in danger of being lost
without speedy assistance, so that without any longer hesitation, he advanced
with his Squadron, and falling upon that part of them, he forced a passage
through the Storms of the Enemies shot and fire, and found Lieutenant Admiral
Tromp, whose Flag was then hoisted in de Swart's Ship, in the last extremity,
but yet fighting with all imaginable intrepidity, as likewise did Vice Admiral
Vander Hulst, and the Captains, Solomonsz, de Haan, and Van Amstel, their Ships
being surrounded and battered on all sides by the English, were able to hold
out no longer, and were at the point of being burnt or sunk, without the
assistance of de Ruiter. At his approach, Captain Solomonsz's Ship was already
all on fire, which 'twas impossible to Quench. That Captain and a good part of
his men had very much ado to save themselves on board another Dutch Ship.
Solomonsz as soon as he was got out of that danger, went on board Captain
Schey's Ship, where after he had further Signalized his Bravery, and given
great Proofs of his Courage, during the whole time of the fight, he died at
last in the bed of Honor. Captain Swa^t's Ship on board which was Lieutenant
Admiral Tromp, as likewise the Ships of all the three other Captains
abovenamed, were reduced into so pitiful a Condition, by the loss of all their
Masts, that Lieutenant Admiral Tromp was again obliged to change Ship, and
those which were Commanded by Vice Admiral Vander Hulst, and the Captains de
Haan Swart and Van Amstel, being quite disabled for fight, had Order to go out
of the fight and seek shelter in the first Harbor they came to. In the same
shock, Vice Admiral Vander Hulst was killed with a Cannon shot, being extremely
Regreted because of his great Merit, Experience, and Bravery. But God be
thanked those losses were doubly Recompensed the same day by the great number
of English Ships that were burnt or sunk according to the following Order, viz.
1. A Ship of the Red Squadron carrying near 60 Guns was sunk in the Van guard
of the English Fleet, about noon. 2. A Ship of the blew Squadron, carrying
between 50 and 60 Guns, sunk at three in the afternoon, presently after de
Ruiter had thundered at her in passing. 3. A Ship of the White Squadron carrying
near 50 Guns, sunk a little after, by the side of Vice Admiral de Liefde, who
shot her through and through in so many places that she rolled on one side, and
was swallowed up by the Waves. 4. Another Ship of the White Squadron carrying
50 Guns, sunk half an hour after, in sight of de Ruiter's Squadron, and of
Captain Van Meeuwen who followed her close, and gave her a Broadside in
passing. And absolutely to convince the World, that the two abovesaid Ships of
the White Squadron were two different Ships, it is to be observe d that several
Officers and other Seafaring men saw both of them sink, that is to say, that
the same persons that saw one perish, saw the other undergo the same fare a
little after; for we have so carefully distinguished things in our Examination,
that there is no reason to fear, we have mistaken a Ships for one. 5. The Ship
called, the Golden Eagle, or the Arms of Groningen, taken the Autumn before by
the English when the Dutch Fleet was dispersed by a Tempest, was sunk by a
broad side from Captain Marreveld. 6. Another English Ship sunk in the midst of
their own Fleet, after she had in vain signified her danger to her Companions,
without receiving any assistance from them.

In the fight of the two first days, as likewise in that of the fourth, of
which we shall speak more largely afterward, it is certain, that it is not to
be doubted, that some English Ships were burnt, which yet we could not be
absolutely assured of, because fire being set to several Fireships at diverse
times, we cannot positively say whether the Ships they grapled were destroyed,
or whether they escaped, except only two that we are sure were burnt to Ashes
during the fight, because the Officers and Seamen that served on board the said
Fireships are now actually soliciting for the reward allotted by the States
for such Service, by producing good Certificates of their performance of it:
Besides, that the English prisoners drawn out of the Waves, and sent into the
respective Colleges of the Admiralty, are able to answer if carefully examined,
and to tell out of what Ships they escaped. It is certain that by that means,
it will be found, that a greater Number of English Ships than we know of, were
burnt or sunk.

The fight of the 12th. of June was terrible and Bloody, especially afternoon,
so that there were few Ships of either Fleet but sufficiently felt the effects
of it by the loss of their Masts, Round-Tops, Top-Masts, Sails, and Rigging:
Amongst others, the Topmast and Admirals Flag of de Ruiter's Ship was shot
away, about 3 or 4 a Clock, which obliged him to give Order to Lieutenant
Admiral Van Nes, till such time as he could repair it, to put the Admirals Flag
on board his Ship, and to Command in Chief in his absence, according to the
Orders before given: Which he did with so much Courage and Conduct, that after
the two Fleets had broke through one another three times, as the Hollanders
were ready to fall on the fourth time, the English tackt about and made with
all the sail they could for their own Coasts. Their Fleet was then weakened by
the loss of 8 or 9 men of War. The Hollanders seeing them fly made all the
sail they could, to pursue them; But their flight was favored by the obscurity
of the night, and the Calms that then begun to come on, which obliged the
Hollanders to veer back toward their own Admiral again.

In the mean while, de Ruiter having Repaired his damages, put up the Admiral's
Flag again, and reassumed the chief Command of the Fleet on the 13th of June.
But the English discovering at break of day, the mischiefs that the obscurity
of the night had hidden from them, and seeing a good Number of their Ships much
shattered, thought fit to burn them, to prevent the pursuit of their Enemies
and prevent their falling into their hands. After which they did their best to
get into the Thames. The Wind was at East, and then turning to the
East-South-East, grew so weak that they were forced to crowd all the sail they
could. It was impossible for the Hollanders, to know justly how many Ships the
English had burnt. But the English in their public News of the 17th of June,
Printed at London by Authority, made loud claim to the Victory, and pretended
they burnt but three by order of the Admiral, viz. the St. Paul, and two other
lesser Ships. The English continuing thus their retreat all the day came at
last so very near the Sand-banks that are at the mouth of the River, that Sir
George Ayschew, Admiral of the White Squadron, who was in the Royal Prince
carrying 90 Brass Guns, one of the most considerable Ships of the English
Fleet, run a ground upon the bank called, the Galloper, which was a great
misfortune for a General who had given signal proofs of his Courage all the
whole time of the fight, and who was then retiring only by order of his
Admiral: And it is a very astonishing thing that after he had fired several Guns
to give notice to the rest of the Ships of the Fleet to advance to his
assistance, yet no body would offer to come nigh him, but he was thus deserted
and left exposed to danger even by the Ships of his own Squadron. Being in that
pitiful condition, he saw himself just going to be burnt by the approach of two
Dutch Fireships, if Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, who was then in the Ship of Rear
Admiral Sweers, had not given a signal to Command the Fireships to proceed no
further, so much the rather because by putting up a Flag on board him, in the
manner usual on such occasions, he showed marks of Submission, and demanded
Quarter, upon which the Seamen of Rear-Admiral Sweers Ship, had Order from
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, to go on board Admiral Ayschew, which they did
accordingly. And Admiral Ayschew, and some of his Officers were Conducted on
board Rear Admiral Sweers, and the next day being put into a Galliot, he was
conveyed to the Hague, by order of Admiral de Ruiter. As for his Ship, the
Prince Royal, though she was afterward got off of the Bank, yet because she was
so extremely shattered that de Ruiter thought her not in a condition to be able
to follow the main body of the Fleet, he Commanded her to be burnt; which was
immediately put in execution, after they had taken out the men. Near about the
same time toward evening a Squadron of 22 English Men of War appeared toward
the West, under the Command of Prince Robert, who according to the advices we
had of him, was detached away the Day before, to sail toward the Harbors of
Plymouth and Portsmouth, in order to join some other Men of War, and to go meet
the Duke of Beauford, Admiral of France, and to fight him. Three other great
English Ships that were come out of the Thames likewise joined him, which
altogether made a Reinforcement of 25 Men of War. At the Sight and Approach of
that Succor, the Squadron of Zealand and Friesland advanced to fight them; but
Prince Robert avoided them, and tackt away to join the Body of the English
Fleet, so that he joined them accordingly about the Dusk of Night. And then the
Enemies Fleet was composed of 60 Men of War, of which the most part were fresh
and in good Condition. The Dutch Fleet was still 64 Men of War strong, but
having maintained already a Fight of 3 Days, both their Ships and Men had
suffered very much, and their Forces were in a manner spent. As for the rest of
the Dutch Fleet, there were three of them burnt or sunk, as has been already
said; the rest were detached away, to conduct into Holland the Prises taken
from the Enemies, or those of our Ships that were unmasted and disabled by them.

Things being in that State, and the Hollanders being still at the Eve of
another bloody Battle, made a Motion in the Night, in order to avoid the Banks,
and get more Sea-room. When it was Day, Admiral de Ruiter fired several Guns to
summon the Generals and Captains of the Dutch Fleet on Board him, where he held
a Council of War, and exhorted every one of them in particular, to have in
Recommendation his own Honor, and the Glory of his Country. So that after he
had given them the necessary Orders, the Fight begun again on the 14th of June,
at 8 in the Morning, and was fought between the Foreland, and the Banks of
Flanders, in the open Sea, about 8 miles from the Shore. The Wind was South
South East, so that the Hollanders having the Weather-gage, came pouring with
the Three Squadrons of their Fleet upon the Enemies Navy, in three several
Places, forcing a Passage through them, by which means some English Ships were
separated from the rest. After which, de Ruiter caused a Motion to be made to
the Southward, with design to charge the Enemy again, who did the same on
their Side; which was renewed three several times. Thus the two Fleets fought
all the Day with much Obstinacy, the Victory all the while seeming equally
balanced, and not to know for which side to declare. In the Time of this cruel
Fight, a Dutch Ship commanded by Captain Vittenhou^, was burnt and sunk. And an
English Fire-ship seeing the Ship of Vice Admiral de Liefde unmasted, was going
to grapple him, but was repulsed by the said Vice Admiral, and chancing to fall
foul upon another Dutch Fireship, they were both reduced to Ashes. On the other
side, one of the Dutch Fireships endeavored also to fasten upon Prince
Robert's Ship, to burn her, but was grappled her self by an English Fireship
that kept by Prince Robert's side, so that they were both burnt together with
an English Ship that chanced unfortunately to fall foul upon them, and all
perished in the Flames. In the mean while, Lieutenant Admiral Tromp with Rear
Admiral Sweers Ship, which he was in, and some others of his Squadron, after he
had maintained a long and furious Fight, found himself reduced into so pitiful
a Condition, that he was forced to retire out of the Fray, to refit and repair
his Damages, with Design to return again, as soon as was possible to the
Charge. De Ruiter, though weakened by the Retreat of several of the most
considerable Ships of his Fleet, which had been already disabled, considering,
that the Sun begun to decline, resolved to make a last Effort, to force the
Victory to declare it self; and accordingly gave the Signal to the Hollanders,
to fail on on all sides upon the English Fleet. At which Signal the Lieutenant
Admirals, van Meppelen and de Vries, as also the Vice-Admirals Bankert, Schram,
and Koenders, and Rear-Admiral Bruinsveld broke in among the Enemies with all
imaginable undauntedness, and it happened, that Lieutenant-Admiral Van Nes and
Vice Admiral de Liefde, with the Rear-Admirals Van Nes, and Evertsz, followed
by several other Ships, finding themselves below the English, and Admiral de
Ruiter with the rest of the Fleet, above them, that part of the English Fleet
that was between them, was so furiously attacked, as was likewise their whole
Navy in general, afterward, that in less than half an Hours Fight, they were
put in Confusion and begun to fly the second Time. On the one side were to be
seen the White Squadron with 8 or 10 Men of War flying right before the Wind,
and on the other, the Admirals of the Red and Blue making likewise full Sail,
and doing what else they could, to advance their Retreat toward the English
Coasts. In the mean while, the Dutch Ships at de Ruiter's Signal, took all the
English Ships they came near enough to Board. Rear-Admiral Bruinsveld, having
with much Courage and Resolution grappled two of the Enemies Frigates, took
them, but afterward, whether it were for want of Order, or by the Fault of
those that had the guarding of them, the English retook them again. Some time
after, Captain Pauw hearing of that Action, fell vigorously upon them again,
and wrested them once more out of the Hands of the English. But one of those
Frigates, called the Bull, was so shattered that she, no longer able to keep the
Sea, soon after sunk. The other, called the Essex, carrying 58 Guns, and less
endamaged, was carried into the Texel. A like Accident happened to another
English Frigate, but she was retaken by the Enemies. Vice Admiral Koenders took
likewise at the same time a Ship called the Nagelboom, that was taken from the
Dutch the Year before, carrying 62 Guns, and sent her into the Texel Captain
Ruth Maximilian, took also the Ship called the Couvertyn of 54 Guns, and sent
her into Goree. Besides them, the Dutch Officers pretend to know of two English
Ships more that were sunk the Day before, viz. one of the White Squadron,
swallowed up by the Waves at 6 in the Evening, and a little while after the
other met with the same Destiny; which makes us apt to think that several other
English Ships might have the same Fortune, though the Dutch Officers know nothing
of it, the Enemies being in so deplorable a Condition, and pursued by the
Hollanders. It seems, that God, after he had so gloriously favored the Arms of
the Victours, was not pleased they should be utterly defeated by the
Destruction of their whole Navy, which appeared as unavoidable: For the
shattered Remainder of them miraculously escaped by the Favor of a thick Fog,
about 7 a Clock at Night. However, the Dutch Fleet being victorious and
triumphant, continued to chase them a long time after their being routed, and
would have pursued them into their very Ports, if they had not been afraid
their Ships would have lost themselves, and have been scattered. And therefore
de Ruiter having fired some Guns for a Signal to advertise all the Ships of his
Fleet to veer back toward their Admiral, and the whole Dutch Fleet thereupon
assembling together, they sailed away all Night leisurely, and with little Sail
homewards.

The next Morning, which was the 22^th of June, the English appearing no more
at Sea, the Hollanders gave over chacing them, and de Ruiter arrived the same
Day, and anchored at Wielingen, which was the Rendezvous appointed them by the
States, his Fleet then consisting of 60 Men of War. Nine Holland Men of War,
besides that Commanded by Colonel de Gent, which were most endamaged, or who
had Orders to guard home the Prises taken from the English, were already
arrived at Goree: Ten more had been sent before at several Times upon the same
Errand to the Texel, which was the Place of their Rendezvous. And the four
others, as we have already related, were burnt or sunk in the Fight, making in
all, with a light Frigate of the Meuse, that had served the Fleet as an
Advice-Yacht, the number of 85 Men of War that composed the Fleet, besides
Fireships and Tenders, when it came out of the Texel: Whereas on the contrary
we hear, That the Remainder of the English Fleet retired in Disorder into the
nearest Harbors, and the most of them into Harwich. To this let us add for
conclusion, That the United Provinces have all the reason in the World to thank
God for blessing their Arms with so signal a Victory, since without counting in
those Ships of the Enemies that were burnt or sunk, of which the Dutch Officers
had no Knowledge, the English Fleet was weakened with the Loss of 23 Men of War
taken or destroyed by the Hollanders; among which, were an Admiral and a
Vice Admiral: Whereas on the side of the United Provinces, there are counted
but 4 lost, neither did there remain any thing in the Hands of the English,
after a Battle of 4 Days, that could show the least Advantage they had gotten
over the Hollanders that could diminish the Glory of the Victory, that was so
justly due to them.

This was the Relation published by the States, of the memorable Battle of 4
Days, the Bloodiest and most terrible one certainly that ever was fought at
Sea. But the unexpected speedy coming out of the English Fleet again in little
above 6 Weeks after, with much greater Strength than before; and with several
of those Ships said to have been lost, took off very much from the Credit of
the abovesaid Relation, how Authentic soever it had appeared before. However,
that dear-bought Advantage which they called a Victory, was so much the greater
on the Hollanders side; because their Allies, the French, were not there to
share with them in it, but only decoying away a considerable part of the
English Forces to hunt after them, where they were resolved not to be found,
had left the Dutch the fair Opportunity, with their whole Force, to fall upon
little more than half the English Royal Navy. For notwithstanding all the fair
Promises France had made, to join their Fleet to that of the States, and the
mighty Hopes they had given them of their great Designs, they all vanished into
Smoke, the French having no other Design at the Bottom, as has been already
hinted, and has since more visibly appeared, but to get their Ships built, to
procure Men skilful in Naval Architecture, and to learn the way of Sea Fight;
which they effected first by striking in with the Dutch, and afterward
perfected by wheedling the King of England, which has proved since to the Smart
of both Nations. In a Word, as to the Fighting Part, the French left the Dutch
to cope alone with the Maritime Forces of England, as they did in a following
War, the English to deal with those of Holland, though to hinder England from
putting forth its full Strength, they were pleased to appear with their Fleet
to be Spectators of the Fray in which they were sure to be Winners whosoever
lost. But to return again to our direct Subject, it may be said, That under God
the undaunted Courage and wise Conduct of Lieutenant Admiral de Ruiter had the
greatest Share in what Advantage was gotten in that fierce Battle against the
Potent and Warlike, who though outnumbred and overpowered, yet fought so
obstinately, that they would in all probability have ravished the Victory from
a less expert and valiant Chieftain than he. For he ranged his People in Battle
with so much Judgment, and made them fight in such admirable Order, that in
spite of the most desperate Efforts the Enemies could make to break his
Squadrons, it was impossible for them to effect their Purpose. For that Great
Man was observed with an indefatigable Care, to encourage his Captains and
Seamen, and influence them to make his Fleet tack and wheel about with such
nimble and well-timed Motions, that at the least signal he was immediately
obeyed, and thereby lost no opportunity to charge the Enemies where there was
any prospect of advantage. But his Courage appeared in its Chiefest Luster when
he had occasion to break into the heart of the Enemies Fleet to relieve any of
his Ships and Commanders that were distressed and surrounded by them; so that
by his presence and the good Order he gave every where and in every thing, he
from the very beginning of the fight did all that could be done to trace out
himself a way to Victory.

Neither was the bravery of Lieutenant Admiral Tromp less Admirable than that
of de Ruiter, considering his undaunted boldness in breaking in among the
Enemies, and in exposing himself so much to the most imminent dangers, that he
was several times forced to change his Ship. At the sight of his Flag the
Enemies seldom failed soon to turn Tail and fly, looking upon him to be the
scourge of their Arms. And because his Flag had been put up in several other
Ships he was forced to remove into during the fight, the English asked, whether
there were five or six Tromp's in the Holland Fleet or no? For indeed, it may
be said, he was in a manner every where, never recoiling, but being often
enclosed in the midst of the Enemies Squadrons, enduring the greatest fire of
their Guns by the terrible and frequent broad sides, they let fly at him. The
rest of the Officers of the Fleet, both General and Inferior, strove likewise
with Emulation, which should give the most signal marks of their Courage in
that fierce Engagement. However the gaining of that Battle cost the Hollanders
the Blood and Lives of a great many brave men who died there in the Bed of
Honor, viz. Cornelius Evertsz, Vice Admiral Vander Hulst, Rear Admiral
Staghouwer, the Captains Otho Van Treslong, Solomonsz, Jansz, Vttenhout,
Wouter, Wyngaarden, Adam Hourtuin, Simon Bink, and about 800 Seamen or
Soldiers. The Number of the wounded amounted to 11 or 1200, amongst whom was
Captain Vikrot who died a little while after at Hoorne. But the loss of the
English, was as we have said, related to be incomparably greater, there being
reckoned to be about 6000 men killed, amongst whom were the Vice Admirals, Sir
Will. Barkley and Sir Christopher Mings, and several Captains. And about 3000
English were made Prisoners, that were either saved out of the ships that were
sunk, or else found on board those that were taken. Besides which, the Holland
Accounts reckon them to have lost 23 men of War, whereof 17 were said to be
burnt, or sunk, and the other 6, viz. the Swiftsure, the Loyal George, the
Levenwolden, and the Couvertyne were carried into Goree, and the Essex and the
Nagelboom into the Texel.

Amongst other remarkable passages in that fight, the undaunted Resolution of
Vice Admiral Barkley was much admired, who having 40 men killed on board him,
and being no longer able to make resistance, yet was so obstinately bent to
fight, that he would take no quarter, and would have killed with his own hand 3
or 4 of his Enemies that had boarded his Ship; but at last being shot into the
throat with a Musket Bullet, he retired into the Captains Cabin, where laying
himself down at his length on a Table, he was found in that posture dead by the
Victors, all over besmeared with the blood flowing out of his wounds. Rear
Admiral Sweers, having boarded Admiral Ayschew's Ship, this Latter delivered to
him the Keys of his and yielded himself up to the discretion of the Victour.
The Hollanders took out of his Ship, 500 men, and a little while after the
flames getting to the Powder Room, it blew up about 11 a Clock at night. That
Ship carried 92 Guns, of which those of the lowest Tire were of thirty six
Pounds Bore, and there were 8 of 48. Her whole Compliment of Men was 620, and
she was the same Ship that the King of England embarked in when he returned to
be Reestablished in his Throne, in 1660. Vice Admiral Mings having received a
Musket shot in his throat stood about half an hour holding his Finger upon the
wound, to keep it closed, and to stop the blood, but a second Musket shot
taking him in the neck he died, after having given most signal proofs of his
Courage to the very last gasp. Admiral Ayschew was carried to the Chatellany at
the Hague, on the 16th. of June, from whence he was Conducted to the Audience
of their High and Mightinesses, and afterward carried to Louvestein, under a
good Guard of Horse, from whence he writ the following Letter to His British
Majesty.

SIR,
Admiral Ayschew's Letter to the King of England.
YOur Majesty without doubt has heard of the Battle fought on the 11th. of this
month between the two Fleets, off of Duinkerden, and the North Foreland. The
Enemies riding at Anchor, cut their Cables at our approach. We charged them
fortunately two or three times, but our Forces being much Inferior to theirs,
and our Fleet falling into a Consternation at the very beginning of the fight,
we could not have all the success that was to be wished for. And therefore the
Squadron of Ships under the Command of his H^ghness your Majesty's Nephew,
would have been a great help to us, if they had not unhappily been sent to the
Westward. That day many of our Ships were extremely endamaged, in the Number of
which was that of the Duke of Albemarl. Some Dutch Ships were reduced to Ashes,
as well by our Fireships, as by their Powder taking Fire. The next day we
renewed the fight with much Resolution and Courage. But on the 3d. day I was
enclosed by the Enemies together with some other Ships of my Squadron, and
being vigorously attackt was forced to my great regret, to yield, through want
of power to resist any longer, I having 150 men killed on board me. I am as yet
in perfect health, and was removed hither after I was made Prisoner. When I
came on board a Dutch Rear Admiral, I heard that the Ship committed by your
Majesty to my trust, was burnt. My Vice Admiral was also taken, and Sir William
Barkley killed. As to what remains, the Silence and Secrecy that prevails here
keeps me in Ignorance at present of the other particulars of the fight. The
Reports that go abroad here, make our losses to amount to 36 men of War taken,
burnt, or sunk, and 4000 Prisoners. God grant they may prove false. In the mean
while, I beseech your Majesty, to take our misfortune with patience, and to
have compassion of our Family.

Postscript.
I Have received all imaginable civilities as well from the Officers of the
Dutch Fleet, as from the States General. I was much suprized when I arrived at
Rottendam, to see the Streets so full of Seamen; for I could not Comprehend how
so powerful a Fleet and that was so well manned should leave so many Seamen
still in the Country.




The States considering the great worth, and noble extraction of Sir William
Barkley who was one of the Kings chief Favorites, and Brother-in-Law to the
Duke of York, having married a Daughter of the Lord Chancellor Hide about two
months before, ordered his Body to be Embalmed, and deposited at the Hague. And
sent the following Letter to his British Majesty to inform him of it.

SIR,
WE always thought, The States Letter to the King of England.
the honors due to the great men were not incompatible with the duties of War,
and that Virtue and Valor ought to be respected even in the persons of our
Enemies. Which induced us to give some singular marks of it in relation to the
Body of S r Willaim Barkley Vice Admiral of the White Squadron in your
Majesty's Fleet. He gave such great proofs of his bravery and undaunted Courage
in the last fight, that we were willing to pay those best duties to his
Illustrious memory. For that effect we have Ordered his Body to be embalmed,
till such time as his near Relations, and those to whom his memory is dear can
otherwise dispose of it, as they shall think best. In the mean while, we have
caused it to be placed in the great Church, in a State suitable to his Birth,
Valor, and the great Services he has rendered your Majesty, who may please to
send such order concerning it as you shall think fit. And if it be your good
pleasure to have it transported into England, we desire you would be pleased to
grant the necessary Passports for the security of the Yacht we intend to give
for his Transportation. But if on the contrary, your Majesty shall choose rather
to have him Interred in the place where he now is, you will be pleased to let us
know your will, to which we shall always endeavor to conform our selves, as
far as the present State of affairs will permit. We recommend your Majesty's
Sacred person to the protection of God, etc.


In the mean while, the States to thank God for the gaining of so great an
advantage, and to pray him to bless their Arms in the rest of the Course of the
War as he had done in those happy beginnings, ordered a Thanksgiving-day, which
was solemnly observed the last day of June, and followed by public Rejoicings
and Bonfires, in which not only the people of the United Provinces had part,
but likewise all the Countries in which their High and Mightinesses had any
Ministers residing. All the Captains of the Danish Fleet fired all their Guns
three times to the honor of the Hollanders, their Allies; And the Queen of
Denmark, gave a splendid Feast to all the Lords and Ladies of the Court, at
which the King was present. And the same Rejoicings were celebrated at
Stockholm, at Ratisbonn, at Paris, at Madrid, at Genua, and at all the Courts
of Europe where the States had any Ambassadors, which were continued three days
together, with Feastings, Fireworks and Vollies of small shot. The Town of
Brussels was the only place that looked upon all that with an evil Eye. For the
Mobb getting together near the Dutch Resident Sasburg's house, committed a
thousand insolences, and because they were hindered from pulling down the
Scaffolds set up for some Fire works, they were so Transported with Rage and
Fury, that they fell upon the house of the Resident, crying out; Long live the
King of Spain and the King of England; and those Mutineers continued their
insolences till the Marquess of Castle Rodrigo, Governor of the Low Countries
reduced them to their duty with a Body of Horse; after which he made excuses to
the States, Testifying to them how sensibly displeased he was, that he was not
able to prevent all those disorders.

On the 5th. of July, were performed the Funerals of Lieutenant Admiral
Cornelius Evertsz, and Vice Admiral Vander Hulst, to whom great honors were
paid. The latter of them was interred in the Old Church at Amsterdam, where a
Marble Tomb was erected with his Statue, at the public charge, in Memory of
his great Actions. And his Epitaph was engraven on a Table of Black Marble in
these Terms in Dutch.

Ter Onsterlijker gedachtenis van den Ed. Manhaften Zeeheld Abraham Vander
Hulst. Vice Admiral van Holland en West Friesland, gebooren tot Amsterdam den 9
April MDCXIX.
Here rust by dio niet Rusten kon,
Eer by Zijn Vyand overwon:
Om Hoog lieft by en Vreugden,
In Marmor door Ziin deugden.
Anno 1666.

Of which the Sense in Englsh is this,
To the immortal Memory of the Illustrious Hero, Abraham Vander Hulst.
Vice Admiral of Holland and West-Friesland, Born at Amsterdam April 9. 1619.
He that never had any rest till he had vanquished his Enemies, now rests here.
He lives in Heaven in perfect Felicity, and upon this Marble by his Virtues.
Anno 1666.

Lieutenant-Admiral John Evertsz, whose Conduct had appeared suspicious, and
whom the States, to appease the incensed People, had ordered to quit his
Employment for a time, would needs solicit for a re-establishment after the
death of his Brother; and for that effect he writ to the States of Zealand,
representing to them, That he passionately wished he might be permitted to
render his Services to his Country as he had done before, in quality of
Lieutenant-Admiral of that Province: That he ardently desired to sacrifice his
Life for the Public Interest, in so pressing an Occasion as that as his
Father, four of his Brothers, and one of his Sons had done before him with so
much Glory, who all had the Happiness to die in the Service of the State, with
their Arms in their Hands, after they had signalized themselves in many
Battles. The States of Zealand making Reflection upon his consummate Experience
in Sea-affairs, and the undaunted Courage and good Conduct he had shown in
several Battles, and even in the very last Years Fight, according to the
unanimous Testimony of all the Officers of the Fleet, granted his Demands, as
being persuaded, that at a time when they had lost so many great Men, this
Gentleman might do good Services to his Country by succeeding them. And
accordingly having proposed it in the Assembly of the States General, they
consented to it.

The States Fleet being got ready to put to Sea again, and being 60 sail strong
of Men of War or Frigates, unmoor'd on the 5th of July from Wielingen, under the
Conduct of Admiral de Ruiter; and some regular Land-Troops, drawn out of the
Garrisons, were privately marched beforehand, to be embarked on board some
Transport-ships, which were designed to make a Descent. And all the whole Fleet
being thus advanced over against Schoonevelt, was reinforced with 5 Men of War
and 7 Frigates, besides another Reinforcement they receiv d some days after, by
the arrival of Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp, and some other general Officers, out
of the Meuse or the Texel. The great diligence and expedition that was used to
get betimes to Sea, and to prevent the English, made them conceive great Hopes
of Success; for they promised themselves to be able to surprise the Enemies, to
enter into the River of Thames, or Harwich, to make some considerable havoc
there, and destroy the Enemy's Fleet, or at least to make some Descent. But
they were mightily surpised when they saw those People whom they thought they
had mauled and weakened beyond a recovery for that Year, appear of a sudden
toward Diep Royal, with a Fleet of no less than 88 sail of Men of War or
Frigates, 13 Fireships, 20 Advice-Yatchts, besides Transport-ships; so that the
English Fleet, who had had Advice of the setting out of the Holland Fleet, knew
so well how to secure themselves of all the Posts where any Descent could be
made, by placing there both Horse and Foot, that they quite broke all the
Designs of the Hollanders, who saw themselves thereby disabled to attempt any
thing for want of good Sounders.

The Dutch Fleet was divided into three Squadrons, the first of which was under
the immediate Conduct of Lieutenant-Admiral General de Ruiter; the second under
the Lieutenant-Admirals Evertsz, and Tierke Hiddes de Vries; and the third was
commanded by the Lieutenant-Admirals Tromp and Van Meppel; and in that order
they kept the mouth of the Thames shut up till the first day of August; and
then the English Fleet, being 90 sail strong, taking advantage of the Tide,
came out of the River in sight of the Dutch Fleet, which gave place to them,
because de Ruiter was afraid of running aground upon the Coasts of England, and
so had done all he could to make his Fleet sheer off to a convenient distance
from it, that he might give no Advantage to the Enemy so near their own Coasts.
And as it happened, 'twas a great Happiness for the Dutch Fleet they had done so;
for the next day, the Wind rising high, was followed with a furious Tempest of
Thunder, Lightning, and a great Rain; but, which lasted not very long, the next
day, viz. the 4th of August, the two hostile Fleets anchored pretty near
one-another, and passed all the Night in presence one of the other.

The English Navy commanded by General Monk was composed of 90 sail of Men of
War, and 20 Fireships, and was likewise divided into three Squadrons, viz. the
White Squadron, commanded by Sir Thomas Allen; the Red one, under the Conduct
of General Monk; and the Blew one, commanded by Sir Jeremy Smith. The fight
begun about noon next day, and was so very disastrous to the Hollanders, that
it rendered almost for ever ireconcilable the two greatest Men for Sea-affairs
that ever the Ocean bore, or that ever the United Provinces had to command
their Fleets; I mean, de Ruiter and Tromp: Whether it were that that
Misunderstanding proceeded from the Jealousy Tromp had conceived, by reason of
the States conferring upon de Ruiter the chief Command of the Fleet at his
return from Guiney; or whether Providence, that presided over all Events, had a
mind to conceal from us the true Cause of it, we know not; but yet methinks
it is more probable to believe, that Envy, which is always the Enemy of the
Virtue and Merit of Great Men, was minded that way spightfully to make a mortal
thrust at the Reputation of Tromp; but that his Reputation was always so well
and firmly established in the World, that nothing will ever be able to shake
it, nor make the least impression upon it. Let us say then rather, that in the
heat of the Fight, and being transported by his natural Eagerness and
Intrepidity, he would needs give chase to the English Blew Squadron, and that
was it that was all his Crime; for if de Ruiter and the Lieutenant-Admirals
Evertsz and de Vries had gained any advantage over the English, I am persuaded,
they never would have complained that Tromp had deserted them. In the mean
while, by a sad reverse of Jadish and Unconstant Fortune, the Hollanders, who
had gathered some Laurels in the precedent Expedition, were forced in this last
to yield to the English the so much contested Empire of the Sea.

The better to satisfy the World of the principal Circumstances of that famous
Fight, we shall insert here the Letters written by the general Officers of the
Fleet, to the States, about it.

High and Mighty Lords,
Admiral de Ruiter's Letter to the States about the Fight in August, 1666.
SInce my last, of the 4th of this Month, before Noon, the 2 Fleets engaged in
Fight, about eleven of the Clock, the Wind at North, our Vanguard, under the
Conduct of Lieutenant-Admiral Evertsz, begun the Attack, and engaged with the
Enemies White Squadron: The main Battle, under my own Command, fought against
the Red Squadron; but it was a great surprise to me, when I saw
Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp, who commanded the Rear, instead of advancing with his
Squadron, to lag behind, which gave opportunity to the English to separate us,
and get between him and I. I am also obliged to tell you, That I did not
perceive he was in any Action with them till toward Evening, when he fought a
very little while against some Ships of the Blew Squadron. However it was, my
Ship being attackt by the Sovereign General, on the one side, and by the Naseby
and several other Ships on the other, withstood the greatest shock of the
Enemies, as likewise did my whole Squadron; but we received them so vigorously
that after an obstinate Fight of three hours, they were forced to quit us for
some time. In that while General Monk's Ship was so shattered, that he was
forced to change his Ship, as we found by the removal of the Admiral's Flag; as
was afterward more particularly reported to us. We therefore took our
advantage of the Respite and Release given us by the English, to repair our
Losses and Damages; and having observed that our Vanguard went still further
and further from my Squadron, following the advantage of the Weathergage which
they had gotten, I fired some Guns, to command them to veer back toward the
Admirals Flag, but that was not able to stop them. The English Admiral having
remarkt that, came pouring with his Squadron upon me and some other Ships
belonging to my Flag, which engaged me in a cruel fight, which yet I maintained
vigorously, in hopes that either Tromp or Meppel would come in to my assistance
from behind, or else Lieutenant-Admiral Evertsz, who had the Vanguard, from
before; but I afterward found that I had but vainly flattered my self with
that Hopes, so that my Ship having had all her Sails and Rigging shot down by
the board, I saw my self disabled to govern her any longer: and being thus
reduced into a condition not to be able to make any more resistance, by reason
of the great number of killed and wounded I had on board me, I was constrained
with small sail to follow the body of my Squadron, which began to fly. As for
Lieutenant-Admiral Tromp, who had the weathergage, it was easy for him to have
veered back toward us, whereas it was impossible for us to move toward him;
and I know not what obliged him not to do it. Seeing our selves thus deserted,
we thought there was no other Remedy left for our preservation, but to tack
away to the southward, and to fight retreating: Besides that, the Calm which
began to come on would not suffer us quickly to get out of the Fight; and we
being likewise glad to make but little sail away, as thinking that by favor of
the Night the said Rear might join us, and that we might return all together to
the Charge, and dispute the Victory with the Enemy. But after all, when the Day
was come, we perceived none come near us but the main Body of the English
Fleet, who began to play their Guns upon us in pursuing us: We answered them as
well as we could, from behind; but the English having detached out a Fireship
to come and burn me to Ashes, I made my Barge advance, which was backed by some
others, into which those brave French Volunteer Lords, de Lorrain, de Lavoy,
and de Coaslin leapt with their Retinue, who went and forced the Fireship's Men
to jump into the Sea, and save themselves by swimming, after they had set Fire
to her, and so by that glorious Action preserved the Admiral Ship from Flames.
In the mean while having discovered some of our Ships that were scattered from
us in the Darkness of the Night, the English sent a Detachment of some Ships
from their Fleet to give them Chase; which as soon as I perceived I summoned
all the Officers on Board the Admiral Ship, 20 of which were commanded by Order
of Vice Admiral Bankert, to oppose the Design of the Enemies. As soon as the
Account of the Ammunition and Provision, which the said Officers of the Fleet
have need of, as also of the Losses and Damages they have suffered, shall be
drawn up, as they have represented it to me several times, I will take Care to
send it to the Colleges of the Admiralties. I have also been informed in
general, with much Regret, of the Death of some of our General Officers and
Captains; namely, of Lieutenant Admiral John Evertsz, who having one of his
Legs shot off, died a little after. Lieutenant Admiral Tierke Hiddes de Vries,
has likewise a Leg shot off, and is in Danger of Death; his Ship lost us in the
Night, and that of Vice Admiral Bankert is sunk: Vice Admiral Koenders is
likewise killed, as also the Captains Ruth Maximilian, Jeupian Poel, and Henry
Vroom. Captain Hugh van Nieuhof having lost a Leg, and Cornelius Hogenhoek
being wounded in the Belly are also in great Danger of losing their Lives. As
for the Enemies Losses, I have yet no Knowledge of them, but by the Report of
the abovesaid Officers, 2 English Ships were sunk, and 2 burnt. However, it is
certain, and we were Eyewitnesses of it, that they were very roughly treated,
and that most part of their Ships will be forced to retire soundly battered. I
am peswaded your High and Mightinesses will be informed of it, even before you
have received this present, etc.


Lieutenant Admiral Tromp coming next Day before Wielingen with his Squadron,
writ to the States the Letter following.

High and mighty Lords,
YEsterday Morning, Lieutenant Admiral Tromp's Letter to the States.
the Enemies Fleet being about 90 Sail strong, came up with us; the Wind was
North-East mixed with a Calm, Lieutenant Admiral Evertsz having the
Weather-gage, vigorously attacked the English. I commanded the Rear, and that
of the Enemies was commanded by Sir Jeremy Smith, carrying a Blue Flag, through
which I opened my self a Passage with my Squadron, till I had gained the
Weather-gage; so that the Enemies Rear being thereby separated from their Main
Battle, we fought them till N^ght came on, and till at last we put them to the
Rout; we chaced them all Night, without being able to hear any thing either of
the Vanguard or of the Main Battle. The next morning, finding our selves near
the Galloper, we continued still for some time to pursue the Enemies, but
seeing 'twas to no purpose, and that nothing was able to make them stop, we
resolved to veer back toward Admiral de Ruiter. When the flying English saw
that, they veered back toward us, and followed us with little Sail till the
Dusk of Night. Then we discovered the main Body of the English Fleet to Leeward
of us; who Luffed, to make up to join us; but we could hear nothing all the
while neither of Admiral de Ruiter, nor of the other General Officers of our
Fleet, till toward Evening we discerned a Ship coming toward us, which
appeared to us to be that of Lieutenant Admiral Tierke Hiddes, but because she
had neither Flag nor Topmast, we took that for an unlucky presage. We are
arrived this Day before Wielingen, with our Squadron which is still in a good
Condition, and wants nothing but Ammunition. If we were so happy as to be
informed where Admiral de Ruiter is, we would use all diligence imaginable to
go and join him. The Main Body of the Enemies Fleet luffs as much as it is
possible, so that if no Assistance come in to us, we shall be forced to our
great Regret to retire to Wielingen.


Lieutenant Admiral John Cornelius Meppel, who jointly with Tromp had given
Chase to the English Blue Squadron, came to an Anchor before Ter Veer, from
whence he writ the following Letter to the College of the Admiralty of the
North.

Noble and Potent Lords,
THis present is only to let your High and Mightinesses know, Lieutenant
Admiral Meppel's Letter
That on Wednesday last, the States Fleet engaged in a Fight with the English,
which was so cruel and bloody, that it is almost incredible. All the afternoon I
fought against the Vice Admiral of the Blue Squadron, being backed by the
Captains belonging to my own Flag, who seconded me with all imaginable Bravery,
so that the abovesaid Vice Admiral was forced to retire sorely battered. It was
then calm Weather, which hindered us from advancing. I have above 100 Men killed
or wounded on Board me, whom I will endeavor with all speed to send on Shore.
My Main Mast has been shot through with 7 Cannon Balls, and my Ship is so
pierced with Shot too, that it is scarce to be believed; I was in Danger of
Sinking, and my lower Tire of Guns was already under Water; but the great
Diligence we employed in stopping up the Holes, has preserved us. I am sensibly
concerned that things did not go, as it was to be wished. However, Tromp and I
forced the Enemies Squadron to betake themselves to Flight, which they
continued to do the next Day as fast as they possibly could. And because we
thought not fit to pursue them any longer, we tackt about to the Southward, to
seek out de Ruiter, whom we have not been yet able to find, and we are much
troubled, he was not seconded. But God knows the Bottom of the Affair, of which
doubtless your High and Mightinesses will afterward be informed.

POSTSCRIPT.
Our Rear-Admiral de Haan is killed, with James Gerritsz Roemer, and 15 or 16
more were likewise killed or wounded. Vice Admiral Schram and I are well.
Captain Isbrand Clement has his Leg quasht to pieces; my two Lieutenants are
mortally wounded. Tys Ryndertsz is well.




Seven Days after the Arrival of Tromp, Admiral de Ruiter writ the following
Letter, as he rid at Anchor between Flushing and Zouteland.

High and mighty Lords,
SInce my last, written on the 5th of this Month, Lieutenant Admiral Tromp has
appeared in the Road with the Squadron under his command, and as far as I could
observe as it was passing, it was very little or nothing at all endamaged. He
has reported to me, That on the 4th toward the Evening, he was in Action with
the Blue Squadron, which he put to the Rout, after he had burnt one of their
Ships carrying 64 Guns, whereof 53 were of Brass, and a Fireship which he also
destroyed with the Flames. The Ship of the deceased Admiral Tierke Hiddes de
Uries is also come, very much shattered, into the Road with the said Squadron
of Tromp, so that of all the States Fleet we have lost only the Ship of
Vice Admiral Bankert, and that of Ruird Hillebrandt. Yesterday in the Evening
we came to an anchor between Zouteland and Flushing, from whence we perceived
the English Fleet before our Coasts consisting of about 80 Sail great and
small. I hourly expect the Deputies of your High and Mightinesses, to give
Order about all things, etc.


Though the Loss of this Battle was very sensible to the United Provinces, yet
they pretended, the English had no reason to brag of having got any other
Advantage over the Dutch Fleet than that of having divided their Squadrons;
though it is true, they thought by that means the more easily to destroy them one
after another. Here follows an extract of the Letter sent by Prince Robert and
General Monk, to White Hall, after the Fight, by which it appears what their
Design was. We flattered our selves very much, that de Ruiter would fall into
our Hands; but it was calm Weather, and our small Frigates were not such nimble
Sailers as theirs. They were before their own Coasts, and we were afraid of
running upon the Sand Banks. In the mean while as we were holding a Council of
War, we heard some firing of Guns toward the North-west, which made us presume
that it was Tromp, with Smith, and therefore we resolved to make up toward him
before he approached any nearer Home. But Tromp retired safely, and we followed
him in the Royal Charles, till we came within 6 Fathoms depth of Water, etc.

Smith, who commanded the Blue Squadron, met with but a very ill Reception in
England, because they were the first that begun to fly, and the Officers of
the other 2 Squadrons made great Complaints against him.

In the mean while, the Deputies of the Admiralties and the Plenipotentiaries
of the States with the Pensioner de Wit, came on board Admiral de Ruiter, as
well to inform themselves of the particulars of the fight, as to give orders
for putting the Fleet to Sea again with all imaginable diligence. In that time
the Differences between the two Admirals de Ruiter and Tromp begun to break
out. For de Ruiter complained by word of mouth to the Deputies and
Plenipotentiaries, as he had done before by Letter, to the States, of the
Conduct observed by Tromp, and openly charged him with all the disorder that
had happened in the Fleet, and with the ill success of the Battle. Tromp having
understood all the shrewd passes de Ruiter had made at his Reputation, thought
of nothing more than of Vindicating himself from so great and bloody an
outrage, by charging de Ruiter, in return, with all the blame he imputed to
him: And for that effect, he writ the following Letter to the States General,
and to the States of Holland.

High and Mightinesses. Tromp's Letter to the States in his own Vindication.

I Find my self indispensably obliged to inform you of all the particulars of
the last fight between your Fleet, and that of his British Majesty. On the 4th.
of this Month, the English Navy came up right to us, the wind at North-west
mixed with a Calm. Our Fleet was to Lee-ward, Lieutenant Admiral Evertsz having
the Vanguard, advanced in good order by favor of the Wind. At that motion, the
White Squadron, followed by the main body of the English Battle fell upon him,
whilst de Ruiter who Commanded the main body of our Fleet, staid about two
hours and an half below the Rear of which I had the Conduct, so that Lieutenant
Admiral Evertsz was already so far advanced, that his Flag was hardly to be
discerned, and the great distance there was between the Van and the Main Battle
of our Fleet gave the English the greatest advantage in the world to separate
one from the other. And Lieutenant Admiral de Ruiter, who remained immovable in
his post, began then only to advance to follow Evertsz when the Van-guards of
the two Hostile Fleets begun to Cannonade one another. In the mean while my
Squadron that shut up the Rear was forced to remain in its post till de Ruiter
was advanced, and then being impatient to engage, we endeavored to gain the
Weather-gage, to be able to get up to the English, whilst a part of the ships
of de Ruiter's Squadron were still mingled among ours. As our Squadron was thus
advancing in good order, the Rear Admiral of the Blue Squadron, followed by a
Fire-ship came and fell upon one of our foremost ships, which our Rear-Admiral
Vander Zaan seeing, he set the Enemies Fire-ship on fire with shot from his
great guns. The Admiral of the Blue Squadron followed likewise by a Fire-ship
came up with me and attackt me, Who was backed by the Captains de Haan and Van
Amstel. We played our Guns at him and at the other English ships, whereof one
being very much shattered, and I finding it was practicable to get the weather
of her, we boarded her, being backed with a Fire-ship, and after we had battered
her a long time with continual Broad sides, we fastened our Fire-ship upon her,
to burn her to Ashes. That ship was called the Resolution, and carried 64 Brass
Guns, and 2 Iron ones, and having 140 men on board her, whereof 45, among whom
were a Pilot and a Quarter Master, were saved by our men. Lieutenant Admiral
Van Meppel, and Vice Admiral Swers withstood at the same time a very furious
Shock. This latter fought a long time against the Vice Admiral of the Blue
Squadron, who returned often to the Charge upon him with fresh Men; but he was
so vigorously repulsed by the brave Van Meppel, that he was forced to quit him
with Loss; However Van Meppel's Ship was so miserably shattered, that she had
above 5 Foot Water in her Hold. Our Squadron therefore being thus engaged in
Fight, separated the English Rear-Guard from their Main Battle, so that we
fought with it till about 5 a Clock in the Afternoon. And my Ship had then
fired away 10300 l of Powder. The Vice Admiral of the Blue which was behind,
within Cannon-shot from us, did all he could to burn Captain de Haan, but the
Fire-ship's Crew that were detached for that purpose, seeing our Boats ready to
receive them, retired with haste, after they had received some Cannon-shot. We
used our utmost Endeavor by towing to get up to him, but to no purpose.
However, soon after the Wind beginning to freshen, and being turned to the
South-west, we took the Advantage of it to return again to the Charge. And
accordingly I gave the Signal for our whole Squadron to fall all together at
the same time upon the Enemy; and at the same time our other Ships, the Wind
being changed, were endeavoring what they could, to get the Weather-gage. By
the Favor of that fresh Gale, we came up with the Admiral of the Blue, whom we
treated so roughly with our Guns, that he was at last disabled; and his
Master's Cabin being set on Fire, he fired some Guns to advertise his Vice and
Rear-Admirals to veer back toward him to come to his Assistance; but the
Enemies fearing the Danger, instead of veering back toward him, shamefully
betook themselves to Flight; And had it not been for the Calm which then came
on, in all probability, not only that Admiral, but the most part of the Ships
of his Squadron would have fallen into our Hands. Having gotten then such great
Advantages over the most considerable of the Enemies Squadrons, we were, in the
Judgment of all Men experienced in Marine Affairs, engaged to pursue the
Victory, and without committing an irreparable Blunder, we could not let them
retire without giving them Chase; for supposing we had let the Enemies go off,
and turned back to go to the Assistance of Lieutenant Admiral de Ruiter,
besides that the Calm would not have permitted us, we should have been the
Cause of the Routing of the Ships of de Ruiters, and Evertsz's Squadrons,
because they would have presumed we had given way, and had the Enemies at our
Backs, so that by that means, we should not only have discouraged our own
Ships, but have raised the Courage of our Enemies, who would not have failed in
that case to pursue us. I leave it therefore to your High and Mightinesses, and
to all brave Marine Officers that have long time frequented the Sea, to judge,
Whether if Lieutenant Admiral de Ruiter had timely cut off the Enemies Vanguard
from their main Body, as we did their Rear, we should not have gained a signal
Victory? I add, That that might have been executed with so much the more Ease,
because our Vanguard was strong enough successfully to have fought that of the
Enemies. I protest to your High and Mightinesses, That Partiality has had no
share in what has been set forth, I being ready to maintain in the Face of the
whole World, that it is all conformable to the Truth; and I declare before God,
That I have done nothing that betrays my Intentions, which were for the Good of
the Public, and the Glory of my Country.

And now, High and Mightinesses, I cannot suffer without Reparation, that
without having any Regard to all the faithful Services I have done, Admiral de
Ruiter, out of a Principle of Hatred and Jealousy, should offer such a bloody
Outrage to my Honor and Reputation, as to make me pass for a villainous and
ill-intentioned Man, only because God did me the Favor to make me triumph over
the Enemies with a small Force, when he with a Strength incomparably greater,
met only with Shame and Disadvantage on his side. So then, if I have in this
occasion, acted contrary to my Honor and Duty, I see my self incapable for the
future to render my Services to my Country. And besides, it is not now a Time to
suffer any cowardly or villainous Persons in the great Employments at Sea, but
it is rather necessary, to make Choice of Prudent and Valiant Captains that may
be ready at all times to sacrifice their Estates and Lives for the Good of the
State, which Advantages I can without vanity say, I have hitherto possessed in
such a manner, that I believe neither Lieutenant Admiral de Ruiter, nor any
other Man living upon the Face of the Earth, is able to ravish them from me.
But I apprehend with a sensible Regret, that many Disorders will happen in the
Fleet; and that the Officers and Seamen, when they come on Shore, will proceed
to pernicious Extremities, which I pray God of his Clemency to avert, putting
my g eatest Hopes in him, and in the wise Conduct of your High and
Mightinesses, whom I recommend to his Holy Protection, and remain, etc.


The States of Holland fearing that Hatred between the two Admirals might be
attended with fatal Consequences, committed that Business into the Hands of
some Members of their Assembly, to be examined; and Pensionary de Wit, who had
always entertained an irreconcilable Hatred for Tromp, for being well affected
to the Interests of the illustrious House of Orange, proposed to the Assembly
of the States of Holland, the Resolution of the Commissioners appointed for
that purpose, viz. That in order to the preserving of Union and Peace in the
Fleet, Tromp should be cited to come and justify himself; That he agreed not
with Admiral de Ruiter, in what he had advanced; That the Service of the State
absolutely required, That one of those two Admirals should be put out of his
Place; and that they could better be without Tromp, than de Ruiter, etc.

That Project was approved by the Nobles, and by the Towns of Dort, Delf,
Leyden, Amsterdam, Gouda, Rotterdam, Gornichem, Schiedam, Schoonhoven, the
Brill, Alkmaer, Hoorn, Edam, Medenblick and Purmerend. The Town of Harlem would
have Tromp cited to be examined about the Letter he writ to de Ruiter. The Town
of Enku^sen was of the Opinion, That Endeavors should be used, to reconcile
them together again in a friendly manner. Monikendam would have Tromp to
present a Petition to beg his Acquittal, but the States at length took the
following Resolution.

THE Pensionary has made Report to the Assembly of the Considerations the
Deputies of their High and Mightinesses have made, The States Resolution about
deposing Tromp from his Place of Lieutenant Admiral.
in Pursuance of the Commission given them on the 18th instant, concerning the
Resolutions their said High and Mightinesses are to take, in order to stop and
prevent the fatal Disorders that might happen in the Fleet, and to provide for
the maintenance of that good Understanding that ought to prevail among the
Sea-Officers, and principally upon the Examination that has been made of
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp's Letter to the States, from the Ship called the
Holland, in the Road of Flushing, dated the 13th instant, in which he gives a
particular Relation of what passed in the Fight against the English, and of the
Conclusion he infers thence, as appears by these following Words:

And now, High and Mightinesses, I cannot suffer without Reparation, that in
Contempt of all the faithful Services I have rendered Admiral de Ruiter, etc.

Upon which having deliberated, we have judged, That the said Lieutenant
Admiral Tromp, after such great Marks of the Hatred and Animosity he has
conceived against Lieutenant Admiral de Ruiter, Commander in Chief of the
States Fleet, could not be continued in his Employment jointly with de Ruiter,
without exposing the Fleet to an inevitable Ruin, by the Disorder and
Confusion that would predominate in the Command of it. Wherefore, for the
preventing of such great Disasters, it has been resolved, and we will, That the
Commission of Lieutenant Admiral of Holland and West-Friesland of the College
of the Admiralty of Amsterdam, provisionally granted to the said Tromp, be
Revoked and Remitted by these Presents, and that in consequence of the same,
his Employment vacant by his Dismission shall be filled up with another Officer
of Merit: And that the whole may be done in good Order, the Matter shall be put
in Execution by the Generality, and the said Tromp shall be summoned without
Delay before their High and Mightinesses, and at his Arrival his Dismission
shall be made Public, as it ought to be.

Lieutenant Admiral Tromp then coming to the Hague on the 23d of the Month,
Tromp displaced by the States of Holland.
in Obedience to the abovesaid Resolution, presented himself next Day before
the Assembly of the States; where Pensionary de Wit told him from their High
and Mightinesses, That it was their Will and Pleasure to take from him the
Commission of Lieutenant Admiral of the College of the Admiralty of Amsterdam,
that had been granted him. Tromp made him answer, That he was ready to pay a
willing Obedience to their High and Mightinesses, with many Thanks besides for
the Honors they had done him. But because it was feared some Mutiny might
happen in the Fleet by reason of the great Affection the Seamen bore to Tromp,
the States forbad him to stir out of the Hague till further Order, and to go or
write to the Fleet, upon pain of being accounted the Author of all the
Mischiefs that might ensue. And in Truth there was some Danger of it, but the
good Order that was given and the Prudence that was used in so Nice a Business
as that, restrained the Malcontents within the Bounds of Obedience. The same
Day the States of Holland advanced to the Office of Lieutenant Admiral, vacant
by the Dismission of Tromp, Mr. de Gent, Colonel of a Marine Regiment; Sweers
likewise, who was Rear-Admiral before, was made Vice Admiral of the same
College in the Place of Vander Hulst, Verburg succeeded Sweers in the Place of
Rear-Admiral, and Captain David Vlug was made Rear-Admiral of the College of
the Admiralty of the North, in the room of de Horn, who was killed.

Mr. De Gent being informed of the Honors the States were doing him, would
fain have excused accepting them, and among other Reasons he represented, That
having frequented the Sea but a little while he thought himself not capable to
Command a Squadron; but the States pressing him again to accept the place that
was presented him, and Tromp with whom we had contracted an intimate
Friendship, joining his persuasions with the instances of the States, he was at
last prevailed with to consent to it, and accordingly took the Oath in Quality
of Lieutenant Admiral of Amsterdam, about the end of the month. Thus Tromp
after he had given so many signal proofs of his Courage, was at length
constrained to quit the Sea service.

Hectora qui solus, qui ferrum, ignemque, Jovemque Sustinuit toties, unam non
sustinet iram, Invictumque virum vincit dolor. Tromp solicited by the Count d'
Estrades to take service under the French King, but in vain.
The Count d' Estrades, Ambassador from the Court of France to the States,
observing what had happened to Tromp, thought it would be for the interest of the
King his Master, to wheedle him to pass into his Service, being persuaded, that
Admiral, whilst his resentments were yet boiling hot, would easily be induced
to accept the great advantages that he should offer him from the King his
Master; and accordingly he made him an overture to that effect, offering him an
annual Pension of 50000 Livers; but Tromp, to his great surprise, bluntly
answered him; That he had rather live all the rest of his days as a simple
Burgher, and continue faithful to his Country, than to betray it at the expense
of his own honor, by taking service under a Foreign Prince, what mighty offers
soever were made him on that account.

In the mean while, they were busy at work in Zealand, in Arming out the Fleet
with an indefatigable care and diligence, whilst the English lured on by the
hopes of Booty, appeared before the Vlie with a Fleet of 60 sail of men of War.
And that they might with the less encumbrance carry on so desired an
enterprise, they had sent all their sick and wounded men back into England; And
9 or 10 Dutch Merchant ships outward bound, either to the North, or France,
were newly fallen into their hands. The English Fleet then approaching near the
Dutch Coast, seemed at first to despair of being able to do all the mischief
there they had before flattered themselves with the conceit of, by reason of
the difficulties that presented themselves in their way; But being instructed
contrary to their expectation, how to surmount them, by one Heemskerk, formerly
a Captain in the service of the United Provinces, but who was discarded from it
for his Cowardice, they were encouraged to such an attempt as might make the
Zealanders feel the fatal effects of the loss of the Battle, by a malicious and
mischievous enterprise that Traitor proposed to them.

The English Fleet being arrived on the 17th. The spoils done by the English at
the Vlie.
of August near the Vlie, got advice by a fisherman that fell into their
hands, that the Isles of Vlie and Schelling were the most exposed of all those
Maritim^ Countries, that there were some Magazines belonging to the States, or
the East India Chamber, unprovided of any Garrison to defend them, and that
there were in the Port a great Number of Merchant-ships richly laden. It Is
true, those Merchant-ships, as well as those in the Texel had been advertised
before hand by the Deputies, to retire in time into Harbors of security, but
not being sensible at first, of the importance of those Advices, they
unfortunately had ventured to stay behind. The English therefore together with
Heemskerk, held a Council, and after they had projected their enterprise,
resolved to put it in execution the next day at 8 in the morning. By favor of
the Tide, and of a North Wind, 10 men of War, 5 fireships, and 7 Yachts sailed
in as far as below the Brandaris of the Isle of Schelling, whilst another Yacht
slid into the Vlie, where she told 160 Merchant-ships, and 2 men of War, their
Convoys.

Sir Robert Holms, of whom we have already spoken several times, was the Head
of that enterprise. He considered, that if he attackt the Isles first, the
Merchant ships would thereby gain time to provide for their security, and
therefore detacht away 2 Frigates which entered into the Tonn^n, and followed
them with the rest of his ships, but being stopped by a contrary wind, he was
forced to fall back again toward the Brandaris. Then after he had held a
Council of War, he ordered the Pembroke Frigate followed by 5 fireships, to
advance to go and attack the Merchant fleet. And accordingly Captain Brown,
having fastened upon the ship of Captain Adelaar, one of the chief of the
Convoys, reduced her to ashes. The Captain after he had made all the resistance
possible, leaping at last into a Boat with sixteen 16 of his men, to save
himself, both he and they were unhappily swallowed up by the Waves. The second
Convoy ship was likewise burnt, but Tol, the Captain of her was more lucky than
his Companions, for he escaped in his Boat. The Merchant ships cut their Anchor
Cables at so horrible a spectacle to fly as well as they could from the fury
of the flames. In the mean while the men in the three English Fireships that
still remained advanced? Crying out! I am Heemskerk the Author of the
enterprise; and set fire to some Merchant ships richly laden, and bound for
Muscovy, which after their men had signalized themselves to the utmost in their
defense, were likewise burnt to ashes. After that, the English with 22 Boats
went out of the Brandaris, and by favor of their Oars and the Tide together
gave chase to the Merchant ships, that were flying, and all of them they could
reach, they set on fire with flaming trusses of straw which they threw into
them. However, because the English Seamen were Commanded under pain of death
not to pillage, the Pilots and Masters of the Dutch ships found opportunity by
that means to save their men and their Money in their Boats. Some of those
unhappy wretches that dwelt in the Vlie, fearing the English would come and
plunder the Isle, had withdrawn their best effects from thence, and
transported them on board the Merchant-ships, so that they had the cruel
displeasure to see them destroyed by the flames. Three Privateers and one
Merchant ship bound for Guiney well Armed and Provided with able Seamen made a
very vigorous resistance; for they repulsed the English, and sunk some of their
Boats, so that under their shelter, several rich Merchants designed for Muscovy
were preserved from the Enemies fire, who durst follow them no further for fear
of running aground.

Holms being informed by some Prisoners, that the Vlie likewise was in no
condition to defend it self, detacht away two Frigates and some small Vessels,
with orders to Land their men in the Fort: But a Tempest arising with a most
terrible rain that lasted all night, it was impossible for them to put their
project in execution, because their powder, and other necessary materials to do
execution withal were wetted, and their matches Quenched: And besides, the men
that were Commanded out upon that design were so miserably Weather-beaten, that
they were quite spent, so that it is certain if the Dutch had had so much
presence of mind with them, as to have sent thither three Companies of Seamen
that were hard by, the English Incendiaries would have been in great danger of
being totally defeated, because their Boats being most of them staved to pieces
by being tossed against the shore, were then become most of them but the sport of
the Waves. But their attempts had more success in the Isle of Schelling, for
having landed 11 Companies of Regular Troops near the Brandaris, without
meeting with the least resistance from the Inhabitants, the most part of which
are Fishermen, and Mennonites, a sort of Sect that think all War unlawful, 5
Companies of Incendiaries advancing to the Windward, set on fire 350 houses,
and amongst them, the Church of the reformed was also half burnt down, and it
was one of the saddest spectacles in the World, to see the poor inhabitants of
that place in the utmost desolation, and the affrighted women running cross the
Country with their little Children in their Arms, seeking to save them both
from the rage of the Incendiaries, and the fury of the flames. In fine the
English pillaged what the fire had spared.

Holms would have carried on those strange successes further into the Country,
and two other Villages in the same Isle were just ready to be treated after the
same rate; but that being obliged to stay till 24 hours were past, before he
could attempt any thing more, and to wait for a favorable wind to execute his
enterprise, and besides, finding that the inhabitants having begun to Retrench
themselves at the Eastward of the Village, had raised two Batteries, and
expected every moment some Cannon from Enkuisen, he thought it would be two
hazardous to push his design any further, and that it would be much better to
think of retreating, and so ordered all his men to return immediately on board,
and on the 20th. of August he rejoined the English Grand Fleet, by order of
Prince Robert and General Monk, who seeing that sickness begun to reign amongst
their Men, made sail back toward the Coasts of England.

The States being sensibly concerned at the mischief done by the English
Incendiaries to those poor Islanders, watched all opportunities to Return them a
Rowland for their Oliver, and in little time after, met with a very favorable
one to wreck part of their Revenge. For two Dutch men of War that were convoys,
seconded by two others that had rid a good while at Anchor under Gluckstadt,
fell on the 27th. of August with a fair Wind, upon a Merchant Fleet of 17
English ships that were at an Anchor near the New-Mill, and fired so terribly
at them with their Guns, that not knowing where to shelter themselves, they cut
their Anchor Cables, and fled to save themselves. But when they of Hamborough
saw them approach toward their Town, they sounded an alarm; all the streets
were in a moment filled with people, and it being just at the beginning of
night, all the Town was on a sudden enlightened with a Million of Candles and
Torches, and the Burghers were all in Arms. About 9 of the Clock, 4 Merchant
ships, viz. 3 English, and one Hamburgher were on fire, this last happening
unluckily to ride too near the others, and if the wind had not chopped about to
the North, it is certain, that all the rest that escaped, would have likewise
been reduced to Ashes. Two days after that expedition, de Ruiter was sent for
to come ashore, to speak with the Count d' Estrades the French Ambassador, the
Marquess of Bellefonds, and the Deputies of their High and Mightinesses, which
were met there, to treat about the place where the French Fleet was to join
that of Holland. For the Duke of Beauford, Admiral of France, had been a long
time expected home, and they had received advice, that he was ready to quit the
Coasts of Portugal whither he was gone some months before, in order to return
to Rochelle. In the mean while, the most Christian King had Commanded the Count
d' Estrades, to present the Order of St. Michael to de Ruiter, in
acknowledgment of the undaunted Courage and Singular Conduct he had shown in
the last Battle. But to return to what concerns the pretended Junction of the
two Fleets, the Court of France after their usual manner, contented themselves
with bubling off the Hollanders with fair promises and specious hopes that
vanished all but into smoke; for the Junction, as it was never intended, so it
was never made.

The States Fleet being got ready, unmoor'd on the 5th. of September,
consisting of 71 men of War or Frigates, and 27 fireships. Besides the New
Officers abovementioned, Vice Admiral Bankert succeeded as Lieutenant Admiral
in the room of John Evertsz; and Captain Matthysz was made Rear-Admiral of
Zealand. The fleet was divided into 3 Squadrons; the first was Commanded by de
Ruiter himself; the second by Lieutenant Admiral de Gent; and the third by
Lieutenant Admiral Bankert. On the 8th of September, the Dutch fleet came to an
Anchor between Dunkirk and Newport, and upon some advice received from Paris,
that the Duke of Beauford, Admiral of France had unmoor'd from Rochelle: Nay,
and that he was come already as far as the mouth of the Channel, in order to
join de Ruiter, the States fleet weighed Anchor on the 11th. in the morning,
and made sail toward Callis and Bullen: Where the Vice Admirals Sweers, and
Evertsz, meeting with a great English ship, called the Loyal Charles, carrying
56 Guns, and 200 men, they took her. She had underwent a most terrible Tempest,
in which she had lost her Foremast and Bolt-sprit, so that de Ruiter ordered
her to be burnt. About noon, he heard, that the English fleet consisting of
above 100 sail was following after that of Holland, whereupon de Ruiter
presently put up a Red Flag as a signal to his fleet to fall all together at
the same time upon the Enemies. But the English Admiral tacking about to the
North ward, sheered away with all his Navy from the Dutch fleet, which chased
them, and fired at their Rear, in the view of an infinite Number of People that
were got together on the Coasts of France, and were spectators of the daring
Courage of the Hollanders, and of the Retreat of the English, who, as was
supposed, for want of Men, who in great Numbers had been swept away by
Sickness, contented themselves only with making a Show at Sea, but did not
think fit to hazard an Engagement, and so made toward Portsmouth. And as for
the Admiral of France, he appeared not, and so de Ruiter being weary of waiting
so long for him in vain, had Orders from the States, to conduct the Fleet back
again into their respective Ports, and only to detach a Squadron out of them of
25 Men of War, to cruise to the Northward, to look for the Ships that were
expected coming back from the East Indies.

Four Days after, the States had News of the Burning of London by the most
terrible Fire that ever was yet seen. Dreadful Fire of London.
For beginning on the 12/2 of September, it made such an Advance by favor of
the Wind, that it was not extinguished till the 16/6th, that is to say, 5 Days
after, when at last they were fain to smother it by blowing up some Houses, as
the last Remedy that could be thought of. It seemed as if Fire had been fallen
from Heaven to punish that proud City, and that God, the just Revenger of
Crimes had determined to reduce it into Ashes, or at least to chastise it in
such a manner, that it should for ever wear lasting Marks of his Punishment.
For that dreadful Conflagration extended from the Tower to Temple Bar, and in
all that space, there remained not a House standing all-a-long by the Thames,
so that it may well be said, That by that Judgment the Inhabitants of that
great City, and even of all England suffered Losses incomparably greater and
more sensible than the English had lately caused to the Inhabitants of the
Isles of Vlie and Schelling, which were esteemed at Twelve Millions of Livers,
whereas those of the English amounted to One hundred Millions. And the
Desolation was so great that Multitudes of People were seen to wander about
almost in deep Despair without any Home or other Place of Shelter to go to, and
were reduced to the greatest Depth of Misery, and would have perished by
Hunger, if the King had not ordered some Provision to be made for their
Subsistence, other particulars as well known, and amply recited in other
Writings obvious every where, we shall omit to insert here.

The Pensioner de Wit upon that Advice, as he was an implacable Enemy to the
King of England, as well as to the House of Orange so nearly allied to that
Royal Family, and had secretly blown up the Fire of that War, resolved to make
his best Advantage of it, and presently writ to Admiral de Ruiter, to let him
know, That so fatal and unforeseen an Accident as that, might possibly induce
the States to change the Resolution they had before taken, to lay up their
Fleet in their Ports, because it had been certified from good Hands, That Monk
was returned to London, and therefore it was easy to presume, the English
Fleet would not be so soon ready to unmoor. And the States accordingly by his
Instigation writ to de Ruiter on the 26th of the same Month, that upon a piece
of News of so great importance, they had resolved to keep their Fleet out still
at Sea, till further Order. De Ruiter obeyed their Order, but without any
Success at that Time: For the English sailing out again on the 5th of October,
made a Motion as if they would advance to attack de Ruiter, but as soon as they
saw him move toward them to engage them, they sheered away again to avoid him.
At that time the Duke of Beauford, Admiral of France sent de Ruiter Word, that
it was impossible for him to come and join him, and therefore desired him to
excuse him for having put in with the French Fleet into Breast. So de Ruiter
seeing there was no appearance of attempting any thing to effect, retired again
about the middle of October with his Fleet, whereof a part put into Zealand,
another into the Meuse, and the rest into the Texel.

A little time after, there were some happy steps made toward a Peace for the
States, as we have already said, having written to the King of England about
the Funeral of Sir William Barcley, that Prince was so sensibly touched with
the obliging Deportment of the States in that matter, and with the Honors they
had rendered to the Memory of a Person that was so dear to him, that he returned
them Thanks for it by the following Letter, dated the 11th of August.

High and Mighty Lords, and Right Dear Friends,
WE have seen by your Letter, The King of England's Letter to the States.
dated the 10th of June, brought to us by a Trumpeter, a glorious Example of
your Civilities, concerning the Honors you have been pleased to render to the
Body of Sir William Barkley, who after having signalized himself, lost his Life
for the Service of his Prince and Country: After his Death, he fell into your
Hands by the Fortune of War, and the Honors you have rendered to his glorious
Memory were very pleasing to me; I shall always consider them as an effect of
your generous Good Will, and whenever the like occasions shall happen, we will
endeavor on our part to answer them, by acknowledging Virtue and Merit even in
the Person of our Enemies, to whom we shall give Proofs of our Tenderness, as
far as the Occurrences of War shall permit us. And because the near Relations
of the Deceased desire, his Body may be interred in the Tomb of his Ancestors,
upon the Offer you have made us, to grant them that Favor, we have consented
to it; and that the Vessel designed for his Transportation may not be attacked
in its Passage by our Subjects, we have added to this enclosed, the necessary
Passport. Besides, we assure you from the bottom of our Heart, That the
Advantages our Arms have lately gained by the Blessing of God, shall not render
us so haughty, as to make us forget the Damages the present War causes to the
Reformation, and how great the Hopes are that our Enemies have conce^ved from
our Troubles and Dissentions: So that we are ready to put our hand to so pious
a Work, as is that of pacifying them, upon the first Just and Reasonable
Condition that shall be proposed to us on that Subject.


The States comprehending by the Expressions contained in the King of England's
Letter, That that Prince seemed more inclinable to terminate the War, and to
hearken to Propositions of Peace, than formerly, writ to him the following
Letter, dated the 16th of September, by the Yacht ordered to transport into
England Vice Admiral Barkley's Body.

SIR,
The States Letter to the King of England
BEing informed by your Majesty's Letter of the 4th of the last Month, that your
Intention was, That Sir William Barkley's Body should be transported into
England, in order to be delivered into the Hands of his Relations, we
accordingly send it, to satisfy the Offers we made your Majesty to that effect.

Moreover, we have with much Pleasure seen the good Disposition in which your
Majesty is, mentioned toward the close of your Letter, which signify the
Inclination your Majesty would be pl^ased to have to put a stop to that Current
of Mischiefs the War has lately brought upon the two Nations, with this Clause,
As soon as your Majesty shall be invited to so holy a Work by reasonable
Cond^t^ons. We therefore doubt not of the sincerity of the so often repeated
Protestations newly made, signifying your Inclination for a Peace: But we are
not ignorant likewise, that you are persuaded there will be no Advance made
toward Peace, so long as you shall make no Overture of the particular
Conditions upon which you judge it might be concluded. However, we on our side
have given all imaginable clear Explications of our sense thereupon by our
Ambass^do^r, whom we ordered to stay in the Court of England expressly upon that
account, though your Majesty had already recalled yours. Mr. Van Beuningen, our
Minister extraordinary at the French Court, renewed them in the last Place in
presence of the Queen your Majesty's Mother, to Mr. Hollis your Ambassador,
without receiving any positive Answer thereto from your Majesty. We could not
with Justice, according to what is practiced in such Negotiations, have ordered
our Minister in the Conference held at Paris with the said Hollis, to solicit
him to make the Overture of the Conditions upon which your Majesty pretended to
make Peace, as we had done, or at least to have agreed beforehand, that your
Majesty should give a final Answer, sincere, and without Reserve to the
Advances we had made, and that in a prefixed Time: But however to give Proofs
at the very first of the ardent Passion that induces us to labor to bring
about so Christian a Work, we have passed over all those Formalities, making it
our Glory to make the first Advances, and to go as far with them on our side as
is possible, hoping that your Majesty acting in the same manner, the so much
desired Peace might be concluded without delay, and that by that means the
effusion of so much Christian Blood as was shed in the ensuing Battles might
have been prevented. And since by the Letter of the 11th of December last Year,
and afterward in the Conference held at Paris, it was proposed to your
Majesty's Choice to treat of Peace, either under condition, That both Parties
should mutually restore all that each of them had taken from the other before
or after the War, and thence to pass to the Examination of the Pretensions that
were in question before the War; or that each Party should keep the Conquests
they had made before or after the Rupture, with respect to the Time when the
said Offer was signified to the Parties; and that in consequence of that, all
the Pretensions concerning any Losses or Damages suffered, should be forgotten,
and held for Null on both sides. It seems to us, That the Clause specified in
the abovesaid Letter of your Majesty is already fully executed, and that
thereby your Majesty has been several times invited to the Conclusion of so
pious a Work. For we cannot persuade our selves, that as to what concerns the
Offer of the abovesaid Conditions, there can be any proposed more advantageous,
if Regard be had to Reason and to the Justice of the Cause, considering that
all we possess, or that we have taken from your Majesty or your Subjects, is
adjudged to be good Prize, and ought to be preserved according to the Laws of a
just War, since we took up Arms only for our own Defense; whereas, on the
contrary, all that has been taken from the United Provinces, or their Subjects,
which amounts to above 100 Ships, with their Merchandises and Effects, as
likewise the Fort of S. Andrew, the Isle of Boavista, New Holland, and Cabo
Corso, all that was taken by Surprise unjustly, and without any Declaration of
War. And yet your Majesty slighting so advantageous a Proposition, never
considered to explain your self openly, nor to determine upon the Choice either
the one or the other of the proposed Conditions, or so much as to relate the
Reasons you had to reject them, or at least to make us a clear and sincere
Overture of what other Conditions might have induced you to a Peace, to which
we have often solicited you. On the contrary, your Majesty broke off the
foresaid Conference, which was the greatest Hopes of those that ardently desire
Peace, and which was happily begun in the presence of the Queen your Majesty's
Mother; you broke it off, we say, by the sudden recalling of your Ambassador,
without showing any manner of way your Approbation of it. Things being thus, we
leave your Majesty to judge, what all those general Protestations of Affection
and Passion of Peace can tend to so long as they shall not be followed by
particular Conditions which are to be the Foundation of it. And because
Experience teaches us, That the Mediation of Foreign Power is not unprofitable
but may contribute much to the Conclusion of so holy a Work, that Consideration
induced us to determine to accept of the Mediation of the King of Swedeland, in
the Confidence we have, that that Prince being equitable, will have regard to
the just and Advantageous Propositions we make, though that Prince having been
put by your Majesty into the Number of your Allies, it seems obvious, that we
might look upon him as suspicious, and a Party adverse to us, and consequently
as one interested in the Treaty. Besides that, your Majesty has declared, You
could not enter into Negotiation without his Consent. The Kings of France and
Denmark, who are in War as well as we, against your Majesty, have in like
manner accepted the said Mediation of Swedeland. We made no Difficulty at the
very first Offer made to us of it, to give our Consent to it in Writing, that
it might be presented to your Majesty; but yet hitherto, whatever Instances
have been made, it has been impossible for us to induce the Minister of the
Crown of Swedeland residing here, to make us the same Declaration from your
Majesty; namely, Whether you would please to accept of the said Mediation of
Swedeland or no? as well in regard of our selves, as of the Kings of France and
Denmark our Allies, which being once granted, we protest again once more, not
only in general Terms, that we continue still in the violent Passion that
incites us to the Conclusion of a solid Peace, but we make all the particular
Advances besides that Right and Justice can exact of us. And because a general
Declaration that comprehends no real express and reasonable Condition, either
on the one side or the other is more capable to produce new Umbrages, and leave
the Mind in suspense, than to promote a Treaty of Peace, we declare
consequently, That we stand to the Propositions that were made on our part in
the Conference held at the Court of France in the presence of the Queen, your
Majesty's Mother, as has been already related.

In fine, we pray your Majesty to confirm the general Profession and
Protestation you have made, That you desire nothing more than Peace, and to be
pleased to join to it a particular Declaration, that may show that you
determine upon the Choice of one of the Conditions, which you may think
convenient for that purpose; and in consequence of it, your Majesty is also
prayed to be pleased to let the said Conference already begun to be continued,
as well in respect of the Place, as to the Persons. But if your Majesty should
make any Scruple to do it, and should have any Reasons not to consent to it,
that then your Majesty would consent that the Mediating Ministers of the Crown
of Swedeland may make Choice of another Place, where not only our
Plenipotentiaries, but likewise those of our Allies as well as those of your
Majesty may be obliged to meet with all Diligence. And we shall take it for one
of the greatest Testimonies of the sincerity of the Protestation your Majesty
has so often repeated concerning Peace, if it stir up no Jealousy nor Disunion
between us and our Allies, to obstruct it.

In fine, we will wait your Majesty's Declaration in Writing, which being
signified to us by the Minister of Sweden, by which the Mediation of that
Prince, presented to all the Members of the League, as well to the aforesaid
Kings of France and Denmark, as to us, shall be authorized. And we pray God to
inspire your Majesty with such Sentiments for Peace as we have our selves, and
such as may consequently move you to resolve to make Choice of the necessary
means whereby to promote so great a Work; that so we may in a short time enjoy
the Effects of a firm, solid, and inviolable Peace, to be concluded between
your Majesty, and the Powers at present in War against England: And for our
particular, we shall make most ardent Prayers to God for the Prosperity of your
sacred Person, and for the Subjects of the two States.


The King of England made the following Reply to the States.

High and Mighty Lords,
WE received Yours of the 16th of the last Month, The King of England's answer
to the States Letter.
which was delivered us by one of your Trumpeters that accompanied the Body of
the Deceased Sir William Barklay, in order to be committed into the Hands of
his near Relations. We consider that Mark of your Civility with all possible
Resentment, and we pray you to be persuaded, that we will do the same by you,
as often as occasion shall serve.

As to the other Part of your Letter, concerning Peace, and the frank and free
Answer we made you on the 14th of August, by inviting you to seek it, we cannot
enough complain, That all the Advances we have made for that purpose, should
end in no other effect, but to make us be charged with ill-grounded Reproaches
that openly condemn the manner of Acting we have observed, tho all the World be
informed to the contrary. Those are without doubt such Preliminaries, as are
not very capable to facilitate it, and it is a thing altogether surprising, that
you should endeavor to persuade your own People, and all Europe at the same
time, That we are the Aggressors and Authors of the fatal Consequences which
have been enkindled between us: You unjustly accuse us of shutting our Ears to
all the Proposals you make for an Accommodation, by refusing to inform you of
our lawful Pretensions: In fine, you pretend that we alone reject it, whilst
you and your Allies desire it, and passionately seek for it, whereas the Truth
is, you your selves have to this very present Day refused to make the least
step that was capable to advance it, and to extinguish the fatal Torch of War.
This conduct so contrary to your pretended Intentions, obliges us for the
Defending of our Honor, and the Justice of our Cause from such sensible
Outrages, to declare before the Face of the whole World, how ill-grounded your
Reproaches are: It forces us, I say, to renew once more the Advances we have
made for the Re-establishment of Peace, ever since the very beginning of the
War, and which yet you have always rejected. We protest to you then, that, if
you think fit, for the Time to come, to charge your selves with all the Blame,
which engages our Honor to provide for its Security, then we may by the
Assistance of Heaven, deliberate with Success about the means that shall be
judged proper to pacify our Troubles, and put a stop to the cruel Effusion of
so much Protestant Blood. In the mean while we cannot forbear relating the
following Particulars, to undeceive the Public.

1. That we have made several pressing Instances, but all to no purpose, to
move you to make Reparation for the Damages suffered by us and our Subjects,
which you were engaged to do by the last Treaty, which was not violated on our
part.

2. That the Commanders of your Fleet in the East Indies prohibited our Ships
under the Command of the Earl of Marlborough, the Entrance, of a Harbor, where
there had been a long Time an English Manufactory settled, provided with a
great Quantity of Merchandises designed for the lading back of the said Ships
at their Return; all which Merchandises were soon after stopped by your Officers,
under pretense, That you having declared War against the Princes with whom we
pretended to trade, it was no longer lawful for us to have any more Commerce
with them. And about the same Time, that Imperious and Extravagant Declaration
was published likewise in your Name, in Africa, by the Officer that commands
there for you, with a Prohibition to all our Subjects to traffic with the
Inhabitants of that Country; so that when we demanded Reparation for the
Damages suffered, showing you an Authentic Copy of the Declaration lately
published there in your Name, against the Glory and Interest of the Kings and
Princes that have Commerce there, and that are not able without Resentment to
endure so cruel an Outrage, you were pleased to disown that Attempt, and
absolutely refused to give us any Satisfaction.

3. We say, That as soon as ever your Ambassador complained of the Hostility
lately committed by Captain Holms in taking of your Fort near Cape Verd, we
assured him upon our Royal Word, That that Attempt was committed without our
Knowledge and Participation; so that after having disavowed it, we summoned him
up to appear here, and after having seriously examined the Affair, we declared,
that the said Holms should be punished according to the Rigor of the Laws, if
he were found guilty, with Intention to make Reparation for the Damages you had
suffered. But that Protestation, how sincere soever it were, was not capable to
satisfy you, though it ought to have done so however, according to the Tenor of
the Treaty: On the contrary, you persisted to reproach us with having
authorized the Insult made by the said Captain; who being at length come back
into England, we forbad him to present himself at Court, and what is more, we
committed him presently to the Tower of London, where he continued Prisoner
till after the Rupture. And yet your Ambassador never in all that Time
advanced any thing against him, that was a sufficient Ground to bring him to
his Trial; And what is more, Holms alleged, That before he attacked your Fort,
he intercepted in his Way to Guiney, Orders by which your Officers were
enjoined to seize upon the Castle of Cormantine, which they afterward actually
attacked.

4. The Isle of Poleroon was not delivered into our Hands, according to the
Conditions of the Treaty, though we were engaged to great Expenses, in Arming out
two Fleets at two different Times, which we sent thither to go and take
Possession of it; the Governors excusing themselves, by the Orders that had
been signified to them, alleging they were not sufficient for their discharge.

5. We say, That de Ruiter had order to attack our Subjects, at the same Time
when you caused Instances to be made to us, to stop the Departure of our Fleet
designed for Guiney, under fair Appearances, That your Fleet should stay in
their Ports in Expectation of coming to an Accommodation; at a Time, I say,
when you were soliciting us to join our two Fleets together, to go and reduce
the Corsairs of Algiers to their Duty, which we consented to with Pleasure. And
yet de Ruiter separating himself from our Forces in the Mediterranean, without
giving the least Notice of his Design, went to the Coasts of Guiney to commit
all sorts of Hostility against our Subjects, and to seize upon the Country
under our Obedience. All that passed before we had caused any of your Ships
that were stoped, to be sold, or that we had attempted the least thing against
your Subjects. These Five Points being proved, and being entirely conformable
to the Truth, as we have shown, and all these things having past before we
thought of providing for our Security, by using the means an Offensive War
engaged us to, we doubt not but you will pass in the World for the Aggressors,
and that our Honor will for the future be safe from being aspersed with the
Blame which ought wholly to be charged upon you. A War being thus kindled then,
and God having blessed our Arms with happy success, we find our selves so much
the more inclined to Peace, and evidently to set forth the sensible outrages
that are done us, by representing as if we were obstinately bent to continue
the War by refusing to propose proper means to procure a Peace.

As for the overture made to us by your Ambassador during the time he remained
in this Court, we refer our selves to the answers we made to all the memorials
he presented us, which give sufficient Testimony of the inclinations we have
for Peace.

As to what passed in the particular Conferences we had together, it is easy
for you to satisfy your selves about it by the faithful Report of a man of
Honor in whom we have had an extreme confidence, and we wish he would declare
himself, whether we have not always Testified a great Aversion to War, and as
much inclination for Peace as a Christian is obliged to have, not thinking it
fit to commit particulars to writing, that we might not expose our selves to
those Inconveniences which your manner of proceeding would have excited at that
time.

As for what concerns the recalling of our Envoy from the Hague, before your
Ambassador was called from London, it is notorious, he was driven thence by the
cruel Treatments used to him, for being dispoiled of all the privileges annexed
to his Character, his Domestics being imprisoned, and notwithstanding all the
Complaints made of it from us, and the promises made us, that the like should
not happen any more, his secretary being put also under an arrest, without any
reasonable pretense, and guards being placed before his house, and nothing
having been neglected that was capable of stirring up the Rabble to rise upon
him, all those violences, I say, obliged him to provide for the security of his
person by a handsome retreat.

It Is true, the most Christian Kings Ambassadors, after a stay of some months,
and after we had accepted their Mediation, made us some particular
propositions, but it is true likewise, that they afterward disavow'd them, as
they were ordered by you to do, and gave us to understand, that you had
absolutely disapproved them, in confidence that the sickness that reigned then
in our Kingdom had so much weakened it, and reduced our people into so pitious a
Condition, that it would be impossible for us to put out our Fleet to Sea
again. The Ambassadors of the Court of France presented afterward some other
Memorials, assuring us from the King their Master, that he would engage to make
you consent to the project that had been proposed; and that as to what
concerned the exorbitant and unreasonable demand we had made, it seemed
improper to serve for the ground of a Treaty; adding, that your Ambassador
might receive full power to treat of those propositions, or else of some others
equally profitable to both Parties. And there their Mediation ended, so that
they departed, after having declared, that upon the refusal of the abovesaid
propositions, their Master would be obliged to assist you during the rest of
the War. Things then having past in that manner, it is easy to Judge whether we
are at present in a State to make you any other proposals on our part.

As to what passed at Paris between our Ambassador Extraordinary, and Mr. Van
Beuningen, we think our selves obliged to relate it a little at length, to
undeceive the public, by informing them what pains was taken, to persuade
them, that we were formally entered into a Negotiation, that reasonable and
advantageous proposals had been therein made us, but that we had rejected them,
and that in fine by a Criminal obstinacy we had broken off the Negotiation. A
sound Judgment may be made how things passed by what we are going to relate,
that you may be disabused of the unfaithful Account that has been given of
them, and of the false prejudices pretended to be drawn from thence.

We could do no less than to recall our Ambassador Extraordinary from the Court
of France after the recalling of the Ambassadors of the most Christian King,
and the Declaration of War that followed close after it. Our Ambassador then
having signified his Letters of Revocation, being very much indisposed, a great
Lord of the Court that was much considered, came to visit him, and told him as
a secret he entrusted to him, that the King his Master took all imaginable
pains to induce you to a Peace, that Mr. Van Beuningen your Envoy would be
ready to make an overture of some propositions, that might be made for a ground
for it. And therefore for that effect he prayed him to defer his Voyage, and to
order it so as to meet the said Envoy at the Queen our Mothers Palace to treat
there in her presence about the means of attaining to a Peace. Our Ambassador
answered him? that having received his Audience of leave, he was divested of
his Character, that he had no power to enter into a Negotiation, and that
according to his orders he was obliged to depart as soon as ever his health
would permit him. A few days after, the same Lord made him a second visit, in
which he renewed his instances, and declared to him in his Masters Name, that
if he persisted in his Resolution to depart, without hearing what they had to
propose to him for promoting of a Peace, he would undoubtedly be charged with
all the blood that was going to be spilt, for having refused to lend an Ear to
those expedients that might be capable to prevent so great mischiefs. Upon such
pressing Solicitations, our Ambassador promised to meet them at the Queen our
Mothers Palace, declaring however, that he had no power, but that if he did it,
it would be out of Complaisance and Curiosity to hear what proposals they had
to make. And accordingly he went thither at the appointed hour, as likewise did
one of the Ministers of the most Christian King. Their Conversation having been
employed some time in discoursing about the War, and your Envoy obstinately
maintaining that we were the Aggressors, he proposed again the same Alternative
that you now have newly proposed to us, to which he demanded a positive answer,
namely, That reparation should be made on both sides for all the damages
suffered since the beginning of the War; or else, that each party should remain
in possession of what they actually possessed. Our Ambassador showed him the
mistake in reasoning after such a manner, and how far we were from being the
Aggressors; he also Represented to him the impossibility of determining upon
the choice of either of those proposals, till it had been first examined, when
the War begun! how? and by whom; without which it was impossible for him to
understand the true Sense of that proposition. After that discourse, our
Ambassador concluded that he had not power to treat, but an express order to be
gone immediately. But that however they might dispatch away an express to
inform Us of those proposals, which was in his opinion, the only way to come to
a Peace, to which he knew of his own certain knowledge, I was altogether
inclined. That was the end of an enterview, which they would needs have to pass
in the world for a Negotiation, and of which all the blame, and ill success has
been imputed to Us. And since you repeat the same thing in your Letter, as a
considerable advance for Peace, we have likewise right to make you the same
answer now which our Ambassador made them at that time, namely, that it is
impossible for us to explain our selves clearly concerning those two
propositions, till you have first explained the terms of them. In that view, we
have accepted the Mediation of our dear Brother, the King of Swedeland, as we
are ready to refer it to any other Prince, who shall not have declared himself
a party against us, in hopes that by that means it may clearly appear, what
conditions you desire a Peace should be concluded upon; though you are not
ignorant we have particularized several things about that Subject, as also
several of your own people have done that are well affected to Peace, and to
the good of their Country, that are at present prosecuted, because they
suffered themselves to be too easily persuaded into a belief, that as to what
concerns the abovesaid propositions, you would take a resolution to dispatch
some body to Us, to treat about proper means to procure a Peace, and to prevent
the inconveniences that have followed since.

As to the nomination of a Neuter place to treat of Peace with France and
Denmark which are engaged in the present War, we say, that as we have no
differences with the most Christian King, but only so far as he has concerned
himself in your quarrel, we doubt not but we may Accommodate our selves
together by acknowledging our true interests, which permits us not to suffer a
good Correspondence that has prevailed so long time together between us, and
that Crown, should be destroyed by the obstinate refusal to agree to just and
reasonable means to come to a Peace. As for the King of Denmark, who could not
meddle in these disputes without violating the engagements he had equally both
with you and Us, we cannot consent with respect to that Crown, to the
Nomination of a Neuter place. Nay we are constrained to declare here that the
enterprise made in the Haven of Bergen, would never have come into our
thoughts, if that Prince had not induced Us by his solicitation to send our
Fleet thither by the hopes he made us conceive of sharing together in the spoil
of your ships. However notwithstanding the sensible outrages we have received
from him on all occasions that have presented themselves, we make no scruple to
tell you, that as we accept the Mediation of our dear Brother, the King of
Sweden, as well in regard to France, as to your selves, so when our particular
differences shall be composed, we will accept your Mediation to procure a Peace
with Denmark upon reasonable Conditions, and that with design to strengthen the
Union that ought to Reign between the Protestant Princes.

That therefore you may have no more matter to entertain your people withal in
the deceitful opinion, that we refuse to explain to you the conditions upon
which we desire a Peace, and though that manner of proceeding be quite out of
Common use; namely, to outrage and attack in an open War your Allies and
Neighbors, and then to demand of them afterward what are their pretensions,
instead of offering them a just Reparation for the damages they have suffered,
notwithstanding the inconveniences that may follow therefrom we will not omit
to let you know at the same time, what we would not have and what we pretend.
We desire not your State should suffer the least change, that the Sovereignty
by which you Reign over your people should be in any manner weakened or
altered, and much less yet, that you should depend on any Prince neither do we
pretend any other Empire over the Sea, but such as our predecessors have at all
times incontestably possessed.

We demand only, that you should inviolably, and in every point observe the
last Treaty that was concluded between us, and that the injurious Declaration
published by your Governors in the East Indies and Africa, be suppressed and
disavow'd, as contrary to the honor of all Sovereigns and the common right of
Nations; and that besides such a Regulation of Commerce may be established in
the West Indies, that our Subjects may be secured from the insults and
oppressions to which they have at other times seen themselves exposed.

And though we propose not a Reimbursment in money to satisfy the immense
charges of the War, yet we demand a moderate Sum in consideration of the
damages, and to indemnify us for the losses we and our Subjects have suffered,
such a one as shall be judged reasonable; and moreover that security be given,
that the said Treaty shall be inviolably observed in all things as the
Mediators shall find agreeable to Reason and Justice.

In fine, we expect that in order to the promoting so pious and important a
work as is that of the Peace to be made between us, and which is to confirm and
preserve that of all Christendom, you shall depute some person to come to us to
Regulate the Preliminaries that may contribute to bring the Treaty to
perfection. This being done we doubt not but God will protect us, and that he
will turn all things to good, which will appear principally by reciprocal
Testimonies of tenderness, and on our part by the continuation of the good will
we always have had for your State; but if for particular reasons, you reject
this expedient, and that you obstinately persist against your true interests to
refuse to accept the Peace that is put into your hands, I leave it to the
public to Judge, whether of us ought to be charged, if the War continue, with
the fatal Calamities and terrible misfortunes that will accompany it, and
whether we have not done on our side, all that our honor would permit us, to
prevent them. I pray God so to dispose your Hearts as to make serious
Reflections upon the true interest of Protestants, and to consider how much it
will be exposed to the rage of its Enemies if the War continue. We Recommend
you, High and Mighty Lords, to his holy and happy protection, etc.


This Letter extremely surprised the States, they thinking it a very hard and
sensible thing to the United Provinces, that the English should pretend to have
all restored that had been taken from them, without being willing to restore
any thing they had been taken from the Dutch. The States therefore in order
once more to show all the fair appearances of Justice on their side, and of the
pretended sincere desire they had for Peace, caused remarks to be made upon the
King of Great Britain's Letter, tending to justify their Conduct, and to answer
separately to the Five points that were there advanced, and sent them to the
King joined with the following Letter.

The States Answer to the King of England's Letter of the 14th. of October 1666.
SIR,
WE have received your Majesty's Answer dated from Whitehall the 4th. of
October Old Style, or on the 14th. of October last, to the Letter we writ you
dated on the 16th. of September; and though at the very beginning of your Letter,
your Majesty endeavors to justify your Arms against this State, we believe it
to no purpose to enter actually into any dispute about that Subject, because we
are persuaded that if your Majesty would take the pains to peruse the writings
that have formerly been delivered into the hands of your Ministers, and that
have been likewise made public, that you would be undoubtedly convinced, as
well as all the World, of the Justice of our cause, and of the Motives that
engaged us to our own defense.

As to the five points in the Conclusion of your Majesty's said answer, we are
in a State to protest by the faith of men of Honor, that we have not violated
the last Treaty in any of its parts, and that we will engage for the future,
inviolably to observe the Peace, in case it be made, praying your Majesty
moreover, to set your self at rest in that respect, and to be pleased to give
order, that it be punctually observed on your part.

As to the second point, though your Majesty's Ministers and particularly Agent
Selwyn, published upon the Coasts of Africa a Declaration without
Contradiction, more imperious, and injurious, than that which ours could have
invented, and much less have put in execution, as has been made amply to appear
elsewhere, yet we have silence thereupon, and we have not been observed to make
any noise about it in the World. However, to show that we are ready to remove
that obstacle we consent that the two abovesaid Declarations shall be both
disannulled and disavow'd as well on your Majesty's part, as on ours.

To the third, that we are no less inclined than your Majesty, to consent to a
Regulation of Commerce, provided it be General and Reciprocal, being hardly
able to conceive that your Majesty would refuse in Europe and elsewhere, what
you pretend to be Equitably your due in the East- Indies.

To the fourth, that though we are so far from being in a Condition to consent to
a Re-imbursment for the charges of the War, or the damages suffered by your
Majesty or your Subjects that on the contrary, we have right to pretend the
restitutien of the Ships and effects of our good Subjects, stopped in the Harbors
or upon the Rivers of your Majesty's Kingdom, or that were taken at Sea by
surprise, upon the Coasts of England; as likewise of New-Holland, Cabo Corso,
and other places taken in Africa, without publishing before hand any
Declaration of War, and in the time when our said Ships entered into your
Majesty's Ports, trusting in the public faith of a Treaty of Peace, in
confidence in the sincere Declaration which you had caused to be several times
reiterated to us by your Ministers that resided then at the Hague, namely, that
we ought not to take any umbrage at your Majesty's Arming, nor in any manner to
apprehend the meeting of any of your Majesty's Ships of War, adding that your
Majesty should always abhor the Conduct of the usurper Cromwell toward us, and
would never enterprise any thing against the Liberty of the State, and of its
Subjects; but that if it should happen that your Majesty could receive no
satisfaction upon the Complaints that should be made to us on your part, that
as a Generous Prince you would Declare War against the State, before any Act of
Hostility were Committed. However it be, we shall be always ready to stand to
the Terms of the said Declaration, if any thing must be expected of us.

As to the fifth, which is that your Majesty would make a Difficulty to trust
to our Word or Seal, though on our side we were ready to trust to your Majesty's,
we shall readily agree to any other proposition to render it the more firm and
inviolable by the Guarantie of other Princes or States that are Friends or
Allies.

But since your Majesty testifies by your Answer above annexed, that you have
some grounds to hope to induce us to a particular Treaty, to the exclusion of
our Allies, we find our selves obliged to advertise you, that that cannot be,
and consequently, it is absolutely necessary in Order to come to a good Peace,
that your Majesty determine to treat jointly with us and our Confederates, and
that you must needs dispose your self to consent that choice be made of a
Neuter place where the Plenipotentiaries as well of the Crowns of France and
Denmark, as those of your Majesty may jointly with ours meet with all Liberty,
without which all the pains that can be taken about it, will be to no purpose,
because we are resolved to remain inseparably linkt to our Allies, and to
hearken to no proposition that may tend to break our Union, directly or
indirectly, and that with so much the more confidence because we are fully
persuaded, our Allies will remain always unshaken in the same mind. We
therefore make ardent prayers to God, to be pleased to incline your Majesty to
a thing that is a Preliminary, without which it is impossible to come to a
Peace; and we hope when affairs shall once be placed upon a good foot, we shall
have new reasons to redouble our Zeal, and to put up prayers for the prosperity
of your Majesty's reign.


However all hopes of being able to effect a Peace that year vanished to
nothing, and the United Provinces began to labor vigorously in refiting and
remanning out their Fleet. And for that end they resolved to keep their Seamen
in pay all winter that they might have their full Complements of men ready
early in the Spring. For they thought it good Policy to make that last effort
to oblige England to accept a Peace which they called just, by endeavoring to
obtain by the force of Arms, or by subtilty of intrigue, what they could not
effect by fair means.

The Ministers of the Crown of Sweden coming to the Court of England about the
latter end of the Year 1666. used all the Diligence imaginable in quality of
Mediators, to compose the Differences among the Princes that were in War. The
first Step they made in that Affair was, to prevail with the King of England,
to consent to the naming of a Neuter Place, where the Plenipotentiaries of each
Party might securely meet in order to treat of a Peace. After much Pains taken
in it, they obliged the States to write the following Letter about that Subject
to the King of England. The Respect due to that Prince, obliged the States to
make that first Advance, whilst the Ministers of Swedeland on the other side
endeavored their utmost to persuade his Majesty to grant their Demand.

The States Letter to the King of England, concerning the Nomination of a
Neuter Place.
SIR,
WE expressed to your Majesty in ours of the 26th of November, the Reasons that
hindered us from sending our Ministers to London to treat there of a Peace
jointly with the other Plenipotentiaries. And we doubt not but your Majesty,
upon a serious Reflection thereon, will be of the same Mind with us. But that
your Majesty may not think we neglect any thing on our side, that may
contribute to any thing that may be capable to advance so important a Work, and
to give you the clearest Evidences imaginable of the Sincerity of our
Intentions upon this Subject, we were willing to assure your Majesty by these
Presents, That the Instances we have made hitherto, to persuade you to name a
Neuter Place, does not at all concern our particular Interests; Nay, and we
protest, That if that Affair concerned us in particular, we would take Pride in
passing by all Formalities, by heartily consenting that our Differences might
be terminated any where, wheresoever it should please your Majesty, not
excepting England it self. But because by virtue of the Alliance in which we
are engaged with the Crowns of France and Denmark, it is impossible for us to
act otherwise, we hope your Majesty, will think good, that the Negotiation of
the Treaty may be begun and perfected elsewhere than in the Dominions of your
Majesty. We have therefore thought fit, for the facilitating so Holy a Work, to
pray your Majesty by this Letter to consider this Affair as it is really at the
Bottom, and at length to be pleased to let the Treaty be carried on in a
Neuter-place, where the Plenipotentiaries of each Party may meet. And since we
have sufficiently explained our selves thereupon, if your Majesty will but be
persuaded of the sincerity of our Sentiments, there is all Appearance, we shall
soon see the End of a Work that is the Subject of the greatest Hopes of our
People, and of the Glory of the Princes interested therein. To which we pray
God be pleased to incline your Majesty; In confidence of which we shall make
Wishes for the Prosperity of your Majesty's Reign, and the Preservation of your
Majesty's Sacred Person.


This Letter being put into the Hands of Mr. Appelboom, Resident from the King
of Swedeland, at the Hague; that Minister sent it away presently to London, to
the Ambassadors of that Crown there, who delivered it to the King of England;
who made the following Answer to the States.

The King of England's Answer to the States last Letter.
High and Mighty Lords,
HAving received yours of the 13th of this Month, by the Hands of the
Ambassador Extraordinary of the King of Sweden, by which you repeat your
pressing Instances, to induce us to name a Place where the Plenipotentiaries of
the Princes engaged in the present War may meet; and since you protest besides
that if it were not upon their Consideration, you would make no Scruple to
consent that the Congress might be in England; and on the other Side, the said
Ambassadors, Mediators, having confirmed to us the sincerity of the violent
Inclination that moves you to seek for a Peace, by praying us most earnestly to
be pleased to consent to your Demand as to the only means by which to be able
to effect the Conclusion of so Christian a Work; therefore to give you real
Marks of the Passion we have to enter into new Engagements of Peace and Union
with you, for the Good and Repose of all Christendom, and principally of the
Reformation, we not only consent that the Treaty shall be managed in a Place
whither the Ministers of your Allies may come with all Security, but further to
lay the Foundations of a new and solid Confidence, and in order to prevent the
Delays and Obstacles which will undoubtedly arise by naming any other Place,
we have resolved to send our Ambassadors to the Hague, where the
Plenipotentiaries of your Allies either actually are or may be in a little
time, to treat there all together about the so much desired Peace. And if you
be speedy in sending us a Passport for the Security of our Ambassadors they
shall go to the Hague before the end of February; assuring you, That it shall
be none of our Fault if Christendom do not soon enjoy a Peace, as well as our
own Subjects: To which we pray God to incline you, and to take you, High and
mighty Lords, into his Holy Protection.


The Hague being thus chosen by the King of England, for the Negotiation of a
Peace; the States, for particular Reasons approved not that Choice, but writ
again about that Subject, to pray him to be pleased to name another Place;
representing to him, That since his Majesty upon the Instances made to him to
persuade him to consent to a Neuter Place, had had the Goodness to do them the
Honor to will that the Peace should be treated on in their Country, they
assured themselves, That his Majesty would make no Difficulty to send his
Ministers to Mastricht, Boisleduc, Breda, etc. However the other Allied Princes
were not content neither with that last Choice; for the French King refused to
accept of the 3 Places the Hollanders had last named, and would rather have
Dover chosen for the Negotiation. The Ambassadors of Swedeland perceiving that
all those Nicities of France were not at all seasonable at that time, labored
so hard with that Court, that at last Breda was accepted, whither all the
Plenipotentiaries being come, in the Month of May, the first Conference began
in the Castle the 4th of June 1667. Surinam taken by the Zealanders.
Whilst they were busy in Regulating the Preliminaries of the Treaty, a
Squadron of Men of War that was sent by the States of Zealand into America,
under the Conduct of Commadore Kryusen, made strange Depredations there. For on
the 26th of February, they took a Castle, seated on the River of Surinam in
Guiana, where there was a considerable English Colony; they contented
themselves with obliging them to submit to the Obedience of the Hollanders, and
left them in Possession of their Goods and Estates; besides which, the
Zealanders made several other Conquests. In the mean while the English, whether
they were enfeebled by their great Losses by War, Fire and Plague, or whether
that Court was blinded by false and treacherous Counsels, which latter was most
probable, neglected to arm out their Fleet that Year, and appeared not at all
in the Channel, but in small Squadrons and Convoys. But the Dutch Fleet to the
Number of 60 Sail of Men of War, The Dutch Fleet sails out, and makes toward
the Thames.
besides those of Zealand and Friesland, which had not yet joined them, set
sail the 11th of June under the Command of Admiral de Ruiter, accompanied with
Mr. Cornelius de Wit, Deputy of the States, and Brother to the Great Pensionary
of that Name: They steered their Course toward the River of London, with a
Design not only to go and attack the English in their Harbors, but likewise to
make a Descent some where to ravage the Country. For that effect they held a
Council of War to consult by what means they might run some light Frigates a
considerable way up the River, to go and burn the English Ships that were
there. Lieutenant Admiral de Gent was chosen for that Expedition, for which
they gave him the Command of a Squadron formed out of the Detachments made from
the Grand Fleet. It was composed of 6 Men of War, 1 Advice-yacht, and 2
Fireships of the Admiralty of the Meuse; of 11 Men of War, 4 Advice-Yachts, and
2 Fireships of the Admiralty of Amsterdam, and 13 Galliots. The next Morning,
being the 19th of June, Lieutenant Admiral de Gent, and Mr. de Wit, Deputy of
the States, went up the Thames at the Head of that Detachment, and by an
Enterprise they went so much the boldlier upon, because they were well
informed, They should meet with little Opposition, revenged the Mischief the
English had done before in the Isles of Vlie, and Schelling; as appears by the
Report the said Mr. de Wit made of that Action to the States, Cornelius de
Wit's Letter to the States, about the Duthc going up the River of Thames.
in the Letters he writ them on that subject; the substance of which imported,
That on the 17th instant the Dutch Fleet coming to an Anchor at the Mouth of
the Thames, as they were consulting with the general Officers of the Fleet,
what Enterprise to go upon, having received Advice by a Pilot of a Norway Ship,
coming from London, That 10 or 12 English Frigates, carrying from 30 to 40 Guns
apiece, together with about 20 Merchant Ships, outward bound to the Barbados,
were riding at Anchor in the Hope, near Gravesend, it was resolved they should
go and attack them, and to endeavor to destroy or take them. And for that
effect a Detachment was made from the Fleet, of 17 Light Frigates, 5
Advice-yachts, some Galliots, and some Boats. That on the 19th, about 4 in the
Morning, the Wind being turned about to the South-West, they were forced to
luff, and afterward constrained by that contrary Wind to cast Anchor: Hope,
which gave Time to the English Ships to escape away. However, to Day, continues
he, about Noon, as the Tide begun to come in, we advanced as far as the Mouth
of the River of Chattam. We presently gave Order to the Land-Troops and Marine
Soldiers to make a Descent, and to attack the Fort of Sheerness; In the mean
while we advanced with our Men of War, and anchored before the same Fort. At
our Approach, one of the King's Frigates with some other Vessels, The Fort of
Sheerness taken.
and some Fireships that were there, betook themselves to Flight, and the Men
in the Fort ran away likewise before our Troops got thither; so that after the
Fort had been cannonaded about an Hour and an half, our Seamen scaled it to
pull down from thence the English Banner. We found there 15 Pieces of Cannon,
which we carried off to our Ships; and a great Magazine of Masts, Yards, and in
general of all Necessaries for the Rigging of Ships, valued at near 400000
Livers. We gave Order to all our Captains, to carry each of them on Board them
a good quantity, and to set Fire to the rest. Because the most part of our
Land-Troops were separated from us by the foul Weather, the General Officers
thought not fit to engage themselves too far up the Country with so few People,
or else they might have done a great deal of Mischief. We are however of
Opinion, to keep the River of London blocked up, and to hinder the Passage of
Ships there as much as it is possible for us. And for that effect, Lieutenant
Admiral de Ruiter is to come up and join us with the Main Body of the Fleet.

All those happy Successes were further seconded by a much more mischievous
Expedition, in which several English Men of War were burnt in the River of
Rochester, as you may find by the following Letter.

High and Mighty Lords,
De Wit's second Letter to the States.
SInce my last of the 10th, by which I informed your High and Mightinesses of
the taking of Sheerness, we have received fresh Marks of God's Protection, by
several glorious. Advantages we have newly obtained. After we had detached away
some Advice-Yachts, and several Boats armed, to go and sound the Passage from
hence to Chattam, we resolved to send up thither to Day Lieutenant Admiral de
Gent's Squadron; and accordingly by the Favor of a good North-East Wind, we
unmoored from Sheerness at 6 in the Morning. About Noon we arrived near some
English First-Rate Men of War, having on Board them very brave Guns, and being
very well manned, who made a Show at first as if they would make a brisk
Defense; but as soon as we had burnt 4 or 5 of them, some of the others were
deserted, so that we took them. I cannot at present give you a particular
Account what Ships perished by the Flames; but I know very well, that the Royal
Charles, carrying 90 Brass Guns, and another carrying a like Number, fell into
our Hands. There are still 4 or 5 more a little above us, against which we have
sent some of ours, and because there is a very great Consternation among the
English, we doubt not but to take them. According to the Advices we have had of
the Enemy, they have sunk 16 or 18 Ships, the most part Fireships, to block up
the Passage of the River against us: But in spite of all these Precautions, our
Ships are passed up, and we flatter our selves with the Hopes to bring along
with us those which we shall have taken. We are in the Resolution to wait here
your High and Mightinesses Orders, that we may be able to regulate what we are
to do more; thanking God for having so powerfully protected our Arms to the
Destruction of our Enemies, which makes us conceive new Hopes of Peace, to the
Advantage of our Nation, or at least we can boast to have had the Glory to
ruin their Forces in such a manner, that if the War continues, they will be no
longer in a condition to hurt us, and we shall have no reason to fear them any
more: Which we: passionately wish, and at the same time all sort of Prosperity
to the State.


On the 23d of June Mr. de Wit sent some other Dispatches to the States, to
inform them of several remarkable Circumstances, which were not before come to
his Knowledge, and added thereto the sequel of so many happy Progresses. He
informed them, that the Bed of the River was so narrow, that there could but
one Ship pass along it abreast, and that the English fired so hotly from their
Artillery, that none of the Hollanders durst advance to go near them any more:
But that Captain Brakel, belonging to the College of the Admiralty of Roterdam,
offering himself to that Service, made appear, that nothing is impossible to a
great Courage. For though he commanded but a sorry Frigate, ill manned and
equipped, yet he undertook alone to go up and burn the English Men of War, so
that being advanced with all imaginable Resolution, without firing a Gun, he
endured all the Enemies greatest Fire. He was scarcely arrived within Musket
shot of an English Man of War, but that he fired a Broadside at her, and
falling upon her at the same time, by the Favor of the Wind, grappled her and
took her, with the Loss only of 3 Men. A Dutch Fireship grappled likewise
another English Man of War of 52 Guns and burnt her. That Disaster struck such
a Consternation into the Enemies, that a part of the Royal Charles's Men fled
away, and the rest jumped into the Water. We took with the Help of our Boats,
without any Resistance, another English Ship, called Charles the Fi^th of 50
Guns, but being grappled by one of our Fireships, she blew up in the night.
The ship called the Fort of Hunningen being deserted by her men that fled away
in Boats was taken: she carried 70 Brass Guns; but she was unfortunately burnt
contrary to the Orders we had given. This loss was followed with that of
another very considerable English Ship which we likewise destroyed with the
Flames. Yesterday we perceived 3 more above us which we hope to destroy to day;
the Water was so low that it was impossible for us to get up to them. However
the North wind continuing to blow, and the rest of our Fireships that were
scattered from the Flag being veer'd back again toward the Admiral, we gave
them orders to go up and burn them. And though it seemed, that Vpton Castle
situated upon the River side, might have opposed that enterprise, because the
passage being very narrow in that place, our men must have been forced to have
endured its fire, yet in spite of all those obstacles, the business was carried
on with so much prudence, that we burnt them to day about 3 in the afternoon.
Those 3 Ships were the most considerable in all the English Navy, they were
named the Loyal London, the Royal James, and the Loyal Oak. Mr. de Wit adds in
the close, We have obtained, says he, all these Glorious advantages hitherto
without the loss of above 150 men. We are at present resolved to go down the
River, to join the Main Body of our Fleet. According to the advices we have,
all the Kingdom is in Alarm, and they are there Assembling a great Number of
Troops; But all that is not able to intimidate us. However because most of our
Fireships have been spent, we pray the States to give Order that we may have
more. All our Officers both General and Inferior have Signalized themselves,
and given proofs of an unparallelled Bravery. Lieutenant Admiral Aylva's
Squadron, has joined the Admiral's Flag, so that the Fleet is Reinforced with a
Considerable Number of Ships of War, and we have nothing more to do but to put
up prayers for the continuation of the prosperities with which it has pleased
God hitherto to bless the Arms of the State.

The Duke of York and General Monk were the melancholic Spectatours of the
Expedition, and according to the report of some Prisoners, they had been but
the day before on Board those 3 Ships that were last burnt. Retiring to
Rochester they were in an unconceivable vexation, to see the Finest and Richest
Ships of all their Fleet destroyed so strangely, and they in no Condition to
put a stop to those terrible Ravages of the Hollanders. There were several
other Ships and Fireships likewise lost, which the English themselves sunk in
the River of Chattam, on purpose to stop the Hollanders passage, and besides
them were lost 8 of the most considerable men of War in the whole English
Fleet: Which made both Court and Country exclaim against those pernicious
Counselors that had advised the King to be amused so far with the hopes of a
Peace, as to venture to treat without Sword in hand, and after so great a
Victory as he had had the last time over the Dutch to be persuaded under
pretense of saving Money, not to put his Fleet out, when it was so necessary
for the obtaining an advantageous Peace, and of preserving the Honor and
Reputation the Nation had gotten at so dear an expense in two consecutive Dutch
Wars, which now was by one of the greatest oversights imaginable in Policy
obscured and tarnisht all at one blast, and never since recovered it self
altogether to its former Luster.

Those surprising and heavy mischiefs much Alarmed and imbittered the people.
So that an insurrection was feared in Kent, and about Rochester. Upon which the
Duke of York, and General Monk apprehending least those glowing Sparks might if
not timely quenched kindle into an Universal Conflragation that might endanger
the Government, thought it best to stifle them in time by sending with speed a
good Body of Troops both Horse and Foot, down to the Coasts, as well to awe the
Mutinous People as to oppose the Hollanders. However the whole Storm of the
public discontent fell afterward upon Chancellor Hyde, as being the reputed
Author of those Counsels that were supposed to have caused all those ill
successes, so that he was forced to fly into Exile, to avoid a worse destiny,
from which the King his Master could not have protected him without exposing
himself to the extremest danger. In the mean while the Common Opinion among
the People in Holland was, that these new attempts instead of disposing the
States to a Peace would have kindled fiercer flames of War, and have made the
two Nations irreconcilable; But experience quickly showed the contrary the
Negoation for Peace at Breda, was thereupon all on a sudden further advanced
than it had been in many conferences before.

On the 25th. of the Month, it was resolved in a Council of War held on board
the Fleet, to detach away Lieutenant Admiral de Gent with a Squadron of 22 Sail
of Men of War and Fireships, toward the North, as well to endeavor to seize
upon the Isle of Hitland, as to cruize for the Ships that were expected from
the East- Indies. But as for De Ruiter with the Rest of the Fleet, they went
and Anchoured before the Isle of Sheppey, where they Landed Four or Five
hundred men, who advanced into the Country without Resistance, and brought off
to the Fleet, a great quantity of Refreshments of all sorts.

The Count de Hoorn was afterward sent with his Regiment on board the Fleet,
and de Ruiter received orders, to remount the Thames, in order to attempt some
further enterprise. For which effect, Lieutenant Admiral Bankert who was newly
come to the Fleet with a Reinforcement of some Ships from Zealand, was
Commanded with a Squadron of 14 of the lightest Ships, and 2 Fireships to
advance near Gravesend, and do all the mischief he could. But that new
enterprise had no success, but only served to augment the consternation that
was already among the inhabitants of London, because the English had sunk so
many Ships to stop up the passage of the Thames, that it was impossible for the
Dutch to make any advance; and besides the Batteries of Great Cannon that were
raised all along on both sides the River fired so hotly upon the Ships that
ventured within their reach, that Bankert was forced to retire, and veer back
toward the Admiral.

The Fleet then having been Reinforced by the Troops brought by the Count de
Hoorn, the Generals thought fit to attack the Fort near Harwich, the principal
Circumstances of which Action are Related in the Letter Mr. de Wit writ
concerning it to the States, of which here follows the extract.

I Having represented to all the Officers of the fleet that it was fit the
States Troops should be employed in some remarkable Expedition, Harwich Fort^st
^^med.
and several Persons in the Fleet pretending they had particular knowledge of
the Fort of Harwich, the General Officers thereupon resolved to detach 1600
Land-Soldiers and 400 Seamen, under the Conduct of Rear Admiral Vlug, and the
Captains Swart and Luz, and that being divided into equal Companies at 12 in a
Company, 4 of each Company should be chosen to throw Granado's, and the rest
should carry Scaling-Ladders, and Axes to cut down the Palisado's, if they met
with any. Things being thus ordered, we caused Vice Admiral Evertsz to advance
with 14 men of War, 1 Advice Yacht, and two Fireships, to attack the fort on
one side, which Squadron was divided into two Parts. And Rear Admiral Van Nes
had order to enter the Bay with 6 men of War, to approach nearer the fort,
whilst Vice Admiral Evertsz should vigorously attack it on another side. When
the signal was given the Troops were transported to shore in Boats and
Galliots, with all imaginable speed. Observing, that Vice Admiral Evertsz who
was to attackt the fort before, kept at too great a distance from the Ramparts,
and that Rear-Admiral Van Nes went not into the Haven, as had been projected,
we Resolved, de Ruiter and I, to go up to them, and make them advance. But when
we came there, we found it impossible for Vice Admiral Evertsz to get any
nearer, and upon the Report made to us by the Soldiers we sent to Van Nes, that
there was no going in on that side, the Boom being cut, we resolved to send in
some Boats to sound the passage, but the Tide going off, and a Calm coming on,
it was impossible to execute any thing. Evertsz approach^ng as near the
Ramparts as he could possibly, fired at the fort, but the shot he made had but
very little effect, because it was almost out of his reach: Whereas the Castle
fired vigorously on their side upon his men of War. When we saw nothing
considerable could be done on that side, de Ruiter and I took a Boat and went
on shore to the Troops there, which we found there drawn up in order of Battle,
and waiting till the men of War were got in: And after we had related to them
the obstacles we met with, we resolved to make them advance and to attack the
fort vigorously by Land, since 'twas impossible to do it by Water. The Generals
thought fit to leave a body of foot under the Conduct of the Count de Hoorn, to
guard a certain passage, as well to secure our Boats as preven^ the Enemies
from falling upon us behind. When all things were ready we marched our Troops
toward the fort, and when we were come very nigh it the Seamen that carried
the Scaling Ladders, had others to advance; in the mean while, the Enemy fired
so terribly with their small arms both from the Fort, and from a Galliot that
was in the Harbor, that our Officers, after they had examined more nearly the
works of the Fort, finding there was no appearance of their being able to take
it, resolved to Retire; which was done in good Order. The body of Foot that was
posted to guard the passage was vigorously attackt by the Enemies Horse and
Foot, but were received so briskly by them, that after a long and obstinate
fight, they were forced to retire with loss.

That attempt having thus failed, de Ruiter advanced higher up the River and
made the Ships of his fleet bespread the whole breadth of it that they quite
blockt up its passage. Rear-Admiral Vander Zaan was ordered to stay with 8 men
of War, at the mouth of the Harbor of Harwich, to observe the Enemies Ships
coming or going to and from the Northward, and Vice Admiral Evertsz, and Star
were sent toward the North-Foreland, to hinder the English from coming in on
that side.

In the mean while this strange and indirect proceeding of the States Forces
made a great change in the Negotiation for Peace that was managing at Breda.
For the States Plenipotentiaries stuck not to say, That the advantages their
Arms had newly obtained, might perhaps make their Masters alter their minds;
That however they consented to conclude a Peace upon the conditions that had
been presented, but that they could not answer for its Ratification. And that
it was not to be imagined, the States and their Allies should stand to the
offers that had been made, if God cont^nued to bless their Arms with new
Conquests. The Dutch Aiming by that Declaration, to oblige the English to make
choice of one or the other of the propositions that had been made them, viz.
That each party should either render back Reciprocally what they had taken or
else keep on both sides what they had. And the King of England's
Plenipotentiaries appeared likewise much more inclinable to Peace than they had
done before, and the Differences as well with the States, as with the Kings of
France and Denmark were at last terminated on the 10th. of July; save only that
Mr. Coventry one of His Britannick Majesty's Plenipotentiaries was obliged to
go back with all speed to London to get some points agreed to, which it was not
in their power to decide.

The news of a Conclusion of the Peace was brought to the Fleet the 14th. of
the same month, and yet because it was not fully ratified, such was then the
insolence of the then Lovestenian Government, for which they afterward paid
dear, that orders were sent for all that, next day to de Ruiter, to continue
still to do all the mischief he could upon the English Coasts, because the
Peace was not yet fully concluded. Upon that advice the Fleet was divided the
same day into 2 Squadrons, whereof 1 under the Command of Lieutenant Admiral
Van Nes, was ordered to block up the River of Thames, and the other under the
Command of de Ruiter in person Quitted the Thames to go a cruizing along the
Channel to infest the several Ports of the Kingdom there.

On the 18th de Ruiter's Squadron passed the Strait of Callis, and the next day
advanced right against the Singels without meeting any Ship. But the English
Barbado's and Smirna Fleets which they had flattered themselves with the hopes
of taking, were got safe into Port before they could reach them. Seeing then
they had mist their desired prey, they resolved next to attack Torbay, where
there were 2 Merchant Ships. Which enterprise put all the Coasts of England so
much the more in alarm, because de Ruiter having divided his Squaron into
several bodies, made them appear in several places at one time, which so
perplexed the English that they knew not which way to bend their Force to hinder
a descent. On the 8th of August, having received a Reinforcement of 7 men of
War, and 8 Fireships, he sailed as far as Plymouth, upon advice he had
received that a good Number of English men of War were there assembling. The
next day toward evening, a Boat came out of Plymouth carrying a White Flag,
which came directly to de Ruiter to tell him the News of a Peace. There were in
it two English Colonels accompanied with two other Gentlemen who came on board
the Admiral, and told him that Peace was Concluded between England, and the
United Provinces; after which they made him great protestations of Amity,
praying him to order all Acts of Hostility to cease. They complained at the
same time of the fight that had newly happened on the Thames between Lieutenant
Admiral Van Nes, and some of the King's Ships; and how that, contrary to the
Peace, many of their Ships had been endamaged, and several Fireships burnt to
Ashes, etc. But de Ruiter without taking any notice of all those Compliments,
thought not fit to discontinue his Enterprise as believing the States would not
have failed to have informed him of so great a piece of News, if things had
been really so as the English pretended.

Lieutenant Admiral Van Nes having received orders from the States, to remount
the River of London and to go and attack the English men of War and Fireships
that were in the Hope, and to keep the English in a perpetual alarm, set sail
accordingly with his Squadron, on the 2d. of August and found there Admiral
Spragg with 5 Frigates, 17 Fireships, and a great many small Vessels. The
principal Circumstances of the fight that happened between them on that occasion,
are Related in the following Letter written by Lieutenant Admiral Van Meppelen,
who led the Vanguard.

A fight in the Thames between Admiral Sprag and the Dutch Squadron under
Lieutenant Admiral Van Nes.
UPon the advice we had, that 5 of the King's Frigates whereof the biggest
carried 54 Guns, 16 or 18 Fireships, and a good Number of small Vessels were
riding a little below Gravesend, we resolved to go and attack them. I led the
Van, and Captain Naalhout was Commanded with 8 Fireships, to go and begin the
attack. I following him close with five men of War, and was backed by
Lieutenant Admiral Van Nes. At our approach the Enemies hoisted their Sails,
and staid in their post till we came near their Fireships that were at Anchor;
we pressed them so closely, that some of them in a fit of despair, cut their
Anchor-Cables and retired toward the King's Frigates who likewise began to
fly. Captain Naalhout fell upon them with so much Courage, that he forced them
to veer back toward their Fireships who enclosed them so round, and kept so
close to them, that it was Difficult to come near any of them. Then a Calm
coming on, the small English Vessels fired so many shot at our Fireships, that
we were forced to quit some of them, after we had set fire to them, and there
were two of them set on fire and burnt by the Guns of the English. But as soon
as the Wind began to rise a little they all betook themselves to flight, and we
chaced them as far as under the very Fort of Gravesend which fired fiercely
upon us, with its Cannon. We Anchored with our whole Squadron in the same place
from which we had chased them, and we lost in that Action 11 Fireships, so
that there was but one left us, and the English lost 7.

On the next day being the 3d. of August, we perceived the Enemies coming down
the River, and making toward us. We therefore quitted our post, and as we were
retiring, because the only Fire-Ship we had left, run a ground and that it was
impossible to save it, we set it on fire toward Evening. The English were
already got very near us with their Fireships; we received them vigorously,
and both sides continued firing at one another, till we cast Anchor, and then
the English quitted us. The next day we advanced so fast, that by the good
Conduct of Lieutenant Admiral Van Nes, we were out of danger of running a
ground. However, the English left not off following us, in Hopes to burn the
first of our Ships that should have run aground; But we gave them chase again
about the dusk of the Evening.

On the 5th. of August in the morning, we descried 21 Sail making toward us
with a fresh East-North-East Gale, which we easily discovered to be the English
come out of Harwich. They had 5 Frigates, 14 Fireships, and 2 Galliots.
Whereupon Lieutenant Admiral Van Nes held a Council, and it was resolved we
should cast Anchor, and manfully to stand the Enemies shock, in spite of the
danger we exposed our selves to of losing some Ships. As soon as they got near
enough to us, the first motion they made, was to come and fall upon Captain
Naalhout to endeavor to burn him; but he hastily weighing up his Anchor,
vigorously Repulsed two Fireships that were coming to grapple him, and escaped
as 'twere by Miralce. The Rear-Admiral of Zealand was very near being burnt,
but he escaped the danger by Repulsing the Fire-Ship with his Guns.

The Number of Fireships that were destroyed as well on the English as the
Dutch side, was very near equal. After that Rencounter Lieutenant Admiral Van
Nes returned to his post to keep the River blockt up, as he had done before.

A Peace was at last Concluded the last day of July. And Admiral de Ruiter
having received advice that the Ratifications were exchanged on both sides, the
25th. of the same month, and thereupon the Peace was accordingly Proclaimed,
ordered all Acts of Hostility to cease. Such was the end of the Second War the
United Provinces had with England; which was terminated indeed by a Peace, but
such a one, alas that was but of small duration, since scarce had those two
Powers laid down their Arms, but they were forced to take them up again, as
will appear in the sequel of our History.

THE LIFE OF Cornelius Tromp, Lieutenant Admiral of Holland and of
West-Friesland. The Fourth BOOK.
HOlland and its Allies began now to taste the Fruits of Peace; England,
Swedeland, The Tripple League.
and the United Provinces entered into a strict Alliance together, at the
beginning of the Year 1668. The States foreseeing, that France would not fail
to conceive an Umbrage at it, and that Ambitious Crown being Jealous at all the
precautions taken by those Powers for their own security, might afterward
perhaps endeavor to seek its Revenge upon some of them, thought it necessary
to secure themselves from that danger, by Uniting themselves more strictly with
England which they did by a Defensive Alliance with Sir William Temple
Ambassador from his Britannick Majesty at the Hague. The first good effect that
Tripple-Alliance produced, was to put a stop to the rapid Course of the
usurpations of France in the Low Countries, by setting bounds to its Ambition.

For the French King knew so well how to make his advantage of the late War
between England and Holland, which he had fomented for his own ends, that he
took that opportunity, to surprise the weak Spaniards then under an infant
King, and to wrest several important places from them in the Low Countries,
contrary to the Faith of the Treaties on foot between the two Crowns. But the
Triple-Alliance forced him to lay down his Arms, so that on the 2d. of May, a
Peace was Concluded between France and Spain at Aix la Chappelle.

After that, the French King being much disgusted at the Conduct of the States,
never left off to seek out occasion to show his fierce Resentment. The first
step he thought fit to make toward it, was to endeavor to break the Famous,
and by him so much dreaded Tripple-Alliance, by dividing the Princes that were
engaged in it. The disgraceful Ravages and Spoils the Hollanders had so
unfairly committed on the English Coasts, but chiefly at Chattam, at a time of
a Treaty of Peace, as likewise some new difficulties about Navigation and
Commerce, furnished him with a hopeful pretense, enough to work withal upon the
King of England; there wanted only a dextrous Person to be chosen that might be
fit to persuade his Britannick Majesty. And as the French have always been
successful in employing the Ministry of Females in their most important
Negotiations, because they are more insinuating, and flatter generally with a
more powerful and irresistible influence than men; so accordingly the Duchess
of Orleans, Sister to that Prince, was pitched upon to pass to the Court of
England, to manage that nice affair. She set out then in the month of June
1670, 1670.
accompanied with a great many French Lords, under pretense of making a visit
to the King her Brother. The States were not long before they perceived what
blow the French were designing at them. For they well enough foresaw that the
Voyage of the Duchess was intended only to break the Tripple-League; And they
had certain Advice, that the French King was preparing to march with a
powerful Army toward Dunkirk early in the Spring; besides all that, they made
no Difficulty to say publicly at Stockholm, that if the French King should
attack the United Provinces upon any other pretense than that of the Triple
League, that Swedeland would not be obliged to assist them.

The French Court, without declaring themselves openly had already begun to
Commit a sort of Hostility, by laying excessive imposts upon all Dutch
Merchandises imported into that Kingdom. The States having Complained of it
several times with no effect, resolved at last to retaliate that usage, by
forbidding the importing any Brandy or French Manufactures into their
Dominions, hoping by that means to oblige the most Christian King to alter his
proceedings. And because the march of the French Army toward Dunkirk put them
in some apprehension for the Low Countries, the States resolved also to have a
powerful Fleet at Sea under the Command of Admiral de Ruiter both to secure
their Commerce, and to observe the motions of the French. And besides they
Solicited England likewise to put a Fleet to Sea, to join with theirs,
according to the obligations of the Tripple-League: But King Charles gave them
already to understand, that he had quite different aims.

On the 8th. of June 1671. de Ruiter sailed out of the Mense with some men of
War, toward Ostend, near which place, his Fleet was to Rendesvouz. It
consisted of 46 men of War, 10 Advice-Yachts, and 6 Fireships. It carried 2379
Guns, 8090 Seamen, and 2768 Soldiers; and was divided into 3 Squadrons, the
first under the immediate Command of de Ruiter, the second under that of
Lieutenant Admiral Bankert, and the third under the Conduct of
Lieutenant-Admiral de Gent. Whilst the Fleet was cruizing upon the Coasts of
the Netherlands, it was on the 20th. of August overtaken with a violent
Tempest, by which several Ships were endamaged, and that of Admiral de Ruiter
was one of the worst treated. Two days after, he went and Anchored near
Westkappel, to Repair and Refit his shattered Ships; from whence he discovered
a Yacht, called the Merlin, which carried the King of England's Flag on her
Main-Mast-Top. She was come out of the Meuse and going back for England, and as
she passed throw the Dutch Fleet she saluted de Ruiter with some Guns, but he
being busy in Refiting his Ship, could not make use of his Guns to answer his
salute. Lieutenant-Admiral de Gent perceiving it, rendered the King's Yacht the
Honors due to her with a salute of 7 Guns: And in the mean while Admiral de
Ruiter having made have to get his ready, saluted likewise with 9 Guns; but the
English made him no return. At the same time setting Sail^, he summoned on
board him all the General Officers and Captains of the fleet to inform him what
damage they had suffered by the late ill Weather. And then it was that
Lieutenant Admiral de Gent told him, that after he had returned his salute to
the Kings Yacht, the English Captain fired twice at him with Bullets, because
he refused to strike his Flag; that thereupon he sent his Captain on Board the
Yacht to know of the Commander the reasons that oliged him to act in that
manner, and that hearing that Madam Temple was on board her, because he had had
the honor to visit her at her lodging at the Hague, where she had treated him
with great civilities, he was minded to go on board the Yacht himself to pay
her his Respects; and that as he went in, he told the Captain very civilly,
That as for an affair of so great an importance as that was, to strike his Flag
to one of the King's Yachts, upon their own Coasts, truly without an Express
Order, he durst not do it, but that if his Britannick Majesty had reason to
pretend any such thing, the difference ought to be decided between his Majesty
and the States; and that after that discourse, they parted good friends,
Notwithstanding which, that Rencounter by the French was made the Subject of so
much noise and blustering in England, that the States found they had reason to
apprehend very mischievous Consesequences from it.

The Campaign the most Christian King was to make near Dunkirk having ended in
a bare review of his Army; The States thought the Spanish Low Countries had
nothing to fear that year, and therefore they resolved to call home their
Fleet, to prevent the Tempests that begun already to reign. And accordingly
Admiral de Ruiter had orders to retire on the 21st. of September and the 23d of
the same month, the Fleet went into Port, to be Disarmed and laid up.

In the mean while the designs France had formed against the Netherlands, begun
to break out, as likewise the intelligence the King of England had with that
Crown; And the States were informed from good hands, what Springs the French
King had set on work to break the Triple League, and that to induce King
Charles to break out or it, he promised to put into the field an Army of 100000
men, and to set out to Sea a Fleet of 40 Sail of men of War. But however the
English on their side to lull asleep the States, gave them good words.

At the beginning of the Year 1672, Merlin Yacht was revived again. And Sir
George Downing was sent to the Hague from his British Majesty, to make
Complaint of it, and to demand Reparation; adding, that Lieutenant Admiral de
Gent ought to be punished. And though the 19th. Article of the Treaty at Breda,
That men of War, or Merchants Ships belonging to the United Provinces, when
they shall meet any of the King of England's Ships of War in the British Seas,
shall be obliged to strike their Flag, and lower their main Topsails as was
formerly practiced Yer Sir George Downing would needs maintain, against the
Commissioners appointed to treat with him, that the business of the Flag was
not to be taken from the Treaty of Breda, but from an Ancient right; and that
the civilities they rendered one another, were all times to be Reciprocal, etc.
Some days after, he delivered in a writing wherein it was asserted, That the
Empire of the Sea belonged to the English: That not only every single Ship was
obliged to strike their Flag, but even whole Fleets: That Lieutenant Admiral de
Gent had failed in his Duty, and ought to be punished, etc. All the Reasons the
States could allege, would not satisfy Sir George Downing, nor stop his hasty
departure.

The States likewise employed all imaginable means to satisfy the French King,
but that Prince had taken so strong a Resolution to make War, that nothing was
able to divert him from it. Whereupon the States seeing plainly, that all those
Preparations were making against the United Provinces, and that the Netherlands
were going to be made the Theater of a terrible War, they begun to provide for
themselves, by raising a Fund to defray the vast expenses they were like to be
engaged in. And after deliberations, the Prince of Orange was Created Captain
General of the Armies of the State the 24th of February, upon certain
conditions not necessary to be inserted here. The States having enjoyed Peace
by Land near 24 years, their Landforces were so accustomed to Idleness, that
they were not like the same men; and too long a rest had effeminated the
Spirits of the Soldiers, that there was no Reliance to be made upon their
Service. Therefore Orders were given for new Levies and endeavors were used to
make Alliances with the Neighboring Princes for Auxiliary Troops. They used
all diligence to fit out a Fleet of 48 Capital men of War, and 24 Fireships,
besides Galliots and other small Tenders; which Number was afterward
considerably Augmented.

In the mean while, the English put out a Fleet of 38 men of War, divided into
three Squadrons; and the States Agent named de Clarges, having discovered, that
their design was to go and meet, and attack the Dutch Smirna Fleet, one of the
richest they ever had yet, used his best Policy to disappoint the English; and
for that effect dispatched away several Galliots from Callis, to go and give
the Smirna men notice of it in the Spanish Seas; so that upon that Advice, they
took their Precautions for their own defense. They were to the Number of 72
sail, including among them 6 men of War, that were their Convoy. When they were
come as far as the middle of the Channel a Squadron of 9 English Frigates, The
Dutch Smirna Fleet attackt by the English.
and 3 Yachts under the Command of Sir Robert Holms, came and attackt them.

On the 24th. of March. At the sight of the English, the Merchant Fleet threw
themselves into the form of a Crescent, and maintained the fight so vigorously
for some hours, that Sir Robert Holms was forced to retire from them toward
night but the next day having received a Reinforcement of 4 or 5 men of War
more, he came up with them again, and charged them a fresh, but with no better
luck then at the first time, and the whole Smirna Fleet had escaped, had not
the English, upon the renewing the fight a third time, happened to take one of
the Convoy Ships whose Captain was killed, which was the cause of the loss 4
Merchant Ships which were cut off from a Squadron that were put into some
Disorder, such was the end of that fight; And that was all the advantage the
English gained over them. But the main body of that Merchant Fleet, got in at
length safe into the Ports of Holland. The Captains, de Nes and de Haas, who
commanded there in chief, lost their lives there, and Captain du Bois had his
Left hand shot off

The French King Declared War against the United Provinces the same day. The
pretense of which Declaration was, That the displeasure his Majesty had
received from the Conduct of the States General of the United Provinces for
some time past toward him, was come to such a height, that his Majesty could
no longer dissemble his Resentment, without prejudice to his Glory, and that a
proceeding so very unsuitable to the great obligations the States had to his
Majesty, and to other Kings his predecessors, had at last provoked him to take
a Resolution to make War against them by Sea and Land, etc.

The motives that induced the Bishop of Munster and Elector of Cologne to join
with France likewise in a War against the States, were not much better founded
then those of the French King. The King of Swedeland being then but very young,
had not experience enough to avoid suffering himself to be imposed upon by the
promises of France, quitted likewise the Engagements he had with his Allies, in
prejudice to the Tripple-League.

The United Provinces then seeing themselves thus without any second, and all
alone engaged in a danger of a very fo^midable aspect, fell into Great
extreamities. For the French King entering their Country with a very Numerous
and well disciplined Army, took Town after Town without Resistance; whilst the
Bishop of Munster, and Elector of Cologne, attackt the States on another side,
and finding the places open, were no less Victorious than their Great Allie. In
fine, such was the rapidity of their progresses, that of seven Provinces, three
were already fallen into the hands of the Enemies; And if the affairs of the
United Provinces had succeeded so desperately ill at Sea, as they had done at
Land, it may be said, that in all humane appearance, they had been
irretrievably lost. For after such great losses, what could they expect but a
Total Ruin? but because those Events do but indirectly concern our Subject,
and that they have been already very largely and fully related by several
Historians, we shall leave them to return to speak only of the Actions that
happened at Sea.

They had wrought with so much diligence in arming out the Fleet in Holland,
that it was ready on the 9th. of May, to set sail. And the vigilence and care
of Admiral de Ruiter, and Pensionary de Wit, contributed very much to that
successful advance. It set sail then under the Conduct of Admiral de Ruiter
and Cornelius de Wit. Deputy of the States, consisting of 67 sail, which Number
was soon was soon after Augmented, by a Reinforcement of several Ships more. On
the 14th. day of the same month, the two Fleets of England and France joined
likewise near the Isle of Wight; And the same day the Dutch Fleet sailed
toward the Coasts of Great Britain, where they Anchored till the 7th. of June
being Composed then of 91 men of War, 44 Fireships, and 23 Advice-Yachts,
making in all, 158 sail. Then weighing Anchor they arrived at break of day at
Solbay. The Confederate Fleets that were above 100 sail strong of men of War,
had as the Dutch Relations Represent things, several times already avoided
Battle. But the Hollanders having discovered themselves, presented them so
unexpectedly and suddenly before the bay, that several of the Enemies Ships
were forced to cut their Anchor-Cables to get out to range themselves timely in
a Line of Battle. A fight between de Ruiter and the English and French Fl^ets.
The two Royal Fleets were likewise divided into three Squadrons. The Duke of
York, as Lord High Admiral of the Kingdom, had the Command of the main Battle,
or of the Red Squadron; The Count d' Etrees Vice Admiral of France Commanded
the Right Wing, or the White Squadron; and Admiral Mountague Earl of Sandwich,
had the Conduct of the Left Wing, or Blue Squadron. Admiral de Ruiter disposed
himself to attack the Red Squadron; Lieutenant Admiral Bankert the White, and
Lieutenant Admiral de Gent the Blue one. De Ruiter advanced his Squadron, and
came up and posted himself within Pistol shot Right against the Duke of York,
and fired a broadside at him, which he returned again with the like. The two
Admirals continued thundering at one another, with continual discharges for
about 2 hours, till they were both much shattered. But at last, the Duke of
York's Flag, with the main Topmast to which it was fastened, being shot down,
he was forced to remove, and put up his Flag in another Ship, called the
London. Lieutenant Admiral Van Nes, seconded by some other Ships, made right up
to the Vice Admiral of the Red; both of them kept with their head to the North
in charging: But a Calm coming on, they could make no more motion with any
advantage to themselves. However they continued firing at one another all the
while without intermission. The Royal Catharine an 80 Gun Ship, Commanded by
Captain Chichly, falling near Van Nes's Ship, he gave order to his men to seize
and take her, ^ut a little time after Van Nes had quitted her to return to the
fight, the Dutch that were put on board to keep her, begun to pillage, so that
the English that were left in her, knew so well to make their advantage of that
opportunity, that they retook her again, and carried her back into England.
Captain Brakel did that day, without having received any order for it, one of
the Boldest and most Heroic Actions in the World. For at the very beginning of
the battle, whilst the Wind continued to blow still a soft Gale, coming out of
de Ruiter's Squadron, followed by a Fire ship, he tackt to the Northward, and
fell upon the Earl of Sandwich, Admiral of the Blue Squadron: He made up to him
without firing so much as one Gun, enduring all the furious discharges of his
Enemy, and of several other English Ships that were about him. And when he was
got very near the Royal James he fired a whole broadside at her so effectually,
that a moment after there was nothing to be heard from her but the lamentable
cries of a great Number of poor wounded wretches not to speak of those that
were killed with shot or splinters. But that which sets of the Glory of that
Action with so much the more Luster, is, that Brakel's Ship, called the Grand
Holland, carried not above 300 men, and 62 Guns, whereas the Royal James
carried above 104, and 1000 men so that this compared to the other appeared but
like a small Boat. Yet Brakel attackt her so vigorously, and fired so furiously
for half an hour into the very heart of the Enemies Ship, that according to
wheat Admiral Mountague himself said, he would have yielded to Brakel, if he
had born a Flag. Lieutenant Admiral de Gent's Squadron had begun likewise to
engage, and some of his Ships advanced likewise and fell upon Admiral
Mountague; he having already repulsed and sunk 3 Fireships, found himself so
overwhelmed by the Hollanders that he could not hold out any longer. To
Disengage himself he caused Brakel's Ship that h^ld him so fast Grapled, to be
chopped off with Axes; and which had been before so ill treated, that she was n
longer able to keep the Sea. Most of his Officers were killed, and he had
scarce 100 sound men left, able to do Service. But to return to Mountague's
Ship, a fourth Fire-ship falling upon him, Grapled him so fast, that his Ship
was soon burnt to Ashes. The Seamen jumpt Pell-Mell into the Sea. And Mountague
himself with two of his Sons being entered into a Boat in hopes to save
themselves, she was in a trice filled so full of men, and overcharged, that she
sunk; so that Admiral Mountague or the Earl of Sandwich, that had been so
Famous, unfortunately perished there with two of his Sons. His body was taken up
among other Dead men, and carried to London, where it was interred with great
Honor and Magnificence.

On the Hollanders side, Lieutenant Admiral de Gent, was not much more
Fortunate than Admiral Mountague: For being extremely Irritated against the
English ever since the business of the Merlin Yacht, because they would needs
have had him punished by the States, he advanced and fell into the Blue Squadron
with so much Fury and Undaunted Resolution, that he caused much Terror and
Disorder among them: but he had hardly fought half an hour, when he was taken
off by a Cannon-Bullet. His Death was resented as a great loss to the United
Provinces as well for the great Services he had rendered, as for those he might
still have rendered them. Captain Panhuisen that Commanded under him on board
his Ship, took his time to inform de Ruiter and de Wit, without any noise of
his Death. He was ordered to make no words of it, and in the mean while, to act
with his Ship what was most requisite for the Service of the State: But as he
was worthily acquitting himself of his Employ he had the misfortune to have one
of his Legs shot off.

Lieutenant Admiral Bankert of Zealand attackt so vigorously the White
Squadron, Composed most of the French Nation, that the Count de Estrees who
Commanded it, having, as it is thought, secret orders not to fight, tackt away
to the Southward, which motion separated the French from the English, whom
they had a mind to leave in the Lurch; which separation Bankert taking
advantage of, pursued them close, firing continually at them, but the French
would not be persuaded to make any stand to face them, but continued to retreat
till the night came on, and then they begun downright to fly, and to make all
the sail they could toward the Channel.

There were performed many brave actions on that memorable day as well by the
English as the Dutch. A great English Ship of 70 Guns was burnt by a Fire-Ship,
two more of the first Rates were sunk, and there were two more destroyed. The
English on their side, so cruely battered the Ship called the Jesus, Commanded
by Captain Dyke that they sunk her. The Ship Staveren, Commanded by Captain
Elsevier, was after a vigorous resistance, taken and 9 or 10 Fireships were
spent to no effect. The night separated the Combatants, and the English besides
Admiral Mountague. are said to have lost 18 Captains, all men of Note, and
above two thousand Seamen and Soldiers.

Mr Cornelius de Wit, who represented upon the Fleet, the Sovereignty of the
States, gave in this occasion likewise Signal proofs of his Zeal, by the
undaunted Resolution with which he exposed himself to all sorts of dangers, as
appears by the following Extract of the Letter he writ on that Subject. The
Extract of a Letter of Mr. Cornelius de Wit.


THe fight continued all day with a great deal of obstinacy and heat, insomuch
that Mr. de Ruiter said he never was in so hot an Action in his Life. I cannot
specify what Number of men, we had killed on board our Ships, because they were
instantly thrown over board as fast as they fell, but this I can tell, that of
12 Soldiers and a Sergeant, drawn out of Mr. Ritenburg's Company to be my
Halbardiers, and which were some of them about me, and the rest over the
Masters Cabin, there remain 9 Alive, whereof one has both his Legs shot off,
and two more are mortally wounded. I kept my self all the time before the
Masters Cabin, and when I was weary with standing, I sat down in a Chair, that
I might be able attentively to observe all that passed, etc. The next day the
Hollanders would have renewed the fight, but the two Royal Fleets being again
rejoined, kept to the Wind-ward of them without seeming to dare to approach
them, which the Hollanders pretended to be an undoubted mark, that they had had
the disadvantage the day before, since it is to be presumed said they, if it had
been otherwise, they would have endeavored to have made use of the advantage
of the wind which was on their side, to have charged them again. But the
English all^dged, that there arose so great a Fog, that they could not do it.

The body of Lieutenant Admiral de Gent, who was killed in that Battle, was
transported in a Galliot into Holland, and embalmed at the Hague, and thence
was carried to Vtrecht, where it was enterr'd in the Dom Church, and a Stately
monument was afterward erected to his Memory, at the States charge.

The Dutch out of a very necessary policy in the then distressed condition of
their affairs at Land, published, that they had obtained a signal Victory in
that Battle over the Royal Fleets; which News being spread abroad on the 7th.
of June at the Hague, contributed not a little to raise and revive the drooping
hopes and dying Courage of the People, who were extremely dismayed at the rapid
Progresses and terrible depredations of the Enemies Land-Armies on their
Frontiers. For at the very beginning of June, no less than 3 Armies, viz. that
of France, of the Elector of Cologne, and of the Bishop of Munster, entered
their Country, and attackt them on every side at the same time. And Orsoy,
Bunick, Wesel, and Rynburg, were all taken in four days without any Resistance.
The French King adding Conquest to Conquest entered every day further and
further into the Country, and pusht on his ambitious designs with so much the
greater Rapidity, because all gave way before him by an unparallelled fatality.
And it may be said, that if the Confederate Fleets had been as successful, as
their Land-Armies, the States had been lost without retrieve, and the United
Provinces would have been forced to submit to the Yoke of those Foreign Powers
that then attackt them with so much fury; but by reason that the French Fleet
fought not at all, and that the English trusting on their assistance did not
employ their full Naval strength, and that Admiral de Ruiter by his vigilance,
had surprised them at a disadvantage, when they little dreamt of him, in that
he hindered them thereby from gaining a Victory over him, that success was to
him and the Dutch at that ticklish Juncture of Time, as advantageous as an
Actual and Complete Victory at any other season, by keeping up the hearts of
the dispirited people, securing their Navigation, and preserving their Coasts
from the like Invasions and direful desolation with which their Land-Frontiers
were afflicted.

However the United Provinces were reduced into so lamentable a condition, that
the States at length took a Resolution to send two Deputies at the same time,
viz. one to the French King, and another to the King of great Britain, to
endeavor to move those two Princes to come to some Accommodation with them. On
the 19th of June, two Deputies past through the Fleet, and made all the speed
they could toward the Court of England, whilst others were dispatched away to
go and address themselves to the French King, at the head of his Army; but
alas! all those steps were made but in vain; For the two Kings, puffed up with
so many past successes, and with the hopes of a Total Conquest, made such
exorbitant demands, that there was no complying with them; so that the Deputies
were fain to come back without doing any thing.

In the mean while the Mob beginning to rise, accused those who had the
management of the Government, and principally the two de Wits, of being the
Authors of all those disasters and charged them with Treason, and holding
dangerous Correspondence with the Enemies of the State. The Confederate Fle^t^
appear ^n the Holland Coasts.
Nay they further openly affirmed, that there was no possibility of Governing
the State any longer, unless the party of the Louvesteins were pulled down, and
the perpetual Edict made in 1667 to the prejudice of the Illustrious house of
Orange were annulled and the dignity of the Statholder restored to the present
Prince, etc. So that in fine they prevailed so, that on the 3d. of July, that
Prince was created Statholder, The Prince of Orange made Statholder
and Captain and Admiral General of the Armies both by Sea and Land of the
United Provinces, which news caused an unspeakable joy among all the Officers,
Seamen and Soldiers of the Fleet.

A few days after the Royal Confederate Fleets appeared before the Dutch Coast
with design to make a descent near the Hague, Harlem, or the Texel: But that
enterprise was diverted by a kind of Miracle. For on the very day singled out
for that design, as the Enemy was expecting the coming in of the tide, to send
in their Boats and small Vessels Laden with Soldiers in order to Land them, it
happened to delay its advance 12 full hours later than Ordinary, contrary to its
natural Order, to the great surprise and astonishment of all that were versed
in Sea affairs, and that ever frequented that Element. That prodigy was looked
upon as one of the most sensible marks of the Protection of God that begun to
declare it self for the States. That Retardation of the Tide was likewise
followed by a horrible Tempest, that forced the Enemies Fleets with terror to
quit the Holland Coasts, and to retire homewards with great loss. For three of
their men of War, and some other Victualling Ships were cast away or swallowed
up by the Waves.

During these Transactions, de Ruiter kept with the Dutch fleet near the
Holland Coasts to have an eye upon the Motions of the Enemies. On the 5th of
August, news came, that 14 East- India Ships valued at near 14 Millions of
Livers were happily arrived at the mouth of the Eems before Delfzil. The
Enemies had flattered themselves with the hopes of taking them, and thought it
was impossible for them to miss of so rich a prize; which obliged them to post
themselves near the Dogger-Sand to be the readier at hand to seize upon them.
For they could not imagine, the Government could have time to advise them of
the Rupture, because they were put to Sea at the time of the beginning of the
War, and that if they had received any information of it, that could not have
been till it was too late for them to take any precautionary measures to secure
themselves. But yet by an instinct as 'twere of Providence, they stole from the
vigilance of the Royal Fleets, and the Holland Fleet sailed toward the Eems to
Conduct them into the Respective Harbors of their own Country, where they
arrived on the 22d of the same month.

The States Fleet would have kept at Sea something longer, but because the
summer season was almost past, and that Tempests would soon begin to reign, and
that besides there was no more danger for that year of any descent by the Royal
Fleets, or of any other important attempt, they retired home and entered into
Port, on the 22d. of September, to be disarmed and laid up.

From that time forward things begun a little to change face, and Holland was
secured by cutting the ditches and sluices and overflowing all the Avenues to
their Towns; and Provision was made likewise for the preservation of the
passages of Gorkum, Schonhoven, and Minden; For Naerden, was then in the Power
of the French. The march of the Auxiliary Troops sent by the Emperor and the
Elector of Brandenburg to the assistance of the United Provinces contributed
also very much to stop the Conquests of France by the diversion they gave. For
the most Christian King was forced to make great detachments to form an Army
under the Command of the famous Marshal Turenne, to send to oppose them. The
Prince of Orange on another side, advanced toward Charleroy with design to
besiege it, but the great Frosts and Ill Weather that happened all on a sudden,
broke his measures, so that after he had taken and plundered Binch, that Prince
retired. However the Frosts that thus had crossed the designs of the Prince of
Orange, favored those of the French. For the Duke of Luxemburg having formed
an Army out of detachments drawn out of Vtrecht and other Conquered places,
prepared to make an invasion into the heart of Holland, by passing his Troops
over the Ice. The Count of Koningsmark, who had the guard of the passes, not
finding himself strong enough to Resist him, deserted Bodgrave, and retired to
Leyden. Luxemburg seeing the Weather was like to change to a Thaw, made his
Troops advance with Extraordinary dispatch, and past the Rhine with very little
resistance by reason of the consternation and disorder among them that guarded
the ^assages, and marched to Swammerdam, with a Resolution to go further if the
Frost continued to favor his designs.

The Retrenchments made near Nieuwerburg, were unfortunately deserted in a most
unseasonable nick of time; which extremely favored the retreat of the French:
For a Thaw happening to follow, if that post had been preserved, the Duke of
Luxemburg's return had been cut off; who however, was constrained to retire
with more haste than ever he made in.

It Is not to be Expressed in what strange alarm and consternation all Holland
then was. The Depredations of the Duke of Luxemburg.
However, the States, without losing Courage for that, neglected not to give
the necessary orders every where, causing the sluices to be opened, to let in
the water round about all the places that were most exposed. The Duke of
Luxemburg being come near Gondsche Sluis, where Count Koningsmark was posted
with his Troops, found there so much resistance, that he was forced to turn
back again, carrying desolation every where along with him, and miserably
Ravaging all the places through which he passed. It would be a difficult task
to describe all the excessive cruelties he committed there; it is enough to
say, that he carried them to such a height, that no future Ages will ever lose
the Memory of his Barbarities. The Villages of Swammerdam and Bodgrave were
burnt to Ashes.

At the same time, which was the last day of the Year, the Troops of Groningen
returned him his change. For the Frost that had put by the Seige of Charleroy
having locked up the Marish waters round about the strong place of Koeverden,
they took advantage of that opportunity and seized that important Fortress.

These were the principal Events of the Year 1672. and this was the deplorable
condition into which the United Provinces were then reduced. But God being
pleased afterward to espouse their Interests delivered them from the
unsupportable Yoke of Foreign powers, by such surprising means, that they
recovered all their places again in less time than they had lost them, as will
appear in the sequel of this History.

At the beginning of the Year 1673. Amsterdam, to burn the States men of War.
The Author of it was one Fraser a Scotch-man, who as he confessed himself, was
incited to that bold and pernicious attempt by great promises of reward from
the Duke of York, who was ever an irreconcilable Enemy to the United Provinces.
That unhappy Criminal was therefore broke alive upon the Wheel, and exposed
afterward near Voolewyijk.

In order to put themselves into a condition to make the same vigorous
resistance against the two Fleets of England and France which they did the last
year, the States began with incredible diligence to forward the preparations
making to Arm out a powerful Fleet. And for that effect, all the Deputies of
the Colleges of Admiralty and the Commissioners of the Navy, had several
Conferences with the Prince of Orange, in which it was concluded, that the
Fleet should be considerably Augmented and Rendered more potent than it ever yet
had been. Tromp restored to his Admiralship.
In the mean while, the Office of Lieutenant Admiral of the College of the
Admiralty of Amsterdam, being vacant by the death of Mr. de Gent who succeeded
Cornelius Tromp when he was dismissed from his Employment, His Highness, in
Quality of Stat-holder, and Admiral General, having a perfect knowledge of
Tromp's rare merit, and incomparable valor and Conduct, as well as of the
singular Zeal and Affection he had always shown to the Illustrious House of
Orange, represented to him of what importance it was both to himself and the
State in that pressing Juncture, to forget past things, and pressed him to accept
again of the Office of Lieutenant Admiral of the College of Amsterdam, in order
to recontinue his Services to his Country, in a time of such distress.

The Prince stirred so warmly in that Affair that he found means to reconcile
him to de Ruiter, and thereby to prevent the disorder the inveterate hatred of
those two Admirals might cause in the Fleet. Accordingly they embraced one
another in the presence of His Highness, and mutually promised to forget all
that was passed, and to live thenceforward as brothers.

The Re-establishment of Tromp in his former Post at Sea caused an
unexpressible joy to all the Seamen in the Fleet, and in General, to all the
common people: Who seemed confident after the Reconciliation of those two great
Men, that the United Provinces would be able to Triumph over the Naval Forces
both of England and France, so much weight they imagined to be in the Conduct
of that one man to turn the Scale of Victory on their side.

At that time, the States projected an attempt of very great importance, which
was to dam up the mouth of the Thames, by sinking in it great many Ships
extraordinarily laden, and so to render it unpassable. And for that end they
had prepared at Amsterdam 8 ships fitted for that expedition, nay they were
already sent to the Texel, as thinking the success of that enterprise depended
solely on the speed used in it. In the mean while they labored and wrought
night and day to man out their Fleet that they might have their full Complement
early in the spring. And if that project had succeeded, no doubt but England
would have felt a long time its effect by the interruption of its Commerce
which would thereby have been totally ruined, and that without any Battle, or
Effusion of Blood.

On the 10th of May, the Fleet assembled at Schoonevelde, and were 80 sail
strong, who the next day, without staying for the Zealand Squadron, or the
other ships that were not yet come to them, sailed out, and made toward the
Thames. But a great Fog coming on, and the English having had intelligence of
their design, it was impossible for them to execute any thing, so that they
were fain to tack about, and return back again to an Anchor at Schoonevelde,
the ships that were wanting arrived daily to the Fleet, and in the mean while
they employed themselves in Regulating the division of the Squadrons, and the
orders they were to observe. The whole Fleet was divided into three Spuadrons.
Admiral de Ruiter's was composed of 19 men of War in the line of Battle, 4
Frigates, 8 Fireships, 4 Advice Yachts, and 3 Galliots. The General Officers
under him, were Lieutenant Admiral Van Nes, Vice Admiral de Liefde, and
Rear-Admiral Van Nes. Lieutenant Admiral Bankert s Squadron consisted of 18 men
of War, 5 Frigates, 8 Fireships, 5 Advice-Yachts, and 2 Galliots; he had under
him, Vice Admiral Evertsz, Vice Admiral Saar, and Rear-Admiral Vlug. Lieutenant
Admiral Tromp's Squadron consisted of 18 men of War, 5 Frigates, 9 Fireships, 5
Advice-Yachts, and 2 Galliots; having under him, Vice Admiral Sweers,
Vice Admiral Schram, and Rear-Admiral de Haan.

After that division, it was ordered, that Lieutenant Admiral Van Nes should
command in chief Admiral Tromp's Squadron during his absence, and that
Vice Admiral Evertsz should likewise Command that of Lieutenant Admiral Bankert
till he should come to the Fleet himself.

The affairs of the Government, and the preparations that were to be made by
Land so entirely took up the Princ^s care and time, that it was impossible for
him to come down to take a review of the Fleet. And therefore he was pleased to
write the following Letter to de Ruiter to encourage the Captains* and Seamen,
and to incite them all in General, and every one in particular to acquit
themselves worthily of their duty in their respective stations.

Noble, Equitable, Valiant, Well-Beloved, Incomparable,
WE could have wished, The Prince of Oranges Letter to the Officers of the
Fleet, to encourage them, etc.
the affairs of the State would have permitted us to go in person to the Fleet
to have the satisfaction to see in it so many of our Brave Countrymen that all
Zealously Labor in defense of their Country. That considerable fleet now
equipping is one of the most powerful means that can be employed for the
preservation of the State; and there is reason to hope, that consideration will
inflame the Courage of those who have the honor to be chosen to have the
Conduct of it. The Eyes and Hearts of all the Subjects of the United Provinces,
nay, and of all Christendom are now turned that way, and are attentively
observing what motions, and what attempts it will make under the Valor and
Conduct of those who Govern it. And what infamy will it not be then for them
that shall be so cowardly as to fail in their duty in so important and glorious
an occasion? But we expect no such ungrateful News, but rather on the
contrary, that by your Prudence and Undaunted Resolution, as well as by that of
those about you, the Glory our Nation has lately gotten by Sea will be
maintained with the Protection of God, by the fresh Zeal and Courage which you
shall exert. This being so, they will have reason to rejoice, and we likewise
with them, that they have been the Instruments to bring things to a happy end
in so just a cause. We shall take care to recompense the Merit and Bravery of
those that shall have given any signal proofs of it, and shall provide, that
Great and Glorious Actions shall not be repaid with ingratitude, but rather
with a proportionable Reward. I pray you to assure all those under your Flag,
from the greatest to the least, of this, and at the same time, to let every one
of them understand, that no Pardon is to be expected by them who shall not do
their duty, and shall be guilty of Cowardice. That is both the true intention
of the States, and Mine too, that those which shall deserve it, shall be
punctually and speedily punished according to the utmost rigor of the Orders of
the Commission, and of the Laws of the Country; so that the Cowards and all
those who shall not behave themselves like brave Soldiers before the Enemy
shall have nothing to fear more, than to enter the Harbors of the State;
because it will be impossible for them to escape the rigor of Juctice, and the
indignation of the people which will pursue them every where. We persuade our
selves that none of them will fall into any such misfortune, but that rather
every one will strive to signalize himself with a commendable ardour in so
pressing an occasion, in confidence, that God will make all succeed to the Good
of our Country, and the immortal honor of all those that shall have faithfully
served it. I pray God to take you into his holy protection, and all those that
are with you etc.


To which Letter de Ruiter made the following Answer. De Ruiter's Answer to his
Highness:


Most Serene Prince,
AFter I had sent away about noon, my last writing to your Highness, I received
toward evening, yours, wherein your Highness is pleased to exhort us to do our
duty for our dear Country. I am infinitely obliged for it to your Highness, and
will not forget to morrow without fail, to inform the General and Inferior
Officers of the same, that we may all of us together behave our selves in such
a manner, that we may be able to answer for our Conduct before God, before your
Highness, and before all Christendom. Your Highness may entirely rely upon it,
as I do in your Highnesses word, That Lieutenant Admiral Tromp shall agree and
live with me and the other Members of the Council of War, in the same
confidence and union, as we live at present with the rest. For then I dare
flatter my self with the hopes, that all our enterprises under the protection
of God, will have a happy issue, being with all imaginable respect, etc.


The Prince answered de Ruiter again in the manner following,

Noble, Equitable, Valiant, Well-Beloved, Incomparable,
YOurs of the 24th. instant was delivered to us; His Highnesses Answer to de
Ruiter.
and we were glad to hear the things of which it makes mention. As to the
opinion of Vice Admiral Evertsz, which is, that the Vice Admiral and Rear
Admiral of Zealand ought to preceed in rank, those of the College of the
Admiralty of Amsterdam, we think fit, that without prejudice to the right of
any Person, things be left at present in the same order which has been observed
for some time, according to which you may regulate your self. Moreover, we have
very carefully recommended to Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, to receive your orders
with due respect and obedience, as the said Lieutenant Admiral has promised to
do. We are persuaded, he will worthily acquit himself of that duty, and all
things will tend to a good and salutary end for the Service of the State, and
the present conjuncture. I recommend you to the protection of God, etc.


On the first of June, Lieutenant Admiral Tromp invited Admiral de Ruiter, and
all the rest of the General Officers of the Fleet with him, to dine on board
him. And they made on that occasion a thousand protestations one to the other
of a sincere and tender friendship. The other Generals, and all the Captains
drunk healths to their Country, giving a thousand assurances of their zeal and
inviolable adherence to its service; and they all swore, they were ready to
spend the last drop of their blood for its Interest. So much good will gave
great hopes of an assured Victory and an occasion to make proof of it soon
presented, since about 4 a Clock in the afternoon, whilst they were yet at
Table, the advanced-guards of the Fleet gave them notice, they had discovered
the Enemies Fleet.

And a little while after, their scouts appeared. But because 'twas late, the
Dutch Fleet tackt about to the North West, and begun to dispose all things
ready to come to an Engagement, the next day. The English Fleet had cast Anchor
to the Westward of the Dutch, and prepared likewise for fight, but a Calm
coming on, the two Fleets could not come up with one another. The next day
there arose a surly Wind with some Rain, which obliged both parties to remain
at Anchor in presence of one another. On the 4th and 5th the Wind rose higher
still, and became more violent. But at length on the 7th. which was the day of
the monthly fast, and the same day on which the Dutch had attackt the Enemies
in Solbay the last year, the two Fleets engaged.

Admiral de Ruiter held a Council of War as soon as it was day, where it was
resolved to weigh their Anchors a-peak to be ready for fight. But no sooner
were the Officers that had been at the Consult, gone off from on board the
Admiral, but the two Royal Fleets made a Motion, and having cast their
Squadrons into the form of a Crescent, made up directly toward the Dutch. The
Forces of those two Potent Fleets were very unequal, according to the Dutch
reports. For those of the Allies were said to consist of 140 sail, whereof 90
were Capital men of War, whereas the Dutch pretend to have had there but 52
Capital ships but ill manned and furnished, 12 Frigates, 14 Advice Yachts, and
25 Fireships, making in all 103 sail. There were several ships that were not
yet come into the Fleet; for of the Zealand Squadron there were hardly 4; and
of Friesland, and Groningen, there were none at all; and of those of Amsterdam
and Rotterdam there were the ships of Vice Admiral Sweers, of the Commander de
Meuwen, of Captain Brakel, and several others that were not yet come. Nay, they
were forced for want of Seamen, to take the men out of 3 Zealand Frigates, to
man Lieutenant Admiral Bankert's ship. In the mean while, the English and
French Fleets, having the Weather gage, came nearer and nearer to the
Hollanders. Prince Robert who had the Command in chief of the two Royal Fleets,
led the Vanguard, which was the Red Squadron. The Count d' Estree had the
Conduct of the main Battle, or of the White Squadron; And Sir Edward Sprag,
Admiral of the Blue, Commanded the Rear. The English being ill satisfied at the
Conduct of the French in the last Battle, durst trust them no more, but fearing
they would desert them again as they did before, thought fit to place them
under their own Squadrons; so that Mr. d' Assedan, the French Rear Admiral, was
placed under Prince Robert's, Squadron and the Marquess de Grancy under that of
Admiral Spragg. As to the Order of the Dutch Fleet, Tromp led the Van, de
Ruiter the main Battle, and Bankert the Rear.

Lieutenant Admiral Tromp seeing the Enemies White Squadron advancing toward
him, made a speech to his Officers, and represented to them, the necessity of
there duty, and to fight like brave men; that for that effect, they needed but
to follow his example: That for his own part he was spurred on by no other
interest to give proofs of his Zeal to his afflicted Country, but that of the
Love and Tenderness he had for it: That he had no other end in coming to Sea,
but to labor to restore the shaking State of its affairs, by delivering it
from those Disasters and Calamities that were ready to overwhelm it, and which
without a speedy and timely assistance, threatened it with inevitable ruin.
That he had much rather sacrifice his Life for it* than to Live to suffer its
ancient Liberty to be oppressed, and the Dutch Nation forced to undergo the
unsupportable Yoke of a Foreign and Tyrannick power. We have, pursued he, a
just God, and an Equitable Cause, upon which having an entire trust and
confidence, I doubt not of a good and happy success, if you will but behave
your selves like brave men. Every one of them at those words, promised him to
do so; and as soon as prayers were done, Tromp turned to the Seamen of his
ship, and cried to them, Children, the Enemy is near us, let every one of you
now give proofs of his bravery, and satisfy the Engagements that brought us
hither on board; And if you do it I Will assure you, that I will recompense you,
and that all shall go well. After that discourse, the Seamen testified an
unexpressible joy, throwing their Caps up into the Air, and crying out! Long
live Tromp? with promise to spend to the last drop of their blood for the
Service of their Country.

About 2 a Clock in the afternoon, the Battle begun. The White Squadron engaged
with that of Lieutenant Admiral Tromp. It is not to be expressed with what valor
and undaunted Courage they fought; and notwithstanding the inequality of their
Forces, thanks, under God, to the Cowardice, or rather perfidiousness of the
French to the English, the advantage after having a long time wavered, was at
last forced to declare in favor of the Hollanders, and was by them styled a
Victory. Though at the same time it be certain, that if the French had managed
the War then only by Land, and left the English to their own sole but whole
strength to attack the Dutch by Sea, they would have been so far from
pretending to Victory, that they would have inevitably been destroyed; such
disadvantage is there sometimes in a confederate Force, though seemingly greater
than an Enemies, when the Allies act not in full Concert, Union and Fidelity
one with another. The most part of the Circumstances of that Battle, as
reported by the Dutch, are related in the Letters written on that Subject to
his Highness the Prince of Orange, and to the States General, by the two
Admirals, de Ruiter and Tromp which we have here inserted.

High and Mightinesses,
WE engaged Yesterday about two in the afternoon, in a Battle which lasted till
night. Tromp's Letter to the States.
In breaking in amongst the Enemies, our ship, the Golden Lion, was so roughly
handled, that we were forced to remove to the ship, called the Prince on
Horseback, whose Captain Van Bergen was killed. I put up my Flag there, and
then returned to the fight. We fought on board that ship, till about 7 a Clock
when our Main Mast being shot over board into the Sea, we were forced to change
ship again, and to go on board the Amsterdam, Commanded by Captain Vander Zaan.
We engaged again afresh in the fight, till dark night parted us. The Enemies
ships that were the forwardest next the place where we were, had already begun
to fly with all the sail they could. We are at present on board the ship
Comet, Commanded by Captain Middeland, and we hope, that Almighty God, to whose
protection we Commit your High and Mightinesses, will grant a Complete Victory
to our dear Country, etc.


Most Serene Prince,
Admiral de Ruiter's Letter to his Highness.
MY last written to your Highness was dated the 6th. Instant. After noon, the
air begun to clear up a little, and toward evening we could see the Enemies
again. During the night the ill weather was quite appeased. On the 7th in the
morning it was fair Weather, and the Wind was North-West. That day the Enemies
Fleets begun to move. I fired the usual signal to call a Council of War, where
it was resolved to keep our Anchors a-peak, to be ready to be weighed up at the
first approach of the Enemies. The Officers that had assisted at the Council of
War were not yet gone away from on board me, when the Royal Fleets advanced
toward us in the form of a Crescent. The White Squadron that was turned
toward the North, was the first that engaged with Lieutenant Admiral Tromp,
and both of them tackt to the North-East-ward. The Squadrons that were under
mine, and Lieutenant Admiral Bankert's Command, could not be so soon attackt by
the Enemies. However to prevent them from separating us, we made likewise to
the North-East-ward till about two in the afternoon; and then we thought it
time to tack about to the Southward, after we had given the signal for it, and
sent notice to Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, by an Advice-Yacht of that motion; and
then I engaged with the Red Squadron, and Bankert with the Blue one. I was more
fortunate in breaking in amongst the Enemies than Bankert, for his main
Topmast, being shot down he had much ado to advance, however he got a great
way in, we broke quite through the Enemies, and we cut several of their ships
from the main of their Fleet by getting the Weather-gage of them. We thought
not fit to pursue them, but rather to make a motion toward the North, in Order
to veer back toward Lieutenant Admiral Tromp. We joined him toward evening.
When we charged the Enemies they tackt about to the Southward, and we made the
same motion, and fought till the night parted us. After the Battle we went and
anchored within two miles of West-Kappel. As for the particular passages of the
whole time of the fight, it is impossible for us to give an exact relation of
them, because we have not yet had time to be informed of them. But however it
be, we presume, that, God be praised, the Victory is on the side of the States,
and of his Highness. And in order to make it a Complete one, we will put our
selves in readiness to fight with all the vigor imaginable, hoping that God
will bless our arms more and more. The fight was furious on both sides, and on
our side some did better than others, according as the Wind was more or less
favorable to them, and it is like the same happened also amongst the Enemies.
There were a great many ships endamaged on both sides. We have lost some
Officers, viz. Vice Admiral Schram, Rear Admiral Vlug, as likewise the
Captains, Van Bergen and Bakker; Captain Nassaw, is dangerously wounded. The
Fireships of both Fleets were able to do but little execution, and yet a great
many of them were either burnt, or sunk. We have named Rear-Admiral de Haan to
the Vice-Admiralship vacant by the death of Schram, under the Flagg of
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, and the Commander Meuwen to the Rear-Admiral's place,
who came to the fleet Yersterday in the time of the fight. He reported to us,
that he had taken a Yacht coming from London, laden with refreshments, and some
Rich suits of Clothes for the Count d' Estree. There is likewise come to us
another frigate from Friesland, carrying 30 Guns, and 150 men. That there might
arise no confusion by removing the flag, I have ordered Rear Admiral Vlug to
put it up in his ship till further order. The Captain of a French fire-ship
whom we saved, Reports to us, that the English fleet consisted of 60 men of
War, and 30 fireships, and that the French Squadron was composed of 30 men of
War, the least of which carried 50 Guns, and of 10 or 12 fireships, and and
that reckoning in the Advice-Yachts, the Confederate fleets were composed of
140 sail; That Prince Robert Commanded in chief; that the Count de Estree, had
the Conduct of the White Squadron, and Sir Edward Spragg that of the Blue; and
that the two fleets, English and French were mingled together. The Enemies are
at present to the North-West and a quarter Westward, at about two miles
distance from us, busy in repairing their damages.


Here follows Tromp's Letter to the States.

High and Mighty Lords,
Tromp's Letter to the States.
WE are now more particularly informed of what passed in the last Battle fought
between the Naval Forces of England and France, and the fleet of the United
Provinces. We are persuaded that the Enemies have lost 11 or 12 Ships that were
burnt or sunk, and several Fireships. We have, God be thanked, lost not one
Ship, except some Fireships, to about the Number of 6, if I mistake not. The
fleet is still in a very good condition, and if the Wind had not risen, de
Ruiter and I were resolved to attack the Enemies again. But since God permitted
us not to do that, we are now laboring with speed to repair our damaged Ships.
I am returned again on board the Golden Lion which wants nothing but her main
yard. I have writ into Zealand to have another speedily sent me. We have found
on board the said Ship about 100 men killed or wounded; whose places we will
endeavor to supply again out of other Ships. Rear-Admiral de Haan is likewise
returned on board his Ship, which is now also in a good condition, he is named
by way of Provision, to fill up the place vacant by the death of Vice Admiral
Schram, in our Squadron; and the Commander de Meuwen, is to supply that of Rear
Admiral de Haan, etc.


Lieutenant Admiral Tromp gave likewise in this Battle, as he had done in all
the precedent ones in which he was present, most signal proofs of his undaunted
Courage. The very Number of ships he was forced to change, is enough to serve
for his Elogium in that behalf; for before the fight was over, he had already
changed his ships three or four times, which were all so extremely shattered
that they were quite disabled. Rear Admiral de Haan behaved himself likewise
very gallantly, having been forced to shift his ship three times.

De Ruiter, and Tromp in that rencounter gave one another most noble and
generous proofs of tenderness and affection. By the assistance de Ruiter gave
to Tromp, he was delivered from the Eminent Peril under which he was ready to
sink; for being engaged in the midst of two Squadrons of the Enemies, he
endured a most Terrible encounter without any hopes of ever being able to go
through it. Tromp being sensible of his danger begun to despair of escaping it,
unless de Ruiter would come speedily to his assistance, and he was already in
an extreme impatience to see him, and comforted up his discouraged Seamen with
the hopes of seeing themselves soon delivered by that Great man. And as soon as
Tromp saw de Ruiter appear, his joy was extreme, so that he cried out! Courage,
my lads, see there is the best of our friends that is advancing and coming to
our assistance, and I likewise will never desert him neither so long as I live.
De Ruiter accompanied with Lieutenant Admiral Bankert and his Squadron, broke
then through the Enemies Squadrons, and delivered him with as much zeal as
fidelity, which promised hopefully that the Reconciliation of those two great
men, would for the future continue firm and inviolable.

On the 12 of June, the fleet was sufficiently repaired, and in a condition to
attack the Enemies again; when de Ruiter presently called a Council of War, in
which it was Resolved, that since there was no further Reinforcement to be
expected from the Country, and that on the contrary, the English were to
receive one, with the first Westerly Wind, it was better to prevent them, by
attacking them first, unless they received Orders to the contrary from the
States; That all things should be got ready for that effect against the 14th.
to endeavor by the protection of God, to chase them off the Sea. Accordingly
they Ordered the whole fleet to be divided into three Squadrons. The first was
composed of 17 men of War, 2 frigates, 8 fireships, and 5 Advice-Yachts, under
the Command of Admiral de Ruiter, Lieutenant Admiral Van Nes, Vice Admiral de
Liefde, and Rear Admiral Van Nes; the second was also composed of 17 men of
War, 2 frigates, 8 fireships, and 6 Advice Yachts, under the Conduct of
Lieutenant Admiral Bankert, Vice Admiral Evertsz, and Rear-Admiral Dik. Lastly
the third was Commanded by Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, Vice Admiral Sweers, and
Rear Admiral de Haan, and consisted likewise of 17 men of War, 3 Frigates, 8
Fireships, and 5 Advice Yachts.

The same day the resolution was taken to attack the Enemies, the Deputies of
the States, Mr. Boetsclaar and Mr. Reigersbergen came on board Admiral de
Ruiter, and being informed of the design that was projected, they approved it.
Therefore the Signal was given to the whole Fleet, to set sail, and advance
toward the Royal Fleets, whose Forces that before the first Fight, consisted
of 140 Sail, were then reduced, as was reported among the Dutch, to 118, by the
Losses they had suffered. The Dutch Fleet then weighed Anchor between 11 a
Clock at Noon; and the English and French Fleet seeing them approach, got
themselves likewise under Sail, and made show as if they would have stood them,
and been glad to engage them; but as soon as the Dutch begun to come near them,
and play their Guns at them, the Enemies tackt away to the North-west-ward, and
stood for the Coast of England, with all the Sail they could. The Dutch Fleet
followed them close, but could not oblige them to make a stand, till about 4 in
the Afternoon.

At that Time Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, who commanded the Vanguard, engaged
with the Blue Squadron, commanded by Sir Edward Spragg; de Ruiter, on his side
attacked the Main Battle, or Red Squadron, commanded by Prince Robert; and
about 5 a Clock the two Chiefs of the Hostile Fleets were engaged in a very
fierce Fight. A little while after, Lieutenant Admiral Bankert, who commanded
the Rear, fell likewise upon the White Squadron, under the Command of the Count
d' Estree. The Fleets fought a great while, and the Fight was very obstinate;
but as the Royal Fleets had signified at the very first, that they had no mind
to engage, they left off Fighting, and dexterously made use of the Advantage of
the Wind, which they had, to retire toward the English Coasts. Lieutenant
Admiral Tromp was the first and the last in the Fight, and the Bravery with
which he attacked Admiral Spragg, who likewise did Wonders, can never be
sufficiently admired.

Among other remarkable things that happened in that last Engagement,
Vice Admiral Sweers, that commanded a part of Tromp's Squadron, being in the
Ship called the Elephant, a much better Sailer than the Golden Lion, in which
Tromp was, going before him, went away so swiftly that the rest of the Ships of
his Squadron could not follow him, by which means he found himself on a sudden
engaged with Spragg, and the Vice Admiral of the English Blue Squadron, without
any Ships near him to back him, but only 3 Frigates commanded by de Jong,
Hartwich, and de Noirot; for the other Captains of his Squadron, instead of
following him, as they were obliged to do, veered back again toward Lieutenant
Admiral Tromp; Sweers seeing himself so unexpectedly deserted, made all the
Resistance he could, but after he had born a very fierce Shock, he was so
terribly shattered by the Ships of the Blue Squadron, that he was at last
forced to quit the Line of Battle, and make off further to Sea, to repair his
Damages, which Conduct of his was interpreted by Tromp to be a piece of
Cowardice, though the Truth was, 'twas pure Necessity that obliged Sweers to act
in that manner.

Admiral de Ruiter had engaged, as we have said, with Prince Robert's Squadron,
and their two Ships having grappled one another fought both very desperately.
Bankert likewise signalized himself, and fought with great Valor against the
White Squadron, which was very severely handled by him. Prince Robert was
forced in that Fight to remove out of the Royal Charles, that was disabled,
into the Old Sovereign, and then making the best of his way toward England,
the two Royal Fleets followed him in Disorder. In the mean while, the Dutch
Fleet finding they had the Advantage, past that Night in the Place where the
Battle was fought, with a Resolution to advance the next Day and present a
third Battle, to the two Royal Fleets, in case they would accept it; but when
Day was come, they could see neither English nor French appear, but heard they
were retired into the Thames: Which was a surprising thing to the Dutch, to
find that two such powerful Fleets as were the English and French, and so much
superior to them in Force, should so shamefully fly from them. But the Cause of
it was imputed to the treacherous Conduct of the French, and the Animosities of
Prince Robert against them on that account, and the Hatred he and most of the
English then in general bore to that leaguing with a Popish and Dangerous Power
against a Protestant State, and other Jealousies then reigning, concerning the
pernicious intrigues then carrying on between the already perverted Duke of
York and the French, against the English Religion and Constitution, which made
the Officers and Seamen, very cold in prosecuting the then Quarrel against the
Dutch in comparison of what they had been in the former Wars. However it was,
when the Dutch saw the Enemies were retreated home, they retired likewise, and
went and anchored at Schooneveld, from whence Lieutenant Admiral Tromp writ the
following Letter to the States.

High and Mighty Lords,
YEsterday at 11 a Clock, Tromp's Letter to the States.
having weighed Anchor with an East Wind, the Holland Fleet made a Motion in
order to approach the Enemies, who unmoored at the same time, and made away
with full sail from us, to avoid a Fight. Scarcely had we joined them, but our
Squadron which had the Van, engaged with the Enemies Blue Squadron, which begun
about 4 a Clock in the Afternoon. The Shock was fierce and obstinate, and was
not discontinued but by the approach of the Night. A little while after I had
begun the Attack, Lieutenant Admiral General de Ruiter and Lieutenant Admiral
Bankert engaged likewise, and fought vigorously. We chaced the Enemy as far as
within 5 Miles of Solbay. Night being come on, we tackt about, and steered
toward Schooneveld, which is the Place of our General Rendezvous. It is not to
be expressed how much Courage and Affection the whole Fleet testifies. We saw
one great English Ship burnt and several more are extremely endamaged. As to
what passed in other Squadrons, your High and Mightinesses will doubtless be
soon informed of it, to which we referr our selves. I do not see we have lost
any one Ship. We pray God Almighty to be pleased more and more to bless the
Glorious Government of your High and Mightinesses, etc.


This second Battle cost the Enemies, according to their own Report, about 3000
Men that were killed or wounded. Two Days after that great Action, the Deputies
of the States coming on Board, a Council of War was called, in order to take
new Resolutions about what it were best to undertake, that might be useful and
advantageous to the State: Where the Conduct of Vice Admiral Sweers in the last
Battle was brought in Question, which caused great Disputes between Tromp and
Sweers, and they were pusht on with so great a Transport of Heat and Animosity
by Tromp, that it was to be feared, they would have been attended with very ill
Consequences.

Tromp accuses Vice Admiral Sweers of not doing his Duty.
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp upbraided Sweers to his Face, That he had not done his
Duty, through a shameful Cowardice, which had made him turn his Back before the
Enemies. And he alleged, That the said Vice Admiral going foremost, with a
part of his Squadron, had not attackt the Enemy as he ought; and further, that
he had not maintained the Attack neither, when he was engaged any better than
he had begun, because he kept still so to the Windward, that the Captains that
were under him were forced to quit him, and to veer back and join him the said
Tromp, as all those Captains could faithfully testify.

To that, Vice Admiral Sweers answered in his Justification, That the Damages
his Ship had suffered, as well as the great number of Men he had killed and
wounded on Board him, sufficed to clear him from the Injustice and cruel
Outrage done to his Reputation, since by that it might easily be seen he was
hotly engaged with the Enemies at the Beginning of the Fight; but that at last
his Main-topmost being shot down, he was forced, much against his Will, to
retire, in order to repair his Damages; That in such an occasion it was
impossible for him to change his Ship, because that of Captain Jong was as much
disabled as his own, and that besides the Frigates that seconded him were too
small to put his Flag up in; And that he made Oath before God, that he was not
guilty of the Crime imputed to him, but that he had performed as well as any
Man in the Fleet.

And the Quarrel between these two Generals grew so hot, that they would have
proceeded from Words to Blows, had it not been for the Respect they were
obliged to have for the Deputies of the States, who were there present, and
who, to prevent the mischievous Consequences that might follow from those
Differences, ordered Cornelius Evertsz, Van Nes, and John Dik, accompanied with
Van Wouw, the Fiscal of the Fleet, to go on Board Vice Admiral Sweers Ship, to
examine the Damages he had suffered, and to report them to the Council of War.
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp fortified his Accusation with 14 Depositions which
were received, and which all amounted only to this, viz. That they had seen
Vice Admiral Sweers to the Windward, a great way off from the rest, and knew
not the Reason of it.

Vice Admiral Sweers replied to all that, in the first Place, by a List of the
Losses and Damages his Ship had suffered, authorized by the Attestation of the
Commissioners appointed to examine them, who loudly declared, That if the Ship
had been their own, they must have been constrained to act in the same manner
as Sweers had done. In the second place he produced a list of his killed and
wounded men, which were to the Number of 32 of the latter, and 11 of the
former, which was attested by the Surgeons of his ship. The Prince of Orange
taking that affair to heart, sent word to the Council of War, that he desired
them, to put it off till some further time, that he might himself be fully
informed of the whole truth of it. Tromp and Sweers professed themselves well
satisfied with it, and promised to conform to his Highnesses orders, and that
was the end of the dispute between those two Generals.

On the 19th of the month upon advice, that the Royal fleets were retired into
the Thames Rear Admiral de Haan was detacht away with a Squadron of 12 men of
War, 2 fireships, and 4 Advice Yachts, with order to observe them. And he
reported at his return, that he had heard from a pilot of Lubeck that came from
London on the 16th, that the two Hostile fleets were riding near Sheerness to
the Number of about 70 men of War, and that they were to go up the River as far
as Tilbury Hope, to take on board 30000 men of Regular Troops in order to
attempt a descent upon the Coasts of Zealand, and that there were already 20
ships ready.

On the 27th. the two fleets of England and France put to Sea again, being 150
sail strong, viz. 80 English and 28 French men of War. The Dutch fleet on the
other side, were but 100 sail in all, including the Reinforcements they had
lately received; but however, in that dangerous Juncture, they resolved
notwithstanding the inequality of their Forces to go and meet the Enemies, and
give them Battle. And on the 1st. of August, they met them, but the Enemi^s who
intended nothing less than an Engagement endeavored to avoid a fight.
Lieutenant Admiral Tromp whose Squadron had the Van, fired several Guns at them
to invite them to an Engagement, and presented them Battle, but that was not
their design. The Hollanders observing the Enemies behavior, presumed it to be
a Stratagem they played to make show as if they fled, only to draw the Dutch
away from the Coasts of Zealand, that they might have opportunity afterward to
execute their great design, which was a descent. And in effect, they were not
deceived; for the next day toward evening, the Royal Fleets appeared before
the Meuse, and a day after, before Scheveling.

At that motion of theirs, all Holland was in an alarm for fear the Enemies
should enter into the heart of the Country to waste and destroy it, and
therefore in order to oppose them, all the Companies of the Burghers of the
Hague, and of Delft and all the peasants of the villages round about were
Commanded to march with all haste toward the Coasts. Cannon was likewise sent
down thither to furnish sufficient batteries of defense. About 11 a Clock
before noon, 6 or 7 light Frigates approacht so near the Coasts by favor of the
Tide, that the Dutch on shore begun to play their Cannon at them, which the
English answered with the like, but without doing much mischief. After that the
Enemies made off again into the main Sea, and showed themselves the same day in
the afternoon, near Zandvoort and de Wikopzee, about three miles from the
shore, and sending up 2 Frigates near to this last place, they battered it for
some time with their Guns. The next day they appeared likewise before Egmond
and Petten, and lastly before Helder, and the Texel.

The Prince of Orange hearing at the Army which was encampt at Ramsdonk that
the Enemies Fleets hovered about the Coasts of Holland, came with all have to
the Hague where he arrived on the 4th. of the month very early in the morning.
He had ordered his Regiment of Guards and some Horse, to follow him in order to
relieve the Burghers that had guarded the Coasts of Scheveling under the
Conduct of the Duke of Holstein. The Prince of Waldee, likewise came to the
Brill at the same time, to give the necessary orders there; and General Wirtz
was sent to Walcheren to look after the preservation of that post.

The Prince of Orange after he had been at several conferences held concerning
the affairs of the Land Army, went down to the Fleet to give likewise his
orders there; and he no sooner entered on board Admiral de Ruiter, but they
saluted him with 13 Guns in acknowledgment of the honor of his presence, after
which he assisted at the Council of War, where it was resolved Battle should be
given the Enemies as soon as it was possible, in hopes thereby to force them at
least to quit the Coasts and Harbors of the United Provinces. Those
Resolutions being taken his Highness represented to every one their duty and
what great necessity there was in so pressing an occasion, to fight
courageously for the Honor and Interest of their Country: That done, he left
the Fleet, with the acclamations of the Seamen who cried out Long live the
Prince, and returned back toward the Hague.

The Dutch Fleet without any further delay, weighed Anchor the very next day,
and steered away directly toward the Texel, where the Royal Fleets were; but
by reason of contrary winds they could not get up with the Enemies Fleet till
the 20th. A third fi ht.
The next day in the morning, the fight begun, which proved one of the most
furious and bloody ones that ever was recorded in History, and that ever was
fought upon the Ocean. The Dutch having got the Weather gage in the night fell
upon the Enemies about the break of day. Lieutenant Admiral Tromp had the
vanguard, de Ruiter Commanded the main Battle, and Bankert, the Rear. About
half an hour after 7, the Royal Fleets made a motion, to attack the Hollanders.
De Ruiter upon that presently gave a signal, and made his Squadrons make
another motion to preserve the advantage of the Weather-gage, and to prevent
the Enemies attack by attacking them first. By that motion, Bankert's Squadron
that had the Rear before came to have the Van; de Ru^ter's Squadron was still
in the main Battle, and Tromp's in the Rear.

About half an hour after 8, Bankert fell upon the Count d' Estree's Squadron,
which had the Van of the Royal Fleets, de Ruiter attacked Prince Robert's
Squadron, and Tromp the Blue one Commanded by Sir Edward Spragg. Then the fight
was general, The French desert the English.
and the two contending Fleets were thoroughly engaged. However, the French,
excepting only Rear Admiral Martel, who fought with all the bravery imaginable,
showed by their Conduct, that their design was to husband and spare their
forces, and according to the opinion of most knowing men, it was presumed, the
Count d' Estree, though he made a show of fighting bravely for a time, had secret
orders from his Master to act in that manner, so that about 11 a Clock they
very fairly made a tack about to the Eastward, and stood off to the Wind-ward,
where they remained malicious spectators of the rest of the fight.

Admiral de Ruiter being engaged with Prince Robert, those two Admiral's and
their Squadrons fought most desperately. Lieutenant Admiral Bankert seeing the
French were gone off, thought not fit to pursue them any longer, for fear of
being drawn away too far off from the main of the Dutch Fleet, but veered back
toward the main Battle, and went to the assistance of Admiral de Ruiter.
Prince Robert seeing the main force of the Hollanders falling upon him, and
that the French had left him in the Lurch, and would not come in to his
assistance to enable him to dispute the victory, and being almost overwhelmed,
he and his, by the furious firing of two entire Dutch Squadrons, thought it
time to provide for his and their safety, by a prudent retreat, and so steered
away to the Westward with all the sail he could make, and quitted the fight,
leaving the advantage and claim of Victory to the Hollanders, and was pursued
by de Ruiter, Van Nes and Bankert, till two a Clock in the afternoon.

In the mean while the English Blue Squadron, and that of Lieutenant Admiral
Tromp, having made a tack to the North in fighting, were already gotten to such
a distance from the main of their Fleets, that they were out of sight. Admiral
de Ruiter fearing Tromp might be in danger thought fit to go and seek him out,
in order to assist him. And accordingly he advanced with his own and Bankert's
Squadron that way.

Prince Robert observing the motion made by de Ruiter, begun to be in as much
fear for Spragg as de Ruiter was in for Tromp; And therefore without any
further hesitation, he ordered his Squadron to make the same motion as his
Enemy that he might follow him; the Count de Estree with his Squadron followed
him; but yet neither of them thought good to come near the Hollanders any more,
for fear of being obliged to come to a fresh engagement with them, and
therefore they prudently kept at a distance out of the reach of Cannon-shot.
The terrible and fatal fight beween Tromp and Spragg.
In the mean while, Tromp and Spragg fought a long time with such an obstinacy
and desperate fierceness as was incredible, and to see them in the heat of
fight, one would have said, those two Admirals had sworn their Mutual and
Common Destruction.

Vice Admiral Sweers who Commanded a part of Tromp's Squadron, was engaged with
the foremost Ships of the Blue Squadron, Commanded by Vice Admiral Kempthorn
and Rear Admiral the Earl of Ossory. Sweers attackt Kempthorn so vigorously
that he was forced at last to give way, which put to the rout most of the Ships
of the Blue Squadron who were pursued by the Hollanders; But the two chiefs of
the contending Squadrons continued fighting for 7 hours together with so much
obstinacy, that the Cannon and small shot played perpetually without any
intermission from both the two Admirals upon one another.

There happened a thing extremely surprising, and almost incredible to Tromp in
that Battle, that shows the great happiness that attended him in all the fights
he was present in; which is that the Combat had already lasted 6 hours before
he had so much as one man killed or wounded, Tromp's Happiness in Battle.
out of 500 he had on board him; which extraordinary luckiness was looked upon
as a manifest proof of the Protection of God; for most of the Bullets were seen
to fly either over or cross his Ship without doing any harm, though those two
Chiefs of Squadrons fought pretty near one another. But Sir Edward Spragg was
at last so severely handled by Tromp that he had 400 men killed, and 300
wounded according to the Earl of Ossory's report afterward to Tromp of that
Action; so that seeing himself re^uced to so pitiful a condition, he quitted
the fight, and about noon betook himself to flight. Tromp did all he could to
stop him, and with Cannon-balls beat down all his sails and his Mizzen Mast as
he was pursuing him.

Spragg being thus disabled, 15 or 16 ships of his Squadron, advanced and fell
upon the Golden Lion in which Tromp was, to revenge their friend's Quarrel, and
setting some fireships at her, had like to have burnt her, but Tromp repulsed
them so dexterously that they could do him no harm. The Enemies seeing their
Fireships take no effect, environed him round; and st^ed at him on all sides
with continual broadsides from all their guns that in a little time his Ship
was quite disabled; she was so grievously battered and pierced through and
through with shot.

Tromp then was forc^d to quit his Ship, the Golden Lion, and went on board the
Comet, and kept himself always close to the Royal Prince, to have a watchful
eye upon Spragg who after he had likewise changed his Ship was r^turned again
to the fight. He was removed into the St. George, and did his utmost, to defend
the Prince Royal that was in danger of being taken or burnt by Tromp; ^empthorn
veered back likewise with a part of the Blue Squadron toward Spragg, and so by
that succor and the motion they ma^e, the Royal Prince was secured. In the
mean while, the St. George was so roughly handled that Sprag was likewise
forced to quit her, as being altogether disabled. Accordingly for that effect,
he leapt into a Boat to go on board the Royal Charles; but soon after a Cannon
Ball was Level d so unluckily at the Boat that she was ready to sink; Admiral
Spragg's death.
Spragg seeing the danger he was in, ordered his men to row hard, to try to get
back to the St. George; but it was too late; for the Boat sunk in an instant.
The English running to his assistance, found him dead, having his head and
shoulders above water, and his hands and arms so strongly grasping the side of
the boat, that they had much ado to get them loose. Such was the end of one of
the most valiant Admirals England ever had. It is reported, that when he took
his leave of the K. of England, he promised him to bring him Lieutenant Admiral
Tromp alive or dead, or else to lose his own Life in the attempt, which last
accordingly came to pass.

The English Blue Squadron and that of Tromp were engaged in a bloody and
obstinate fight, and if Prince Robert had not come in speedily to the
assistance of the Blue Squadron, it had been totally defeated, which the Prince
well foreseeing advanced with all imaginable haste, and joined the the Blue
Squadron about four a Clock in the afternoon, and de Ruiter and Bankert's
Squadron had done the same thing with Tromp's. And Spragg's Ship having lost
her Main Masts was towed away out of the fight by a Frigate.

After de Ruiter, Van Nes, and Bankert had joined with Tromp, they all fell
afresh upon the Enemies, who had the Weather-gage, which gave occasion to
another fierce and bloody fight, whilst the Count d' Estree with his Squadron
keeping all the time to the wind-ward, contented himself after his former
manner to be only a Spectatour of the Fray, without troubling himself at all to
assist the over-matched English, who seeing themselves so basely deserted, and
attackt at the same time by the whole Force of Holland, were after a most
valiant and vigorous resistance, forced at last to give way, and about 7 in the
Evening, they begun to retreat, and were pursued by the Hollanders till the
beginning of the Night, who forced them a second time to Quit the Sea.

The Dutch lost in that fight, The Dutch Loss.
the two Vice-Admirals, de Liefde, and Sweers, and the very same Evening, the
Rear-Admirals, Van Nes and de Haan were named provisionally to supply their
places. They lost likewise the Captains, Van Gueldre, Sweerius, Visscher, and
Jobsz Kiela, but that which is most remarkable, is, that so great an Action as
that, cost the Hollanders only 4 or 5 Fireships, without the loss of so much
as one Man of War. The Dutch Fleet being thus Victorious, kept out still at
Sea, excepting only the Ships of Tromp, Rear-Admiral de Haan, and of the
Captains, Brakel, and de Jong, which were sent into Port to be repaired. As to
the Number of their Men killed and wounded, in the whole Squadron of Amsterdam,
there were reported to be but 71 of the first and 120 of the last, and in the
other Squadrons proportionably.

As for the Loss on the English side, The Engllish loss.
there were more said to be killed in Admiral Spragg's single Ship than the
Dutch would own to have been in their whole Fleet. There were also reckoned in
that Number 4 Captains, recommendable for their Bravery, and many other Persons
of Note, who all lost their Lives in that Battle. Two of their bigest Ships
were said to be sunk, and 6 or 7 burnt, and 10 of their Fireships spent and
lost in vain. Here follow the Letters written concerning that Action, by the
Dutch Admirals, to the States.

High and Mighty Lords,
De Ruiter's Letter to the States.
BY my last, dated the 20th instant toward Evening, I certified your High and
Mightinesses, That we had discovered the same Day the Royal Fleets, having the
Weather-gage. At Night they steered to the East-south-eastward, as we thought
fit to do to the West-north-westward; so that the Wind turning to the East, we
found our selves Yesterday-Morning in sight of the Coasts of Holland, having
the Weather-gage. I presently gave the Signal for our Fleet to get into Order
of Battle, with a Resolution to attack the Enemy. The Royal Fleets seeing us
prepare for Fight, did the like on their side; so that about half an Hour after
7, the two Fleets engaged. I attackt Prince Robert, Bankert attackt the Count
d' Estree, and Tromp Sir Edward Spragg. We broke reciprocally one through the
other, having sometimes the Weather-gage, and sometimes losing it. The Allies
Fleet made at first a great effort with 28 Fireships, which they had, whereof 8
or 10 were destroyed in part by our Boats, who forced them to set Fire to them
themselves, and then to quit them; We likewise lost 4 or 5 of ours. A Captain
of an English Fireship that was taken Prisoner, reported to us, That the
Enemies 5 or 6 Days ago took one of our Ships, homewards bound from the
East Indies, which came away before the rest. The Fight lasted till the
beginning of the Night, and ended not but with the Retreat of the Royal Fleets,
who steered away toward the English Coast in a very shattered Condition.
Admiral Spragg's Ship was towed away by some Frigates, having lost all her
Masts. One of their biggest Men of War is sunk, and we have lost none at all.
As for the Officers of our Fleet, we have lost the two Vice-Admirals, de Liefde
and Sweers, and the Captains, Van Guelder, my Son-in-Law, and Sweerius, besides
several others wounded. Secretary Andringa is in the Number of these last. We
hope to inform your High and Mightinesses more particularly of the
Circumstances of this great action; and we thank God, that he has left us the
Masters of the Sea; which will favor the coming in of those Ships into our
Harbors that are expected home, etc.


Admiral Tromp's Letter to the States.
High and Mighty Lords,
THOUGH the Royal Fleets of England and France had on the 20th instant the
Weather-gage, yet the Wind next Morning chopping about to the East-south-east,
we found our selves to the Wind-ward, and they to the Lee-ward. Our Fleet was
about a Mile from the Country of Petren. We tackt about to the North, and the
Enemies to the South; about 8 a Clock we likewise made the same Motion to
follow them. The Fleet of the Allies was 150 Sail strong, great and small.
Lieutenant Admiral Bankert having the Van, attackt the White Squadron. Admiral
de Ruiter attackt Prince Robert, who commanded the Main Battle, and we attackt
the Rear, or the Blue Squadron, commanded by Sir Edward Spragg. Our Ships, that
were the foremost advanced toward the South-East, begun to play their Guns,
and so insensibly the main Fleet engaged. Being come up directly to Admiral
Spragg, we cannonaded him so terribly, that his Main and Mizzen Masts were both
shot down, and then we were disposing our selves either to Board him or Burn
him; but the Ships of his Squadron that backed him, running in to his Aid, made
so great a Resistance that our Ship was reduced into a pitiful Condition, and
was so disabled that I was forced to quit her, to remove into the Comet, where
I put up my Flag about 2 a Clock in the Afternoon. In the mean while the
Enemies having made themselves Masters of the Weather-gage, our Men were so far
from letting them keep any Advantage from thence, that they attackt them with
so much the more Bravery and Courage, and reduced them into such a Condition,
that their Squadron was almost ruined by it. We beat them till 7 a Clock in the
Afternoon, when we forced them to quit the Sea. I hope to go to Day on Board
the Elephant, vacant by the Death of Vice Admiral Sweers. I do not know, that
this Fight has cost us the Loss of so much as one Ship. As for what passed in
the Squadrons of Admiral de Ruiter, and Lieutenant Admiral Bankert, I am
persuaded, that the Letters of those two Admirals have fully informed your High
and Mightinesses, etc.


The Bodies of Vice Admiral Sweers, and of the Captains, Van Guelder, and
Sweerius were carried to Amsterdam to be buried there; but that of Vice Admiral
de Liefde was sent to Rotterdam. Those great Men were accordingly interred with
all the Honors due to their high Merit; and their Country for which they lost
their Lives, omitted nothing that might contribute to the immortalizing their
worthy Memory, erecting to them most stately Tombs, whereon are engraven
suitable Epitaphs, to publish their Heroic Actions to Posterity, which are to
be seen in the abovementioned Cities.

After that happy Advantage, which in that Juncture was more worth than a much
greater Victory, the Dutch Fleet continued at Sea till the 22d of September,
and then because there was no Appearance of any thing considerable likely to
pass between them and the Royal Fleets, during the remainder of that Year the
States sent them Orders to retire home. And accordingly on the 28 of the same
Month, The States thank the Sea-Generals for their Courage and Affection shown
in the last Battles.
the Generals presented themselves before the Assembly of the States General,
and of the States of Holland, where they received public Thanks for the Zeal
and steadfast Affection they had shown for the Service of their Country in the
three last Battles lately fought. After which the States were pleased to reward
every one of them in particular. They also ordered a certain Gratuity in Money
to be given to the Widows of those General Officers that were killed; and for
that effect the following Resolution was taken by them, and published the 30th
of September, 1673.

AFter a due Deliberation, it has been thought sit, in pursuance of the
Resolution taken by their High and Mightinesses on the 28th instant, The
Resolution of the States of Holland and West-Friesland f^r ordering Rewards to
their General Sea-Officers, etc.
and in Acknowledgement of the Services the Generals of the Fleet have rendered
to their Country in the last Battles fought against the Enemies Fleets, There
shall be given to Lieutenant General Admiral de Ruiter, a Letter of
Constitution of 6000 Livers annual Rent; to the Lieutenant Admirals Van Nes and
Tromp 4000 Livers each; to the Widows and Heirs of the Vice-Admirals de Liefde,
Sweers and Schram an Annual Allowance of 2000 Livers each; to the Rear
Admirals, John van Nes and de Haan 1000 Livers each as likewise to the Widow
and Heirs of Rear Admiral Vlug, a like Letter of Constitution of 100 Livers
Annual Pension. These three successive Advantages the Dutch Fleet had gotten
over the English and French, quite ruined all the Conquests the French King had
made by Land, with as much Rapidity as Success; for thereby the Coasts and
Havens of the United Provinces being freed from the Oppression of two powerful
Fleets, that kept them as it were besieged, the Dutch had thereby time to take
Breath, and to draw from thence the Troops that were posted there, and to
employ them elsewhere. For the Prince of Orange seeing Fortune begun to declare
her self for his Arms, marched the States Army, that was reinforced by some
Spanish Troops, toward Naerden, in order to besiege it; and after the
Reduction of that Place, he joined the Emperors Army under the Command of Count
Montecuculi, and formed the Siege of Bonne, that was taken on the 14th of
November. Which happy Successes, and the Arrival of the Imperialist, absolutely
broke the Measures of France and its Allies, and forced them all at a spurt to
quit the Conquests they had made with so much Rapidity, by disabling them to
preserve them, without leaving themselves without Troops sufficient to oppose
to the Prince of Orange and Imperialists in the Field, which it was much more
dangerous for them, to let their Enemies be Masters of, than it was prejudicial
to quit their late Conquests, and the Pride they took in having gotten them.

Therefore on the 7th of October they quitted Woorden, on the 14th of November
Bommel, and on the 23d of the same Month Vtrecht, and in general all the
Conquests they had made in the Provinces of Vtrecht, Guelders and Over-Yssel:
But before their Retreat, they extorted immense Sums from the Inhabitants, and
committed all the Depredations Cruelty and Despair could incite them to. So
many fortunate Successes happening in so short a time, not only freed the
United Provinces from the Disasters they were like to sink under, but put them
into a condition to take some Revenge for them.

For that effect, the States, redoubling their Care and Diligence, begun to
think of Manning and Arming out a powerful Fleet; Preparations of War for the
Year 1674.
and resolved it should consist of 90 Men of War, 24 Fireships, and 24
Galliots, etc. amounting in all to 162 Sail. Whilst they were making those
vigorous Naval Preparations, the Spaniards, who had declared War against
France, by virtue of their Treaty of Alliance with the States General of the
United Provinces, employed the Marquess de Fresno, their Ambassador in the
Court of England, to endeavor a separate Peace between the King of Great
Britain and the States. A Peace concluded between Engl^nd and H^lland by the
Spanish Ambassador.
The Negotiation that had been set on foot for a General Peace, at Cologn, was
just then like to be broken off by the exorbitant Demands made by France and
its Allies, so that the States finding there was no trusting to any Hopes on
that side of a General Peace, used all their Artifices to separate England from
the other Allies, and for that purpose sent full Power to the Marquess de
Fresno, to treat on that Subject with that Crown, who managed it so dexterously,
that on the 19th of February, 1674. a Peace was effectually concluded at
Westminster between the States and the King of England, to the Exclusion of
France, and its Allies.

That Peace caused an unexpressible Joy to the United Provinces, and raised
hopeful Expectations in all their People; and as the Union of England with
France, formed together, had they acted unanimously, so formidable a Sea-power,
that it seemed at first to the Hollanders, to have been invincible, though the
Event, and ill cemented Correspondence of those two Nations showed the
contrary, so now the United Provinces had reason to flatter themselves with the
Hopes, France to Reason, being alone, after they had divid^d England from it,
which was the more powerful of the two at Sea, than they could expect before.
Which Achievement was as terrible a Stroke to France, as it was a Glorious and
Advantageous Omen to the United Provinces.

That troublesome Thorn being plucked out of their Foot, the States reflecting
upon the immense Charges they had been forced to be at for equipping out a
Fleet, numerous enough to encounter two such formidable Sea-powers as they had
had before upon them, thought they might now well enough retrench some of them,
now they had none but Fran^^ to deal with. And therefore they ordered, that the
Fleet for the Year 1674 should be composed only of 66 Men of War, 18 Fireships,
12 Great Galliots, and as many smaller ones, and 24 Flutes, etc. making in all
150 Sail, and that 9000 Regular Troops should be embarked thereon, and that
they should carry with them 6 Months Provision; that a part of that Fleet,
under the Command of de Ruiter, should sail toward the Caribbe Islands
belonging to the French, to destroy them, whilst the other part, under the
Conduct of Lieutenant Admiral Tromp should advance toward the French Coasts,
in order to make some Descent and Diversion there. And the General Rendezvous
of that Fleet was appointed to be at Wielingen.

A Relation of the Principal Adventures that happened at Sea in the Year 1674.
taken out of the Original Memoirs of Lieutenant Admiral Tromp.
THE Fleet of the United Provinces weighed Anchor on the 24th of May, and on
the 26th arrived before Dunkirk, from whence they departed on the 27th toward
Dover, where the Marquess de Fresno, the King of Spain's Ambassador at the
Court of England, came on Board the Admiral, to see it. They afterward kept
cruising along the Channel, and about Torbay, till the 7th of June; and during
all that time kept the Coasts of France in a continual Alarm.

Lieutenant Admiral de Ruiter, in pursuance of the States Orders, separated
from Lieutenant Admiral Tromp on the 8th, with a Squadron of Men of War and
some Troops, and sailed away for the West Indies: And then the rest of the
Fleet under Tromp unmoored from Torbay, and arrived the same Evening near the
Goutstart. On the 19th and 20th they discovered the Isle of Vshant. At the
approach of the Fleet, the French fired their Beacons all-a-long the Coast, and
the Arrierbann of Britainy were most of them posted in and about Breast, which
they had taken great Care to fortify: And they had placed a great many Ships
at the Mouth of the Harbor, upon which they had placed Cannon, and erected
Batteries. The French being so strong upon their Guard on that side, the
Generals of the Dutch Fleet, found it impossible to execute their Projects
there, and unanimously resolved to move toward Belle-Isle, and there to wait
for such of their Ships as were straggled from the Body of their Fleet, and
then to sail all together toward the Mouth of the Loire. According to that
Project, the Fleet unmoor'd, and on the 22d a small English Vessel, that was
sent out a scouting, returned to the Fleet, and brought with her a French,
Sounder of S. Lazar. On the 23d the Fleet went and anchored on the East of
Belle-Isle. As soon as the Duke de Chaulnes, Governor of Britainy, had heard
of the Arrival of the Hollanders, he hastily drew together 4000 Peasants, which
the next Day were reinforced with 4000 more, and 400 Gentlemen on Horseback,
who came from Landernau, Guanove, and S. Renans: and besides that, he
dispatched a Courier to the Marquess of Coetlogon, with orders to throw himself
into Belle-Isle, which he accordingly did with 600 Foot, and 80 Gentlemen.

On the 24th the Dutch Fleet anchored on the East Side of the Castle, in 13
Fathom Water. There came likewise to the Fleet a small English Ship, which
reported, There were 8000 Men in Arms in the Island, which was also confirmed
by the French Sounder that was taken. But it being found afterward that their
Number in reality was but 3000, the Dutch resolved upon a Descent. But first
the Count de Horn sent a Trumpeter with a Summons to the Governor of the Isle;
who returned in the Afternoon with this Answer, That both he the said
Governor, and all the Inhabitants, were resolved to defend themselves to the
last Extremity, in case the Island were attacked.

The Dutch attack Belle-Isle.
On the 26th Lieutenant Admiral Tromp, and the Count de Horn, took a Boat, and
went and viewed in what Places it would be most proper to make a Descent; and
when they came back to the Fleet, they ordered the Land-Troops to be in
Readiness for the next Day, with a Design to make then an Attempt, in case the
Wind proved favorable: And accordingly, on the 27th, at Break of Day, the
Signal was given for it, upon which all the Galliots, being filled with
Soldiers, approached the Shore, in order to make a Descent, by Favor of the
Fire made by the Guns of their Men of War. The Dutch, being landed, found much
less Resistance than they expected, though the French had made double
Retrenchments, and posted in them numerous Guards; and that besides there was a
Hill in the way very steep and difficult of Ascent. As soon as the Troops were
landed, they drew up in order of Battle, and advanced toward the Castle, and
when they came within Musket Shot of it, because it was now Evening, they made
a Halt. In the mean while, a Detachment that had been sent ascouting out of the
Castle, no sooner heard of the Approach of the Dutch, but they turned back in
all haste, and retired again into the Fortress. On the other side, a part of
the Fleet approaching as near as could be to the Castle, fired furiously at it,
which the French did their best to answer in the like kind. On the 28th the
Dutch went and encampt at Soison, where they seized on all the Cattle of the
Country, and sent them to the Fleet: The same Day the Admirals Bankert and Van
Nes were commanded to move to the Westward of the Castle, where it was lowest.
On the 29th a Bark belonging to the Castle came out to the Fleet with a White
Flag, and brought a Letter from de Lorgerie, to the Dutch Generals, to let them
know that he wanted Refreshments, and that if they would give him leave for two
or three Fishing Vessels they should catch Fish for him and them too; but
Admiral Tromp would by no means grant his Request.

On the 30th Tromp sent another Trumpeter to the Castle, To desire the Release
of some Dutch Prisoners, in consideration that the Count de Horn had already
released a great Number of theirs, both Men, Women and Children. Upon which
Demand, the Governor sent back 17 Soldiers and Seamen, and one Drummer, who
venturing to straggle too far from the Army were taken by the French; and
because in so doing they had transgressed their Orders, two of them at their
Return were hanged for an Example. The Dutch, after having staid two Days upon
the Island, resolved at length to reimbark again, without attempting any thing
more upon the Castle, because they thought it would cost too much Time formally
to besiege it. They carried off with them only three Pieces of Cannon from the
Island to the Fleet.

On the 2d of July they unmoored, and on the 3d came to an Anchor in the Bay of
Bourgneuf, right against Narmourtiers, and employed the rest of the Day in
making the necessary Preparations in order to a Descent the next Morning. In
the mean while, Admiral Tromp took Boat and went and viewed where it might be
most proper to attempt it. The Enemies had made several Retrenchments upon the
Shore, and had placed there their Musketeers. On the 4th the Signal was given
for Landing, and thereupon all the Troops getting into Boats for that purpose,
approached the Shore, to which they were forced to climb up over Rocks, or wade
through the Water as high as their middles.

The French at the first Approach of the Dutch, fired something briskly upon
them, but as soon as they saw them advance, and march toward them with an
undaunted Resolution, they deserted their Retrenchments, and retired a great
way up into the Country. They likewise quitted the Castle of the Island, so
that the Hollanders were all landed about 7 in the Evening, and put up the
Prince's Colors upon the Castle, and upon the Mills. They found 17 Pieces of
Cannon planted along the Shore, which were sent to the Fleet, and 12 Ships that
had been forced to run aground. The Dutch, in landing, had but 135 M^n killed
and wounded, Officers and all. The Prisoners reported, there were 5000 Men
ready to pass into the Island from the firm Land, and that 500 of them were
already arrived.

Upon those Advices, the Count de Horn hastened the March of his Troops, with a
Resolution to oppose their Passage, leaving Captain Brakel with 3 Companies of
Seamen and 60 Musketeers in the Castle, and Captain Hardenbrock, with Admiral
Tromp's Company of Seamen in the Abbey, to guard those Posts. The Army being
arrived toward Evening to the Place by which the French were to pass, found
they were all retired back into the firm Land, where there appeared a Body of
the Enemies Horse and Foot. But the Army wanting Water, they were obliged to
remove, and encamp an Hours March back from thence, leaving Mr. Zomersdyk with
400 men to secure that Post.

On the 5th of July 2 Brigantines built Galleywise, and well armed, that were
sent from Rochelle, arrived at the Island, and not knowing the Dutch had made a
Descent there, without any Fear, approached the Shore. Mr. de Zomersdyk at the
Sight of them, posting himself with 60 Musketeers behind a Rising Ground, made
a Show with his Men as if they had been French, the better to amuse and decoy
them; whilst, on the other side, the Dutch fell upon them so suddenly, that
they were forced to yield.

That Island contains about 1000 Houses, and is not above 250 Paces distant
from the main Land, so that the French on the one side, and the Hollanders on
the other could mutually cannonade one another. For when the Tide is low, the
space between Bouin and Beauvoir, which is in the main Land of Poitou, is so
very dry, that as many Men as please may pass in a Rank from either of the
Places to the other, which may be done two Hours after the going out of the
Tide.

The French, to intimidate the Dutch, gave out a Report, That their King had
sent Orders to all the Horse and Foot that were on the other Side, to pass over
to oppose their Depredations, and force them to quit that Post; but for all
their Bravado's their Countenance well showed, they were more apprehensive of
the Hollanders, than the Hollanders were of all their false Alarms, since they
removed all the Straw and Boiling Vessels that belonged to their Salt Pits, to
Bouin and Beauvoir, for Security. In the mean while Admiral Tromp commanded all
his Ships to return again to their Flag; on the 7th he approached the Shore
with his whole Fleet, and recommended to his General Officers strictly to
forbid their Seamen, under Pain of Death not to amuse themselves with plundring
ashore either Cattle, or any thing else.

On the 8th of the same Month, 2 Frigates and 8 Fireships came back to the
Fleet, and reported, they had been at S. Martha's Island, where they had seen
stranded a French Frigate of 40 Guns, which afterward by some Fire accidentally
falling into her Powder-room, was blown up. The same Day a Frigate with 9 other
Vessels, were detached away toward S. Andrews, to take in Water for the whole
Fleet. Two Brigantines and 2 Yachts were likewise sent to cruise about Breast,
to destroy the French Fisher-ships, and to take them, if possible. On the 9th 2
Frigates, 2 Fireships, and 2 Galliots more, were sent away toward the Island of
S. Martha, and the Mouth of the River of Bourdeaux.

On the 10th the Captains, Dekker and Megang came back to the Fleet, and
reported, That they had presented themselves before the Island Heys, but durst
not attempt a Descent for want of Men enough to execute it: That, according to
the Report of an English Ship come from S. Martha's, the Appearance of the
Dutch Fleet had put all the Islanders into a great Consternation; that they had
sent over into that Island 10000 Men, but the most of them Peasants, gathered
up in haste, and some Pieces of Cannon. On the 11th, 5 Days Provision for the
Subsistence of the Army was sent on Shore.

On the 14th the Frigates that had been cruising on the Coasts of Britany, came
back to the Fleet, with a French Ship, that 6 Weeks before was in company with
22 Merchant Ships, under the Convoy of some French Men of War, who had
conducted them from Marseilles to the Straits Mouth. She carried 10 Guns, and
30 Men; 17 of the other Merchant-Ships saved themselves by running in close to
Shore upon the Approach of the Hollande^s. The Dutch Brigantines were ordered
thereupon, to return to the Coasts of Britany, to endeavor to take those
Ships. On the 20th some Ships that had been detacht to cruise before the Mouth
of Bourdeaux River came in likewise, and reported, That they had been informed
by 24 Sial of English and Hamburgers, That the French King's Ships were retired
to Rochfort, where they were secured by 5 Barriers; and that 2 Fireships were
preparing at Rochelle. The same Evening 3 Days Provision more was sent to the
Land-Army.

On the 22d the Brigantines returned to the Fleet, and reported, they had
destroyed 3 of the Enemies Barks, and that 4 or 5 small Ships laden with
Ammunition, were near Boulin: Upon which, Captain Hidder was forthwith
dispatched away with some Brigantines, to destroy them. The Dutch, after having
ravaged the Country, retire.
The Hollanders, after they ha^ for three Weeks together ravaged that Island,
resolved at length to quit it, but they first blew up the Castle, filled up the
Retrenchments, that had been made a long the Shore, and plundered the
Inhabitants. All the Cattle which they found there in great Numbers, was
already consumed in feeding their Men, but they carried off Hostages with them
to the Fleet, for 14000 Crowns Contribution.

The Prisoners reported, That the Duke de Chaulnes was encamped with 400
Gentlemen of the Arrierban, between Crouil and Lazare, at about 6 Hours or
Leagues from Narmoutier; That the Duke de Retz with 1200 other Gentlemen, and
5000 Inhabitants, was between Bourgneuf, and Machou, about a League from
Narmoutier. The Duke of Vionville had his Post at Boulin and Beauvoir, and
commanded a Body of 2000 Gentlemen of the Arrierban and 8000 Inhabitants. The
Duke de Gadagne commanded at Rochelle, at Oleron, and at the Isle of The, where
the French had their main Forces. For, according to the common Report of the
Prisoners, and of the Men belonging to some English and Hamburg Vessels, there
were in the Isle of The alone 10000 Foot and 1000 Horse; and that the
Foot-Regiments of Gadagne, Neuville, Louvigny, a Marine Battalion, and several
other detached Companies, and the Horse Regiments of Courcelle and Bellegarde
were arrived there 6 Weeks before.

In Oleron there were likewise a great many Horse and Foot, and 3 Weeks before,
there was also arrived a Marine Battalion to meet Tromp. The Spanish Governor
of S. Sebastian writ to the Count de Horn, that after he had carefully informed
himself of the Number of Forces the Enemies had about Rochelle, Bourdeaux and
Bayonne, he had found, they amounted at least to 8000 Foot and 6000 Horse, and
the Marshals de Grammont, and d' Obret, and the Counts de la Scre, and de
Louvigny had the guarding of the Coast between Bourdeaux and Bayonne.

The French Prisoners, taken by the Dutch, assured them likewise, That the
Misery to which the People of those Coasts were reduced, was inexpressible; for
that their Houses were plundered, and their Lands ravaged every whit as cruelly
by the French Horse, as if they had had an Enemies Army in the Heart of their
Country. After the Reimbarkment of their Troops, the Dutch Generals thought
fit, because their Fleet begun to want Fresh Water, and that the Ships they had
sent to S. Andrews on that Errand, were not yet come back, to send out 2 Men of
War and 5 Galliots more to fetch them some, with Orders to them to sell off the
Prizes they had taken from the French.

Admiral Tromp sails toward Cadiz:
After that Expedition the Fleet sailed away for Cadiz, and arrived there on the
26th. When they entered the Bay, they rendered the Spaniards the usual Salute of
60 Guns. Among a great many Persons of Quality that came on Board the Admiral,
the most remarkable was Don Nicholas de Corduba, General of the Spanish
Galleys. And there it was they heard the News of the Victory, as it was called,
which the Prince of Orange had then newly obtained at Seneffe over the great
Prince of Conde. On the 29th Don Diego de Cavalliero came also on Board, to
complement Admiral Tromp, and the Count de Horn. He was received with all the
Civilities due to his Rank; and they drank together the Healths of the King of
Spain, of the States General, and of his Highness the Prince of Orange; after
which he returned to the Town. On the 31st Admiral Tromp, and all the General
Officers of the Fleet, were received at Cadiz with all imaginable Honors: For
the Governor came on Foot, followed by his Coach, and conducted him to his
Palace, where he was treated with much Magnificence; which was further expressed
by the Discharge of all the Cannon; after which, he went to the Dutch Consuls,
where he was likewise received with great Honor, and returned the same Evening
on Board the Admiral-Ship.

On the 11th of the Month of August, the Count de Ho n, don Bernardo de Salinas
and Mr. de Sommersdyk, went to Madrid, where they were received by the Queen of
Spain with great Marks of Friendship. The Subject of their Journey was to
confer with the chief Ministers of that Crown, and to concert with them what
was most advisable for the Fleet to attempt against the Coast of Provence. On
the 1st of September they returned again to Cadiz, and were received there with
all the Honors that could be expressed. On the 5th there were public
Rejoycings, and Bonefires were made all over the Town, and a great Number of
Candles put up in Lanthorns in every Ship in the Fleet, to celebrate the
Victory obtained at Seneffe by the Prince of Orange, which in the Darkness of
the Night made the most delightful Spectacle in the World. Several whole Rounds
of Cannon both from the Castles and Fleet likewise discharged, which loudly
proclaimed the Universal Joy conceived at those early and hopeful Successes of
the Prince. On the 6th, the Dutch Smirna Fleet arrived in the Grand Fleet; and
on the 7th they weighed Anchor and past the Straits in the Night, with Design
to advance higher into the Mediterranean; but the Approach of the Winter, and
some contrary Orders Tromp received, broke off the Designs that had been
projected to be put in Execution there; which obliged Tromp to quit the
Mediterranean on the 1st of November, from whence on the 4th of December he
arrived at the Texel.

After that Expedition, the Fleet disarmed. The Reputation Tromp had gained in
the World was then so great, that he was looked upon to be the greatest Man at
Sea of his Time. And the King of England himself had conceived so much Esteem
for him, The King of England invites Tromp to the English Court.
that he passionately desired to see him; and for that Effect gave Order to the
Earls of Arlington and Ossory, who had been some while at the Hague, To desire
him, on his part, to be pleased to pass the Seas, and to go and stay some Weeks
at the Court of England.

Tromp accordingly disposed himself to answer the Honor done him by that
Prince; and on the 12th of January set Sail with 3 Yachts that waited for him;
at his Departure he was saluted with several Guns, as well from the Brill, as
from the Yachts appointed for his Transportation. The Prince of Orange in
Person accompanied him as far as the Brill, and gave him all the imaginable
Marks of the high Esteem he had conceived of his great Merit. On the 16th of
the Month he arrived at London. The Duke of York, Dukes of Monmouth and
Buckingham, with all the Grandees of the Kingdom, went to meet him, and did him
the greatest Honors imaginable. The Curiosity of the People of England was so
great to see him, That the Streets were so thronged with People, that there was
hardly any passing. And appearing once at the Royal Exchange, there presently
crowded in such a Multitude of People, that the Change as spacious as it was,

The King of England to Honor the Virtue and Worth of one of the Greatest men
at Sea that ever Holland bred, Tromp made a Baron by the King of England.
though he had been his Enemy, and had gotten most of his Reputation in
Sea-Battles fought between the English and Dutch Fleets, would needs however
raise him to the quality of a Baron and make it Hereditary to his Family; so
that in default of Heirs male, it should fall to his Brother Harpetsz Tromp
Burger Master of Delft, and after him to his issue male, and upon failure of
them, to his third Brother Adrian Tromp, a Captain of a Ship in the Service of
the States General.

And accordingly Letters Patents were immediately expedited for that effect by
the Lord High Chancellor of the Kingdom; after which, Tromp took his leave of
his Majesty who presented him at parting with his picture enricht with
Diamonds; and so departed toward the end of February, and returned to Holland.

The French King finding himself deserted by his own Allies, the Electour of
Cologne, A new War in the North.
and Bishop of Munster, who after the Example of England had made likewise a
separate Peace with the United Provinces, used all his Artifices to procure
some new Alliances by which he might attain his end, which was to be able to
Revenge himself upon those who had left him so unexpectedly in the Lurch. His
Quick-scented Policy presently suggested to him, that if he could find means to
kindle a War between the Potentates of the North, his work were done, and he
would thereby give a powerful diversion to the arms of those Princes that were
come in to the assistance of the Hollanders. The Court of Swedeland seemed to
him the most proper to be wrought upon to favor his enterprises, because of
the long Alliance that had been between that Crown and France. Mr. de
Fenquieres, was therefore dispatched away in quality of Ambassador
Extraordinary from the most Christian King to the Crown of Swedeland, and so
prevailed by his solicitations upon the corrupt Ministers there, and the young
experienced easy King, that he persuaded them to a Rupture, so that General
Wrangel drawing together the Swedish Army in Pomerania, fell suddenly upon the
Territories of the Electour of Brandenburg, and was so successful at his first
onset, that he, soon gained the passes of Lokkowits, Zedenik and Bernaw, and
made himself Master of Landsbergen, of the new and old Rupin, and of Kopenigh.
Upon the news of which sudden Progress, the Electour of Brandenburg justly
fearing the Swedes, if not timely and vigorously opposed, might push their
successes much further, and at length strip him of all his Dominions, went in
all haste to the Hague, where in the month of May, an Alliance was concluded
between the King of Denmark, the Electour of Brandenburg, the Dukes of
Brunswick, and Lunenburg, and the United Provinces, by which all those powers
engaged themselves mutually to assist each other against the arms of France and
Swedeland; and amongst other things it was stipulated, that the States for
their part, should Equip out 9 men of War to be sent into the Sound, into the
Service of the Electour of Brandenburg.

On the 18th. of June following the States declared open War against Swedeland,
8 days after the Spaniards had published the like at Brussels. In the mean time,
the Swedes taking advantage of the weakness of their Enemies, who expecting
nothing less than to see a War kindled in the North, had left their Frontiers
unprovided, entered into Havelland and seized upon the Towns of Nauwen,
Brandenburg, Ravenau, Havelberg, etc. But the Electour of Brandenburg with a
wonderful diligence assembling his Forces, checked his Enemies in their full
Career, and obliged them to quit Ravenau; and soon after engaging in a Battle
with the Swedish Army, he defeated them, killed them 2500 men, and forced them
in fine to retire in Disorder into the Country of Mecklenburg.

The King of Denmark likewise at the same time Declared War against the Swedes,
and thereupon immediately sent his Fleet after its Junction with the Ships of
the Hollanders Quota, into the Baltic, to cruize upon the Coasts of Pomerania;
and drew up his Land-Army at Gadebusch, where the Elector of Brandenburg met
him; and those two Princes having held a Council of War together, to Consult
upon what enterprises they might most advantageously employ their Troops, after
that, the King of Denmark advanced to Wismar, where he left 6 Regiments to
block up that place, and then marched away with the main of his Army toward
Damgarten in Pomerania; on the other side, the Troops of Munster and
Brandenburg entered the Country of Bremen, and General Swerin with a body of
3000 Brandenburgers seized the Isle of Wollyn,; Damgarten was also reduced
under the obedience of the Danes, and a little while after Wismar also
surrendered to the King of Denmark, who besieged it in person.

During these transactions, the young K. of Swedeland after the Ceremony of his
Coronation which had been lately performed at Vpsal, employed his utmost care
and efforts for the fitting out a powerful Fleet, with a Resolution to make
some attempt upon the Isle of Zealand, but that Fleet was no sooner got to Sea,
but it was so roughly handled by a horrible and sudden Tempest, that after the
loss of several Ships, it was forced to return into Port. The Danish Fleet
under the Command of Admiral Adelaar, after having a long time but in vain,
waited for that of Swedeland, received orders likewise to return home; and so
ended the year 1675.

Swedish Armies were nothing more fortunate the following Campaign than they
had been in the last. For being attackt almost on all sides at the same time,
they had the displeasure to see those Enemies they had so rashly raised against
themselves, make themselves Masters of a considerable part of their
Territories, and bid fair to carry all the rest. It Is true indeed, the Swedes
seized upon Swingerschans in the month of January, and defeated the Munsterian
Troops in the Duchy of Bremen, but those happy beginnings were followed by
perpetual losses one after the other; and so as they were the first that begun
the War on that side, they were likewise the first that felt the disastrous
effects of it, and that Repented they had so unadvisedly engaged in it upon the
delusive suggestions of a false and self-ended Allie.

Fortune which had followed the Arms of the Allies in all the attempts they had
hitherto made by Land upon the Swedish Dominions, Declared herself likewise in
their favor at Sea. For at the very beginning of the year, the States General
of the United Provinces had resolved jointly with the King of Denmark, to send
early in the Spring, a Fleet of 40 sail of men of War into the Sound, viz. 25
Danish, and 15 Dutch Ships, of which Tromp was to be the Commander in chief:
And accordingly they ordered all imaginable diligence to be used in fitting out
that Fleet; which being effected, Tromp sailed out of the Texel on the 11th. of
May, with the Ships designed for the North with which joined several Merchant
Ships, and on the 12th. he arrived in the Road of Copenhagen where the King of
Denmark, Tromp Knighted by the K. of Denmark.
in consideration of his Transcendant worth, and high Reputation, was pleased
to honor him with the honor of Knighthood of the Order of the Elephant.

In the mean while, Admiral Niels Juel being entered the month before into the
Baltic Sea with a Squadron of 12 men of War, and a Reinforcement of 8 more,
seized upon the Isle of Gothland. After which expedition, he received a further
Reinforcement of 6 men of War Danish and Dutch; so that he had then a Fleet of
26 Capital men of War with which he cruized in the Baltic. At the beginning of
June he descried the Swedish Fleet consisting of 44 men of War besides Tenders,
and small craft; and on the 4th of the same month at 6 in the evening the two
Fleets engaged between Schoonen, and Bornholm; and though the Swedes were
superior to the Danes in Number of Ships and men, yet they never durst attempt
to board any of them, but contented themselves only with firing at them at a
respectfull distance. The Danes charged the Enemies Fleet with a great deal of
Courage, and cut off 5 Swedish ships from the main body of their Fleet; But a
calm coming on, they could not possibly pursue them, so that they were forced
to content themselves only with plying them with continual Broadsides of their
Guns, till night parted the Fray for that day. The next day about 6 in the
morning, the two Fleets prepared again for a second Battle.

The Swedes having the Weather-gage, A Sea fight between the Danes and Swedes.
advanced in good order against the Danish Fleet, and did their best to hinder
them from gaining that advantage from them, so that the Danes were forced to
begin the attack, and the fight was very bloody. But when the Swedes found
there was little appearance of getting the better of the Danes, they begun to
recoil, which was the cause, that neither of the two Fleets were much damaged.
The Danes flattered themselves with the hopes of burning the Swedish Admiral
with a fire-ship they let drive against one of her sides, under the covert of a
thick smoke; But the Swede fired so hotly upon the Fire-Ship with his Guns that
he thereby saved himself from the flames, and then in his turn, fell fiercely
upon the Danish Admiral, who made so vigorous a resistance, that the Admiral of
Swedeland was glad to let him alone and to retire with his Fleet near Bleking.
The Danes having no express order to hazard any thing, because they were
inferior in Force to the Swedes, retired likewise, so that the fight ended
before 10 in the morning, without any advantage to either of the parties worth
braging of, saving only that the Danes took one of the Enemies Galliots
carrying 10 Guns and 30 men, without losing any thing on their side.

The News of that fight being come to Copenhagen, Tromp sailed immediately with
a Reinforcement of 4 Danish and 3 Dutch Ships, and speedily arrived in the
Danish Fleet. The next day after his coming he disposed all things for a third
Battle which was fought on the 11th of the same month, and was incomparably
more furious and bloody than the two preceding ones; of which what the issue
was may be seen by the following Letter written on that Subject, by Admiral
Tromp to the States.

High and Mighty Lords,
Admiral Tromp Letter to the States.
SInce my last of the 5th of this month, which I gave my self the honor to
write to your High and Mightinesses, we had the happiness to sail out of this
Road, favored with a fresh Gale; and on the 7th we arrived at the Fleet which
lay at Anchor between Stead and Valsterbon. On the 8th. the Wind
East-South-East, we weighed Anchor, with the whole Fleet, and steered away to
the Southward, continuing our Course till night came on, when we cast Anchor at
South-West and a quarter West of Stead. On the 9th. at break of day, with a
South-West Wind, and after we were past Valsterbon, we discovered the Enemies
Fleet being about 50 sail strong, great and small, according to the report of
our advanced guards. And because in the afternoon the wind grew higher, and the
Enemies had the advantage of it, they made use of it to slide away from us, so
that we had much ado to follow them. The night following, we pursued them with
full sail, but then changing their Course they stole out of our sight by favor
of the darkness; which obliged us to send a detachment of 7 light Frigates to go
and hunt them out, and get some new discoveries of them. About noon, we
descried them to the South-East-ward of our Fleet, upon which we presently gave
the signal to all the Fleet to make all the sail they could to get up with
them, and we followed them till the dusk of night. On the 11th of June before
noon, we discovered them again to the Southward of Oeland, and at 11 a Clock
we got up so nigh to them, that they were forced to cast themselves into a line
of Battle. About noon the wind was West-North-West, and we had the
Weather-gage; and then the two Fleets engaged: And no sooner was the fight
begun, but the Ship called the Three Crowns carrying 134 Guns, and Commanded by
the Swedish Admiral, was overset, and blown up into the air in a little time
after, by I know not what accident, since I had given her but very few
broadsides. At that, all the whole Enemies Fleet made as if they would fly. I
presently gave the signal for attacking them on all sides, and falling upon
them with our whole Fleet, which motion made them stop short, we then tackt to
the Southward, and I drew near them, and flankt the Enemies Admiral's Ship
that was the chief of a Squadron, carrying 96 Guns. I vigorously charged both
that and the other Ships that seconded her. And after we had fired at one
another reciprocally about an hour and an half, the Swedish Admirals mainmast
was at last shot down, and I forced him to strike his Flag, and to beg Quarter,
which I granted him because of his vigorous resistance, and the bravery he had
showed, and I sent my boat to fetch him off, but it was too late; For one of
our Fireships having grapled his Ship, not considering he had struck his Flag,
and that I had given no signal at all for any to board her, she was burnt to
Ashes; so that that fine Ship perished with all her men, which were to the
Number of 650 Seamen, excepting only 50 which were saved by a Boat, amongst
whom was a Priest. That happened about 6 in the afternoon. The Enemies Fleet,
after the fatal loss of two Admirals, seeing that Fortune favored us, and that
the wavering Victory was ready to declare it self for the Danish Fleet, thought
it time to make away into the Main Sea, so that all the Ships which composed
it, confusedly betook themselves to flight, and stole away by the help of their
sails from the pursuit of the Victours. They left behind them the Neptune, of
44 Guns, and 198 men, which was taken by Captain Van Zyl. There was likewise
another taken as considerable as that. The Enemies did all they possibly could
two several times to burn me, but their Fireships were always Repulsed.
Besides, it is a surprising thing, and that proves, that Justice and the
blessing of God follows the arms of all the Allies, that they lost not one Ship
in so memorable an Action, and are hardly at all endamaged: The greatest
damages my Ship has suffered, consists in Sails and Rigging, and some shot
received between wind and water. My first Captain, Ad an Akkerstoot died in the
bed of honor, and my second Captain, Teunisz Van Anten had his right arm shot
off whilst he was signalizing himself. The Captain that Commanded the Land
Troops has likewise lost an eye, and as to my men, I have had 100 killed and
wounded. We have been in chase of the Enemies ever since the day before
Yesterday, endeavoring to make the best advantage we can of their defeat. The
day before Yesterday in the morning we saw one of their Ships stranded, and
toward evening another of their biggest were staved against the Rocks of
Westerwyk. We took from them a Frigate of 16, and a Yacht of 6 Guns. But I know
not what passed in the Squadron of Admiral Niels Juel, of whom we have heard
nothing since the Fight. Since the shattered remainder of the Enemies Fleet is
retired into the first Ports they could find, to avoid our pursuit, and that
not any of their Ships appear any longer at Sea, we have resolved to go to
Stead, or Bogt Van Kuik, to confer with his Danish Majesty, and to take the
orders that shall be judged agreeable to the present State of affairs. I pray
God to be pleased more and more to bless your High and Mightinesses Government,
and to Render your arms every where Triumphant.


The losses the Swedes suffered in that Battle amounted to 10 capital men of
War, amongst which were 2 Admirals, 1 Frigate and 1 Yacht, besides a great
Number of men killed and wounded. It will be impertinent to relate here what
caused the destruction of the first Admiral's Ship that passed for one of the
finest that ever appeared yet in the Northern Seas. It carried 134 Brass Guns,
and 1100 men. At the approach of the Allies Fleet, Admiral Kruits who was in
her, Commanded the Guns to be placed on one side in their Carriages that he
might be ready to fire a whole broadside; after which the gunners were ordered
to pass to the other side, which they did; but they having forgot to make the
Guns fast, the Ship turned on her other side, which made all the Guns fly out
of their Port-holes, and fall on the other side, and so overset the Ship. And
that disaster was soon followed with a greater, which was that the lighted
matches fell into the Powder-Room, which some moments after blew up the Ship.

The Swedish Fleet having been chased almost as far as Stockholm by the Danes,
Admiral Tromp sailed to the Sound with his Squadron, and came to an Anchour at
Kongerbotcht. Great rejoycings were made at Copenhagen for the Victory lately
obtained over the Swedes; after which the King of Denmark was resolved to push
his Conquests still further. And for that effect sent Orders to Admiral Tromp
to come with the Confederate Fleet to Vistad, to endeavor, if it were
possible, to make a descent on that side, in Schonen, whilst he on the other,
should enter it with his Land-Army. Admiral Tromp punctually executed those
orders, by coming with all speed before that Harbor; where being arrived, he
sent a Trumpeter in a Boat, to summon the Governor to surrender the place. But
Mr. Veersen who Commanded there, made answer to Tromp, that the guard of that
place was as much entrusted to him, as the Conduct of the Fleet was to Tromp,
and that consequently he was resolved to defend it like a brave Soldier against
all that should attack it.

After that answer, Tromp sent a detachment of 4 Frigates, and 3 Galliots, to
advance near the Town, and to Cannonade it; but by reason of a Calm coming on,
it was impossible for him to execute any thing that day, but he was forced to
stay till the next day, when the Frigates approaching within Musket shot of the
Ramparts begun to play, at them with their Guns. In the afternoon Tromp
reinforced them with 4 frigates more, and they fired so furiously with all their
Guns at the Ramparts, that no body durst appear any more upon them. After which
a body of 3000 Seamen and Soldiers were Commanded to make a descent on both
sides of the Town. The Burghers did all they could, to oppose them with a body
of 700 Horse, and 150 Foot. But as soon as the Danes had Landed under shelter
of the Great Guns that so hotly fired against all the shore, the Swedes were
forced to retire with the loss of 151 men killed or wounded, and the Danes
advanced near the Town.

About 6 at night, the Admiral ordered the Troops to be in readiness to attack
the Town on both sides as soon as ever he should give the signal for it, but
first he thought fit to Summon the Governor once more to surrender it; and the
inhabitants begun to show themselves, and reported, that the Swedes had quitted
it, but that they had min'd it before their Retreat. The Danes thereupon
presently seized it, cleared it of the Mines, and refortified it with a
Resolution to maintain it, and defend it stoutly in case the Swedes should
return with an Army to attack them, and for that end, they drew out of the
Fleet such a proportion of Guns and Ammunition as was thought necessary, and
carried into the Town.

The King of Denmark having embarkt his Army consisting of 18000 Men, Horse and
Foot, unmoor'd the 8th of July with a Fleet of 500 Ships, and came to an Anchor
the next day before Raa upon the Coast of Schonen between Helsingburg and
Landskroon, accompanied by the Prince his Brother, and the Generals of his
Army. And upon advice that the Swedish Army was marched toward V^stad, he
Cammanded his Army to make a descent and to Land all the Artillery, and all the
Warlike Engines that followed them, and sent presently a detachment of some
Regim^nts, to invest Helsingburg, and besiege it. That place was reduced to his
obedience without much resistance. But the Garrison retiring into the Castle
defended themselves there for a while very stoutly; however, at length seeing
there was but small hopes of any succor, they yielded at discretion on the
14th of the month.

The King of Denmark observing that the Swedish King, though he was in Person at
the head of his Army, was not in a condition to oppose his Ravages, and to
oblige Tromp to quit Vistad, but that he was so far from that, as to be retired
to Christianstadt, resolved to pursue his Conquests still further, and so
taking advantage of the opportunity fortune presented him, he decampt on the
15th with his Army from Helsingburg, and marched directly to Landskroon, which
he caused to be attackt with sword in hand, and reduced it. But the Danes with
all the diligence they could use, were not able to prevent the Swedes from
retiring into the Castle which was extremely strong both by Situation and the
Artfull works about it. They defended themselves there like brave Soldiers, but
were at last constrained to yield. On the next day being the 18th. his Danish
Majesty marched his Army to Christianstadt and summoned it to surrender, and
upon refusal, took it by force of Arms. The Danish Arms made likewise a great
progress in Norway and Victory followed them every where: For the Fortress of
Wennersburg was taken there by the Sieur de Guldenlieu, and a part of the
Country of Daalsland and of Westergothland was likewise put under Contribution,
etc.

Some time before, the Swedes had demolished the Fortress of Christianople. The
King of Denmark considering, that place was of great importance to him, sent
order to Admiral Tromp to go before it with the Fleet; Tromp accordingly
arrived there on the 15th of September, and took it presently, repar'd the
fortifications of it, and made it stronger than ever it had been before.

On another side, the Arms of the Elector of Brandenburg were no less
Triumphant than those of the Danes. For he entered Pomerania with his Army,
toward the end of June, with a Resolution to force the Swedes to raise the
sieg of the Fort of Wolgast which was extremee hardly pressed by them. And
being so successful at the very first to make himself Master of the Fortress
of Tribsee, he thereby broke the designs of the Swedes. The Fort Pennemunder
was taken soon after, as likewise were the important Fortresses of Staden and
Anklam, the Pass of Lokkowits the Town of Demin, etc. After all these
Expeditions, the Dutch Fleet retired, and that of Denmark went to Copenhagen,
where it was disarmed, excepting two Squadrons under the Command of the
Admirals Bielke and Rotsteyn, who had orders to cruize about in the Baltic
Sea. Admiral Jens Rotsteyn advancing with his Squadron to Karelshaven besieged
by the Danes, Landed there some Guns and some Troops, to help to straiten the
place the more, and to force it to surrender.

The Danish Admiral Wibe, who was substituted in the place of Marcus Rotsteyn,
who was accused not to have done his duty before Gottenburg, undertook at the
same time to burn the Swedish men of War that were at Anchor before Elsburg;
but he succeeded not; however the Swedish Admiral fled, to avoid the danger,
and another ship whose head was shot off, sunk. The Vice Admirals ship had the
same misfortune as the there, the Ship called Kalmerstet lay dry for 3 days
together, and a small Vessel, and a Swedish Fire-ship perished likewise by the
flames. The Swedes upon that attempt retired up nearer to Elsburg to Repare all
their damages.

The King of Swedeland seeing there was no other means to put a stop to the
conquest of the Danes, but by venturing a Battle, after he had received a
Reinforcement of 5000 Finlanders and some of the Country Militia, took a
Resolution to march in person toward the Enemies with an Army of 18000 men. He
accordingly marched to Helsingburg which he took without much resistance. The
Danes were retired into the Fort, and the King of Sweden flattered himself with
the hopes of forcing them to surrender, but they made so vigorous a resistance
that he was forced to retire with loss. The King of Denmark hearing the King of
Swedeland was upon his march, went and posted himself between Landskroon and
Helsingburg, for fear otherwise if he should not cut of his passage, he should
enter further into the Country. The two Armies therefore by that means came and
remained in sight of each other, each of them having their King at their head,
and being separated from one another only by a River. And a great frost coming
on, the River that parted them was frozen, which gave occasion to a bloody
battle that was fought the 14th of December, A fight between the two Kings of
Sweden and Denmark.
where the Courage of two great Princes shone forth in all the Acts of Valor
and Conduct, whilst each of them emulously strove to outdo the other, exposing
themselves to danger as much as the meanest of their Soldiers. The advantages
in that fight were so equally poized, that both parties pretended to the
Victory; In fine the Battle was so bloody and obstinate, that there were left
on both sides above 9000 men dead in the field. The King of ^enmark considering
the Important Services done him by Admiral Tromp, and the Glory he had Acquired
in all the expeditions undertaken under his Auspicious Conduct, was pleased
after he had Knighted him to honor him further with the quality of a Count, to
express to him the great esteem he had for his Person, and thereby to link him
the more firmly to his interests.

The Rigors of Winter which make themselves to be very sensibly felt toward
the North, yet were not able to hinder the attempts those Kings continued to
make, to get an advantage one over the other. Swedes who kept the field of
Battle in the last action, though the Victory were contested them by the ^a^es,
were minded to show their Enemies, that it was not without justice, they
claimed it; and for that purpose the King of Swedeland marched with his ^rmy to
Helsingburg to besiege it, and in effect forced it to surrender on the 9th of
January. That unexpected expedition, and the fortunate successes that attended
it, fired the Danes with an Emulous Rage, and put them upon taking measures to
stop the further progress of their Enemies; and their apprehension was so much
the greater, because the Sea that parts Schonen from Zealand was frozen up by
the hard weather that had continued ever since the beginning of February.

The King of Denmark considering, there was nothing could keep up the
Reputation of his Arms better than a potent Fleet that might make him Master of
the Northern Seas, thought fit to renew his instances to the States General, to
induce them to send another considerable Reinforcement of men of War again into
the Baltic at the opening of the next Campaign; and the better to succeed in
what he proposed, he prayed Tromp to be pleased to go to Holland, and to make
the demand for him in person to the States, as hoping he would more easily
obtain it than another. Tromp therefore departed from Copenh^^en on the 19th of
February, but the Tempests he met with by the way, were the cause that he
arrived not at the Hague, till the 20th of March.

At that time the Prince of Orange marched at the head of the Army to the Relief
of St. Omers. Tromp followed his Highness in that expedetion, and news coming
that Admiral Michael de Ruiter died on the 29th. of April the last year being
1676, of the wound in the Sea Fight he had with the French before Palermo in
Sicily, and there being no man Judged more capable worthily to supply his place
than Tromp, it was accordingly conferred upon him about the latter end of
March, Tromp made Admiral General in place of de Ruiter killed at Palermo.
and he was created Lieutenant Admiral General of the United Provinces, with
permission however from the States, to continue during that one Campaign more
in the King of Denmark's Service. In the beginning of May, he was received in
that quality in all the Colleges of the several Admiralties, who all did him
great honors.

The States having deliberated upon what was to be done in marine affairs,
concluded at length to fit out 15 men of War to be sent to the assistance of
the King of Denmark, and named the General Officers to Command that Squadron,
which were, William Bastiaansz as Admiral John Van Nes as Vice Admiral, and
Philip Allemonde as Rear Admiral. They set sail on the 29th of June with
Lieutenant Admiral General Tromp, and made the best of their way for Denmark.

In the mean while, the Swedes seized upon Karelshaven, and marched to
Christianstadt. The King thereupon without any hesitation, resolved to go in
person into Schonen. His arrival broke the designs of the Swedes who went and
posted themselves near Landskroon without daring to hazard a Battle which the
King of Denmark presented them. At Sea the Danish arms were Triumphant; for
upon Advice, that the Swedish Admiral Erick Zeeklad was sailed out of
Gottemburg with a Squadron of 9 men of War, 2 Advice-Yachts, 3 Fireships, and
4 other Vessels, in order to pass the Belt, and join the main Body of the
Swedish Fleet that was hourly expected, Admiral Niels Juel went out of
Copenhagen on the 2d of June, to search after them, and if possible to hinder
their junction, the winds that were contrary to the Swedes and hindered them
from passing the Belt favored his attempt, so that according to his wish he
attackt them at Rostock with a Squadron of 11 men of War.

After two hours fight the Swedish Admiral, who was in a ship carrying 60 Guns
and 300 men, was forced to strike his Flag, and to yield at discretion. And the
Danish Admirals second took the Ship called the Angel Gabriel carrying 50 Guns,
and 260 men. The Danish Vice Admiral took the ship called Kalmar Kasteel
carrying 74 Guns, and 400 men. Captain Dreyer took the Wrangle Paleis of 44
Guns, and 300 men, and Captain de Wit took the Meerman of 46 Guns and 300 men.
One of their Fire Ships was burnt, and 2 of their Advice Yachts, were taken; so
that of the whole Swedish Squadron, there were but very few ships escaped;
whereas on the contrary, the Danes lost not one Ship, and they came off only
with the loss of 70 or 80 men killed amongst which there was not one person of
note.

Those happy Progresses animated the Danish K. to attempt the Conquest of some
important Place; for which end he marched his Army to Malmuyen, of which
depends all the Country of Schonen, in order to besiege it. Another memorable
Sea fight between the Swedes and Danes.
The Danish Army came before that Place on the 19th of June, but found there so
vigorous a Resistance that they were forced to quit it on the 7th of July
following. On the 11th of July the Swedish Fleet being 40 Sail strong, got to
Sea, and in the Morning advanced with a favorable Wind directly to the Danish
Fleet, which was much inferior to them in Force, and attacked them vigorously.
The Danes, at their Approach, got into Order of Battle, and showed a great deal
of Courage and Resolution. Admiral Mark Rotsteyn had the Van, Admiral Juel
commanded the main Battle, and Admiral Jens Rotsteyn the Rear. At the first
Motion made by the two Fleets, the Swedes fell upon the Danes with a great deal
of Bravery; but in the sequel of the Fight, the Danes soon showed them, That
they had more Experience than they in Sea-actions, and were more skilful in
making their Motions, for having in a trice gotten from them the Weather-gage,
The Total Rout of the Swedes.
they cut the Swedish Fleet in two. Admiral Juel signalized himself most
notably, and valiantly bore the Shock of 6 of the Enemies Ships, in which Fray
his Ship called Christian the first was so battered and disabled that he was
forced to quit her, and go on Board another, called Frederick the third. In the
mean while the main Body of the Sweedish Fleet was put to so great a Rout, that
they quitted the Fight, and left to the Danes a glorious Victory, and a great
many of their Ships. For Vice Admiral Bielke took the Mars, carrying 72 Guns;
Rear-Admiral Floris Karstensz took the Julius Caesar of 60 Guns; Captain Van
Vacht took the Flying Wolf of 56 Guns; Captain Dreyer took the Swedish Lion of
52 Guns. The Dragon, carrying 64 Guns, was stranded; the Saturn was burnt; and
the Jupiter, carrying 60 Guns, was sunk, etc.

Toward the End of that famous Fight, the Auxiliary Squadrons sent by the
States to the Aid of the K. of Denmark appeared toward the Sound, under the
Conduct of Lieutenant Admiral William Bastiaansz; and came very opportunely to
help to complete the Ruin of the shattered Relics of the Swedish Fleet, for
they cut off the Passage of Gottenburg from 3 of their Ships, that were retired
near Malmuyen. Admiral Tromp, upon his Arrival, went immediately to Copenhagen,
at whose Return a Council of War being held, it was resolved to send a
Detachment to attack the said Swedish Vessels, which carried each of them 70
Guns. And that Action was performed in the Sight of the King of Denmark. The
Captains Tyloor and de Bois, that were commanded out upon that Exploit, got a
great deal of Honor by it. The first of them advanced, and thrusting himself
between two of those Ships, fired at both of them so terribly with his Guns
that one of them sunk, and the other yielded; and the third was burnt by a
Dutch Fire-ship. In a Word, the whole Swedish Fleet was reduced into a most
pitiful Condition, and several of their General Officers fell into the Hands of
the Victors.

That was the second Victory the Danes had gained over the Swedes by Sea that
Year. A little while after their two Land-Armies likewise engaged again in a
cruel Battle, which was fought on the 24th of July pretty near Landskroon. The
2 Kings of the North were both there likewise in Person again, each of them at
the Head of his Army, and both Parties being encouraged by their Presence,
fought with so much Valor and desperate Obstinacy, that it could not well be
known to whom the Victory was due. That Battle cost both Parties the loss of
5000 Men that were left dead upon the Spot. After the Fight, the Swedes again
kept the Field of Battle, and the Danes retired to Landskroon, to repare their
Losses.

The Count de Guldenlieu, Governor or Viceroy of Norway, formed an Enterprise
upon the important Place of Marstrand, where is a very commodious Port, in
which a great Number of Ships may safely ride in any Weather. The Town stands
in an Island of the same Name, which is environed on all sides with Rocks.
There are in it two other considerable Places besides, viz. Karelstein and
Gustaafsburg. This Marstrand then was attacked by the Danes on the 18th of
July, with about 1600 Men, and after 2 Hours Assault was taken, the Swedes
quitting it, after they had nailed up the Cannon. They also set Fire to
Gustaafsburg, and retired to Karelstein, to which last Place the Danes, after
the taking of Marstrand, marched likewise: The Swedes that guarded it made a
vigorous Resistance for a time, but at last were forced to surrender it on the
3d of August. Jempterland, which had formerly been subject to the Danes,
surrendered likewise to them, toward the l^tter end of the Month. All those
happy Successes on the Danes side were followed by another bloody Battle fought
between the two Armies, in which the Danes had the better, the Swedes leaving
behind them about 1400 men Dead on the Spot.

After the last Sea Fight, in which the Danes had had the Victory, their Fleet
being reinforced with a Squadron of 9 Dutch Men of War, under the Command of
Lieutenant Admiral William Bastiaansz, put to Sea again. Admiral Juel, who
commanded it in chief, directed his Course toward the Country of Smaland, and
the Isle of Enland, before which the Fleet anchored on the 11th of August.
Where being arrived, 2 Trumpeters were presently sent off, one to the Country
of Smaland, and the other to the Isle of Enland, to summon the Inhabitants to
come and agree with the Danes about Contributions; but they were so far from
complying with that Order, that they were so insolent as to abuse the
Trumpeters, and sent them away very ill satisfied. Tromp who was on board the
Ship called the Prince George, came to the fleet accompanied with Vice Admiral
Bielke, and was so surprised at the strange answer and Treatment the Trumpeters
met withal, as also at the order found on board the Swedish Ships there taken,
importing that if they had had the Victory, they were to destroy all the
Islands belonging to the King of Denmark with fire and sword, that he thought
fit to send the Sieur Mullet with a detachment of 200 Soldiers and 100 Seamen,
into the Country of Smaland, and Vice Admiral Spaen with another party of men
to the Isle of Enland, with orders to do all the mischief and spoil they
possibly could there, till they had made the proud hearts of the inhabitants
stoop to reason.

Those orders were followed with an effectual execution. For the Troops that
entered Smaland burnt there some Lordships, some Villages, and the small Town of
Munsternaar. Those sent into the Isle of Enland put to the Sword 36 Peasants
they found in arms, burnt several Villages, and committed a thousand other
spoils. Vice Admiral Bielke advancing to the place where the Swedes used to
build their Ships, set fire on all the materials serviceable either for
building or rigging of ships; he likewise Commanded his men to pillage two
Lordships and four Villages. In the mean while care was taken, to found the
port of Kalmar, with a design to go in and attack the Swedish Ships there; but
that was found impracticable because of several rocks there that lay concealed
under water, and that the Swedes had likewise sunk several ships in the mouth
of the Harbor to stop up its passage against any Enemy. All those obstacles
made the Danes take a Resolution to attack the Enemies by Land. And accordingly
they begun with setting fire to a Country house about a Cannon shot off the
Town of Kalmar. Those of the Town made what opposition they could against them
by firing their great Guns at them, and sending some Troops against them, which
the Danes beat back to the walls of the Town, and pursued so close, that it is
certain if they had had men enough to have gone through with their attempt they
might have entered the Town Pell-Mell with the Enemies, and have made themselves
Masters of it, so great was the consternation they then were in; and besides
the Danes having set fire to the Suburbs that consisted of 200 Houses, and 11
Mills, they might well enough have advanced into the Town, under the covert of
the thick smoke that arose from them.

On the 20th the Admirals Tromp and Juel took boat with 500 men, and advanced
toward the Isle of Enland, with a Resolution to attack the Fort that stands
there right against Kalmar, upon the Seashore, and which is flankt with 5
Regular Bastions. Tromp at his arrival sent a summons to the Governor to
surrender, and upon his refusal, ordered his men to mount to the assault. The
Enemies seeing themselves fiercely attacked, made little resistance, but
retired into a Wood that is by the side of the Fort, and so the Danes entered
and took possession of it. That which made the Swedes defend themselves so ill,
was partly their want of force, and partly their own Cowardice. For they hoped
for some assistance from Kalmar, which came not till after the taking of the
Fort, and so they mist the benefit of it, because they had not the Courage or
Patience to stay for it. Those succors being ignorant of the taking of the
Fort, Tromp hastily Reimbarkt his Troops in the boats in order to go and meet
them; but the Swedes seeing they were like to be attackt by the Danes thought
it better to return back from whence they came, than to expose themselves to be
beaten. However both parties in retiring fired several vollies of small shot
one at the other, but without doing much harm excepting only to Vice Admiral
Spaen who unfortunately lost an eye. The Fort of Borchholm of which depended
the preservation of the Isle of Enland, had in it a strong Garrison of 1200
men, and therefore the Danes thought not fit to attack it, but contented
themselves with pillaging and spoiling the flat Country, from whence they
carried off near 2000 head of great and small Cattle, which were sent to the
Fleet.

And since fortune smiled so upon the Danes, and their Arms were every where
Triumphant, the King of Denmark would not be content with the depredations his
Troops committed in the Enemies Country, but would needs form a further and
more important Enterprise upon the Isle of Rugen: For which effect, he sent for
some thousands of men of his Troops from Schonen, and sent orders to Admiral
Tromp, and Lieutenant Admiral William Bastiaansz, to come to Copenhagen with
their Squadron; Admiral Mark Rotstein received the same order, and to bring
with him a detachment of the biggest Ships of the Danish Fleet. On the 5th of
September they parted from Admiral Juel, who seeing there was nothing more to
do at Kalmar, nor in the Isle of Enland, weighed Anchor the next day, and
passing by the Country of Smaland, he ravaged the Isles of Vkno, and Runo,
where he put several of the inhabitants to the sword that attempted to make
resistance. After that expedition, he went and attackt 24 of the King of
Sweden's Magazines near Westerwyk. Captain Bovenfield with a party of 150
Seamen, was commanded to go and burn them, who at the same time set fire to two
Lordships and three Villages that were higher up the Country, in spite of the
opposition the Swedes made with a body of Peasants that were got together.

After that, a Resolution was taken to attack Westerwyk, and burn it, for which
execution choice was made of some of the lightest Frigates in the Fleet, with
which were sent a detachment of 500 Soldiers, and as many Seamen under the
Command of General Mullet and of Rear-Admiral Florisz Karstensz. On the 10th.
of September, they presented themselves at the mouth of the Haven of Westerwyk,
where they lodged two Frigates which fired hotly at the Bastion of Sparosund,
whilst on the other side, the Generals advanced with their Boats into the Port
to view in what place they might best make a descent; and after they had past
by several Islets, they attackt two Retrenchments, which they took. On the
11th. at break of day, they forced open the Barrier or Boom of the Haven, and
sent in their Fireships and their other small Ships.

About 7 a Clock the Danes presented themselves before the Town, which appeared
to them in the form of a Half Moon, being adorned with many fair Houses and
Stately Turrets. From the Sea-ward Captain Dreyer fired upon it with his Guns,
which the Swedes answered from a battery of 12 pieces of Cannon they had
erected on the shore. When night came on the Swedes threw their Cannon into the
water, and Quitted that Post, and afterward the Town; upon which the Danes
next morning seized both the Town and Fort. That place belonged to Count
Koningsmark. The Danes reduced it all to ashes, not sparing so much as the
ships that were in the Harbor. After that great Expedition, the Fleet weighed
Anchor, and sailed for Gothland after they had put all the Country every where
in alarm, and carried terror even as far as Stockholm the Capital City of the
Kingdom.

Admiral Tromp as we have said, had received order, to go to Copenhagen, where
he arrived on the 10 of September, together with both the Dutch Squadron, and
the Danish one that was detacht from the main Fleet.

All things being ready then for a great Expedition the King of Denmark had
resolved upon, his Majesty put himself at the head of the Fleet followed by
Tromp, by the other General Officers of the Fleet, and by 4000 men, being
Regular Troops which were embarkt with them. On the 13th. of the month, they
weighed Anchor, and on the 16th they came in sight of the Isle of Rugen, and
the next day the great ships Anchored at the point of Wittaw, whilst the
Galliots and other smaller Vessels were sent toward the shore, between the
Peninsule, or half Island Wittaw, and Jasmund, where they Landed their Troops
with such Expedition that about 4 in the afternoon the best part of both their
Horse and Foot were already on shore. The Commander Keller at the head of 30
men, and a Major at the head of 15 Germans advanced the foremost of all; at
their approach a body of the Enemies Cavalry of 100 men fell upon them and
charged them, but after two discharges they were fain to fly, not being able
any longer to stand against the fierce firing that was made at them from the
ships. The Danes lost not one man in that Rencounter and presently discharged
their Cannon and small Arms for Joy they had had the happiness to Land without
any obstacle.

The same evening, 50 Danish Horse were detacht away toward Wittaw and
Jasmund; but they found no body there but some Peasants, and two Horsemen whom
they brought Prisoners to the Army. On the 18th the King himself and Prince
George himself came likewise to Land, and several Gentlemen of the Country,
yielded themselves and demanded Protections. Four days after his Majesty
departed in order to return to Copenhagen leaving the Command of his Army in
chief to Marshal Goltsz. Admiral Tromp departed likewise with the Danish Envoy
Mr. Buckwald, and Mr. Brand the Resident of Brandenburg, to go to the Electour
of Brandenburg, who was then employed in the Siege of Stetin. They arrived
there on the 22d. Upon whose application the Generous Electour presently
detacht away a Body of Horse with orders to go to the Fort Pennemunder, to be
ready at a Call to back the Danes in their enterprise upon the Isle of Rugen.
And by that means, the Danes were so well Reinforced that Count Koningsmark
that Commanded the Swedish Troops in that Isle, found himself not in any
condition to oppose their depredations, and much less to give them Battle.
However to do what he could, he Commanded the Gentlemen of the Country and all
the Inhabitants to come in and join him, but Marshal Goltz having published
contrary orders, there were very few that ventured to pay obedience to Count
Koningsmark.

Neither were the Danish Troops Reinforced only by the Brandenburgers, but the
King of Denmark himself came and joined them with a good Body of Horse, so that
the Army then was 8000 strong. Count Koningsmark therefore finding his forces
much inferior to those of the Danes, thought it better to Quit the field, than
stay to be beaten out of it; and therefore retired to Straelsund, carrying off
with him all he possibly could. Thus the Danes became Masters of the whole
Isle, excepting only the Old and New Fort, the first of which they took soon
after, but the latter of them having received a Reinforcement of fresh Troops
from Straelsund, stoutly withstood all their attacks, and were the cause
afterward that they were forced to Quit all the Conquests they had made there.
All those happy successes the Danes had in the Isle of Rugen, were followed by
the taking of the Town of Stetin, which after a long and bloody Siege yielded
at last to the Electour of Brandenburg on the 26th. of December.

Koningsmark being desperately enraged at the Progresses of the Danes in the
Isle of Rugen, was extremely impatient to find an opportunity to deliver it
from their depredations, and to restore it to its rightful Prince; And for
that effect, having with wonderful celerity embarked his Infantry, he went and
Landed with his Cavalry at the New Fort, which the more easily deceived the
Danes, because they thought nothing more impracticable or less to be feared
than so speedy a return of the Swedes. At his arrival he assembled all the
Troops he had with him to the Number of 5000 fighting men, and on the 18th. of
the month, went and encamped in the open field with a Resolution to give Battle
to the Danes. Major General Rumor who succeeded in the place of Marshal Goltz
who was recalled by Virtue of avocatory Letters from Poland, Danish Forces, and
being not a man of spirit to suffer the Bravado's of Count Koningsmark, he also
appeared in the field with an Army of 7000 fighting men, so that the two
parties engaged in a Fight, which was fatal to the Danes. For Major General
Rumor happening to be killed at the very first onset, his death was followed with
the defeat of his Army, and the Officers choosing rather to die with their
swords in their hands, than to Offer to turn their backs, the Dani^h Army was
entirely routed, with the loss of 400 men killed, and about 5000 Prisoners of
War, who might all have been cut in pieces if the Clemency of the Victors had
not prevailed over the obstinacy of the vanquished. That signal Victory revived
the drooping Courage of the Swedes, and Re-established their affairs upon so
good a Foot, that the losses and damages either of the Parties had suffered by
the other that Campaign, were thereby in some Fort counterballanced.

The King of Denmark seeing there was no hopes of drawing any succors for that
years Campaign from the United Provinces, gave Admiral Tromp permission to
return home, and conferred the chief Command of his Fleet upon Admiral Niels
Juel, making him Admiral General. Admiral Tromp therefore prepared to be gone;
and then the Elector of Brandenburg taking a Resolution to carry his Arms once
more into the Isle of Rugen, and to make a Conquest of it, whatever it cost
him, and thinking Admiral Tromp might be of great use to him in that design,
desired him to be pleased to accompany him in that expedition. He therefore
took leave of his Majesty, after having received a very rich present from him,
and all imaginable marks of Friendship and Gratitude, and went to VVolgast,
where the Elector of Brandenburg most kindly and nobly received him.

The Enterprise of Re-entring into the Isle of Rugen being then projected, the
Danish Fleet, under the Command of Admiral Juel, had order to advance. On the
22d of September, Major General Lewenhelm, who Commanded the Danish
Landforces, took post at Wittaw. The Swedes, to the Number of 1000 men,
offering to oppose their decent, were repulsed with loss. His Electoral
Highness having embarkt his Troops at Pennermund, came himself on board,
Commanded to weigh Anchor on the 22d, and made toward the Isle of Rugen with a
Fleet of 210 Ships, and 140 Barks, or small Vessels proper for Landing the
Troops in; and thus the Fleet advanced, being ranged in very good order of
Battle.

Marshal Dorfling Commanded the Troops under the Elector; Tromp, who engaged in
that expedition as a Volunteer, had the Command of the Fleet, and went in the
Ship called the Electoral Prince. In the afternoon a Calm coming on, they were
forced to cast Anchor very near the Isle. In the mean while the Swedes kept
firing at the Fleet from a Battery of 10 great Guns and yet in all that time
killed but 2 Persons, which is very remarkable. On the 23d at break of day,
Admiral Juel having left his own Fleet, came on board the Elector, to inform
him, that the Danes had taken post the day before near Wittaw.

Upon that advice, the Elector gave order to his people, to weigh Anchor, that
he might not give time to Count Koningsmark to attack the Danes before their
Junctions, with his Troops. About noon the Calm begun again, so that to make
the more haste, they were forced to tow the men of War forward with boats: when
they drew near the shore, the Troops made use of Pikes and Shovels instead of
Oars, to get to Land with the more haste; Nay some of them jumpt into the Sea,
up to the neck in water, and waded to shore, because they would be there the
foremost and the first, to give proofs of their Bravery. At the approach of the
Danes, the Swedish Horse showed themselves on the high grounds, and Count
Koningsmark caused some pieces of Cannon to be advanced, resolved to fire
briskly from them upon the Brandenburgers before they should recover the
disorder their Landing would necessarily put them in: But seeing them so nimbly
get into Battle array, and that they had already got Cannon with them ashore,
he ordered his men to quit the Post where they were placed; so that the
Electors whole Army consisting of 4000 men, made a descent without any
opposition from the Swedes, and without having above two men killed and one
wounded.

Marshal Dorfling, as soon as he was Landed, took with him all the Horse that
were yet disembarkt, and fell to pursuing the Swedes, and 200 Horse of them
having charged 8 Batalions of the Enemies, their consternation was so extreme,
that they turned tail soon after. There were taken that day about 200
Prisoners. Count Koningsmark seeing his affairs going down the Wind, was minded
to use Circumspection, and thought it high time to rally together the Relics
of his dispersed and dispirited Forces, and accordingly he assembled them
together in one body, and advanced with them toward the old Fort, with design
to pass from thence to Straelsund, in case of necessity. But in the mean while
General Dorfling, who followed him close at the heels, marched with that
diligence, that the next day he ^epresented himself before that place. The
Swedes were extremely surprised to see him there; and because he observed they
were busy in embarking themselves to get away to Straelsund, Dorfling ordered a
Body of 500 men, under the Command of Major General Schoning, to advance along
the shore side, and put himself at the head of them with his drawn sword in his
hand, to charge them. And whilst they attackt the Swedes on one side, a part of
their Cavalry lighted from their Horses, and attackt them on another, so that
the place was taken by assault. A great Number of Swedes were put to the Sword
in the first heat of the attack, and 900 Foot, and 500 Horse were made
Prisoners.

Count Koningsmark, after he had signalized himself, and done as much as man
could do, leapt into a Boat, and got away from the Victors: presently after
some Regiments were Commanded to go and attack the New Fort; but when the
Cannon begun to batter the Ramparts, the Garrison that were Germans mutinied,
and forced their Officers to set open the Gates to the Brandenburgers. Such was
the destiny of a Fortress which the Danes had not been able to take, and which
yet surrendered at last without any resistance to the Arms of the Elector of
Brandenburg. The Isle of Danholm being afterward attackt by 2000 men,
submitted likewise to the obedience of the Trumphant Arms of the same Elector.
All those happy successes were followed by the supplemental addition of the
Town of Straelsund, where Count Koningsmark was retreated with the shattered
relics of his Army, which consisted of 1600 Horse and 600 Musketeers, which
yet after noble and stout resistance, made by the valor and Conduct of the
said Count, worthy to have served a more fortunate cause, was taken. This last
Conquest was so much glorious for the Arms of his Electoral Highness, because
that place was counted one of the important ones of all Germany.

Admiral Tromp, after he had assisted at all the Conquests in the North, where
he acquired a very great Reputation, Returned at length into his own Country,
Honored with the Glorious Titles of Baron, Knight and Count, conferred upon
him by two Great Kings, in admiration of his incomparable Merit.

The Place ensued soon after, and some Family considerations, besides some
particular and private Discontents, obliged him at length to quit the Sea and
the public Service till the Year 1691. And then a Mighty War arising between
France and England, the United Provinces, and most of the Princes of Europe, he
was looked upon as the most capable person to Command the States Fleet, to
maintain and support the Glory the Hollanders have acquired by Sea since the
appearance of their Renowned Republic in the World.

And indeed the present King of England, William III. had named him to Command
the States Fleet as Admiral General for the Year 1691, and the people began
already to flatter themselves with a thousand happy successes from the Joy and
Good Will the Seamen unanimously testified on that occasion; but the French,
who are Ingenious in foreseeing, thought it was necessary to use all sorts of
means to prevent so great an Evil as seemed to threaten them on that side: they
looked upon Tromp to be the only man that could Traverse their designs, and make
head against their growing Power at Sea, the Empire of which they pretend now
to dispute against both England and Holland: so that if we may credit what has
been reported, the Treacherous Intrigues of that Nation contributed to cure
themselves of the Umbrage and Apprehension they had conceived of that Great
man, by procuring him an unnatural Distemper to cut him off on a sudden. We
will enter into no particulars about it; but it is too well known, that Court
omits nothing to get the ablest Generals amongst their Enemies dispatched out of
the World by one means or other, when they prove deaf to their Charms, and
incorruptible, and faithful to their Country.

However it were, the Incomparable Tromp fell sick, whilst the preparations for
the Equipment of the Fleet were carrying on with all diligence. All Europe had
then their Eyes turned that way, and begun already to Count upon a famous
Sea-Battle, in which the Hollanders were to carry away the Victory; and Tromp,
whose good Fortune had all along accompanied Bravery and Wise Conduct during
his life, in all the Battles he ever fought, was looked upon as the happy man
that was shortly to revenge his Country for the loss of the Battle under the
less fortunate Conduct of Admiral Evertsz, by reason the English Admiral failed
in his duty; But alas, Death at length, with his malevolent Scyth, cut down in
an instant all those blooming hopes, and deprived Holland and the Allies of an
Admiral that was to have established Navigation in its ancient Liberty, and to
have Triumphed over the formidable French Fleets, if God had not been pleased
to take him away in the Prime of his years.

He died at Amsterdam, after a long lingering sickness on the 29th of May,
Admiral Tromp's Death.
about 8 a clock in the morning, generally regretted by all the World. He was
the Son of the valiant Admiral, Martin Harpertsz Tromp, and of Dinah de Haas,
born at Rotterdam. He married Margaret de Rhaaphorst, Widow to the late Mr.
Helmont; by whom he had no Children. His Body was carried on the 6th of June,
between 9 and 10 at night, along the Lord's new Channel, to a place called
Amstel, where it was put into a Yatcht in order to be Transported to Delft, and
there interred in the stately Tomb of his Illustrious Father.

His Burial.
The Solemnity of his interrment was performed in the following manner. First,
the Company of Major Witsen marched at the head of the Convoy, followed by
favor of the light of abundance of Torches, I. By the bearer of the two
Anchors placed Saltire wise; II. After him followed the Admiral-Flagg; III. The
Generals Staff; IIII. The 4 Quarters of his Arms, and Representing the Alliance
of his House; V. The 3 Casks; VI. The entire Coat of his Arms; VII. The Habit
of Armor; VIII. The order of Knight of the Elephant, reposing upon a Pillow of
Black Velvet; IX. The Sword; X. The Spurs. XI. The Gantlets; XII. The 3
Standards; After which followed the Admiral's Corpse covered with his Arms; The
4 Corners of the Pall being held up by 4 Marine Captains, viz. Mr. Hans
Hartwich, Mr. Abraham Taalman, James Willemsz Broeder, and Roemer Vlak, After
them marched the Deceased's near Kindred, and afterward the Burgermasters, the
Sheriffs, and Counselors of the Town.

Such was the end of the incomparable Cornelius Tromp, whose memory will be
dear in all Ages to come, to all the Lovers of Virtue and Valor, of both which
he has left an August Example to his Nation after his Death.

FINIS.

