A SERMON PREACHED Before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, On Wednesday, March 22.
1692. Being the Fourth Wednesday in LENT.

By J. LAMB, Rector of Wheathamstead in Hartfordshire, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
2 PETER i. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
that by these ye might be partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the
Corruption that is in the World through Lust.


THAT we may be Partakers of the Nature of God! why were we not always so? Was
not this the Distinction, the Essential Difference of Man, That he was made in
the Image, and after the Likeness of God? (Genesis 1.26.) And was not this Image
of God, or the Freedom of our Choice, the Holiness of our Will, and all the
Impressions of universal Righteousness upon our Minds; were not these, I say,
supported by Laws, and defended by such Assistances as were sufficient to
preserve them?

Whence is it then that Man, the only Being upon Earth that understands
himself, should be also the only Being that Rebels against the Law of his
Creation? That he of all the rest should Degenerate, and become the Contempt
and Scorn of Nature?

What shall we say? Has Providence overlooked us? Has God forgotten us? Has He
neglected the most Excellent Part of the Visible Creation, for whose sake the
rest were made, and suffered it to be Lost? No surely! For His Kingdom rules
over all; and He upholdeth all things by the word of his Power, (Heb. 1.3.)

But Peccability, or that we may Choose amiss, is implied in our Power of
Choosing; and this, this Liberty, by us abused, is the only Cause of our Misery,
our Shame, and Ruin.

For, notwithstanding all the Advantages of inward Impressions, and outward
Revelations, yet the Generality of Men, by a Constant Conversation with Sensual
Objects, destroy their Reason, and corrupt their Virtue, till their very Nature
is Changed, till they are sunk and lost in an Inferior, Wretched, Brutal Life.

But God, who considers our frame, and remembers that we are but Men, (Psalm.
103.14.) looks down upon us with Compassion, Invites us to return to our selves
again, to our primitive Integrity, to all the Beauty of our first Creation; and
encourages our Endeavors by the Manifestation of Himself, His Power and Glory
to us, (ver. 2.) by Additional Rewards, by exceeding great and precious
Promises in the Gospel of His Son. Whereby, (or by whom) are given unto us
exceeding great and precious Promises, That by these, (by the Power and
Efficacy of these upon our Minds) we may be partakers of the Divine Nature,
having escaped the Corruption that is in the World through Lust.

Upon which Words, that I may discourse with the greater Plainness and
Advantage, I shall endeavor to reduce their Sense, their whole Intention, into
these following Propositions.

1. First, That the Chief Design of the Gospel of, our Savior is, to make us
Partakers of the Nature of God. II. Secondly, That the only Means to attain
this End, or the only Way to partake of the Nature of God, is to escape the
Corruptions of the World, through Lust. III. Thirdly and Lastly, That those
exceeding great and precious Promises, which this most Holy Gospel has assured
to all who comply with its Design, are a sufficient Motive to us, to strive
with all our Heart, to escape the Corruptions of the World, that we may partake
of the Nature of God.
I begin with the First of these, viz.

1. That the Chief Design of the Gospel of our Savior is, to make us Partakers
of the Nature of God. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
Promises, that by these, (or for this End, and to this Intent, that,) We may
partake of the Divine Nature. That being provoked by a firm Belief, and a
steadfast Expectation of these Rewards, we may aspire with all our Heart, after
a Participation of the Nature of God.

And for the Clearer Demonstration of this most useful Truth, I shall briefly
proceed in this following Method.

1. First, I shall take a view of the Nature of God in general, as far as it
falls under our Conception. 2. Secondly, I shall consider in what Sense, and
under what Limitations, we Frail and Mortal Men may be said to partake of the
Nature of God* 3. Thirdly, and Lastly, I shall endeavor to make it manifest,
That thus to partake of the Nature of God, according to our Capacity, is the
Vltimate End, and the Chief Design of the Christian Institution.
1. First, I shall take a view of the Nature of God in general, as far as it
falls under our Conception.

It is true indeed, the Divine Hypostasis, or the naked Essence of God, is far
above out of our Reach; the more we pry into it, the more we shall be sensible
of our Ignorance, our Vanity, and Rashness. We may Confound and Tire our
Reason, but shall never Master and Subdue the Object. There is no Proportion
between the Notion and the Faculty. No bounded Understanding can lay hold upon
Infinity; no Created Being can trace the Footsteps of Eternal Ages, or fix his
Thoughts upon a vast Immensity, without Repulse, without Confusion. And
therefore in our Contemplation of God, the first Distinct, and Clear Conception
that we frame, is this, That He is Incomprehensible.

But however, though our Mind is unequal to the Attributes of God; though we
cannot contain or enjoy them, in their Infinite Degrees; yet by those little
Glimmerings of Reason, by those Powers of inferring one thing from another,
which we find in our selves, we certainly Know, in general, that He who is the
Spring, the Principle, and Original of all Existence, from whom they derive,
and in whom they resolve, is Himself endued with all Possibilities of Happiness
and Perfection. For what can be hid from His Knowledge, or kept from his
Possession, who is the Cause of All things?

God therefore is but One, Existing of Himself, entirely Independent, and under
no Control; His Being is Unchangeable, his Knowledge is Infinite, and his
Duration is Eternal: He fills all Places with his Presence, and overrules all
second Causes by an Almighty Power. His Will is always Pure and Holy, as it is
Absolute and Free, determined to the best and wisest Ends, and managed by the
most perfect Wisdom, Justice, Truth, and Goodness. His Decrees are
Uncontrollable, the best in their Design, certain in their Event, without
Possibility of ill Success.

These, and all things else that are better than their Contraries, are bound up
in, and Inseparable from the Notion of God, who is Infinite in all Perfections.

2. But if this be the Nature of God, How is it possible for us, poor, bounded,
sinful, frail and mortal Men, to become Partakers of it? And this is the Second
Thing to be Considered.

And by the Account which has been given of the Nature of God, it appears, That
some of his Attributes are so Absolute a Property, so Essential to the Deity,
that they cannot be Imparted: They Exist entirely and solely in Himself.

That more than One should be ONE, or First, or Self-existent, the Cause of all
things, Infinite, or Immense, is a Contradiction. These, and some others, admit
of no Degrees, and are therefore Incommunicable.

But however, there is something of God in the very Nature of Man, Essential to
us, and Inseparable from us, which no other Part of the Visible World can boast
of.

For we move from our selves, in some degree, as God does; we act for the sake
of such Ends, as we our selves propose. We Reason, Judge, Reflect, and are
truly styled a Conscious Being. We penetrate the Dimensions of our Little
World, and our Soul is present every where within her Bounds. And thus the
humane Nature Resembles the Divine;

Exemplumque Dei quisquis est in Imagine parva. But this Assimilation is
necessary, it is Inseparable from our Nature, and therefore cannot be the
Subject Matter of a Law. Wherefore then, by a Participation of the Nature of
God, when it is urged upon us as a Duty, or proposed as a worthy End, we
understand a faint Resemblance, an imperfect Imitation of those Divine
Perfections, which are Absolute only in God, but yet are Competent in a Good
Degree to all his Reasonable Creatures; Competent, I say, not Necessary, or
Essential to us: for then there would have been no Room for Choice or Virtue.

And thus, if we had not been wanting to our selves, we might have preserved,
and, by the Grace of God, we may yet recover a fair Proportion of the Purity of
His Mind, and the Holiness of his Will; of his Wisdom and Providence, of His
Mercy and Justice, of His Truth and Goodness, with which our Nature was
ennobled, and from which we so unhappily fell.

And this is the Participation of the Nature of God, which is made our Duty in
the Text; It is the Imitation of those most Excellent Rules, by which he
Governs the Freedom of his Choice, and Exercises His vast, unbounded Power.

It is a good degree of that Universal Righteousness, which directs the
Dispensations of His Providence, and knits them all together into the most
Excellent Order and Agreement. And thus it is (...), a Participation of the
Disposition of God, an Imitation of His Way, and manner of acting. It is to
govern our selves in our narrow Sphere of Action, and in all Relations,
according to His Example and Command. It is to subdue our Will to His, our
Inclinations and Imperfect Reasonings, to His most perfect Methods of
proceeding.

For it is not only to do what He Commands, but to Prefer it, to Love and
Choose our Duty; to be united to it, and in our Proportion and Capacity, to be
what the Law Requires. To act by the same Principle, to move by the same
Spirit, to entertain the same Opinions of what is Good and Evil, and in every
thing to Conform our selves to his most perfect Reason. This is to partake of
the Nature of God.

And, according to this Account, it is expressed in Scripture, by His Image,
and His Likeness, (Genesis 1.26.) and this Image of God upon our Souls, is
explained by Knowledge, (Col. 3.10.) By Holiness of Life, (Ephesians. 4.24.) By the
Mind and Disposition of God, (Phil. 2.5.) And, finally, To abide in the Father,
and in the Son, is to abide in the Practice of that which they had heard, and
had been taught from the Beginning, (1 John 2.24.)

And as for those places of Scripture, which denote a more Mysterious Union
between the Souls of pious Men, and God, they are not understood as
Declarations of our Duty, simply; but rather as the Rewards of a great
Affection, and a zealous Virtue; or of those Divine Delights and Pleasures,
which will fill the Minds of those who thus unite themselves to God. That is
the Second.

3. I proceed to the Third and Last Particular, and shall endeavor to make it
Manifest, That thus to partake of the Nature of God, according to our Capacity,
is the Vltimate End, and the Chief Design of the Christian Institution. Whereby
are given unto u exceeding great and precious Promises, that, (or for this End
that) by these, (by the mighty force of so great Rewards) we may be Partakers
of the Divine Nature.

The Religion then it self, is a Body of Principles, and Rules of Life, for the
Restoration of our Nature to a Participation of the Nature of God. And the
Promises annexed, are made subservient to this, as to their Last Design: That
by these we may be Partakers of the Nature of God.

It was the Loss of our first Integrity, by unreasonable Will, and vicious
Appetites; It was our falling short of the Glory, and defacing the Image of God
upon our Souls, which was the Occasion of our Savior's Manifestation in the
World, That He, the Seed of the Woman, might break the Serpent's head, (Genesis
3.15.) That by Him our Loss might be repaired, our Bruises healed, and our
Decays recovered.

There can be therefore no Dispute, but His design is to destroy those Wicked
and Ungodly Habits, in which our Misery Consists, and to restore us to the
Government of our Reason, and the Image of God again, which was our Original.
Felicity.

The Gospel of our Savior is Salvation, Health, and Redemption to Mankind; but
we are not capable of Salvation any other way, but by the Reformation of our
Manners, and the Raising of our Nature out of that Degenerate Condition it is
in, to a Conformity with the Life of God.

For we cannot be happy but in the way of our Nature. And therefore if our
Savior had redeemed us from the Guilt and Punishment of our Sins, and not from
our Iniquity, (which cannot be supposed) yet even this would have been no great
Advantage; It could not properly be called, the bringing of Salvation to us;
Because we should have been the same Imperfect, Wretched Beings still, that we
were before.

Thus Reason will persuade, That to save a Man, is to restore him to the
Perfection of His Nature.

But why should we Consider the Probability of the thing in reason, when the
Religion it self declares its own design so plainly, That it is Impossible we
should mistake it.

(1.) For the Prophets of old, many Ages before it was revealed, have
represented it, as a Law of Righteousness, that should be seated in the inward
parts, and purify its Proselytes from all their filth, (Jer. 31.33.) Dan.
9.24.)

(2.) And no sooner had our Savior Himself begun to instruct the People in His
Religion, but He lays down this as His First, His Fundamental Principle, Except
a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God, St. John 3.3. and Verse
7. Marvel not that I say unto you, (your Nature must be changed,) ye must be
born again.

(3.) And if we look into the Religion it self, what are all, or at least the
greater Number of, the Duties there required, but so many several Parts of the
Image of God which we have Lost? Are they not the Dispositions of His Mind, the
Attributes of His Will, and the Methods of His Providence, that, by the
Practice of them, we may be perfect as our Heavenly Father is perfect, (St.
Matthew. 5. ult.)

(4.) And are not the Apostles particularly careful to instill this Principle
into us, not only in the Text, but every where throughout their Epistles, that,
For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the Works
of the Devil? (1 John 3.8.) That this is the Will of God, this is the great
design of the Gospel, even your Sanctification? (1 These. 4.3.)

Do they not resolve the Substance of Christianity into this, That we be
followers of God, (Ephesians. 5.1.) That we be Holy as God is Holy, (1 Pet. 1.20.)
That if we have heard Him, and learned Him, as the truth is in Jesus, we shall
put off the Old Man, which is Corrupt, and be renewed, transformed, in the
Spirit of our Mind; and put on the New Man, which is Created after God in
Righteousness, and Holiness of Life? (Ephesians. 4.24.)

(5.) And are not all true Christians, who have resigned themselves to the
Direction of their Religion, are they not said to be new Created? (Ephesians. 2.16.)
To be new Begotten? (1 John 5.18.) To be Joined to the Lord, Adopted into His
Family, and to become his Children? (1 Cor. 6.17.) Joh. 17.24. Romans 8.16.)

This then is the specific Difference of Christianity, that it rectifies our
Nature, and cleanses us throughout, in Body, Soul, and Spirit.

And therefore if we are not thus renewed in Every Point, we may assume the
Name, but, in truth, We are not Christians. For the Foundation of God, says the
Apostle, stands sure, and has this Seal, Let every one that names the Name
of Christ, depart from Iniquity, (2 Timothy 2.19.)

He then, upon whom the Gospel has not this Effect, He whose Nature is not
changed, and whose Mind is not renewed, is not upon this Foundation. He is in
the same Condition, at the present, as He would have been, if our Savior never
had appeared. For He is a Savior only to those who obey Him, ( Heb. 10.)

And thus it appears, That the End of the Promises, and of all that our Savior
did and taught, is this, That we may be Partakers of the Nature of God. And
this is the First, and the Principal Assertion in the Text.

I proceed to the Consideration of the Second; namely this: viz.

II. Secondly, That the only Means to attain this End, or the only Way to
partake of the Nature of God, is, to escape the Corruptions that are in the
World, through Lust. Having Escaped, or by the means of Escaping, the Corruptions
of the World, we may be Partakers of the Divine Nature. This is the plain
Construction of the Words, and thus much they Import, at least; That the
Corruptions of the World, and the Nature of God, are Incompatible; that they
cannot subsist in the same Subject; that we must be free from the one, before
we can attain the other: That unless we Escape the Corruptions of the World, we
cannot, but if we do Escape them, we shall attain, by the Grace of God, to a
Participation of His Nature.

By the World, we understand, The Pleasures and Allurements of it; or those
Grateful Satisfactions that it yields to our Inferior, Sensual Desires.

By the Corruptions of the World, we understand, Those vicious and destructive
Habits, which we have brought upon our selves, by an Overvalue, and an
Inordinate Enjoyment of it. Or those ill Effects, which these Terrene and
Sensual Pleasures have had upon us, in that they have imposed upon our Reason,
Corrupted our Integrity, and Depraved our Nature.

The Soundness of the Mind consists in this, That we preserve the Authority of
our Reason, that we Judge, and Choose, and Love, and Enjoy, according to the
Value of the Object, the Nature of the Thing, and the Command of God. That all
our Faculties fulfill their End, and perfect their Design; That we gratify all
our Genuine Desires, and improve in all our Interests.

But to exceed these Measures, to neglect our greatest Good, to make no use of
our Noblest Powers, to starve our Best Capacities, on the one hand; and to load
and nauseate our Inferior Appetites, on the other; to be governed by them, and
resolved into them, is the Depravity, the Corruption of a Reasonable Creature.
The Humane Nature, or our Powers of Judging truly, of Loving wisely, and of
Acting freely, are destroyed.

So that all the several Instances of sensual and worldly Pleasures, that
overcome our Reason, and gain a Dominion over us, are styled in the Text, by an
easy Metaphor, The Corruption that is in the World, through Lust, or through
the Power of Inordinate Desire.

Wherefore then, to Escape the Corruptions of the World, is to Rectify our
Judgment, and Reform our Manners; to Change our Affections, and Flee from all
the Baits and Opportunities of Vicious Actions. To recede from all our former
Notions of our Happiness, and from all our Consequent Affections, Desires, and
Course of Life; and attain to another Sense of things, to a Right Opinion, to
Suitable Desires; to a Cheerful Will, and Vigorous Endeavors, Informed and
Governned by the Will of God. It is to recover the True, the Natural, and the
Perfect Temper of our Minds, which is corrupted by the Pleasures of the World;
and to enjoy those Pleasures, for the time to come, in such Degrees and
Measures, as may consist with the Laws of Reason, and the Safety of all our
Interests.

And though it is not possible for us, to preserve our selves in a Continued
Course, of perfect Health. Though we cannot keep the Balance always, and
exactly, even between the Soul and the Body, in this Imperfect State; Yet we
may attain to a perfect Soundness both of Judgment and Affection. We may
Resolve our Happiness into our Duty; we may both understand and hate the
turpitude of Vice; We may frame a steady Resolution to Escape it; We may always
stand upon our Guard; And whenever we are Polluted, ( For in many things we
all offend,) we may Cleanse our selves, as soon as we discern it, by a true
Repentance. This is to Escape the Corruptions of the World, according to the
Measure and Capacity of a Man.

And that thus to Escape the Corruptions of the World, is the only way to
become Partakers of the Nature of God, is evident beyond Exception.

For a State of Bondage to the Corruptions of the World, is the Sensual, the
Brutal Nature, that pursues the present Appetite without Respect. It is
directly contrary to the Laws of Reason, or the Nature of God, and is therefore
inconsistent with it.

But to Assert our Liberty, to Escape from under their Dominion, to throw off
all those evil Habits, which we have superinduced upon our selves, will raise
our Minds again, and restore us to the same Condition we were in before.

A Participation of the Nature of God, is our First, and Perfect Temper; This
we Corrupted by the Pleasures of the World; But if we Escape the Corruptions of
the World, we recover our selves again, and are, ipso facto, re-invested in the
Nature of God. We return of Course, to all the Pleasures and Advantages of our
former State.

And thus it appears, That the only way to become Partakers of the Nature of
God, is, to Escape the Corruption that is in the World, through Lust. And this
is the Second Proposition.

I proceed, but very briefly, to the Third and Last, viz.

III. That those exceeding great and precious Promises, which are Assured to
all who comply with the Design of the Gospel, and become Partakers of the
Nature of God, are a sufficient Motive to us, to use the Means, which are
prescribed, or, to Escape the Corruptions of the World. Or,

That the Rewards Proposed are a Reasonable Inducement, as well to pursue the
End it self, as to use the Means in order to it; That Escaping the Corruptions
of the World, we may partake of the Nature of God.

The Possessions, the Glories, and the Pleasures of the World, are so Exceeding
grateful to Corrupted Appetites, and so Conducive to our Mistaken Interests,
that they prejudice our Minds, and stop our Ears, against the Just Advice of
those who would persuade us, That our Sense is Vitiated, and our Pleasures are
Deceitful; that they are Mischievous to us at the present, and will be Fatal in
the Issue.

And therefore nothing less, than a positive Command, backed with the Sanction
of the severest Punishment, and the Promise of a great Reward; of Pleasures far
superior to those we now enjoy, supposing they were indeed, what they seem to
us, will ever reduce us to a sober Sense, or persuade us to deny our selves,
and Escape the Corruptions of the World.

But such are the Promises annexed to the Religion of our Savior, they are so
Great, so Exceeding precious, that they ought to carry all before them. There
is nothing can compare with them, and therefore, if we have any Sense, we shall
forbear, or do, or suffer any thing, that we may attain them.

Let us but consider what they are, and how they support their Character, and
we shall be forced to grant, That the Motive is Irresistible.

From the very moment then, that we Escape the Corruptions of the World, we
enter upon another, and a better Life; upon a State of the most perfect
Happiness, which shall Improve upon us, and Continue to Eternity.

It is perfected, indeed, in Heaven, but it begins on Earth, and we shall feel
the mighty Advantages of the Change, even in this Imperfect State.

For now our Nature is restored, our Infirmities are healed, and our Sins are
pardoned; our Souls are now refreshed, our Conscience is at Ease, our Minds are
raised, and we may come with Boldness to the Throne of Grace, (Matthew. 11. ult.)
Ephesians. 3.12.) An humble Confidence, and a perfect Love shall banish all our
Fears, (1 John. 4.18.)

We now shall pass from one degree of Grace unto another, till we come to the
fullness of the Stature of Christ; till we are settled in a Blessed Hope; till
our Assurance shall be full, (Heb. 6.11.) Ephesians. 4.13.)

Now we shall be under the Protection of the Holy Spirit; He shall direct and
guide us through all the Dangers of This present Life; prevent Temptations,
assist us in them, and find out a way for our Escape, (John 16. 1 Cor. 10.13.)

Whatsoever we need shall be supplied; whatsoever we ask we shall receive,
(Mat. 7. Luke 11.9.) whatsoever we are capable of receiving, we shall Enjoy.
For we are united now to God Himself, ( John 10.35.) We are his Temples, His
peculiar place of Residence, (1 Cor. 3.17.) But oh! what sensible Touches of
Unspeakable Pleasures; what Resolution, what Alacrity of Spirit, what Ecstasies
of Joy, what Irradiations of Love, must needs arise from such a Presence of God
upon the Mind! What a perfect Contentation in Life; what Hope, what
Cheerfulness in Death!

For, indeed, to Die is Gain, (Phil. 1.21.) it is an Improvement still of the
Life of God. It brings us to the Euge, bone Serve! Well done, good and faithful
Servant, enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, (St. Mat. 25.21.) Into those
Inexpressible Joys, which Eye has never seen, nor ear has heard, nor can it
enter into the heart of man to conceive, (1 Cor. 2.9.) For now we shall be
clothed upon with Immortality, (2 Cor. 5.2.) and possessed of an exceeding
weight of Glory, (2 Cor. 4.17.)

Now shall all our Faculties be enlarged, and filled; for we shall see him as
he is, and know even as we are known, (1 John 3.2.

Have we shall converse for ever with the Holy Angels, with the Pure and
Immaculate Spirits of the Just, ( Heb. 12.23.) Nay, with God Himself, and our
Blessed Savior, (St. John 17.) Their Glories shall be now revealed; Their
Brightness shall encompass us, and the Returns of our Love and Adoration of
them shall transport us; in whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at
whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore, (Psalm. 16.11.)

These then are exceeding great and precious Promises; they are the Summum
Genus, they are Absolute and Perfect; they are capable of no Improvement,
nothing can be added to them, that can set a greater Value upon them.

For are not all things precious, according as they approach to the Nature of
God, from whom all Beauty and Goodness is derived? But are not all these
Promises Divine? Do they not assure us of an Everlasting Union and Communion
with Himself? ( John 10.30.17.22.) But surely there is a great deal more
implied in this, than we are able so much as to conceive.

For why should the Unity of our Souls with God, be expressed in Scripture, by
the Unity of the Head and Members, (Col. 1.18.) of the Vine and Branches, (St.
John 15.1.) of the Soul and Body, of the Husband and Wife, (Ephesians. 5.23.) and
finally, of God and our Blessed Savior, (John 17.) Or why should it be called
a Mystery by St. Paul, (Ephesians. 5.32.) if there was not something in it, that is
above our humane Understanding?

And hence it is, that in the Meditation upon those Effects, which may proceed
from such a perfect Sympathy, and an entire Consent of Will with God, we run
our selves, indeed, into the most Delightful, but Indistinct Imaginations.

Shall we not, then, Escape the Corruptions of the World? Shall we not forbear,
or do, or suffer any thing, that we may Entitle our selves to these exceeding
great and precious Promises.

Are our Vices of Inestimable Value? Are our Corruptions so Amiable, so
Necessary to us, that nothing will persuade us to let them go? Shall these
Unequal, Allayed, Deceitful, Transient, Mixed, Unsatisfactory Pleasures, be put
in the Balance, with a Crown of Glory, (1 Pet. 5.4.) an Incorruptible
Inheritance, an Everlasting Kingdom? (1 Pet. 1.4.)

Shall a Man be Content to lose his Interest in an Eternal Good, and the
Greatest too that he is capable of Receiving, that he may only enjoy the
Delusions of a Frenzy, or the Pleasures of a Dream for the present?

Are not such Proceedings against our Common Sense? Are they not foolish even
to Derision?

USE.

Let us be persuaded then, to submit to the Evidence of Reason, and sacrifice
our Vices to the Conviction of our Consciences. How can we enough Adore the
Goodness of God, who has allured us by exceeding great and precious Promises,
to the Obedience of those Commands, which are themselves our greatest Good? Who
has made those things our Duty, which also fit us for the true Enjoyment of
those Rewards, which are annexed to our Obedience?

Finally, Since our Religion is our Interest, and the Rewards proposed are so
transcendent, so much greater than we our selves could have desired, I hope we
are all Resolved, to escape the Corruptions of the World, that we may partake
of the Nature of God.

We cannot be happy so long as our Dispositions are Contrary to His; so long as
we are disjoined and separate from our Principle.

There is nothing here below, that is large enough to fill the Capacity of a
Man. Nothing but God, the Inexhaustible Fountain of Good, can yield us a steady
and a constant Satisfaction. But in him there are Infinite Varieties of
Indefectible Treasures; His Favor will afford us fresh Delights, and preserve
us in a perfect State Everlasting Happiness.

To which, may God, of his Infinite Mercy, bring us all, for Jesus Christ his
Sake, the Righteous; To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor, Glory, and Praise, now, and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

