A SERMON PREACHED Before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, On Sunday, Jan. 15.
1692.

By J. LAMB, Rector of Wheathamstead in Hartfordshire, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen.
ISAIAH lvii. 21. There is no peace, says my God, to the Wicked. The whole
Period runs thus: But the wicked are like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace, etc.


FRom the 15th. Verse, to the end of the Chapter, the Prophet proposes several
Considerations to us, to persuade and excite us, to repent of our Sins, and
amend our Lives; as,

First, That a true Repentance will certainly be accepted; That God has
Compassion upon us still, and is unwilling to continue his Displeasure against
us. For I will not contend for ever, at the 16th Verse, Neither will I be
always wroth, for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have
made. Secondly, From the Consideration of the happy Consequence of a true
Repentance, the Displeasure of God shall cease, his Judgments shall be removed;
our dread of God, our fear of his Power and Justice, shall be changed into an
humble confidence of his Favor, into a sense, and enjoyment of his Love. Our
Spirits will be sedate and quiet, our Mind serene, our Reflections cheerful,
and we shall be thoroughly satisfied in our selves. I create the fruit of the
lips, at the 19th ver. Peace, peace to him that is afar off, and to him that is
nigh, says the Lord, and I will heal him. Thirdly and Lastly, From the
Consideration of the Terrors, the Vexation and Despair, that do continually
gall and torment the Wicked. For the wicked are like the troubled Sea (at the
20th ver.) when it cannot Rest, whose waters cast up Mire and Dirt; There is no
Peace to the Wicked, says my God. Which words consist of these two parts. The
First is a Positive Assertion, an Unlimited Proposition, There is no Peace to
the Wicked. The Second, is the Authority upon which the Proposition is
established, even the Testimony of God Himself, There is no Peace, says my
God, to the wicked.

That God who created our Capacities, and therefore knows, both what will
satisfy, and what will Grate upon them: That GOD, who is our God, who has a
tender Regard for our Happiness, whose very Essence is Truth and Goodness, who
can neither be deceived Himself, nor impose a Falsity upon us. It is this God,
that says, There is no Peace to the wicked.

And for the farther Illustration of this important Truth, I shall briefly
proceed in this following Method.

First, I shall explain the Terms, and consider (1.) Who are understood by the
wicked. And (2.) What by Peace, when it is said, There is no Peace to the
wicked.
Secondly, I shall inquire into the reasons of the Proposition, and consider
whence it comes to pass, That there is no Peace to the wicked. Thirdly and
Lastly, I shall endeavor to make it manifest, That the Force or effect of
these Reasons upon the Minds of the wicked, is by no means to be avoided: That
as there is sufficient cause, why they should be uneasy; so, in fact, they are
affected, at least Habitually, with a sharp and pungent sense, of Pain and
Misery.
First, I shall explain the terms, and consider, 1. Who we are here to
understand by the wicked. And, 2. What by Peace, when it is said, There is no
Peace to the wicked.


And First, By the wicked are understood such Persons as have thrown off the
Government of God, and obey the Suggestions of their own Will; Dissolute Men,
that Choose, and Love, and Act by the Inclination of their sensual Appetites,
without Regard, or in Contempt and Opposition to the Law of God. They are
styled in Scripture, Sons of Belial, or such as assume to themselves a
boundless Liberty of doing whatsoever they list, for that is the meaning of the
Word. And this Definition of the Wicked, agrees exactly with all the Accounts
and Descriptions of them in the Holy Scriptures. They set themselves against
God, and against His Anointed, says the Psalmist, (2.3.) saying, Let us break
their Bonds in sunder, and cast away their Cords from us. They walk in the Ways
of their own Hearts, (Eccles. 11.9.) and in the sight of their own Eyes, (says
Solomon.) They do their own Ways, and find their own Pleasures, says the
Prophet Isaiah, (58.13.) They are Children of Disobedience, fulfilling the Will
of the Flesh, and of the Mind, says the Apostle ( Ephesians. 2.23.) That is the
first.

Secondly, By Peace, in the Text, which is denied to the Wicked, we understand
Tranquillity of Mind, and a Rational Uniform Satisfaction in our State. Peace,
I confess, is taken many times more generally for all Prosperity and Welfare, (
Ephesians. 2.17.) but here it is understood in a more particular, and indeed, in
the more usual sense, viz. of Inward satisfaction, and a Deliberate Content of
mind. Because the No-Peace of the Wicked is opposed to the Rest and Peace of
the Righteous, at the 19th verse; and because the Prophet has explained it thus
himself, in the Words before my Text. But the wicked are like a troubled Sea,
when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt. There is no Peace to
the Wicked: They shall never Attain to a State of true Content, or enjoy an
Habitual, Steady, Satisfaction. Thus much for the Explication of the Terms.

Secondly, I proceed, as I proposed, in the Second place to consider the truth
of the Proposition it self, or whence it comes to pass, That there is no Peace
to the Wicked.

The kinds of his Trouble, and the Symptoms of his Disquietude are very many;
but they all proceed from one or other of these following Causes, either,

1. From the Degeneracy of their own Nature. Or, 2. From the Malignity of Vice
it self. Or, 3. And Lastly, From a sense of their Guilt, from their Dread of
God, and of the terrible Sanctions of his Law.
First of all, The Disquietude of the Wicked, arises from the Degeneracy of
their own Nature. As the Goodness of God inclined him to Create the World, so
His own most perfect Wisdom Assigned to every sort of being, a peculiar End;
that so the several parts pursuing their Design, and fulfiling their Intent,
should all Conspire to make up a perfect Harmony in the whole Creation, and
should every one attain their own perfection, and enjoy the proper Happiness
that is allotted to their Being.

But Man was highly Honored, above the rest of his Fellow Creatures, Impressed
with the Image of God, and quickened by his Spirit; Enobled with the Powers of
Judgment and Election, entrusted with a Liberty of Action, and obliged to no
other, than that Eternal Law of God Himself, that Purity of Will, that
Universal Righteousness, which render the Divinity so Glorious, so Amiable, so
Revered.

Wherefore then, so long as we preserve the Distinction of our Kind, our
Likeness to God; so long as we Judge, and Choose, and Love according to his
Example, and Command, so long we are happy; we Exert our proper Powers, we are
under no Control, we gratify our true Desires, we pursue the Design, and are
Delighted with the Pleasures of God Himself.

But if we decline our proper Rule; if we suffer our Passions to prevail over
our Judgment; if, laying aside our reason, and the Law of God, we Choose, and
Love, and Act by the Inclinations of the Body; we sink, of course, into a state
that is evil to us in it self, that is necessarily miserable; into a Condition
that is directly Opposite to the Intent of our Creation: Our Frame is
Disordered, our Nature is Degenerate; we separate our selves from our
Principle, and wander in untrodden, rugged Paths, Racked and Tormented with the
Tumult, the Violence of our Passions, with Variety of Contradictions, with an
eager desire of Happiness, and a continual Disappointment. Maxima peccantium
poena est, peccasse, says Seneca. The greatest Punishment of Sin, is to have
finned. Sceleris is scelere, supplicium est. And this is that War, which the
Apostle speaks of, between the Law of his Body, and the Law of his Mind; (Romans
7.23.) We may suppress our Notions of Good and Evil, in a great degree; but we
cannot destroy them utterly. The Soul will strive to recover it self, it will
be reaching after its proper Happiness; The things which we would, (there is
still a desire after our Original Good, that we have lost) though, we do them
not: and the things which we would not; there is a Check, a Control upon us,
in the practice of Vice; our Pleasures are not free, we are under the Rebuke of
our own Spirit, though we do them. That Is the first.

2. Secondly, The Disquietude of the Wicked arises from the Malignity, the
Mischievous Quality of Vice it self.

What is Vice, but Excess, or a Motion Praeternatural? And therefore it is a
Force upon us, and must of Necessity, be painful, and uneasy to us. As the
Muscles, Nerves, and Sinews of the Body, so long as they move according to
their Intention, so long we enjoy Delight, and Pleasure in their Motions: But
if they are stretched beyond their proper use, we are immediately upon a Rack,
tormented with a sense of the sharpest pains.

And thus in respect of the Faculties of our Souls; so long as we keep them
within their Bounds; so long as we Believe, Desire, and Act, according to the
Rules of Reason, and the Law of God; so long there is a perfect Symmetry, a
pleasant Harmony in all our Motions, notwithstanding the great variety of
Desire, Design, and Action, that we manage in the World: But if we forsake our
Rule, if we indulge to our Passions, and become Extravagant, we are presently
Discomposed, and out of order; we have brought a Sickness, a Convulsion, a
Dyscrasie upon our selves, a state, a Habit of Disease and Pain.

And if any Wicked Man will cast up a fair account with himself, he shall find
how his Vices have Deceived him; what Pain and Anguish they have brought upon
him, instead of those Delights, and Pleasures which they promised him. What
Uneasiness, what Restlesness of Mind, what Debility of Body, what Prejudice in
Interest, what a General Inconvenience.

Does not Impatience of Desire disquiet him, Malice and Revenge distract him,
Repining Envy gnaw him? Does not Ambition prey upon his Vital Spirits, and
Intemperance Expose, Besot, and wast him? That is the Second.

3. Thirdly and Lastly, the Disquietude of the Wicked arises from a sense of
their Guild, from their Dread of God, and of the Terrible Sanctions of His Law.

He has appointed a Day, in the which He will Judge the World in
Righteousness. (Acts 17.31.) He will bring every Work into Judgment, with every
secret thing. (Eccles. 12.14.) We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, to give an account of our Actions done in the Body, whether they be
good or evil. (2 Cor. 5.10.) And they that have done Good, shall go into Life
Everlasting, and they that have done Evil, into Everlasting Punishment. (Jo.
5.28.)

This is the Immutable Law of God; this is the Natural, the Universal
Expectation of all Mankind.

How is it possible then, that a Man should endure himself, or enjoy his being,
who is obnoxious to these grievous Pains? What a dreadful Consideration it is
to him, that he can neither escape his Trial, Demulce the Anger, or avoid the
Power of God?

And therefore all the Terrors in the World, even Death it self, are trifles to
the Wicked, in comparison of their fearful Expectation of a future Judgment;
when the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven in flames of fire, to take
vengeance of them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 2. These. 1.8.

This is the (...), that Genius within our selves, which Socrates speaks of,
that Upbraids our Vices, and Torments our Consciences.

These Fears of a future Account, that are fixed and rooted in the Minds of
Men, are a Constant Principle of Trouble and Confusion to the Wicked. His Guilt
dismays him, his Fears Dispirit him, and Incurable Remorse Distracts him.

These are the Arrows of the Almighty, the Poison whereof, says Holy Job, will
drink up our very Spirits. (Job 6.4.) These again are the gall of Asps within a
Man, (Job 20.14.) and the Terrors of the Lord that set themselves in array
against us. Job 6.4. These are the Rolling-pin, upon which the Pythagoreans
place the Wicked; that gives them a continual Uneasiness. (...).

And thus much for the second General, the Reasons of the Proposition, or
whence it comes to pass, that There is no Peace to the wicked. And we find it
arises,

1. From the Degeneracy of their own Nature. 2. From the Malignity of Vice if
self. 3. And Lastly, from a sense of their Guilt, and the fear of Punishment.
Thirdly, I now proceed to the Third and Last. Particular, and shall endeavor
to make it manifest, That the Force, or Effect of these Reasons, upon the Minds
of the Wicked, is utterly unavoidable; that as there is sufficient cause why
they should be Uneasy; so in fact, they are affected at least habitually, with
a sharp, and pungent sense of Pain and Misery. That the Cause, or Wickedness
being put, Disquietude and Trouble will follow of necessity, not in Reason
only, but in Fact.

This one thing I premise, that we speak of Men of understanding, that are
capable of common sense; of such as have the use of their Reason, who fear what
is terrible, and expect such Events as are probable.

And as for those stupid, senseless Wretches, if there are any such, whom
nothing can affect, I think they are sad Examples of this present truth, in
that they Decline the Judgment of their Consciences, and are run away from
themselves, that they may Avoid the Anxiety of their own Minds.

That then, which I propose to my self, for the Illustration of this Particular
is, to Consider a Wicked Man, (1.) under all the several Sentiments of
Religion; And (2.) in all the various Fortunes of the World, and endeavor to
prove, that there is no Relief, against the force of the former Reasons, to be
found in any of them.


And these two General Heads will take in all the Refuges, to which the Wicked
have ever had Recourse.

1. First then, I shall consider a Wicked Man under all the several Sentimenrs
of Religion, and endeavor to prove, That no Hypothesis whatsoever, will afford
him any satisfaction.

If it were possible for a Wicked Man, to be absolutely Unconcerned about the
matter of Religion, it might be impertinent to consider his Opinion of it. But
Religion pretends to determine our Happiness, to direct our Lives, and oblige
our Obedience by the Sanction of Eternal Punishment. And therefore no Man can
be easy till he has considered it. It is not founded upon the Sand, or
published by a few Designing Men; but it pretends to an agreement with the
Principles of our Nature, the free Inclinations of our Souls, and to the
General Consent of all Men: To the support of a Supernatural Revelation that
has settled it, of an Almighty Power that has Attested, and Confirmed it.

And therefore no Man can be thoroughly satisfied in his State, unless he either
(1.) Conforms his Life to the Law, that he may acquit himself at the Day of
Judgment; or (2.) frames such a Notion of Religion to himself, as shall deliver
his Mind from the fear of the Law; and that must be one or other of these that
follow.


1. Either first the Principles of Religion are false. 2. Or at least, that
they are not Infallibly certain. 3. Or if they are, yet however, That the
Goodness of God will forgive us at the Last.
And in Fact and Practice every Wicked Man, that has retained his common Sense,
has actually taken Sanctuary in one or other of these Opinions of Religion.

I shall therefore confider, what Reasonable Satisfaction may be found in any
of them.

And First in Atheism. Lucretius boasts extremely of the happy Effects, that
will certainly follow, upon a firm persuasion, That there is no GOD. Exaequat
nos Victoria Coelo. If there was, indeed, such a Being as a God, He could not
be more happy than we are, who have delivered our Minds from the Belief and
Fear of Him. We now are Masters of our selves, we are under no Control, no
slavish Fears affright us, no Terrible Apprehensions sour our Pleasures; we
may now enjoy our selves without Regard, and Exult in that Entire and perfect
Liberty we have attained.

But this is all a Shadow, a mere Imagination; for alas! They beg the Question
of themselves, they rejoice in the Inferences, which they draw from a
Proposition, of the truth whereof they are not, they cannot be assured.

Neither the Epicureans themselves, nor any other sort of Men, did ever pretend
to Demonstrate, or Affirm directly, That there is no God; That there is no
Conscious, Self-existent Being that made the World in Wisdom, and preserves it
by His Power.

Such a Notion is Encumbred with so many Difficulties, that we may venture to
say, It is Impossible for a Man in his Wits, to bring his mind to a perfect
acquiescence in it.

That the most Wonderful Effects should be produced without a sufficient Cause;
That the most Curious Building, for Beauty, Proportion, and Consent of parts,
should jumble by chance, into the most Excellent Order; That the Dust in the
Street, by a kind Position, Site, and Motion of the Parts, may come to be
sensible of Pleasure and Pain, and capable of Thinking, Arts, and Policy.

These things, (and many other, and grosser Consequences of that Opinion, That
there is no God) are so Absurd, that we Reluct against them; that we Reject
them as it were by an Anticipation of mind. Those Seminal Principles, that are
Inseparable from our Nature, Resist the Notion.

And therefore Atheistical Persons rather Wish there was no God, than go about
to prove it. They content themselves with Cavilling at the Accounts that are
given of the Nature, and Providence of God, and the Creation of the World; but
are very tender of Asserting the Negative in terms, or of owning the Necessary
Consequences of that Opinion.

And it has always been observed, That those who have pretended to be Atheists,
have discovered their Distrust of that Opinion, whether they would, or no; and
that not only by Suetonius, of Caligula, but by Tully, and all that have writ
upon the Question, of all the Atheists they have ever known, or heard of.

This therefore is no Principle of Peace, no Refuge against the Fear of
Invisible Powers, or the danger of a Future Account. For after a Wicked Man has
brought himself as near to an Atheist as he can, he shall be as much tormented
with the Distrust of his Principle, as he was before, with his Fears of God,
and of a future Judgment.

But if we suppose that they could extinguish the Notion of Religion, and
suppress all sense, and apprehension of God, and his Providence in the World:
Yet how can they expect any true Content, or Happiness from thence? If in this
Life only we had hope, Man, of all the Beings in the World, would be the most
Wretched and Contemptible.

That small degree of Reason we are Masters of, would be the Instrument of the
greatest Mischief we can imagine.

For what is Reason without Religion, but Craft and Subtilty, to delude, and
cheat, and procure to our selves, by any means, whatsoever we can bring within
our Reach? Earthquakes, Hurricanes, the Tiger, and the Lion, are Innocent, and
Harmless things, in comparison of Men, conspiring Mischief one against another,
without Control.

And therefore, if there was not a God above, who Restrains, and Separates the
Boisterous Spirits of Men, the World would be nothing else, but a Stage of
Confusion, War, and Blood. Every one would endeavor to supplant his Neighbor;
Society would be Dangerous; Black, and Uncomfortable, Solitude our only Refuge.

Finally, If there is indeed no other Principle in the World, but Blind,
Inconscious matter, there can be no Stability, no Security that it will
continue. Why should it not dissolve again into an Indigested heap? For
Instability is employed in Chance and Fortune, says Tully, upon the like
Occasion. (De not. Deor.)

But is there any foundation of Rest or Pleasure, whilst all that we Have, or
Hope for, is Obnoxious to continual Change, and we our selves to Annihilation?
Yet nothing but an Almighty Providence can support our hope; no other Principle
can preserve the matter in the Condition that it is, (...), That all Things do
not immediately run into a Mass, a Heap again.

And thus it appears that there is no Content, or solid Satisfaction to be
found in Atheism. It is impossible for us to be fully persuaded of the
Principle; or if we were, yet nevertheless, we should be as Miserable as we can
imagine.

2. And therefore, Secondly, We will suppose a Wicked Man a Skeptic, (or one
that does not directly deny, but, however, is not thoroughly satisfied of the
Truth of Religion, and a Future State) and consider whether this Opinion is a
surer ground of satisfaction to him, than the other.

And this, indeed, is the most usual Refuge of the wicked. It is more easily
apprehended, and therefore the more greedily Imbibed. It is far more easy to
Carp at the Management of a Question, than to Confute the Principles upon which
it is founded. A little Wit, and a great deal of Confidence will serve them
here, instead of that Judgment in Philosophy, that entire, and perfect Victory
over our own. Nature, which the other Refuge will require.

And therefore to pacify their Consciences, and suppress their Fears of a
future Account, they endeavor to make themselves believe, That though the Being
of God, and the Principles of Religion, may be probable, yet that they are not
Infallibly certain, or impossible to he false: That it cannot be proved by
Demonstration, that God takes notice of our Actions, and will bring us to
Account. And therefore, why, say they, should we Restrain our Inclinations, or
act, upon Principles, that may possibly deceive us?

And thus upon the strength of this little foolish Reasoning, they Encourage
themselves in a Belluine Liberty they have taken, and laugh at the Credulity of
all the Religious World.

Especially, if they can find an Author of Note, who favors their Opinion,
that they may boast Authority; or a Book ill writ, on the other side, that they
may Ridicule it; or an unaccountable Providence, that they may Carp and Object
against it: Any difficult Passage in Scripture-History, or Doctrine, that they
may Burlesque it; any. Question of the Modus of things Divine, and Mystical,
that is not easily solved, that they may Deride and Insult it.

And thus provided, they hope at once to Cure their Fears, and raise a
Reputation of Wit and Judgment to themselves.

But let us suppose it to be true, as it is really false, That the Principles
of Religion are not Infallibly certain, (though that is a Deceitful Phrase, since
any Truth is Infallible as to us, or to the Inclination of our Belief, and
Practice, that is as Manifest as the nature of the thing is capable of being
proved, as all the Principles of Religion are. But let us suppose, however,
that they are not so Evident as it is possible for them to be; yet since they
are not plainly false, by their own Confession, or so Improbable, that they
dare deny them boldly, and reject them utterly; they shall find no Peace, no
solid satisfaction, in this Hypothesis.

For Doubting is Anxious in its Nature, because it is the Leaning of the
Judgment to both the sides of the Proposition. In a matter of less Concernment,
it is very troublesome, the Mind is Distracted, and upon the Fret, according to
the value of the matter in debate, till it comes to a Resolution.

But what shall we say, when the Question is of no less Importance, than an
Eternal Life, of Happiness, or Misery? Nothing less than a Security that cannot
possibly Deceive us, will remove our Fears of so great a Danger.

In the Belief and Practice of Religion, we should have a Reasonable
Satisfaction, though our Principles should be liable to Exception; because we
sustain no present Damage, nor run any Hazard of future Evil. But those who
Despise, and Oppose it, can never be at ease, unless they proceed upon the
surest and most certain grounds, because cause they are undone for ever, if
they shall happen to be mistaken.

And therefore, if there was but so much reason on the side of Religion, as
might support a fair Dispute: yet Wisdom would adhere to the Affirmative, and
Oblige us to Piety and Virtue; since no Man can be absolutely out of Danger any
other way.

So that unless a Skeptic can Extinguish Humane Nature, and Vanquish all his
Principles of Common Sense, he can never support an Habitual Peace in his Mind
upon this Foundation.

3. Wherefore Lastly, We will suppose a Wicked Man a Christian, and consider
whether he may find any Grounds of Peace, and Comfort to himself, in that
Religion.

And in truth, that Deluge of Profaneness, which Over-spreads the Christian
World; that Ambition, Treachery, and Injustice; that Violation of Faith, that
Barbarity of Manners, and the Havoc that is made of Christian Blood: Those
causeless Schisms, Heresies, and Hypocrisy, that every where abound, might
Incline an Indifferent Man to Believe that Christianity had indeed Released us
from all Obligations of Nature, and Revelation.

But if we understand it, we cannot so Mistake it; and if we well Considered
it, we could not Deviate so grossly, from the Rules and Precepts of it.

For does it not Oblige us to Universal Righteousness without Reserve? to
things that are Lovely and of Good Report (Phil. 4.8.) as well as to those that
are Simply Honest? And that not in Action only, but in our Principle: not only
that we do our Duty, but that we Love, Prefer, and Choose it? And is not all,
and every part of this, secured, by the most Terrible Sanction of Eternal
Death? Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, upon every Soul of Man
that does Evil? These shall go away into Everlasting Punishment? Without any
Condition or Limitation, excepting that of Repentance only. (St. Mat. 25. ult.
Romans 2.9.)

And when all this is said, shall we please our selves, as the Wicked do, with
Vain Opinions, such as these: 1. That our Religion is rather a Scheme of Divine
Philosophy, than a Rule of Life. 2. That the Goodness of God will moderate the
severity of his Law. 3. That He, who sent His Son to save us, will never
Inflict Eternal Punishment upon us. 4. That all these things are threatened in
Terrorem, to maintain a Decorum in the World; but that there is no danger of
their Execution.


But how can we trust to so weak a Support? to Notions that we frame to our
selves, without any Color of Reason, or so much as a Pretense to Revelation?
Is not the Law it self, both Holy, Just, and Good, fitted to our Capacities,
suited to our Interests, and framed by the true Dispositions of our Nature? Is
it not written in our very Mind? Is it not nigh unto us, even in us all? Is it
not fixed and fastened upon us, by the inward Conviction of our own Consciences,
by the outward Ministration of the Word, and Sacraments, by the Divine
Operations of the Holy Spirit?

What then is to be said? Why should we hope, against all the Reasons of
Government, that notwithstanding this, Trangressors shall Escape Unpunished?

Let us not deceive our selves with fond, ungrounded Notions of Infinite
Goodness. God is Good, it is true, but He is also Just; and every Single
Attribute in God, is exercised with safety to the rest: His Mercy with safety
to His Justice. And this is that Eternal Rule, which God is pleased to govern
His Proceedings by. Shall we sin then, says the Apostle, upon the like
occasion, that Grace may Abound? God forbid!

Thus then it appears, That Christianity affords no Comfort to the Wicked, so
long as they continue so.

It is true, It invites us to Repenrance, upon this very Consideration, That
our Souls shall be then Refreshed, (St. Matt. 11.) That we shall have peace of
Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, (Romans 4.17.) That we shall be settled in
a Blessed Hope, (Tit. 2.12.) That our Joy shall be full, (Joh. 16.24.) and such
as no Man shall take from us, V. 22. But neither Christianity, nor any other
Notion of Religion, will give us any Peace, or solid Satisfaction, in a State
of Wickedness.

And as there is no Relief to the Wicked, in any Notion of Religion.

2. So, in the Second place, there is no Ease, no Peace to be found, by them,
in any State of Life, in any Condition whatsoever.

And, First, not in Prosperity.

We will suppose him the darling of Fortune, and undes a free Enjoyment of all
that the World bestows upon its greatest Favorites. Let him be strong of Body,
in the Flower of his Beauty, and the Prime of his Youth; Let his Family be
renowned, his Titles Swelling, and his Estate Magnificent; Let him lie in his
Prince's Bosom, let his Enemies fear him, and his Friends Address, and Court
him.

Yet, Alas! How little an Advantage is all this to him? It may Enable him to
Stifle, to Quiet the Symptoms, for the present; but the Distemper will return
upon him with a greater Violence.

The Accidents of Fortune, make no Alteration in his Nature, no difference in
the Reasons of his future Expectation; and therefore they can be no cure of his
Disease.

What pleasure, then, in Attendance, Baths, and Feasting, when a Man is ill at
Ease? What Enjoyment of the World, when a Man is Condemned to Die? Non enim
Gazae, neque Consularis
Summovet lictor Miseros tumultus
Mentis, etc.
Hor. In short, they may hide him, a little, now and then, but they cannot
separate him from himself.

2. And if there is no Peace to the Wicked in Prosperity, much less shall they
find it in Adversity: In forsaken Age, in Wretched Poverty, in Painful
Sickness, in a general Neglect.

There is a proper Happiness, a sufficient Support, in every Condition, to
Balance all that is wanting, to the Good and Virtuous. For besides a Cheerful
Reflection upon themselves, that they have done, what lay in them, to prevent
the Evil that is come upon them: And besides the Pleasure they may find, in the
Exercise of Christian Patience, in the raising of their Spirit above the power
of Fortune. Besides these, I say, there is an unspeakable Joy, in their
Prospect of a future Life; a Life that never shall decay, a Continued state of
Happiness, that shall never fail. But the Wicked deprive themselves of all the
supports, and benefits of Humane Nature. They have a Pain upon them, that
nothing can Relieve or Cure. For the Spirit of a Man may sustain his
Infirmities, (all the Calamities of this Mortal Life) but a Wounded Spirit who
can bear? Prove. 18.14.

3. There is, then, no Comfort to the Wicked whilst they live; and therefore
they cannot hope for any when they come to Die.

Now all the Principles of Anguish and Vexation, will act upon them with their
utmost force. No Poynant Pleasure to deceive them now; no Idle Scoffer to
Encourage them; no Flatterer to sooth them; no Guard to break the Blow. Now
then their Hearts Condemn them, their Consciences accuse them, their Guilt
amazes them, and their own Breast is a Consuming Fire, before they fall into
the Hands of the Living God.

And thus it appears, That as there is always Reason enough, why a Wicked Man
should be uneasy: so the Force, and Effect of those Reasons upon the Minds of
the Wicked, is utterly unavoidable.

USE.
It now remains, That we Consider this, and show our selves Men. Tranquillity
is our Sovereign Good, it is the end of all our Labors, and the Crown of
Wisdom. But there is no Peace to the Wicked; it is not to be found in the Paths
of Vice.

Plutarch upbraids the Epicureans, for their narrow, base Conceptions of Humane
Nature, as if our only way to be happy, was (...), etc. wholly to resolve our
selves into the Body; to drown the Soul in Sensual Pleasures.

If therefore any of us have been deceived in this particular; If we have
wandered out of the way of our Content and Happiness, let us be persuaded to
return again with all our Might. Let us at last Conform our selves to the
Religion we profess: Let us endeavor to transcribe our Savior's Copy, that we
may walk, as He also walked, and Be, as He was in the World, 1 John 2.6.

So shall our Life be happy, and our Peace shall be full. So shall we know both
how to Abound, and how to Want, and how to be Happy in all Conditions. So shall
the God of Peace, come into us, and abide with us for ever, to clear our
Doubts, Encourage our Faith, Assure our Hope, Facilitate our Endeavors, and
refresh us with the Irradiations of his Love, till he bring us, at last, to a
fullness of Joy, to that Eternal Rest which He has provided for us.

Of which Unspeakable Bliss, may God, of His Infinite Mercy, make us all
Partakers, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to Whom, with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Praise, and Glory, now, and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

