THE EARL OF LINDSEY HIS Declaration and Justification, Who is now prisoner in
Warwick Castle: Wherein He Declares the Justice of His Majesty's cause in
taking Arms for the preservation of His Royal Person and Prerogative.

Being A pattern of Loyalty, and Mirror of Obedience, for all His Majesty's
loving Subjects to be rightly guided by



Printed in the Year M.DC.XLII.

A DECLARATION AND Justification of the Earl of Lindsey, now prisoner in
Warwick Castle, where he makes apparent the justice of His Majesty's cause in
taking Arms for the preservation of His Royal Person and Prerogative.
MY LORDS,
IN the distress wherein I do remain, it does bring great comfort unto me to
hear of the continuance of your health, and of the good success of His
Majesty's Arms, there is no happier news that can arrive to turn my fetters
into freedom, or my sorrows into hopes, or which can prefer them sooner into
the absolute possession of joy. In this apprehension (me thinks) I am not the
person which I was, and the more close my body is restrained, the more enlarged
and noble is my mind. This is the happiness which I have gained by the
solitude of my thraldom, and whiles my enemies have endeavored to afflict me,
they have befriended me: In this only I have just reason to lament, that I
cannot enjoy that immediate influence from His Majesty's aspects which you do,
and I have those his incomparable virtues in contemplation only, which you
really do behold and daily do derive from them more glory, by the full
observation of their admirable working. His Majesty like unto Him whose second
he is, gives restless Demonstrations of Religion, Justice, Prudence, and
Moderation unto all; and constant in His own goodness, offers mercy unto
those whose swords have taught Him to be merciless: And by a high example of
wonderful piety to avoid the effusion of their own blood, the King stoopes
unto His Subjects, and the Conqueror unto the conquered. I would willingly
fall a martyr in this cause, and I am sorry that I have not lost my life rather
then my liberty for the justice of it. I have a long time been detained a
prisoner, (for who can charg me of any other crime?) my adversaries would make
the world believe, that they do me some great favor when they leave it to my
free election, whether I will be so, or no. Do they believe that any is so in
love with fetters that he would not change them for his freedom, were the
conditions equal and proportionable to them? Some of my friends have told me,
and would persuade me to a belief, that my liberty may be gained: It may be
gained peradventure indeed, but how? As from Merchants that value it at so high
a rate that my fidelity, honor, and all that is dear unto a noble mind, must
be the price to purchase it. If I refuse what they propound, the loss of
goods, of lands, and by the length of my restraint, peradventure the loss of
life it self must be the price that shall pay my ransom. This is a hard
choice; it is in my power to be a freeman they do allege: but how? if I will
be a slave, fall off from the example of my noble Father, and Predecessors, who
laid the foundation of their first honors on their loyalties and their
obedience to their Prince* If I will abandon His Majesty's service in the war,
and enter into a new covenant and Protestation with them to take up Arms on
their side, as if treason were nothing unless I made it Sacramental. I have
already given my faith unto my Prince, (upon whose head this Crown is by the
law of Nature and of Nations justly fallen) shall I falsify that faith, and
join unrighteous hands with theirs to trouble the peace and the splendour of
it, Heaven forbid? But they allege again; that in this cause of theirs,
Religion, the privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and
glorious hopes and shows are pretended. Dare not all Rebels cloak their
purposes with such goodly titles? Has not His Majesty, in whom alone the
chief power does consist, given many and strong assurances to maintain the
same? has He not taken Protestations too sacred to be profaned by the
jealousies, or misconstructions of any whatsoever? that He will preserve the
Protestant Religion in that form and purity, as it was in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, and His Father of blessed Memory? Has He not with true zeal and
justice, complained of the great scorn and disregard, that is cast upon the
Service of God in the Book of Common Prayer? and that while Religion is
pretended to be reformed it is destroyed? Truly (my Lord) they are much
deceived who think that Religion and rebellion can be companions, or that God
will favor their attempts that strike at himself through the Princes sides.
In that very word the King, there is such a Deity enclosed, that who wounds
them wounds the Divine Nature. Why then should the sword be so rashly drawn
under so holy a veil? was Religion ever built on blood? It Is true indeed, the
blood of the martyrs has bin the foundation of the Church. But (my Lord) we
must know again that it is not their blood, but their Cause that made them
martyrs; and that the best Martyrs were so far from opposing the authority of
Princes, that they willingly did submit their lives to their commands. I can
never read that they made any one insurrection to oppose their Prince, or any
inferior Authorities derived from Him. Tertullian and St. Hierome (to whom I
am beholding to my imprisonment for our best acquaintance) does inform me,
that in those ancient times of elabourate Persecution, when invention lived
almost altogether on the blood of Christians, and cruelty grew witty to torment
them, that they only contended against them in the Prayers for their
conversion, and in the holy examples of a virtuous life, whereby they so much
multiplied, that in few years the army of the Christians were the best
protection and Lifeguard of their Emperors, although Heathens; And thus the
Primitive Christians did ever propagate the Gospel with no other then their
own blood, which at all times they did shed, not only to God, but to their
own Princes although Pagans, but never against them. As the Devil was the
first Rebel, so Judas was the first traitor amongst the Apostles, and shall we
rank our selves with such hated Examples of Disloyalty and Treachery. But were
the cause good? Are the arms of the Parliament to be preferred to the Army of
His Majesty? are they able to contend with Him? when have we fought with them,
but they have been beaten? At the battle of Keinton where my Father lost his
life, and my self my liberty, (although in my own particulars, I have small
reason to speak of the success of that day) yet I believe in that field was
tried to the uttermost what the courage or the numbers of our Adversaries could
perform. We observe that His Majesty with His Army still kept the field, and
I would it had been my happiness to have kept it with Him, or to have sealed
there the obligation of my Loyalty with the dearest blood I have. We shall
find the forces of our Adversaries, or rather the relics of their forces to
retreat with what speed they could to this place of safety, where they made my
self and some other captives the excuses of their coming, when indeed their
own necessities were the chief occasions that did induce them to it, whiles
the Army of His Majesty unfollowed by the enemy, in a secure march was making
up toward London. I will pass over the fight before near unto Worcester, and
the defeat given them after near unto Brainceford. We shall find that victory
has been careful always to attend the sound of His Majesty's drums and His
Cannons, and with broad wings to cover his head in the day of battle, and at
the end of every fight to be seen to perch again and to rest her self on the
safe crest of His glorious helmet: we find His Majesty's Armies to increase
daily both in number and in courage, whiles their expectations, and aid from
Scotland, move not at all, or very slowly forward. They have no new places to
resort unto for succor. To look for it in the Netherlands is in vain, the
English Regiments you know are there wholly devoted to His Majesty's service,
and a league betwixt both Princes is cemented by a strong tie of Marriage: To
depend upon any foreign assistances were to build new Castles in the air,
and besides wheresoever they shall address themselves, they shall find that
who appear disloyal to one King, will be distastefull to all Kings. Their
persons and their cause, will be there no less odious then their religion. It
is easy to begin, but let them observe the event of such ill-grounded war.
We have seen with horror the miseries that attend it, as the firing of houses,
wasting of goods, famine, Rapes, Ruin of towns and cities, and the unjust
Liberty usurped, lost in an instant, and for ever. The respects of wife,
children and blood, are ties which by nature man does hold most dear. If we
pity not our selves, let us not forget them that are so precious unto us,
Kings have strong hands to put bits in the most stubborn mouths: if they
cannot relish gentle subjection, how will they digest slaverie? I would advise
them therefore, not to put back this blessed Arm that stretches out to
receive the^ when the sword has made more havoc, and all is wilderness, they
will then beg for that they now refuse. For my part (my Lord) I am in their
powers, and if it should fall into their hands, I know not how this free speech
of a prisoner would be taken by them. Howsoever they dispose of me, I will
never distayne my Ancestors, nor leave that foul title of a traitor, as an
inheritance to my Posterity: they may when they please take my head from my
shoulders, but never my heart from my Sovereign. All my hopes are anchored on
God, and the good success of His Majesty's Arms, and on the Justice of His
cause, for which my prayers shall never be wanting. Through the sad misfortune
and melancholy of my bondage, I have now exchanged the practice of a soldier
for pensive solitude, and the sloth of contemplation; wherein I receive the
more delight, that I have the more leisure to observe and collect the
activenesse of your spirit, the action of your virtues, and the brave Sphere
in whom they move: which might puzzle a far better Mathematician then my
self. I have the leisure to peruse and contemplate sometimes on those
excellent speeches, delivered by the Lord Digby, and the Lord Falkland, men of
admittable faculty, and who can conquer with their pea, as well as with their
swords: and I do congratulate the happiness of Oxford that in their ages, does
now again enjoy those wits which in their infancies she did nourish. I look
on the advancing of my Lord of Newcastles Forces with a great deal of hope,
and believe as he marches by, he will do us the good office, as to make it his
complement to wish his friends so happy as to keep him company in his approach
to His Majesty: Assureing you that nothing under Heaven, can convey a more
absolute content unto my heart, then to be so happy as to kiss again His
Majesty's hand, and to express my self to be,

(My Lord) Your most humble, and most affectionate servant, LYNDSEY.

(...)
