PROSODIA CONSTRUED And The meaning of the most difficult words therein
contained plainly illustrated: Being An addition to the construction of LILIES
Rules, and of like necessary use.
By Barnab. Hampton.

LONDON, Printed by Roger Norton, 1672.

PROSODIA CONSTRUED.
PRosodia Prosodie (that is to say, that part of Grammar, which teaches the
right accenting or tuning of the syllabels of words and also the quantity of
syllabels as Holioke writes:) est is ea pars that part quae which tradit
teaches pronunciationem rectam the right pronunciation vocum of words: dicitur
Latin it is called in Latin [after the Latin manner] accentus the accenting
[or right tuning of] words in pronunciation. Autem and Prosodia Prosodie
dividitur is divided in Tonun into the tone [or tune:] Spiritum the breathing
[in pronounciation;] Tempus the time; that is to say, the time for
pronunciation of a long syllabel or a short.] Tonus the tone, or tune est is
lex a law vel or nota a note [or mark] qua whereby syllaba a syllabel in dict
one in a word elevatur is lifted up vel deprimitur or is press^d down. Autem
and tonus the tone est is triplex threefold. Acutus sharp [or lifted up] Gravis
Grave [great or pressed down,] Circumflexus the circumflex [or bowed about
accent, or both lifted and pressed down, after Rainus, after others lifted up
like the acute accent.] Tonus acutus the acute [or sharp] accent est is virgula
obliqua an overthwart stroke [or dash] ascendens ascending [or going] in
dextram up toward the right hand sic after this fashion ['] Gravis the grave
[or pressed down accent or tone] est is virgula obliqua an overthwart dash [or
stroke] descendens descending in dextram toward the right hand ad hune modum
after this manner [`.] Circumflexus the circumflex accent [or that accent,
which being bowed a bout, is both lifted up and pressed down,] est is quiddam
conflatum a certain thing composed [or made] ex utrilque of them both, hac
figura of this figure or fashion [.] Etiam also Apostrophus addatur huc may be
added hither qui which est is quaedam pars circuli a certain part of a circle
apposita set to, in summo litterae on the top of the letter, quam pinges which
you shall describe sic after this fashion ['.] Ostenditur hac nota it is showed
by this note or mark [or this note sheweth] vocalem ultimam the last vowel
dictionis of the word deesse is wanting [or to be wanting:] ut as, Tanton' me
crimine dignum dixisti; pro tantone. Ne what dixisti me dignum have thou said
that I am worthy of tanto crimine so great blame? Sunt there be spiritus dito
two breathings [thorow the throat in pronounciation, like the Hebrew gutiural
letters, (...)] Asper the rough [or harsh breathing,] and and lenis the mild
[or smooth:] Asper the harsh [or rough breathing in pronunciation] quo whereby
syllaba aspirata an aspirated syllabel [or a syllabel of harsh pronunciation]
profertur is pronounced: ut as, homo a man or woman, ^honor honor. Lenis the
mild, quo whereby syllaba a syllabel profertur is pronounced [or uttered] citra
aspirationem without harsh breathing in pronunciation: ut as, Amo I love, ^nus
a burden.

Regula prima the first rule Tonorum of accents.

DIctiobrevis a short word monosyllaba being of one syllabel, aut longa or a
long one positione by position, acuitur is made acute: ut as, mel honey, fell
gall, pars part, pax peace. Longa natura a long word by nature circumflectitur
is made circumflex, [or circumflexed:] ut as, spes hope, flo^a flower, sol the
Sun, thus frankincense, rus the country. In dislyllaba dictione in a word of
two syllabels si if prior the forms fuerit longa shall be long natura by
nature, posterior the latter brevis short, prior the former circumflectitur is
circumflexed: ut as, Luna the Moon, mu sa a song. Acuitur it is made acute [or
lifted up] in caeteris in other words: ut as, citus quick, [or swift,] latus
broad. solers subtle [or cunning.] Si if dictio polysyllaba a word of many
syllabels habet has penultimam the last syllabel saving one longam long, acuit
eandern it marketh the same acute, [or lifts it up:] ut as, libertas liberty,
penates he^thenish household gods. Sin but if habet it have penultimam the last
syllabel saving one brevem short, acuit antepenultimam it makes the syllabel
before the last save one acute [or lifts it up:] ut as, Dominus a Lord,
Pontifex an Archbishop or Prelate, Composita words compound^d a of facio the
word facio to do excipiuntur are excepted; ut as, benefacis thou do well,
malefacis thou dos evil, calesacit it makes hot, frigefacit it marketh cold.
At si but if penultima [understand the word syllaba syllabel] the last syllabel
save one fuerit longa shall be long natura by nature, and and ultima the last
syllabel brevis short, penultima the last syllabel save one circumflectitur is
circumflexed: ut as, Romanus a Roman, amator a lover. Composita the compound
words, a of fis thou art made or done and and sit he is made or done acuunt do
lift up ultimam the last syllabel: ut as, malefit it is ill done, calefit it is
made hot. benefit it is well done, satisfit it is satisfied. Quia because hodie
at this time, [or in this age] propter imperitiam for the unskilfulness hominum
of men circumflexus the circumflex accent vix discernitur is scarcely discerned
[or distinctly known] ab acuto from the acute accent prolatione in
pronunciation, Grammatici Grammarians confuderunt have moved without all order,
[or have used promiscuously or in common] circumflexum the circumflex accent
cum acuto with the acute accent [that is to say in respect of the tone or
sound: otherwise they are not used promiscuously.] Sunt there are quinque five
things quae which perturbant do very much trouble regulas tonorum the rules of
the accents differentia the difference transponit transposeth [or removeth]
tonum the [tune or] accent: ut as, una together adverbium an adverb acuit
ultimam makes the last syllable acute [or lifts it up] ne videatur that it may
not seem esse to be nomen a noun. Sic so eo thither, alio to another place,
aliquo somewhither, continuo by and by [forthwith] sedulo diligently, porro
moreover, forte by chance, qua which way, aliqua by some way, nequa left any
way, illo thither, falso falsely, cito quickly, fere almost, plane manifestly
[or plainly,] and alia and others id genus of that kind: puta the word puta pro
for sicut, pone pro for post afterward, coram in presence, circum on every
part, alias elsewhere, or otherwise, palam openly, ergo this word ergo
therefore conjunctio a conjunction, sed but ergo pro for causa a cause
circumflectitur is circumflexed: ut as, venimus we came illius ergo for his
sake [or cause.] Igitur therefore haec omnia all these, sicut Graeca acuti-sona
like as Greek words of an acute sound [or accent] quidem indeed acuuntur are
sounded acute [or as a lifted up] in fine sententiarum in the end of sentences,
vero but in consequentia verba among words following [them] gravantur they are
[sounded or] made grave tones [or pressed down] Sic so causa differentiae [for
the cause of difference or] for difference sake, antepenultima the last
syllabel save two suspenditur is lifted up in his in these. Deinde afterward,
proinde therefore, perinde even as, aliquando sometime, ne. quando lest at any
time, hujusque and of this sort, alonge far off, delonge from a far, deinceps
afterward, duntaxat only, deorsum downward, quapropter wherefore, quinimo but
that more is, enimvero forsooth, propemodum almost [in a manner] admodum very
much [yea,] affabre workmanlike [cunningly] interealoci in the mean while,
nihilominus yet nevertheless, paulominus a little less, [somewhat less] cum
when non sunt they are not orationes diversae diverse; speeches, uti sunt as are
pube tenus up to the middle, crurum tenus up to the shanks: enim for non sunt
composita they are not compound words, velut like as, hactenus [thus far]
hitherto, quatenus how far, [so far as] and and reliqua the rest ejus generis
of that kind [or sort.] Transpositio transposition [or removing of words]
invertit tonum [turns or] changes the [tune or] accent, id quod that which
venit comes in usu in us in praepositionibus among prepositions, quae which
postpositae being set after gravantur are made grave tones: ut as, Per transtra
through the seats and and remos oars or rowers. Imperium the rule [or
government] is te penes in the power of thee. Attractio attraction [or drawing
together] mutat tonum changes the accent, cum when conjunctio inclinativa an
enclitical conjunction [or a conjunction that gives his accent to the last
syllabel of the word before him] sequitur follows post vocabulum aliquod
after any word: ut as, que and [or both,] ne whether, ve or [or either. [Enim
for hae particulae these particles attrahunt do draw accentum the accent [or
tune] syllabae praecedenti to the syllabel before-going que and acuunt eam do
make this syllabel acute, [or list it up:] ut as, Liminaque both the thresholds
[by Synecdoche the Temple] que and laurus the laurels dei of [the feigned god]
Apollo: [It may be constructed,] Que both lumina the lights laurasque and the
laurels dei of God: Sic so Dum, sis, nam, parelca are things added. Autem but
ubi where est there is manifest a compositio a manifest composition tonus the
accent non variatur is not varied: ut as, Denique finally, utique verily,
itaque therefore, undique on every side, hiccine is this he? and and hujusmodi
of this sort. Tamen notwithstanding ubique, servat keeps tonum the accent sui
temporis of his time, and and also ubivis. Concisio the cutting [short]
transfert conveighs over tonum the accent cum when dictiones words castrantur
are cut short per Syncopen by the figure Syncope, aut or Apocopen Apocope; tunc
enim for then retinent they retain [or keep] tonum the accent dictionis
integrae of the whole word: ut as, Virgili, Valeri, Mercuri, pro instead of
Virgilii Valerii, Mercurii. Sic also, quaedam nomina certain nouns and and
pronomina pronouns syncopata cut short by syncope circumflectunt ultimam do
circumflex the last syllabel t^ut as, Arpinas one of Arpinum, Ravennas one of
Ravenna, nostras of our country or sect, cujas of what country or sect, etc.
and so forth. Sic likewise donec until a of donecum. Sic so huc hither, illuc
thither, istuc thither, adhuc yet, hitherto, etc. and so forth, pro for hucce
hither, illucce thither, etc. Et and composita compound words a of dic, duc,
fac, ut as, benedic bless thou, reduc being (again, or) back again, calefac
make hot or warm. Idioma the idiome, hoc est that is, proprietas linguae the
propriety of the tongue variat changes tonum the accent, ad^o^t so that, si if
Graecae dictiones Greek words veniat integre ad nos do come wholly or purely
unto us servent tonum suum they keep their own accent: ut as, Simois a River in
Troy, Periphas a man's name in Virgil, acuunt penultimam they make the last
syllabel saving one acute [or lift it up:] at but facta Latina being made Latin
words elevant antepenultimam they lift up the syllabel before the last saving
one, quia because corripiunt they make short penultimam the last syllabel
saving one, Autem but quae words which prorsus siunt are made altogether Latina
latin words servant quoque they do keep also tonu Latinu the Latin accent: ut
as, Georgica, Bucoolica, antepenultima acuta the last syllabel saving two being
acute, licet although apud Graecos among the Greeks habeant they have tonum the
accent in ultima on the last syllabel: ut as, Georgica, Sic and so also
comoedia, tragoedia, sophia, symphonia recipient receive or have tonum their
accent (...) antepenultima on the last syllabel saving two, licet although they
have it in penultima on the last syllabel save one in sua lingua in their own
tongue. Por^o moreover, s^ if tonus proprius the proper accent vocis peregrinae
of a strange word ignoretur be unknown, tutissimum fuerit it shall be a most
safe thing enunciare illam to pronounce that word, juxta Latinum accentum
according to the Latin accent. Syllabae communes common syllabels in pro^a
oratione in prose (...) not composed in more temper corripiuntur are always
made short^ut as, celebris famous, cathedra a seat or chair, mediocris
indifferent or mean.

HActenus hitherto de tonis of the accents and and spiritibus breathings in
pronunciation, deinceps henceforth [or from henceforth] adjiciemus we will add
pauca a few things de tempore syllabarum concerning the time of syllabels and
ratione and the form carminis of a verse. Tempus the time we est is mensura the
measure syllabae pronunciandae of a syllabel to be pronounced [or of
pronouncing a syllabel.] Syllaba brevis a short syllabel est is unius temporis
of one time, vero but longa a long syllabel duorum is of two supines. Tempus
breve a short time notatur is noted sic thus [or after this fashion](^.) Autem
but, longum a long time sic thus,(-): ut as for example, te^rra the earth.
Pedes feet siunt are made ex syllabis dispositis of syllabels disposed justo
ordine in a just [or right] order. Autem and pes a foot est is constitutio the
setting [or placing] together duarum syllabarum of two syllabels vel or plurium
of more ex certa observatione according to the certain observation temporum of
the times, or measures of the syllabelsr. Alii pedum some of the feet
dislyllabi are of two syllabels, alii others trissyllabi are feet of three
syllabels. Autem but non multum attinet it does not much appertain ad hoc
nostrum institutum to this our purpose [or instruction] disterere to reason de
te^asyllabis concerning feet of four syllabels. Dissyllaba feet of two
syllabels sunt are Spondaeus, ut as for example, virtus virtue; Pyrrichicus,
^ut as, Deus God; Trochaeus, ut as, Panis bread; Iambus, ut as, amans loving.
Trisyllabi feet of three syllabels sunt octo are eight, Molossus ut as,
magnates Noble men or states; Tribrachus, ut as, Dominus a Lord; Dactylus, ut
as, scribere to write; Anapaestus, ut as, pictas godliness; Bacchius, ut as,
honestas honesty, Antibacchius, ut as, audire to hear; Amphimacer, ut as,
charitas charity; Amphibracus, ut as, venire to come. Porro moreover, pedes
feet concinnati trimmed (or well composed) justo nu^^ero in a just or lawful
number atque ordine and order constituunt carmen compose (or make) a verse.
Enim for carmen a verse est is oration a speech constricta bound justo atque
legitimo numero to a just and lawful number pedum of feet, Imprimis first of
all, composituro carmen he that is to compose a verse discendum est must learn
metiri ipsum to measure it rite truly (or well) pedibus by the feet, quam which
vocant they call scansionem scanning. Autem and scansio scanning est is
legitima commensuratio a lawful measuring together (or measuring) carminis of a
verse, in singulos pedes into everyone (or each one) of the feet. Synaloepha,
Eclipsis, Syjnaeresis, Diaeresis and and Caesura accidunt do happen scansioni
to scanning (or lawful measuring of a verse by the feet.) Synaloepha est is
quaedam elisio a certain striking out vocalis of a vowel ante alteram before
another in diversis dictionbus in diverse words: ut as, Crastina vit' to morrows
life est is nimis sera too late, viv' live hodie to day. Autem and fit it is
made interdum sometime, in his dictionibus in these words: ut as, Dii
heathenish gods Diis to, (from, by, or with) those gods. iidem the same, deinde
afterward, deinceps afterward (or furthermore) semianimis half dead, semihomo
half a man, semi-ustus half burnt, deest he (or it) is wanting, deero I shall
be wanting, deerit he (or it) shall be wanting, and similia and such like
words. At but heu and and o nunquam intercipiuntur are never taken away.
Eclipsis est is quotics as often as ^ the letter ^ cum sua vocali with his
vowel perimitur is taken away, proxima distione the next word exorsa beginning
or (when the next word begins) a vocali with a vowel; ut as, Monstr',
horrend', inform', ingens; cui lumen ademptum; pro for monstrum, horrendum,
etc. and so forth; O ingens, horrendum, inform monstrum O huge, horrible,
deformed, (or ill favored) monster, cui from whom lumen ademptum his eye was
taken, (or whose eye was put out) Synaeresis est is contractio the contraction
(or drawing together) duarum syllabatum of two syllabels in unam into one: ut
as, Ceu or alvaria the hives texta fuerint have been (or were) framed lento
vimine with a soft (or tender) twig: pro for alvaria. Diaeresis est is ubi when
(or where) duae syllabae two syllabels fiunt are made ex una dissecta of one
syllabel cut asunder (or parted:) ut as, Debuerant they ought evoluisse to have
unwound fusos suos their spindles: pro for evolvisse. Caesura est is cum when
post pedem absolutum after a perfect foot syllaba brevis a short syllabel
extenditur is made long in fine dictionis in the end of a word. Species
Caesurae the kinds of Caesura sunt are Triemimeris a Triemimer (as though you
should say, The division or the half of three feet) (subaudi understand thou
constans consisting) ex pede of a foot and and syllaba a syllabel: Inhians
pectoribus he much coveting the breast, consulit takes counsel [or divination]
from exta the entrals spirantia yet living. Penthemimeris a penthemimer ex
duobus pedibus [consists] of two feet and syllaba and a syllabel: ut as, Amor
love vincit overcomes omnia all things, and nos cedamus and let us yield [give
place] amori to love. Hepthemimerit an Hepthemimer ex tribus pedibus of three
feet and syllaba and a syllabel: ut as, Ostentans boasting of artem his skill
[or cunning] que and pariter also [or likewise] arcum sonantem his sounding
bow. Eneemineris an Eneemimer constat consists ex quatuor pedibus of four
feet and syllaba and a syllabel: ut as, Ille he fultus having born up latus
niveum his side white like snow molli hyacintho with soft crowto^s [being a
purple colored flower.]

De generibus concerning the kinds Carminum of Verses.

GEnera Carminum the kinds of verses de quibus concerning which decrevimus we
have determined [or purposed] tractare potissimum to entreat of principally hoc
loco in the place, sunt are Heroicum the Heroic verse, wherein the deeds done
by noble man are set down with praise, Elegracum the Elegiack verse [wherein
lamentable matters are set forth] Asclepiadaeum the As^lepiade [or the verses
whereof Asclep^ad^s was the first Author.] Sapphicum the Sapphick, Phaleucium
the Phaleucic, [or the verse whereof Phaleucus was the first Author.] Lambicum
the lambick verse. Carmen Heroicum an Heroic verse, quod idem which same verse
dicitur Hexametrum is called an Hexameter, quidem constat indeed consi^^th sex
pedibus of six feet, numero in number, vero but duobus of two feet genere in
kind, dactylo a dactyle, and spondeo and a spondee. Quintus locus the fifth
place vendicat claims peculiariter properly dactylum a dactyle libi to it self,
sexus the sixth place claims spondaeum a spondee: reliqua the rest, hunc vel
illum this foot or that prout volumus even as we will: ut as, Tytire O Tytir^s,
tu thou recubans lying at rest sub tegmine under the covering patulae fagi of a
broad or wide spreading beech tree, Spondaeus a spondee reperitur aliquando is
found sometime etiam in quinto loco even in the fifth place: ut as, Chara
soboles. O dear offspring Deum of the Gods, magnum incrementum the great
increase Jovis of Jupiter. Ultima syllaba the last syllabel cujusque versus of
every verse habetur communis is accounted common. Carmen Elegiacum an Elegiack
verse, quod and which also habet has nomen the name Pentametri of a
Pentameter, constat consists ^ duplici Penthemimeri of a double Penthemimer,
quarum of which prior the form^r comprehendit comprehends or contains duos
pedes two feet, dactylicos being dactyles, spondaicos spondees, vel or
alterutros either of them, cum syllaba longa with a long syllabel; altera e^iam
also the other (Penthemimer) contains duos pedes two feet, sed but omnino
dactylicos always [or altogether] dactyles, item also [or likewise] cum syllaba
longa with a long syllabel; ut as, Amor love est is res a thing plena full
soliciti timoris of pensive or careful fear. Carmen Asclepiadaeum an Asclepi^de
verse constat consists ex Penthemimeri of a Penthemimer, hoc est, that is to
say, spondaeo of a spondee and and dactylo a dactyle and and syllaba longa a
long syllabel, and and deinde moreover duobus dactylis of two dactyles: ut as,
Meccenas O neble Menas edite descended atavis Regibus of ancient or noble Kings
(Thus Bond) at avis Regibus, id est that is, antiquis Regibus Atavis, after
Cooper and Rider are the great grandfathers grandfathers: but it may be
interpreted as Bond has it, by a Metonymy of the subject for the adjunct; for
great grandfathers grandfathers are the subject. Carmen Sapphicum a Sapphic
verse constat consists ex ^ochaeo of a trochee, spondaeo of a spondee, dactylo
a dactile, and and demum at last duobus trochaeis of two trochees: ut as, Jam
now Pater id est, Jupiter misit Jupiter has se^ [for so heathenish men
believed] satis nivis snow enough atque and dirae [subaud grandinis understand
thou the word grandmis] terrible o^ horrible hail terris in our land [or
countrey] Tamen notwithstanding in hoc genere carminis in this kind of verse
Adonicum additur an Adonick is added post tres versus after three verses, quod
which constat consists ex dactylo and spondaeo of a dactyle and a spondee: ut
as, Pusce O suscus, integor a man incorrupt vitae of life, que and purus pure
sceleris of wickedness, non eget needs not jaculis the darts nec a^cu nor the
bow Mauri of the M^or, nec neither pharetra his quiver gravida full venenatis
sagittis of poisoned arrows. Carme^ Phaleuciu that kind of verse whereof
Phaleucius was the first Author, five or Hendeca-syllabum a verse of eleven
syllabels constat consists ex spondaeo of a spondes dactyio a dactyle, and and
tadem at the last tribus trochaeis of th^ee trochees: ut as pavens Mabili O
trembling or fearful Mab^litu [or M^bil] quoquo d^ff^gias whithersoever thou
can fly away, non poteris latere thou shall not be able to ly hid from
nostrum nasum our face [by Synecdoche,] [or fight by Metalepsis Legitm us
versus lambicus a lawful lambick verse constat consists e solis Iambis of
Iambicks alone: ut as, Roma ipsa Rome her self ruit falls viribus suis by her
own strength (or force.) Tamen notwithstanding in locis imparibus in places
unlike recipit interdum it receives sometime tribrachum, spondaeum, dactylum,
an apaestum, the tribrach, spondee, d^ctyle, anapest pro Iambo instead of the
foot Iambus, atque and in paribus (subaudi locis understand the word locis) in
like places tribrachum it receives or takes a tribrach; raries it makes more
rarely (or seldom) spondeum a spoudee. Hoc carmen this verse deducitur in duo
genera is divided into two kinds, Dimetrum a dimeter (which consists of four
feet,) and Trimetrum and a Trimeter, five or Senarium a verse consisting of six
feet. Dimetrum a Dimeter (verse) constat consists ex quatuor pedibus of four
feet: ut as, O dulces notae O sweet notes carminum of songs quas which pulchra
thy self being fair fundis thou pourest out ore melleo with thy honey mouth (or
sweet mouth) que and succinis lyrae singest after the harp (or to the harp) (In
verses which are sung to the harp, two simple feet are commonly accounted for
one) Trimetrum a Trimeter five or Senarium a verse consisting of six feet,
Trimetrum a Trimeter verse constat senis pedibus consists of six feet: ut as,
Qui they which damnant do reprove (or find fault with) nos us, sunt are maximi
histriones the principle stage players.

De quantitate concerning the quantity primarum syllabarum of the first
syllabels.

QUantitas the quantity primarum syllabarum of the first syllabels cognoscitur
is known octo modis eight ways (or by eight rules: Positione by position,
vocali ante vocalem by a vowel before a vowel, diphthongo by a diphthong,
derivatione by derivation, compositione by composition, praepositione by a
preposition, regula by rule, exemplo by example, seu or authoritate by
authority.

Vocalis a vowel ante duas consonantes before two consonants aut duplicem or a
double consonant in eadem dictione in the same word est is ubique longa every
where long positura by position, ut as, ventus a wind, axis an axel, tree,
patrizo to do like his father. Quod si if so be [or, but if] consonans a
consonant claudat priorem dictionem do end the former word, item also sequente
the word following inchoante beginning a consonante with a consonant, etiam
also vocalis praecedens the vowel going before erit longa shall be long
positione by position: ut as, Major sum I am greater quam tha^ cui whom fortuna
fortune possit nocere can hurt. Syllabae the syllables jor, sum, quam, and and
sit, longae sunt are long positione by position. At si but if prior dictio the
former word exeat do end in vocalem brevem in a short vowel, ^equente the word
following incipiente beginning a duabus consonantibus with two consonants,
interdum sometime producitur is made long, sed but rarius more seldom: ut as,
Occulta spolia [deportabant they did bear away] secret [or unknown] spoils and
and plures triumphos many triumphs de pac^ as concerning peace. Vocalis brevis
a short vowel ante mutam before a mute sequente liquida a liquid following,
redditur communis is rehearsed [or made common: ut as, Patris of a father,
volucris a fowl [or bird.] Vero but longa a long vowel non mutatur is not
changed: ut as, Aratrum a plough, simulacrum an image.

Vocalis a vowel ante alteram before an other in eadem dictione in the same
word est ubique brevis is every where short, ut as, Dus God, mus mine, ^us
thine pus godly. Excipias you may except [or, excipias for fac ut excipias
except] genitivos casus the genitive cases in ius, habentes formam having their
form or [declining] juxta secundam declina^ionem pronominis according to the
second declension of the pronouns, ut as, unius of one, illius of that. Ubi
where ^ the vowel ^ reperitur communis is found common, licet albeit in
al^erius in the word alterius of another, sit semper brevis it be always short,
in alius in the word alius of another semper longa it be always long. Etiam
also genitivi and dativi the genitive and dative cases quintae declinationis of
the fifth declension, sunt excipiendi are to be excepted ubi e where the letter
e inter geminum i between the double i fit longa is made long: ut as, faciei of
a face, alioqui otherwise non not, [that is, it is not made long:] ut as, ri of
a thing, sp of hope, fidi of faith. Etiam also fi the syllabel fi in (...) in
the verb fio to be made or done, est longa is long, ni i except e and r the
letters e and r sequantur do follow simul together: ut as, Fierem I might be
made or done, Fieri to be made or done. Sic so octo mariti the eight husbands
^unt are made up in number (or account,) for then they might not be married to
any more than eight husbands. Quid what non putes may you not think posse fieri
can be done. Ohe Interjectio the Interjection ohe signifying ho ho, a voice or
shunning habet has priore^ syllabam the former syllabel ancipitem doubtful (or
double that is, both long and short.) Vocalis a vowel ante alteram before
another in Graecis dictionibus in Greek words subinde ever now and then fit
longa is made long: ut as, Pierides O Muses dicite say you [or tell you.]
Respice Laerten look back unto (or regard) Laertes who was the father of
Ulysses. Et also in possessivis in possessines, ut as, Aene^ia nutrix Aeneas
his nurse. Rhodope^ius Orphe^us Orpheus of Rhodope [a mountain in Thracia.]

Omnis diphihongus every diphth^ng apud Latinos among the Latinists est is
longa long: ut as, Aurum gold, neuter neither the one nor the other, musae of a
song: nisi, except vocale sequente (...) vowel following [or when a vowel
follows:] ut as, Praeire to go before, praeustus burned in the sore part, [or
burned at the point,] praeamplus very large.

Derivativa derivatives, or words derived of others sortiuntur are allotted
[asssigned] eandem quantitatem the same quantity cum primitivis with their
primitives: ut as, amator a l^ver, amicus a friend, amabilis amiable [or to be
beloved,] prima syllaba the first syllabel brevi being short ab amo of the verb
amo to love. Tamen notwithstanding pauca excipiuntur a few derivatives are
excepted quae which deducta being derived a brevibus of short primitives,
producunt do make long primam the first syllabel. Cujus generis of which kind
sunt are, Vox vocis a voice [or word] a voco of the verb voco to call; lex
le^gis a law a of lgo to read; Rex re^gis a King a of rgo to rule [or govern;]
se^des a seat and and se^dile a bench [or stool] a of sdeo the verb sedeo to
sit, jumentum a drawing beast to draw burdens a juvo of the verb juvo to help;
somes chips [or any matter which is easily set on fire,] and and fomentum a
plaster ^o mitigate pain a of foveo to cherish; jucundus pleasant a of juvo to
help; junior younger a of juvenis a young man or woman; mobilis to be moved [or
moveable] a of moveo to move; humanus gentle [or courteous] ab homo derived
from homo a man or woman's vomer a plough-share a of vomo to cast up: pe^dor the
stink of the feet a of pde a foot. Et contra and contrariwife: sunt there are
[subaudi verba understand the word verba words] quae deducta which bring
derived a longis of long primitives corripluntur are made short, qualia sunt of
what sort are, Dux ducis a captain [or leader] a of duco to lead, dcax a jester
[or scoffer] maledcus one that uses railing, and also multa many words id
genus of that kind [or sort] a of d^co to say [or speak;] sdes faith, a of fio
to be made or done; arena sand, arista the beard of a corn ear, ab areo derived
from [or of] areo to be dry: posui I have, put [or set] a of pono to put; gnui
I have begotten a of gigno to beget; fragor the noise made with the fall of any
thing, and and fragilis brittle [or frail] a of frango the verb frango to
break; noto notas to mark, a of notu to be known; nato to shoot out under the
earth a of natu to be grown or sprung up; dse^tus eloquent a of dissero to
dispute; opor adead (or sound) sleep a of Sopio to bring asleep. Et also
nonnulla alia some others exutroque genera of both kind quae which relinquuntur
are l^ft observanda to be observed studiosis of the studious inter legendum
while they are reading.

Composita compound words sequuntur do follow quantitatem the quantity
simplicium of their simple words; ut as, potens mighty, impotens impotent, or
weak; solor to delight, consolor to comfort; lgo to read, perlgo to read
through, le^go as, to send as an Ambassador a of alle^go to excuse by
messengers. Tamen notwithstanding, haec brevia these short words enata being
derived a longis of long words excipiuntur are excepted: ut as, Innuba
unmarried, pronuba a bridemaid a nubo derived of nubo to be married, dejro to
swear with a great oath, p^jero to for swear a of juro to swear. Ex
praepositionibus of the prepositions, hae these ubique producuntur are every
where made long; A, de, prae, se, e, nisi, except (...) sequente a vowel
following [or when a vowel does follow:] ut as, unda the water dehiscens
dividing it self with its [or his] own proper motion, Sudibusve praeustis or
that kind of country spears, being burned at the end. Quoque also pro this
preposition pr^^t is longa long, Praeterquam saving only in istis in these;
Procella a great storm (or tempest on the sea.) protervus saucy, froward,
profugus a fugitive, or a wanderer, pronepos a nephews son, propago a lineage
(or stock) pro for stirpe a descent of the stock, profanus wicked [or unholy,]
profiteor to profess, pr^fundus deep high, proficiscor to proceed, pro^ari to
prophecy, propero to make haste, profugio to fly fast away, profecto the thing
proceeding [or one departed] [but with O grave it signifeith truly.] procurto
to run before, profundo to pow^^ out largely, propella to drive away [a far
off, or to drive forth] propullo to drive away, propago, as, to cause to spread
abroad, habent (...) priorem syllabam the first syllabel ancipitem doubtful
Propheta a Prophet and and propono to drink to sunt are Graeca Greek words
[subaudi understand thou scripta the word scripta written] per o parvum with
little O (which they call (...)) and and proinde therefore habent they have
primam the first syllabel brevem short. Etiam also di the syllabel di
producitur is made long, nisi except in dirimo in the word dirimo to break off,
and and dsertus eloque^^t. Reliquae praepositiones the rest of the prepositions
corripiuntur are made short, si if positio position sinat do suffer. Cujusmodi
sunt of which sort are ad to, ob for, ab from, sub under, re in composition,
etc. and so forth.

Omne praeteritum every preterperfect tense dissyllabum of two syllabels habet
has priotem the former syllabel longam long: ut as, le^gi I have read, e^mi I
have bought. Tamen notwithstanding excipias except fidi I have cleaved a of
findo to cleave, bbi I drank, ddi I gave, scdi I have cut, stti I stood, tuli I
have born or suffered.

Geminamia words doubling priman the first syllable praeteriti of the
preterperfect tense brevem shorts ut as, pe^pendi I have weighed, ttendi I have
stretched^ totondi I have sheared, momordi I have bitten, ppendi I brake wind
backward, tutudi I have knocked, ffelli I have deceived, ttigi I have touched,
pupugi I have pricked, ddici I have learned, co^cidi I have fallen a of cado to
fall, ccdi I have beaten (or cut) a of caedo to heat (or cut.) Et also quin
moreover (that more is) supinum dissyllabum a supine of two syllabels quoque
likewise producit priorem makes the former syllabel long: ut as, motum to
move, latum to bear or suffer, lotum to wash, cre^tum to perceive. Excipe
except thou qutum to may or can, ltum to dawbe (or smear) over, tum to go,
tutum to rush, ratum to suppose, datum to give, ^atum to sow, Et also ctum a
of cieo, es, to trouble [of the second conjugation:] nam for as touching citum
to trouble a cio cis of cio cis, quartae of the fourth conjugation, habet it
has priorem the former syllabel longam long.

Vero also quantitas the quantity quarum syllabarum of what syllabels non cadit
does not happen [or come] sub praedictas rations under the aforesaid rules,
petenda est it is to be sought [or fetched] a usu from the use, exemplo the
example atque and authoritate authority poetarum of Poets, certissima regula
being the most certain rule omnium of all. Ergo therefore, discant pueri let
boys learn observare to observe [or mark diligently] communes quantitates the
common quantities primarum syllabarum of the first syllabels ex Poetis of
Poets. Cujus sortis of what manner sort sunt are Britannus a man of Britan,
Bythynus a man of Bythynia, Cacus a giants name, Cosyra the name of an Island
[or Isle,] Crathys the name of two rivers, one in Greece, the other in Calaber,
Pachinus a mountain in Sicily, Palatium a Prince or Emperors court or palace,
Pelion a hill in Thessaly, Criticus be that judges men's writings, Curetes
spear-men, Diana Jupiters daughter, [an heuthetishgoddess,] Fidene a Town of
the Sabines in Italy, Gradivus the name of Mars, hinnulus a little mule, Pyrene
the name of a fountain, rubigo rust, Rutilius the name of diverse Romans, Hymen
a song sung at a wedding, Italus a man of Italy, liquor moisture [or liquour,]
liquidus moist, Lycas engendered of a wolf and a dog, Orion Neptunes son, rudo
to bray like an ass, Sychaerus Dido's husband, Sycanius a man of Sicily, and
similia and the like words.

MEdiae syllabae middle syllabels possunt cognosci may be known partim partly
eadem ratione by the same way [or means] qua by which primae the first
[syllabels may be known,] etiam also partim partly ex incrementis from, or by
the increases [or increasings] genitivi of the genitive case, atque and
analogia from the proportion conjugationis of the conjugation. Arbitramur
dictum we think [or judge] it to have been spoken abunde abundantly supra
before in generibus nominum in the genders of nouns de incrementis concerning
the increasings genitivi of the genitive case nominum polysyllabarum of nouns
of many syllabels, unde from whence licebit it shall be lawful petere to seek
[or fetch direction] si quid haesitaveris if you shall doubt anything de hac re
concerning this matter. Frequens lectio the often reading and and observatio
the diligent observation optimorum poetarum of the best poets facile
suppeditabunt will easily furnish us with caetera the residu^, Pueri didicerunt
boys have learned analogiam conjugationis the proportion of the conjugation ex
imbibitis rudimentis from the first principles [or instructions] conceived [or
understood,] nempe that is to wit, a the letter a, indicem a sign [or token]
primae conjugationis of the first conjugation esse to be longam long natura by
nature, praeterquam in do saving only in the verb do to give, and and ejus
compositis in the compounds of that verb [or in his compounds,] quando when
sunt they are hujus conjugationis of this conjugation: ut as, Damus we give,
circundamus we compass about; dabis thou shall give, circundabis thou shall
compass about; dare to give, circundare to compass about. Praeterea
furthermore, animadvertant let them mark diligently syllabas rimus and ritis
the syllabels rimus and ritis ubique habendas every where to be taken [or
accounted] pro brevibus for short in praeterito perfecto, in the preterperfect
tense modi subjunctivi of the subjunctive mood, autem but debere that they
ought esse to be longas long in future, in the future tense in prosa oratione
in prose [or that which is no meter:] vero but reperiti indifferntes that they
are to be found indifferent in carmine in verse, quemadmodum even as Aldus the
Grammarian contendit affirms [or proves;] ut as, praeterito in the
preterperfect tense amaverimus when we have loved, amaveritis when ye have
loved: futuro in the future tense, amaverimus when we shall or will love,
amaveritis when ye shall or will love. Et also est there is a time ubi when
mediae syllabae the middle syllables, variant do vary apud poetas among poets:
ut as, in his in these quae which subjunximus we have set under: connubium
wedlock, ficedu- la agnat-snapper, Malea a promontory by Laconia, Pharsalia a
country of Th^ssaly, Batavus a man of Holland, Sydonius a man of Sydon, and
and similia the like words.

Latina adjectiva Latin adjectives in inus ending in inus, producunt penultimam
do make long the last syllabel saving one: ut as, clandestinus secret,
mediastimus a slave, parietinus of a decayed watt, matutinus belonging to the
morning, vespertinus belonging to the evening, repen^us sudden. Praeter except
hae^ sequentia these adjectives following. Diutnus long continuing, crastnus
appertaining to tomorrow, pristnus ancient, perendnus belonging to the next day
after tomorrow (or of the third day after) hornotmis of a year old, sero^nus
that is in the evening, oleagnus of an olive tree, fagnus of a be^^h-tree,
cedrnus of a cedar-tree, carbasnus of fine linen, Et and reliqua materialia
the residue of the nouns signifying matter, five or in inus words ending in
inus, formata formed a nominibus metallerum of the name of metals, qualia sunt
of what sort are permulta very many deducta derived a Graecis vocibus in inos
of Greek words in inos; ut as, Cristallnus of Cristal, my^rhnus of myrrh,
hyacinthnus of a jacinth stone, adamantnus of an adamant stone, etc and so
forth. Usus use and and observatio diligent marking poetarum of the poets
foelicius docebit will more happily teach caetera the other words (or the rest)
quam than ullae regulae any rules Grammaticorum of Grammarians, quas which
solent thae are wont tradere to teach de quautitate concerning the quantity
mediarum syllabarum of middle syllabels, aut either fine ullo modo without any
measure aut fine or end. Quare wherefore illis praetermissis those being passed
over, jam accingamut let us now prepare our selves ad aperiendas quantitates to
open (or declare) the quantities ultimarum syllabarum of the last syllabels.

QUanquam although ultimae syllabae the last syllablis aut either aequant do
match, aut etiam superant or do moreover exceed numerum ipsum the very number
literarum of the letters, tamen notwithstanding non pigebit it shall not irk us
etiam also perourrere ilias to run them over ordine in order. Primum first of
all a finita words ending in a producuntur are made long: ut as, Ama love thou,
contra against, erga toward. Excipias thou may except puta that is to say,
it^ s^, quia because. Item also nominativos the nominative cases in a ending in
a, cujuscunque genoris of whatsoever gender, numeri number, aut or
declinationis declension fuerine they shall be, praeter vocativos except the
vocative cases in a ending in a, a Graecis of the Greek words in as ending in
as: ut as, O Aenea O Aeneas, ^ Thoma O Thomas; and also ablativum the ablative
case primae declinationis of the first declension: ut as, ab hac mu^a from this
song. Numeralia words of number in ginta ending in ginta, habent have finalem
the syllabel at the end communem common, (that is to say, both long and short,)
sed but frequentius more often longam long: ut as, triginta thirty, quadraginta
forty, Desinentia words ending in b, d, t, brevia sunt are short: ut as, ab
from, ^d to, caput an head. Desinentia inc words ending in the latter ^
producuntu^ are made long^ ut as ac and, ^ic so and and adverbium hic the
adverb hic here. Sed but tria in c three words ending in ^ semper contrahuntur
are always contracted ut as, ^ac milk, nc neither donc until. Duo two words
sunt communia are common, sic^ do thou, and and pronomen hic the pronoun hic
signifying this, or that; and and neutrum hoc the neuter hoc this, on that,
modo so that now sit it be not ablativi casus of the ablative case. E finita
words ending in e brevia sunt are short: ut as, mar the sea^ almost, leg road
thou. Omnes voces all words quintae inflectionis of the fifth decla^nsion in e
ending in e sunt excipiendae are to be excep^ ut as, die^ in the day, side^ the
ablative case of sides faith una together cum adver^e with the adverbs enatis
ibde sprung from thence (or derived of them) ut as, holi^ to day, quotidie^
daily, prid^ the day before, postridie^ the day after, quare^ for what cause
(or wherefore,) qua de re^ wherefore,) ea re^ for that cause (or therefore,)
and and siqua sunt similia if there be any like them. Et item and also,
secundae perionae singulares the second persons singular secundae conjugationis
of the second conjugation imperativotum of the imperative moods activorum of
verbs activte: ut as, Doce^ teach thou, move^ move thou, mane^ tarry thou,
cave^ take thou heed; Etiam also monosyllaba in e words, of one syllabel in e
producuntur are made long: ut as, me^ me, te^ thee, ^e^ a syllabel added to
words [as hicce^.] praeter except qu and, or both, n whether, v or [or either]
conjunctiones encliticas the conjunctions enclitical. Quin and yea, and that
more is [or more over] quoque also adverbia adverbs inc ending in c, deducta
derived ab adjectivis of adjectives habent have e the letter e longum long: ut
as, pulchre goodly [beautifully,] docte^ learnedly, valde^ pro for valide^
mightily. Quibus unto which ferme^ and and fere^ the adverbs, ferme and fere,
signifying almost accedunt are added. Tamen notwithstanding ben well, and and
mal ill omnino corripiuntur are made short always [or altogether.] Postremo last
of all, [finally,] quae words which scribuntur are written per^ with the Greek
letter na Graecis of the Greeks producuntur are made long natura by nature
cujuscunque casus of whatsoever case, generis gender, aut ornumeri number
fuerint they shall be: ut as, Lethe^ a river of Hell [feigned by the poets]
causing forgetfulness Anchise^ the father of Aane^ cete^ pl. number. n. g. as,
cete immania great whales, Tempe^ a fair field in Thessaly. I finita words
ending in i longa sunt are long: ut as, Domini of a lord, magistri of a master,
amari^ to be loved, doceri^ to be taught. Praeter except mihi to me, tibi to
thee, sibi to himself [or themselves,] ubi where or when, ibi there, quae which
sunt are communia common, Vero but nis except and and quas as it were
corripiuntur are made short: cujus sortis of which sort [or manner] eti am also
sunt are dativi and vocativi the dative and vocative cases Graecorum of the
Greeks quorum genitive singularis whose genitive case singular exit in os
ends in os breve being short: ut as, huic Palladi to Minerva [the feigned
goddess of wisdom,] Phillidi to Phillis [Licurgus daughter] Minoidito Minois
[the daughter of Minos King of Cretes:] vocativo in the vocative case O Amarill
O Amarillis, O Alex O Alexis, O Daphn O Daphnis. L finita words ending in I,
corripiuntur are made short, ut as, animal a living creature [that has life
and sense,] Hannibal a Carthaginian captain, ml honey, pugil a champion, sal
salt, consul a consul. Praeter nil except the word nil contractum a contracted
word a of nihil signifying nothing, and and Sol the Sun. Et also Hebraea
quaedam certain Hebrew words in ^ ending in ^: ut as, Michae^l a name of
Christ, [signifying, Who like God?] [when men are so named, there it is another
meaning of the word,] Gabrie^l the name of an Angel, Raphae^l the name of an
Angel, Danie^l the name of a Prophet. N finita words ending in n producuntur
are made long: ut as, Paan one name of Apollo, Hymen the feigned God of
marriage, qui^n but [or but that,] Xenophon the name of a man so called, non no
[or not,] demon a devil. Excipe except thou forsan per adventure, forsit an
per adventure, an whether, tamn notwithstanding, attam n but yet [or
notwithstanding,] veruntamn nevertheless. Et also in the preposition in
corripitur is made short cum compositis with his compounds: ut as, exn from
henceforth, or afterward subn ever now and then, den afterward, pron therefore.
Et also illae voces these words accedunt his are added to these quae which
castrantur are cut short per apocopen by the figure Apocope: ut as, mn' what,
me? vidn' do thou not see? audn' do thou not hear? nemon is there no body?
Item also nomina in en nouns ending in en, quoram genitivus whose genitive case
habet inis correptum has inis made short: ut as, carmn a verse [or song,]
crimn a fault, pectn a comb. tibicn a player on the flute, make nis in the
genitive case. Etiam also Graeca Greek words in on ending in on, per o parvum
written with little o, cujuscunque casus fuerinc of whatsoever case they shall
be: ut as, ilion one name of the city Troy, Pelion an hill in Thessaly,
nominativo in the nominative case: Caucason the name of a mountain, Pylon the
name of a town where Nestor was born, accusativo in the accusative case. Etiam
also quaedam some nouns (...) in ending in in, ut as, Alexin Alexis, (the name
of diverse men.) In in ending in in: ut as Ityn Itys, (the son of Tereus and
Progne,) Quoque also in an words ending in an, a nominativis in a of the
nominative case ending in a: ut as, nominativo in the nominative case,
Iphigenia Aganum^ daughter, Aegina the daughter of Aesopus a certain King,
Accusativo in the accusative cases, Iphigenian Aegin^n, Nam in an and as
touching words ending in an (Holyoke so consteueth the word nam) a nominativis
in as of the nominative cases ending in as; producuntur are made long: ut as
nominativo in the nominative case Aeneas a noble man of Troy, Marsyas the name
of a famous Historiographer. Accusativo in the accusative case, Aenean Marsyan.
O finita words ending in o, communia sunt are common; ut as, amo to love, Virgo
a virgin, porro moreover, docendo in touching: legendo in reading, eundo in
going, and and aliae voces other voices gerundii in do of the gerund in do (or
other words being gerunds in do) [But yet remember that adjectives like gerunds
are only made long] Praeter except obliquos in o the oblique cases ending in o,
qui which semper producuntur are always made long: ut as, huic Domino to this
Lord, subaudi huic understand this word huic) servo to this servant. Ab hoc
templo from this Temple, (subaudi ab hoc understand these words ab hoc) damno
from this loss. Et also adverbia adverbs derivata derived ab adjectivis of
adjectives ut as, tanto by so much, quanto by how much, liquid^ clearly, falso
falsely, primo first and foremost, manifesto plainly or clearly, etc. Praeter
except sedulo diligently, mutuo mutually, crebro frequently (or often,) sero
late in the evening, quae which communia sunt are common. Caeterum but yet modo
now of late, and and quomodo how corripiuntur are made short semper always.
Quoque also cito quickly ut and as also, ambo both, duo two, ego I, atque also,
homo a man or woman, vix leguntur producta are scarcely read (made) long, Tamen
yet monosyllaba in o words of one syllabel in o producuntur are made long: ut
as, do to give, sto to stand, ut and as also ergo pro causa for a cause. Item
also Graeca Greek words per o written with great O subaudi producuntur are made
long, cujuscunque casus of whatsoever case fuerint they shall be: ut as, haec
Sappho this Sappho (a famous Poetress) haec Dido this Dido (the daughter of
Pelus King of Tire:) hujus Androgeo of this Androgius (the son of Minos King of
Crete,) hujus Apollo of this Apollos,(the name of a man:) hunc Atho this Athos
(a wonderful high hill in Thracia,) hunc Apollo this apollo [for Apollona, as
Dispauter writes, of (...) as Also Camden in his Greek Gramar:] (the name of
the feigned heathenish god of wisdom.) R finita words ending in r corripiuntur
are made short: ut as, Caesar the surname of the Julians in Rome, torcular a
wine press, pr by, vr a man, uxor a wife, turtur a bird called a turtle. Cor
the heart semel legitur is once read productum made long apud Ovidium by Ovid
ut as, Meum molle cor my soft heart violabile est is to be broken, or hurt
levibus telis with light darts, or slender weapons. Etiam also subaudi haec
verba understand th^se words, producuntur are made long, Lar a god of the
household, city, or fields, (as heathen people believed.) Nar, a river running
into Tyber, ve^r the spring, fur a thief, cur wherefore. Quoque also par equal,
or like cum compositis with his compounds: ut as compar equal, impar unequal,
dispar unlike. Graeca quaedam certain Greek words in er ending in er, quas
illis that among them desinunt in (...), d^ end in (...): ut as for example,
Aer the air, crate^r a great cup (or goblet,) character a mark, sign, seal or
print of a thing, ether the firmament or sky, (...) savior. Praeter except
pater a father, and and matter a mother, quae which apud Latinos among the
Latinists (or Latin Authors,) habent ultimam have the last syllabel brevem
short. s finita words ending in the letter s, habent have pares terminationes
the like terminations (or endings) cum numero vocalium with the number of the
vowels, nempe that is to wit, As, es, is, os, us, Primo first and foremost, As
finita words ending in as producuntur are made long: ut as, amas thou love
musas songs, majestas majesty (or honorable dignity,) bonitas goodness.
Praeter except Graeca Greek words quorum of which genitivus singularis the
genitive case singular [or whose genitive case singular] exit in dos does end
in dos: ut as, Archas the son of Jupiter, Pallas Minerva (the goddess of
wisdom;) genitivo in the genitive case Archados, Pallados. Et also, praeter
except accusativos plurales the accusative cases plural nominum crescentium of
nouns increasing: ut as, Heroes a noble man Heroos in the genitive case. Phillis
King Lycurgus his daughter, Phillidos in the genitive case. Accusativo plurali
in the accusative case plural Heroas, Phillidas. Es finita words ending in es
longa sunt are long: ut as, Anchise^s Aeneas father, sede^s thou fittest,
doce^s thou teach, patre^s fathers, Nomina in es nouns ending in es, tertiae
inflectionis being of the third declension excipiuntur are excepted, quae
corripiunt which do make short penultimam the last syllabel saving (...)
genitivi crescentis of the genitive case increasing; ut as, mils a soldier,
segs standing corn, divs rich: Sed but arie^s a ram, abie^s a fir tree, parie^s
a wall of an house, Cere^s the feigned goddess of corn; and also pe^s a foot,
una together cum compositis with the compounds of it: ut as, prepe^s light in
flying (or swift,) bipe^s having two feet, tripe^s having three feet, quadrupes
having four feet (or four footed,) sunt longa are long. Quoque also es the verb
es a sum coming of the verb sum to be corripitur is made short, una together
cum compositis with his compounds: ut as pots thou can (or art able,) ads
thou are present, prods thou profitest [or art profitable,] obs thou hinderest
[or hurtest.] Quibus to which words pens in the power potest may adjungi be
adjoined [or annexed] una together cum neutris with words of the n^uter gender,
ac and nominativis pluralibus to the nominative cases plural Graecorum of the
Greeks: ut as, Hippomans a venomous humor coming from a mare, cacoeths an evil
custom, Cyclops giants with one eye, Naids fairies haunting rivers and
fountains. Is finita words ending in is brevia sunt are short: ut as, Pars
Priamus [King of Troy] his son, pans bread, trists sad, hilars merry. Excipe
except obliquos plurales the oblique cases plural in is ending in is, qui which
producuntur are made long: ut as, Musis the dative or ablative case plural of
musa a song [or of Musae the Muses,] [which were feigned goddesses of
learning,] mensis the dative or ablative plural of mensa a table, dominis the
dative or ablative plural of dominus a lord, templis the dative or ablative
plural of templum a Church. Item also quei^s pro for quibus the dative or
ablative of qui which, cum producentibus with words making long penultimam the
last syllabel saving one genitivi crescentis of the genitive case increasing ut
as, Samni^s a Samnite, Salami^s an^le by Athens, genitivo in the genitive case
Samnitis, Salaminis. Add huic add hither [or to this place] quae words which
dosinunt do end in diphthongum ^is in the diphthong eis, ^i^e Graeca whether
they be Greek words sive Latina or Latin, cujuscunque numeri of whatsoever
number aut casus or case fuerint they shall be: ut as, Symoci^s a river in
Troy, Pyroci^sone of the horses of the sun, partei^s put for parts the parts,
omneis put for omnes all. Et item and also omnia monosyllaba all words; of one
syllabel: ut as, vis strength, power or force, li^s strife, or contention,
praeter nominativos except these nominative cases s signifying he and and qus
who, and also bs twice apud Ovidium in Ovid. Secundae personae singulares the
second person singular verborum in is of verbs ending in is, accedunt istis are
added to these, quorum secundae personae plurales whose second persons (...)
desinunt in itis do end (...), penultima the last syllabel saving one producta
being made long, una together cum futuris with the f^ure tenses subjunctivi. in
^is of the subjunctive mood in ^is: ut as, audis thou hear, velis thou
may or can be willing, dederis thou shall or wilt give pluraliter plurally
(or in the plural number,) auditis ye hear, velitis ye may or can be willing,
dederitis when ye shall or will give. Os finita words ending in os producuntur
are made long: ut as, honos honor, nepos a nephew, Dominos lords, servos
servants. Praeter except compos he that has ability or power in something,
impos that is unable (not having power,) and and os ossis a bone Et also Graeca
Greek words per o parvum written with little o: ut as, Delos an Isle in the
Aegean sea, where Apollo and Diana were born, Chaos a confused heap of all
things, whereof poets conceived all things to have come in the beginning,
Pallados the genitive case of Pallas, Minerva, Phyllidos the genitive case of
Phyllis King Lycurgus daughter ^s finita words ending in (...) ^orripiuntur are
made short: ut as, famulus an household manservant, regius royal, tempus time,
amamus we love. Producentia words making long penultimam the last syllabel
saving one genitivi crescentis of the genitive case increasing excipiuntur are
excepted: ut as, salus a saluting (or health,) tellus the earth (the ground)
genitivo in the genitive case salutis, telluris. Etiam also omnes voces all
words quartae inflectionis of the fourth declension in us ending in us, sunt
longa are long, praeter except nominativum and vocativum singulares the
nominative and the vocative case singular: ut as, hujus manus of this hand, hae
manus these hands, O manus O hands. Etiam also monosyllaba words of one
syllabel accedunt his are added to these: ut as, Crus the leg, (from the knee
to the ankle,) thus frankincense, mus a mouse, sus a sow, etc, and so forth. Et
item and also, Graeca Greek words per diphthongum (...) with the diphthong ous,
cujuscunque casus fuerint of whatsoever case they shall be: ut as, hic panthus
this Panthus, (a Trojan, the son of Otreus,) Melampus a famous Soothsayer:
Hujus Sapphus of this Sappho (a great Poetress,) Cliusthe genitive case of Clio
being the name of one of the Muses. Atque and nomen JESUS the name JESUS
venerandum that is worthy to be reverenced, (or ought, or is to be reverenced)
piis cunctis of all godly (or religious) persons. Postremo last of all omnia
ufinita all words ending in u, producuntur are made long: ut as, manu the
ablative case of manus an hand, genu a knee, amatu to be loved, diu a long
time, (or long time of continuance.)

Finis Grammatices the end of the Grammar.

