A SERMON PREACHED Before the King and Queen AT WHITEHALL, Jan. 19. 1689.

By J. LAMB, Chaplain to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.

A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN.
PROVE. xxii. 4. By Humility, and the fear of the Lord, are Riches, and Honor,
and Life.


LOrd, who will show us any Good? is the general Enquiry, the universal
Question of all Mankind. Every being pursues its own perfection, and would fain
be satisfied in all the Capacities it understands, and in all the importunate
Appetites it feels. Desire and Want are the misery of Life, but Good or
Happiness, is the free enjoyment of things convenient to us, the gratification
of all the genuine dispositions of the true and proper inclinations of our
Nature. But such is the ignorance and depravity of Man, that we are not so
sensible of the nobler and more excellent Capacities of our Minds, as we are of
the sensible and more obvious goods of the natural Life. To preserve and defend
that being we have acquired, to enrich our selves with all such things as
please the Body, and conduce to the ease of our Lives, and to secure our
Acquisitions, by a fair reputation in the World, by the hearty good will,
esteem and love, of all that know us; this is the general design of all Men,
these are the practical Principles of every individual Person. But the
perfection of the Mind, the improvement of our Reason, the Government of our
Will, the fear of God, and the preparation for an Eternal Life hereafter;
these, because they are intellectual, invisible, and future, are commonly less
regarded, too often lost, and swallowed up of sense.

Wherefore God, who loves and seeks our Happiness, even more than we our
selves, allows to our Imperfections, gives us His Laws as we can bear them, and
draws us insensibly to Virtue and Obedience, by annexing those good things,
which we all perceive, admire and prosecute, to the practice of those Moral
Duties, which are equally our Happiness, but not so easily discerned. And thus
of his Goodness he leaves us to the knowledge of our Souls, and draws us to
himself, our chief and most absolute Good, by the means of those sensible
things, which we understand, esteem and love; For By humility, and the fear of
the Lord, are Riches, and Honor, and Life.

The Proverbs of Solomon are the Emanations of the great understanding, which
God had bestowed upon him, 1 Kin. 3.12.
above all the Men that ever lived; the most perfect rules of Wisdom, for the
Government of humane Life; piercing and awakening of the Mind, consented to of
all, as soon as the words are understood. They are generally independent one of
another, but complete and full in every period. This before us encourages
Humility, from the consideration of the great advantages we may reasonably
expect, and are assured unto us from the practice of it, even all that is good
and desirable in this present World, both Riches, and Honor, and Life.

Which words are a positive assertion of the certain effects and consequences
of Humility, that is to say, that a modest opinion of our selves, and a
cheerful submission to the will of God in all conditions, arising from a pure
and perfect Principle of Religion, and the fear of God, will procure us Wealth
and Honor, and secure the enjoyment of them both, with Peace and Pleasure, to
a good old Age. By Humility, and the fear of the Lord, by such an Humility, as
proceeds from the fear of the Lord, are Riches, and Honor, and Life. So that
the Text consists of these two Parts.

I. A Duty recommended, Humility with the fear of the Lord.

II. The Reward proposed to enforce and encourage the practice of it, are
Riches, and Honor, and Life.

I. I begin with the first, the Duty recommended. Humility, with the fear of
the Lord. And for the clearer and more perfect illustration of it, I shall
briefly consider these two things.

1. The definition, the nature, and principles of Humility in the general. And

2. The several parts and exercises of Humility so defined.

1. I begin with the first, the definition, nature, and principles of Humility.

Humility has a near relation to many Graces, but if we consider it by it self,
as a single Virtue, it is, an habit or temper of Mind, proceeding from a
Principle of Religion, or the fear of God, which subdues all lofty, false
Opinions of ones self, and disposes a Man to a cheerful acquiescence, in all
Estates and conditions of Life, that God shall place him in.

(1.) It is an habit of Mind, a frame or temper of Soul; for a Virtue cannot be
defined by single actions. Fasting, Weeping, and Praying, may be the effects of
Repentance, a submiss Behavior of Humility, or they may not; because the
outward acts, be they what they will, may proceed from diverse causes, and are
therefore good or evil, according to the intention of the Author: they are the
Servants of many Masters, and receive their denomination from the inward
Principle that produced them.

(2.) Again, Humility is such an habit of the Soul, as must be framed and
wrought by a Principle of Religion, or the fear of God, for so says the Text,
By Humility, with the fear of the Lord, proceeding from a Principle of pure
Religion, are Riches, and Honor, and Life. God has commanded it, I will
therefore study the goodness of it, that I may love it, and choose it, and
endeavor to attain the perfection of it. Nothing can be a Virtue in us that we
have not chosen. Dispositions of Nature may be rewarded, if by our care we
preserve them incorrupt; and they are very happy that are naturally well
inclined, but the Virtue is far more perfect, to say no more, that is freely
chosen, against the bent of our inclination; when reason exercises its proper
power, and subdues unreasonable Appetites, devoted Customs, to the Obedience of
God.

In our present instance, there is a depression of Mind in many Men by nature,
an indifference to every thing, which is not so properly the grace of Humility,
as a natural Necessity. Humility then is an habit or temper of Mind, arising,
not from sinister respects, not from reasons without our selves; nay not from
natural necessity, but from a principle of Religion, or the fear of God. And it
chiefly consists in these two things.

First, In a modest, just opinion of our selves, and

Secondly, In a cheerful submission to the will of God, in all the conditions
of Life, that Providence shall place us in.

First, Humility subdues all lofty false opinions of our selves, of our own
perfections and deserts. It is the exercise of our Reason in judging and
valuing our selves and others: that we neither arrogate those qualities which
indeed we never had; nor magnify those we have, in our own conceit, above the
degree of perfection we have attained, but that we think of our selves as we
ought to think, as S. Paul describes the nature of Humility, Romans 1 2.3.

Every Man, by the instinct of his nature, would be more excellent and perfect
than he is. God only is stable and immutable, desiring and wanting nothing, but
we are weak and impotent, always craving and never satisfied; weary of our own
condition, as if we wanted something that was our due, and envying the
condition of our neighbor, as if he had too much. God has therefore obliged us
to Humility, or a just opinion of our selves and others, that we may be
sensible of our own miscarriages, defects, and faults, as well as of the graces
and good qualities of our Neighbor; that we may be glad our own condition is
so happy as it is, and ready to acknowledge the Excellencies, and be well
contented with the Prosperity of others, as the same St. Paul explains
Humility, Phil. 2.3. In lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better than
himself. That is the first.

Secondly, The second part of Humility respects our place and station in the
World, and teaches us to submit with cheerfulness to the will of God, under all
the dispensations of his Providence. It moderates Ambition, regulates the
desire of Worldly Goods, and disposes us to a grateful liking, to ease and
satisfaction in the place we are in. Our desires will be higher or lower,
according to the opinion we have of our selves; but Humility subdues those
false imaginations, which Pride and Vanity impose upon us. It shows us our
weakness, dependence, faults, and imperfections, and inclines us to be well
contented in our station, and to believe our selves to be very well provided.
This is the definition, the nature, and principles of a Religious Humility, as
it respects our Neighbor and our Selves.

There is another considerable part of Humility, that is exercised in a more
immediate manner upon God Himself, and consists in the most honorable
apprehensions of His Sacred Majesty, in the most sincere acknowledgement of our
dependence upon Him, and Obligations to Him for Life, and all the comforts of
it, in the most profound respect and reverence; in the most obsequious
addresses to him, in the deepest sorrow, in the greatest indignation against
our selves, in the lowest demission of Mind, whenever we offend him, together
with all the outward expressions of our inward sense, that Nature, Reason,
Custom, or Example, shall direct us to. But because this part of Humility
toward God, is more easy in the practice, than the other; there is no dispute
between God and his Creature for preeminence, he understands our thoughts, and
can easily punish our Pride and Arrogance; and therefore no Man, who believes
his Being, does directly oppose himself against him, or set himself in
competition with him. And therefore at the present, I shall only consider that
part of Humility that is exercised upon our Neighbor and our Selves. And it
chiefly consists, as you have already heard, in a modest opinion of our own
deserts, and a cheerful submission to the will of God, under all the
dispensations of his Providence. As Pride on the other hand is an over-weaning
opinion of ones self, contempt and undervaluing of others, with a suitable
ambition of Worldly greatness, to assert and support this vain conceit. Thus
Pride is explained by Arrogance, Prove. 8.13. By Self-conceit, Phil. 2.3. By a
vain desire of Glory, Gal. 5.26. and (...), one that boasts of his endowments,
Hesychius explains by (...), a proud Man. Superbia, says St. Aug. est perversae
celsitudinis appetitus (de Civ. Dei) and he describes a proud Man thus: He
cannot bear to be subject to any: amongst his equals he affects precedence; and
what he wants in merits, he will invade and force by flattering his superiors,
envying his equals, and despising those below him. Thus much for the
definition, the nature, and principles of Humility in the general.

2. I proceed, as I proposed in the second place, to consider the several parts
and exercises of the duty so defined.

The Virtue of Humility is one, and indivisible, neither more nor less than a
modest opinion of our selves, a cheerful contentation in our place, with
candor, deference, and good will to all. But the practice upon these principles
are as various, and infinite, as our capacities of expressing the sentiments of
our Mind. Ep. 66.
Virtue is one, says Seneca, neither less nor greater, but its species are
many, which are expressed according to the variety of life and actions. And in
our present instance, I shall endeavor to illustrate the principal exercises
of Humility, in these following particulars.

(1.) In our Desires and Aims. (2.) In our Looks and Gestures. (3.) In our
Garb, and Habit. (4.) And principally in our Conversation.
(1.) In our Pursuits, Desires, and Aims: A Man that is truly humble in his own
opinion, will moderate his ambition of Worldy goods, he will be always apt to
think he has as much as he deserves, and ready to rejoice in the rewards of
Virtue, upon whomsoever they shall light. If any good befalls himself, he does
not look upon it as his due, but as a kind encouragement to pursue that Virtue
which he thinks he wants at present. But the desires of the proud are never
satisfied; if once a Man can persuade himself that his deserts are great, he
can never be pleased, till he has attained the reward which his vain conceit
has set upon his merit. Besides, it is Power and Riches that nourish his Pride,
that gratify his fond opinion of himself, and force, at least, a dissembled
honor from abroad. And therefore the vanity of his Spirit, will inflame his
desire, after all such things as indulge and feed the humor. St. Aug. says of
Pride and Ambition, that they are so far one and the same, as Pride is never to
be found without Ambition, nor Ambition without Pride. (de Salut. Doct.) Is he
made Tribune of the People, Epist.
says Seneca, speaking of a proud Man, instead of returning thanks for that, be
complains that he is not promoted to the Praetorship, nor would that content
him, unless they choose him Consul. Nay, the Consulship it self will hardly
please him, unless he may rule alone. So true is that account which Solomon has
given of him, That he always expects to divide the spoil, Prove. 16, 19. that is
the first.

(2.) The second exercise of Humility is in our Looks and Gestures. A Man of an
humble Mind, that is truly sensible of his own desects, will not estrange, or
separate himself from his Neighbor. He does not delight in the distance of
inferior People, nor strike an awe upon them by an haughty look. He is always
sensible of his own defects, and is therefore glad that his Neighbor will be
free, and easy with him; extremely pleased with a good acquaintance; with the
entire and perfect Friendship of all about him. Humilis ultimum se judicat, and
blando vultu terram intuens, De Salut. docum.
says St. Aug. he is so far from neglecting, much less from scorning any Man,
that he addresses all with a clear and a cheerful Countenance, with freedom and
courtesy, with sweetness and affability. Nay the very gestures of his Body well
express the humility of his Mind, his motions are indifferent, easy, free and
natural, without affectation or singularity, (...), says St. Paul, he is not
puffed up, he is not swelled with high conceit, he does not strut, and look
down with contempt upon the World, but governs all his gestures by the rules of
ingenuity, and the customs of the place. But the looks of the proud are
affected, singular and scornful, (...), a Man of Pride is he, qui super alios
apparet, ut se conspiciendum praebeat, one that looks over all the World, that
he himself may be exposed to view. He uses all imaginable artifice to be seen,
inquired of, and admired, though it be but of the simple. And thus the
unreasonable thirst of Honor, betrays a Man, insensibly, into contempt and
scorn; for we shall hear in the end, that the humble Spirit shall inherit
Glory; Ecclus 22.24.
and not the Generation of Men, Pro. 30.13.
whose Eyes are haughty, and whose Eye lids are lift up. That is the second.

(3.) This inward habit of true Humility, will be visible in our outward garb,
in our way of living in the World. A Man that is truly humble, does not desire
to be talked of. He rather affects to be concealed. He is afraid lest those who
read upon him, should observe more evil qualities than good; and therefore he
always appears and lives, without design of observation, without any just
provocation to envy, or evil will; but as a Man of his condition, according to
the custom of his Country, may be supposed and expected to appear and live. But
a garish habit, and a manner of living, that is above his quality or estate, is
a certain indication of Pride and Discontent. He is sollicitous of public
notice, and shows, that he thinks it fit, and right, that he should be in a
higher station than he is; and therefore he will thrust himself into the
outward garb and habit of it, though with the utmost hazard. He that imitates
the fashions of Men in Authority, Honor and Wealth, betrays his Ambition,
though he makes himself ridiculous. That is the third

(4.) And lastly, This inward habit of true Humility, will chiefly express it
self in our Conversation,

First, With our Acquaintance, Friends and Equals, a Man of an humble Mind is
full of courtesy and condescension, forward and ready in all expressions of
civility and regard to his Friend, even more than he himself expects. He is not
emulous of precedence, but if place be undoubtedly his due, he rather accepts
it in compliance with the economy of the World, than for any delight in the
thing it self; according as St. Paul directs, Romans 12.10. 1 Pet. 5.5.
Be kindly affectioned one toward another, with Brotherly Love, in Honor
preferring one another. He despises no Man's judgment, nor obtrudes his own
Opinion with rudeness, violence, or passion, though it may be never so clear or
evident; He hears the discourse of others, with all civility and just
allowance, if it be good and proper, without any visible dislike, much less
affront, if it chance to be frivolous and impertinent. Gal. 5.26.
He neither provokes nor envies any, Man. He does nothing through strife or
vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, he esteems his neighbor better than
himself. Phil. 2.3. In a word, he is always jealous of his own judgment, and
ready to say with Agar, Pro. 30.2. Surely I have not the understanding of a
Man, and is therefore well contented, if by all the Arts of Civility and Love,
he may preserve a good understanding, and a kind acceptance in the World. But a
proud Man is always full of himself, jealous of his reception, impatient till
you understand how much he thinks himself above you. He expects that all the
court should be addressed to him, that he should preside and rule over all the
Company; that every Man should be of his Opinion, hear his Discourse, allow his
Characters, endure his tediousness, commend his Wisdom, admire his Beauty, and
add to the Character he gives or insinuates of himself: if you oppose him, you
strike him to the heart; if you rebuke him, he becomes your Enemy, for so says
Solomon, Pro. 9.7. Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee; rebuke a wise Man,
and he will love thee.

Secondly, Again, In his conversation with those that are any way superior to
him. An humble Man has a low opinion of himself, and is satisfied in his
station; he wishes he could deserve what he has, or more, but is well contented
with the promotion of his betters; He frankly rejoices with them that do
rejoice, Romans 12.
and is really pleased with the prosperity of any Man. He is cheerful under
Government, and loves the hand by which the benefits of the Commonwealth are
dispensed unto him; Ephesians. 5.21. 1 Pet. 5.5.
he is sincere and free in all the Customary Honors that their place and
quality require. But a proud Man hates his Betters, his address is forced, his
outward Compliment is against his will; he abhors from his Soul, that the
Honor and Wealth, which his vain conceit has resolved to be due to himself,
should be enjoyed by another: and therefore he does what he can to find a
fault, to depreciate his worth, and to stir up Enemies: he is ready to carp at
his Abilities, vilify his Manners, reflect upon his Wisdom, undervalue his
Estate, despise his Person. Something or other to bring him under obloquy, and
level him with himself.

Thirdly, and lastly, In his Conversation with those below him. A Man of an
humble Mind will be candid, civil, and ingenuous in the highest stations. He
hides his accidental luster, with a true and a decent greatness, and converses
courteously with inferior Men; He neither frights them from him by his Pomp,
nor discourages their approach by a forbidding look, but is easy of address,
ready to be spoke with, benign and cheerful toward all. He condescend to Men
of low estate, (Romans 12.16.) Receives their visits, treats them kindly, accepts
their Presents, helps them in distress, as our Savior washed the Disciples
feet (Joh. 13.14.) and obliges us, according to his Example, to wash one
anthers feet. He accepts the services of his Servants with a cheerful
Countenance, and a civil gratitude; He makes their places easy, by showing
himself the Friend, as well as the Master of the Family. But a Man that is
proud and potent, is the most intolerable Being upon Earth; he studies to make
himself a terror to all about him; he is pleased when he can appale them by a
stern and cloudy Countenance. Nay so unaccountable is Pride with Greatness,
that he does not know himself, what it is he expects from his Dependents. St.
Aug. upon this account compares him to a Ship that is tossed upon the Waves, De
Salut. Doc. lib.
without a Pilot. What humor, lust, or passion, must be gratified to day, is
uncertain; quite the contrary perhaps to Morrow. Who shall be next in his
favor or displeasure, is hard to guess. If you please him, he is frequish in
his favors; for his kindness to you, is only to use you as his Slave for a
while; if you fall into disgrace, he designs and works your ruin.

These are the principal Acts, the necessary Effects both of Humility and
Pride; wherever the Principle is, these will be the certain radical
operations of it; we shall fall into them naturally, as occasion offers. Only
in this, as in all other Virtues whatsoever, allowance must be made to the
Passion and Surprises, to the Frailty and Imperfections of humane Nature. But
where these outward acts are as stable and equal, as even and uniform as our
present state permits, there, and there only, is the Virtue: for it does not
consist in any particular thing, not in conversing with the Poor, not in an
abject Countenance, not in a squalid Habit; but in an uniform practice of all
the necessary acts of Humility, as occasion offers. It is this alone that is
the Grace, because it is this alone that can never be acted or put on. It is
impossible that Hypocrisy should be uniform, no Hypocrite can imitate so many
several things. The Expressions of Humility are copious and infinite, and
therefore are never to be taught or acted. But the Grace it self is an inward,
living Principle, and will influence our outward Actions, easily, naturally,
and without teaching.

Hence it appears, that Kings and Noblemen may be humble as well as others:
they may use an outward Grandeur according to their Quality, and yet be very
meek: for the Grace is within the Man; he may possibly endure, rather than be
conceited of his Equipage, much less a Despiser of others. No, we must take
especial care to preserve the economy of the World, and the distinctions of
Men, in all our Meditations of Humility and Pride, and endeavor, according to
what has been said, to have a right understanding of both.

Thus, as briefly as I could, I have laid before you, as well the Nature and
Definition, as the principal Acts and Exercises of a Religious Humility.

II. And I now proceed to the Second General, the Reward proposed to persuade
and encourage the Practice of it: By humility and the fear of the Lord are
riches, and honor, and life. And here there are these two things to be
considered.

1. That Riches and Honor and Life are a real Blessing, and the proper matter
of Reward. And

2. That Humility with the Fear of the Lord will certainly procure them.

1. That Riches and Honor and Life, are a real Blessing, and the proper matter
of Reward.

Happiness can be nothing else but the Satisfaction of natural Appetites,
according to, and not exceeding the Intention of Nature. God has made us
capable of variety of Satisfactions, and given us suitable Desires, and
therefore want in any of these is Misery in proportion: for there is no notion
of Misery, but Emptiness and Desire unsatisfied. What is contrary to our
Nature, frets and grates us, but what is agreeable to our true and natural
dispositions delights and pleases us; the one is called Happiness, the other
Pain or Misery: and therefore the Goods of the World (comprehended here in
Riches and Honor and Life) having a real value in them, in their order and
degree, are proposed as the Reward of Humility with the fear of the Lord. If
Temporal Blessings prove pernicious to us, as oftentimes they do, the Fault is
not in them, but in us, in that we resolve our final Happiness into them, and
set our Affections upon them, to the prejudice of our higher and more excellent
Capacities. But they may be lawfully enjoyed to that degree that God allows,
and are worthy of a just pursuit in the way that he proposes, and that is, says
the Text, by humility, and the fear of the Lord. This is the Method that God
has appointed, and they that seek them thus, may expect to attain them.

(1.) By a natural Power and Efficacy in the Virtue it self.

(2.) By an Efficacy Moral; there is something in the practice of Humility,
that disposes kindly to all those several ends.

(3.) By an efficacy Divine and Spiritual; the blessing of God will assist and
forward the designs of the humble, that he shall ordinarily attain his ends,
and live in Plenty, Honor, and Esteem, to a good old Age. By Humility, and the
fear of the Lord, etc.

(1.) By a natural power and efficacy in the virtue it self. An humble
disposition tends to Riches, procures Honor, and preserves Health.

First, It tends to Riches, and promotes our interest in the World. It causes
us to propose such ends as are reasonable, and within our reach; it makes us
cautious and prudent in our measures. It gives us Patience under the crosses
and disappointments of the World, and encourages us to try contentedly again.
His Life is comfortable, his matters are managed with silence and discretion,
his Mind is steady, calm, and fit for business. But the Proud are high and
lofty in their aims, furious in prosecution, and impatient of any rub. They
propose more to themselves than they can compass, which baffles all their
projects, and brings them to nothing in the end.

Secondly, Again, Humility naturally tends to Honor, Wisdom and Steddiness;
Patience and an even prudent managery are so seldom seen, that they never fail
to procure esteem and a fair reputation in the World. Those things have a
luster in them, which by a necessary efficacy, like the Sun it self, dazzle the
sight, and charm the spirits of all Men.

Thirdly, and lastly, Humility naturally tends to Health, and prolongs our
Life. Pride and solicitude, Envy and desire unsatisfied, nourish a continual
Passion, exhaust the Spirits, disquiet sleep, and so destroy the Health and
Life of many. Plut.
As Themistocles says of himself; that the Victory and Trophies of Miltiades,
interrupted his Peace, and would not suffer him to take his rest. But an humble
indifference, a meek and a cheerful temper, is the Fountain of all tranquillity
and pleasure: his Spirits do not rage, and boil, and overset the Body; his rest
is sweet, his Mind is free, neither empty of all design, nor pressed down with
care. He has business enough to employ his thoughts, leisure enough to regard
himself, content and quiet under all events. And thus by natural causality,
From Humility, etc.

(2.) Again, By an efficacy moral; Humility disposes kindly to all these
several ends, because it conciliates the good opinion of all Men. The deigns of
the humble are modest, and therefore he uses no indirect provoking Arts to
attain his Worldly ends. He builds a Fortune upon no Man's ruin; he is fair
and upright in all his dealings, candid and ingenuous, without design or trick,
which irresistably gain the good will of all. Every one will be his Friend,
ready to assist him, advise him, inform him of any design that is upon him, or
of any good that may be in his way. And indeed a stock in the favor and
good will of our Neighbor, may prove the best estate in this uncertain World.

(3.) And lastly, By an efficacy Divine and Spiritual; The Blessing of God will
attend the humble, and so dispose and order second Causes, that they shall live
in Plenty, Peace, and Honor, to a good old Age. An humble compliance with the
will of God, Content in our Station, Gratitude for Benefits received, Patience
and Self-denial under cross Events, dispose, in their nature, to the Favor and
Love of God, the Governor of the World. He cannot but be pleased with those
that comply with his Providence, and promote his own Designs. And therefore
upon whom shall I rest, says God, but upon him that is of an humble and a
contrite spirit? Humility is a Bed of Repose and Pleasure to God himself, is
St. Augustine's Note upon the place. And though the Lord be high, yet he has
respect to the lowly, but beholds the proud afar off, Ps. 138.6. The Proud
are in a manner out of his sight; but the humble are under his particular care
and providence. And therefore the meek shall inherit the Earth, Matthew. 5. They
shall have wisdom and counsel, Prove. 11.2. They shall be exalted, Luke 1.52.
They shall have rest and tranquillity in all conditions, Matt. 11. ult. But
pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall, Prove.
16.18. Tollitur altissime, ut majori casu ruat. And thus, By humility, and the
fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life, as well in the Nature and
Reason of the thing, as by the special Promises of God.

Use. It now remains that we earnestly endeavor to accomplish our Souls with
this so useful, so advantageous a Virtue. You see it is every way your
Interest, as well as it is your Duty: Pride is a vain and empty Satisfaction, a
continual Disappointment; but Humility is a sure Foundation of Riches, and
Honor, and Life. Pride would fain be great but cannot; but Humility is
indifferent, and is therefore courted by the World, it follows it, and offers
it self unto it. If you say, that Pride is so natural to us, that it is
impossible to be rooted out; that it has so obtained in the World, that no Man
with any Decency or Reputation can lay it now aside. The Answer is this, that
if it were impossible, it could not be made a Duty: the truth is, the Desire of
a more perfect State, to strive after greater Excellencies, than we have, the
Emulation of virtuous and lovely Qualities: These are the true dispositions and
genuine Inclinations of humane Nature; but the Vice of Pride is unnatural and
wholly foreign to us: it would be esteemed for that which it has not, it would
be rewarded for that which it deserves not, it is a Complication of
Immoralities, Rebellion against the Providence of God, Detraction, Envy,
Malice, and vain Imagination. This, to be sure, is a Disease we have brought
upon our Selves; we love the Vice, we nourish the Distemper, we force our
Nature to it, and vainly hope, to come off at last by pleading a Necessity. But
did you ever endeavor to cure this Malady in earnest? did you ever use the
proper Means? did you ever consider how little reason you had to be proud or
haughty? what a miserable imperfect Being the best of us is, how insufficient,
how dependent? St. James persuades to Humility from hence, That we are all
subject to God, (c. 4. v. 7.) And what have you, says St. Paul, that you have
not received? If you received it, why do ye glory? Nay, even that, that we have
received, and is so precarious, so entirely at the will of another, is so
little in it self, so fading and imperfect, that it is no Foundation of Conceit
or Haughtiness. For we are nothing but soreness and corruption, says the
Prophet. Sordet in conspectu Judicis, S. August.
quod fulget in conspectu operantis, says the Father. It is well that there
remains a more perfect State hereafter for us, who never attain to so great a
Perfection of our Nature here, as other Beings do in theirs. What is our
Beauty? it is commonly mistaken, especially by our Selves; but where indeed it
is, the Shades do so hide the Light, that it generally spoils the Picture. The
Flowers of the Field excel us: and what we have, is fading and inconstant;
there is no security in it, no propriety, and therefore the value of it is not
great. Is it his Wisdom that a Man may value himself upon? Which Wisdom? That
of Yesterday, or his present Sentiments? For alas, a Man is so unstable, so
inconsistent with himself, that his Principles, Opinions, and Institution of
Life, are seldom the same many years together. There is always some bias or
other that obstructs his Judgment, and hinders the free and proper motions of
his Mind, which at the best are but imperfect. What is it then? Is it Wealth
and Power that puff us up? But Power without Reason and Goodness, is a
Whirlwind, a Tempest, Belluine Ferocity, the degeneracy of humane nature: and
as for the Power that is justly exercised, it is equally beneficial to the
Subject, with the Prince, it equally secures them both in their Rights and
Properties. The Power and Dominion of one Man over another, is at the best, but
a necessary evil, brought into the World to restrain the exorbitant tempers of
Men, and indeed most evil to those that exercise it. Does it not oblige them to
a tedious attendance? are they not subject to distracting Cares, opprobrious
Censures, dangerous Envy, treacherous Conspiracies, and frequent Dissolutions?
Upon the matter then, there is nothing in a Man's Possession that is sufficient
to elate his Mind? That that really commends him, is an humble sense of what he
has attained, and an earnest endeavor to proceed and improve; this at the same
time will both prevent the assuming Glory, and make you really deserving of it.

Finally, Set the Example of our blessed Savior before your Eyes, who humbled
himself to death upon the Cross for us. Let us blush, says the Father, to be
proud, S. August.
for whom our Savior is thus humbled. We must needs be very undeserving
Wretches, who so provoked the Almighty Justice, that nothing but the Blood of
his Son could atone our guilt. These things, if well considered, would be
sufficient to keep down all the ebullitions of a haughty Spirit; especially if
we add to this, our constant Prayers to God for his assistance, who will be
always ready to support our weakness, prevent temptation, facilitate our
Victory, and bring us at last to that Happy State, where we shall all be as
great and glorious as we can desire. Matt. 5.3.
For blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. To
which God of his Mercy bring us all, for Jesus Christ his sake the Righteous,
to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor, Glory, Praise,
Dominion and Obedience, now, and for Evermore. Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 4. for leaves read leads, p. 6. l. 11. for devoted r. and rooted,
p. 12. l. 6. r. Doc.

FINIS.

