THE Great and wonderful PREDICTIONS Of that late Famous Astrologer Mr. Lilly;
and Mr. Partridg and Mr. Coley, concerning this present Year 1683. To which is
added A true and faithful ACCOUNT OF THE Famous Prophecies of the three German
Prophets; Predicting and Foretelling, some years since, this present Invasion
of the Turks into the Empire of Germany and Hungary, with the events of the
same, to the admiration of all that shall hear or read the same. Also their
strange and wonderful Predictions concerning the Pope, and the King of France:
With the total and sudden destruction of the Papal power; and the miraculous
Conversion of the Turks and Jews to the Christian Faith. As also presaging the
uniting of all Religions into one visible Church. Which Prophecies have been
had in esteem by many famous and illustrious persons of these times.

LONDON, Printed for Josh. Conyers at the black Raven in Ducklane, M DC LXXX
III.

Kind Reader,
WE here present thee with some remarkable Prophecies of that Ancient and
Famous Astrologer, Mr. William Lilly, lately deceased; concerning this great
year 1683. predicted by him many years since, in the year 1655. Says he,

In the year eighty three,
Great Changes there will be
In England. But --
Long ere that time poor Merlin sleeps
In's Grave secure; sad England weeps.
Left he no Heir unhappy Man,
That this obscurer Riddle can
Unfold? -- No.
In his Anglicus for 1677. he has these words.

Those pretending to ^eligion, or such as are famous for Schisms or Heresies,
or those of different judgment from that Religion Established by Authority, for
some years will grumble and repine for that restriction on their Consciences,
(as they will term it) and the nearer to the time of the Conjunction, the more
Confederations they will have, either, near the time of the Conjunction it
self, or a little after; we fear great disturbance of those Nations, and the
Princes they live under, disquieting their Governors: this for Conscience sake,
as they pretend. But in our Nation, (as before was expressed) breach of the
people's just privileges, ancient customs, and former enjoyed rights will
animate the generality to a strong and sturdy Rebellion, and countenance that
translation of Monarchy mentioned by Trithemius.

Again, says he, Many believe the last Age of the World is at hand; we verily
conjecture, That a troublesome and vexatious time is approaching upon most
Nations of Europe, wherein those pretending to Religion, whether Papist or
Protestant, will show little mercy or compassion to those persons whose
un^appiness it will be to fall under their subjection. God bless us from such a
Reformation that must be advanced in the ruins of a well settled Government.

Mr. Partridg in his Astrological judgment on this year 1683. has these words;
Saturn and Jupiter in conjunction in Leo, are contriving to make themselves
secure, and to this end there are many and various endeavors used to convene
those of the greatest and best policy, to invent and contrive some new ways of
Trade, commerce, and Government: But methinks Saturn and Jupiter both
peregrine, look rather like Plotters than Statesmen, and seem to be such as
would rather overthrow a Kingdom, Laws, and Religion, than secure any, unless
it be such as serves their own turn: for you know that Highway men in their way
are for self-preservation, though the Law be directly against them, and say,
they ought to be hanged. Well let them plot on, then they have the worst
success that ever men had; for what ever they contrive or consult, it will be
known to their enemy, be it never so deep or Clandestine.

The great and wonderful Prophecies of the three German Prophets, Christopher
Kotterus, Christiana-Pomatovia, and Nicholas Drabicius.
WE present thee, kind Reader, with these remarkable Prophecies of the three
German Prophets, which have been highly esteemed of by the famous and
illustrious persons of these times, which some years since foretold the
invasion of the Turks in Germany, and the events of the same: Also Predictions
concerning the French King's Wars, and the destruction of the Papal See of
Rome, with the conversion of Jews and Turks; which take as follows.

On the 11 th. of June there first of all appeared an Angel in the shape of a
Man to Kotterus, which spoke to him as follows: That the anger of God was
kindled against mankind, and that in fury he hastened to inflict punishment on
them, except they repent of their Pride and Impurity, and for contempt of God
and his Word. After this he vanished.

The Prophecy concerning Rome is, That the Lion of the Tribe of Judah shall
rore against the Whore of Babylon, behold she is now falling, but is not yet
fallen, but presently shall fall. O thou cold, thirsty and presumptuous City!
it is not the height nor strength of thy Walls shall defend thee; behold the
time is coming that thou shall totter, and thy horrid lies, and false
perverting of the Scriptures with thy spiritual fornications. O you Kings, you
Princes, and Potentates, who do flatter her, and drink the Wine of her
impurities, and partake of the Cup of her blasphemies. Behold the dry and
withered Tree of the East begins to shoot forth her leaves, and her blushing
knots; but the trees of the North do stand unmoved.

Behold the Lion of the North begins to rouse himself, and two other of the
same color do follow him that will pluck up the trees of the South, Root and
Branch. O that thou had known the day of thy visitation; but glory be to him
that does Wonders. After a little silence, the Angel said, O Babylon! fair but
painted, and destitute of true foundation, false in thy Doctrine, false in thy
L^fe, evil in thy Works, two and forty Months shall quickly be expired, and the
three Days and half a Day shall come to an end: and the spirit of life shall
return into those whom thou, O wicked Babylon, have murdered. The five Months
of thy Judgments will quickly be accomplished, and then the Pope, the Spouse of
the Devil shall fall. The Angel further said, That besides the Devil, the great
adversary of the Church, there are two others that shall destroy and tread down
all things: one of them does not yet know the true God, of whom he is now
ignorant; but shall know him, for the time is at hand that he shall acknowledge
the true God, and shall accomplish his dec^ees against the great Whore, sitting
upon the hills above the Sea, who is another trampler upon, and destroyer of
the Church, whose remembrance is come in the sight of God, to give her a cup of
the Excandescence of his Anger; he cares not for God, nor does God care for
him, for his time is almost past. Then Kotterus demanded of the Angel, Will
there be a great effusion of Blood? the Angel answered, Yes: for since Germany
is so stubborn as not to pray to Almighty God to withdraw his Rod and heavy
Hand held over it, but does more and more provoke him, and does still fill up
the measure of her sins, that it runs over with the abundance thereof,
therefore there shall be a great battle and overthrow to the Devil and the
Dragon, and a great supper shall be prepared for the fowls of the air. Woe unto
Caesar the King, and Princes, the Counts, and Barons: Woe unto the Countries
and Cities of the German Empire; all these things shall fall upon you, Famine,
Dearth and War, and effusion of Blood; for the condemnation of the great Beast
is near and certain. Kotterus interposed again, and said, Shall the faithful be
delivered from these great Judgments? the Angel answered, Rejoice O little
Flock, thy Shepherd shall defend thee, you have in the Scriptures infallible
promises of deliverance.

The Lion of the Tribe of Judah is he who wageth war against Germany, and he
does manage it by the Lion of the East, and the Lion of the North, neither does
he want power or means to inflict his punishments for many great Causes.

The Visions, Revelations and Prophecies of Christiana Pomatovia.
THere appeared to me a man armed from Head to Foot, whose Head was as fire,
and flame came out from his Mouth; he came forth, and stood by himself, and one
of the company brought him a Sword, and did put it into his right hand, saying,
This is my strength, and with the right Hand of my strength, and this Sword
will I destroy my adversary, behold I am prepared, and will come unexpectedly
in a day that the wicked shall not think of me, and will render unto every one
according to his deserts, and in my wrath will I grind into powder all
Unbelievers. I will now hasten my Judgment, I will perform a wonderful thing,
much evil shall come from the North, and from the East, upon all the
Inhabitants of the Earth. And immediately were heard these words, B^bylon is
fallen, it is fallen, the great House of Austria is fallen, that proud and
lofty House is fallen to the ground, neither shall it ever be built up again,
and the Pope, and all that devilish Antichristian Synagogue shall suddenly be
cast down, and blotted out of memory. By the Lions are the Hungarian, the Turk,
the Tartar, the Sweed, the Dane, the Hollander, the English, the French, the
Switzer and Saxon, by these Antichrist and Babylon, and Kingdom of Satan shall
be utterly overthrown, especially that great house of Austria, which they were
not able to pluck down without the assistance of the white Lion of the tribe of
Judah. And I beheld innumerable troops of Horse, and bands of Footmen of all
Nations, drawing themselves into two great bodies, marshalled in batallia one
over against another: And the Lord said unto me, Observe them now, and
immediately I heard Drums beating, and Trumpets sounding, and the Lord said,
Let us go up yonder Hill and observe the success of the battle more distinctl^;
I heard the sound of the Trumpet, but the battle was fought beneath us on the
foot of the Hill. Then he said unto me, This is the Army of the South, the
Antichristian Army, the Army of the Whore and the beast, pointing to the
Southern Army. And turning himself to the other Army, he said, This is the Army
of the East and North, of which I have made mention to you. Remember these
things that I have declared, for all will come to pass according to the
Prediction. (By the Eastern Army is always meant the Army of the Turks.) And I
looked a long time upon them, till I observed few of the Northern Army
remained, the sad sight oppressed me with grief, fearing they would be utterly
overthrown, but the Ancient of times comforted me, and said, Behold help comes
from Sion, the Throne of my Holiness. And I looked again, and behold a great
Army descended from Heaven, which was commanded by a man in a flame, with a
great Sword in his hand, uniting himself to the northern Army.

And I beheld also Clouds of smoke waving down, and falling down on the
Southern army; and the fight was renewed, and the Southern army did fall like
leaves in Autumn beaten by violent wind, many of the Southern Army after this
were slain, and the rest fled, that not one of them remained of them: But the
northern Army having gained great spoils, returned with great joy, and the Army
from Heaven ascended from whence it descended.

The Visions and Prophecies of Nich. Drabicius.
THis Drabicius was born at Straswick in Germany, (his Father was Consul of the
said City) he was Minister of Gods Word at Zeranick, he was attractive in his
disc^urse, and grave in his conversation, he had a love and zeal to piety: His
first vision was in the year 1643. A voice spoke unto him, saying, Write that
the time is now come, I will revenge the offenses given to my holy Name, I will
cause the Turk to come and to overthrow Vienna, as Jerusalem was overthrown;
and I will bring evil upon the house of Austria to cut it off from the earth,
for she has g^ven no ear to the peaceable counsels of the King of Polonia, now
her destruction approaches. Drabicius a^ked, When it would come to pass? it
was answered, to day and tomorrow will fill up the measure of her iniquities;
and I will bring many great and (...) Nations upon the house of Austria, and
they shall tread upon Vienna, as Jerusalem and Samaria were trodden upon, to
revenge my quarrel, and to drive away Idolaters, with the false Prophets, and
to vindicate the in^uries offered to Frederick that was King of Bohemia, and to
his progeny, with whom you also have been banished. Drabicius asked, whether
the progeny of the King of Bohemia be restored to their dignities? it was
answered, Wherefore have I afflicted Germany, but because they did forsake him;
woe to the Bohemians, woe to the Silesians, woe to the Moravians, for now is
their destruction at hand. The Revelation, ( ^une 11.) Hear the voice, O house
of Austria, thy roots are in Hungaria, which I am now going to pluck up: but
thou shall perish with the Captain^ thy Coun^ellers, and thy posterity, thy
strong men shall fall. The Revelation of April 7. 1646. As I awaked out of
sleep, a voice sounded in m Ears: O house of Austria! O thou house of Austria,
I have born with thee, I have born; with thee, so many ages, I have advanced
thy glory on high in the midst of many Nations, with much patience I expected
thy conversion unto me thy Creator; but thy heart is grown fat, and thy eyes
are darkened, that neither thy self, nor thy Captains shall see their
lamentable fall and ruin, for the abomination thou have committed. Who did
seduce thee, O house of Austria? thou have forsaken me, and thrown my Laws
behind thy back, and have erected Idols of abomination throughout thy Cities
and Streets, and in thy Temples and Chancels, thou have set up Statues and
Images, gilded and painted with beautiful colors. Thou with thy Counselor,
and Judges, and Princes, have neglected my word, and have neglected justice,
and righteousness, and mercy; therefore have I brought evil upon thee, and thy
house: in vain do thou lean upon a Reed, which is Spain: in vain thou
expectest help from the Pope, Bavarian or Saxon, Mentz and Cologn will deceive
thee, for they have lost their strength with thee; for I have risen up against
them, and have delivered their powers into their hands, who do make war against
thee, that he may do to thee as to the house of Ahab, and to thy Priests, as my
Servant Elias to the Prophets of Baal. October the 10. The word of the Lord
came to me again, saying, Although it be not yet come to pass, which not long
since I declared to you, yet undoubtedly it shall take effect: For though he
has gained a peace for a time, he shall gain nothing by the delay of a little
time, which nevertheless shall come, and is even at hand, for the destruction
of the beast must begin in Hungaria.

And after a long silence, the Lord said to me again, All my words shall be
fulfilled, that it may be manifest unto all, That I am he that will confound
the counsels of my enemi^s, and will remove the half dead person from his
Throne, by electing to me that chosen Vessel; the King of France, for whom
Germany shall cry out, Long live, long live the King of France; which as soon
as it shall be done by my command, who am King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
your liberties shall be restored, O ye worshippers of me.

And O you Kings, Princes, and commanders of my Army, and you my Ministers of
the Gospel, throw in your net into the Sea, to fish for the Jews the remainder
of my Vintage, on the right side, and on the left, for the Nations of Turkey
and Tartary, and other places, for I have opened my Prisons, and healed the
wounded* that they may be admitted to the Banquet of my House, the Church, and
many rooms that are in it, are yet empty for those persons to be brought into
it, the Jews and the Turks, and other people ignorant of the worship of the
true God, and the Gospel of our Lord Jesus, who are to acknowledge me, and to
come into the pales of my beloved Spouse.

I will have a reformation amongst the Idolatrous Ministers of the Whore, and
those that shall be found refractory shall be put to death, for I will not have
the least root of Popish Doctrine in any Nation, and I will that there be but
one order and government of the Church amongst all Nations.

The chief scope of all these Prophecies and Revelations, being to invite men
to attend the judgments of Almighty God in his punishments of the sin^ of the
world, and to be made worthy of his mercies, which in the last age of the world
he will pour forth on all mankind; It well becomes all mutually to admonish one
another to repentance, and to increase our faith in the promises of God, and to
inflame our mutual charity, to pray for one another, that we may be made
partakers of so unspeakable mercy. Amen.

FINIS.

