Mr. Lillie's Predictions Concerning the many Lamentable FIRES Which have
lately happened.

WITH A Full Account, not only of all the Great FIRES in ENGLAND this present
year, 1676.

AS AT Cottenham near Cambridge, Southwark, Blanford in Dorsetshire, Wittham by
Oxford, Abington in Bark-shire, Nightingale Lane, etc.


But also beyond the Seas* MOSCO, where Seven Thousand Dwelling Houses were
Burned down, April 22.

The Cities of STARGUARD, and New BRANDENBURGH in Germany, May 21.

And Several Towns in BURGUNDY, the FRENCH COUNTEE, and PICARDY belonging to
the French King, consumed in May last.

Published for General Satisfaction.

With Allowance,

June 23. 1676. To. L'Estrange.



Printed for P. Brooksby, in West-Smithfield. 1676.

Mr. Lillies Predictions Concerning the many lamentable Fires which have lately
happened, etc.
THe many sad and lamentable Fires that have lately broke forth or happened
about this Honorable City of London, and in several other parts and places of
this Kingdom, have for some time bypast been the Common Theme of most Peoples
Discourse: but as it is usual for every one to abound in his own sense, and
natural for those under affliction to ascribe the cause of their sufferings to
others, so on this occosion many groundless Reports and surmises have been
spread abroad; We confess that by all we can discover, (and we have been not a
little curious and inquisitive in the matter) we cannot positively find any
solid bottom for such Conjectures; and therefore many look upon these disasters
as chastizements from Providence for our sins, proceeding from what we call
unfortunate accidents, and occasioned by neglects, carelessness, etc. As the
proximate and immediate causes, though we will not deny, but rather affirm that
there might be and were several others more remote contributing unto, or at
least signifying and fore-shewing the same or the like Calamities, and that not
only in this Nation, but in several other parts of the European world.

It must be remembered, that the Inhabitants of this Earthly Globe have for
several years past, and do at this present labor under the effects; or
Male-significations of the Comet or Comets (whether singular or three
distinctions we shall not here dispute) appearing in the years 1664. and 1665.
Sure we are, the last visible in March 1665. had a Tail eminently large and
conspicuous, and toward the end of it is appearance looked very red, fiery,
and inflamed, etc. Which (besides its martial significations whereof all Europe
has been sadly sensible) did likewise very aptly denote many strange and
unusual calamities by fire, (whereof the dreadful conflagration of London soon
after following was a sad and amazing Instance.) Nor can it be reasonably
imagined the effects of so wonderful a Phaiomenon should terminate in one
single disaster though never so eminent.

In this very year 1076. we have had diverse violent and threatening positions
and aspects of the superior bodies, enough to bring into act more of it is
dismal significations, as the Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, Jan. 15. The
square of Saturn and Mars, Feb. 23. of Jupiter and the Sun, March 28. The
Conjunction of Sol and Saturn, April 25. and that remarkable (though not total
as a certain inconsiderate Ignore calls it) Eclipse of the Sun in Geminy,
(Londons Horoscope) on the first of June, etc. But least any Drolsters of the
times whose ignorance renders them Enemies to sidereal studies should pretend,
we only go about with Lesbian Logic to sit the foot to the last, and coin
causes unthought of, for effects now plainly visible, give us leave here to
remind the world of those many plain hints, or rather prophetical Expressions
delivered to this purpose by that most Judicious Artist Mr. Lilly in his
Menlinus Anglicus (or Almanac) for this present year, finished by him, and
sent to the Press in the beginning of September, 1675.

In the 1^ Page of his Astrological Judgments on the position of Saturn in
Taurus he has these suffic^cently plain words -- Great will be the Tribulations
or Afflictions of many Countries, many Cities, Towns, Villages, and Houses
fired and destroyed.

God preserve London from farther Fires, etc. p. 23.

And in the Page before that, upon the Eclipse before mentioned. -- We may not
wonder at the great variety of actions like to succeed this Eclipse, or at the
Lightning, Fire or Fires hence expected.

And in P. 5. -- God of his great mercy grant that no farther calamities,
Pestilence, Fires, etc. befall England.

In the before cited Page 14. He has these significant words. -- Mercurius in
Aspectu Martis in Exordio Anni in signo Ignes significat validos ventos and
Ignes: Mercury in a fiery sign in aspect of Mars signifies Fires very frequent.

And P. 20. He declares particularly Starguard in Germany, France, and the West
and Southwest of England to be passive in these calamities.

We now dare challenge the greatest calumniators of astrology to declare, what
more could be expected from an Artists Pen to this purpose, (not pretending to
supernatural illumination) than these repeated and so often inculcated
predictions; and how far they are (already) verified, is too sadly apparent by
the ensuing Catalogue of Dismal fires which (pinch beyond what is usual) have
since the writing thereof happened, omitting a great number of smaller fires
whereby only 1 or 2 houses chanced to be consumed, and insisting on what has
been more general and remarkable.

Within a fortnight after the writing of the said Astrological judgments, Viz.
on Monday Sep. the 20. happened the lamentable fire at Northampton, whereby the
greatest and richest part of that ancient and eminent corporation was destroyed.

On Saturday the 29 of April 1676. about 10 of the clock in the morning at a
noted Village called Cottenham, within four miles of Cambridge, in the Road to
Ely broke forth a dreadful fire, beginning in a Stack of course sedge whereunto
the Wind had carried some Embers by a certain woman carelessly flung into a
backside, and from thence the flames were carried by the violence of the wind
all along the street, so that in the space of five hours there were above one
hundred Dwelling-houses consumed, besides Barns, Stables, outhouses, Stacks of
Corn, Hay, Faggots, etc. to the value of many thousand pounds.

On Friday the 26 of May, 1676. was the terrible Fire in Southwark; It was
first discovered in a Colourmans Shop, between the George and Talbot Inns, near
St. Margorets-Hill: It soon seized the other side of the way, and continued
rageing from about three a Clock in the morning, all the day, till the evening
follovving, and in that space burnt down these Five Famous Inns, the
Queens-head, the Talbot, the Georg, the White-Hart, the King's Head, and the
Green-Dragon in Fowl-lane: As likewise the Counter, the Mealmarket, etc.

In a word, all along on the East Side of the way, from the Queens-Arms-Tavern,
Situate about a Dozen Doors below the Spurt-Inn toward the South, unto St.
Thomas Haspital toward the North was consumed, but the Hospital safe; only
some small damage sustained in the Porch, Windows, etc. And on the West Side of
the way, from St. Margarets-hill, to St. Saviors (Commonly called St. Mary
Overies) Church: which Church was with extraordinary pains, and great
difficulty preserved; There is modestly computed at the least six hundred
dwelling houses destroyed.

The same day happened a Fire at Abington in Barkshire, which burning very
fiercely, destroyed several Houses, and had it not pleased God that the wind
suddenly changed, it is believed the whole Town had been consumed, but by that
singular providence, and the great industry used, it was preserved, and the
Fire in short time Extinguished.

About the same time the Town of Blandford in Sommersetshire, was a
considerable part burnt down to the ground, there being (as we stand informed)
about thirty dwelling houses there consumed.

The beginning of this instant month of June, a Fire began in a Barn in a
Village called Wittham, two or three miles from Oxford: which destroyed about a
dozen houses, and had wasted many more, if great numbers of people had not
speedily come in to their assistance from Oxford; It Is said that a day or two
before, the Officers of this Village had set a certain Vagabond woman in the
Stocks, for begging, or some other misdemeanour, and that she should threaten
that within four and twenty hours she would be even with them, and make them
repent it, etc. and thereupon it is supposed that she, or some of her
Confederates might mischievously set this Barn on Fire, it being scarce to be
imagined how it should come on fire any other way.

On Wednesday the 21 of this instant June, there was a very considerable fire
in Sun-Court in Nightingale-lane; it began in a Box-makers-house, and though
immediately on the discovery of it there was thousands ready to help quench it,
yet it could not be Mastered till it had destroyed above Twenty Tenements.

The same week also there has been several great Tempests of Thunder, with
fierce and unusual Lightning, whereby three very large Stacks of old Hay were
consumed near Brainford, considerable hurt done near Putney, and great damage
sustained at several other places.

But to show that our Native Country of England is not the only sufferer under
these Calamities by fire, but that rather it is a general affliction sent by
Providence, and some particular Constitution of the Heavens about this time,
stiring up, or signifieing such destructive effects more then at other seasons.

Be pleased to take notice that there was in the City of Mosko a dreadful fire
in April last, which lasted with much fury for the space of Nine days, and in
that space burnt down to the ground above seven Thousand dwelling houses,
besides Shops, Warehouses, outhouses, and other Edifices Innumerable: on the
29 of April it was thought to have been mastered and stopped, but about Eleven a
clock that Night the Wind blowing very strong at North-west, it broke forth
afresh, the loss sustained is as well incredible as Invaluable and adds as to
the beginning of it: that it is supposed to be done by Fire-kindlers: There have
been likewise several great fires in Germany, in May last, and particularly the
Cities of Starguard (expressly mentioned by Mr. Lilly) and new Branderburgh,
belonging to his Electoral Highness, were then above half burnt down and
consumed, and diverse great fires have likewise about the same time happened in
Burgundy, Picardy, and other parts of France.

We shall conclude this Paper with the words of Mr. Lilly in his Astrological
Judgments before recited. -- God Preserve London, (and all his Majesty's
Dominions) from further Fires, and Increase the Trade and Commerce therefore;
Ad Infinitum: Amen.

FINIS.

