A SERMON PREACHED Before the QUEEN, AT WHITEHALL, Jan. 24. 1690/1.

By J. LAMB, Chaplain in Ordinary to Their MAJESTY'S.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1691.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
TIT. II. X. -- That they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all
things.


THE credit of any Institution of Religion, depends upon the happy Effects that
it has upon the temper and lives of its Disciples. It Is true, to judge of a
Religion by the Effects, may be contrary to the stricter Laws of reasoning,
which oblige us, a priori, to consider the Authority of the Author, and to
judge of the Religion it self by granted Principles of Truth and Goodness. But
because these considerations are too deep and close for common understanding;
therefore the eyes of the generality of Men will be fixed upon the lives and
behavior of its Proselytes, as the surest way of informing themselves in the
Nature and Authority of the Religion it self. And by how much Christianity is a
more Holy Institution than any other, by so much its Honor and Reputation in
the World, does more depend upon the suitable Conversation of Christians;
because perverse and wicked Men will be so much the more unwilling to believe
it, and will therefore more capriciously inspect the lives of Christians, that
they may furnish objections against it, and reasons of satisfaction and comfort
to themselves, in their Vice and Infidelity.

St. Paul therefore, though he justifies the Christian Faith, by Divine
Authority, by the Power of Miracles, and the Gifts of the Holy Ghost; yet He is
especially solicitous, that it may be asserted and commended to the World by
the suitable lives of the Disciples; that both the Jews and Gentiles, when they
observe it in the practice of it, may be persuaded, by this more easy and
sensible conviction, that our Savior was no Impostor, nor his Religion a
Design; that the Proselytes of it do heartily believe it, because they have
conformed their Souls and Lives unto it, and exemplify those Excellent Virtues
in their actions, which their Law requires, and which all men, by the common
instincts of humane nature, admire and value.

And to this very purpose he wrote this Epistle to Titus, full of apposite
Instructions concerning the Government, as well of Himself, as of the Clergy
and Laity under His charge, with particular respect to the Reputation and
Honor of the Christian Religion, as an end which he chiefly and more expressly
here designs. For, Chapter the first, he obliges Titus to a Conscientious
discharge of the Office of a Bishop, that the Gainsayers may be convinced, v.
9. The Clergy to Piety, Zeal, and Diligence, that they of the contrary part may
be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you, Chapter 2.8. The Aged, the Widows,
the Youth, and all other sorts of Men, That they exercise such Christian Graces
as are proper to their respective stations, that they may adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior in all things.

For the clearer illustration of this important duty, I shall briefly consider
these Three things.

I. First, The meaning of the Words. II. Secondly, The nature of the Duty. III.
Thirdly, The reasons which oblige us, and the encouragements which may persuade
us to the practice of it. IV. Fourthly and lastly, I shall draw some Inferences
from the whole.
I. I begin with the first of these, the Explication of the terms, ad shall
consider,

1. First, What is meant by the Doctrine of God our Savior. 2. Secondly, What
by Adorning the Doctrine of God our Savior. 3. Thirdly, Who are understood by
they; or who are the subjects of the duty: That they may adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior in all things. And, 1. First, By the Doctrine of God our
Savior, the Apostle understands the Christian Religion, or that institution of
Faith and Manners, which the Ever Blessed Jesus taught and published, when he
was here on Earth. Ph. 1.27.
It is one, amongst many other general words, Mar. 8.35.
as the Gospel, the Word of God, Jam. 1.21.
the Faith, the New Testament, by which the Christian Religion is expressed in
Scripture. Luke 22.26.
2. And secondly, To adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, is to advance the
Credit and Reputation of the Christian Religion in the World. It is so to
govern and demean our selves, that we may reconcile its Enemies to a good
opinion of it; that we may procure, and even force regard and veneration
toward it. The Gnostics had disgraced the Christian Faith, by their
seditious, sensual, and licentious Doctrines; some against the common interest
of Society; as this, That Christians were exempt from Obedience to their
Governors; That Christian Servants were, ipso facto, manumiss'd: Some against
common honesty; as, That the Disciples might dissemble their Religion; or, if
hardly pressed, Might apostatize in case of Persecution; that by a clearer
light, it was revealed to them, That sensual lusts might safely be indulged.
And hence our Religion was blasphemed, as a Doctrine that overturned the World,
moved Sedition, and corrupted the People. And this was the occasion of this
Epistle, in which the Apostle recites and recommends the principal Laws of
Christian Life, for this very end, in a more especial manner, that the progress
of the Gnostick Heresy might be prevented, the mouths of Adversaries stopped,
the honor of our Religion retrieved, and the Doctrine of God our Savior in
all things magnified, and adorned. 3. Thirdly and lastly, By the They in the
Text, the Persons upon whom this duty is incumbent, we may fairly understand
the whole Body of Christians. All that name the Name of Christ, let them adorn
the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things; for he presently urges a motive
that is general, and which equally concerns all states and conditions of men
whatever, v. 11. For the Grace of God which brings Salvation, has appeared
to all men, teaching us to deny Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and to live
soberly, etc. And thus much for the literal construction of the words.

II. I proceed, as I proposed in the second place, to consider the nature, the
acts, and exercises of the Duty it self, in what it consists, and when a Man
may be said to Adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things. The Grace
of God, says the Apostle, has appeared, has brought Salvation to us, has
manifested a Divine Authority; we our selves pretend to believe it, we adore
the Mystery, and are baptized into it: If this be so, then adorn the Religion
ye profess, do it Honor, do it Right, That the sound thereof may go forth into
all lands; that at the name of Jesus every knee may bow, Phil. 2.10.

Now the Doctrine of our Savior is rightly divided into Articles of Faith, and
Precepts of Life. I shall therefore consider, how a Man may adorn the Doctrine
of God our Savior.

1. First, As it is a rule of Faith. 2. Secondly, As it is a rule of Life.
1. First, As the Doctrine of our Savior is a rule of Faith, or an institution
of Religion, which we believe and own as of Divine Authority.

It has been always a great Objection against our Religion, that the wise
impose it upon the credulous and easy multitude, as an useful instrument of
Peace and Society, whilst these do but laugh at their folly, and make use of
their Conscience of Religion to the advantages of Policy and Ambition. We shall
therefore adorn our Religion, and do it honor in the World, if we shall
manifest, beyond any reasonable exception, that we unfeignedly assent unto it,
that we firmly believe it to be, what we pretend, of Divine Original. And this
will be evident to all, If

1. First, Our Faith be perfect and entire. If we receive our Religion as it is
in it self, in all its parts, in every Article, and in their plainest sense. To
pack a Religion or Creed according to our own Affections, Interests, or
Passions, is as easily discerned by others, as it is nauseous and contemptible
in it self. There is nothing which we more detest than a Religious Cheat. Few
are so patient as to consider that Religion soberly, whose Disciples are
observed to prevaricate in their profession, to alter, change, extinguish, add
or expound, as serves their interest: I do not say they should do so, but it is
incident to humane nature to abhor the Religion it self, and the persons so
abusing it, without any farther disquisition.

But if it be evident, that we embrace the truth in the Love of it, that we
submit our Judgment and our Interests entirely to it, we shall cause it to be
considered with Reverence and Respect: It is not easy to condemn the judgment
of considerable numbers of Men, in all things else as wary and judicious as any
other, whose understanding, interest, and affections, are subjected to this
Religion. It is but natural to infer, that it must certainly have appeared with
great Authority, or else it would never have been received with such respect,
sincerity, and self-denial.

2. Again, We shall adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, considered in
general, as a System of Faith, or an institution of Religion which we receive,
and own as of Divine Authority; if we are steady, firm, and constant in the
profession of it. If we are grounded, and settled, and are not to be moved from
the hope of the Gospel, as the Apostle speaks, Col. 1.23. If we shall be so
established, that when Tribulation comes we shall not be offended, St. Mat.
17.21. we shall then advance the Reputation and Honor of our Religion. Courage
and Constancy are apt, in their nature, to provoke admiration, to remove
prejudices, to beget an opinion of sincerity in the persons, of the weight and
authority of the doctrine it self, which they so steddily confess. Forasmuch as
no Man will suffer much for a School Question, or an indifferent Proposition.
Thus Act. 26. v. 28. The King, says St. Paul (when he was upon his Trial for
his Religion) knows these things, before whom I speak freely. And Agrippa said
unto Paul, almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian: so great is the force
of Constancy and Assurance. Thus Act. 4. v. 13. When they saw the boldness of
Peter and John, they marvelled. It startled the Rulers and Judges, (for these
are the they here) and the people glorified God for that which was done.
Wherefore, though this be no infallible test of truth; yet, in effect, there
always was, and ever will be, a regard, a deference to that Religion, which the
Proselytes are content to attest with their Lives. But to change our Religion
with our Interest, or for fear; to dissemble, coin, distinguish, and
equivocate, reflects dishonor and contempt upon it. Who can consider it as any
thing more than an humane invention, or an artifice of state, where they
observe its Votaries, to use such a boldness toward it, as is inconsistent
with the belief of its Divine Authority? But there were false Prophets amongst
the people, says St. Peter; these were the Gnostics, who taught the lawfulness
of a dissembled Apostasy, in case of persecution, and many shall follow their
pernicious ways, and what is the consequence? By reason of whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of. That is the second.

3. Thirdly and lastly, We shall adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior,
considered in general, as a system of Faith, or an institution of Religion,
which we receive as of Divine Authority, if we shall express an Affection, a
prudent Zeal in the Profession of it. For by these we testify, not only our
conviction of the truth, but a high satisfaction in the Religion it self. Zeal
for Religion consists in a careful study of the Law it self, 1 Pet. 3.15.
that we may be able to give a reason of the hope that is in us; in a constant
devout attendance upon all our Religious Rites, and solemn Services; in a
vigorous endeavor, as much as in us lies, to propagate and advance it; to
suppress Profaneness, Heresy, and Schism in our place and station. It will be
believed, that there is Divinity, and Worth in that Religion, that is so
heartily embraced, and so well beloved of its Disciples. But a coldness, an
indifference to its honor and interest, will bring it into disrepute. Who will
believe we esteem our Religion divine or pure, that observes so general a
neglect of Religious Worship, such a bold licentious progress of Heresy and
Schism, which every day gains more and more upon us. And thus I have considered
how we may demean our selves in the profession of our Religion, that we may
adorn it, that we may raise and support the reputation of it in the World.

2. I proceed, as I proposed, in the second place, to consider how we may so
order our Christian Conversation, that we may adorn the Doctrine of God our
Savior, as it is a rule of Life and Manners. And to this purpose it is
absolutely necessary.

1. First, That our Obedience be Entire and Universal. For if we believe the
Divine Authority of our Religion, it is not possible we should presume to pick
and cull such duties only, as shall best agree with our interests and
affections, because we are equally obliged to every part, and are taught, that
He that offends in one point is guilty of all. And therefore if we believe,
that our Religion was composed by infinite Wisdom, and will be required at our
hands by Infinite Power and Justice, according to the tenor of the Law, it is
not possible we should be guilty of such Presumption. So that a partial
Obedience demonstrates our Religion to be humane, to be our own; not to be our
rule, but our subject, which we govern as we please our selves; and therefore
the Adversaries of it will abhor our pretenses, and our Religion too. Thou that
make thy boast of the law, through breaking the law, says St. Paul,
dishonourest thou the Law? (by choosing some and neglecting other duties, as the
Apostle himself expounds it,) For the name of God is blasphemed amongst the
Gentiles through you, Romans 2.23. But besides, unless our Obedience be entire,
the beauty of our Religion will be obscured. There is a connection, a dependency
of Christian Graces one upon another; wheresoever therefore the Chain is
broken, there is a kind of inconsistency, an harshness, a disagreement. But if
our Life shall be all of a piece, acted by one and the same Christian Principle
in all things, we shall then lay open, and expose our Religion to view in its
proper colors. We shall display its symmetry and proportion to the eyes of all
men. If thy whole body, says our Savior to our present purpose, be full of
light, having no dark part, the whole shall be full of light, St. Luke 11.36.
If no faculty be left unwrought upon, no evil affection unsubdued, if we are
entirely united to our Religion, if we understand, believe, desire and act by
the laws thereof, we shall advance its honor in the World; both out Religion
and our Life will be the common object of respect and love. That is the first.
2. Secondly, That we may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, considered as a
Rule of Life, it is necessary that our Obedience be free and cheerful; that we
part with our selves, with our own self-will, and sensual Appetites, without
hesitation or complaint, not by constraint, but willingly. For such a ready
practice, will express the Graces of our Religion more smartly, more to the
Life: and those who observe it, will have reason to be in love with it for it
selt, and to be thoroughly reconciled to such a Yoke, which they find is so
easy, so pleasant to those who bear it. Do all things, says the Apostle,
without murmuring, and without disputing, let your Obedience be prompt and
cheerful, forward, and without regret, that ye may be blameless, without rebuke
in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, amongst whom ye then shall
shine as lights in the World, Phil. 2.14, 15. That is the second. 3 Thirdly, We
shall adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, considered as a Rule of Life; if
in cases doubtful we determine our practice on the side of the Law, and of our
Duty. No institution of Religion can be so particular as to provide for all the
circumstances of duties, because they are as infinite as the relations, means,
and tendencies of things. If we therefore shall look beyond the letter of the
Law, if we consider what is Lovely, and of good report, as well as what is
barely Just and Necessary; if we walk by the analogy of Faith; if we endeavor
to be perfect as God it perfect, to proceed from one degree of Grace unto
another, we shall certainly bring our Religion into honor and esteem. It will
be believed that we heartily embrace it, that we truly love it, when it is
evident, that we have wholly resolved our selves into it. By such a true
Affection, by such a prudent Zeal, it will appear our choice, our delight, and
our ultimate end, which cannot but subdue the prejudices of its Enemies. Who
could withstand the power of our Religion, if it were thus sincerely and
thoroughly imbibed? Whereas a shrivelled, narrow Virtue, that stands upon terms
with God, and considers how far we may indulge our selves, without the
violation of some great and notorious Law, dishonours our Religion, and
depresses the credit of Christianity. How should it be thought any other than a
tyrannous superstition, when it appears a disease, a burden, an abhorrence to
the Disciples of it? That is the third. 4. Fourthly and lastly, We shall adorn
the Doctrine of God our Savior, as it is a Rule of Life, by an eminent
practice of some particular Virtues, as of Mercy and Charity: wheresoever these
are expressed to the Life, habitually, bountifully, freely; all that observe
it, will esteem the Religion from whence such a Spirit flows. Who is not apt to
favor his Opinions, whose Goodness is conspicuous, or who has done us any
signal favors? Is it not the common sentiment of all Mankind, that Religion is
designed to mend the World, to, correct the roughness that is superinduced upon
our nature, and the selfishness of our ends, to enlarge our spirits into a
generous respect to each others good, to fix the Laws of our nature more close
upon us, by the accession of Divine Command? Wheresoever therefore the social
Virtues, universal Love, a Catholic temper, humanity, mercy, bounty and a
readiness to forgive, shine and are eminent, there our Religion will be
honored and esteemed, as a Doctrine that is a public blessing to the World.
And thus our Savior commanded the multitude [five thousand persons] to sit
down on the grass, and fed then, by a Miracle, till they were filled. And what
was the effect of this Miraculous Bounty? Why, they were in love with such a
Teacher, and said, of a truth this is the Prophet which should come into the
World, St. Jo. 6.14. And thus ye may see both the meaning, and the practice of
this duty. And if we well observe these rules and measures I have now laid
down, we may certainly know, whatsoever our calling, station, or profession may
be, whether our Christian conversation is such as adorns the Doctrine of God
our Savior; nay, we may judge of every action we do, whether it tends to the
honor of our Religion or no. Every Man that is honest and sincere, may easily
apply these general Rules to any particular instance that shall be before him.
For all that has been said is no more than this, That a Man that would render
his Religion lovely and amiable in the World, must entertain it in all its
parts and Articles, promote it zealously, confess it steddily, practice it
cheerfully, depart from his Liberty, in doubtful cases freely, in all his
actions express a prudent Zeal, but above all, that he have Fervent Charity,
that God in all things may be Glorified, 1 Pet. 3.8.
And were our Religion received and practiced according to these just
directions, how would all the World be subdued and vanquished by it? It would be
the power of God to salvation, both to the Jews and Gentiles, 1 Cor. 1.24. when
all dissembling and equivocation, when all disguises and hypocrisy, when
sullen selfishness, and private interest, shall be banished the dominions of
this Religion; when no man shall seek his own, Mat. 7.12.22.39.
but every one another weal; when we shall Love our Neighbor as our selves,
and do to others as we would they should do to us. How would Christendom be
thronged with those that would come from the furthest parts of the East, to
behold the golden Age renewed, and to pay their respect to that Religion which
has thus restored the beauty of the humane nature? And thus much for the Duty.

III. I proceed (but very briefly) to consider the reasons which oblige us, and
the encouragements which may persuade us to the practice of it.

And all those Arguments indeed, which oblige us to believe and practice,
according to the directions of our Religion in general, do as firmly bind us to
such degrees of Faith and Virtue, as shall adorn it. For this is not a
different duty, it is but the same thing in its just and proper measures; a
more eminent Virtue, a more perfect Faith, a more excellent Life. But I shall
only consider those at present, which appear more apposite and particular, and
they are these that follow.

1. First, To adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior by such a Faith, and such a
practice, as I have now described, is the most infallible assurance, both to
our selves and others, that our Principle is sincere and perfect.

It cannot be denied but there are degrees of true Faith, and true Virtue, and
that the Religion of our Savior is urged upon us by a double Sanction, by the
joys of Heaven, and by greater degrees of that Joy. The former shall be the
reward of sincere Obedience, though in a lower measure; the latter of a
growing, abounding, perfect Faith and Life. But however, though we do not say
it is impossible, yet a staggering Faith, a starved ungrowing Virtue is very
seldom true. For a Principle of true Religion is nothing less than a sense of
the Divine Authority, Beauty and Goodness of the Law it selt, an immovable
hope in the Promises, and a dread of the threatenings there delivered: And
whosoever is affected in earnest with a sense of these things, will endeavor,
by a natural promptitude, by a moral necessity, to pass from one degree of
Grace to another, till he come to be perfect in Christ Jesus. Where can he stop
who sincerely believes there is a Heaven before him? This then is the test of
true Religion, that we find our Faith grow stronger, temptations weaker, with a
freedom, and cheerfulness, in all Obedience to the will of God. Whosoever has
this hope in him, purifies himself, even as he is pure, says St. John, 1 Epist.
3.3.

2. Secondly, Let us consider, that to live such a Life as shall cause our
Religion to be esteemed and honored in the World, is the greatest Blessing, as
well to our selves, as others, that we can either imagine, or desire. For He
that converteth a sinner from the evil of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, Jam. 5.19, 20. What can more excite
our Emulation, than to stand in the place of the Apostles, to subdue
prejudices, to mollify hardened hearts, to work Miracles, to win Souls, and
enlarge the Kingdom of our Savior. That Is the second.

3. The third encouragement to such a profession and practice of our Religion
as shall adorn it, are the particular Promises which are made to those who
shall attain unto it. The service is so eminent, that God has been pleased to
encourage it by special Promises. He that confesses me, says our Savior, him
will I confess, it, a particular manner, before my Father, St. Mat. 10.32. And
again, When they reproach and persecute you, Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for
great is your reward in Heaven, St. Mat. 5.11, 12. In a steady Confession, and
a most Holy Life, there is an assurance of Faith, a Zeal, an affection to the
service of God, that is not common, even amongst those who are really good, and
therefore it will be particularly considered. St. Paul departed from his
Liberty for the sake of the Gospel, and refused to accept of any maintenance
from the people, 1 Cor. 9. And doing this willingly, says he, [that is, without
an express command] I have a reward, v. 17. I shall have a particular
consideration for it. But on the other hand, a most dreadful woe is denounced
against those, who, professing the Christian Religion, scandalize it, and cause
it to be blasphemed by the unsteadiness of their Faith, or the debauchery of
their Lives. Offenses will come, says our Savior, but woe unto those by whom
they come. It were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he
were cast into the midst of the Sea, Luke 17.1, 2. That is the third.

4. The fourth and last encouragement to such a profession and practice of our
Religion as shall recommend it in the World, is the particular peace and
satisfaction which will arise from such a Faith and Life. All dejections and
interruptions of our Peace, are the Judgment of our Consciences against us,
that we have yielded to temptations, that we have pressed upon our Virtue to
preserve our Pleasures, or our Interest: But he that is grounded and settled in
his Faith, steady in his hope of the Promises, habitual, zealous, and universal
in the practice of his duty, will find his Peace as constant as his Principle,
as inexpressible as his Love. To relieve the distressed with a bushel of wheat,
is but common humanity, says Plutarch; but what excess of joy did Phidias and
Theophrastus find in those extraordinary actions of theirs; when they delivered
their Country from Tyranny and Oppression? (Lib. de Tranq.) The Testimony of
our Consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our
Conversation in the World, 2 Cor. 1.12.
must needs be a Principle of great rejoicing.

What expectation of Divine Assistance! What hope in difficulties! What
Confidence at the hour of Death, will he certainly find, who can truly say, Oh
Lord remember how I have served thee with a perfect heart! Thy Glory has been
my principal aim and end, and thy Law my business and delight!

And thus I have explained the Duty, and considered the Motives which may
excite us to the practice of it: It now remains, that we endeavor, upon the
force of all that has been said, to subdue our own Self will, and sensual
Appetites, and devote our selves to the Obedience of God, to the service and
honor of our most Holy Faith. That we study the Beauty, Worth, and Perfection
of our Religion; the Goodness, Power and Faithfulness of the God we serve, that
we may walk worthy of our Vocation, Ephesians. 4.1. That we may have our Conversation
as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. That we may stand complete and perfect in
all the Will of God, Col. 4.12. That your light may so shine before men, that
they may see your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Mat.
5.16. That at the dreadful day of Judgment, we may meet our Lord with Joy, and
give him such an account of the Talents he entrusted us withal, as shall be
received and passed, with, Well done good and faithful Servants, ye have been
faithful over a few things, I will make you rulers over many things, enter ye
into the Joy of your Lord, Mat. 25.21.

Which God of his Mercy grant, to every one of us, for Jesus Christ his sake
the Righteous; to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all
Honor, Glory, Praise, Dominion, and Obedience, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St Paul 's
Churchyard.
BIshop Overall's Convocation Book MDCVI. concerning the Government of God's
Catholic Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World, 4to Dr Falkner's
Libertas Ecclesiastica, 8vo -- 's Vindication of Liturgies, 8vo -- 's Christian
Loyalty, 8vo Dr Scott's Christian Life. In three Vol. 8vo Dr Fowler's Libertas
Evangelica, 8vo Mr W. Allen's Tracts, 8vo Mr Raymond's Pattern of pure and
undefiled Religion, 8vo -- 's Exposition of the Church Catechism. Mr Hesketh's
Piety, the best Rule of Orthodoxy, 8vo -- 's Serious Exhortation to frequent
Commanion, 8vo -- 's Case of eating and drinking unworthily, 8vo Faith and
Practice of a Church of England Man, 12. The Third Edition. Mr Lamb's Dialogues
between a Minister and his Parishioner, about the Lord's Supper, 8vo -- 's
Sermon before the King at Windsor. -- 's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. -- 's
Liberty of humane Nature, stated, discussed and limited. -- 's Sermon before
the King and Queen, Jan. 19. 1689. Dr Grove's Sermon before the King and Queen,
June 1. 1690. Mr Jeffery's Religion the Perfection of Man, 8vo Dr Worthington
of Resignation, 8vo -- 's Christian Love, 8vo Dr Pelling's Sermon before the
King and Queen, Dec. 8. 1689. -- 's Vindication of those that have taken the
Oath, 4to Dr Kidder's Christian Sufferer, supported, 8vo Dr Sharp's Discourse
concerning Conscience; The first Part; wherein an account is given of the
Nature, and Rule, and Obligation of it. And the case of those who separate from
the Communion of the Church of England, as by Law established, upon this
pretense, that it is against their Conscience to join in it, is stated and
discussed. -- 's Discourse of Conscience: The second Part; concerning a
doubting Conscience. -- 's Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons, April 11.
1679. on Revel. ii. 5. -- 's Duty and Happiness of doing good, in two Sermons,
the former Preached at the Yorkshire Feast, Feb. 17. 1679. on Eccl. iii. 10.
the other before the Lord Mayor at the Spittle, Apr. 14. 1680. on 1 Timothy vi.
17, 18, 19. -- 's Sermon at the Election of the Lord Mayor, Sept. 29. 1680. on
Psalm. cxii. 4. -- 's Lent-Sermon at Whitehal, March 20. 1684. on Luke xvi. 31.
-- 's Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, Apr. 11. 1690. on Gal. v. 13. -- 's
Fast-Sermon before the Honorable House of Commons, May 21. 1690. on Deuteronomy. v.
29. Reflections on a French Testament, Printed at Bordeaux, An. Dom. MDCLXXXVI.
Pretenced to be Translated out of the Latin into French, by the Divines of
Louvain. By Richard Kidder, D. D. and Dean of Peterborough. Dr Hickman's Sermon
before the Queen at Whitehall, Oct. 26. 1690. -- 's Fast Sermon before the
Honorable House of Commons, Oct. 19. 1690.
Polemo-Middinia. Carmen Macaronicum. Autore Gulielmo Drummundo Scoto-Britanno.
Accedit Jacobi id Nominis quinti, Regis Scotorum, Cantilena Rustica vuglo
inscripta. Christ's Kirk on the Green. Recensuit, notisque illustravit E.G.


