THE Lord Lambert's LETTER To the Right Honorable The Speaker of the
PARLIAMENT, Concerning the Victory which it has pleased God to give the Forces
of this Commonwealth over the Rebels under Sir George Booth in Cheshire.

Read in Parliament, Monday Aug. 22.

To which is added A LIST of the Officers which are Prisoners, with the number
of Soldiers and Colors taken; according to the Relation made by Captain Brown,
who was present in the Fight.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb over against Bainards Castle in Thames Street,
1659.

THE Lord LAMBERT'S LETTER To the Right Honorable the Speaker of the Parliament.
SIR,
I Have given the Council of State an account of our several Proceedings, since
the time that by their Commands we left London; and having had nothing which I
thought worthy your knowledge, I have refrained hitherto from giving you that
trouble; but now think it my duty to acquaint you how the good Hand of
Providence has lately appeared in an Engagement betwixt your Forces and the
Enemy.

Upon the Lords day last, the two Regiments of Foot which marched from London,
with the Horse under the Command of Col. Swallow, and Major Creed (being in all
Nineteen Troops) united at Drayton in the County of Salop. But by reason of the
weak condition of the Garrison of Stasford (the safety whereof I judged very
considerable) I sent back the Militia Troop under the command of Capt.
Backhouse thither: Also, to the assistance of your Friends in Derbishire the
Militia Troop of that County, and Capt. Sabbertons; and with the rest I marched
to Namptwich in Cheshire on Monday last, where we staid two days, till four
Companies of Col. Biscoes Regiment, and one Troop of my Regiment came up to us,
and three Troops more of Col Lilburns, and two Companies of Col. Ashficias,
were advanced as far as V^^xeter.

Upon Thursday morning, although it proved very unseasonable for Rain, yet
judging your service required expedition, and finding a great resolution in the
Soldiery to encounter all difficulties, according to former resolution upon
full debate with the Superior Officers, resting upon the Providence of God we
advanced toward Chester; and being marched about five miles, we had certain
intelligence, that the enemy, with about four or five thousand horse and foot,
were marched toward N^rthwi^h; which caused us to alter our resolutions, and
to march directly toward the Forest of De la More, over which they were to
pass; and being arived thither, we had notice that they were about three miles
before us.

Your Forces marched with that cheerfulness, that had we had day enough, we
should in all probability have engaged them before they had reached Northwich,
but do what we could, we only gained a view of their Reer-guard in the duske
of the Evening, and took three or four prisoners. That night they quartered at
Northwich, and we at a small Village called Weeverham; from whence the next
morning we advanced very early toward them, and before we had marched a mile
we discovered them both Horse and Foot, half a mile on this side No^thwich
drawing amongst the Enclosures, where it was impossible for Horse to do
service, and not without difficulty for the Foot to break through. We presently
engaged them, and after a short dispute they quitted their grounds, and
retreated from hedge to hedge, yet in that order as they suffered very little
damage, it being impossible for our horse to sall in amongst them, and at
length came to Winington-bridge, behind which they retreated, without any other
loss than that of Reputation, and discouragement in meeting with those whom
they found of equal courage, but engaged in a better Cause. Their next endeavor
was to secure that Bridge, which they had good reason to hope for, considering
the Advantages they had both in regard the River was unfordable, the Bridge
narrow, flanker'd with a strong ditch on the Far end, and a high Hill, up
which no Horse could pass otherwise than along the side in a narrow path. But
the Forces having their former courage increased by seeing the presence of God
with them, fell on as if they had been upon equal Terms; and after a short
dispute, the Enemy having spent two or three good volleys, our men still
advancing upon them, they quit their station, and gave way for both horse and
foot to march over. Our horse, which hitherto had been useless to us, advanced
over the Bridge, together with some Foot. The horse made toward a party of
theirs, which I judged was of their choicest, and came to secure the Retreat of
their Foot; and the Foot scrambling up the Hill after their Retreating Colors,
our Horse charged, but by reason of the narrowness of the way, in small
parties* To speak truth, that of the Horse was performed on both sides like
Englishmen; but ours got the better, and the Enemy turned their backs. We had
the pursuit of them above a quarter of a mile, where they again made Head, but
were routed, and thereupon their Horse and Foot fted on all hands, and our work
was only to give them Chase. Most of their Foot got into Enclosures, and
escaped, our wearied Foot not able to overtake them, nor possible for the Horse
to get to them. Their Horse divided, some toward Chester, and some toward
Warrington; we had the pursuit as far as Frodsham and Warrington where they
could proceed no further, the latter being garrisond with four Companies of
Foot and a Troop of Horse.

The Enemy had left this while in Northwich two Companies of Foot and two
Troops of Horse; which when I understood, I sent the Adjutant-General, with
Capt Evanson's Troop and a Troop of Dragoons, who advancing up to the bridge
and firing upon them, the Enemy drew off in good order, but not being able to
make their retreat, was routed and pursued within two or three miles of
Manchester. And though I cannot say your Victory was great in respect of
prisoners or men slain, yet I judge it a total Rout, or which by the providence
of God may be improved to so much. I cannot hear that we have above one man
slain outright, and not above three dangerously wounded: Of the Enemy not above
thirty sluin; of prisoners I have no full account as yet, but I suppose about
three hundred, whereof most Horsemen, and some Field Officers of quality: I
shall upon better information give you an account thereof. The Enemy reported
themselves to be above Four thousand, but to our view there never appeared
above Two. The service done by the Foot, was chiesfly performed by Col.
Hewson's Regiment. The same day we marched with the Foot back to Northwich,
where upon consideration of your affairs, we have determined to divide your
Forces; Col. Ashfield with his four Companies, Lieut. Col. Duckenfield (who
showed himself a worthy Servant this day to you and his country) with part of
Col Hewson's Regiment, and a convenient number of Horse, to march for
Lancashire, where, if there be any Root left for renewing this Rebellion, I
judge it lies. I have likewise writ to Col. Lilburn who is with some Horse and
Foot about Wakefield, to unite with them if they see cause. The other part of
your Forces I intend to march toward Chester, having received this day a
Message from Col. Crexton, Governor of the Castle, by one of his Soldiers who
swam the river and came to me, That he cannot for want of Victuals hold out
longer. I have likewise ordered Col Jerome Zankey with the Irish Forces, who by
common fame I hear is landed at Beaumarris, to advance with all speed toward
Shrewsbury, and to expect further Orders there in prosecution of the reducement
of Chester, (which if your occasions may not require them elsewhere, I desire
you will please to confirm.) The Enemy left there four Companies of Foot, a
Troop of Horse, besides what escaped thither from the Fight near Northwich, and
what that disaffected City will afford in Townsmen.

I shall here take the boldness to represent to you the great necessity of the
Soldiers by want of Pay, we being to issue that small portion we had after the
rate of six pence a day, and already well nigh spent, so as Shoos, Stockings,
and other Necessaries in their long and dirty marches cannot be provided for.
Your former care in this assures me I need say no more, and therefore shall
break off this discourse, wherein (may be* I have mentioned many particulars
not worthy your notice, and shall beg of God that he will direct your Counsels
to such things, as may be for his glory, and suitable to these great mercies
bestowed upon you: Assuring you, that what may further concern your service in
these parts, shall be diligently performed by

(SIR) Your most faithful and humble Servant, J. Lambert.
Northwich, Aug. 20. 1659.
Whitehall, Monday, August 22.
The foregoing Letter was brought by Capt. Brown of Col. Hewsons Regiment, who
was in the Engagement, came from thence on Saturday-noon, and arived
yesternight about Midnight, and relates; That Sir George Booth flying with
some horse toward Chester, was pursued by Major Creed within two miles of the
City. Another party of them running toward Manchester, were putsued by Col.
Swallow; and Col. Ireland, with about an Hundred Horse, ran toward Leverpoole.
He faith, their Horse at first were a gallant Body, betwixt 17 and 1800. The
Officers which were taken prisoners before he came away, he names as solloweth,
viz.

Col. Massey of Cheshire. Major Harrison, lately a Capt. of Col. Gibbons
Regiment. Capt. Philip Egerton. Major James Scotfield. Capt. Martland. Capt.
Smith. Cornet Grosvener, son of Sir Richard Grosvener. Capt. Cosel. Lieut.
Davies. Ensign Ward. Ensign Langshaw. Lieut. Sear. Cornet Gill. John Bromley
of Wolverhampton, Gent. Capt. Stutly. Capt. Davies.
That the number of private Soldiers taken were 236. about 30 Colors, and good
store of Horse.

Their word, he faith, was Have at all. Ours, God with us.

This was the Account of things, as they stood at the time of his coming away;
Our Forces being then upon pursuit of the Enemy several ways.

FINIS.

