A Second, and a Third LETTER FROM THE Lord LAMBERT, Dated at Chester, August
21. And read in Parliament, Tuesday Aug. 23.

The One directed To the Speaker of the Parliament; The Other, To the Lo:
President of the Council of State; Together With a Letter from Major Edm:
Waring Governor of Shrewsbury, of the same Date.

Wherein is set forth the Manner OF THE Surrender of Chester, With the Names of
the Principal Persons taken Prisoners, and the state of Affairs concerning the
Issue of this Rebellion.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb over against Bainards Castle in Thames Street,
1659.

The Lord Lamberts Letter to the Right Honorable the Speaker of the Parliament.
SIR,
BEing according to those Resolutions I last acquainted you with, upon our
march toward Chester, we were met by two persons from that City, who were
instructed to offer some Terms of surrender thereof; I suppose upon fear,
least the Town should become a Prey to the Soldiers. Having heard what they had
to say, I called together diverse of the Officers, and acquainted them
therewith, who advised me to this Answer; That if they would set open their
Gates on the morrow by Ten of the Clock, submitting themselves wholly to the
Parliament, and receive in such Forces as should be appointed, I would engage
that no Soldier by violence should take any thing from them; And lastly, That I
would attend for their answer till eight of the Clock the next morning, without
any further action. Whereupon the Enemy finding themselves incapable to stand
upon their own defense, and the City declining all further assistance, that
night in confusion, in small parties, they left the Town, and about Ten of the
Clock, finding the Gates open, we marched in with one Regiment of Foot, and two
Troops of Horse. Upon my march thither, I met with two Inhabitants from
Leverpoole, and one Mr. Brown who had formerly been in your service, who upon
the route of the Enemy, got some well affected together, and took diverse
prisoners of the routed forces, which had fled that way. They inform me that
that Town has continued very faithful to your service, and that the Governor
appointed by the Enemy, did assure them before hand, That he would keep that
place for your service, and has now declared for you. Before I had this
information, I sent Major Hoare with three Companies of Foot of Colonel Hewsons
Regiment, and three Troops of Horse to reduce that place, whom I have ordered
notwithstanding this, to proceed according to his former instructions, and
having secured that place, by putting in some of his men to march up to a
conjunction with the rest of that Regiment in Lancashire, in case they should
meet with any opposition there. It is the earnest desire of those persons, that
the Castle may be demolished, which I humbly conceive may be for your service,
and pray your directions therein. I have sent a Summons to Harding Castle which
I hope will be delivered; It is likewise the desire of some of the
well-affected in these parts, that the Castle may be demolished, which I
likewise submit to your consideration. Sir Thomas Middleton yesterday past over
the Ferry at Ronckhorne, and came to this Town, and as I am informed, is gone
to Chirk Castle. I have sent thither a Summons, and have accompanied it with
three Troops of Horse, and four Companies of Foot, under the command of Colonel
Biscoe, and intend (if it please God to give a Blessing to your forces gone
into Lancashire) to go thither my self to morrow, I doubt not but the
Insurrection in these parts will be wholly broken.

I (...) more at present worthy your knowledge, and there^ ^all only on their
behalf desire, That the Forces may be supplied with some proportion of pay,
whereof at this time they stand in great need. Sir, I shall humbly subscribe.

Your most faithful and most humble Servant J. Lambert,
Chester, August 21, 1659. Sir, The enclosed is a List of some Gentlemen and
Prisoners taken in the Fight. The Soldiers expressed great zeal in this service;
many lost and spoiled their horses, whereof I humbly desire your confideration.



The Lord Lamberts Letter to the Right Honorable the Lord President of the
Council of State.
My Lord
I Take the freedom to refer your Lordships to mine, to the Parliament of the
21 instant, for an account of our proceedings with the City of Chester, which
is now possessed by your Forces. I find this City has shown it self very
malignant, and those few Friends you have are in great expectations, that you
will put the Power of this place as well Civil as Military, into such hands as
may be faithful to you, and a security and protection to them. In which I
humbly offer that some effectual course may be speedily taken. If there be any
thing in these parts which may require my further service and attendance, I
shall desire your speedy commands therein, which shall be most readily observed
by

My Lord, Your Lordships most faithful humble Servant, J. Lambert.
Chester, August 21.
The Governor of Shrewsbury's Letter to the Right Honorable the Lord President
of the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
NO sooner was the Post gone hence yesterday, but a party of my Troop returned
from my Lord Lambert, who went to Convoy him some Money from this Town, and
were present in the Fight about Northwich, and gave me assurance, that my Lord
had dispatched away an Express to your Honors, with an account of that Affair,
to which I humbly referr your Honors. Just now the Messenger that I sent your
Letter by, directed to Col. Croxton this day fortnight, returned back, who came
forth of Chester last night at Ten of the Clock; and before he left the City,
Sir Tho. Middleton, the Lord Kilmorrey, with other Gentlemen, with 5. Colors
of Horse, made no small haste to Chirke-Castle from Chester. The Foot that were
in the Town mutinyed, threw open the Gates, tore their Colors, and Sir George
Booth fled out of the North-gate; they only kept a slight Guard at the Gates,
being drawn from the other Guards in confusion, and left them in the Castle to
their own liberty. He assures me, when he came from thence, the Enemy were
resolved to shift for themselves: I held it my duty to hasten this Account. I
have sent the Horse forth this Garrison, since yesterday Noon, who are not yet
returned. By the Letter I received from my Lord Lambert this day, for covert to
one, which I dispatched from him to Col. Zankey, I was given to know, That he
divided his Army, and intended to march one part toward Chester, the other for
Warrington. Just now at Writing, a Boy of this Town, now fled home, confesses,
he was under one Capt. Shenton, who dismissed his Company last night at Chester,
and bad them shift for themselves. I crave your favor for my rude Lines,
remaining engaged to serve you

Shrewsbury, 21. August, 1659. Ten at night. Edmund Waringe.

The principal Prisoners as yet known, since the last, are, The Lord
Killmorrey. Major Peter Brook, an Apostate Member of the Parliament. Sir
William Neile. Major General Randolph Egerton. Sir Thomas Powel of Flintshire.


There were about 400 others, Prisoners, when the Captain ( viz, Capt. Spilman)
took charge of these Letters, who came from Chester on Monday morning, the 22
Instant.

FINIS.

