OBSERVATIONS On the LETTER Written to Sir THOMAS OSBORN, Upon the Reading of a
BOOK called the Present Interest OF ENGLAND STATED.

Written in a Letter to a Friend.

LONDON, Printed for I. B. Anno Domini, 1673.

Observations, etc.
SIR,
SO soon as some indispencible occasions would permit* I did at your instance,
strictly peruse the Pamphlet, called The present Interest of England stated; as
also, the Letter directed to Sir Thomas Osborne in answer to it, and at your
request, shall now give you my sense of both.

I find no Cause by the scope of the Letter, to believe otherwise of the
Author, then according to his own Professions, that he really designs the
Honor, Greatness, and Prosperity of this Natoin. An Honest, and Honorable
undertaking, the perfect discovery whereof, I wish may be pursued, by men of
leisure, and put in practice by those of Power.

I understand the Letter, to agree fully with the Pamphlet in all its Maxims,
relating to our domestic Interest, not differing neither from our Foreign in
anything, save what relates to Holland, and therein likewise, not in all, but
only in some particulars, but in several of them; I observe also the Author of
the Pamphlet, to be by the Letter exceedingly mistaken; for whereas it renders
him so Biased with affection to the Dutch, as makes him overlook the
usefulness of Foreign Alliances. I cannot (...), but (...) grounds all he
writes concerning Holland, upon the safety and benefit of England, insomuch as
it seems strange to me* how a person of that Candor and Ingenuity as the (...)
of the Letter must be, sh^^^ so for (...) the world that the Pamphlet he
answers, pleads

First, For allowing all the injuries and wrongs done by the Hollanders to this
Nation, (Page 5.)

Secondly, For the studying of their Interests, and loving of them, because
they (...) Trades, though by being so, they take our Trade from us, (Page 5, 6.)

And Thirdly, That their Parsimonie is no good Reason for dislike of them,
(Page 6.) As if all these were Arguments made use of by express words in that
Book, when I do not find any expressions relating to any of these particulars,
that do either in words say so much, or will in the least admit of any such
Inferences or Conclusions; (although as to this Third, if there were any word
to that purpose, it might be defended) For all the Arguments made use of by the
Pamphlet, against the destroying of the Hollanders, are either upon the account
of Justice and Righteousness, (which establishes a Nation) or clearly in
reference to the safety and utility of this Kingdom, both in Church and State,
and not in the least, upon any particular affection to the people of that
Country, as the Letter does insinuate the Pamphlet; being no otherwise
concerned for them, then as it is, for preserving the Balance of Christendom,
in opposition of Popery and Slavery.

I find the Pamphlets commendning the Dutch for their Morals, (compared with
the French, etc.) to be answered by objecting, that if the Author had lain but
one night in any Inn of theirs, he would have been convinced of the contrary,
which implies, that he had never done it, or at least never told the world he
had, and yet the Book justifies his opinion of them in affirming his
experience, from having traveled their Countries; (Interest of England Page
30.) and truly by his general knowledge of the Netherlands, he may well be
supposed to have thoroughly done it, and granting so much, it consequently
follows, that he must then have experienced their Inns, but if from Cousening,
and Cheating* in Inns, Alehouses, and Taverns, the measures of a peoples
Morals, must be Calculated, I fear, some other Countries, by high reckonings,
false measures, in Bottles, Pots and Cans; exceeding them, and tacitly allowed
of, etc. will be found as faulty as they, and to lie (at least) equally with
them, under the burden of that uncharitable Syne^do^he, of blaming the whole
for a part; for I can my self by experience, so far join with the Pamphlet in
justifying of it, as to aver, That I never trevelled in all my life, in any
Country so cheap as in theirs, and that no private person does otherwise, but
either voluntarily, by being profuse, or carelessly in spending more then he
needs, in not keeping to his ordinaries, but living at large; for their Rates
by Land or Water, are so certain, that none can pay one more then another, and
the like is in their Inns, for Ordinaries and Lodgings; insomuch that I have
often wondered their great Trade and Populousness (which in all other places
makes things dear) considered, I found living there so cheap as I did. But as
no number or society of men, can be said to be perfectly good, or altogether
evil; so the most just and certain Rule for applauding, or condemning any
Country, is not from a few Instances of a small part of it, but by way of
Comparison with other Countries, and by that Standard, Holland cannot be found
by much, so bad as Popish Countries, where the Doctrines of the Jesuits (which
has more or less an influence upon most of their Religion) of good Intentions,
Probability, and Necessity, etc. and of their whole Church, of keeping no faith
with Heriticks, etc. is inconsistant with honest Conversation, rendering them
unfit, even for one another Society, there being no fence against such
Principles.

The Cruelty at Amboina, is (I confess] to be had by all in abhorrence; but
since it was before we were born, that it was acted but by a few, and disowned,
and not justified at home. That King James of happy memory, and his wise and
excellent Council, and Favorites, thought therefore not fit to revenge it; and
that it has since, by several treaties, been buried, and put in Oblivion; I
question whether we ought still to remember it; but provided, that the constant
Trade that the Popish Nations have (in all ages down to our times) driven in
Massakres, and Cruel Torterings, and that with the applause, and approbation of
their chief Bishop and Church, as Italy, Savoy, France and Ireland do witness,
may be remembered; I can be well pleased, that that single Act at Amboina,
committed by a few Protestants condemned by the rest, and which is abhorred by
the Principles of their Religion, may not be forgotten; and thereupon the whole
designs of the Pamphlet and Letter, each severally considered, I cannot
observe, that they differ in any Material Circumstance, but that both aim at
the same end, the Honor, Greatness, Prosperity and safety of this Nation,
unless the first is too straight laced in the Rules of Honesty and Justice;
believing (that though Interest rightly understood or mistaken, governs all the
world yet) that that precept of doing to others, as we would have them to do to
us, gives no latitude to any Country to destroy another, to the end to
increase their own Trade, or greatness; for were it otherwise, nothing could be
more for our security against Invasions, and the profit of England, then to
destroy in time the French in their Shipping, and thereby in their Maritine
Commerce, before they are overgrown in strength and Trade, in both, which from
young Interlopers, they are in a short time too much increased, especially in
our Newfoundland Fishery, where they have almost eaten us out, to the
unspeakable prejudice of the Western Parts! though that Trade was once our
greatest Nursery for Seamen, and might have been much more improved, and is of
such a Nature, as the Dutch were not capable of doing us much prejudice in, or
at least as they never attempted to do us any.

The Letter reproves the Pamphlets inviting all Princes into the triple League,
scoffing at it, as absurd; the League being now determined, and to evince the
error, gives this account of the League: That the French King being entered
Flanders, with a very powerful Army, the Kings of England, Sweden, and the
States of Holland, entered into a confederacy, with design to force the French
to make peace upon such Terms as should be proposed by them, (and therein
wisely to prevent the growing greatness of France) and at the same time the
Confederates made Articles amongst themselves, to help one another, in Case any
of them should be invaded for having made this League) either by the French
King, the King of Spain, or any of their Allies, and upon the acceptance of the
Articles proposed, the Confederates became their Guarranty or Sureties; for
performance of them on both sides.

And now, this being the state of the Case, where the Absurdity or Bull lies,
in making no distinction between the Triple League, and the Guarranty of the
Peace, is beyond my apprehension; for the League, as is confessed being made to
induce (that is to force) the French King to a Peace, (the King of Spain, who
was Invaded, standing in no need of Compulsion) and the Confederacy continuing
for wartanting of the said agreement (which in effect is no less then an honest
and prudent League, for keeping the French, within tolerable bounds and
limits) and for the assistance of each other against any that should endeavor
to revenge this consederacy; the Triple League seems to me (as it is confessed
by the Letter it self, at the lower end of Page 15.) to be still in being, and
the expression to be as properly used, as that of Guarranty, as being one and
the same thing; for the Guarranty, aiming at the same end the League does, and
being one Article of the confederacy, the Triple League must be still in being,
as well as the Guarranty, And surely, it was the last Session of Parliament.
thought so to be, when Money was desired for maintaining of it; but this, Sir,
is not worth contending about; for the matter being clearly laid down by the
Letter, the judgment of it is left to your self.

As I am no Statist, nor pretender to it, so it concerns not me to inquire
further into the Articles agreed on by his Majesty with the Swede and Dutch,
then is made public, nor in the least to attempt the Censuring any Action of
State; (for that shall always be Foreign to me) but yet I presume I may
without offense say, it does not appear to me, as it does to the Author of the
Letter, that the Emperor and Princes of Germany, could not have been taken into
the Triple League by the Confederates, without engaging to assist them upon
occasion against the Turk; for as we find that it has been ordinary for
Princes to limit and proportion their Leagues, according to their Interests, so
it is irrational to do otherwise; And it does not follow, that because it is
the Interest of the Emperor, and Princes of Germany, to enter into a League
with other Princes, for keeping the French King from unjustly incroaching upon
his Neighbors, that therefore those Princes, contrary to their manifest should
enter into a League with them against the Turk* but I Honor the Author of the
Letter, for the care he expresses to have for the prevention of War to this
Nation, and for the rest and quiet of the poor people of England, (Page (...))

The Pamphlet not being concerned in the complaint against those that blame the
breach with Holland* because of the Triple League, I shall pass that over,
agreeing fully with the Author, that self-preservation is chiefly to be
preferred, (...) Populi suprema lex.

The Author of the Letter, in his treating of the Interest of England, has
several Observations, and Notions, deserving consideration, which I shall
reduce to these six heads following.

First, That our increase in power, since the time of Queen Elizabeth, (of
famous memory) is not proportionable to the increase of the Dutch, (Page 12.)

Secondly, That the Dutch, being so powerful at Sea as they now are, may by
joining with the French, (whenever they will agree upon it) endanger the
Conquest of England; and keeping to themselves the most confiderable parts in
it for Trade, being Masters at Sea, provide for their own security against the
greatness of France, (Page 12.)

Thirdly, That it is not wisdom for any Nation to have its safety depend upon
the prudence of another, as in relying upon its being against the Interest of
Holland to Invade England, because they may mistake their Interest, (Page 12.)

Fourthly, That a Conquest of England being made, the Dutch Government being
more easy and indulging Trade, then the Arbitrary and severe Regiment of
France, as also their Religion concurring more with ours, then that of France,
the Trading Party of England would be likelier to close with the first then the
latter, and for the like Reason should Holland be ever in danger of a Conquest
by the Conjunction of England with France, they would rather choose to become
part of the English Government, then submit to the power of France: For that
their joining with us, and therein making it, as much our Interest to promote
their Trade, as the Trade of any other Nation, may answer that Objection, That
their fear of our obstructing their Trade, will make them averse to us, (Page
13.)

Fifthly, That it is not probable, that the Dutch will ever agree to put
themselves under the Dominion of the French, who will not trust them without
such advantages as may compel them to observe their promises, as the other will
never give them such a power, least they should make a corrupt use of it, (Page
14.)

Sixthly, That considering the Situation and Constitutions of England, a
Coalition with us would prove more acceptable and advantageous to them, then
any terms they can expect from the French, and that should we get no more then
the Maritine Towns, and the French all the rest of the States Dominions, we
should have no cause to repent our Bargain, (Page 14.)

These Notions contain the substance of that part of the Letter, which treats
of the Interest of England; the first of which I must not at present deny,
because the Auxiliary assistance which we have received from France, seems to
make it good; yet the Story of 88. acquaints us, that the States in thosetimes
with 35. Men of War, Blocked up Dunkirk, and the Duke of Parma's Navy in it, to
the great service of England; but it is certain, that all Nations will
increase, or decline more or less, according as their Interest is pursued, and
their Government suited to it, which happily is the Cause why none can be said
to have outdone the States of Holland (their low beginnings considered) in
increase in Trade and Riches; but if augmentation in Territories, and power be
a Crime, it is one that France is more guilty of then the United Netherlands,
and ought therefore to be looked upon with a more jealous Eye? for the natural
advantages that we have of the Dutch in the Situation of our Country, and the
greatness of it; in the goodness and number of our Havens and Ports, to breed
Seamen, and Harbor Ships, are such, as appears to me to render it impossible
for them, ever to become our superiors at Sea ( as is suggested by the Letter,
Page 11.)

As to the second assertion, or head, I must in that crave leave to dissent,
without granting the question (which is begged) that Holland, whilst in
liberty, might be under a likelihood of agreeing with France for the Conquest
of England, the thing seeming to me to be morally impossible.

First, From their want of people, especially fit for War, their Dominions
being small, and furnished much with strangers, and altogether with Traders,
Circumstances which no Country must be under, that designs Foreign Conquests
or Invasions.

Secondly, From the Nature of their Government, in its being no more then an
Union of several absolute Sovereignties, for common defense and preservation,
which is a quality not fit for acquisitions, in that the difficulty in
satisfying every concern upon the good success of their Arms, and the many
occasions that would arise from thence of differences amongst them, renders it
impracticable.

Thirdly, From the impossibility of the French, and their agreement upon the
Division of England; for that it is not to be imagined, but each of them would
be jealous of the others increase in Territories and Power, and that the States
would have no more cause to presume upon their overwitting the French, in
getting to themselves the most considerable places in it for Trade, (as is
supposed by the Letter Page 12.) then the French in overreaching them, who
have always been wise enough in Treaties; For that an increase in the French
Monarchy would be more dangerous to the States, then the like in the States
would be to them, who are already the others overmatch, and it cannot with
reason but be supposed, that in the Division of England, the French would on
the one hand have an Eye at supplying themselves with that they only want, for
making them uncontrollable in the world, good Havens and Ports, and also on the
other hand, that the Dutch would never yield unto that, that would destroy
them. But if England had reason to be jealous of France and Hollands
Conjunction, in order to the Conquest of it: (as the Letter suggests) I fear
with the same reason France will be jealous of Englands impatronizing Holland,
as being as well unwilling to have the Dominion of the Seae so much undivided
in the hands of any one Lord, as all the rest of Europe cannot check it, as we
are to have the Dominion of the Land in the like kind under any other Lord or
Prince*

To the Third ascertion, I have not any thing to object in opposition, nothing
being more ordinary in the world then gross mistakes in the Interest of
Countries, proceeding often from passion, revenge, and disordered affections;
yet this may be said in the Case, that the States were such great Masters in
the knowledge of their civil Interests, that none might have been safelier
trusted upon that account then they.

To the Fourth head or assertion, I have only this to answer, that as it is
natural for all Rational Creatures, of two evils to choose the least, so
supposing, that the States being reduced to a necessity of parting with their
own Government, will have the Election of their new Lords in their own power;
and taking it for granted, that they are men of some Conscience and Religion,
(though some deny them to be so) I do fully agree with the Author of the Letter
in his opinion, that they will in such Case choose rather the English, then the
severe Government of the French, unless the consideration (in their partial
opinion) of who is best able to protect their Country, do not prevail with
them, to trust the French King in point of Religion; but I very much question,
whether it is not groundless to suppose, that any Nation being attacked by two
great Monarchs, will have the choice of their own Masters left to themselves,
by a mutual agreement betwixt those Monarchs, without which it cannot be; but I
highly esteem the Author of the Letter, for the true sense he expresses to
have of the French Government, from which the Lord in Mercy deliver all other
Countries.

The Fifth assertion, is a supposition that the Dutch will have it in their
choice, to trust the French or not, and in such Case I am of opinion with the
Letter, that they will never do it, Spain, Lorrain, and the Protestants of
France, being a sufficient warning to them; but as Affairs now stand, I very
much fear they will not have the Election of it in their own hands.

The Sixth assertion, though as most Weighty, deserves most Consideration; yet
for the first part of it, whether England admitting the Dutch to a Coalition,
would be of more advantage to them then any terms they can expect from the
French. I will not dispute, but am much of belief, that the French Councils,
considering that they want nothing to facilitate their universal design more
then an Interest in the Northern Seas, where they might Harbor, and form an
Navy, nourish and breed Seamen, and likewise considering, that the Maritine
Towns of Holland, Zealand and Friezland, would signify nothing without Trade;
but in danger of being swallowed up by the Sea, for want of ability to maintain
the Banks against it, nor Trade signify any thing without liberty, they would
soon find it necessary as to their Interest, to wave the French Principles for
arbitrary Government, and to leave the Dutch in a great measure of freedom,
relying only upon Cittadels, for keeping them dependant upon them, and forcing
them upon occasion to be useful to them, as judging that the best way to serve
themselves of them, least otherwise by severity, they should provoke the
dispersing the Inhabitants to Emden, Bremen, Hambourg, Lubeck and Dantzic, etc.
the four first being Imperial Free Cities, and the latter the same under
Poland; for arbitrary Government, (that must be maintained by the Sword) and
the idle Callings and rude manners of Soldiers, which are altogether
inconsistant with, and Enemies to Trade and Commerce, will always cause Traders
to change bondage for liberty, or at least in hopes of better entertainment one
Country for another, as did the subversion of the Florentine Government in
that Country; and as they were preparing to do the like in Holland, when they
feared the late Prince of Oreng's over-turning that State, for the Antipathy
betwixt Merchants and Soldiers is such, that all Monarchs of Trading Countries
have ever held it their Interest, to keep their great Trading Towns free from a
Mercinary Militia, and it is exceeding difficult, if not Morally impossible for
a Prince to advance Trade to any great height, where the people are under the
awe of a standing Military power; and the French King seems to own the truth of
this, in that finding the benefit of Commerce, he is even in France content
that his Trading Cities should be freed from Soldiers, and more gently used
then the rest of his Country; for so far as the Nature of his arbitrary
Government will permit, he studieth all manner of ways to advance Trade.

As first, by totally prohibiting such Foreign Commodities, and Manufactures,
as his people are capable of making, sufficient to serve his Country, as
Train-Oyl, etc.

Secondly, By burthening others with high Customs and Impositions, to the end
to encourage his own Artisans and Seamen, thereby making the Trade of England
thither very prejudicial to us, our Transportations hence being inconsiderable
to our Importations thence, and as they improve in any faculty, so they either
prohibit or increase their impositions, upon the Importation of the
Forrein-made Commodities of that faculty.

And Thirdly, as an encouragement to Trade, the French King has lately
declared the exercise of Commerce in a Gentleman, to be no prejudice to his
quality, having also erected an Academy for breeding his Nobility to Sea
Affairs* and teaching them the Art of Navigation, etc. All which may well Alarm
England to a jealousy of their designs as most dangerous to it, and to look
upon the French, as those Rivals, whom (if hatred be lawful, as the Letter in
this Case seems to make it) we ought most to hate; for should they once come to
Vie with us in Trade or Naval strength, we should find them to exceed all that
ever went before them, in insolency, injustice, and selfishness.

And whether the second part of this Notion has a good foundation, which
asserts, That should England get but the Sea Towns alone, leaving the rest of
the States Dominions, to the French, we should have no cause to repent our
Bargain. I will not presume to judge, yet this I think considerable in the
Case, that should the Inlands of the United Provinces, and with them all the
Conquered places fall to the share of the French, as by the late published
Proposals in Dutch (if true) they seem to pretend unto the Latter; then having
thereby the command of the Rivers of Rhine and Mase, etc. together with Sluice,
and the other Garrisons which shuts up the Trade of Flanders and Brabant, they
will have it in their power to render all the parts of the Seventeen Provinces,
which will remain to the Kings of England and Spain of no more use to them,
then they please to allow of.

First, Because the Sea Towns of the United Netherlands, cannot be divided from
the Inlands, from which they receive their nourishment, nor deprived of the use
of their Rivers, by which they drive their Trades without utter ruin to them,
and making them thereby an intolerable burden to their Masters.

Secondly, Because the Spanish Netherlands will thereby be so environed, or
rather be leagured by the French Garrisons and Forces on all sides, as well
toward Germany, Holland, and Zealand, etc. as toward France, that having no
means left them, for forming or maintaining an Army, (as any that know those
Countries must confess) they will always be in the French Kings devotion, and
when assaulted by him, without possibility of contributing any considerable
assistance to their own deliverance, or to make the Triple League of any use to
them,

Thirdly, Because such will be the enervated condition of the Spanish
Netherlands, that the King of Spain will be necessitated, as not being able to
maintain them longer then the French will permit him, either to quit them
voluntarily, or (if he can obtain so much favor) to make an exchange or sale
of them to the French King, who then having Flanders and Brab^nt, (which he
has so long thirsted after) and all the Rivers belonging to them in his own
hands, will assuredly for the advantage of himself, and his own Countries even
in times of peace, so obstruct and hinder the Trade of the Maritine Towns of
Holland, Zealand and Friezland, (if in the possession of any but himself) and
in times of War totally shut them up by Land) as will restore Flanders and
Brabant to their ancient Trade, and make a new Holland of them, which being in
the hands of the French, will probably prove abundantly worse to England then
the old, if large experience of injuries and injustices, committed in Trade by
them against this Nation, may warrant a Conclusion, as by the Certificate under
the Lord Ambassador Hollis his hand, (which I send you here enclosed) given
upon an order of his Majesty's Privy Council, Dated the 17. April 1667. in the
Case of Sir Francis Top, and Company, does for one instance sufficiently
appear.

Nay, such is the envious care of the French, that no Nation should get or
thrive by them, that (as Mr. Samuel Fortrey, one of the Gentlemen of his
Majesty's Privy Chamber, reports in his Book Printed 1663. and Dedicated to
King Charles the second) not many years ago, they suspecting (through mistakes)
that England had an advantage of them in their Trade for France, they were upon
Counsels for prohibiting all Trade with England, until upon a strict
examination, they found, that whereas England vented of their Commodities into
France, not to above the value of Ten hundred thousand Pounds per annum; France
vented of theirs to the English Six and twenty hundred thousand pounds; and
then finding that they had Sixteen hundred thousand Pounds advantage in the
Balance, they soon let fall their design, though yet not without burthening
English Manufactures with New Impositions, in such manner, as might much hinder
the vent of them in their Country. And Mr. Fortrey in the aforementioned Book,
does not only recite the very Balance of Trade it self, which he affirms was
presented to the French King, to show the advantage they have in their Trade
with England; but also adds further, that hereby it may appear, how insensibly
our Treasure will be exhausted, and the Nation beggered, whilst we carelessly
neglect our own Interest, and strangers abroad are diligent to make their
advantage by us.

And it is of no little consideration, that the French should so far overvalue
themselves, as to increase their Impositions upon Dutch Commodities, to a
degree of prohibiting* them, and deny to the Dutch the like power by theirs, as
if they had a right to deal as they please toward other Nations, and yet none
to do toward them (by way of Retalliation) any more then they shall think fit
to give them leave to do, an over weening opinion of their own greatness, which
all Princes and States ought to be jealous of, as not knowing where their
ambition will end.

And besides these things thus instanced in, we have great cause to take
notice, that as the effect of the implacable hatred of the French to our
Nation, they cannot forbear in their writings to express their inveterate
malice against us, as that Book called le Politic de France, writ in the year
1669* and Dedicated to the French King, is a pregnant Testimony, where no
better Epithetes are allowed us, then being without friends, without faith,
without Religion, without honesty, without any justice, of defying or provoking
Natures, light or unconstant to the highest degree, cruel, impatient, gluttons,
proud, audatious and covetous, proper for ready execution and assaults; but
incapable of managing a War with judgment, with other such like opprobrious and
reproachful expressions, besides a Method propounded to be observed in order to
the Conquest of England, Page 158, 159, 160, 161. enough to raise a lawful
indignation in all true Englishmen, against such insolent slanderers, who by
their impudence, endeavor to impose their own Characters upon in, contrary to
the known experience of the rest of the world.

And now Sir I have no more to add then (all Circumstances considered) my
agreement with the Pamphlet in this Principle, that while France is so great as
at present, it can in no kind be for the safety of England to subvert Holland
and Zealand, etc. which are properly called their out-guards or works against
all Invasions, and cannot be demolished, or in the hands of the French, without
laying England naked, or at least the more open to that Nation, and that
nothing is more demonstrable, then that since the United Provinces cannot
signify much without freedom, they will under their own Government be of most
use to all Christendom, (save France, who only wants them as a qualification
for threatening, instead of courting their Neighbors,) in maintaining the
general Balance of Europe, even as it was great wisdom in the long Parliament
(for the wickedest of men may have worldly prudence) to join with Holland in
the preserving of Denmark, as necessary for the Ballancing of Sweden, when
Cromwell (in his time) in revenge of manifest affronts, and hatred had designed
the ruin of the Dane.

And thus Sir, having in obedience to your Commands, given you freely my sense
of the Pamphlet and Letter, without varying from the matter in either; as it is
in them respectively stated, I hope you will pardon any thing wherein I may
differ with you in judgment or opinion; for I have this for my Buckler, that
what I have writ is Truth, and that I aim at nothing in it, but the true
Interest of the King and Kingdom of England, and Protestant Religion, denying
that any can have more Cordial affection for them, then my self, who am etc.


April 17th. anno 1669. According to the Printed Copy.
IN obedience to an Order of Council of the 16th. present, requiring my
opinion, what is fit to be done for relief of Sir Francis Top, and Company: I
do humbly certify, that I have perused their Case, and find that they complain
of great losses, and damages, sustained in the year 1644. whilst they lived in
St. Malo, from the French, by seizing their Goods in a time of Peace, in the
very Harbors of France, whither they had brought those Goods in a way of
Trading, and where by several Treaties then in force, and by the very Law of
Nations, (which gives a security to the Persons and Estates of all, who reside
peaceably within the Dominions of any Prince or State) they ought to have been
safe and free from all Arrests, the owners not having done any thing whereby to
forfeit their Interest in them; which course, if suffered, must needs be the
destruction of all Trade and Commerce, between the two Kingdoms, as it is also
very dishonorable, and injurious to his Majesty, that the public faith should
be broken to his Subjects, who Trade under his protection, by virtue of the
Treaties made between the two Crowns; and it is much to be feared, that the
proceedings in France may become very prejudicial in this kind to the whole
trading of the English Nation in that Kingdom, if nothing be done to stop this
growing mischief: In regard this is not the single Case, where this course has
been put in practice, the like having been done several times to English
Merchants at Rouen, who are not yet free of the trouble* for a Capture at Sea,
whether real, or pretended to have been made in 1616. by an English Privateer
of a French Ship, belonging to one Delaun^y, valued but at six thousand Livers.
And whilst I had the Honor to serve his Majesty, as his Ambassador in France,
two English Ships coming into Harbor at Marseille, when they had Landed their
Goods, and paid all duties, were seized upon, Ships and Goods, and
notwithstanding all my solicitations, would not be discharged: But some Months
after, the War breaking out, were given to the East India Company there, they
pretending some Ships of theirs, to have been formerly taken by the English.
And now as I hear at St. John de Luz, the same usage is threatened, if not
already begun to our Merchants there, for the reparation of the Widow de Lazin,
for some goods of her late Husbands, taken from her by the Parliament in 1643.
So as all this makes me fearful it may come to be a constant Custom* if not
prevented. I do therefore offer it as my humble opinion, that all care should
be taken for the prevention of it. And for this particular Case of Sir Francis
Topp's. and Company, that in the first place a fair application may be made to
the French King, as well by his Ambassador here, as by his Majesty's Ambassador
at Paris, for the just satisfaction of the Petitioners, which may be hoped will
prove effectual, and should it not, it will then be time for his Majesty to
consider, what is further to be done for the vindication, of his own Honor,
and and the protection of his Subjects.

Hollis.
FINIS.

