THE LINEN and WOOLLEN MANUFACTORY DISCOURSED: With the Nature of Companies
and Trade in general: And particularly, that of the COMPANYS FOR The Linen
Manufactory OF ENGLAND and IRELAND. With some REFLECTIONS HOW The TRADE of
Ireland has formerly, and may now affect England. Printed at the Request of a
PEER of this Realm.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Thomas Mercer, at the Half Moon joining
the East-Corner of the Royal Exchange, Cornhil, 1691.

The Linen and Woollen MANUFACTORY Discoursed.
SIR,
THE Deference I bear to your Integrity, and great Judgment, subjects me to the
least of your Commands, and that brings before you my Thoughts on those several
Heads you proposed to me.

1. My Opinion of Companies in Trade, by Authority of the Great Seal in general.

2. Of the present Company in England for the Linen Manufactory.

3. Of that for the same in Ireland.

I doubt you may judge of my Sense in this Discourse, as Men do of Minerals,
that when they appear near the day, as they phrase it, and are easily come at,
that the Vein is not good. So may you judge of my forward Opinion in the
following Lines; however, you that command, can pardon, and by your better
Judgment supply my Defects.

I shall begin with that of Companies in general. These I take to have been
very common in the early days of Trade, when Navigation was judged a Mystery
next to that of the Black Art, and such as would venture their Persons and
Estates into the New World, as they termed new found Countries, Heroes equal to
Alexander and Caesar, Aes triplex circa pectus erat -- Horace: In these Times
Kings could not exceed in their Grants and Privileges, that by them Adventurers
might be increased, and Trade brought to their Dominions, we see how fond
Princes were of Merchants, by the great Privileges our Kings gave to the
Easterlings, as they then called the Flemings, the Still-Yard is a lasting
Monument of their Grandeur; and our Chronicles tell how boldly they would upon
any Distaste bear on our Kings.

So were our Companies in following years courted by Foreign Princes, and
States, to settle their Trade in their Dominions; but as Trade and and Commerce
became familiar in the World, the Wisdom of Government made the Privileges of
Trade universal to their Subjects: and so by degrees Companies were abated, and
only such continued as were thought useful for preserving some particular
Trades, that if left at large might become less profitable to the Kingdom.

There is another Reason for Companies in Foreign Parts, which some bring to
strengthen their Opinion for them here. They tell us Companies are frequent in
France, Holland, Swedeland, and likewise in most small Princes Dominions; but
in all these Places there may be Reasons which hold not here, some of them have
but little Trade and Navigation, the People not affected with Trade, but
content themselves with the Product of their own Country. Now in this Case
there is Reason for the Government to encourage Companies even to the seeming
loss of the People in general, that is by placing such Duties and Prohibitions
on Foreigners: as to keep them out, that so their own Subjects may set their
own Rates on what they import, otherwise they would not be able to manage a
Trade that Foreigners could undersel them in, and so their Country would become
a Province to other Princes, I take them to be not better who govern not their
own Trade, but are beholding to Strangers. Companies in Countries under these
Circumstances seem absolutely necessary to preserve some Trade of their own,
but we in England are not under these Necessities.

France and other Countries before mentioned have Inducements much of the same
Nature; for tho they may drive considerable Trades in the World, yet they come
after us in their Foreign Plantations, and Trade, and where they are so,
nothing but Companies can introduce them, but had they an open and secure Trade
they would soon throw down the Enclosure, and make their Trade common to all
their own Subjects.

There is yet another reason for Companies, and that is all I can find which
carries a pretense for any in England, that is, where there wants a Force and
Government to secure Ships and Men, whilst they are employed in the Trade of
the Country among Savages, and so have not the Protection of the Country, as in
other more civilized Nations. Here, if the Government of the Kingdom do not at
the public Charge set up and maintain Forts and Garrisons for the security of
their own People that trade there, the Trade can be no other way carried on but
by a Company and Joint Stock, and that Trade appropriated to them as a Fund and
Recompense for their Charge of maintaining a Force and Government. But this
seems to proceed rather from the Mistakes or Neglect in Government, than a good
Expedient for Trade, that any Society of private Men should have a Regal Power
to make War, or Peace, give Commissions, etc. may be thought an Indication of
Weakness in the National Power they derive from, and is a Creature within a
Creature that wants a Name: and however this Management may secure a Gain to
the Company, yet at the same time it may be a Loss to the Nation to which they
belong. As that of the African Company, which by the best Judgment is
depricated as the Bane of our Foreign Plantations. Something of which is
touched upon by Mr. Dalby Thomas in his Historical Account of the Rise and
Growth of the West India Colonies, a more Rational and Mercantine Discourse I
have not met with. Now it might be thought more Honorable for the Nation to
secure every part of their Trade at the public Charge, than to leave it to the
Conduct of private Men* and so set up a Commonwealth within a Monarchy: that
for any Miscarriages are not called to account like other Offenders, but
treated like an Ally, I know not how better to distinguish Men that seize Ships
and Goods where they find them without Process of Law.

By this Account you will believe me no Friend to Companies; and I must confess
my Judgment and Experience, as far as it goes, is against them: but still with
a Reserve to such, as by a long Descent from their Predecessors, that purchased
it by signal Service to the Nation, have in a manner a Freehold, as that of the
Turkey, Hamburg, and some other Companies in being. But that Projectors and
Courtiers should be inspired with New Lights, and out of Love to the Nation,
create new Methods in Trades, that none before found out; and by enclosing
Commons the Liberty of Trade into Shares, in the first place for themselves,
and then for such others as will pay for both, is, I must confess, to me, a
Mystery I desire to be a Stranger unto.

And this brings me to the second part of your Enquiry, my Thoughts of the
present Linen Manufactory in England. You know my Aversion to the Sin of this
Age, Scandal and Reflection, to avoid which, I may perhaps be short in setting
forth my Sense of this Company; and the Progress they make in the Design they
propose, of making Linen to the Advantage of the Nation, and Profit of the
Company.

1. First then, I submit to better Judgments, that a Company and Joint Stock is
not a proper way to set up and increase Manufactory. It is usual for any Man
that designs to take up the Trade of another, whom he pretends not to exceed,
but labors to imitate, to follow the Steps of him he makes his Aim. Now then
if we take up the Trade of Linen Manufactory from Germany, Holland, and
France, let us see if any of these Kingdoms established it by Companies; if
they did not, and grew great in it by other Methods, it might then be thought
our best way to do as they did.

But that the very Name of a Company and Joint Stock in Trade, is a Spell to
drive away, and keep out of that place where they reside, all Men of Industry,
and Business that relates to what the Company pretends unto, is not new to any
Man of Employment in the World. The great Motive to Labor and Encouragement of
Trade, is an equal Freedom, and that none may be secluded from the delightful
Walks of Liberty. Now Trade to Merchants, and mechanic Arts to Workmen are
their Walks, which where any challenge a Right to keep the Key, they will not
come; a Subjection in Manufactories where a People are obliged to one Master,
tho they have the full Value of their Labor, is not pleasing, they think
themselves in perpetual Servitude, and so it is observed in Ireland, where the
Irish made a Trade of Linen Yarn, no Man could engage them, but they would go
to the Market and be better satisfied with a less price, than to be obliged to
one Master: but this of a Company is one Master to a Kingdom; and whatever they
pretend unto in saying they hinder no Man, yet they have such Advantages by
being a Body incorporate, and having a Joint Stock, that no Man of a private
Purse dares engage in that Trade they call themselves a Company of: Much less
will any new Stores come, where at their Entrance they must put on a Shackle of
the Company's forging.

2. We have the Practice of former Ages against the introducing of
Manufactories by Companies. I do not find that the Woollen Manufactory, first
introduced by Edward the Third who brought in the Flemings, was advanced by
Companies, but that he gave like Immunities to all that would employ themselves
in it. And however Notions and Opinions may prevail in Schools, the plain
Methods of Labor are better understood by the Practick than Theory.

There was much more Reason for a Company and Joint Stock to set up the Woollen
Manufactory in that ignorant Age, than there is for this of the Linen
Manufactory; that of the Woollen was a new Art not known in this Kingdom, it
required a great Stock to manage, there was required Foreign as well as Native
Commodities to carry it on, Oil, dying Stuffs, etc. and when the Manufactory
was made, there must be Skill and Interest abroad to introduce the Commodity
where others had the Trade before them: but there is nothing of all this in the
Linen Manufactory; Nature seems to design it for the weaker Sex. The best of
Linen for Service is called House-wife's Cloth, here then is no need of the
Broad Seal, or Joint Stock to establish the Methods for the good Wife's weeding
her Flax Garden, or how soon her Maid shall sit to her Wheel after washing her
Dishes; the good Woman is Lady of the Soil, and holds a Court within her self,
throws the Seed into the Ground, and works it till she brings it there again, I
mean her Web to the bleaching Ground.

Now to appropriate this which the poorest Family may by Labor arrive unto,
that is, finish and bring to Market a Piece of Cloth: to me seems an infallible
Expedient to discourage universal Industry, making the World believe they will
do Wonders in their Company, and by that means discourage all private
Endeavors; and when all is done, themselves like the Mountain in the Fable
bring forth a Mouse.

3. As a Company will hinder the Increase of new Comers, so it will destroy
such as are settled here already. There are, as I am told, in several parts of
the Kingdom, private Men that employ themselves and their little Stock in the
Linen Manufactory of Thread, Cloth, Tapes, etc. Now tho I believe any one of
these Men with five hundred pounds Stock, shall actually increase the Trade
more than a Company with five thousand pounds, yet this Company drives out five
thousand small Traders that are now in it. Traders are like Armies in a Field,
small parties, tho numerous, yet being disjoint, give way to a united Force:
and this of the Linen Manufactory above any Trade I know, if (which I must
confess I doubt) it be for the Good of the Nation, requires more Charity than
Grandeur to carry it on, the poor Spinner comes as often to her Master for
Charity to a sick Child, or a Plaster for a Sore, as for Wages; and this she
cannot have of a Company, but rather less for her Labor, when they have beat
all private Undertakers out.

These poor Spinners can now come to their Masters Doors at a good time, and
eat of their good, tho poor Masters Cheer; they can reason with him, if any
mistake, or hardship be put upon them, and this poor People love to do, and not
be at the Dispose of Servants, as they must be where their Access can only be
by Door-keepers, Clerks, etc. to the Governors of the Company.

I have seen a short Discourse of that Labourer in Charity, Mr. Tho. Fermin,
and his Endeavors to promote the Linen Manufactory, his Work was to relieve
the poor, God's way, not by a Tax, which at best is but Man's way, and as it is
employed in England not the best. But I lose Mr. Fermin; that he did in little,
showed what might be done at large* and that would (in my weak Opinion) have
been a more probable way, to have inured idle and the most useless Hands in the
Kingdom to spinning Linen, as he proposed, than the Formalities of a Company.

4. As a Company destroys particular persons, and hinders the Improvement every
particular Man would make in the Trade a Company invades, or rather ingrosses;
so a Company imposes upon the Nation in general: It is, a Natural Consequence,
and let them say what they can, all Men will believe it, that as they become
Masters of the Trade, so they will be of the Prices of the Commodity: and that
they must have greater Rates for their Linen, than private persons could
afford it for, is of necessity; otherwise how shall the Grandeur of the
Company, Officers, etc. be maintained, and that which will be more than all the
rest, the Frauds, Neglects, and Miscarriages of their numerous Agents, and
Instruments employed in the managing part; and it is to be noted, that this
Company (to which I believe we have nothing like in Story, if considered in all
its preposterous Designs and Machins) has not the Advantage of Companies that
trade by Sea, for they by a Joint Stock make great Adventures in one Bottom,
and so are in many things at no more Charge with the Management of Ten thousand
pounds in Trade, than a private Man may be with One. But here with our Company
it is not so, but on the contrary, the Company must be at more Charge than a
private Man in their several Cheques, and Controlers upon their Servants;
whereas every private Man does his own Work, and as it is always done so to
most Advantage, so most especially in this of the Linen Manufactory, where
there must be a particular Eye to every pound of Thread Weaving, Whitening, and
a multitude of other things; all which extraordinary Charge and Difficulty the
Company must lie under more than private Men, can no other way be raised, but
by lessening the Wages of the Poor that make the Linen, and raising the Price
on the Rich that wear it? Our Laws provide well against Forestallers in
Markets, and tho not so well as it might be, yet there is some care taken that
Men have the fair buying of the Victuals they eat. This I have sometimes
thought is like Tithing Mint and Rue, neglecting the more weighty things of the
Law, we provide Men should not be cheated in buying a pennyworth of Eggs, but
make no provision to secure them from the same Abuse in a hundred pounds laid
out in Clothes. The poor Artizan shall not be oppressed in laying out his penny
to one poorer than himself, but he is without Remedy shortened by a Company in
his Penny as it comes in. I have heard Complaints of this Nature in greater
matters of the public Sales of the East India Company, perhaps if due
Consideration were had of these great Ingrossers, there would be sound more
Reason to restrain them, than a poor Woman that travels in the Country to buy
up and sell in a Market a few Hens and Chickens. But to return to our
Corporation for Imaginary Linen Manufactory.

I shall now lay down what offers to me, that if it were possible to introduce
it in this Kingdom, that yet it would not be for the Interest of the Nation to
have a Linen Manufactory set up as a Trade in the Kingdom.

Divine Providence that appoints to every Nation and Country a particular
Portion, seems to allot that to England which was the first acceptable
Sacrifice to his Omnipotency, that of the Flock: the Produce of which is the
most universal Covering of all the civilized Countries of the World, our
Woollen Manufactory; a Talent which no Nation has to that perfection as we
have. This has been for many Ages the Support of the Nation, employing the
poor at home, our Men and Ships at Sea. Now to decline this, and set up another
Manufactory, looks like an extravagant Mechanic, who by his Improvidence has
lost his own Art, and thinks to retrieve his Misfortune by taking up that of
another Man's. This is condemned in particular persons, and to be feared in a
Community.

But it will be said, there is not Employment for the Hands of the Nation in
the Woollen Manufactory: and since Linen carries away so much of our Money, it
seems the Interest of the Nation to employ idle Hands in that which will keep
Money in the Kingdom.

Now tho both these Assertions have too much Truth in them* yet neither of them
have Weight enough to enforce the Conclusion, that the Linen Manufactory is
the only Remedy. If we search into the Bottom of our Distemper we shall find
another Cause of our Disease.

It is not because there is less Woollen Manufactory used in the World than
formerly, that our Trade declines, nor yet because we make more than formerly;
for it is demonstrable, that from the year 1673 to the year 1680, there was
much more Wool wrought up in England, than in eleven years since: Nor is it
altogether to be assigned to the present War; for that our Trade decayed in the
latter part of King Charles the Second, and all the Reign of the late King. The
Reasons then for our Decay in the Woollen Manufactory seem to be these.

1. The Growth of course Woollen Manufactory in Germany, with which the
Venetians trade to Turkey.

2. The Prohibition of our Woollen Manufactory into France.

3. The Increase of the Woollen Manufactory by our Neighbors with the help of
our Wool, so that in some things they outdo us in the price they can sell at.

4. By the great Wear of East India, and other Silks, and the use of Calicoes,
which was formerly supplied by our Tammies and Says.

5. The want of the Consumption of Ireland, which abated all the Reign of the
late King.

There is yet a Cause as valid as any of the former, which for some Reasons I
forbear to mention.

Now to me it seems possible to Counterpoise all these, and to retrieve our
Manufactory, and that by two ways.

First, By preventing the Transporting of Wool, which if done, the French and
others, that now furnish Markets abroad, would not be able to supply their own
Expense.

It may be thought a vain Assertion, after all Attempts that have been made to
prevent the Exportation of our Wool, to say there is yet a way that may
effectually do it. Yet I am morally sure it may be done both in England and
Ireland; and if this were done, there is another thing that might oblige the
French, when there is a Peace, to take off their Prohibitions on our
Manufactory.

The other way to bring our Woollen Manufactories into esteem abroad, is, to
make them so cheap as to undersell the German Coarse Manufactories; and that
may be done with ease, which I can make out upon occasion.

These two things if practicable, as I persuade my self they are, will set the
Woollen Manufactory on so good a Foot, as together with a Consumption, not yet
practiced in England, will find Employment for the meanest Hand in England. So
that there will be rather Want than Superfluity of Hands in the Woollen
Manufactory.

Now if there be any thing in all I have said, it seems reasonable to consider
well, before the Nation gives up its Staple and long continued Trade for a
Shadow, as I take the Linen Manufactory to be: for although I believe it can
never come to effect, yet so far it may go as to injure that of the Woollen, by
diverting some that are now in i^, and so raise the price of Spinning, than
which nothing can be more prejudicial; for as I mentioned before, nothing can
retrieve our lost Trade abroad, but underselling our Competitors: so then we
must labor to make ours as cheap as we can, and not set up another
Manufactory, to bid who gives most for Spinners; a ready way to ruin the
Clothing Trade of England, but not to set up the Linen, which whenever it
thrives must have a better way than the Methods the Company takes.

But because some pretend this Company may be of good use to the Nation in
laying a Foundation for a Linen Manufactory, for Argument sake allow it does
take. Let us consider, beside what has been said before of injuring the
Woollen Manufactory, how it will affect the Kingdom in the two Pillars that
support it, that of the Rents of Land, and the employing our Ships and Men at
Sea, which are thought the Walls of the Nation.

For the Rents of Land they must certainly fall, for that one Acre of Flax will
employ as many Hands the year round, as the Wool of Sheep that graze twenty
Acres of Ground. The Linen Manufactory imploys few Men, the Woollen most,
Weaving, Combing, Dressing, Shearing, Dying, etc. These Eat and Drink more than
Women and Children; and so as the Land that the Sheep graze on raises the
Rent, so will the Arable and Pasture that bears Corn, and breeds Cattle for
their Subsistence.

Then for the Employment of our Shipping, it will never be pretended that we
can arrive to Exportation of Linen; there are others and too many before us in
that: and the Truth is, he that cannot thrive at his own Trade, will hardly in
that of another Man's. If we are beat out of our Inheritance the Woollen
Manufactory, by Foreigners, over whom we have such Advantages in our Wool,
Fullers-Earth, and long continuance in the Trade, it can be nothing less than a
Miracle for us to take from them their Linen Manufactory, in which they have
so much the Ascendant over us.

I shall end this part of my Discourse with the answer of a West Country Man to
his Neighbor, that asked what Voyage he had made in a Fishing at New
Found-Land that proved not good, I have made, said he, a brave Voyage, as you
may guess, for I have sold my Bible and bought a Tobacco-Box. Would it not be
so to this Nation, if they should change the Noblest Manufactory in the World,
for the poorest, and most despicable? So are those People in all parts of the
World that are Employed in the Linen Manufactory, which only thrives where the
Country is crowded with Poor, and Bread not to be had at the charge of the
Parish; where the Tenant is but a Vassal to his Lord, and there is no power in
any to relieve, but in the Lord, who is a stranger to the practice.

It is a mistake in them that believe the Linen Manufactory in Holland to be
the Product of their own Country: it is only the easy part, that of Weaving
and Whit'ning, most of their Thread comes from Saxony, where there is both Laws
and Necessity for Industry; both of which, one as the blessing of God, the
other by the impunity of our Government, this Kingdom is free from. And thus
you have my Opinion and Grounds for it, that if it were possible to raise a
Linen Manufactory, it is not profitable to the Kingdom, but of most dangerous
Consequence to put that in the Heads of the Poor, that may alter the Employment
of their Hands. I know some Countries where they would have ill Entertainment
that should on any pretense change the Hands of the People; and this at least
gives a pretense to the Spinners of Woollen to stand on their terms with their
Masters.

I now come to your third Enquiry; My Opinion of the Company for the Linen
Manufactory of Ireland, and for that I have the same value as for this of
England, but for different Causes, and they are these:

First, Though it must be allowed that Ireland, every thing being considered,
is the aptest part of the World for a Linen Manufactory; yet under its present
Misfortunes I cannot see how it can be great in it, and that which may be set
going in the Kingdom toward so good a Work, a Company seems the ready way to
blast; for at the first Planting of a Country (and as Ireland now stands, so it
must be considered) every Man comes with his design in his Head, some perhaps
with a little Money in their Pockets, lay a Scheme for making Linen Cloth; they
intend to settle themselves where they may find most Spinners, and spend their
time in Riding the Country round to encourage them, and buy up the Linen Yarn.
These Undertakers have their Friends and Partners in England, to whom they send
over their Linen, and have back in Returns Tobacco, (for by the way it is to
be noted they of Ireland are forbidden any but what comes directly from
England) Hops, and English Manufactories. This now is a Trade and probable
encouragement to make a growing Manufactory that England may gain by, and this
way was begun in the latter end of Charles the Second's Reign with hopeful
success. But here these honest Men will meet with an invincible Enemy, with
their Standard the Broad Seal set up, giving notice that they are the Men that
will encourage and set on foot the Linen Manufactory; and this being
Proclaimed puts an end to our several English Undertakers, and Foreign supplies
of Poor that might be drawn to Ireland by the Encouragement of a Universal
Freedom and Liberty, in setting up the Linen Manufactory. But however a
Company may operate to the driving out the poor that are already in that
Business of Linen I know not, but sure I am there is Experience of other
Places that Companies keep out new Stores.

But the Company will tell you, they hinder none from working or buying Linen;
this would not be believed, if they had not the Broad Seal to tell us so. They
are the first Men I ever heard of that were at the Charge of passing a Patent,
only to tell us, they intended to do no Body wrong, nor proceed in the Trade
they incorporate themselves in; whatever Belief the first part of their
Declaration may gain, I leave the Squires of the Company (I mean those that pay
the Reckoning) to judge: but for the last part, that they intend not to proceed
in the Trade most believe, and yet they equally do Mischief, as if they did;
since in the Opinion of the World these Men that incorporate get great
Privileges, great Men to head them, and of their Fraternity, raise great Sums
of Money of one half of the Company to be admitted in with those that pay
nothing but a Trifle for a Pretense. I say all this gives Ground for honest Men
that know not the Original Design, to believe that they intended to do as much
mischief as they have power for: that is, proceed in buying Linen Yarn, etc.

2. As the time is most improper for setting up a Linen Manufactory in
Ireland, so are the Methods and Constitutions of Companies in Ireland
destructive to both Kingdoms.

Ireland I take to stand in its Relation to England much in the same Nature
with our Foreign Plantations, and might be made more beneficial than them all.
But if Ireland be at first setting out, after this late Devastation, begun with
Companies that will, as I said before, be a Bar to the peopling that Kingdom
with Foreign Protestants, and Ireland can never be safe whilst the Irish so
overbalance the English, as they do to this day. So then there seems Reason
to preserve Ireland, as a Foreign Plantation, from the implacable Enemy of
England the Irish, but Companies in Trade will hinder New-comers, and that
makes for the Irish; this is against the Security of England.

The next thing Ireland may be considered in, is how it stands as a Foreign
Plantation to England in point of its Trade, and Consumption of our Woollen,
Iron, and other Manufactories; and in that, by an Account I have seen, it
exceeds all the West India Plantations, as also in that of our Natural Product,
Corn, Hops, Salt, etc.

Now then, that which hinders the Increase of People (and that does Companies)
abates the Consumption of the Product of England in Ireland.

We will next consider Ireland in its Natural and Artificial Product as a
Foreign Plantation, and as such how we should use it. I have before mentioned
how they consume our Product, we will now see what becomes of theirs, and in
that we use them as Foreign Plantations, prescribing them Rules, Methods, and
Prohibitions in some of their Commodities, as their Wool, Linen, Yarn, etc.
we oblige them to send no where but to England; and if they be kept to it in
their Wool, as I am sure they may, England would find it wants, not abounds in
Wool, for the seeming Excess of Wool in England is not because we have too
much from Ireland, but because we have not all, for one pound of their Wool
works up ten of Foreign, and that enables them in their Manufactories abroad,
to furnish the Trade we formerly had entire to our selves. But to return, as we
prescribe Rules to Ireland what they shall send here, so we do what they shall
send to other parts; to our Foreign Plantations they may not send any
Manufactories, but have Liberty to send their Provisions, Servants and Horses;
and as we confine what, how, and where they may export, so we do in many things
their Imports; that they shall import none of our Foreign Plantation
Commodities from thence direct, but all from England. After all this it may be
thought Ireland is so entirely a Plantation of England, that it may deserve the
Care of the Nation, to people that Kingdom, but the Noise of Companies will
keep out Planters, and therefore to be suppressed.

If any should presume to set up a Grant that might keep out People from the
Foreign Plantations, it may be presumed the Government would lay its Hands on
such mistaken Grants; this of the Linen Manufactory is such, it will keep out
People disposed to that Manufactory, for such love to have Choice of Masters.

Therefore we never see Companies set up in our Foreign Plantations, every Man
is Master of his own Invention, Labor and Designs; so it seems the Interest of
England as well as Ireland to have the like Freedom there; for if Companies are
once admitted in Ireland, it is not the Subjects of either Kingdom shall be
Masters of them; there are those in the World that know how to use such
Advantages better than we do; and with their Money will soon purchase the
Ruling Shares, especially when the Grant is designed for selling, not trading
Shares, and being so bought, the Purchasers have Authority to set up a
Joint Stock, can sue, and must be sued as a Body Politic with all the other
Privileges usual in such Grants. Being thus established, they shall ingross all
the Trade in the Kingdom, let their Company be called what you please, and
these Men may live in what part of the World they think fit, and govern the
Trade of Ireland by their Factors, tho the Company bears the Name only of the
Linen Manufactory.

And however the Generality of Men see not the hidden Mysteries and Influences
Companies have in Trade, yet Merchants and Handicrafts do; and that is the
Reason I find those of Ireland give, why that wonderful Statute, (for such I
take it to be) which gives greater Privileges to Foreigners than native
Subjects, had no Effect, brought not ten Families, some say not one into
Ireland, and all because Men love not Enclosures in Trade, tho they may be in
them themselves; for by the Statute before mentioned, any Foreign Protestant
that would settle in Ireland, might upon his demand, taking the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy before any Justice of Peace, be made free of any City,
Trade or Company in the Kingdom, paying twenty shillings, and was also by the
same Statute declared, and was naturalized. But all this would not do whilst
there were Companies in the Kingdom, tho they are not of so appropriate a
Constitution as this of the Linen Manufactory and all Companies of Joint
Stocks are.

I now come to show how in particular the Company for a Linen Manufactory in
Ireland will affect England.

1. It will prejudice England in its Manufactories of Fustian, Tapes and
Manchester Ware, much of which are made by the Linen Yarn of Ireland.

Now tho this Company cannot promote a Linen Manufactory in Ireland, yet they
may, and if they design any thing, it must be that, ingross the Linen Yarn in
the North of Ireland, which was formerly sent to England, and employed as
aforesaid, the want of which or setting a price upon it, must be of prejudice
to the Manufactories of England, with some other Disadvantages that would swell
this Discourse here to mention.

2. If this Company should prevail, of which there is no reason to fear, they
by their Compact made with the Company here, have agreed that all the Linen of
Ireland shall be sold by the Company here, so then the People of England must
pay for their Linen what they please, and that which is yet worse, the Linen
and Linen Yarn, that hitherto has been purchased by the Manufactories and
Commodities of England, the Company will be paid for in Money: And then where
is the Difference to have it from France or Ireland? Nor will the Company's
selling for Money be an Advantage to Ireland, but to the contrary enable the
Company to impose on the Kingdom what Goods, and at what Rates they please,
when they have beat out the numerous Chapmen that use daily the Irish Trade:
even the Farmers of the West of England would come for Ireland with their Hops,
Cider, etc. and so the English of Ireland, who are our Bone and our Flesh,
dealt with us as Brethren, but it will not be so when the Trade of Ireland is
managed by Foreigners in Companies as it seems now designed.

3. The admitting this Company for Linen Manufactory will be a President for
the same in all other Trades, and Employments of the Kingdom. It is said there
is a Patent now passing for the Fishing of Ireland, there may with as much
Reason be another for Plowing.

And why not some public spirited Projector have a Patent for a more excellent
way of cutting Turf, a Fuel much used in Ireland?

This way of appropriating the Trade of Ireland is happily of worse Consequence
to England, than at first sight appears. Perhaps it will not be thought a
Prejudice to England, that a Patent is granted for a Fishing in Ireland, when
it shall be in the Name of Men of England. But when this Patent is transferred
to Foreigners, and they with their Men and Ships manage this Fishing, what will
England or Ireland get by it? Several Small-Crafts that use to come from
England to the West of Ireland will be beat out of their Trade, and in
conclusion Ireland made a Province for Trade to any Foreigners that will buy
from our projecting Patentees.

As I said before, Ireland is no more than one of our Foreign Plantations, only
I think it will be allowed the first place, and more than any other in nearness
of Blood, and that of our Nobles, there being many Familes in that Kingdom
descended from the ancient Families of this, and most of the Estates in Ireland
held by the Descent from our Brethren, who purchased it with their Blood. These
Reflections may prevail for our Care of them, at least equally to any Colony
abroad; and we never think it our prejudice to have them thrive, nor would the
Growth of Ireland, if rightly disposed or understood. And here give me leave to
make a Digression, if it may be called so, but you may think it not foreign to
the Discourse.

I find it generally believed, that Ireland is as mischievous to our Trade in
time of Peace, as it is destructive to our Men and Treasure in time of War. And
tho this Opinion never went far with me, yet something I did doubt was in it,
until I met with that which gave plain Demonstration to the contrary, and it
was this.

I fell into an entire acquaintance with a Gentleman of Ireland, whose
Experience, and long Continuance in all the Foreign Trade of that Kingdom,
furnished him with Arguments I could not answer, to prove that England was a
great Gainer by the Trade of Ireland. When I could not confute him, nor he
prevail with me, he told me he would show me that which carried Authority with
it, and so he did; being, as he assured me, the Work of some years, as he could
spare time to compose it. The whole Discourse takes up many Sheets, upon the
Trade of Ireland to all parts, and particular Remarks upon every Commodity
exported and imported into that Kingdom, and where, and how it affects England.
Some other things he reserved as Secrets from me, as he does the rest to
others; for it was never seen by any but one beside my self. Out of the whole
he has extracted an exact Account of the Exports and Imports for one year in a
Medium out of six; and then distinguished what related to England, by what
Ships brought in, and out; then computed the Value of each Commodity, and to
what they were improved being manufactored in England; and then what Money in
Specie, or Bills of Exchange, which is the same, was returned from Foreign
Parts to England out of the Proceed of Goods sent from Ireland, all which being
brought to a Sum, it appeared, that England gained by Ireland more than two
Millions Sterling per annum. It seemed to me an incredible thing, but being, as
he affirms, Matter of Fact, for which he has the Account of the Customs, it is
not to be denied, the Breviat is drawn in so plain and intelligible a Method as
renders it easy to any Understanding, and therefore to mine: I would fain have
prevailed with him to Print the whole Matter, but he thinks it may be made
better use of another way; and affirms, that as great as this looks, yet it
might be improved to much more, if the Trade of Ireland were disposed, as it
might be, to the Advantage of England. But he said that Kingdom was in no
Reign, since the first Conquest of Ireland, consulted in its Trade, but left to
its self, or treated like an Enemy, all the use made of it was, for Courtiers,
Men of Projection and Necessity, to traffic, and dispose it into Grants,
Employments, and Offices, and so made it rather a Forest for Game, than a
Plantation of Trade and Commerce; and that which continued it so in the Reign
of Charles the Second, was the Jealousies and Mistakes of England, believing it
grew too fast, and incroached on their Trade, tho it is demonstrable, Ireland
does us no hurt, but where we by our own Laws force it; and that act, pardon
the Expression, like Lunaticks that strive to suppress their Shadows, for fear
they should assault them.

None will say England would be the worse, if it were double the Acres it now
is, and tho the Sea part us from Ireland, may not Laws make us one, in our
Interest and Trade, and so that Ireland may be more profitable to England in
general, than Wales or any County in England is to the whole in its proportion?
There never was so fair an Opportunity for enriching this Nation by Ireland as
now; it is by Divine Providence once more put a Blank in our Hands, in which
his Majesty may stamp what he pleases: and we have Reason to believe, that he
who ventures His Royal Person so freely for the Preservation of these Kingdoms,
will not deny us any thing that can contribute to our Growth in Trade and
Treasure. One thing I must not omit, which I had from this Gentleman of
Ireland, that to me seems valid for Confirmation of all he asserts: That
Ireland neither insures nor gains on England; for that in the last twenty years
of Ireland's greatest Prosperity, not one Man of England purchased in Ireland,
but numbers of Ireland have in that time purchased in England; as they of that
Kingdom, I mean the English always do, as they increase their Fortunes. This
being so, Ireland is to England a Mine of Treasure, and affects us, tho in a
much larger Proportion, as Newfoundland, and Hudson's Bay, whatever is gained
in them terminates in England.

I shall close this Discourse with the Complaint I have heard from the
Generality of Merchants, that when all the Governments of Europe have for more
than twenty years past been consulting their Interest in Trade, and how they
might improve it, we of England make no Provision for ours, but leave it to the
Ravage of Strangers, and the worse Confusions of an ungoverned Multitude in
Trade, whereas, if we had a Council of Trade composed of Merchants from all
parts of the Kingdom, set apart for searching into the several Practices of
Trade, and Miscarriages therein, England would have grown beyond any part of
the World in Trade, and Navigation, and might thereby have prevented the
wonderful Rise of France; whose prodigious Advance in Navigation and Commerce
is assigned to the Experience and Conduct of Colebert that was originally bred
a Merchant, of whom it is said, that when he was prime Minister of France, he
would say he did his Master better Service in a Committee of Merchants, than at
the Council Board. We have much greater Funds for Trade than France can pretend
to; and tho we may want Coleberts, yet lesser Men, with greater Helps than he
had, might at least retrieve, if not increase our lost Trade, which in several
Branches are decayed almost to a total Loss: as that of Muscovy, Greenland,
Newfoundland, and others.

And if Fame be true, we are in the ready way to lose what we have left, the
Exchange being filled with Projects, Wagers, Stock Jobbing, upon imagnary
Wrecks, Pharee Companies of Manufactories, etc. all which bode ill, and is a
Green Sickness in Trade; when Men are taken up with Rubbish, like Maids feeding
on Chalk, and Cinders, rejecting wholesome Food. This Evil looks like a
spreading Leprosy over the Nation, when Merchants and Tradesmen live like
Gamesters on the Spoil of each other, setting up Projects instead of
Merchandise, which cunning Men cut into Shares, and so manage their Designs, as
to fix their Ignis fatuus at last on innocent and well meaning Men, to the Ruin
of them and their Families. I name not Men or Things to avoid Reflections; but
wish those that are faulty in this matter would consider, that such Artifices,
however the Hand of Justice in this World cannot reach, yet the Cries of Widows
and Fatherless ascend a Tribunal that brings all things to Judgment. Those
Frauds are of a new Stamp, not known in former Ages, and therefore want a Law
to restrain them: which, it is hoped, the Great Council of the Nation will look
into, and that there may never more appear amongst us any of these Sirens, that
a Council of Trade may be the standing Probationers of all new Inventions, and
Expedients for Trade, that so Quacks in Trade may be suppressed, and honest
Industry and ingenuous Discoveries encouraged.

By which means a Stop may be put to those Men, who like Cadmus's Serpents
Teeth sowed in the Ground, bring up Men in Armor killing one another: I wish
the Moral prove not truer than the Fable, we see Losses between private Men in
Gaming often end in Blood; and National Gaming, Projects and Deceits, with
Wagers on the Success of Companies, taking Cities, and Success of Monarchs,
must needs alienate the Affections of the Subject one from the other, and some
from the King. This to me seems not an accidental Misfortune, but an Artifice
of France, to raise Divisions amongst us, and bring our Trade to Confusion; for
the French have as well Jesuits in Trade, as in Religion, to distract us. But
we have not such invincible Champions for the first, as blessed be God we have
for the latter: In my weak Judgment and Reflection on the present Condition of
this Nation, nothing has a worse Aspect than the Trade, Navigation, and
Manufactories of it, and all for want of public Spirited Men, that would, like
our Ancestors, who whatever they were at home, every Man, when in Parliament,
was no less than a County, or Borough, and spoke not himself, but them. If
this Bravery of Mind were in our Senators now, the Commerce of England would
not look like a Scramble, for want of due Regulation; which cannot properly be
without Men of practical Heads in Trade appropriated to the Work; nor is the
present War a valid Pretext for the Neglect, since there seems as much Reason
to provide for Trade in Time of War against Times of Peace, as there is for
Armies in Time of Peace against a Time of War, which God in his due time put an
End unto.

FINIS.
SOME Considerations: Humbly Offered to Demonstrate How prejudicial it would be
to the English Plantations, Revenues of the Crown, the Navigation and general
Good of this Kingdom, that the sole Trade for Negroes should be granted to a
Company with a Joynt-Stock exclusive to all others.
THe great and unspeakable Advantage the West India Plantations are to England,
is so well known, that it needs no demonstration to prove it. The only thing
Necessary, is to endeavor to improve and increase this mighty advantageous
Trade, by securing them from the Insults of their Enemies, and enabling them to
make larger quantities of the Commodities of those Colonies.

Now the means most conducive thereunto will be to make the Trade to Africa
open and free for all the Native Subjects of England, which Trade for Slaves is
chiefly from Acra to Angola, and contains about 1200 Miles Sea-cost, in which
extent the present Affrican Company have neither Fort, Castle, nor Factory; so
that they have not the least color for a Pretense to an exclusive Right of
Trade into those Parts.

It is well known, that the Riches of the Plantations consists in Slaves
chiefly, by whose strength and labor all their Commodities, as Tobacco, Sugar,
Cotton, Indigo, Ginger, etc. are produced; and the more Slaves those
Plantations are supplied with, the more Commodities are made, and the stronger
they are to defend themselves against any Insults. Neither can there be any
more danger of being over-stockt with Negroes, than there is that too much
Tobacco, Sugar, etc. should be sent to England; for it is a plain consequence,
the more Negroes the more Goods will be produced, the more Goods the more
Custom paid, and all those Commodities rendered here at home so cheap as will
enable this Nation to send them abroad cheap also. to the great discouraging of
the Plantation-Trade of all other Nations. Wherefore it is very plain, that a
large supply of Negroes will not only bring great Riches to this Kingdom, but
will also greatly Increase our Navigation.

Whereas on the contrary, should the Affrican Trade be enclosed, and confined
to the Wills and Powers of a Company, the consequence would prove as fatal to
the Plantations as a Power given to one Person in England to supply the
Gardners with Servants, and the Farmers and Carriers with Horses: It is not to
be doubted that the one would be constrained to pay yearly for his Servants as
much as his Years product would amount to, and the other for his Team as much
as the Rent of his Farm, which would prove great Discouragements to their
Labor and Industry. This may we reasonably suppose would be the Case of the
Planters in the West Indies, were there but one Person that must supply them
with Slaves, they being so extremely Necessary, that it is impossible to live
without them, every Man being rich or poor according to his Stock in Slaves. A
Man that may be Proprietor of 10000 Acres of Land, would still be poor had he
no stock of Negroes to employ upon it.

It might be fairly Objected, That the present Affrican Company have carried on
their Trade but very imperfectly as to their own Advantage, (notwithstanding
that was all the Design they aimed at) as may be plainly proved from the Care
they have taken to supply all the Plantatitions, it being very well known that
they have not for these 20 Years or more sent one Ships-loading of Negroes to
Virginia nor Maryland, which are two very large Countries, and capable of
making twice as much Tobacco as they now do, were they but well supplied with
Negroes.

Every Negro that is sent into those Plantations, makes as much Tobacco yearly
as pays from 30 l. to 40 l. Sterling. Custom, but the Company think that is not
material to their Stock: They understand the People are generally poor, and
therefore will not venture to trust them; whereas at the same time private Men
have, (though with the hazard of being seized by the Companies Agents) and had it
not been for that Supply those Countries had been in a much worse Condition
than at present they are.

To further demonstrate what before is hinted at, that the Company have no
Forts, Castles nor Factories from Acra to Angola, nor do they suppose them
necessary to carry on the Slave Trade, is plainly proved from their own
Practice and Management of that Trade, for when they design a Ship to trade for
Slaves, they put a Lee-ward Cargo (as they term it) on board the Ship, and give
the Master or the chief Officer of the Ship full power to dispose, barter and
sell the said Cargo for their Accounts, allowing them a Commission of 4 per
Cent. for disposing of the said Cargo, taking on board the Negroes, and
delivering them to their Factors in the Plantations, who have usually been the
Governors of those Places, who have disposed of the Negroes not always to the
poor Planters liking, but necessity has no law, so must submit to the Will and
Pleasure of their Superiors.

Now this great and growing Evil can only be prevented by permitting more
Sellers of Negroes than one, wherefore since it is evidently demonstrable, that
it is no charge to carry on and manage the Slave Trade, and of what great
Concern it is to encourage and support the English Plantations, whereby the
Navigation of the Kingdom, Revennues of the Crown, and the General Good of this
Narion is so much advanced, therefore it is humbly hoped that the Trade from
Acra to Angola inclusive may be henceforth judged and allowed to be free and
open for all the Subjects of this Kingdom.

A LETTER From a MEMBER of the Parliament of Scotland To his Friend at LONDON,
Concerning their late ACT, for Establishing a Company of that Kingdom, Tradeing
to Africa and the Indies.
SIR,
THE Account you give me by your last, of the various Shapes into which some
Persons at London have Transformed our late Act of Parliament, for Establishing
a Company Tradeing to Africa and the Indies, and their representing it under so
many several Colors, to those of different Capacities and Affections, puts me
in mind of the Shepherd, who, ambitious to be thought Weatherwise, never failed
with an air of Gravity, to publish his pretended Revelations of the ensuing
Weather, in various and quite contrary manners to his several Profelites,
thereby securing to himself certain Evidences in all Weathers that could
happen, if any should dare to call the Infallibility of his Predictions into
question. And really, The exact Idea you give me of the manner in which these
Persons seem to busy themselves in other Men's Affairs, affords me matter
sufficient to renew my Speculation, concerning the precarious Nature of all
Mankind, in point of Interest; and by Retrospection into some Transactions of
this and the last Age, I am induced to trouble you with the following Narrative
of some Observations naturally arising from the same, which to me seem directly
to point at the Temper, Inclination, and real Interest of all BRITAIN: But
before I launch into so wide an Ocean, I cannot forbear expressing the
Satisfaction I have in Reflecting, That the whole Representatives of a Nation
so little experienced in Trade, as ours, should with so unanimous a Voice
(Nemine contradicente) agree to such Measures and Foundation of Trade, as now
seem worth the Notice of so great a People as our Neighboring Nation; and my
Satisfaction therein is still the more exalted, by finding in your Account,
That the most Sober and Tradeing People of that Kingdom, are so far from
conceiving any disgust at, or dislike to it, that they generally express an
Inclination to be concerned in it: Excepting (as you observe) a few who (every
body knows) are preingaged to a dear Self-monopolising Interest, together with
some few others, whose Instructions from a Foreign Court must in all
probability oblige them to lay hold of any seeming Opportunity for blowing the
Coal of Sedition in this Island, that they may fish in troubled Waters: And as
a little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, you must always expect to find such
Persons very vigilant, by their Emissaries, to amuse the Unthinking Crowd with
groundless Apparitions; and by a more industrious Artifice, have their
designing Insinuations buz'd into the Ears of some great Ministers, who, having
the bent of their Thoughts employed about Matters of State and Government,
suitable to the great Sphere in which they move, may possibly, through want of
Time, consider this Matter no further than by a bare superficial View of such
fallacious Positions as may probably, by Prepossession, be dogmatically
obtruded upon them, to serve private Ends, though masked under the specious
Pretenses of a National Concern. Wherefore, I hope those worthy Gentlemen at
London, who are concerned in this Company, will endeavor to anticipate any
evil Effect of these or the like Mis-representations and groundless Suggestions
mentioned in your Letter, by obviating the Fallacy of such noisie Arguments as
(you say) are daily with an Air of Magisterial Stiffness dictated at
Garraways, and from thence diffused amongst the credulous Multitude; which,
whenever impartially examined and considered, will doubtless appear to have
no other Merit at bottom, than a Noose of Sophistry to catch Woodcocks in. For
there was never any Constitution of Trade concerted by any Free Kingdom, State
or Commonwealth in Europe, with greater regard to the Constitutions and
Privileges of all other Nations in Amity with His Majesty, than this has been:
yea, should we have had a Committee of English Merchants to Examine and Report
our Proceedings while we were Passing this ACT, they could not possibly have
been more nicely tender of Encroaching upon, or Interferring with the English
Immunities, either Abroad or at Home, than we have been. And in regard that
Pyracy, Hostility, and all manner of violent Force, is not only inconsistent
with, but diametrically opposite to the natural Laws and Institutions of Trade,
we have, in the Body of this ACT, precluded the Company from Acting or Settling
in the very Indies, without Consent of the Natives. And, in short, we had then
the Law of Nations so immediately under our Consideration, that it was thought
by the most Precautious of our Assembly, we had left no room for so much as a
possibility of Cavilling. But there is none so blind as they who will not see;
and by what you write, I find, had there been any thing in our Act that could
not bear the Trial of the strictest Enquiry on the aforesaid Heads, it had
certainly been long e're now ripped up and printed in Capital Letters by those
who were at the Trouble and Expense of Reprinting the Act at London in several
shapes, and under a new Title of their own framing, of design to adapt it more
properly to the Notion of Rivalship and Emulation, which (you say) they so
industriously preach in Coffeehouses.

Obj. Oh! but (say they,) Though there be nothing in the Act that at present may
seem to interferr with, yet in the Consequence it may prove pernicious to the
Interest of England.

In Answer to which, give me leave to observe, That as this Act was calculated
for a Common and Public Good; so though it be a received and standing Maxim,
That No Evil is to be done, that Good may come of it; yet no reasonable Man
will urge from thence the Alternative, That we ought to forbear doing an
apparent Public Good, because of a remote possibility of an imaginary Evil
Consequence.

And before I step further, pray let us take a short View of what Prospect
there may be of this bug-bearing Consequence. Why, truly Scotland proposes an
Advantage by Foreign Trade, and leaves it at England's door to accept or
refuse, being concerned for one Moiety of all the Profits, Emoluments and
Advantages arising from such Trade; and by the bye, England's embracing that
Offer, seems to me an auspicious Prognostic of future Success. Now, should we
happen to be frustrate in our Expectation by this Trade, then all the vain
Jealousies of Rivalship and Competition fall of course. But if it should (as I
hope it may) answer our Wishes, by a plentiful and prosperous Harvest, in
return to our Honest and Infant-Undertaking, England, sure, would be mightily
hurt, to reap One Half of all the Profits thereof; which I pray God may prove
the happy Consequence, so much feared by your Monopoly-men.

Yet all this (you say) cannot please them that are resolved to be implacable;
for that there are a certain sort of such good-natured Christians in the World,
as would choose rather to lose a certain Benefit and Advantage to themselves,
than endure the very thoughts of seeing their Neighbors in any tolerable
degree of equal Prosperity. In allusion to which, it is no new thing to tell
you, That ever since the Reformation of Religion, the Jesuits, in their various
shapes, have left no means unessayed, to propogate the several Sects and
Schisms which, during the last Age, have, like a general Contagion, overspread
this Island, and undoubtedly gave the first rise to all the sad Catastrophe and
dismal Consequences of the late bloody Civil Wars. And even so, since the Union
of both Kingdoms under one Monarchy, we have too too manifest and pregnant
Proof of how far the Matchevilian Maxims of Policy have, by the means of French
Pensioners and Emissaries, gained credit enough at the Court of England, to
improve the Remnants and Dregs of the ancient Feuds of both Kingdoms into an
almost avowed Reason of State (though a much mistaken one) That it was the
Interest of England, to suppress and keep Scotland poor. Which was indeed
chiefly intended and contrived with design to leave England in the lurch, and
carry on the real Interest of France, where this Maxim had its birth, by
regaining Scotland into their ancient League.

For the Sting and hidden Poison of the Serpent lay in this, That the People of
Scotland, from the natural consideration they must needs have of any severe
Treatment, or unreasonable and intolerable Exactions imposed upon them by
their domineering Neighbors, might in time be tempted, like the Israelites in
the Wilderness, to murmur and look back into the Onions, Melons, Garlic, and
Fleshpots of their old acquaintance.

Yet by the Influence of this Jesuitical, Barbarous and Hellish Principle,
together with the general Corruption of such colleaguing and self-designing
Ministers as have (to the grief of these Nations) been at the Helm of Affairs
during those latter Reigns, this poor Nation in particular has been most
unmercifully crampt and fettered in its natural Liberties, both as to Religion,
Property, Trade, and indeed, all the real Badges of a Free and independent
Kingdom, other than in shadow; till the late Providential and Happy Revolution
gave us not only a fair opportunity of reassuming all our ancient Freedoms, and
natural Liberties, but also of extending the same, in point of Trade, far
beyond those Limits which some of our Neighbors seem now unwilling to allow Us.

And I would gladly offer it to the serious Consideration of any Honest,
Unbiased and Free-thinking Englishman, Whether, upon His present Majesty's
Accession to the Crown of England, when Ireland was in a manner quite lopped
off, France making mighty Preparations for War, all Europe invelop'd in almost
unquenchable Flames; and England it self, not free from Intestine Divisions,
and Bosom Enemies, who flattered themselves with the Hopes that Scotland would,
from the consideration of its being so long kept at Arm's-length, be tempted to
act by an Interest separate from that of England? Whether (I say) upon
condition of assurance then, that we would follow England's Example, in placing
the Crown of this Realm upon the Heads of our present Gracious Sovereign, and
and His late Royal Consort (of Blessed Memory,) when they feared our Demurring
upon it, England would not have willingly fulfilled, and put us in possession
of the long promised Union of both Nations; and settled the same upon such an
equal and lasting Foundation, as that we might have freedom of Trading into the
very Heart of their Plantations?

For, how little soever the apparent Proportion be, which our Nation may at
present seem to bear on the Theater of Public Action, as being in a manner
wholly eclypsed by the refulgent and radiant Beams of England's more
resplendent Greatness, I may without Hyperbole justly say, That as Matters then
stood, We had the Balance of Europe in our Hands.

Yet all the Considerations we had in view of our own particular Interest, and
the Advantages which we might have made of that Opportunity, soon gave way to
the irresistible Zeal and Affection which we had for the Restorer of the
Protestant Religion, and common Liberties of Britain. For, lest that by any
Delays in our Proceedings, the Measures of England might be protracted, We did,
in almost One Breath, Declare the Throne Vacant, our Selves a Free, Independent
State, Their Royal Highnesses King and Queen of this Realm, and war against all
Their Majesty's Enemies; as not in the least doubting, but that such our
generous and frank Proceeding, with respect to our Neighbors, at so critical a
Juncture of Affairs, might in due time reasonably plead for a grateful
Resentment from the King and Parliament of England, by an equally generous
Condescension, on their side, to our having the same freedom of Trade, by
which, but a little time before, the wisest and most leading Men of that Nation
thought it their Interest to have secured our Affection.

And that this was the sense of the Court of England at that time, needs no
further Evidence than His Majesty's two successive Speeches to both Houses of
His First Parliament; wherein the consideration of an entire Union with
Scotland was seriously recommended: In order to which, some Schemes were
prepared and consulted by certain Noble Patriots of both Nations.

But no sooner had we, in the interim, solemnly consummated, in manner
aforesaid, all that England could have either wished or feared from us on that
Occasion; but of a sudden, all thoughts of such Union fell to the ground: so
that being left to chew our Cud upon that melancholy Proverb, Post est occasio
calva, which in our Dialect may be rendered, A True Scotchman is Wise
behind-hand; our next and only Remedy was, to make the best of a bad Market. In
order to which, we then Resolved to think of framing such wholesome and
advantageous Laws for the Advancement of our poor Trade, as might not only
rouse up and animate the depressed and often-disappointed Genius of our
fellow-Natives, but also invite and enduce Strangers more experienced in Trade,
to embarque upon the same bottom with us: and to that end, We did, in the Third
Session of this current Parliament, Anno 1693, Pass a Preliminary Act,
conceived in general Terms, for the Encouragement of Foreign Trade, which you
see narrated in the beginning of this last Act: By the gracious and necessary
Concessions of which, we have a plain Demonstration, through the Virtue of
those Noble and worthy Patriots whom His Majesty's discerning Eye singled out
of the Crowd of Pretenders to the Offices of State, That our present King is
not only Pater Patriae, but Pater Patriarum; and, like the true Emblem of that
Immense Deity whose Anointed he is, diffuseth his Favors with a more
unconfined and universal Influence than any of our late Kings of Britain; Their
natural Easiness of Temper giving many fatal Opportunities to the mercenary
Ministers of those Times, both to impose on their Masters, and prey upon the
Liberties of their Fellow Subjects: whereas, our present King does not only
penetrate into what is Just, but has also a Nobleness of Soul, to execute,
with an impartial Hand, what to him seems to be so. And that the giving his
Royal Sanction to this Act, was the effect both of his Justice and Gratitude,
is plain from the natural Regard which in Reason we must needs suppose him to
have had to our frank and seasonable Services, when in themselves they were
most Valuable, and when indeed he stood most in need of them.

Obj. But (you say) the Outcry is, That these are such unprecedented
Concessions and Exceptions as never were, or ought to be granted by a Prince to
any Society or Company of Traders in the World: Ergo, --

Hah! Is the Hue and Cry got up then? I am glad of it: For certainly, the
Great, the Grave, and Wise Men of the Nation, do never join in that Chorus.

But to be more serious; It Is true, that these Concessions may seem somewhat
strange to a People whose Wealth, Capacity, Naval Strength, Foreign
Possessions, Plantations, Forts, and Universal Settlements, want no more to
carry on what Trade soever they please, than to will and to execute.

But on the other hand, if they look upon Scotland, and consider it, as in it
self it is, deficient to a degree of Extremity, in all the necessary
Qualifications of Trade above-recited; they must own of course, that nothing
less than these Concessions and Exemptions could give this New Company a
prospect of so much as a Possibility of ever grappling with such infinite and
almost insuperable Difficulties as they (and indeed, all other Beginnings) must
necessarily encounter with: so that if such Exemptions had not been granted, we
had as good have erected no Company.

And as to these Concessions being without Precedent, I will not pretend to
give an Instance of any that are exactly the same with the Privileges contained
in this Act: but if I let you see much greater, I hope that may serve the turn.
Nor to do that, need I go so far from hence, as to search into the Records of
other Nations, such as France, Holland, Denmark, and others who have given
illimited Powers, and vast Encouragements to their respective Tradeing
Companies; but even in Scotland, when we could not be presumed to have had any
great Notions of Trade about Thirty five Years past, upon the Restoration of
King Charles II. in his First Parliament, and the several Sessions thereof,
(before the French King had time to plant his Janissaries in the Court of
England,) there were several Acts Passed in favor of Trade and Manufactories,
with Privileges and Exemptions far exceeding any in this Act, with respect to
the Purposes for which they were granted, Mutatis Mutandis.

And that I may not seem to speak altogether without Book, I shall give you an
Instance of one for all; namely, the Act Passed, in the Year 1661, for the
Fishings, and Erecting of Companies for Promoting the same; which being too
long to be transcribed, I send you, by way of Postscript, a short Abstract of
the most considerable Privileges and Exemptions therein contained, as they
stand in order, in the Act it self; and all these were Granted for Perpetuity:
Whereas, all the most Important Concessions in this late Act are limited, some
to Ten, some to Twenty one Years; in which time (God knows) we must run very
fast, to come up with any of all our neighboring Nations, who have started so
long before Us.

Now let us further compare both the said Acts, and the Purposes for which they
were severally intended, and then, with respect to this last, we must think of
going we know not whither, undergo the Danger of boisterous Storms, and long
Voyages, with which we are not acquainted: tie up our Stomachs to strict,
regular, and unaccustomed Diets; prepare against the Effects of quite contrary
Climates, and there purchase Plantations, Collonies, Settlements, and build
Forts, etc. Yet as to the Time when all this will happen, he must be a wiser
Man than I, that can tell.

But as to the former Act for the Fishing, etc. all Matters thereunto relating
were to be transacted in view of our own Doors, and in our own Power. But then
you will ask me, How it came to pass, that this excellent Constitution for our
Fishings has had no better Effect? Why truly, I Will tell you, For the very same
Reason which may possibly prove the Overthrow of this New Undertaking (which
God forbid) if we have no better luck in getting honester Men at the Head of
it: For the Dutch, who have got most of their Wealth by Fishing in other Men's
Waters, looking upon us then with a jealous Eye, found a way (as it was then
believed) to grease a certain Great Man in the Fist; who thereupon embarked
himself, and all his Friends, with all his Might, on our Bottom; and who being
once at the Head of all, thwarted all, overruled all, and ruined all: For the
Honest and Well-meaning Men, finding themselves no other than Ciphers, grew
wearied, and so gave up the Cudgels.

By all which, you have a plain Demonstration and Proof, That what may do in
one Nation, will not do in another. But I Am resolved to wait with Patience, and
hope for the best: Exitus acta probat; the meaning of which is in English, The
Proof of the Pudding is in the Eating.

Obj. But then (you say,) The unanswerable and thundering Dilemma, which these
Grumblers would seem, and do actually boast, to fasten upon His Majesty, is,
That either he must retract what he has done, by some public Mark of his
Discountenancing this New Company, or otherwise he cannot in reason deny the
like Concessions to the several Tradeing Companies of England, who have so
largely contributed toward the Expense of this present War.

Answ. This is truly the most plausible Difficulty of all that is offered, and
such a Noose as may readily catch Larks, but will never gravel the judicious
part of Mankind more than any of the former, as being all of one piece. The
better to obviate which, I shall give you a plain, easy, just and adequate
Parallel in the like Case. As for Example: Supposing me Lord of a considerable
Manor producing abundance of Corn, Hay, Fruit, and having all the marks of a
fertile and well-cultivated Soil, which I have Let to Farm for a certain
Annual or Yearly Rent; which Rent I have, by Contract of Marriage, appropriated
to the Payment of my Wife's Jointure: in the interim, there comes to me an
Undertaker, with a Proposal, That whereas I am also Proprietor of a certain
piece of unprofitable, waste Ground, together with some Acres of Land quite
under Water, both which yield me no Rent; he will engage, at his own Hazard,
Labor and Expense, to cultivate the one, and drain the other, providing I
grant him a Lease thereof free of all Rent for Twenty one Years; to which I
readily and reasonably assent, as foreseeing the Advantage that must thereby
accrue, if not to my self immediately, yet to my Heirs and Successors. Upon the
executing of which Lease, should he who Farmed my Principal Manor in manner
aforesaid, come and tax me of being an exacting and partial Landlord, if I
would not also let him sit Rent-free, as well as his new Neighbour-Undertaker;
Pray, what Regard do you think I ought to observe to any Demand that were
grounded only upon such a Reason? The Application whereof is so easy and
natural, that it were calling your Judgment into question, to expatiate any
more upon that Head: Yet lest you may say that omne simile est dissimile, and
think this to be only an indirect Answer to all the Parts of your Objection, I
shall touch them severally.

And, First, As to any public Mark of His Majesty's Discountenance to this New
Company, which would be the doing and undoing of a thing with the same breath,
is so tender a Point, that the very Thoughts of it is attacking and wounding
His Majesty, at once, in two of his most peculiar Attributes, Wisdom in
Council, and Stedfastness of Resolution.

Then as to what Concessions may be advisable to be given to all or any of the
Tradeing Companies of England, I must suspend my weak Judgment therein, the
King, and ensuing Parliament, being the only proper Judges thereof; only thus
far I Will venture to judge, That whoever audaciously dare pretend to anticipate
the Sense of so Great and August an Assembly, by Dictating in Coffee-houses
what his Arrogance thinks, forsooth, they ought to do, may likewise think
himself well come off at last, if he escape with only a Reprimand.

And then as to the last Branch of the Objection, which seems to point at, our
not contributing, so largely as they have, toward the Expense of the War; let
us consider, whether they think Us equally concerned? and whether We may expect
a proportionable share of the Glory and Advantage? If not, then we are but
Auxiliaries, and ought not to undergo any narrow scrutiny on that head: For, A
given Horse ought not to be examined in the Mouth.

But supposing (as indeed I think) We are equally concerned in the same Common
Cause; it must be confessed, That we cannot boast of any great store of Wealth,
(for which we may partly thank those Familiar Spirits of France, who by a
Legerdemain Trick of Hocus Pocus, have too often assumed the shapes of
Court-Cards, in the most considerable Games which have (till of late Years)
been played on the English Stage;) yet, in Proportion to what our Strength was,
in any tolerable measure, able to bear, we have always signified our good
Inclination, by giving such Supplies, from time to time, as have not only
raised very considerable Numbers of excellent Troops, but also Maintained the
same, till called out of the Nation by His Majesty, and then we successively
raised others, to be a constant Nursery for the English Army. This was all we
could do; and could we have done more, we stood in need of no Spurr to do it:
The Widow's Mite in the Gospel was more acceptable to Our Savior, than all the
large Offerings of those who gave only out of the Abundance of their
Superfluities: Of them to whom much has been given, much shall be required.
And if His Majesty should question us upon this head, we can justly answer him
with a Scripture Phrase, Silver and Gold have we none; but such as we have, we
give unto him. True Hearts, and Valiant Hands; Brave Trusty Lads, armed with
Natural Buff, who dare encounter Fire and Smoke, and whose Undaunted Resolution
and Valor, upon all Occasions of Trial, have, to the Diminution of their
Number, given at least some small Addition to the Advancing Glory of the
English Arms: which if we had not given, an equal Number of equal Troops from
any of our most entirely beloved Confederate Princes (if any such they had to
spare) would certainly be good Meat, but must needs have cost England very dear
Sauce.

And since I now treat of our Usefulness to England, how little soever they may
value it; I shall beg leave to look back again upon the further Motives that
induced us to be forward in Passing this Act, and take also a further view of
the Advantages that may probably arise, not only unto our Selves, but to
England in general, by it.

As to the First of these, we observed, That the Customs, Fashions, and Luxury
of other Nations, having bewitched our Traveling Nobility and Gentry, had
introduced a certain kind of Necessity among us, of using and consuming many
more and greater quantities of Foreign Commodities than were so much as ever
known almost to the honest Simplicity of our plain and wise Forefathers, and
more truly than we had superfluous Money to pay for; especially at such
exorbitant Rates as are imposed upon us at the third, fourth, fifth, and
(possibly) sixth hand, by our own Pedlars, and the exacting Broakers of all
other Countries about us. This we see a growing Evil, and such as we could not
justly answer for, to our Constituents, who were equally concerned, if we had
not taken it into our most serious Consideration, and with all expedition
applied the most effectual Remedy we could think of; which, after all our
Consultations, and the best Advice we could have, terminated in this Act; as
hoping thereby, that at some time or other we may, by degrees, come to have at
first Hand, and upon an equal Lay, such Foreign Commodities as are now palm'd
upon us.

By all which, you may plainly see, we had no sinister Design; we meant no harm
to any other Kingdom, State, or Company: Evil to them that Evil think: We had
no thoughts of drowning our Neighbor's Garden, but of watering our own; and I
have no reason to doubt, but that the Simplicity and Honesty of our Intention
therein, will upon all occasions meet with a suitable Return.

And as to what further Advantages England may probably reap from this Act; I
think, with submission, that of all sorts of Men, the English East India
Company has least reason to murmur at it; and I am glad to hear the Wisest of
them do not, nor indeed, any of them (I believe) at their Heart. For,
whatsoever Concessions, Exemptions, or Establishment, the Wisdom of the ensuing
Parliament may think fit to grant to that Company, they have reason enough,
from the consideration of their own Mismanagement, which (I humbly presume)
occasioned the late Treatment some of them had at Westminster, to ground the
best part of their Hopes for better Treatment there at this time, upon the
Emulation which Our Act has seemingly entitled them to raise in the Hearts of
their Friends in Parliament, whom I heartily wish to be many: Salvo Jure
cujuslibet. For I am sure, the World is spacious enough to contain both Them,
and the Scotch Company, for more Efforts than either one or other, or both of
them, are able to put in execution. They may, in time, be serviceable each to
the other, Manus Manum fricat; and as I hope, the English Company may have
reason, before the Determination of the ensuing Session, to Thank the King and
Parliament. They will at the same time be pleased to remember, that they owe us
a Day in Harvest; that is, some seasonable piece of Friendship.

Now, if the ensuing Parliament do (as I believe they will) take the East India
Company into their Care, whether out of a particular Regard to the said
Company, or with respect to the Interest of the whole Nation, or out of
Emulation, from a mixed Consideration of both; I shall have infinite
Satisfaction, to find that we are so far useful to our Neighbors, as to let
them see that to be their Interest now, which for some Years past they at least
seemed to have overlooked, till we put them in mind of it. And my Hopes are,
That if Emulation will once enter within the Doors of that Noble Assembly, they
will raise their Thoughts upon the very Wings of Emulation, and take the right
Sow by the Lugg; that is, cast their Eyes about them, and point at Objects
worthy of such Noble Efforts as They only are able to put in Practice, by
curbing the Enemies of Britain, and putting some stop to the Career and
overgrown Greatness of its Rivals in Trade* of whose Affection or Friendship
England can be no longer secure, than they are sure of Gaining by England:
Whereas, We poor Mortals must at all times look upon our selves as in the State
of Matrimony, For better for worse: So that if we are not allowed some
reasonable measure of Due Benevolence, that Essential Part of Conjugal Duty,
the World will certainly look upon Us as the more excusable, if at some time or
other we should venture to peep abroad.

Object. But still these Grumblers (you say) do urge that this New Company will
Steal vast Quantities of Goods both by Sea and Land into England, and
over-stock the Markets there with Indian Goods, to be Sold at Under-rates, to
the apparent loss of the English East India and Affrican Companies.

This is truly a very wide supposition; yet supposing it all to be true, (as I
believe it cannot) pray wherein is England hurt by it? For over all England
there must be a vast many more Buyers than Sellers of any one particular
Commodity, and as Of two Evils the least is to be chosen; so, Of two
interferring Interests, the most public and universal good of these two is
always preferrable to the other; then beyond dispute, the Buyers of such
particular Commodity (whom I take to be the Body of the Nation) will find it
their Interest at all times, to beat down the Market-price; especially of
Foreign Goods; otherwise our Forefathers of both Nations, were very much
overseen to make so many Laws, which stand yet Unrepealed, against the
Forestalling of Markets, and the Engrossing of Commodities into few hands. So
that if all Restrictions, Limitations, and Prohibitions upon Trade between both
Nations were wholly abrogated, the great and natural ends of Trade, would (in
my humble opinion) be more universally and much better answered.

Now, upon summing up the Evidence on both sides, I find we must reckon upon
many Enemies Beyond Sea: But I hope I may modestly conclude, That after a true
Scrutiny is made, this Act will meet with no Enemies within the Isle of
Britain, but who may be comprehended in one or other of two sorts, and these
Two (some say) very near related: The first are, such who may seemingly grumble
at this Act, for no other reason, but to make a Scaling-ladder of it, to a Wall
which (without it) they were past all hopes of ever getting over. The others
are, a certain set of Men, who (like Watermen) row one way, and look another.
From both which, I hope, the Legislative Power and Government of both Nations
will protect this Orphan.

To Conclude then: As Almighty God, in his All-wise Providence, often reveals
and brings to pass his Great and Excellent Purposes, by ordinary and unexpected
Means; who knows, but that the harmonious Unity which (I hope) will appear in
the Equal, Just, and Impartial Management and Administration of this New
Scotch-English, or English-Scotch Indian Company, may, in good time, be a happy
Motive and Inducement to (at least) all the Wise Men of either Nation, to lay
aside misplaced Passion, the Prejudices of Infancy and Education; Reason justly
for their Own and Public Interests sake; obliterate and bury in oblivion the
distinguishing Names of Scotch and English; and then voluntarily list
themselves under the United Banner of Undivided Britain; to be one in Interest,
and Inclination, in Offense and Defense. From the Consequences of which happy
Day, we may date the Era of BRITAIN's being Truly GREAT. And pray, what should
hinder it? Nature seems to have intended Us for One People, as having
concentered us within the same Liquid Walls; we are the Subjects of One King;
we speak the same Language, differing only in Dialect, as most Counties do; we
profess the same Religion, differing only in some Forms, which may or may not
be; our Laws point at the same End, to distribute Justice, and defend Liberty
and Property: All which may be soon reconciled, if the Wisdoms of both Nations
should once heartily set about it.

No Man alive can have greater Veneration for the Government and People of
England, or be more tender of giving them any the least umbrage of Offense,
than my self: But if any particular Person will, from the Light within him,
apply to his own Breast any Expression herein that may seem harsh, that is his
fault, and not mine: In which case, I Would advise him, like a Friend, to lie still
and be quiet; expiate for any former Escapes in his Life, by a better
Regulation of his Actions in time to come; submit to all Laws and Ordinances of
such as are put in Authority over us, and let the Wisdom of the Nation Rule the
Nation.

If herein I have not answered your Expectation, yet you have an Instance of my
hearty and sincere good Wishes to the Interest of Britain, and of my readiness
to comply with your Desire, whenever you are pleased to Command,

EDINBURGH, November. 14. 1695. SIR, Your Humble Servant, PHILONAX VERAX.

An Abstract of the Privileges contained in An Act (mentioned page 7.) for the
Fishings, etc.
SAlt, Cordage, Hemp, Cork, Pitch, Tarr, Clapboard, Knapple, Skewhoops and
Nets, free of all Custom, or other Imposition whatsoever.

All Herring and White Fish taken and prepared therewith, free of any manner of
Taxation or Burden in the Exportation of the same.

All Strangers concerned therein, Naturalized of course, and also free of all
Taxation upon their other Effects, for the space of Seven Years next after such
their Naturalization.

All Beer, Ale, Strong Water, and other Provisions for Out-reeking of any
Vessel for the said Fishings, free of all manner of Impositions whatsoever.

All Lords, and Proprietors of Land, in all Places throughout the Kingdom where
such Fishing is carried on, to protect, maintain and defend the same, and all
Masters of Ships, Fishers, and others whatsoever thereunto belonging, from all
harm and trouble; otherwise, to refund and satisfy respectively all Loss and
Damage sustained upon their Land.

All Ships, Boats, and other Vessels, in the exercise of the said Trade of
Fishing, and their employment therein, no ways Arrestible by any Creditor: The
Fishers, Masters and Servants in the said Vessels, during the whole time and
season of such Fishing, and their employment therein, free from all Actions of
Debt, and no ways conveenable before any Judge or Judicature whatsoever, for
any Cause or Causes Civil, which might be intended against them: and generally
all the said Persons, Masters and Servants, free of all Captions, Arrestments,
or other Attachments on their Persons, or against their Materials and
Instruments of Fishing, they being actually serving therein allanerly.

The Stock and Profits thereof free of all Stents and Taxations.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 39. for Exceptions r. Exemptions. page 7. l. 23. for hence r. Home.


