A SERMON Preached at the Funeral OF Mrs. MARY ALSTON, Wife to JOSEPH ALSTON
Esquire Who Dyed, Jan. 25. and was Interred at Chelsey, Feb. 7. 1670.

By ADAM LITTLETON, D. D. Rector of Chelsey

LONDON, Printed by John Macock. 1671.

Acts XIII. 39. And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from
which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses.


THE Subject, I have, by appointment, undertaken to treat of, may peradventure,
to some at first proposal, not seem altogether so proper and suitable to our
present occasion. Yet when ye well consider the purport of the words I have now
read to you, that Faith is the great instrument and advantage of a Christians
life; for the just shall live by his faith: and that Justification or
forgiveness of sins is the main comfort, any Christian can have at his death;
inasmuch as he that believes, shall not die for ever, and though he die, yet
shall he live; and over and above, that the Gospel-state affords us Christians
that help toward these ends, which the Jewish economy could not do to them:
ye must acknowledge with me, there cannot be a more effectual Exhortation for
us that survive, then that of Faith; nor a fuller Consolation over our deceased
Friends, then that of being justified; whereby at our departure hence we have a
prospect of ensuing bliss in the other world, by being assured through faith in
Christ, of pardon and acceptance, and of escaping the wrath to come. This
justifying faith, I say, is the ground of all a Christians present duties here
in this life, and of his future expectations hereafter in the next. This it was
made the Apostle say, To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain: a Motto
which every Christian may bear upon his Scutcheon, and inscribe upon the shield
of his faith. For by Christ all that believe are justified from all things, etc.

S. Paul being in a Synagogue of the Jews at Antioch in Pisidia on the Sabbath
day, after the reading of the Lessons, out of the Law one, and the other out of
the Prophets, as their custom was; being desired by the Rulers of the
Synagogue, the chief of the Assembly, to speak, if he had any thing to say for
the instruction of the people, takes occasion, after he had given them a brief
historical account of the Israelitish Commonwealth down to David, to preach
unto them Jesus, and to assert his Messiaship,

By his lineal descent from that King David, according to promise, verse. 23.

By the Testimony of John his forerunner, verse. 25.

By the Completion of Prophecies in his Passion, Crucifixion, Death, and
Burial, verse. 27, etc.

And lasty, and most especially, by his miraculous Resurrection, whereof there
were many witnesses still alive, verse. 30, 31 And that accordingly as David
himself had foretold in his Book of Psalms, particularly in the sixteenth,
where he says, Thou shall not suffer thy holy One to see corruption; which
words in the 36. v. he says, as S. Peter had observed before in his first
Sermon, Acts 2. could not be meant of David's own person, who having served his
generation, died as other men do, and never rose out of that sepulcher he was
laid in; his body having long since moulderd into dust, and his monument
remaining still among them till that day. And now from all these Arguments he
draws this Conclusion in this and the verse immediately foregoing. Be it known
unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto
you forgiveness of sins. And by him all that believe, etc. and then last of all
he pursues and drives home this Doctrine with a vehement Application, in the
two next verses, forewarning them to take heed of rejecting the Gospel, as we
find they did on the next Sabbath Day, verse. 46. when upon the untoward and
unworthy carriage of the Jews, the Apostle disclaims them, and turns to the
Gentiles.

Thus have I given you a short Analysis, and Survey of the Apostles whole
discourse, the sense and main design whereof lies in the Text, that Jesus
Christ was the expected Messiah, the Savior of the world, by whom and by him
alone Justification through Faith in him, and forgiveness of sins, which is the
proper notion and importance of salvation, is to be obtained.

This Doctrine of Justification by faith in Christ is set down here.

1. Affirmatively, in Thesi, By him all that believe are justified from all
things.

2. Negatively, per Antithesin, in opposition to Mosaical observances; from
which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses.

In the Affirmative part we have

1. A great Privilege, or the Benefit it self, wherein Gods favor and man's
happiness does mainly consist; and that is Justification.

2. The Ground of it; Christ. What by his Merit; it is in him, for his sake, and
through his satisfaction, we are justified. What by his Spirit; it is by him, by
his virtue and efficacy working in us, that we are justified.

3. The Condition or Qualification, which makes us capable of it, or, as some
love rather to term it; the Instrument by which it is applied and made ours; and
that is faith. They that believe are justified.

4. The Extent of it, and the latitude it bears. And that twofold.

1. As to its Subject, in quo, viz. the persons justified; all that believe, or
(...), every one that believes is justified.

2. As to its Object, circa quod, to wit, the things from which Justification
is to free and release Believers. And that is (...) from all things, from all
charge and encumbrance, from all damages and inconveniences, which otherwise
might upon strict rules of Justice befall them.

In the Negative part is expressed the weakness and insufficience of the
Mosaical Dispensation for the attaining this Righteousness, which is to be had
only by Christ; that we could not be justified from those things by the Law of
Moses.

You see then, that I have a large field of discourse before me, were I, which
cannot well be expected from me in these straights of time, at large to speak
of Justification, of Christ's Satisfaction, of Faith in Christ, of the legal
Administration, which are so many common places of Divinity, and would each of
them require a Volume to be treated of in their full importance. It will be
enough that I briefly touch at each particular head severally, and so as may be
most agreeable to the purpose of our present meeting, to the Instruction and
Comfort of the Hearers.

And I shall take this Method, first to show, what is meant by Justification,
or by being justified. Next to prove the insufficience of Moses his Law, and
its inability of justifying the observers of it: and then in the last place to
make out how we are justified by Christ, and that through Faith in him. For so
the words stand in the Greek, in this order I have here set them in; From all
things from which ye could not be justified by, or in the Law of Moses, by, or
in him, namely, in Christ, every one that believes is justified.

First then what Justification is. To be justified is to be accounted and looked
upon as righteous and perfectly just in the sight of Good, our Lawgiver and
our Judge; and thereupon to be absolutely discharged and acquitted according to
the tenor of the Law by the Sentence of the Judge from all the penalties that
were to be inflicted upon the transgressors of the Law, and for that our
Righteousness to be accepted of God in our persons and performances, and in the
end to be eternally rewarded. And this all grounded upon the nature and
sanction of a Law, which as it proposes Commands and Rules to be observed, so
is ratified with Promises on one hand of reward to the obedient, and on the
other hand with Threats of punishment to those that shall be found guilty of
the breach of it. Now this Justification, had the Covenant of Nature stood, the
Law of Moses continued in force; must have been made out by our own personal
exact obedience to every tittle of our obligations: for this was the tenor of
that Law. Do this and live, and Cursed be every one that continues not in all
the words of the Law to do them: and this is that is called legal
Righteousness. But in Christ, under the Covenant of Grace, which was
substituted in the room and stead of that other, the Law of Faith has altered
the terms, thus; He that believes, shall be saved; and He that believes not,
shall be condemned. So that now faith in Christ and sincerity of obedience,
(for there are Commands too as well as Promises, and Threats even in this Law
of Faith) is that we call Evangelical Righteousness; whereby we are through
that satisfaction, Christ as our surety has by his active and passive
obedience wrought for us, which through Faith in him is imputed unto us for
Righteousness, justified by him, to the forgiveness of our sins, to the
acceptance of our persons, and to the reward of our services. Again this
Justification is indeed attained in this life, being laid hold on by Faith,
evidenced by our obedience, and sealed to every particular Believers conscience
by the Spirit of Promise: but in the next life will be declared in open Court
at the general Assizes of all Mankind at the last day, so that the true
Believer lives and dies in peace of conscience, as having an assurance through
Faith, that Christ by his death has satisfied for his sins, and purchased for
him everlasting life. For so we find Justification explained in this very
Chapter, by comparing the 38. and 26. verses with our Text. What he had said
there, to you is the word of this salvation sent, repeating it here in other
words. Through this man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins. So that to be
justified is to have our sins forgiven, and our souls saved.

Having thus stated and distinguished Justification, we are now to remove the
legal Righteousness, that we may establish the Righteousness by Faith, and to
show that the Law of Moses was unable and insufficient for the justifying of
any one. Where first we are to premise an usual Distinction of that Law into
Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial.

The Judicial Law was peculiar to the Jewish Commonwealth, designed only for
external polity, and for the quiet and regular administration of the Civil
State of that people, nor has it any obligation upon any other people any
further, then, as it was a body of Statutes appointed by God himself for the
government of his own people, it deserves our veneration, and as far as the
circumstances and customs of other Countries will admit, an imitation.

The Ceremonial Law was most properly the Law of Moses, wherein were delivered
the rules of Gods Worship, which consisted of Purifications and Expiations, and
other Levitical Rites. That again obliged none but Jews, and their Proselytes,
and was to have an end at the coming of Christ.

The Moral Law was not so much the Law of Moses, as the Law of Adam, that which
is written in every man's heart, and was obligatory to all mankind before Moses,
and will be so to the end of the world; such as are all the Precepts of the
Decalogue. For though there be somewhat in them ceremonial, to which none but
Jews were obliged, as in the fourth the strictness of the Sabbath-rest, and the
very day it self (for had it not been so, it could not have been altered;
whatsoever is in its nature purely moral, being of a perpetual as well as
universal, and of an indispensable obligation) I say, notwithstanding somewhat
of Ceremony intermixed, the things themselves commanded or forbidden in those
precepts are acknowledged and owned by the very light of Nature; as that God
should have a proportion of our time bestowed on his service, which in equity
could not be less then a seventh part. Beyond all this, our Savior himself
tells us, he came not to destroy this Law, but to fulfill it in his own person,
and heighten its obligations upon us his followers. And it appears by
circumstances here, that the Apostle addressing his speech to the Jews might
very likely mean only the Law of Ceremonies, as possibly he does in his Epistle
to the Galatians, and other places by works of the Law intend mainly the
Circumcision and other Rites and observances, which some Converts of that
Religion, at the first propagation of the Gospel, mainly insisted on, and mixed
with their Christianity: a persuasion and practice, which the Doctor of the
Gentiles does every where upon all occasions as he meets with it, endeavor to
confute. Yet this Law also having been given by Moses in some sense, as to the
promulgation of it, and the accommodating it to the use and interest of his
Countrymen, I shall take it in too, and make good, that neither the observance
of the Ceremonial Law, which obliged the Jews, could; nor the performance of
the Moral Law, to which all men are obliged can or ever could justify any man.
And this according to that place, The Law was given by Moses; but Grace and
Truth came by Jesus Christ, where as Truth is opposed to Ceremony, so Grace is
to the Law of Nature.

First the Ceremonial Law, besides that it labored under other disadvantages,
as that it was burdensome in its charge, and in its attendance; and it was
obscure, compared to Gospel light, as being but the shadow of good things to
come; it was in its very constitution imperfect and impotent, and that in two
respects.

1. It was not commensurate to the necessities of all mankind; that Levitical
service having been prescribed only, and appropriated to the Jews, as a
characteristical mark of distinction betwixt them and other Nations.

2. It was not adequate to its end; which was the expiation of guilt, the
atonement of wrath, and propitiation for sins. For it was not possible that the
blood of bulls and goats should take away sins, as the Apostle argues, Heb.
10.4. Wherefore the Law, as he says there, could not by those Sacrifices, which
were fain to be continually repeated, make the comers thereunto perfect. For
indeed what proportion was there betwixt those mean oblations and the ransom
and price of souls? For the Verdict of the Law was, that the soul that sins
shall die. What amends then could the death of a poor beast make for the
transgression of its owner? or how could those sorry acknowledgments reconcile
Divine Justice? Which made the Prophet Micah cry out, VI. 7. Wherewith shall I
come before the Lord? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves
of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten
thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression,
the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? No, this would have been no
compensation. It cost more to redeem souls then so.

But, you will say, if it be so, what use was there then of those Ceremonies and
Sacrifices? Was no one justified under that Law, no Righteousness to be had by
that Dispensation? Yes, but 'twas the righteousness of Faith then too, and
those that were, were justified by Christ, who was represented and typified in
those legal Rites: for it was the immaculate Lamb that virtuated all those
Oblations, and the whole Pedagogie of that Law had its effect and consummation
in him. Wherefore it was to be but of a temporary date, and as it pointed to
him, so it was to end in him.

Nor was the Ceremonial Law only imperfect, but the Moral is so too, that which
has a natural obligation upon all men. The inability of this Law, as to
Justification, is partly from our weakness, partly from its own.

1. We are naturally unable to perform it in an exact obedience: and though
some Heretics are bold to say, that a man may by the strength of Nature
satisfy all the demands of that Law we are by nature obliged to; a Doctrine
which modest Philosophers amongst Heathens disclaim; as appears by the body of
death, the blessed Apostle complains of, and other passages in him, taken out
of the Writings of Plato. Yet supposing, that there were no original
corruption, and that a man could lead a perfect life; which are two things that
are not to be supposed; for what man ever was there beside the Son of God, that
was either born, or lived without sin? If he could make satisfaction, where
would be his merit? Or how could he extend that satisfaction to the benefit of
others? But alas! Scripture tells us, no man has redeemed his own soul; much
less is he in a capacity to do it for another, but must let that alone for ever.

2. As we are unable to go through what the Law requires, so the Law also is
unable to help us. It lays Rules indeed before us, and Obligations upon us, and
convinces us sufficiently of the Duty we owe; but furnishes us with no strength
for the performance of it. I had not known sin, says the Apostle, but for the
Law, no, nor practiced it neither. For (which shows the pravity as well as
weakness of our nature) lust takes advantage from the Law, and breaks out with
the more violence from under its restraints. Not but that the Law is in it self
holy, and just, and perfect, but sin finds occasion from the Law to be
exceeding sinful. Wherefore he affirms elsewhere, that as the sting of death is
sin, so the strength of sin is the Law; from whence sin has all its damning
power; since without the Law sin could not damn us; for where there is no law,
there is no transgression. But what follows? But thanks be to God, says he,
which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, and that is our third
Consideration.

That we are justified by Christ alone. What Moses could not do in his Law,
Christ has done in his. Grace has supplied the defects of Nature; and what was
wanting to Legal Righteousness, is made up by the Evangelical. The Ceremonies,
as they were to have their period, so were to have their completion too at the
coming of Truth: and the Law of Works is not so much superseded, as it is
accomplished in its end, by the Law of Faith, which exserts it self, though not
in an exact, as was then required, yet in, that, which is now accepted, a
sincere obedience. Now this Justification I told you, is had by Christ two ways.

1. By imputation of his satisfaction and merit.

2. By the influence and efficacy of his Spirit. I am sorry to find that some
men among us take offense at these terms of imputed Righteousness, and infused
Grace, as notions that do not so well square with Right (i. e. they mean their)
reason. But as sure as our sins were imputed to Christ, so really is his
Righteousness imputed unto us: and as sure as we have no natural ability of our
selves to any thing that good is, so certain is it, that we are to be
influenced by Gods good Spirit, infusing a principle of grace into us, and
accompanying that grace along with his assistances in its particular acts.
Otherwise I am to seek which way we are to expect, either to be justified, or
to be sanctified: for I hope they will not say our Justification or
Sanctification is from our selves, and so make men to become their own Saviors.

1. We are justified by Christ, per modum meriti, as a meritorious cause; by
virtue of that satisfaction he has made for us. For the Father and the Son
having in our behalf agreed upon a mutual Covenant and engagement, that
whosoever believes, should through Christ have forgiveness of his sins, and be
accepted in the well-beloved; and Christ on his part having in his own person
fulfilled the Law, and fully answered all its demands, and satisfied Divine
Justice for us; it now remains that God, as he is faithful, will forgive our
sins, if we be faithful; and that he will in justice justify us sinners by
Faith in his Sons sufferings. For so he that knew no sin was made sin for us,
that we through his obedience might be made righteous. To this satisfaction of
his, which was of it self plenary, the dignity and excellency of the person
that undertook and performed for us, has added that illustrious advantage, that
there has accrued a large stock of merit, a purchase of life and glory for all
Believers, as well as of pardon and grace for true Penitents. Nor is it his
merit alone, for which we are justified. But,

2. We are justified by him per modum efficientiae too, as an efficient cause,
by the working of his Spirit. And this was to ascertain his purchase and to
apply his acquists: and therefore, when he had finished the work of our
Redemption he came into this lower world about, he not only ascended himself
into Heaven, there to sit at the right hand of the Father, and by continual
intercessions to plead and make good his merits; but did also send down the
Spirit to keep residence here below, and to perform the office of an Advocate
and a Comforter, and made him the great Trustee to issue out the revenues of
his grace. Besides, all things in him are gathered into one, and there is that
strict Union and intimate Communion betwixt Christ the Head of the Church, and
all the lively Members of that his mystical Body, all true Believers, that they
and he are one, as the Father and he are one. For he having espoused our nature
as well as our quarrel, the virtue of that hypostatical Union extends it self
over all, even to the very dust of the Faithful, that sleep in their graves.
From this close Union it follows, that all Believers, as being parts of
himself, are animated and acted by his Spirit effectually in several
operations; such as these are in the matter of Justification we are now upon:
that by this Spirit of his, the merits of Christ are applied to us, and that
our Consciences are sprinkled with his blood from dead works, to the purging
away of guilt, that the pardon of our sins is assured and sealed to us, that
Faith is wrought in our hearts, and that a sufficience of Grace is given in to
us, whereby we are enabled to every good work. And all this according to the
Covenant, by which he was to purchase not pardon only, but grace also for us,
whereby we might be as discharged from the guilt, so released from the slavery
and dominion of sin, if we rightly employ our victorious Faith: which is the
condition, or, if you will, taking the word in a moral sense, the Instrument of
Justification.

And this we are now to speak of, and then conclude with the extent of it, that
it is all Believers are justified, and they are justified from all things. And
these two will make up our applicatory part, the condition for our Instruction
and Exhortation, and the extent for a word of Comfort.

Seeing then that Justification is so great an advantage and privilege, such a
benefit and blessing, as none is to be compared to it, as that which sanctifies
and sweetens all the enjoyments of this life, and ascertains Gods favor and
glorious hopes to us in the next: that which renders all conditions
comfortable, living or dying; whereas without pardon of sins and peace of
conscience, let a man's outward fortunes be what they will, the man is an utter
stranger to true happiness, whilst he is here, and will be abandoned to a sad
miserable estate to all eternity hereafter: and seeing that this Justfication
is not to be had but by Christ alone, who took upon him to be our surety, and
has done and suffered all that was necessary to be done and suffered for us in
order to our salvation, and has by his merit and satisfaction purchased for us
pardon and grace whereby we may be saved; and that the merit of his
satisfaction can no other way be derived and conveyed to us but by Faith in
him, a reliance on his merit, and an obedience to his Gospel; and that without
our faith Christ and his Gospel and Salvation it self can stand us in no stead;
and all the merits of his obedience and the benefits of his Passion, and the
dispensations of his Grace will signify nothing, be of none effect to us, if
we remain still in our unbelief; let us be exhorted to have Faith in the holy
Jesus, to have recourse to him as to our Mediator and Advocate, to embrace him
upon his own terms, to nail our sins to his Cross, to cast our burden upon him,
who is able to save to the utmost all that put their trust in him, to shelter
our selves in the clefts of that Rock the wounds of our dear Savior, and
renouncing all other hopes with a holy confidence roll our selves upon his
satisfaction, that we may be clothed with the robes of his Righteousness, and
be found in him to the atoning of our offended God, to the pacifying and
purifying of our troubled and guilty consciences, and to the escaping of
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, and everlasting burnings, which
attend those that through unbelief and impenitence live and die in their sins.

But because Faith is a word of large and doubtful meaning in holy Writ, let me
also for your better instruction, that no one may mistake himself, lay before
you some of the most ordinary acceptions of the word, which yet do not come
home to our purpose nor amount to a justifying Faith.

Sometimes Faith is taken for an acknowledgment of Divine Truths revealed in
Gods Word. And this though it be enough to denominate one Orthodox in his
opinions, and sound in his judgment; yet if it be but Notional, and has no
practical influence upon the heart and life, is no right sound Faith, by which
a man shall be justified.

Otherwhere it denotes a firm persuasion of mind, that the thing he is taking
in hand is lawful and fit to be done. In which sense the Apostles rule is to be
understood, that whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And this is very far from
being a Faith that will justify one before God or men. For some out of an
erroneous conscience (which sure is no good conscence) may having a zeal not
according to knowledge (as often has been done) think those things lawful,
which are quite contrary: such as our Savior speaks of, that will kill you,
and think they do God good service in so doing. And others when they have not a
mind to do things that in their own nature are lawful, and the command of a
just Authority makes necessary to be done, may pretend dissatisfaction of
conscience for a color of their disobedience.

Another common acception, to mention no more, of Faith is to take it for a
strong assurance of Gods peculiar love and favor to them in pardoning their
sins and designing them for salvation. When perhaps they have no other reason
for their so believing, but that they are willing to believe so, and have taken
pains with themselves to persuade themselves into such a belief, and make
themselves believe they do believe: and this may be, as it too too often proves
a dangerous mistake, by putting the name of Faith upon a fond overweening
conceit and a rash unreasonable presumption.

Wherefore that thy Faith may not deceive thee, take along with thee these
three or four marks of trial, to examine it by, whether it be a right
well-grounded Faith or no.

1. A true Faith embraces Christ in all the capacities of his mediatiorial
office; as King, Priest, and Prophet.

2. It takes in the whole compass of Gospel-dispensations; commands and threats
as well as promises; Sacraments and all other Ordinances alike.

3. It ingages the whole man, the assent of the understanding, the compliance
of the will, the regularity of the affections, and the composure of the outward
behavior.

4. It always is accompanied with serious repentance for sin, and a frank
expression and exercise of charity, according to the sense a man has of the
love of God toward himself.

Do thou find then that by thy Faith thou ownest and acceptest thy Savior
all over in all his three Offices? that thou art as content to submit to him as
a Prophet to teach and instruct thee, as a King to rule and govern thee, as
thou art glad to have him thy Priest to satisfy for thee and to bless thee?
Art thou willing to be saved his way, and to conform to his Methods, so as to
engage in working out thy own salvation, and art thou convinced thou ought
to do something for thy own sake, something for his, who has done so much for
thine? Has thy Faith an equal impartial respect to Christ's Commands as to his
Promises? and do thou take as much delight in the obedience of Faith, as thou
do in its assurance? Do thou consider that though it be a Covenant of
Grace, thou stand under, yet it is a Covenant and ties thee up to conditions?
and that though the Gospel be a Law of Liberty, it is a Law still, and that
Christian liberty does not give thee a freedom from duty, but from sin, and is
not to be used as a cloak of malice and licentiousness? Have thou an even
regard to all the means of grace, and a desire to profit by them all, and not
by a wanton preference of one Ordinance to another, forfeit the benefit of all
the rest? Can thou tell where to find thy Faith, in what part of thee it is
seated: does it swim as an empty Notion in thy head only, or has it by serious
resolutions sunk down into thy heart, and thence flows into all thy outward
parts; to the government of thy thoughts and desires, thy words and thy
actions? Do thou use to call thy sins to account, and thinking on them and
thy Saviors sufferings togetber, set open the sluices of grief, and mourn over
thy wounded conscience and thy crucified Jesus? And lastly, have thou such a
sense of Gods love to thee, in the pardon of thy sins, that thou can freely
forgive all offenses done against thee, and for his sake, who for thine has not
spared his Son, cheerfully part with all thou have and resign up all thy
concerns into his hands for his uses, when he calls for them; and is thy Faith
a Faith working by charity, that puts forth vital acts; and evidences and
justifies it self by good works to be a living and a true Faith? For though it
be Faith alone that justifies, yet it is no true Faith that is alone; and as a
man is not justified for his good works, so no man must hope to be justified
without them.

If thy Faith be such a Faith, as will abide this trial, and answer this
description, then it is a Faith thou may trust to, and thou have reason to
believe thy self to be a Believer, and God will improve and build up thy Faith
to blessed assurances of pardon and peace, of Grace and Glory.

And then in the last place, what Comfort will it be to be thus assured, when
thou can apply the general Proposition to thy self, which is that All that
believe are justified. But believe. Therefore I am justified. If all Believers,
then thou, Believer, whoever thou art; of whatsoever condition, be thy worldly
estate never so low, thy outward circumstances never so contemptible, thou have
an equal share and interest in Gods favor, and in the merit of Christ with the
best. Whatever thy former life has been, read with comfort that black list of
the foulest sins, 1 Cor. 6. Idolaters, Adulterers, and the like, and such, the
Apostle tells them, were some of you, but now are ye washed, now are ye
sanctified, now are ye justified. Reflect with sorrow upon what thou have been,
and with joy give God thanks for what thou art. And then how weak soever thy
Faith at present be, can thou say, Lord, I believe, that he may help thy
unbelief, and increase thy faith more and more, till Faith it self shall be
swallowed up into vision.

This as to the extent of the subject; nor has that of the object less of
Consolation in it, when a Believer considers that by his Faith he is justified
and fully discharged from all things, from all suits and evictions, from all
troubles and molestations, from all dues and demands, his surety having paid
all for him. From the guilt of sin, in that he that knew no sin, was reckoned
amongst transgressors, and was made sin for him. From the punishment of sin,
Christ having offered up himself in Sacrifice once for all. As for the
chastisements and light afflictions of this life, as they are but momentany, to
they are attended with an eternal weight of glory. From the demands and
sentence and curse of the Law, his Redeemer having fulfilled all Righteousness
for him, and nailed the handwriting of Ordinances, which was against him, to
the Cross, and undergone the Curse upon the tree. From the wrath of God, which
the Son of God his Mediator has atoned. From the horrors of a guilty
conscience, which the Lamb of God has sprinkled with his blood, and his Prince
of Peace has spoke peace to. From the terrors of death, which the Captain of
his Salvation has conquered by dying. From the accusations of the Devils, whom
the King of glory has triumphed over at his descent into Hell in their own
Territories: and from everlasting damnation, which his blessed Savior the holy
Jesus by his infinite satisfaction has bought off for him. And now what has
this happy person to do in this world any longer, having his debts paid, his
sins pardoned, his God reconciled, his Conscience quieted and assured, his
accusers silenced, his enemies vanquished, the Law satisfied, and himself
justified, and his Savior glorified, and a Crown of immortality, and a Robe of
Righteousness prepared for him; what has he to do here more, then to get him up
to the top of Pisgah, and take a view of his heavenly Canaan, to stand upon the
confines of eternity, and in the contemplation of those joys and glories
despise and slight the vanities and troubles of this sinful and miserable
world, and to breathe after his better life, and be preparing himself for his
change, when he shall be called off to weigh anchor and hoise sail for another
world, where he is to make discoveries of unutterable felicities, and
unconceivable pleasures? O what a happy and blessed condition is it to live or to
die in the midst of such gracious deliverances and glorious assurances; with
this fastening consideration to boot, that neither life nor death, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor any creature is able to separate him from the
love of God, which is in Jesus Christ his Lord? Thus to live, is to live in
peace; thus to die, is to die with joy: peace of conscience, and joy in the
Holy Ghost. What would not a dying man give to have his eternal state thus
secured to him, and to insure his soul for his long long voyage, whence there is
no returning? O let us earnestly beg of God to give us Faith to be our Guide in
this life, and our Pilot for the next.

Amidst these raptures, it is but time, to speak a word or two of our dear
deceased Sister here before us, who has brought us together to do her the last
office of Christian Charity. And sure that Charity, as well as Custom, makes it
necessary, that where much may be said, something must. Nor need I be lavish in
her praises, since to be but just to her memory, and to speak out, but her due
commendations, would seem to distrust the Neighbors, her Acquaintance, my
Auditors, whose good word and high esteem as she had, when she was living; so
she needs no Pulpit-flattery to set her forth being dead. Shall I tell you of
her Conjugal affection and her chaste Conversation coupled with fear? who,
besides the advantages of a great Fortune, brought that to her Husband, which
was a more valuable Portion, a lowly mind; paying that constant respect to his
person, and that due submission to his pleasure, and that sure friendship to
all his Concerns, and demeaning her self to humbly, as if she had brought him
nothing but her Virtues. Shall I mention her indulgent care and motherly love
of her Children? whose Duties she earned by her laborious attendance on their
infant-years, thinking it would look too like an unkindness to be owned as a
Mother, where she had not been a Nurse too, and judging it little better than
unnatural not to entertain them at her breasts, whom she had carried in her
womb. Shall I take notice to you, what good Order and Decorum she kept in her
Family, how she centered all her thoughts and business, like the standing foot
of the Compass, at home, and how unconcerned she was in the Public, unless it
were to do any office of neighbourly kindness, or when the duties of the
Sabbath called her forth? Above (...) humility was remarkable, for she had
that, which S. Peter advises grave Matrons to put on, the ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God, and of good men too, of great
price: and this she preferred before all the gaudy Attire, which others of her
Sex, especially of her Fortune, use to adorn themselves withal. In a word, as
she expressed the virtues of the other Sister in her domestic cares, so I doubt
not but she minded the one thing necessary too, and with Mary in the Gospel,
chose that better part which shall not be taken from her. God grant us all to
be like-minded, and as he has given us his Son, so may he give us of his Spirit
to work Faith and all Grace in us, that so we may be justified and sanctified,
and finally as we hope she now is glorified. Now to God the Father, Son, and
blessed Spirit be all Praise, Honor, and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

