A LIVELY POURTRAICT OF OUR New-Cavaliers, Commonly Called PRESBYTERIANS.

CLEARLY SHOWING, That His MAJESTY came not in upon their Account.

In a Compendious Narrative of our late Revolutions.

printer's device with crown surmounting spread-winged bird

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

A Lively POURTRAICT OF OUR NEW CAVALIERS, Commonly Called PRESBYTERIANS.
NOT, in the least, to blemish the loyalty of any, who (late, indeed, but
seasonably,) became Proselytes, And, with subsequent Merits, cancelled the
memory of their former Errors, Yet, for that many Persons of unbyassed
Principles, are apt to be misled with this vulgar Prejudice, That the
Presbyterians were the Principal Instruments of his Majesty's Restoration,
From the jealousy and disdain, which, (as a passionate Lover of his Majesty,)
I conceive at the very mention of such a Rival, And for the Vindication of that
Cause and Party, which is dearer to me than my life, I shall undertake to
disprove it, by reporting Naturally, the whole Series of their Behavior, and
deriving the Pedigree of Affairs, since the War.

It must be acknowledged, That, from the time, when the two great Factions
began first Visibly to sever, Though a few, the most Noble and ingenious of
them, were early convinced of their mistake, in seeking to reform alawful
Government, by an unlawful War, And endeavored worthily to atone their
guilt; Others, observing the tendency of Affairs to infinite Violence and
Perplexity, became more wary, or, (as they termed it,) Moderate; Yet the
Actions of that Party, for the mayn, declared, that they were still fierce with
Victory, and without Remorse; True it is, that finding, by degrees their own
Impotency to quell the spirits which they had raised or govern the Mutiny of
their Soldiers, without an Establishment; And withal supposing, that the King,
being under their Custody, would not, at his Peril, reject their Propositions,
how hard of digestion soever they were; They sent him Conditions to sign, but
not to consider, much less debate; Nor was it long, that they continued in
this friendly Mood, But being easily scared by the Army, desisted from their
Treaties; And, some Months after, the Vote of Non-Addresses passed both Houses,
in full Carreer, which, what pretense or gloss soever may be given it, (sure I
am,) It proved a Petemptory Summons before Sentence, and an apt Prologue to our
succeeding Tragedy, For, the King being once cast off, the Captive was,
afterward, easily disposed of.

In the year 1648. the great Imposture being, by this time, clearly unmasked,
many others, who, at first, no question, meant sincerely, peceiving the total
miscarriage of their unadvised Zeal, withdrew themselves from their Faction,
and frankly sided with the Royalists; Who, by this Accession of Interests, and
other probable Inducements, were encouraged, (though with disadvantage enough)
once more to Arm, for the prevention of so great and impendent Mischiefs;
Suddenly the whole Kingdom was full of Insurrections upon this Account,
seconded with a powerful Invasion from Scotland; And now, or never, (I take
it,) was the Critical hour, for our Pretenders, to have expressed their
Loyalty; Kingly Government then gasping, and the sacred head being visibly
exposed; But, (contrariwise,) we felt their hands, in many places, heavier upon
us, than the Independents, And, in Committees, especially, they acted with all
the violence imaginable.

The Scottish Army being defeated, and the Royalists, every where, suppressed,
the best Issue, that any good Englishman could now presage, was very fatal; For
though the Factions might seem to differ, much like those on Shooters-hill,
some of them inclining only to bind the Traveller, and leave him helpless in
the adjacent Woods, Others, for their greater security from pursuit,
determining rather to kill him outright, Yet they agreed in the main design,
(viz.) Robbery; The milder sort of them, indeed, calmly dissented from the
Murder, professing to abhor the needle^se effusion of Royal Blood. But, whilst
the opposed only came Negotiations, to resolute Actions, (as it commonly
happens in Counsel, so managed,) Fury took Place. And, without interruption,
finished that accursed Parricide.

The Presbyterians seemed generally to be surprised, and even Planetstruck,
with this deadly blow, Nor could they, patiently, endure the Scandal of being
accounted Privy, much less Parties to the Action, or Contrivance; As if,
(forsooth) they wondered to see him slain by others, whom, themselves had sorely
threatened, and, in effect, outlawed; Yet, had the Tragedy proved only
personal, or had sweet Aristocrasie next succeeded, together with Parochial
Episcopacy, it is possible, the Pill might have been swallowed: But the
Independent Party, having projected other designs, and resolving to go
through-stitch with their work, by the old Principle of Root and Branch,
labored, together, with Monarchy, to reform, (viz.) extirpate Peerage,
Scattering withal, or rather sowing, the popular seeds of toleration, which
made the Breach, in appearance, irreparable; However, (after a breathing space,
civilly allowed them,) the tumor, of it self, began to assuage; For many of
the dissenting Brethren, judging it, I suppose, unseemly for them to continue
long in a state of discord, and professing, that they would not stand upon
Punctilios, where the public was concerned, were, in a short time reconciled
to their enchanted Seats; Wherein the great Bugbear of the times, (viz.) the
Common Enemy, was of singular advantage to them both: Wherefore, that all
pretenses might be duly accomodated, and a certain Decorum in Affairs
preserved, (as it were by implicit Contract or Consent) whilst the Military
Charge remained with Independents, as the surer Cards, the Civil Authority with
all its preheminencies rested still with Presbyterians, as the soberer Party,
who had, likewise, a Major Vote in the Junto.

Matters of Civil Policy being thus compounded, one would marvel, that the
Spiritual should break any squares, or that either Party should be much
troubled with a case of Conscience; But as the Puloits had all along served
other ends, than that of Religion, so, now, it should seem, the Clergy of those
times, (pardon me if I mistake their quality,) finding themselves utterly
disappointed of that Dominion, which they first aspired to, and fearing yet a
further downfall, by the daily growth of Independency, in despair of compassing
their wishes by that Junto, which was awed by an Army, not of their Complexion,
stirred up in the People, (especially their own Disciples,) a new disaffection
to their Rulers; Wherein, being animated from Scotland, they boldly Preached up
the Covenant, which they had kept in Lavender for this or the like Occasion;
And, since they thought fit to remember their Covenant, they could not fairly
forget their King, who (amongst other matters of deeper design) was ^herein
mentioned, (as it were, of Course,) with reference to the times, for which it
was first calculated: Wherefore, on a sudden the Presbyterians grew very
troublesome, And something they offered at, upon these Accounts, But with what
kindness to his Majesty, I leave to any man's Judgment, For their Jealousy of
the Royal Interest increasing, (especially after their disaster at Dunbar,)
instantly, they rather recoyled, than retreated, And, with their Numbers,
Oppressed the King at Worcester, choosing rather to run their Risquo with the
Sectaries, whom ^hey hated, than take their Fortune with his Majesty, whom they
feared.

Immediately upon this Miscarriage, Scotland being subdued by the Forces of the
Independents, The Interest of that Faction grew so prevalent, And their
pretenses so exorbitant, As involved all Persons, of what Judgment soever, if
either they had Estates, Professions, or common foresight, in an equal
concernment to oppose such encroaching Anarchy, And, thereby, afforded Cromwell
both a stirrup of great Advantage, and a convenient cloak for his Usurpation,
The People being Weather beaten, and willing to Anchor any where for present
shelter; But still it was with this notable difference, That, whilst all good
Englishmen looked upon themselves as cast upon a remote and barbarous Island,
where they could not, or would not dwell; The Presbyterians, for the Major
Part, judging, it seems, that they were at home, set up their Rests and pitched
their Tents there: And though all things did not fully answer their humors
(which are hard to please,) Yet, having learned to permit somewhat to
necessity, and share what they could not engros^e they found, (or rather made,)
their condition very comfortable, Many of them, who had the faculty of
shifting, and varying their forms, (as Sects and Insects are, alike, apt to
do,) kept steady footing in the Government, For, if the times did not comply
with them, they, (to be sure,) would comply with the times; Such, (being, no
doubt, the choicest factours of Tyranny,) were the Usurpers own Creatures, and
possessed the chief Dignities and Offices of State: All that had been once
Roundheads, and would but hold their tongues, were countenanced in their
several Ways, And, if they could swallow a Gudgeon, sure of great Preserments,
as they fell, However justified in all their illegal Possessions; The Levites,
with their odd Addresses, and Doctrines, magnifying sometimes the Piety and
Justice, sometimes the Policy and Prowess of their Benefactour, were, by him,
reciprocally entertained, as good Mussulmen, with due encouragement, And to
humor them throughout, their Pulpit Phrases, Gestures, and Tones, were
devoutly imitated and grew in fashion at the Court: Those, that pretended to be
clogged with Principles, and could not walk up to the perfection of others,
(being not very Numerous,) passed under the favorable Notion of tender
Consciences, or weak Brethren, Betwixt whom, and the Usurper, there was always
this General understanding of each other, He, in his part, desired to show
them, He took them not for Royalists, they, on their part, to satisfy him,
That he had no reason to distrust them: In sum, The many Courtesies, which that
Party did him in the Junto 1657. with testify upon Record, That they were not
utterly at defiance with him: On the other side, the Royalists, (unshaken in
their Fidelity, and unpolluted with the General Corruption, whether by
Confederacy, Consent, or Compliance,) reasonably enough supposing, That, the
Popular Basis once undermined, such Paper-buidings could not long continue,
took heart again, And, (being withal ensnared, by the Se^pentine Practices of
some Professors,) freely embarbarqued themselves in great and hazardous
designs to bring in the King; Which, being rather nipped, than suppressed, were
frequently resumed, Every Year the Common Gaols were filled with Cavaliers,
whereof, such as the Tyrant could convict by the Justice of those times, were,
accordingly, dispatched, such as he vehemently suspected, were sent to
Plantations, and remote Prisons, such, as were only in his general List, after
some months durance, went out upon Bail, till the next Summons, or Warrant to
apprehend them, And this, I take it, may serve, at least, for a Landship of
that strangely blended, and Promiscuous Scene.

After the Decease of Oliver Cromwell, It cannot be forgotten, with what
reluctance, the Soldiers and Phanaticks were brought to acknowledge his Son
Richard, whom, soon after, they contemptuosly discarded: The Soldiers
Objected, That they had never known him in Arms, And that he was a Stranger to
their Cause and Merit; The Fanatics found him not for their turn, And were not
willing to hazard their Affairs with him, in whose Experience or Conduct, they
could no way confide; But the Presbyterians judging him to be naturally of
their Principle, However, of soft Metal, and altogether dependant on their
Interest, (as if their Sure were now Trump again) made him their Prince, And
inclined, certainly, to have laid themselves and their Country at his Feet, For
the Pulpits, (the Oracles of Presbytery) recommended him to the People, as a
man after Gods own heart.

With the Fortune of Richard, fell all the hopes of the Presbyterians, For, in
Junto's it was easily perceived, they would be overmatched by those of the
other faction, who were backed by the Army, and furnished with better Notions,
as to the present purpose, than they; And, from a free State, (if such a
Chymaera could then be fancied,) their Prospect was yet more unpleasant. Their
Empire being, on all sides, rejected, as the least tolerable of any, that had
been propounded; So as now they were put to find out a new Bottom, or rather an
Expedient to preserve themselves, if not as Presbyterians, yet as men.

Hitherto, I suppose their Modesty will not pretend much of Loyalty; For making
use only of their ambidextrous Covenant, sometimes by adhering to the Letter,
sometimes by pursuing (as they said,) the main End, (viz.) Reformation, They
hovered, like a Cloud, uncertain where it should drop, and lurked, as it were,
in Ambuscade, (like the Germane Boors, near a Battle,) ready to pillage either
Party, when a disaster befell them; But now, consulting rather the present
State and Exigence of Affairs, than their own Principles, or former Practices,
They found a necessty of engageing, or remaining at the discretion of the
Victour; For, on the one fide, they saw a desperate faction, supported by a
great Army, which must be maintained with Rapine, so as none could, in reason
hope to be Innocent, that was rich, nor safe from them, but by adventuring with
them; Besides, that Tithes, and Colleges, being, in discourse, swallowed, as
the first sweet Morsel, gave a shrill Alarm, Especially to their Ministers,
who, surely, were not silent, or sloathful in communicating their fears; On the
other side, they found the People violently inclined to the King, exasperated
with their Burdens, weary of Unsettlement, and fearful of extreme Anarchy The
Royalists full of fresh hopes, and ready for some notable Effort; And the King,
(to whose Justice they saw themselves very obnoxious, in case they endeavored
to make no Atonement,) not like to be long destitute of reasonable Aid, by the
general disbanding of Soldiers in Foraign Parts; Wherefore, (not to sit dry,
as they say, betwixt two great Rivers, (they Chose to espouse his Majesty's, as
the safer and nobler Interest, being grounded on an English Basis, which they
observed the other wanted; But how lamely they proceeded, Let the year 1659
declare; For, though they knew; what reasonable expectations were from them who
had boasted so much, And who indeed could come more easily to a Rendezvous,
than the Royalists to a Private meeting, Though, for their encouragement, the
right hand of Fellowship was civilly afforded them, Their Achievements, alas,
were very Abortive; And, if we may judge from our Enemies Intelligence, by
which they proceed to apprehend suspected Persons, It will soon appear, where
the Burden lay.

Indeed, though some particular Persons of them Acted, at that time, very
clearly and honorably, yet the greater Number were, (at best,) Lukewarm, many
Subtle ones, forejudging, I presume, the Event of a Free Parliament, (then
contended for,) declined the Enterprise; The Rigid Presbyterians, openly,
branded it with Malignancy, And diverse of their most famous Ministers,
particularly those in Leicestershire, published an Address to the Junto then
sitting, with their names subscribed, beseeching them, that the unadvisednesse
of a few might not prejudice the integrity of many, who still soberly adhered
to their first Principles of a Godly Magistracy and Ministry; So as, admitting
the Faction to be more numerous, then, I trust, it is, Yet the Dissentours
being so many, And the tempers of the rest so various, I suppose their
Endeavors might appear, perhaps the more generous, but could not be
considerable, in proportion with the Royalists, who so freely engaged.

From the Ruins of this design (how dismal soever they appeared,) there
sprung an unforeseen, but considerable, advantage to the Kings Affairs, For
Lambert, having, thereby, gotten a new Rise of Fortune and Reputation with the
Army, And finding by late examples, how easy and cheap it was to Usurp,
especially, where the Usurpation could not be more unwarrantable, or
intolerable, than the Authority it self, was encouraged to thrust out that
Junto, and set up a Committee of his own, with a purpose, no doubt, to follow
the very traces of Oliver; Wherein the whole fraternity, of Fanatics,
(Presbyterians excepted,) firmly adhered to him, as their great Captain, and
Patron, who was to finish that work, which others had left imperfect, (viz.)
the Subversion of all our Foundations both in Church, and State; In order
whereunto, the Confiding Party must be first refined, And the Notion of
Malignancy spread as far, as Policy, or Avarice could extend it; In which
danger surely none were so near concerned as the New-Cavaliers (they being a
fresh booty) but especially the famous City of London, whose sack, it was
visible, the Soldiers gaped for, And their Masters were not very unlike to
gratify them therewith: Wherefore, if they would not altogether renounce their
Senses, They were obliged (as their last refuge) wholly to mingle Counsels with
the Royal Party, and unite themselves to that Cause, which was then very
Popular, And could only in appearance give check to so foul and fierce a
Monster, Or rescue them from Captivity, under those, that measure the Rights of
others by their own Lusts.

In this Confusion of Interests, enervating and supplanting each other, His
Grace, the Duke of Albemarle, (who, with profound Secrecy, had, till then,
reserved himself for such a Juncture,) wisely judged, That Now was his only
Opportunity of Acting, For in dissipating the Fanatics, by the Collision of
Parties, He should Cut the Sinews of Faction, and advance prosperously, upon
their Bellies, toward freedom, and lawful settlement; And, though to vanquish
an Army, so resolved, and appointed, with slender Troops, on which he could
little rely, seemed almost impossible, Yet, supplying his want of Forces, by
his Conduct, and correcting their stubbornness with Excellent Discipline, with
great assurance, he committed the Event to Providence; The Authority he made
use of, was that of the late Junto, which, (how frivolous soever in it self,)
was the best then in being, And, indeed, afforded him sufficient color against
his Enemy, who acted mutinously under that Commission, From thence, therefore
he determined to take his Rise, by the Example of good Builders, who, to erect
a lofty Fabric, lay the Foundation low, Foreseeing, no doubt, That as Lambert,
and his Confederates were very Guilty to the Powers, by them interrupted; Those
Powers were no less obnoxious to the Excluded Members, And they again to an
entire Parliament; So that public interest, being one in motion, probably
would never rest, till, by continual progress it came to center in our Ancient
and Natural Constitutions. His Success was suitable to the Merit of his
design; For, by Civil Stratagems, added to his Military Experience,
Temporising, and Amusing his Enemy with uncertain Treaties, he soon dissolved
that Veterane Army, without hazarding so much as a Skirmish.

This, indeed, was a fair and Auspicious Introduction to better things, But,
alas, Our deliverance was as yet, a mere Embrio, And, (if here forsaken,)
Subject to fatal miscarriage; Whereof his Grace being very sensible, he
resolved to perfect it, by coming with his Victorious Army to London: His
Pretense was very favorable, (viz.) The final Suppression of the Fanatics,
who otherwise might easily be encouraged to make head again, Wherefore, betwixt
taking, and asking leave, preventing resistance, or denial, with a Sober and
Orderly Expedition, he advanced Southward, But, in his March, received
Addresses of all kinds, with such Indifferent Behavior, and Answers so like
Oracles, as, at once, gave Courage to his Friends, yet Hope to his Enemies, and
brought him, undiscovered, to his Journeys End; Where acting, Yet, for a time,
the same Person, having, by an unheard of Stratagem, thoroughly felt the Pulses
of the People, and caught the Malicious in their own Net; He seasonably
appeared, what he always was, A Perfect Lover of his Country.

In the Glory of which enterprise, (the most fortunate and memorable of our
times,) Let not any Party or Faction pretend to share; It being fresh in our
Memories, That neither Presbyterians, nor Royalists were so Convinced, or
Satisfied of his Graces Intentions, (the Disguisal whereof was then his
Masterpiece,) that they thought it fit, or safe for them, to engage with him,
But the whole Nation stood musing, in a kind of Trance, full of various
thoughts, and discourses concerning him, Inclining, doubtless to wish him
well, Yet rather desirous, to know why.

The Welcome of this Notable Deliverance both from present and future
Violences, was Celebrated with unusual Triumphs: For, as well the People in
general, as the Royal Party, being therewith surprised, could scarce contain
themselves, but were transported with Excess of Joy, Wherein the Presbyterians
seemed also to partake; But (like Persons, who debauching over night, are
Crop-sick the next morning,) No sooner was the public security digested, but
they began immediately to consult the concernments of their Faction, And
examine, Whether the Liberty, long desired, and then expected by the People,
would not blast, and finally frustrate their hopes, which were inconsistent
with such Liberty; Many of their Countenances betrayed a kind of Chagrin, or
secret regret, which, for shame, they must not own, And accordingly, from
henceforth, their Business was, not so much to bring in his Majesty, (which no
Endeavors of theirs could greatly expedite, or obstruct,) As to contrive and
limit the Manner of his Entrance, that it might serve their purposes: His
Grace, (no question,) knew a Part of their minds, And, to make his Passage, as
clear as might be, resolved to gratify them, in all things consistent with his
design; Wherefore, pursuing his Method of effecting that, securely, by degrees,
which could not, (without manifest hazard,) be, at once, accomplished, Instead
of a new and free Election, (the Popular pretense,) He permitted the Members,
excluded in 1648. to take their places, and Act as a House of Commons, without
the Lords, But, first agreed with them of a time of Session so short, as might
afford them no latitude to consider ought, but what was in Order to their own
dissolution, and the Summons of a freer Convention, Keeping that other
Expedient, as a reserve, in Case they should herein prevaricate with him.

The Excluded Members were, generally, Persons, who, by long Experience, had
acquired much Prudence, and Moderation; And great Matters were in reason
expected from them, whom it highly concerned, at length, to perform their
Vows, and redeem their honors; Yet, (Whether they only yielded to the
Iniquity of the times, (as many alleged,) Or (as others doubted,) their teeth
were still on Edge with the sower Grapes, they had once eaten,) Certain it is,
That the Subscription by them imposed in the Settlement of their Militia, And
their narrow Confinement of Elections be excluding even the Sons of Royalists,
afforded matter of much Scandal, and evil Prognostic, That they only wanted
Elbow-room for further Severity; Neither, indeed, was their unwillingnesse to
quit their beloved Seats, without special Notice; But they soon made amends for
all, by their much desired dissolution, Committing the Interval of Government
to a Select Counsel of Estate.

During which Interval, the great Argument of our Cabales was this, viz. What
would be the force of those Shackles, wherewith both Parliament and Militia
were then charged; There being scarce ever the like Engines of Faction,
invented, by the late Refiners; so as most of those, whose Complexions were not
sanguine, presaged that all the satisfaction we had swallowed, must be vomited
up again: His Grace was generally acquitted, as having done his part, for it
could not be expected, that he should inspire Parliaments, it was for him
sufficient, that rescuing them from outward interruptions, he both enabled, and
directed them to do good: But, whilst matters thus continued in great suspense,
it pleased God to send a strong East wind, with a Springtide of Loyalty, which
overwhelmed all those Banks and Damms, wherein the Politicians thought
themselves so secure: For the Royalists, rightly apprehending, that then was
the very Crisis of their future hopes, some of them generously despising those
Qualifications, which under great Penalties disabled them, others, most
industriously assisting in Elections; The People perceiving and declining the
snare; and his Grace continually favoring the Cause of Freedom, as the only
Groundwork of his Proceeding, the Major Vote of that Parliament, (by Gods
Blessing,) proved such, as has produced the Peace and happiness we now enjoy.

Had his Majesty lain at the Presbyterians feet, it is probable enough, they
would, at length, have brought him in, if not out of Loyalty, yet for
quietness sake, since, without him, they found, there could be no Settlement;
But, then, he must have taken Conditions from them, and such, as would have
rendered, it doubtful, whether a Diadem, so qualified and Circumscribed, were
worth his acceptance; The Church must have been relinquished, and all the
Sacrilege of the times established, with his consent; His Party forsaken, and
condemned as Felons; Laws should have been made, and executed only in his name:
Upon these, and other the like Agreements, he might, perhaps, have obtained an
honorable Pension, together with a Writ of ease; That whilst he Reigned, they
might Rule, as a kind of Ephori; So that, at best, they may be said to have
contributed to the bringing in of a King of Sparta, but not of an English
Monarch; In a word, either they renounced, or retained their Principles; If
they retained them, they could not with any reason, be presumed to act, with so
little Conformity to themselves, and their Affairs, if they renounced, they
were, then, no longer Presbyterians.

Indeed, if we examine the demeanor of many since our blessed Change, we shall
have little ground to believe, that they were greatly sollicitous for the
bringing in of his Majesty, whom, (pardoning with abundant clemency, and
governing (as he does) with infinite Moderation,) they can yet less afford to
comply with, than they could with the worst of Tyrants; But by their continual
snarling, their readiness to report and improve Calumnies, their delight in
any thing, that may seem to cross his Majesty's wishes, their Proverbial
Interlocutions, importing Menaces, and Designs Above all, their flocking to
seditious Preachers and Lecturers, declare that we owe our Settlement, rather
to their weakness, than their Loyalty; Alas, it is for men of noble and
sincere minds, to be convinced by reason, or reclaimed by benefits, Levened
Natures are not soon purged, nor Cities, overgrown with Faction, easily weeded:
And since, under long Persecutions, the Royal Party not only kept their own
station, but, selling their Inheritances, entailed their Principles, to their
Familes Why should any imagine, that our Professors are regenerate, since the
Kings return: I wish his Majesty's goodness to them, find a due requital, and
this Argument prove a false Alarm, which, at all Events, is safer, perhaps,
than none.

Some, I hear, have undertaken to draw a kind of parallel, betwixt our
principal Covenanters, and the Lords of the League in France, concerning their
return to their obedience; But, I suppose, the disparity will appear to be vast
and important: Those in France being possessed of strong Garrisons, and entire
Provinces at their Devotion, had it in their choice, whether they would present
them, as Peace Offerings to their Prince, or make use of their Advantages, (as
some did) to dis-member the Kingdom. It was otherwise here, for, his Grace
having once muzzled the Army, and thereby freed the Nation from its bondage,
there remained nothing, that could obstruct our immediate Settlement, or afford
leisure for any to capitulate with his Majesty; Again, the holy League was not
infringed by any notorious prevarication that might blast its Credit, But the
Covenant, being trampled on by the Imposers, was grown as vile as Dung, as
scandalous, as the stews, and had done all the Mischief it could: Finally, the
Leaguers had never, personally, disobliged the King, nor affronted the Crown;
And, since their Quarrel was purely Religious, (though surely, therein
extravagant enough, yet) after that Kings conversion to the Roman Faith,
whereby, he partly purged them of their guilt and scandal, there was little
fear of their Loyalty, for the time to come; Whereas, our Covenanters, having
greatly injured their Sovereign, and being poisoned in their Principles, as to
the Government, may, probably, still continue as Thorns in the side of
Monarchy, and have therefore of late been justly branded with an indelible
Character of reproach, So that, I presume, the same Arguments cannot serve them
both, either in relation to merit antecedent, or future confidence.

Hitherto, I have chiefly argued their want of Inclination to serve his
Majesty, if further it shall appear, that they likewise, wanted power, I hope,
it will then be readily granted, that the work was not theirs: Now, what, in
reason, could be expected from those, who by their manifold Perjuries, and
Impo^^ures, (long since detected,) had forfeited all their Interest and
Reputation with honest or sober men; It was easy, indeed, at the first to do
mischief, to disturb a lawful and peaceable Government, For, in combustible
matter, even little sparks, (unquenched,) have kindled great flames, and
sedition is commonly the work of mean Varlets: But, to prevent disasters, or
redress them, to encounter Tyrants, and restore lawful Powers, is no slight
achievement: Briefly, that Party, which in a free Election, could scarce be
chosen to serve for any one County, nor, indeed pretend to it, but in a few,
will not, I suppose, arrogate to it self a national Interest, nor can it seem
to be any way considerable, without faction, or usurped Power.

From all which, it is manifest, that, to God only belongs the glory of his
Majesty's Preservation, and our deliverance, To the blood of King Charles the
Martyr, and other noble Assertours of his Cause, shed in its defense, the
virtue and renown, by which it has outlived its ruin, To his Grace, the Duke
of Albermarle, (next under God,) the honor of redeeming his Country, and
restoring his Sovereign, without bloodshed, or servile Conditions; To the Royal
Party, this just Commendation, that by their restless endeavors, and matchless
constancy, they harrassed all the Sentinels of Tyranny, with duty and fatigue,
blunted the edge of Persecution, and seasoning the people continually, both
with wholesome Principles, and great examples, (like the Salt of their
Country,) preserved it from putrefaction, in the worst of times; To the
Presbyterians, this single Character, that they acted all along like prudent
men, who knew a better use to be made of Conscience than by suffering for it,
and that having tried all expedients of Settlement, or security, without the
King, and found them ineffectual, they at length, inclined to the bringing in
of his Majesty, lest he should have come in without them.

FINIS.

