A PROPOSAL FOR Maintaining and Repairing THE HIGH WAYS.

By E. LITTLETON.

LONDON: Printed and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1692.

A PROPOSAL FOR THE HIGH WAYS.
IT is most certain, that the High Ways of England are extremely bad at
present. And it is as certain, that this badness of the High Ways is a great
and public Inconvenience; so that it much concerns us to have them mended.
But this cannot be done without Charge. For the Ways must still ly in the ill
condition they are in, if we will not be at the Charge to repair them. The way
to have the Work well done, is by raising Money for that purpose, and laying it
out in due Method. For the scambling way of sending in Carts and Laborers will
never do it. Nor will it ever be done by single Parishes: tho you fine them
over and over, for not doing more then they are able. And surely it seems a
hard case, that when a great and foul Road passes through a Corner of a poor
Parish; those people must maintain it whether they can or no, when perhaps
themselves have the least Use of it. But a Hundred can do those things, which a
Parish cannot do: and what the Hundred cannot, the County can. Tho some things
there are, that to be done as they should, would be too great a burden to a
County: and therefore require the Assistance of the whole Kingdom. Which, tho
given in a very small and easy proportion, would perform great matters.

It is therefore humbly proposed;

1. That a constant yearly Tax be laid upon Land of four pence in the pound.

2. That the Collectors of it in each Parish pay the one moiety to the Parish
Surveyor, and the other moiety to the Surveyor of the Hundred.

3. That the Surveyor of the Hundred employ the one half of his moiety upon the
Ways within his Limits, and pay over the other half to the Surveyor of the
County.

4. That the County Surveyor remit one quarter part of his Money to the
Surveyor General of England; employing the residue upon the Bridges and great
Roads of the County.

5. That the Surveyor General employ his whole Money in the London Roads, the
whole Kingdom being concerned in them.

There is great reason to hope and believe, that such a constant Tax, disposed
of in this manner, would make wondrous Alterations for the better in a few
years. It would make the Ways of England another thing from what they are now.

The Parishes will have two pence in the pound, to lay out upon those Ways
that are particularly most useful to themselves. And when they have done this,
they have done their whole Duty: nor are they to be now punished or molested
upon the account of High Ways. As for such of their Ways as are useful to
others also, they will be maintained (or helped to be maintained) by those
others: that is, by the Hundred or the County. Moreover every Parishioner will
have benefit, by what is done by and in the Parish.

The Surveyor of the Hundred will have a penny a pound from the whole Hundred:
To be laid out in those Ways that are most useful to the Hundred. Of which the
particular Parishes, and every particular Man, will have the benefit.

The County Surveyor will have three farthings a pound from the whole County.
Which will also redound to the benefit of the particular Hundreds and Parishes,
and of every particular Man.

The Surveyor General will have a farthing in the pound from the whole Kingdom:
to make good the Roads (where it is needful) from all parts to London. which
will be a great benefit and advantage, both to the Counties, and to the
Hundreds and Parishes. to all Men in general, and to every Man in particular.

The Parishes therefore need not grudge, that the half of their Tax is carried
from them; since the whole is employed for their Good.

The Sum to be laid out by the Surveyor of an ordinary Parish will be under
ten pound. For the yearly value of all England is about ten Millions, (tho some
think it twelve Millions or more:) and the Parishes we know are near ten
thousand. Which gives a thousand pound a Year to each Parish, taking one with
another. And a thousand two pences make eight pound and a Noble.

The Sum to be laid out by the Surveyor of an ordinary Hundred may be
threescore or fourscore pound. And the Surveyor of an ordinary midling County
may have about six Hundred pound. But the Surveyor General will have at least
ten thousand pound yearly. For ten Millions of Farthings make something above
that Sum.

In a great Parish there may be two or more Surveyors; and so in a great
Hundred, and in a great County.

The Parish Surveyors may be chosen by the Parishes, as now they are: and they
may have liberty to lay out their Money (as far as it will go) in what part
they please. But the Surveyors of the Hundreds and Counties, may be by the
Appointment, and under the Direcetion, of the Justices. And the Surveyor
general may be under the Governance, and by the Nomination, of such Persons as
the Parliament shall please to appoint; or may even deserve the Care of his
Majesty and Council.

Let me advise both the greater and lesser Surveyors, to do their work
substantially as far as they go. And what is now left undone, may be done
another time. But a thing done slightly is good for nothing. A due thickness of
Stones and Gravel, may (with a little reparation) last for ever: whereas too
small a Quantity will soon be swallowed up in the Dirt, and no sign left of
it. Moreover where the Ground is false, and rotten, and of the nature of a
Quagmire; all the cost and labor bestowed upon it is merely lost, unless you
lay faggots or bavins of Brush wood, acrosse and under the made Way. And in
this and all other sorts of ground, it must be a principal care to lay the
Ways dry: so that no water may run along them or over them, or ly upon them.

Beside the ordinary Work which is done to the High Ways, there are three
things that will greatly conduce to their Amendment: That is to say, Turning,
Opening, and Levelling.

The Turning of a Way in some places will make it much better, and in some
places will make it also much shorter. A Surveyor therefore, with the
approbation and consent of two or three of the next Justices, should have power
to do it: he making Satisfaction to the Land-Owners, out of the Tax-Money he
has to lay out. And if he and the Owners cannot agree it, then a Jury to be
empannell'd (by the Surveyor or the next Justice) to determine the matter. But
it is likely a good part of this Satisfaction must be allowed by those, through
whose Lands the old way did go, and who now are eased of it.

The Opening and Widening of the Ways is highly requisite in the Enclosed
Countries: where the Roads generally are too narrow, and in many places shaded
with Trees. Which things as they have extremely spoiled the Roads hitherto, so
the removing of these things would go a great way toward their Cure. I
confess, in strictness, they that have thus streighten'd the Ways (that is the
Owners of the Lands adjoining) might be compelled to open them. But it may
seem too hard: whereas no hardships are here intended. And the making new
Fences would be more grievous to them, then their loss of Land. It seems
therefore most equal that this Charge be divided. Let the Owners allow more
Land, and the Surveyor make the Fences. Or if the Owners will do this
themselves, the Surveyor to give them a just Consideration for it. The Land, I
said, must be allowed by the Owners: that is, so much as will give the Ways a
reasonable breadth. But if the breadth be extraordinary, the Surveyor to pay
for the extraordinary Land that makes it. You will say, If the Roads be widen'd
in this manner, many a fine Row of Trees must go to wrack. To which I answer;
that it is very good Husbandry, to cut down Trees full grown, and plant young
ones in their stead. But it seems a little unfortunate, that such care has
been taken to plant Trees, where they may do most Mischief. The planting of
Trees upon High Ways is the same sort of Wit, as the building of Houses upon
Bridges. for both of them destroy the End for which High Ways and Bridges are
ordained, that is, convenience of passage. Yet I confess that Trees on the
North side a Way do little harm. in regard they only keep off the Sun for part
of the day in the height of Summer, when the Ways can best spare it.

When I speak of Levelling the High Ways, my meaning is, That by abating the
Hills and raising the Hollowes and Valleys, the Ways may be brought nearer to
a Level then now they are: and that so the Ascents and Descents may be made
more easy. And here (which is a great advantage) two things will be done at
once. For the same Earth that is taken from the Hills, will be carried down to
the Hollowes. And by this means, if the Hill be cut down six foot, and the
Hollow raised as much; the Ascent will be made easier by twelve foot.

A few Carts will carry abundance of Earth in a short time, going not far and
down the Hill. If it should be half a mile, (and it will seldom be so much);
each Cart may easily carry ten load a day, provided it be filled quick. Which
that it may be, we should use the way of Barbados: where Industry is at the
height, and where they study to carry on great Works to most advantage.

They do there make great Walls or Wears, in the low places where there comes
a good stream of Floud-Water; thereby to stop the running Mould that is washed
from their Land. And without these Walls, there is in many of those low places
a mighty depth of rich Mould. This Mould (however it come to be there) they
carry out to their Grounds near adjacent. to manure them for planting. And when
they go about it, they do not (as we do in England) set two or three Fellows
to throw up the Earth into a Cart with Spades, so that one Cart would be an
hour in loading; but their way is this. Four or five good How-men a breast
lead the way, and fall upon this Earth with their Howes: cutting it down (after
they are a little entered into it) half a yard deep or more; and each Man
taking about a yard in breadth. And so they pass on, leaving behind them the
loose Mould they have dug. After these How-men come nine or ten Fillers
(part Men, part Women) with every one a Box. which is nothing else but a broad
board at the bottom, with narrower boards at the sides and one end, the other
end and the top being left open. Into these Boxes, at the open end, they pull
the loose Mould with broad Howes. and (with the help of one another) getting it
up upon their heads, away they go with it to the Cart; which stands close by,
with the Carter up in the tail of it. Who swiftly takes the Mould from off
their heads, throws it into the Cart, and gives back the empty Boxes. Thus the
work goes on merrily: And by that time each Filler has brought four Boxes,
the Cart is loaded: and presently drives away, another Cart being ready. which
they quickly serve in the same manner. And three or four Carts, plied in this
manner, will carry out in few days a mighty quantity of Earth. Moreover when
the How-men have gone as far as is convenient, they then come back: and either
begin a new breadth, or go over the first breadth again.

In the work here described, the How-men are but four or five, when the
Fillers are nine or ten: because of the softness and easiness of the ground.
But in the Roads of England, where the ground is harder, there must be as many
How-men as Fillers: or rather more. And eight or nine Inches may be found a
sufficient depth, to go on with at one time. Also whereas in the Barbadian
Affair there is mention made of Howes, that sort of Tools is little used in
England. But in such work as pulling down Hills, and cutting through Hills, I
account it much better than the Spade. The rather, because these Works must be
carried on in Summer; when generally all ground is hard, so that a Spade can
hardly touch it. And withal it will look most proper and natural, when the
Workmen go on forward up the Hill, the Earth they have dug being still
carried away from behind them.

In the great Roads, the breadth of these cut Ways should be about twenty
yards. which will take up twenty How-men abreast at once, or ten at twice. This
(I think) should be the breadth; beside the Splay, which may be made last. And
the raised ground below may have the like breadth, beside the Slope. But where
the height of the raised ground is more then ordinary, there should be no
Slope, but a Wall on each side.

In this kind of Work, a Man of Skill will know before hand, how many load of
Earth the low ground will require, to be raised to such a height; and how many
load the high ground, cut down to such a depth, will yield. And he will so
order it, that when the Work is brought to the Line projected, there shall not
a Spade-full of Earth be either to spare or wanting.

If near to a Hill there be a Hollow, that is, such a low ground as rises
presently on the other side, and a Way goes throu the Hollow over the Hill;
that Hollow will easily be raised. And if from the brow of the Hill the ground
soon falls as you go further on, that Hill may be easily cut throu and abated.
And by both or either of these things the Ascent is made less. But if both the
high ground and the low ground be a great continued Plain; in this case the
Ascent cannot be made less, but yet it may be made more easy. For Example:
There is a Hill twenty yards high: and as the Slope is now, you go a hundred
yards to mount it. So that you rise one yard in five. But if the brow of the
Hill be cut throu, and the Ascent be carried (by an easier Slope) fifty yards
farther on; if also, by laying this Earth at the bottom, the Ascent is made
begin fifty yards farther back; you must now go forward two hundred yards to
get up the twenty yards in height, and you will rise now but one yard in ten.

This kind of Work belongs only to the greater Surveyors, and chiefly to the
Surveyor General. who with his ten thousand pound a year will do wonders. He
will do such things as our Forefathers never dreamed of.

Let us now consider the Cost and Charge of these Works. In a great piece of
Work, or a Jobb of the first magnitude, there may be ten Carts, twenty Hours
or Diggers, and as many Fillers. The Carts will need but three Horses a piece,
in regard they go down the Hill when they are laden, and and come up empty.
However, to reckon largely, we may allow ten Shillings a day for each Cart:
which for the ten Carts is five pound a day. And the Wages of the Diggers and
Fillers, with the Salaries of those that Over-see the Work, and other
Incidents, may come to another five pound. which makes ten pound in the whole.
Ten pound a day is sixty pound a Week, six hundred pound in ten weeks, twelve
hundred pound in twenty, and eighteen hundred in thirty. which I think are as
many weeks as are proper for such work in one year. The first ten weeks will
make a great Notch in the top of a Hill, and lay a great Heap at the bottom.
enough to cure any ordinary Steep. But if ten weeks will not perfect the
business, perhaps twenty will: and that which cannot be done in twenty weeks,
may be done in thirty. And surely there are few places, that will not by the
Labor of thirty weeks receive a very great amendment. Labor omnia vincit
Improbus. this Improbus labor will do strange things.

We see an Example of raising a Hollow, at Fleet Bridge. From whence, in former
times, it was a hard Steep up Ludgate Hill, and not much better up Fleetstreet.
But by making the Bridge higher, and filling up the ground at each end, the
Ascent is now made easy both ways.

And to show what Money can do in these Matters, I shall give two Instances.
The one is, That during the times of the Usurpation, they in some places taxed
the Parishes by a pound rate, for repairing the High Ways. Particularly it was
done in Herefordshire, about Lemster: where the Tax was no less then six pence
a pound. This way did not last long. but it did so effectually do the business,
and it wrought such a reformation, that the like was never there seen before or
since. The other Instance is, in what has lately been done in Kent, upon
Canteerbury Road. which they have made very substantially good, where it was
extremely bad before, by a small Tax of about a halfpenny in the pound laid
upon the County.

Perhaps the sum here proposed to be constantly paid, that is a groat in the
pound, may seem at first hearing too great a burden. But either I am
exceedingly mistaken, or it will be found and deemed (upon trial) the best
money that ever was bestowed. so sudden, so great, so general, will the
benefit be. However if it be thought too much, let it be the half, or even less
then half. but then the work will not be half so well done.

It would be a great help toward the charge of the High Ways, if there were
Tolls erected, in fit places, and where they are needful. And surely it seems
just and equal, that those should give something toward such work, who have a
present benefit by it. A Toll therefore is not to be paid to make the way good
hereafter, (for many that go there now, will perhaps never come that way again,
and so would have nothing for their Money); but the Way must be first made
good, and then the Toll paid. Which thing may be easily so ordered. For there
will be People, we need not doubt, that will advance Money for such Works, to
be reimburs'd with Interest out of the Toll: and then the Toll to continue no
longer. Also a Toll for High Ways mended, should be paid only in those Months,
in which the Ways would otherwise be bad. For the Traveller has then a
present benefit. But it is hard to pay Toll in Summer, for a Way that was foul
only in Winter. A Toll is most proper, when a Bridge is made, where there was
only a Ferry before. And people in that case may well afford to pay a Toll; if
it be something less, then what they must otherwise have paid for Ferrying.

I have said already, and say again now, that the Surveyor General, with his
ten thousand pound a year, will do great matters. I suppose the first thing he
will do, will be the Paving or Pitching the Towns Ends here about London: which
now ly in such a beastly pickle. to the annoyance of the people of the whole
Kingdom, who are perpetually coming in hither and going out hence, on all
sides. The reparation of these Pavings may be put upon those who are to
maintain the Ways. And surely the Charge of the Gravel that is carried yearly
to these Ways, to little purpose, will easily repair the Pavings.

In the next place, this Surveyor ('it is like) will fall upon Shooters Hill. The
Steep, which is the thing to be remedied, is on the farther side: and at the
bottom of it there is a small Hollow. If this Hollow were filled up, so as to
begin the Ascent at the further Edge, it would be a great advantage. But we
must not run up to the Beacon, as now we do, where the Hill is highest; for an
easy compass to the right hand, (throu the Wood), will bring us to the top of
the Hill, where it is much lower then where the Way goes now. Also this Hill
may be cut quite throu: it presently falling on the other side, that is, on the
side next London. and the Earth will fill the Hollow before spoken of. I
suppose one ten weeks Labor, after the rate above described, will abundantly
do this whole Business. But this new Way must go upon new Ground, which must be
paid for. I answer, that the Cost will not be great. Every Acre will come to
ten pound: reckoning it at ten shillings an Acre, and at twenty years
purchase. and the new Way cannot take up three Acres. Also this new Way will
not be far about: and near as much will be saved in the up hill and down hill,
as will be lost in the compass.

The going up to Black Heath is not so bad a place as Shooters Hill, but yet is
more difficult to cure. However it may be helped very much; By widening the
passage that is there already: By cutting throu the Brow of the Hill, and
carrying the Ascent on further; And by employing all this Earth, to raise the
Way below quite to Deptford Bridge. from whence the Ascent should begin, and be
gently carried on. Also this Bridge should be made a little higher: and
likewise broader, and every way better. For it is a shame to see such a
pitiful pimping Bridge, upon a great Road, so near our Capital City. The
Surveyor may bestow upon this piece of Work, full ten Weeks Labor, or more if
he please. And he will also be out Money, beside the Cost at the Bridge, for
removing some Houses upon the Road below; which streighten the Road, and will
hinder its convenient raising.

About a Mile short of Deptford, as you go from London thither, the Road to
Tunbridge turns off upon the right hand. where you presently climb a steep
Hill; and afterward you go down another Steep, upon Leusham Bridge. But if you
went further on in Deptford Way, and then turned to the right hand; the Hill
would be avoided, and the way would go to that Leusham Bridge, almost upon
plain ground. Our Surveyor therefore will probably take care of this matter,
among the first. The Land that this new Way will go upon, may be eight or ten
Acres: which will cost twenty or thirty pound an Acre; in all, two or three
hundred pound. And this is no such frightful Sum to a Surveyor General.
Moreover the Surveyor must pay for making the Fences on both sides the new Way.
And he should make a better Bridge at Leusham.

The particular Works already mentioned, will be for the service and benefit of
the Men of Kent. So likewise it will be a service to the Essexians and East
Angles, to have Bow Bridge made better. And surely a handsome and noble passage
in this place, would also be an Ornament to the City of London: and to the
whole Kingdom likewise. For such Public Works are Marks of a Peoples Wealth
and Greatness: giving also a Taste of their Spirit and Genius. But to return to
our business; the Main Bridge at Bow is very firm and strong, and of a good
height. But the made way beyond it over the Low Grounds, with the Bridges upon
the lesser Channels of the River, are but just enough to make the Way passable.
Which therefore looks like a Way leading to a Mill, or at most to some little
Market Town; and not like a great Road, leading directly (and at a very close
distance) to the Metropolis of our Nation. The thing that is here to be done,
is to make this Way something higher and broader, with a handsome Wall on each
side, and handsome Bridges over the lesser Channells. Also the Hollow on this
side the main Bridge should be filled up: which would make the Ascent more easy
and less dirty. And Earth may be had (for this and all the rest) out of the
next Fields toward London, where they now digg Gravel. I doubt this Work, to
be well done, will cost three or four thousand pound.

The Northern Men must be served next: and there is a tough Jobb to be done for
them, which is, the curing of Highgate Hill. There are two Ways from London to
go up this Hill; the one by Islington, the other by Pancras. From Islington you
go along a deep rotten bottom, and then come to a terrible hard and long
Steep: at which many a poor Horse has had his Heart broken. Upon the whole
matter, we must allow it to be a very bad place. And what remedy is there for
it? Truly if we keep the old way, we may lay out a great deal of Money to
little pupose. But a Ridge of high ground (the same that faces London) goes
declining from Highgate toward Hornsey. And if a new Way were carried on
(between the present way to Highgate and the way to Hornsey, but nearer to
Hornsey Way) to the said Ridge, where it is many Yards lower then the top of
Highgate over which the great Road goes now; and likewise if this Ridge were
cut throu, and the Earth carried down to raise the Way below; the Ascent would
then be easy so far. But still there remain several other Ridges, and several
Hollowes: which must be all made level, or brought near the Level, by cutting
throu the Ridges and filling the Hollowes; till we come into Barnet Road, half
a Mile or more beyond and below Highgate.

As for the Way by Pancras, it is a vile Way, and no way becoming the
Metropolis of a great Kingdom. We must therefore endeavor to make it better.
In the first place, when we come to a Watercourse about half a Mile out of
Town, we must not go creeping along this Watercourse, as we do now; but we must
lay a good Bridge over it, and keep upon the higher ground on the right hand.
In the next place, whereas there is a great Hollow just beyond Kentish Town,
that Hollow must be filled up: as likewise a lesser Hollow a little further on.
For otherwise we must go down into them. And to go down hill when we should be
going up hill, is dead loss. Thirdly, when we are past these Hollowes, we must
not go up the steep Hill to Highgate, but keep to the left hand, along the
lower ground, till we come to the Way that crosses from Highgate to Hampsted.
Fourthly, beyond this Way is a high and narrow Ridge of ground: and this Ridge
must be cut through. Which Earth will fill up in a great measure the Hollowes
below. and what is wanting may be otherwise supplied. Fifthly, from the Notch
here made, the Way will go upon pretty even ground, bowing a little to the
Right; till it come in to Barnet Road, about the place where Islington Way
comes in. And this is the place where the Innes will be. And whereas formerly
Islington Way and Pancras Way did part on the top of Highgate, they will now
part here; the one going on one side of Highgate, and the other going on the
other side. And both Highgate and its Hill will be wholly avoided. For you must
take notice, That we are not now making Ways to Highgate; but to Barnet, and so
to S. Albans, and all the North-West of England. The making these two Ways may
cost ten thousand pound: but the Money were well bestowed, if they should cost
ten thousand pound each.

The South-Country Men are concerned in Portsmouth Road: which truly is a very
bad one. But two places especially will cry out to our Surveyor for speedy
help. One of these places is a few Miles beyond Godalming. When you have gone a
while upon the higher and open ground, you pass over a Millpond Damme: and I
think there is a Way likewise above the Pond. But when you have past this
Water, instead of keeping on to the South, which is the direct course, you turn
short to the left hand Easterly, and climb a Sandy Hill for almost a Mile. And
then you turn about to the right hand Westerly; down a Hill likewise, but with
an easier Slope. All which is done, to avoid (and get to the head of) a deep
narrow Valley, which lies just acrosse the direct way or course. And I confess,
the sides of this Valley are so steep, that (as things stand now) there is no
going that way. But if the Surveyor General take this place to task, with his
whole strength before described, he will perfect the Cure in one Summer. so
that the Road may cross this Valley, without much up hill or down-hill, and in
a Line not much bending. But the way and manner of doing the thing, is too long
to be here set down.

The other bad place upon this Road is further on toward Portsmouth: how much
further I do not remember. but the manner of it is this. As you go on from
London, you see before you a high steep Hill. and coming nearer, you find
interposed a narrow Ridge of ground, twenty or thirty foot high: between which
and the Hill there is a Hollow or small Valley. You do not cross over this
Ridge: but keep under it to the right hand, till you come to the End of it.
and then you turn to the Left, and come to the foot of the Main Hill. Where you
find such a desperate Steep, being a very long one withal, and the Way also
being hollow and narrow; that the like is hardly to be seen upon any Road. So
that in short the place is next Neighbor to impassable. But if you were got to
the top of the Ridge before mentioned, which I said is twenty or thirty foot
high, and to which a Way is soon made; if also you were got up as many foot
more, in crossing the said Valley to the main Hill, the way still rising from
the top of the Ridge; and if the top of the main Hill were cut throu, and the
Earth or Chalk (for it is a Chalky hill) were carried down into the Valley,
and there laid with a Wall on each side; by these things the Hill would be
wonderfully tamed, and the Ascent made gentle and easy. Here let me add; that
the Brow of this Hill may be cut throu to better advantage, and the Notch made
deeper, in regard the ground falls presently (tho gently) on the other side.
And I conceive this piece of Work may be done in less then a Summer

But there are places nearer London upon this Portsmouth Road (where it is also
the Road to Winchester,) that deserve our Surveyors care. in particular the Way
to Kingston: which is very uneven. But the Survey or General would soon change
the face of things. There is a deep bottom at Richmond Park Wall: which by
reason of its broadness seems hard to cure. However a full strength of twenty
Howmen with the appurtenances, by abating the Hills on each side and a little
raising this Bottom, would make a great alteration for the better in one
Summer. And the Ascent from this Bottom to Putney Heath would be made equal
and easy, which is now very hard at the upper end.

A Bridge at Putney will build it self, without the help of Projectors, if our
Surveyor General lay out the Money, to be reimbursed by a Toll. which will do
it in a few years. And the Toll may be renewed for a time necessary, when the
Bridge wants repairing. Moreover the making this Bridge at Putney will give a
sensible Advance, to the Lands and Houses thereabouts beyond the Water. and
therefore the Owners ought to contribute. For it seems unreasonable, that
particular persons should receive great Advantage by a Public Work, and pay
nothing toward it. This Advance will be known soon after the Bridge is
finished: for it will be notorious. And it may be found by an Inquisition duly
made. I think the Owners may afford to give the one half, of what their Estates
are clearly and evidently made better: keeping the other half to themselves, as
clear Gains. If Land be worth more by three shillings an Acre, let it pay
eighteen pence: and if a House be worth more by forty shillings a year, let it
pay twenty. to be settled upon it as a Rent; but the Rent to be bought off,
when the Party pleases, at fifteen or sixteen years purchase. If the one half
be thought too much, let it be less: but they should pay something, if the
Advance be considerable. Otherwise it is not worth the looking after.

Let us now look upon Worcester Road: where also there is Work for the
Surveyor General. I mean such things as cannot be done by the other Surveyors.
This Road, as far as Vxbridge, is pretty good: only there are three Hollowes or
narrow Valleys which it crosses, which may be cured after the manner of
Fleet-Bridge. That is, the Bridges may be made something higher, and the ground
raised at each end; so as to have the Ascents both ways, to begin immediately
at and from the Bridges. The first of these Hollowes is a little beyond Tyburn,
where a small River falls into Hide-Park: the second is at Acton, and the third
at Brent-Bridge three miles beyond. But the Road from Vxbridge to Wickham (for
I will now look no farther) is very untoward: going over high and rugged
ground. and there is no good way to cure it, but by turning it. If you ask
where and how this turning must be, I Will tell you. As we come from Wickham
toward Vxbridge, we keep along the Vallie for two Miles and more, and then we
mount to the higher ground: where we quickly meet with a deep Hollow. From the
bottom whereof we turn to the Left hand toward Beaconsfield, up a hard and a
long Hill, which brings us into a Common. But if this Hollow were quite filled
up, (as it might) and the brow of the opposite Hill cut throu; we might go
straight forward, by a short and easy Ascent, to another part of the same
Common. And then, instead of turning to the Left Hand to Beconsfield, we might
keep to the Right Hand, and fall into the Road that goes between Wickham and
Windsor. Which will quickly bring us to a Range of plain dry Commons, all of
the same Level. along which Commons there lies a direct way to Vxbridge: about
half a Mile short of it, coming in to Beconsfield Road. I grant that here also
are some Hollowes: but they may be easily cured. So that upon the whole matter,
it will be one of the pleasantest Roads within forty Miles of London. And
whereas it may be thought a great way about, it will be found very little. For
the straight Line to Vxbridge from the deep Hollow before mentioned, goes
between Beconsfield Road and the new Road here intended. And Beconsfield Road
bows near as much to the Left, as the other does to the right.

I come now to Hampsted Road; which I confess is but a private one, in
comparison of those others before named. But it will be for the Glory of our
Metropolis, and of great Use withal (for abundance of Horses, Carts, and
Coaches, are perpetually passing that Way;) to have it made easy, and handsome,
and noble. Which (I acknowledge) is a very difficult piece of Work. The best
way to do it, in my apprehension, hension, is this. When we are come from
London to Tottenham Court, we must not sink on the right hand down into the
Bottom, as we do now, which makes the Ascent afterward extremely hard; but we
must go straight on upon the Wind Mill, keeping still (by this means) on the
higher ground. I confess the ground here is very uneven: which I suppose is the
reason why the Road was turned the other way. But it must be levelled, at least
in great measure, by cutting throu the high grounds and raising the low. And
this thing requires no small labor and charge: but the Surveyor General can
do it. [Note, that when I speak of the Surveyor General, and what great things
he will do; I chiefly mean the Curators or Directors whose Orders he executes.
but for shortness I name only the Surveyor.] This therefore is the course we
must steer, till we come to the Main Hill that goes up to Hampsted. And then we
must bend to the right hand, still ascending gently and equally, till we meet
with the old Road: which meeting place will be above the hard steep that toiles
us at present.

From hence we must follow the old Road, till we come to the top of the first
Hill, where the great Elm stands. But since the Road is here very broad, and
one side much higher then the other, we should do well to keep on the lower
side: which would much ease the Draught. Whereas now, the gravelled way is made
to run up the highest ground: as if it were contrived, to make the draught as
hard as may be. You will say this was done to keep the Way dryer. But the Way
might be kept as dry on the lower ground, with ordinary Skill.

From the top of this first Hill, to the lower end of the Town or Street, it
would be a very easy Ascent, if the Hollow were filled up that is between. And
within the Town the Ascent is not hard, nor can it be made easier. But to raise
the Hollow now mentioned, I shall offer an Expedient; which will also make good
the Way further on. But first I must tell you how things are there now. Toward
the upper end of the Town the Way divides in two. One way turns to the right
hand, and leads to the greatest Height of the Main Hill or Heath; and from
thence goes toward the Left down a terrible steep, to Hendon and those Parts.
The other way goes straight forward just on the right hand the Windmill: and
over a high and narrow Ridge of ground, being a Spur of the main Hill, upon
which the Mill stands. The way being hardly passable (if at all) for Carts or
Coaches. This Ridge of ground I would have cut throu to the bottom, and the
Earth to be carried to the Hollow that is below. which will hold our Surveyor
Tack for Ten or fifteen Weeks. And this is the Expedient I had to offer.

Beyond the Windmill there is another Spur, which is too bigg to be cut
throu: nor will the Earth be of any use. But we may avoid it by bowing a little
to the Left, still plaining the way as we go and then bowing a little to the
right, we may go down with an easy descent (partly along the Heath under the
main Hill, and partly throu Enclosures) into Hendon Road. This new Snugg Way,
being a near way withal, will be a mighty advantage to the whole little
Country about Hendon; which has now no other way to London, but one that is
almost impassable. And it will give such an advance to their Estates, that
half of it paid as is above proposed, would go a great way toward the Charge
of the whole Work, though it should cost ten thousand pound. Otherwise a Toll
may be set up to reimburse the Charge, or at least a good part of it.

I shall not now mention any more particular Works. And I doubt those that have
been mentioned, will seem to some people to be idle Fancies, and little better
then Dreams. But I am in good earnest: having great assurance, that the things
may be done, and that in a very short time, with such a Sum as ten thousand a
year. And this is but the thousandth part of the Revenue of England: which (as
has been noted) is ten thousand thousand pounds, or (to speak shorter) ten
Millions. And surely this is a small proportion to be set aside for a Public
Work, which brings so much Profit and Convenience, and so much Honor withal.
Private great Works and Buildings are a Species of Luxury: Public great
Works that are unprofitable, are mere Folly: but Public great Works that are
beneficial and useful, (and nothing is more so than Highways) are the Glory of
a Country. But no Country wants them more then Ours; We have not Public
Spirits.

As it has been said already, the great Works about the High Ways will belong
to the Surveyor General. And the other Surveyors will the while be doing, to
very good Effect. So that in one dozen Years and less, there will be such a
Reformation, such a Transformation, as can hardly be imagined.

Thus I have proposed a Method for making good the High Ways of England; which
hitherto have been strangely (I must not say shamefully and barbarously)
neglected, to the great disparagement and dishonor of our Nation.

ADDITAMENT.
THE Sum here allotted to the Parish Surveyors may perhaps seem too little.
But if it be thought fit, it may be doubled. that is, The Tax may be made six
pence in the pound: whereof four pence to go to the Parish Surveyors, the rest
continuing as before. And I confess this would bring the whole into good
proportion, and make it complete. But I durst not propose so high a Tax.

I doubt the Tax that has been proposed, will be thought too high by some
people. But they should consider; That it must be laid out in their own
Business, and plainly for their own Good. They will perhaps say, that however
Compulsion is odious: and that they know what is good for themselves, without
being taught by Acts of Parliament. In answer, I confess they might speak at
this rate, if the Concern were private and particular. As it were very hard, if
a Man should be compelled to make good Ways, to his own House or his own
Grounds: though it were ever so much for his Good. But in a common Concern, and
where a thing is to be done by many, and for the Good of Many; there must be
Compulsion, or else the thing will never be done. As Men that have Lands in a
Marsh, are compelled by Law to contribute to the maintaining of the Banks and
Walls. And High Ways are of the same nature, tho not in the same degree.
Moreover they should remember, that they are already under Compulsion, and at
Charge, about the High Ways: tho in a Method that is uneffectuall.

But still they will say; Here is a certain Charge and Burden, settled upon our
Land in the Nature of a Rent, by which our Land is plainly made worse. To which
I answer, that by the Amendment of the High Ways their Lands will be plainly
made better. Which thing is sensibly found, in Middlesex and other parts about
London. Where Lands are much better and more valuable, and will yield a greater
Rent, for being near a good Road. And why should this Burden seem more
grievous, because it is certain? I think there is little difference, between
having the Charge of the High Ways to come to about four pence in the pound
one year with another, and the paying of four pence a pound yearly to the High
Ways. But the Landlord must pay this certain Tax to his loss and wrong. I
answer, that if the Law provide that the Tenants shall pay it, the Tenants will
pay it, as they paid the Chimney Money.

But the great Cry will be, that ten thousand pound a year must be carried out
of the Counties. and if it be answered, that it must be all laid out upon
London Roads, which are a general Concern; they will reply, that most of it
will be laid out upon the Roads near London it self: so that all England must
contribute toward the Convenience and Glory of London. Here I must confess,
that probably the Roads about London will be first looked after because, this
City being the Center, the Roads near it are more used by the people of the
whole Kingdom, then any other Roads. and it is for the Glory and and
Convenience of England, as well as of London, to have them made good. But
within a short time, the Assistance of this ten thousand pound Stock will reach
all parts of the Kingdom, where it is most wanted: either by acting
separately, or by helping the Surveyors of the Counties. Also it should be
again considered, how light and easy the proportion is, of what must be thus
advanced. It is but the thousandth part, or a farthing in the pound. Moreover a
great part of these Works about London may be done by Tolls. It is not long,
since the Northern Road by Stamford has been made good this way: and why
should not other Roads have the like advantage?

Perhaps it may be feared, that upon the removing of so much Earth, (in the
particular Works beforementioned, and in others of the like kind), this loose
Earth will be long in settling, and will in the mean time be hardly passable.
But I am very confident; that the Earth being brought by Carts, it will be as
hard and firm, in the very doing, as if it had lain seven years. This I know,
that the carrying of Earth in Carts to a Poole Damme, is better than any
Ramming.

There should be some Care taken also of Foot-wayes: which now, in most places
are wholly neglected. Every great Road, (and every great Bridge likewise, after
the Example of the new Bridge at Brentford), should have a Foot Way by the side
of it, Convenient and Pleasant.

Some think the High Ways would be set right without more ado, if the
Justices of Peace had power to lay Money-Levies, when they see occasion, upon
the several Parishes: having power already to make one Parish help another.
And I confess it would much further the Work. But the way looks too Arbitrary.
and in some places something would be done, and in other places nothing would
be done. and it is not occasional Orders; but a constant course and application,
under Officers who make it their business, that will do this Work effectually
and completely.

FINIS.

