CAVENDISH Duke Of NEWCASTLE.
Sherlock sculp.





A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lady JANE Eldest Daughter
to his GRACE WILLIAM, Duke of NEWCASTLE, AND Wife to the Honorable CHARLES
CHEYNE, Esquire At CHELSEY. November. 1. Being All Saints day. By Adam Littleton,
Priest.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, MDCLXIX.

PROVE. XXXI. 30. Favor is deceitful, and Beauty is vain: but a Woman that
fears the Lord, She shall be Praised.
WHO King Lemuel and his Mother, mentioned in the first Verse of this Chapter,
were, I shall not undertake to decide; It Is agreed on by most Interpreters,
that by Lemuel is intended Solomon, who, as Grotius observes, was Octanominis,
had eight several Names given him in Scripture, and by his Mother consequently
is meant Bathsheba, (thought the same Grotius intimate too, it might be
Hezekiah himself, who ordered the Collection of these Proverbs, and his Mother
Abijah the Daughter of Zechariah:) and that Lemuel was blanda matris
Appellatio, a made word of Kindness to sweeten her motherly Instructions.

In the Chapter, that we may come orderly to the Text, there are two main Parts
to be observed.

I. The Queen Mothers Lesson to the young Prince her Son, in the Nine first
Verses.

II. The Character of a good Woman, from the 10. verse to the end. Which if it
be but the continuation of the Mother's Lecture, is then a Direction to him how
to choose a Wife: but if we take it for a Composure of Solomon's, then 'twill be
a dutiful Return of the Son to his Mother's Instructions, in a large
Commendation of her Wisdom and Care; wherein he sets her forth as the Pattern
of her Sex, and pleats Laudum Corollam, a Garland and Imperial Wreath of
Praises for his Mother's Royal Head.

Be this Good Woman then, in the History, Bathsheba, or Abijah, or (as the
Popish Expositors turn it) the Blessed Virgin; be she, in the Allegory, the
Church, or any pious Soul: it cannot be denied, but that even Literally it
belongs, and may properly be applied to any Good Virtuous Woman whatsoever of
the whole Sex; who is here Commended through all the Letters of the Hebrew
Christ-cross-row: This being Carmen Alphabeticum in Lauds Bonae Foeminae, an
Alphabetical Poem in the Praise of a Good Woman.

And though the whole of the Description be Praise; yet we may take a distinct
notice of two Particulars contained in this Poem.

I. Her Properties or Virtues, reckoned up all along to the 28. verse.

II. Her Praise more Emphatically expressed in the very Close, the four last
Verses.

Her Virtues, to give you a brief Summary of them, are

Her Conjugal Fidelity; verse 11.

Her Kindness and Constancy of Affection; verse 12.

Her Houswifery and Diligence; v. 13. 19.

Her Thrift and Menage; verse 15, 16.

Her Industry and Assiduity; verse. 17, 18.

Her Charity and Liberality to the Poor; verse 20.

Her Providence and Forecast; verse 21.

Her Magnificence in her Furniture and Apparel; verse 22.

Her Reputation in Public; V. 23. 25.

Her Traffic and Credit abroad; in Selling, v. 24. in Buying, v. 16. and in
both, v. 14.

Her Discretion and Obligingness in her Discourse; v. 26.

Her Care of Home, and good Government of her Family; v. 27.

Her Praise to these many Virtues is threefold.

1. At Home, by her Husband and Children; who do not speak out of Flattery, but
as having been constant Witnesses of her Virtuous Carriage, ver. 28. commending
her in this form of words, ver. 29. Many Daughters have done Virtuously, but
Thou excellest them all.

2. Pro Rostris, solemnly out of the Pulpit, in the words of the Text: for so
She shall be praised, implies a solemn Commemoration of her Virtues, and an
Encomiastick Harangue upon her Person.

3. For an everlasting Memorial of her, throughout the whole Country, where she
lived: common Fame shall do her that right; in the last Verse, Her own Works
shall praise her in the Gates: to wit, among the Elders of the Land, as it is
ver. 23. among the Nobles and Rulers of the Kingdom; Persons of the highest
Place and greatest Quality.

Our present business is that Part of her Praise, which is to be performed in
this place: whereto, as I have always accounted it no mean Advantage of my life
to have been known to a Person of so eminent a Worth and Goodness; so I find my
self somewhat enabled by that personal Knowledge for a fair discharge of the
Duty of this Hour, without being much beholden either to public Report, or
private Information: though the Whole almost, of what I have to say, will be
That too, which All, that hear me, will readily back with their Testimony.

To come to the business then; the Virtuous Woman's Commendation here is
expressed,

I. Negatively, or, if you will, Comparatively. Favor is deceitful, and Beauty
is vain.

II. Positively: But a Woman that fears the Lord, She shall be Praised.

As if he had said, Favor and Beauty are Idle, Insignificant, sorry, mean,
toyish Things, that deserve not serious Commendation, at least are not fit to
come in Competition with Virtue and Discretion and Piety, which are the truly
Laudable Qualities, and make the only durable lasting Foundation, to erect a
Monument of Praise upon. It Is indeed the Humor and Custom of wanton loose
Wits, to Court the Beautiful, to Commend the Fair, and the Gay ones in their
Sonnets; and to make Elogies upon them, while they are Living, and Elegies when
Dead: but alas! Those are poor Subjects in comparison of the Good and Virtuous;
and when those Poets Laurels and their Mistresses Praises too shall be blasted
by Truth, and withered by Time, the Woman that fears the Lord, the Pious Lady,
the Virtuous Matron shall be Praised on still, and her Memory ever continue
fresh and green.

We shall, to clear our way for the proving Virtue the alone Praiseworthy
thing, show the Deceit and Vanity of those other two Candidates for Praise.
Favor and Beauty.

Favor, in the Original, Grace, that is, the gracefulness of Habit, Gesture,
Gate, Discourse, and the Attractives of a hansom Carriage, so as to gain
Beholders Love; (...) say the Septuagint, the Complaisances of Conversation,
which do readily procure peoples Favor and good Opnion. Ag in, Beauty in the
Symmetry and Proportion of Parts, in the Feature and Complexion; That which
strikes the Eye and affects the Heart. And yet both these deceitful and vain;
for these Reasons.

1. As Frail and Subject to Decay, whether in their own Nature, (or which is
all one as to the Praise and Esteem of them) in the Opinions of Men. The
Fairest Face is as brittle, as the Glass it views it self in, and is at best
thus but a Miroir of Beauty, and when broken with Age or marred by Disease,
becomes a Looking-glass of Mortality. The distinction betwixt Beauty and
Deformity is quite lost in the Grave, and many times before they come there.
Besides, These are things, that owe their Estimate to the Opinion of men, and
not to any Intrinsic Value; which is therefore as mutable and uncertain as
Opinion, which it is built upon. And this cries up one thing to day, another to
morrow. Thamar, after Amnons wicked satisfaction, was as Unpleasing in his
eyes, as she was Fair before. Nay, the Text says, that the Hatred, wherewith he
hated her, was greater than the love, wherewith he had loved her. And it
appears so by his usage of her; for a Friend was employed to bring her in, but
a Servant served to turn her out, and bolt the door after her.

2. As things that may be Counterfeited and put on. These are many times but
ascititious Ornaments: when Art is taught to supply the defects, and to repair
the decays of Nature. Nor is Beauty alone thus false, when some through a
Fantastic Pride or some worse Distemper, walk as if they were their own
Sepulcres, Painted; but Favor or Grace it self may be abused to meretricious
ends; whilst in a demure Aspect, and a graceful Behavior, it may be difficult
to distinguish betwixt a Courtesan, and a Matron, betwixt the strange woman and
the woman that fears the Lord.

3. As they prove too frequently Occasions of Evil, and Incentives to Lust.
This is indeed Fallax Gratia, a deceitful Favor, which leads into Temptation,
and a vain Beauty which insnares and betrays the Soul. Thus some of the Fathers
tell us, the Angels themselves were surpised with the Beauty of the daughters
of men; from whom came the Impious race of Giants. Some Holy persons have upon
this consideration been remarkably Severe to themselves, mischieving their
Bodies to secure their Souls, and preferring a Voluntary Deformity before an
Involuntary Temptingness. Matthew of Westminster tells us, that in the year of
Christ 870. when the Danes were got into this Island, St. Ebb with all her
Nuns of Colingham did all by one consent cut off their noses and upper lips, to
discourage wicked Attempts, and to preserve their Chastity: which
disappointment so enraged the Danes, that, turning their Lust into Cruelty,
they burnt them all alive together with their Abbey. And Vincentius
Bellovacensis tells us of another English Nun, who being for her lovely Eyes
coveted of one of the King Richards, and by him demanded of the Convent, got
both her Eyes plucked out, and sent them to him, as a Present, in a Dish; with
this Complement, that her Eyes were at the King's service, but her Heart was to
be only Christ's. This was very close to the Letter; If thine Eye offend thee,
pull it out. O dangerous Beauty, which do so hazard Virtue, when it is in thy
company! O unfortunate Virtue, that art thus fain to wound and mangle thy self,
that thou may be kept Entire!

However, notwithstanding this deceitfulness and vanity, Those Advantages of
good Carriage and a Courteous Behavior, of Beauty, and a graceful Aspect, are
not absolutely to be condemned, or to be at all disparaged by us, where God
gives them; they being Blessings, as they come from his Hand. And Virtue and
Piety it self does by this means oftentimes meet with a fair Respect, and a
kindly Welcome in the World; a good Face and an ingenuous Address being a kind
of potent Recommendation even to Strangers, who will be ready to think the Face
a good Index of the Mind; and a fair composed Body a suitable lodging for a
Beauteous Soul. So I know not how, Virtue having Favor and Beauty for its
Attendants and Maids of Honor, appears more Serene, and yet no less Majestic;
and does more plausibly insinuate its Aw and Veneration into peoples minds.

Nor is our Virtuous Woman here wanting in these Imbellishments, which may be
requisite either to her Sex or State; but is like the Merchants Ships, to which
she is compared in the 14th ver. even in this Sense, that she is not without
her Tackle and Ornaments. We find in the 22d ver. that her Clothing is Silk
and Purple: she goes in good Habit, in a rich and fashionable Garb, and ver.
26. that she opens her Mouth with Wisdom; and in her Tongue is the law of
Kindness: she charms all she Converses with, and wins them with her Discourse.
But then she prizes these Advantages under these three Conditions.

1. Not so as ambitiously to seek them, or fondly to Vaunt them. She would not
borrow a Complexion from her Boxes; but, what St Nazianzen says of his Sister
Gorgonia in her Funeral Oration, likes that Red best, which she owes to a
blushing Modesty, and that White or Pale, which comes by a severe Abstinenee.

2. Not so as to be Proud of them, or to Rely upon them as solid goods. Beauty
is a thing but skin-deep, and at best is but a Set-off, no real Substance.
Piety is her alone Confidence, and Virtue designed for the Pillar of her
Praise; whereon her fair Name shall be ingrav'd in legible Characters to
succeeding Generations.

3. Not so as to Mis-imploy them, but to Guide them with Virtue and Discretion.
She likes a Cheerful, but would not have it a tempting Look. She composes her
self all over exactly to Innocence, and then makes that very Innocence all over
Complaisant: and above all things takes care, that Beauty may not be her Crime,
and that the Fair Vessel, her Soul is Embarked in, may not want a good Pilot, a
Virtuous Mind to Govern it.

And this for the Negative or Comparative Part, that Favor and Beauty are not
of themselves Things commendable in Women, any further then they are
accompanied and managed by Discretion and Virtue. We come now to the Position,
which is that a Woman, which fears the Lord, she shall be Praised. In which
Proposition we have, 1. The Subject; a Woman, with her Qualification; that
fears the Lord. 2. The Predicate; She shall be Praised.


WOMAN, in the primitive design of Nature, God's Masterpiece, being the last
work of Creation, and made with a great deal of Deliberation and Solemnity. For
to look upon her as a Supernumerary Creature, and one brought into the world by
the By, besides the Creator's first Intention, upon second Thoughts (though
Those too amongst us Men, with whose methods it pleases God out of
condescension to comply, pass for the Wisest) is to lay a foul Imputation upon
Divine Wisdom, as if it had been at a stand, and were to seek. Wherefore, as we
use to argue, that All things were made for the use and service of Man; because
He was made Last of all: I do not see, if that Argument be good, why the same
Consequence should not be of like force here too, that Man himself was made for
the service and affectionate Care of the Woman, who was framed not only after
him, but out of him too, the more to Engage his tenderest, and dearest
Respects. Certainly this manner of Production does plainly evince the Equality
of the Woman's Merits and Rights with Man; she being a noble Cyon transplanted
from his Stock, and by the Mystery of Marriage Implanted into him again, and
made One with him. She is then Equally at least partaker with him of all the
Advantages, which appertain to Humane Nature, and alike Capable of those
Improvements, which by the Efforts of Reason and the Methods of Education and
the Instincts of the Blessed Spirit are to be made upon it, and no less fitted
in her natural Ingeny for all kind of Studies and Employments: though Custom,
like a Salique Law, has excluded them from Public Offices and Professions;
and confined them mostly to the narrow Territories of Home. Our Virtuous Woman
here, besides her Oeconomical Government (wherein her Husband's cares are not
concerned) plays the Purchaser and the Merchant, ver. 16. and 24. though too,
whilst her Husband is sitting in the gates among the Elders of the Land, ver.
23. her hands are holding the distaff at home, ver. 19. A Learned Woman of
Vtrecht, has in a Printed Discourse fairly in this behalf vindicated the
Reputation of her Sex. Nor are there wanting Illustrious Examples of Those, who
for Atchievments in Arms and Seize of Arts have not come short of the
Bravest Men; and lest behind them signal proofs, that their Minerva can upon
occasion, as well weild the Sword, and manage the Pen, as lay her hands to the
Spindle. One Instance out of our own History will be sufficient; Elizabeth of
Happy Memory, who 44 years together swayed the Scepter of this Realm, with as
much Repute as ever any of her Predecessors did, and through all her Reign
showed at once the Spirit and Resolution of her Father, and the Policy and
Wisdom of her Grandfather, without their Vices.

Hence it was, that all Arts and Sciences, all Virtues and Graces, both Divine
and Moral, are represented in the shape and Habit of Women. Nor is there any
reason for fancying Angels themselves more of Our Sex then of the Other; since
amongst them there is no such Distinction, but they may be as well imagined
Female, as Male. Above all, for Piety and Devotion, which is the Top-perfection
of our Nature, and makes it most like Angelical, as the Capacity of Women is as
large, so their Inclinations are generally more vigorous; the natural Biass and
Tendency of their Spirits lying that way, and their softer Temper more kindly
receiving the supernatural Impressions of God's Spirit. This is That, if any
thing, which gives their Sex the Preeminence above us Men, and gains them just
advantages of Praise; that, whereas Those, who have only a hansom Shape and
good Features to command them, are Adored and Idolized by persons of slight
Apprehensions and ungoverned Passions; Pious and Virtuous Women command the
Veneration of the most Judicious, and are deservedly Admired by Holy Men and
Angels. Hereupon St Ierom, though no Friend to a Married life, yet seemed to
pride himself in his Acquaintance with Virtuous Women, and made so many
Addresses to Religious Ladies, that those very Epistles and Missives of His,
which wear Female Names, would make a competent Volume of themselves. And our
Blessed Lord himself has in his History honored Them with a frequent mention,
as his ordinary Associates and constant Attendants. Thus the Woman who fears
the Lord shall be praised.

That Is the Qualification; She that fears the Lord: for that is the right
Virtuous Woman, in the 10. ver. whose price is far above Rubies. But there we
have an Objection, which I must first take out of the way: Where shall we meet
with such an One? Who can find a Virtuous Woman? I can speak it with as much
Truth, as I must speak it with Sorrow, we have lost One; for by all the
Description, if there be such an One to be found, This was She. But this
Question does not import an Impossibility, but only the Difficulty of finding
her. He had in vain taken all this pains to describe her so at large, if there
be no such Person to be found. There are sure such Women; more perhaps then
Men, as Men are now, deserve there should be; and as they are extraordinary
Blessings, so they that Fear God shall meet with them. It Is shrewdly Observed
by one, that the reason of their Paucity proceeds from us Men. Men being
generally so Evil, as they are, make Women generally not so good, as they would
be. For at that time of the World, when Men prized Virtue, and made that the
Standard of their Affection and the Sole Object of their Choice; when
Discretion and Goodness were looked on as the Taking things, and Piety alone,
was accounted a sufficient Portion; then in that Golden Age, the great
Emulation of that Sex was, who should weigh most in real Deserts, and come best
Dowried with those desirable Qualities, when Wives were to be bid for, and
purchased at considerable Rates. But now since the Scales have been turned, and
love has been brought into the Market, that Virtue and good Education are
undervalued, and Wealth is become the Lovely Thing, and all the Shafts of men's
Destres are Tipped with Gold and Silver; or else by Some that lay their Judgments
aside, and let their Fancy choose for them, Beauty is made the Mark, and so
there be a fair inviting Outside, no regard had to the Inward disposition of
the Mind; 'twas Consequent that Women also should grow more negligent of
Virtue, and apply themselves more particularly to those Things, for which they
were to be prized and esteemed by Men. And yet there are still, notwithstanding
this Degeneracy of Manners, such Women to be found of the Primitive Stamp; who,
though they may, in common Civility to Vulgar Error, comply in sinless Fashions
and Modes, and in the Innocent Ceremonies of life (taken up by Others
peradventure, to ill Ends, in these corrupt Ages) yet do make it their main
Employ to enrich and beautify their Minds, and bestow most of their Time in
the Culture and Adornments of their Souls. To find them out, let us Examine the
Character, by which the Hue and Cry is made. She, whom we call the Virtuous
Woman, goes amongst the Interpreters under several names.

(...)[ Esheth Hhail] say some, a Stout Valiant Woman; so the French, une
Vaillante Femme: a Virago, one fit to lead an Army; so that, as it follows in
the next verse, her Husband shall have no need of Spoil. Fear being so natural
to this Sex. it looks like Miracle to meet with such an One; and yet we read
there have been whole Nations of Them: Witness the Amazonian Courage, and the
valor of the Spartan Ladies.

Others, strenuain and sedulam, a busy Industrious Woman, one of a stirring
active Spirit.

A Woman of Wealth and Riches, says Aben Ezra, which is not One of a great
Portion; for Then there was no such Custom; but one that by Industry and good
Managery got Wealth: so in the verse before the Text she is commended in the
Margin of our Bibles, Many Daughters have gotten Riches, but Thou surpassest
them all.

A right good Virtuous Woman, so the Chaldee: one that in her Carriage and
Actions shows that she has the Fear of God in Her.

A Discreet Wise Woman, say Others; or as an ancient Armenian Copy has it, one
of a Sound Brain, and a good Understanding: and this falls in with the Fear of
God here, which, the Wise Son and the Pious Father both tell us, is the
Beginning, or, as the Hebrew word imports, the Sum Total of Wisdom. And they
have a good Understanding that Do thereafter.

This fear of God does not only Contract, but Dilate the Heart too, laying
Restraints indeed upon the Conscience from Sin, but withal Enlarging the powers
of the Soul to all kind of Duty: for it is an Ingenuous Filial Fear, that has a
very quick sense and tender Apprehension of God's Displeasure, and makes her
wary of offending him, either in Doing any thing that should not be done, or
Omitting ought that should. It Is not a Fear then, that arises from the
Weakness and Imbecility of Female Constitution, which renders them more apt to
Devotion; but is very well consistent with that Valor and Courage, which the
70, and other Interpreters make the great Ingredient of the Character,
Imboldning us and putting us on to Do or Suffer any thing for God's sake. And
we may consider it Two Ways. 1. In the Root and Principle. 2. In the Branches
and Productions.

In the Principle, it is a Reverential Fear, which composes the Inner man to
becoming Thoughts and awful Apprehensions of God, and obliges the Heart close
to him with Silken Cords, and binds up all the Affections, that they may not
run loose after Vanities, but fixes them upon Heavenly things, and suits all
the Passions of Humane Nature in a fit and constant Correspondence to the
Attributes of the Divine; so as to Love him for his Goodness, Admire him for
his Wisdom, Dread him in his Power, stand in Aw of his Justice, take Delight in
the remembrance of his Mercies, and at last to be swallowed up into Him in the
Contemplation of his Infiniteness, in all These.

In its Operations, that is, in all the Actions of Life; for, like the Warp, it
runs through the whole Web of all Her Duties; it Tutors the Senses, and puts
all the Members in Array, and orders the Outward man into an answerable Decorum
to the Inward; that her Looks, her Speech, her very Gesture and Carriage, prove
innocent Expressions of honest Meanings, and a Virtuous Mind; and all the
Phenomenon and outward Appearances of Her in her Conversation are but the
natural Representments of her Bright Spotless Ingenuous Soul, the fair Inmate
of a rightly Disciplined and well Ordered Body.

The Fear of God then comprehends in it all Religious Worship, both Internal
and External: nor does it consist in an hypocritical Demureness, and a
distantial Pride, or supercilious Contempt of others, but in a sincere Humility
to God, and Charity to Men; when, which is the Virtuous Woman's Practice, what
with Church and Closet on the one side, to which she always pays a regular
Attendance; and her Family on the other, which she is always, what with
Instruction, what with Example, looking after, She is continually Employed, and
divides her Time betwixt the Offices of a Cheerful Devotion and the Duties of
an Indearing Converse.

Now certainly if there be such a Reward as Praise appointed for the Pious, if
Honor has its Temple adjoined to that of Virtue; then this Pious Virtuous
Woman, here mentioned, must be reckoned the truly Honorable Woman, and will
deserve to have her Grave strow'd with Roses and Violets, and her Memory
crowned with Flowery Chaplets and Myrtle Wreaths of fragrant and lasting Praises.

That Is the Next thing we have to do; She shall be Praised.

It is a Morose Humor in some, even Ministers; that they will not give a due
Commendation to the Deceased: whereby they not only offer a seeming Unkindness
to the Dead, but do a real Injury to the Living, by discouraging Virtue, and
depriving us of the great Instruments of Piety, good Examples; which usually
are far more effectual Methods of Instruction, then any Precepts; These
commonly urging only the Necessity of those Duties, which the Other show the
Possibility and Manner of Performing. But then it is a most Unchristian and
Uncharitable Mistake in those, that think it unlawful to Commemorate the Dead,
and to Celebrate their Memories: whereas there is no one thing does so much
uphold and keep up the Honor and Interest of Religion amongst the Multitude,
as the due Observance of those Anniversaries, which the Church has, upon this
Account, scattered throughout the whole course of the Year, would do: and
indeed to our Neglect of this in a great Part the present Decay of Religion may
rationally be Imputed. Thus in this Age of our's what Pliny says of His,
Postquam desiimus facere laudanda, Laudari quoque ineptum putamus. Since People
have left off doing things that are Praiseworthy, they look upon Praise it
self as a silly thing. And possibly the Generality of Hearers themselves are
not free from this Fault; who peradventure may Fancy their Own Life Upbraided,
when they hear Another Commended. But that the servants of God, which depart
this life in his Faith and Fear, may and must be Praised, I shall endeavor to
make good upon these three Grounds.

1. In common Justice to the Deceased themselves. Ordinary Civility teaches us
to speak well of the Dead. Nec quicquam Sanctius habet Reverentia Superstitum,
quam ut Amissos Venerabiliter Recordetur; says Ausonius, and makes this the
ground of the Parentalia, which had been ever since Numa's time. Praise,
however it may become the Living, is a just Debt to the deserts of the Dead,
who are now got clear out of the reach of Envy; which, if it have any thing of
the Generous in it, will scorn, Vultur-like to prey upon Carcass. Besides,
Christianity lays a greater Obligation upon us; The Communion of Saints is a
Tenet of our Faith. Now as we ought not to Pray To them or For them, so we may
and must Praise them. This is the least we can do in Return for those great
Offices they did the Church Militant, while they were with Us, and now do, they
are with God: nor have we any other probable way of Communicating with them.
The Philosopher in his Morals makes it a Question, whether the Dead are any way
Concerned in what befalls Them or their Posterity after their Decease; and
whether those Honors and Reproaches, which Survivers cast upon them, reach
them or no? and He concludes it after a long debate in the Affirmative: not so,
he says, as to alter their State, but (...) to contribute to it. Tully, though
not absolutely persuaded of an Immortal Soul, as speaking doubtfully and
variously of it, yet is constant to this, that He takes a good Name and a
Reputation, we leave behind us, to be a kind of Immortality. But there is more
in it then so: Our Remembrance of the Saints may be a Means to Improve their
Bliss, and Heighten their Rewards to all Eternity. Abraham, the Father of the
Faithful, has his Bosom thus daily Enlarged for New Comers. Whether the Heirs
of the Kingdom are at their first Admission Instated into a full Possession of
all their Glory, and kept to that Stint; I think may be a Doubt. For if the
Faculty be perfected by the Object, about which it is Conversant; then the
Faculties of those Blessed Ones being continually Employed upon an Infinite
Object, must needs be Infinitely Perficible, and Capable still of being more
and more Enlarged, and consequently of receiving still new and further
Additions of Glory. Nor only so (This is in Heaven:) but even the Influence of
that Example, they leave behind them on Earth, drawing still more and more
Souls after them to God, will also add to those Improvements to the End of the
World, and bring in a Revenue of Accessory Ioys. And would it not be Unjust in
us then to deny them those Glorious Advantages, which our Commemoration and
Imitation may and ought to give them?

2. In a due Acknowledgment of Gods Gifts and Graces. The Praise of his
Servants redounds to his Glory; as Water rises to the same height it had in its
Wellspring. The Father of Lights gives order, that Our Light, which he
communicates to us, may so shine, that men may see our good Works and Glorify
Him: nor has he only annexed to our Temporal Services an Eternal weight of
Glory hereafter; but even here in this World is content we should go Shares
with him, and be made Partakers of that Glory, we bring into his Infinite
Stock. The Servant was justly condemned, that put his Master's Talent in a
Napkin, and buried it under ground: nor would our Ingratitude be less
Inexcusable, should we in silence bury those Gifts he has bestowed upon any his
Eminent Servants, that have by his Grace well Employed them, and wrap up the
Memories of his Saints in the same Shroud with their Bodies.

Lastly, For the Benefit of the Living; and that two Ways: for their
Instruction, and for their Comfort.

For the Instruction of all that are to come After, it is fit the lives of those
that have gone Before should be Remembered. It Is not enough to have a Map of the
Country we are Traveling to, unless we have experience'd Guids, whose Conduct
and Directions we may safely follow. Our way to Heaven does not lie so ready
and plain, that we cannot Miss it; and here it is dangerous to trust to our own
Judgment, and (which was one kind of ancient Superstition) to resolve our
selves as our Staff falls: but our surest Course will be, to observe the Track
of others Footsteps, and walk in their Faith, and go on in the beaten Road of
Holy Examples, for fear of being either led aside into the untrodden Bypath
of Schism and Separation, or carried along in the broad Highway of
Profaneness with the mistaking Multitude. As in a Voyage by Sea the skilful
Pilot, though he consult his Card, and steer by his Compass, yet he neglects
not the Discoveries, other Navigators have made, that have sailed those Seas,
and given notice of Rocks and Shelves, and described the Coastings and Rhumbs
of the whole Course. Example gives life to a Rule, makes it Intelligible and
Practicable. God's bare Commanding us to do any thing is a sufficient
Obligation to Obedience; but when by Others he shows us How it is to be done,
this as it renders it more Easy to Obey, so it puts our Disobedience past all
Excuse.

For the Comfort of Survivers that stay behind, the Virtues and Praises of
their Deceased friends are to be Recounted; that they may not Mourn and hang
down the Head with Despondence, as having no Hope. It was the Custom of some
Barbarous Nations upon the very consideration of the Troubles of this Life,
from which Death sets us Free, to attend their Dead with solemn Shouts and
Expressions of Joy: but We, who have better Assurances, when any of our
Relations are delivered from the Sins and Miseries of a Wicked and Wretched
World, have much greater reason to Rejoice in their behalf, if by the Testimony
of a good Life they have confirmed those blessed Expectations, Upon which the
Hinge of all Religion turns. For in that we Grieve, it is for our Own sakes, not
for Theirs. It Is Our loss, we Lament. They are infinitely Advantaged by the
Change. Why then should we repine at their Advancement, with them back to their
Hurt, and be discontented for the want of their Company, who, as St. Paul says
in another case, are therefore Departed for a season, that we may Receive them
for ever, if We by following their good Example be found worthy to be Admitted
to Them. If it be a Kindness to Them, that our Hearts are touched with, we
should rather, according to the Apostle's Rule, Rejoice with them that Rejoice,
and not Weep over them, since all Tears are now wiped away from their Eyes.
It Is usual in great transports of Joy for Tears to burst out: and such should
be our Tears over Those, that by Living well Learnt and Practiced to Dye Well,
to flow from Joy as well as Sorrow; and our Joy that they are in Heaven should
far exceed the Grief we show for their leaving Earth. I have read of Parents,
that, when their Sons have returned Conquerers from the Olympic Games, could
not master their Resentments, but have dyed with excessive Joy. Now, in a
Christian sense, to have fought a good Fight, and with a Victorious Faith to
overcome the World, how much more considerable a Conquest is it, and how does
it deserve our most concerned Joys? That in any Friend's case, that Dies thus,
it would become us to say what S. Thomas did, when word was brought of Lazarus
his death, Come let us go, and Dye with him. It was Kindly said, and perhaps
not Fondly neither. For certainly the most exquisite Felicities of Life are not
Comparable to the Advantage of a Holy Death. Let us then upon such Occasions,
(as we use, when any Friend alters his Condition to the Better, to Wish him
Joy;) Gratulate those that Dye thus in the Lord; not consider what We have
Lost, but what they have Gained; and join with Them in singing Hallelujahs,
Praising them, and Praising God for them, and Praising God with them. Praise is
a Cheerful Exercise; wherefore let me Entreat, that those Noble Friends and
Relations, who have any Share in this day's Loss, whilst I practically Apply to
the Duty of the Text in Praising this Honorable Virtuous Woman before us,
would lay aside their own Concerns, and be Comforted, as they do mean heartily
to Join with me in the Acknowledgment of her Praises.

I would not detain you long, I need not. All that has been, or may be said of
the Virtuous Woman, belongs to Her. To say all that might be said, would not be
the Business of an Hour, but of Days and Weeks. The bare Relation of her Life
would make the best Panegyric. I shall gather it up as close as I can, that it
may be both Brief and Useful: and That according to our former Method, where we
treated of the Fear of God, which is here given as Her Character.

First as to Principle; the Candor of Her Disposition, the Sweetness of her
Nature, and the Evenness of her Temper, whereof throughout her whole Life she
gave Innumerable Demonstrations. And certainly Good Nature (however some
Ill-natured People, who would pass for the most strictly Religious, may declaim
against It and all Morality) is the best Seed-plot for Piety and all Virtue to
thrive in; the Kindliest Soil for the Fruits of the Spirit, Meekness, Joy,
Patience, Gentleness, Long-suffering, Loving kindness, etc. which were
abundantly seen in all the Instances of her Conversation.

Now because much of This may seem to be Extracted from the Parents, and by
Lineal Descent to be derived from the Family; (For Fortes creantur Fortibus,
and Boni Bonis. Virtues and good Qualities likely run in a Blood) I must so far
mention Her Pedigree, as to give the True Blazonry of her Virtues.

She was Eldest Daughter to His Grace the Duke of Newcastle, a Person of no
less Excellence in His Merit and in His Nature, then he is in his Title; One
that has been the most Illustrious Example in all the three Nations of an
Acting and Suffering Loyalty. To him, besides His other vast Deserts, the World
owed this Excellent Lady; who being powerfully inclined by Instinct and Duty,
and Choice to be like Her Noble Father, did so Naturally Resemble Him, and so
Affectionately Imitate Him, that She represented the lively Characters of his
Soul as well as Feature.

Nor must I omit her Pious Mother, a Lady of most Exemplary Charities, from
whom She received the first Elements of her Virtuous Education; and Her Noble
Grandmother, the Lady Ogle, whose Daring she was; who, to this Lady JANE did
in her life and at her death give particular Testimonies of an extraordinary
Affection, which were often gratefully remembered and repeated by Her.

From these Advantages of Birth, that Natural Principle of Goodness flowed,
which being Enlarged by the Moral accessions of Noble Breeding, and Impregnated
with Holy Exercises, and the Influences of God's good Spirit, streamed into all
the Faculties of her Soul; by which she became the Absolute Governess of Her
own Mind.

She had that Command of Her Passions, that it might be questioned, whether she
had Any. Anger and She were so utter Strangers, that the very Expressions of
Dislike from Her were Obliging. Greatness and Goodness of Mind kept her Soul
always in an equal Poise, so that she could never fancy an Injury or an Ill
meaning from any one, or be upon any Provocation Exceptious. She knew her self
so Innocent and Good, that she deserved no Ill, and therefore suspected none;
and withal She was of so Generous and Great a Spirit, that unkindnesses, if
intended, could not reach Her. So that as on the one hand no body (she
believed) would wrong Her, if they could; so on the other, (she resolved) they
should not, if they would. Her soft yielding Compliance backed with Magnanimity
was like polished Marble, smooth and strong. She was seated above the clouded
Atmosphere of Worldly Joys and Troubles, even while she was Here; and had
wrought Her self to a perfect Indifference and Vnconcernedness in all things,
but Her Service of God, and Kindness to her Friends. She had no Value for the
World, nor Overvalue for Her self, who was one of the Best Parts of it. For as
Her Worth had set Her Even with the Greatest; so Her Humility placed Her
familiarly with the Meanest: and yet this attended with so natural a
Becomingness, that her very Humility exalted her, and her Condescensions made
her the more Venerable and Highly Esteemed.

Where the Passions are kept in this Aw and Order, the Superior Faculties,
being clear and undisturbed, must needs exercise all their Functions aright.
She took, when Young, special delight in her Father's Excellent Composures. And
she has left in Writing a considerable Stock of Excellent ones of Her own,
ever spending the time that best pleased Her with her Pen. Above all, Reading
of good Discourses and making of Pious Meditations were Her chief and daily
Employment: to which and to Her Devotions she was so Constant, that, as she
has filled some Volumes with the One; so for the Other, from her Youth to her
late Deathbed she failed not of Prayer (as I am Informed) thrice a day; and if
Morning or Noon happened to be omitted, She would make amends at Night, and then
to be sure even that Account. Herein lay her solid Satisfaction, in Conversing
thus with God, that She looked upon all Occasions, that Interrupted That, as
Impertinent and Uneasy; and if She had any Quarrel to this Place, 'twas this,
the Multitude of Formal Visits, which she could not avoid receiving from London
and returning, that took off her time from these Spiritual Exercises.

This as to her Principle.

Then as to the Emanations of It to the Eye and Observation of the World, for
we have as yet been but in the Closet.

In her Maiden-state; Of her Infant-years, which were spent at Welbeck, (a
place that bears the Proportion and Resemblance of a Court) under the Tuition
of her Father and Mother, we have already spoken. We shall now treat of her
more Adult Virtues.

What Courage and Loyalty, as the right Daughter of a General, as the Valiant
Woman here spoken of, did she show, in keeping the Garrisoned House of her
Father, where she was left with One of her Noble Sisters, as a Sharer, in her
Virtues and the Misfortunes of Ill times (the Other being before that Time
Happily bestowed) amongst the Horrid Circumstances of War, till taken by the
Enemy, and there made their Prisoners?

What Gallantry of Charity at the Retaking it by the King's Forces, when She
became Petitioner to save her Iaylor's life, whose Treatments, though not
Barbarous, yet had been much short of such Civilities, as to Persons of their
Age, Tenderness, and Quality were due?

What Patience and Magnanimity in all the Disasters of Her Loyal Family; Her
Mother's Death, the Loss of my Lord's Army, his leaving England, His and her
Brothers Banishment after and Proscription, and the Seizure of all their
Fortunes, beside Her own Personal Sufferings and Unsettlements?

What Duty and Piety, when after the Fifths were procured, She was enabled to
become Solicitor for her Father and Brothers, when Loyalty was so Criminal,
that nothing less would serve then to Except them from Life: when with all Her
early Diligences, and Attendances, and Petitionings, how humbly and closely
soever prosecuted, She could not prevail for Her Father; Her Brothers only with
much difficulty had Pardon for Life? And then when things were grown to that
Extremity, that All that could be had from an Enemy was too scant a Support for
Her Banished Father. (I have it from an Excellent Hand, that with great
Obligingness gives this Account in Print) She converted Her own Peculium of
Jewels and Plate (which her Father and Grandmother had given Her) into Moneys,
and sent it over a Token of Affectionate Duty.

Nor stopped Her Duty here, but She continued it together with her Obedience to
her Married state: having resolved without his Leave and Consent not to change
her Condition; nor so neither, without a Liberty from her Intended Husband, out
of that Fortune, Her Father's Nobleness had designed Her, to make him a
considerable Present (so I find it Nobly Acknowledged by the same Excellent
Authoress) of which His Grace (I understand) soon after his Restoration no
less obligingly with greatest Kindness of all generous and indearing
Expressions Ordered a liberal Return.

And then with what Condescending Prudence and Judicious Moderation did She
make her Choice, when having through the Iniquity of the Times observed the
Desolation made in the Greatest Families, and the little Choice then amongst
those Few left of the Higher Nobility, (for She resolved to match with no
Family, which had ill-treated her King and Father, how advantageous soever) She
suiting her Judgment to her Inclination accepted a Gentleman, yet One (besides
His othet Accomplishments, and the Merit of his most Affectionate Respects) of
an Ancient Family and a very Noble Descent, with whose Principles and Fortune
She persuaded her self of Content. And she found That persuasion did not
deceive Her, having here in Chelsey lived these 14 years and few Months, as
Well to Her own, as to the great Satisfaction and Joy of every Body else that
knew Her.

How willing She ever was to Oblige all persons; how Ready to all good Offices;
how Meek, and Humble, and Charitable, and Familiarly Courteous to Neighbors
and all others, let Fame, let Envy it self speak.

Of her Charity to this Place I question not but we shall see in a short Time
some fair Testimonies erected.

Her Devotions she loved particularly to make out in Observing the Fasts of the
Church, as much and as often, as the tenderness of Her Constitution could well
permit.

Next to Reading and Writing she delighted much in her Needle, and has left
great quantities of Work to her Children.

This in short the account of her Life in its Healthful time.

We come at last to the sad Scene of her Sickness and Death, wherein it pleased
a good God in some measure to answer her desires (who had always a tender
Apprehension for Pain) that, though the Fits to sorrowful Bystanders seemed
not to be without Pang and Agony, yet were graciously Alleviated to Her by a
Surprise of her Senses, for the time, and That so Gentle too, as never to cause
any Disorder or Indecency. Nor after the Fits, at the return of Spirits,
sufficient to give Her liberty of Speech, did She ever (except two of her four
last days) complain of Pain, which was then violent in her Head, but even then
and at all other times of her Sickness, while She had Speech, She used it most
in Devotion, and in many gentle cheerful and obliging Expressions to her
Husband, Children, Doctors, and other her mournful Assistants.

Particularly in the Three weeks Interval, She had, when there were very good
hopes of her Recovery, She used often to say, That though she resigned up Her
self wholly to the wise disposal of a good God, yet She being in expectation of
being called away in her first Fits, looked upon her Recovery as a gracious
kind of Disappointment (they were Her own Words) by God Almighty. This She did
(She said) not out of Discontent at her Sickness, which she thankfully
acknowledged tolerable Easy, but (as having conquered this World, and being
now in her Passage to a Better) out of her intuition of a glorious Crown, that,
She trusted, awaited her in Heaven.

Now, now, was the Time, when all the Powers of Her Soul, all Her Virtues and
Graces were Summoned together, with united force to make up the Complin of her
Devotions; wherein she Professed, to the Equal Comfort and Grief of Those that
heard Her, her Confidence in God, her patient Submission to Him, her Holy
Resignation, her Indifference to Life, and her Preparedness to Dye. Of which,
amongst many others, there were two Remarkable Instances. One to a Reverend
Father of our Church, whom she told with great Unconcernedness, as he was
discoursing piously to Her, That she was not afraid to Dye; not that she had or
feared any Trouble or Discontent here, but that she might Enjoy the Blessings
of that Better World. The Other to Her sad and afflicted Husband, whom, as He
was at her Bedside praying to God, that he would restore Her again to Health,
that she might Live and Glorify him, when those, that went down into the Pit,
could not Praise him; she stopped Him in his Prayer, and with a comfortable Look
and strong Voice (though a great difficulty of Speech had some time before
possessed Her) said, She would Glorify God, whether she lived or dyed: and then
recommended her Children to His Care: Who as He did in all her sickness out of
a strong Sympathy of Love, suitable to His constant Tenderness and Her great
Merit, entertain all her Ills with quicker and deeper Resentments (if we may
consider Those as Two, who were so nearly One) then if they had been His Own;
that those Epileptick and Convulsive Fits, which seized Her Brain, did at the
same time seize His Heart: so after Her Dissolution and the Departure of His
Better Soul, He finds no Reason to live, no Joy in life, but This, to look
after those living Remains of his Dear and Pious Deceased, and to be Paying on
that Love, which was Due to Her, in the Indulgent Care of Her Children.

These dear Children of Hers, as She had often in her Health, so she did now
more frequently in her Sickness Instruct, charging them to apply themselves
much to Reading, especially to be diligent in constant Prayers to God, to be
Observant to their Dear Father, and transferring that Obedience they had to Her
self upon Him, to pay Him now a double Duty, and to be entirely Loving to One
another; Then and not else they might assure themselves of all good things from
God and their Father. Further enjoying them to be Respectful to those that had
the charge of them, and ever to give ear to their just and virtuous Advices:
and carefully to decline the Company of vain and impertinent Persons.

As it was Her only Trouble in all her Sickness, that her Indisposition made
Her incapable of giving that Attendance to the Offices of Religion, Praying,
Meditating, Reading, as she used to do: So in the Close, it was the great
Affliction of All about Her, and that, which of any thing She her self showed
most Sense of, that her Speech Failed her: upon the Loss of which she had no
other means of Expressing those pious Ejaculations, She in her last Sickness
Incessantly poured forth, but by Sighs, and Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven;
whither She is gone Bless Soul, to increase the number of Saints, whom the
Church this day Commemorates, and to enter into the Joy of her Savior, having
left Grief behind Her.

Whom in the Whole, as to all Relations, as Her Noble Father (in Whose
Affections if Any had a greater share then Other, it was She) in a Letter of
His since her Sickness Styles Her the Best of Daughters; so Her Husband praises
Her for the Best of Wives; Her Children rise up and call the Best of Mothers;
Her Servants (for whose Encouragement and Reward she took care to the Last) own
as the Best of Mistresses; Her Allies looked upon as the Best of Friends; Those
that had the Honor to know Her, the Best of Acquaintances; and Those that
lived near Her, the Best of Neighbors.

May We All, that knew Her, keep her Virtues alive in our Memory, and in our
Imitation. May her Worthy and Afflicted Husband, as he does, praise Her, and
with a cheerful gratitude mitigate his Sorrow, and comfort himself with the
expectation of a Happy Meeting, when Her own Works shall Praise her in the
Gates of Heaven. May her Children, those Three Noble Plants She has left
behind Her as the dear Pledges of her Memory, rise up and grow up in her
Example, and call her Blessed. And may the Echo of her Praises tend to the
setting forth of the Praise of God, the Father of Spirits, and the Father of
Lights, from whom comes every good and perfect Gift. To whom, the Immortal and
Ever-blessed, Three Persons and One God, We, together with the whole Company of
All his Saints, ascribe, as is most due, all Honor, Praise and Glory, Now and
for Ever. Amen.

FINIS.
AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH of the THRICE NOBLE And VIRTUOUS LADY THE Lady JANE
CHEYNE, Eldest DAUGHTER to WILLIAM DUKE of NEWCASTLE,

By a Person of Quality and Neighbor in Chelsey.

An Elegy on the Death of the Thrice Noble and Virtuous Lady the Lady Jane
Cheyne, Eldest Daughter to William Duke of Newcastle.
DIsmal the darkness, fearful was the Night,
All thoughts were banished bord'ring on delight;
Nature wore Blacks, and the Worlds beauteous Eye
Fled far from the approaching Tragedy:
My doubtful Muse lay trembling, when the Knell
More doleful from the midnight passing Bell,
Subtracting hopes addition gave to Woe,
Now ripe in Numbers, and in Tears to flow.
Ye Chelsey Fields no more your pleasures boast,
Your greatest Pride, is with your Lady, lost;
No more cry up your sweet, and healthy Air,
Now only fit for such as breath despair;
Of your delightful River brag no more,
Briny its Waves, and Fatal is its Shore;
Not all its Sands can count the Tears we spilt,
Not all its Stream can wash away this guilt.
Farewell ( Dear Lady) now a blessed Saint:
Did not Religion on us lay restraint,
Our Vows and Prayers soon would turned be
From Praying for, to Praying unto Thee;
But these as fruitless are, as those are vain;
Thou feel none, nor pitiest our pain,
Our Eyes will better show the Love we bore,
Where to lament's more fit, then to implore;
And sorrow sure our loss will most become,
Like losing Gamesters when we count the sum.
Her Noble Birth she from Newcastle took;
High in Bridgwater, and in Bullingbrook:
But she not half so Great as she was Good,
Owed her least Praise to her Illustrous blood;
By her intrinsic Worth her Titles rise
More splendid from her Virtues, then Allies;
And she more Honor gave unto their Fames,
Then she derived from their mighty Names,
Yet not pufft up with Honors Timpany,
Like Stars she less appeared for being High;
And like them too she freely did dispense
On all beneath her gentle Influence;
So sweetly condescending, as if she
Less then our selves had owned a Dignity;
Her Goodness did our Modesty besiege,
She never knew where she did not oblige:
Hence at her Ills so common was our grief,
Nothing but hers could perfect our relief;
Tears drowned our Joy, Joy did from Tears release,
As her Distempers did arise or cease;
And at her Death an Universal groan
Was heard, as if her Fate had been our own.
Since then she is gone, Oh! that I could inherit
One portion of her great Poetic Spirit,
Like him who caught Elijah's Mantle, I
Of Her and Heaven soon would Prophecy:
My Muse should learn to bear a noble Part,
And boundless Grief make regular by Art:
An Art she knew and practiced so well,
Her Modesty alone could it excel;
Which by concealing doubles her Esteem:
It Is hard to understand and not to seem.
Wandering abroad small Poets does become,
Great Wits (like Princes) best are seen at home:
And yet her Name might Patronize a Muse
Defying strictest Censure to accuse;
For whatsoever her Fancies stamp did own,
Was Sterling Coin to be refused by none;
Without allay, and as her self refined
High as her Birth, yet gentle as her mind;
Where Female sweetness manly strength did meet,
At once (like Samsons riddle) strong and sweet,
If such her Art, her Nature was the same,
As this her Wit, so that adorned her Frame
Moved by a Soul so Pious, that might be
Well termed a Beam of the Divinity;
Which in her Life, and Actions shone so bright
That We i'ts Heat perceived, as well as Light;
Her thousand Graces with a mingled Ray,
Made her Life's Path seem one pure milky Way;
Whilst others Splendors only show their Blots;
As the Moons Light discovers her own Spots.
Her Passions all to Reason gave the sway,
As she unto her Husband did obey;
From just Compliance neither did desist,
'Cause neither were accustomed to resist;
Each kept within it is proper bounds, and range,
Serving to vary her, but never to change.
Her Humor still in Complaisance did 'bide,
Never ebbed to Sullenness, nor swelled to Pride.
In her a Multiplied Example's gone;
And many Noble Patterns lost in One:
None more Devout, none was more Chaste of Life,
None better Mother, none more loving Wife;
Three Blessings (Copies of her self) she brought,
Yet was her self the greatest Blessing thought:
Worthy by none, but him to be possessed,
Who best deserved her, 'cause he loved her best;
Such his affection as in Truth extends
Beyond the Examples of the loving Friends:
Her griefs he grieved, and all her Pains he felt,
As if one Soul within two Bodies dwelt;
And she from that did part (I Am bold to say)
With less regret then He from her away:
With hers He would have given up his Breath,
And Love preserved untoucht by mighty Death:
But that to dare to suffer life might prove
More kindness to the Pledges of her Love.
Pardon ( Dear Saint) my Muses wandering fire;
Silence is heard, where'ts easy to admire:
The praise that him I give (praise justly due)
I Am sure you will not think detained from you;
It Is equal to rejoyn, whom cruel Fate
So hardly did attempt to separate.
As you to dye his glory were content,
So may he live your noblest Monument.
FINIS.

