A Lively Picture OF LEWIS du MOULIN, DRAWN By the Incomparable HAND OF
Monsieur DAILLE, LATE MINISTER OF CHARENTON.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Royston Bookseller to His Most Sacred Majesty, 1680.

A WORD TO THE DISSENTING BRETHREN.
THere is none of you, that knows any thing of the Protestants abroad, but has
heard of the fame of M. JOHN DAILLE. Whose praise is so great not only in the
Reformed Churches of France, but in this and other parts of the World, that I
have some hopes you may suffer your selves to be disabused, by a Man of such
Credit and Authority for learning and piercing observation; for goodness and
humility; for modesty, humanity, and all sort of Virtues: and no longer give
any belief to what LEWIS du MOULIN has written, or shall hereafter write
against this Church, or any member of it; when you see, by the help of such a
glorious light as M. DAILLE was, what kind of man this L. du MOULIN is; of how
small judgment, fidelity, or care about what he says; and of how great vanity,
rashness and passion; or rather rage and fury. Which render him so unfit to be
a Writer, that they quite blind his Eyes; and will not let him understand any
thing truly, though never so clear in it self, if it be contrary to his humor.

You will find this Character abundantly* made good in what follows; which I
have taken out of M. DAILLE'S Preface to his Vindication of his Apology for two
National Synods of France, Printed at Amsterdam, 1657. Read it I beseech you
patiently, and consider it impartially till you come to the end; where you will
find Mr. BAXTER agreeing with him in his Censure of LEWIS du MOULIN. Who is not
so considerable, that any of those learned Divines whom he abuses should
trouble themselves to give him an Answer: but leave the World to judge of him
by this Impartial Character of M. DAILLE; who sets him forth in his proper
Colors.

M. DAILLE his CHARACTER OF LEWIS du MOVLIN.
WHen I think, as M. DAILLE begins his Preface, of the calamitous state of the
Church at present, it calls to mind that miserable face of things, which that
most eloquent Writer S. Basil De Sp. Sancto Cap. 30.
expresses, in a no less sad, than elegant description of his times. For as we
suffer the rest of those most grievous evils which he there mentions; so more
especially, and above all the rest, that outrageous discord among
fellow-citizens, and members of the same body; which that excellent Father
deservedly deplores. A discord so mad, that, as He says of his Countrymen,
while we fall furiously upon one another, we fall and are overthrown by one
another; And if the enemy do not first smite us,
we receive a wound from our Auxiliary; And if he be slain, our fellow-souldier
rises up against us.

This has happened to many excellent Men in our memory; and now we see those
who have had many conflicts with our enemies, and still are in arms against
them (even that great Champion of the Protestant cause among us, Dr.
STILLINGFLEET) assaulted by those, who in all reason, should have helped to
defend them.

A most deplorable thing this is, and never to be enough lamented, that men
should have so little sense, as after all the confusions and calamities they
have brought upon themselves and us, they should again put us in the same
dangers; by joining at this time, in their fierce oppositions and calumnies,
with those who endeavor to pull down this truly Reformed Church. And that,
when it is visible they have nothing to set up in its stead, nor can possibly
come to settle and be linkt together in any order: but are so divided, that
they must remain a great many little Independent bodies, which will be apt
perpetually to clash one with another, till they endanger the loss even of the
Christian Religion.

I know indeed, there are many honest men among those that dissent from us, who
have no such intentions; and for their sakes it is that I write what follows:
that they may help to convince their erring neighbors of the evil design of
such men as would persuade them, the Church of England has been long looking
toward Popery. Among whom LEWIS du MOULIN is a notorious Ringleader: who has
come forth (as that famous Writer M. Daille complains in his case) more than
once or twice, with great outcries against it: In his Patronus bonae fidei, in
his late Celeusma, and now again in his true Account, as he calls it (that is
most false and scandalous report, for so you shall see his words are to be
expounded) of the several Advances the Church of England has made toward
Rome; Printed this Year 1680. In which he has the impudence (Be not angry with
that Word, you shall hear M. Daille charge him with the utmost height of
impudence) to say; that this design of carrying on the Romish interest, has
been strenuously pursued* and advanced ever since the happy Restoration of his
Sacred Majesty, by the Prelatical party, is a thing both so visible and
deplorable, that it stands not in so much need of proofs, as of our tears. p.
25.

Which black Calumny ought to fill the heart of every dutiful Child of this
Church, with a just indignation; and has moved me as soon as I meet with it
(which was not till the middle of the Christmas holydays) to bestow a few spare
hours, in showing how bad an ACCOUNTANT he is, and how little his Bawlings
signify (it is M. Daille his word, if I rightly translate Vociferationes) to
which the smallest suspicion or surmise will so furiously provoke him, that it
is impossible to stop his mouth.

This is none of my censure, but what that Great Man says of him, as I shall
show presently; when I have only desired (as he does) it may be remembered, that
I am not the Aggressor; but only beat back the assaults that are made upon our
Church: and that I contend not (God forbid I should) to drive Brethren out of
our Borders; but that they may not cast us out of theirs. As this Lewis du
Moulin endeavors to do; by bearing the World in hand, that our greatest
Divines are marching toward Popery. In which lewd calumny he fully justifies
this character which M. Daille gave of him above XX. Years ago: and I have too
much reason to believe he is not grown better, but much worse, since that time.

First, That he is tam pusilli animi, of so impotent exceeded the bounds not
only of a Preface (wherein he declamed against that famous Divine) but of
Piety, honesty, reason and humanity. This is bad enough; and yet, there is far
worse, which follows; For he found him of so implacable a spirit; that,

Secondly, He was not able to mitigate him by the most courteous usage and the
civilest ways he could think of to appease his fury. Which wrought nothing upon
a man, who had an ungrounded fancy working in his head, and a great deal of
choler boiling in his breast; which made much stronger impressions upon him,
than all the reason and all the kindness in the World. The business, in short,
was this, He had a conceit that his Father was injured by M. Daille. Who
thereupon sent him a message to assure him, that there was no such thing
intended, as that which he called a disrespect to his Father: and that He would
e're long satisfy the World in Print about it. But this civility (they are his
own words) produced nothing but his scorn and mockery: and instead of
answering, he fell a raving; returning a reply to M. DAILLE his Apology, more
like a mad man, than one that disputed either of Divine, or of Humane things.

M. Daille has occasion there to mention. Among which I must not forget his
high presumption; in writing a Book about the power of the Ecclesiastical
Presbytery, against the common opinion of Protestants: and yet at the same time
arraigning those that take the liberty to differ, as he imagines, from Mr.
Calvin. What does this man think of himself, who is so bold, as to pretend to
the height of Orthodoxy, though he dissent from the commonly received Doctrine
among Protestants; and yet to charge those with advancing toward Popery, who
dissent only from him, or, at the most, only from some Protestants: (as shall
appear before we have done) and that not so much in their opinions, as in the
explication of them?

He would blush at these things, if it were not for M. Daille: which is, that
he has such a forehead, as made him impudently deny that to have been written,
which all men read in Print. Give me leave to relate the story as M. DAILLE
tells it, and in his own words: For it will be of great use, to demonstrate (1
st) that he writes merely as his affections and passions dictate to him, and
therefore (2 dly) there is as much reason to believe he may as impudently
affirm what is not true, as he denied what is: but above all (3 dly) it will
discover the very root of his malignity, and lay bare the bottom of the quarrel
he has with us.

You must know then that M. Daille had written, that Dr. Twisse accused Peter
du Moulin, (this Lewis his Father) who deserved very highly of the reformed
Church, of prevarication; in his hypothesis concerning the object of
reprobation: whereby he had too much promoted the Arminian cause, and pulled up
by the roots the Orthodox Doctrine of Election: Nay, that Twiss feared not to
affirm the aforesaid Peter du M. was filthily mistaken, and brought back again
plain downright Arminianisme to the reformed Church, etc.

Unto these words of Daille 's, this Lewis du Moulin (pretending to vindicate
the honor of his Father) answers in so strange a manner, that it is hard to
say (I write still in M. D. 's words) whether his arrogance and frowardness to
M. Daille, or his impiety to his Father be most wonderful: For M. Daille who
most highly praises his Father, he condemns; but Dr. Twiss his Fathers false
Accuser, he absolves: The former he inveighs against, in savage words,
reproaches and railings; the later he adorns with great elogiums and
commendations: M. Daille he pronounces to be guilty of injuring his Father; but
Dr. Twiss to have always treated him honorably; and that he never hurt him in
word or in writing: or if there were any contention between them, that it was
handled friendly, and without any asperity.

Thus this great Vindex or Defender of his Fathers glory adventures to write
against the common sense of all the World. For is there any body so stupid
(says M. D.) so void of sense, that will think the Patron of a Cause is not at
all hurt by him, who says, that he prevaricates? Is that Divine honorably
treated by another, who accuses him of the most dangerous Heterodoxy? and
affirms he does turpiter hallucinari, filthily mistake; and promotes the cause
of the adversaries, and destroys his own? Call you this honorable and friendly
usage, when a man is publicly traduced; and not only opposed by many
arguments, but said to bring back again (and that courageously and without
tergiversation) that very heresy into his Church, which he had confuted? And
all this is not only said, but pertinaciously contended to be true, by Dr.
Twiss; to the great grief of all sober Persons, except this Son of P. du
Moulin's. Who is so far from complaining of Dr. Twiss, that he is highly
pleased with him and huggs him. He cannot endure Dr. Twiss should be
reprehended, and denies he injured his Father at all. O bonum and pium filium!
(says M. D. upon this occasion) O good and dutiful Child! O how dear (may I
say) are some opinions to him? In which, whosoever dissents from him, he will
tear them in pieces: but let those who agree with them, say what they please of
his best Friends, nay of his own Father, they shall not ^ail to have his good
word. Hence, hence are the tears, that he now ^peaks of. This raised his
Spleen, and put him into a new fit of raving at our Divines; who jump not with
him in some opinions, which are falsely called Arminianisme. If they were but as
rigid as he, in some beloved Doctrines, for which he doted upon Dr. Twiss; we
should not have heard a word of their inclination to Popery: But he would have
found some excuse or other for all their faults; nay, been so kind as to
magnify and praise them, whom he now abominates. For in favor of Dr. Twiss,
his Fathers Sycophant (as M. Daille calls him) he does little less than say,
his Father was a prevaricator, a heretic etc. For he says his Father was not
injured by Dr. Twiss, though he has accused him of these things.

This is his egregious piety to his Father, which he so much boasted of; and
his ardent zeal for truth and sincerity; that is, his monstrous fondness of his
own opinions. Which made him defend his Father in such a fashion, that he
betrayed him; so to vindicate his honor, that he not only absolved his fierce
Adversary from all blame, but bestowed upon him very great praises.

Thus this most vain man, says M. Daille, does not understand that he has this
reward from Heaven for his calumnies against me; (God so whirling about with
secret furies, his mind disordered by a most unjust hatred)
that while he accuses me of a false crime, he falls into a true one himself:
and violates his Fathers fame, by a base prevarication; which he pretended was
by me abused.

Take another instance of his extreme great vanity, judging of them merely by
their according with him in all things. There was a little difference between
his Father and Amyraldus; which was sweetly composed, as soon as they came to
talk together: and to the joy of all good men, they were not only perfectly
reconciled; but the common Friends of both (and of the kindred of this Lewis)
published the very kind Letters which passed between them. Now what does this
vain man and great admirer of such a Father? He presently falls upon Amyraldus
(as M. D. tells us) and singles him out from all others, to pour forth upon him
omne virus, etc. all the venom and bitterness of his slander and evil speaking.
He rakes up again all that they, like good men, had resolved should be buried
and forgotten: and is very angry also, (as if it were an intolerable crime)
that he could see no body in all France, that would raise a tumult and storm
together with him against those that were of Amyraldus opinion.

How could a man more clearly and petulantly condemn the judgment even of his
own Father, or oppose his will, and rescind his Acts, as much as lay in him?
And if you would briefly know how he treated Amyraldus (and so the less wonder
at his virulent declamations against our Divines) M. D. tells us, he calls his
doctrine, Fanatical, Heretical, Arminian, (and that is as bad with him, if not
worse than Popery) worthy to be interdicted and anathematized.

This is another demonstration, that railing is his peculiar gift, wherewith
his ill nature and rancor has abundantly endowed him, and that when he is in
the fit of his fury, he cares not what words he uses; but pours forth, as was
said before, omne virus, the whole venom that is in his heart, upon the least
occasion. For he has nothing worse to say of a man, than that he is an
Arminian: (unless he add the word Socinian) whom (it appears by a passage in
his late Account of the Church of Englands advances toward Rome) he abominates
more than he does a Papist. For speaking there (Page 9.) of the bad Instruments
that have filled England with their Books, for these Fifty Years last past, he
says, they might have been pardoned, if they had only relished of Popery, and
had not been infected with the venom of Arminianisme, Pelagianisme,
Socinianisme, and the Maxims of Mr. Hobbes.

Behold here now a new instance (which I cannot Heylin, Mr. Thorndike, Bishop
Tailor, Archb. Bramhall, etc. and would persuade us they are of that pestilent
nature; (though they abhorred Pelagianisme and Socinianisme, etc. more than
himself: and maintained their doctrine to be that of the Church of England, not
of Arminius) But lets Mr. Andrew Marvel pass quietly for an innocent Writer,
nay extols and admires him so much, as to call him (page 88.) that Great man;
though he has in a most scurrilous manner abused the Venerable Council of
Nice, and expressed therein the very dregs of Socinianisme, or something else
no less Heretical. For this great man of his, has told the World that the
Nicene Council imposed a NEW ARTICLE or Creed upon the Christian World: and
called that explication which they made of the Ancient Belief, concerning the
Son of God, (this being the very thing they insisted on, that they made nothing
New, but only declared what had been always received from the beginning) a
Gibberish, of their own imposing; a Cant, wherein they forced others to follow
them: and in plain terms represents those Fathers who were there assembled, as
a company of pitiful Dunces; who gave sentence as their Chaplains directed them.

This is that Mr. Marvel, whom he and others so much praise; but had he been
of our side, should have been condemned to the Pit of Hell. Consider I beseech
you; what dreadful outcries should we have heard; had any person among us said
any thing like to this blasphemy? This very Lewis would have called him, that
great Villain! or that great Devil, or such names as I cannot invent. But out
of sweet Mr. Marvell's mouth, it is received without any indignation. He may be
a Socinian, or at least an Arian, or perhaps believe Nothing; and he has not a
syllable to say to him. Nay, he praises him; and, as if he were some Hero,
sets a mark of his very high esteem upon him. Mr. Marvel is not only a Great
man; but that Great man.

For what I pray? what is the cause of this strange difference, that he can see
no fault in him, and nothing but faults in others? But only this, that Mr.
Marvel is one of his own gang; a man for his tooth; a great giber and biter;
whose work it was to rail at the Church of England. In such a great man as
this, how should he see any thing amiss? This one newfound Virtue dazzled his
eyes, and made him overlook all his Vices.

Which is a further demonstration that the judgment which this Lewis du Moulin
passes upon any person, is not worth a straw; nor deserves the least regard.
For he judges of men, as he loves or hates: and he loves and hates, according
as they agree with him, or differ from him, in some opinions. Of which he is so
fond, that he will magnify the very worst of men, if they be of his mind; but
vilify the best (as we saw just now in the case of Amyraldus) if they be of
another.

And what a faculty he has in this, and how large M. Daille. Who, leaving the
consideration of the respect this Lewis had to his Father, and looking into the
Disputation it self, (wherein he pretended to give a stab to M. D.'s cause)
could find nothing in his Invective, though he carefully examined it, but a
great heap of lies, impostures, calumnies, and railings; together with a little
sprinkling of histories and fables. Which censure of M. Daille's, is the
perfect and most exact Character, of his late Invective against the Church of
England. And the fountain also from whence such filthy streams flow, is the
very same now that it was then; viz. His Studium causae, (to use M. D.'s words,
which I may render) his zeal for the cause, in conjunction with the highest
degree of rashness; which suggested to him such abundance of lies and
impostures, that to the title of Professor of Histories (which then he had)
might well be added; and of Fables.

Of the first of these, his lying, M. D. gives many M. D. had changed his
opinion, of which he was X. Years before (as if he knew his mind better than
himself) and had rather be listed among the Arminians than keep his place among
the Contra-Remonstrants: and that Amyraldus was a Patron of the Jesuits; With
such like stuff. Which is just like to what he says now of Dr. Stillingfleet;
that He believes the Government without Bishops, to be most conformable to the
practice of the Apostles (p. 54.) but since the Church has heaped upon him
plurality of Great Benefices, he would have us believe the Holy Ghost has
inspired into him other thoughts concerning the English Hierarchy, p. 60. Which
is as true (and no truer) as that Amyraldus was become a Patron of the Jesuits:
and is in part confuted by himself in the very next words; where he quotes his
Epistle before his Apology for Archbishop Laud, for a proof of his change;
which was written (every body knows) when the Church had honored him with none
of her Preferments.

second also, his Impostures, there is no less number than of his lies: As when
M. Daille says that a few are of such or such an opinion; he makes him to say
there are None, etc. But I shall not trouble the Reader with that matter; nor
give a large account of the third, his Calumnies, though he abound in them as
much as any of the rest, and they grow up even to the height of impudence,
malignity and petulancy. It will be sufficient to tell you, that you may know
the man (as M. D. speaks) that he branded, insigni calumni^, with a remarkable
and notorious calumny, all the Divines of their Churches, who had lived in
France for Twenty Years past, or that then were alive; both them that were of
Amyraldus his opinion, and them that were not. The one he condemned of Tyranny,
the other of idleness and sloth; for suffering the Method of Amyraldus to reign
among them. Which clearly shows that this Lewis du Moulin is as great an Enemy
to the Divines of the French Church, if they differ from him in the least
Punctilio; as he is to those of ours: and that he cannot speak with moderation,
of any thing he does not like; but presently it is Tyranny or Popery, or some
such dreadful Monster. He has no mercy upon the dead neither (as M. D. there
shows) but rails upon Blondell, as a favourer of Arminianisme; and upon that
great Divine John Camero; and spares not his own Uncle Andrew Rivet; because in
that Synod (which this Lewis stomachs, because it did not throw Camero out of
the Church) he was the Author of a gentler opinion, than some would have
followed. For he hates any thing that is gentle and soft; and nothing less will
serve him than proscriptions, anathematismes, and the most severe sentences
upon all that is not agreeable to his Sentiments.

As for the fourth thing, his evil speakings and railings, M. D. tells us his
whole Disputation abounds with them. To omit what he says against him, I will
only instance in what he says of Amyraldus. Whom he has the impudence to call
Ardelionem; that is, a busy fellow; a man of an unquiet mind, that can fix no
where. Never reflecting (so fiery is his brain) that this reproach, as M. D.
observes, agrees far better to his own dear self, who was a Divine, forsooth, a
Physician, an Historian, and a Philosopher: whereas Amyraldus never meddled with
any thing but Divinity; which was his profession.

It would be endless to mention all that I have observed, to justify that part
of the Character which M. D. before gave of him; that he being a man whose mind
is disturbed with causless hatred, God is pleased in a secret manner to make
him thus vertiginous, or giddy-headed: And it would be too tedious to make good
the rest of his description of him, which is scattered here and there in M. D.
's Preface, where you may find him charged with absurdities; ridiculousness;
cavilling; speaking things which exceed the height of impudence; (and, than
which nothing can be more scurrilous, or more frantic) insana, mad things,
proceeding rather from anger and rage, than from any judgment. In short, he
says he is a trifler; a man of little reason; easily deceived with slight
appearances of things which are not; more confident than Plautus his
Pyrgopolinices, contemning not only those that he opposes, but making little
account of other Writers on his side in comparison with himself.

These are hard sayings, some will be apt to think: But from thence the sober
Reader may be able to judge what kind of creature this Lewis is. Whom a person
of such temper as M. Daille, who never gives a hard word to our greatest
Adversaries, but in all his other Writings (as Lewis himself confesses) had
expressed a most candid spirit, was forced to handle in this manner. Nothing
but such a sharp and public rebuke from so excellent and holy a Divine, as M.
D. was, could do any good upon a man of such a cankered spirit. Who is not
cured neither by this severe method, but is rather grown more virulent; and
spits out his venom with greater spite than ever against this poor Church of
England.

That when M. Daille had alleged an CXXIV. Witnesses from among the Fathers,
and from the Protestants LXV. and brought no fewer testimonies than Twelve
Hundred, for his opinion; This Man, with great gravity, and no small charity,
blows them all away with one strong breath: Pronouncing that M. Daille intended
to cheat the unskilful; and had either put these testimonies upon the rack, or
drawn them awry to another sense. And this he is pleased to say, Pythagoras
like, without troubling himself to prove it. For out of that multitude of
Testimonies, he only singles out a place of Mr. Calvin's; which he, falsely too,
pretends was not alleged entirely.

What shall we do with such a man as this? Or what regard is to be had to him?
who confidently, and yet carelessly shoots his bolt; and expects to be believed,
because he says it. And he says it in a passion, or rather rage; and out of
virulency of spirit: which makes him think he sees things, which are raised in
his imagination merely by his fury.

And how little a thing will do it, you may judge M. Daille, was only for
maintaining that Christ dyed for all mankind; and thereby put them into a
possibility of salvation, if they do not refuse the Grace of God. A Doctrine
which the Church of England always asserted, and is one of her Articles. And,
though this man would have the World believe the contrary, yet Master Baxter
has plainly demonstrated against him; that herein he either betrays his
ignorance, or too much confidence. You may read his censure of this matter in
his Preface to Disputations about the Sacraments. Where (having taken notice
that this Lewis had said; Amyraldus his Method pleased no body in England, but
one single Baxter) he writes in these terms: I meet with so many of Amyraldus
mind in the point of Universal Redemption, that if I might judge of all the
rest by those of my acquaintance, I should conjecture that half the Divines in
England are of that opinion. And then proceeds to show it is a thing famously
known, that this has been maintained by writing, disputing and preaching, by
as excellent Divines, for learning, judgment, holiness, and powerful preaching,
(as far as we can judge) as ever England bred: mentioning among others
Archbishop Usher, and the Divines sent to the Synod of Dort, etc. and then
concluding, are not these more than unus Baxterus?

Baxter, I shall desire this may be seriously considered, before I conclude;
that if Lewis du Moulin had that honest zeal in him to which he pretends, he
would have handled Mr. Baxter as smartly, and complained of him as heavily, as
he does of any men he has accused for advancing toward Popery. For though he
be not of the Church of England, yet no body is more guilty of what he objects
to our Divines (if it be a crime) than Mr. Baxter; in what he has written
about Faith, and Justification and Christ's imputed Righteousness: which he
explains just as those men whom he reviles; who have no other opinions about
these things (I am well assured from my acquaintance with them) than what Mr.
Baxter himself has. Nor is there any man alive among us, from whom Lewis du
Moulin (unless he have changed his mind) differs more, than he does from Mr.
Baxter. For He defended, as M. Daille observes, this monstrous opinion against
his own Brother, Cyrus Molinaeus, that we are not justified by Faith, but
justified before we have faith. Which Mr. Baxter I am certain accounts a
portentous Doctrine, as well as M. Daille: and has also said all that this
Lewis condemns in the discourses of our Divines about faith, in this short
sentence; It is all one in my account to believe in Christ, and to become a
Christian. And yet we hear not one word or syllable (such is this man's
partiality) of Mr. Baxter's leading the way to Popery. No, by no means; He has
something of the Nonconformist in him; and for that reason he spares him.

But time was when such fiery spirits as L. du Moulin Baxter, just as he does
the Divines of our Church. They said he attributed too much to good works; nay,
according to Mr. Air and Mr. Crandon, the Papists give no more to Works than
He; who taught the People, also they said, to depend too much upon their
Guides; and in downright terms, He was called a Papist. And all, because he
left their way of speaking, and endeavored to make things plainer, and state
them more clearly: which is all the fault they can now find with those Persons,
whom L. du Moulin has belied, and grossly abused by his Impostures. They may,
if they think it worth their while, bestow a particular Answer upon him, and
show how he has misrepresented them: But in my poor opinion they had better
never trouble themselves with such a Reviler: whom no body will mind, that will
consider this description which M. Daille has given of him. Or it may be
sufficient for any of them to say in the Name of the rest (I beg their pardon,
if they think I take too much upon me in directing them what to do) as Mr.
Baxter does to those, who would have had him made a particular reply to Mr.
Crandons Book; God has given me my hours for better and more useful works. And
if any object that the ignorance of common people is such;
that confidence, and railing, and slanders will take with them, as if they
were valid Arguments, and therefore have need of as diligent confutation; I
answer, it is not in my power to cure the ignorance of such people, nor the
slanderous Tongues or Pens of such Writers. And if I must write as long as
slanderous tongues will make me work, or ignorant men need it, then I shall
have work enough to do, and my labors be at the command of every man's Vices.
If any object farther, that our Divines are bound to vindicate their
Reputation, I may Answer for them, as Mr. Baxter does there, (in his Confession
of Faith, p. 7, 8.) that God has suffered the Calumniator to play his part so
grossly, etc. that I think such a tongue is not much capable to diminish a man's
reputation; nor is it any way needful to vindicate it from such.

Yet if you please take Mr. Baxter 's judgment also of this man, whereby you
may see what kind of understanding he has, and how fully I have vindicated
their reputation. You may find it in his Preface to the Disputations about the
Sacraments (Printed the same Year with M. Daille 's Book forementioned) where
he censures that Book, in the Preface to which he used M. Daille so coursly. A
Book, says Mr. Baxter, that has much learning, and more truth than is fairly
used; the face of it being writhen to frown upon them that own it; and parties
wronged, where truth is defended; though, through the unhappiness of the
distinctions, often clouded when it seems to be explicated; and through -- I know
not what, the controversy seldom truly stated. In short, he says, it is an
ungrateful task to answer a Writing, Whose error is a multiplication of
PALPABLE UNTRUTHS IN MATTER OF FACT:
But he lays no less than XX. Considerations in his way, where his Conscience,
he tells him, may find them. At the end of which He cries out, (mark it I
beseech you) This is the faithfulness of the World! it shames and grieves me to
say, of fiding Divines; and as much almost to say, of a PUBLIC PROFESSOR OF
HISTORY IN OXFORD: For the principal honor of an Historian, is his Veracity,
and impartial fidelity; and how much of that his Preface to the Paraenesis is
guilty of, I leave to consideration, etc.

This is Mr. Baxter's judgment of the understanding, Lewis du Moulin: who ought
to submit unto it, and confess himself unqualified to be a Writer; For (if he
speak his true mind in his late Book, p. 64.) he thinks Mr. Baxter to be one of
the sincerest persons in the World, and the most disengaged and free in his
judgment. To which, would to God our dissenting Brethren would be pleased to
trust, and to rely upon Mr. Baxter's judgment so far, as not to give much
credit to the reasonings or reports of a man, who has such a flaw in his
understanding, and such partiality in his affections; as make the one very
weak, and the other very false. As it will be very easy to demonstrate, if
they shall still think him so considerable, as to expect a particular discovery
of all the falsities, impostures and calumnies, wherewith his late Book
abounds, and has grossly abused both the dead and the living. I will now
forbear the instances, because I had rather employ my time otherwise; and would
gladly hope they will so seriously weigh, what opinion Mr. Baxter, and M.
Daille (who was no less sincere, and free, and disinteressed in his judgment)
have of this troublesome man's ability and honesty; as to consider how little
credit is to be given to what he has written, in his most false Account of our
Advances toward Rome. Where, for example, he affirms in his furious rage and
passion, (1.) that the Prelates in their proceedings have exceeded the
barbarousness of the Heathens in the persecution of the Christians, p. 27. And
(2 dly) that there are some excellent Protestants who see as much reason to
abhor the ways of the Church of England, as those of Rome, p. 28. And, 3 dly,
(to name no more of his mad, frantic sayings) that the best interpretation can
be made of the present zeal of the Prelatical party against the Papists, is,
that they are awakened by the love they have to their Benefices; which they
hoped the Papists being their kind Friends, would have suffered them to have
kept, but now see they meant to have all, p. 46, 47. What is all this but lewd
and ignorant, if not malicious railing? It being apparent (to speak one word of
the last) that many Years before the late Popish Plot was discovered, the
Prelatical party, as he calls them, were not only awake, but honestly gave the
Nation warning of their danger; and were the only men that did it; for the
Non-conformists were either then asleep, or so silent, that we could hear
nothing of their fears of Popery; but they lay still,
fondly hugging the Indulgence that was given them. This is known to all those,
that have observed any thing of the Passages of late Years: and may satisfy
all those, who have any list to be rightly informed, how little conscience this
man makes of what he says.

And therefore as they ought not to mind what he has written; so it would be
well if they would consider how little good, or rather how much hurt they are
like to get by what he intends to write. I mean his Ecclesiastical History
(which he tells us he designs) composed by a man, who, in Mr. Baxter's opinion,
wants the principal quality of an Historian, veracity and impartial fidelity,
of which he says he is not much guilty: His error in writing being (when he had
to do with him, and then he was public Professor of History at Oxford) a
multiplication of palpable untruths in matters of fact. A foul error indeed;
which made Mr. Baxter ashamed, and grieved his heart, as it ought to do all
other good men, to think there is no more honesty, among men that pretend
Conscience: so much partiality in siding Divines; and so little faithfulness in
a public Professor of History.

O that all those who now greedily entertain his Books, would lay it to heart!
and see how they suffer themselves to be misled; and what kind of men they are,
who labor might and main, to make the breach wider between us, than really it
is. Let them open their eyes and behold, what such violent spirits are a doing:
disgracing the best men in the Church, and making the World believe they are
marching toward Popery; when they are ready, I am confident, to lay down their
lives rather than submit to it, or move one step toward it; though they might
thereby not only keep all their dignities, but have the addition of all that
the Papacy is able to heap upon them. Why are you so injurious to such men? who
are not angry with you, because you dissent from them; if you did not withal
rail upon them; or love, and cherish those that do. This shows you would
destroy them, and pull our Church in pieces. Men of this spirit are not
content, merely not to be of it; but they would have it not to be. Else we
might all join together against the Common Enemy; though we cannot in all
things agree one with another. But as long as they take this course, they
become also an Enemy, of another sort: and cannot justly blame those of our
Church, who, they complain, cry out against them and remember them of old
things; when they should, in their opinion, only preach against the Papists.
Why do they tempt them to it, by their outcries against the Church; and by
pouring forth such scurrilous language in their Pamphlets?

For my part, I hope the greatest part of the Body of Non-conformists, do not
desire to destroy this Church. But they that rave so furiously against it, give
too much ground to men to believe otherways: the rest not contradicting them,
nor endeavoring to bring them to moderation. Which is a work now very
seasonable for them (and which they are always calling for from our men) if
they would indeed secure this Church; and persuade the members of it, that they
desire not to subvert or unsettle it. Let them openly declare, that they look
upon this Lewis du Moulin, as no better than M. Daille and Mr. Baxter have
described him: one, whose reports they do not trust; a vain Writer and
malicious, if not mad and distracted. Who endeavors to infuse ungrounded
jealousies into your minds of the Divines of our Church: many of which he would
persuade you have for these Hundred Years been moving toward Popery: at least
since the beginning of the Reign of King James, have been daily making nearer
advances to it. And yet, when by such wicked suggestions, this Church was
pulled down, how few of them were there found, that revolted unto Popery? How
can these things consist together; that men should be making their advances
nearer and nearer to Rome, and not then close with it? Why did not the corrupt
party (as he terms it) then follow their inclinations, if they had any that
way, when there was so great a temptation? All their maintenance being then
taken away; and little hope left of seeing it restored?

This, one would think, should open your eyes, to p. 4.) are touched as you
ought to be: though he would have us believe (p. 42.) your life is a continual
practice of repentance. For then, he that says this, would not have had the
confidence to affirm, almost in the same breath, (p. 41.) that they who are
distinguished from us, by the Names of Puritans, Presbyterians, Independents,
Fanatics, etc. are the best Christians, the best Protestants, the best
Englishmen, the most loyal subjects, the greatest pillars, burtresses and
supporters of Monarchy, etc. and that the Party which comes nearest to the
doctrine and practice of the Calvinists and Puritans, have above all others
(mark I beseech you the audacious vanity of the man) observed the command of
the Apostle to the Romans, Cap. xiii. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers. If this be to repent; I know not what it is to justify your selves,
with the highest degree of impudence. Pardon the expression; for I intend it
only to such men as Lewis du Moulin; who if he had truly repented, would in
stead of writing such a Book as this, have made an honest acknowledgment in
Print, that you are the true cause of all our present evils.
Some of you more remotely; others more immediately. For the late War was
raised (not in obedience sure to Romans xiii. 1. Let every soul, etc.) the
Bishops pulled down, the Liturgy exploded by the very best of you. And then,
the worser sort of you plotted the death of the King: upon which followed, the
banishment of the Royal Family into a strange Land: Where, if one of them
changed his Religion; I pray consider to whom that, and all the mischievous
consequences of it, ought originally to be imputed.

Friendly Debate. Whom you ought to have heartily thankt (though now you will
scarce forgive him) for his plain dealing; in calling to your mind all that
folly and madness (to omit other things) into which your People ran, when you
had overturned the best constituted Church in the World. You should have all
taken shame to your selves for it; and then you would not have called his bare
relating these things, a reproachful usage of you: Nor would Lewis du Moulin
have again blown the same coal, which raised before such a terrible combustion;
viz. about the inclination of the Church of England to Popery.

Which is a calumny devised merely to kindle the Peoples wrath against us: for
if the reasons he gives for it were worth any thing, they as nearly touch, I
have shown already, the best men among the Nonconformists, as any of the Church
of England. Mr. Baxter, for instance, who in the main point of Faith and
Justification, is of the same mind with those whom this Railer accuses: as he
might have been informed, even from the Friendly Debate; if he had read it for
any other end, than to bark at it. Let him read again, p. 83, etc. especially
p. 89. of the third part, and he will be convinced, if he be not one of those
who have eyes to see, and see not; that Mr. Baxter has been as much to blame,
as any body; if there be any fault to be found about such matters. And for his
clearer conviction I will point him to another passage in the Book there
quoted, (Disput. of Justification, p. 94.) like to which he will not easily
find in the men whom he has exposed to the Peoples hatred. I have heard, says
Mr. Baxter, as eminent Divines as most I know (some yet living) in a public
Meeting say,
that Bishop Usher, and Mr. Gataker affirmed, that the Papists did not
fundamentally differ from us, in the point of Justification.

By this he may know something of Mr. Baxter's mind, and other eminent Divines
of his acquaintance; and therefore either leave his bawling, or in his next
Book open his Mouth wider (as there is reason) and tell the World, with tears
running down his cheeks, that alas! alas! there is a corrupt, rotten party
among the Nonconformists too: who are as bad as those among the Episcopal
Clergy. For every body knows Mr. Baxter is a leading man, and has a great many
Followers; and there are other eminent Divines also of his mind: who must all
now be proclaimed, by this great and careful Defender of pure Religion, to be
in the number of those, who endeavor to bring in Popery, at least a Mungrel
one (as he speaks, p. 41.) that comes pretty near to the true Popery.

Nay, such is the fiery nature of his spirit, that if his mighty love to
Nonconformists do not allay it, he will scarce oblige Mr. Baxter so much, as to
injure him with moderation and modesty (which as the World goes, Mr. B. there
tells us, he must take for a favor) I mean, acquit him from the charge of
gross Popery. Though I will tell him beforehand, how little he will care for
his, or any other men's censures of this kind, (and therefore, why should our
Divines value them?) for he may read, if he please, in the next Page these
memorable words; and I suppose he is still of the same mind. Since I have heard
of late times,
what it is that goes under the name of Antichristianity and Popery, even with
many that are able to call themselves Orthodox, etc. I confess I begin to have
charitable thoughts of a man that is but freed from the charge of gross Popery;
and if those tongues should free him also from the imputation of all the finer
Popery, I should begin to suspect that somewhat is amiss. And he may find, if
he think good, an answer there, in what immediately follows, to all that he
says about Socinianisme: which was laid at Mr. Baxter's door, as well as the
other.

To this fine pass had your folly brought things in the late times. And will
you never see your errors? or not ingenuously acknowledge them? will you still
go on to lay load upon the men of the Church of England, and to say that they
have undone us; when it is so apparent, there is nothing you now complain of,
but you were the first causes of it, and have brought it upon your selves, and
us?

Be not angry, I pray, at this plain English; but repent, Lewis du Moulin,
though he should remain still impenitent. We will let him rail, and vomit up
all the gall of bitterness that is in his heart; without any contradiction. He
shall have full liberty to vie with the Devil himself in his calumnies; and we
will leave him only to answer to God for it. As he must shortly, for this
foul-mouthed slander (than which it is hard for Hell to invent one more false)
that it will appear by a Cloud of Witnesses fetched from our English Doctors,
etc. that they have got into the Tents of Pelagius and Socinus, made a mere
mockery and illufion of the holy Trinity (which Heaven knows, they to a man
confess and adore) turned into raillery the sacred Mysteries of the Christian
Religion, and do laugh at the imputative righteousness of Jesus Christ, at
Justification by Faith; and have preached that Heathens may do good works, as
meritorious and well pleasing to God, without the grace of Jesus Christ, etc.
as the Alms and prayers of a devout Cornelius, p. 85. Which are accusations
that have not one word of Truth in them; but were suggested to him by his own
enraged imagination, which most unjust hatred to us (to use M. D.'s words
again) has disturbed; or by his unconscionable jealousies, (to speak in Mr.
Baxter's phrase) which will not let him understand aright. For I am as sure
there are no such Divines, not one; much less a Cloud of Witnesses to these
things; as I am that Amyraldus was no Patron of the Jesuits; M. Daille no
Arminian; Mr. Baxter no Papist; and that they are not persecuted, who are
suffered to write even such Books as this without any punishment.

But I will leave those Divines, as I said, to purge themselves, if they think
fit; or turn him over to the Author of the Friendly Debate: who can, I fancy,
if he will attempt it, make this Lewis repent at least of this; that he has
mentioned his Book with such reproach: When it is visible, in my poor opinion,
it is nothing so sharp and severe upon the N. C. as M. Daille is upon their
Champion L. du Moulin. And yet (such is their partiality, of which I pray God
they may all repent) they never speak of M. Daille, but as of a holy Man of an
excellent temper, who is highly reverenced by all the Party; but generally
condemn the other, as a profane and scurrilous Writer, an Enemy of the People
of God, and I know not what. O the power of studium causae, as M. Daille calls
it, zeal to serve the cause, and affection to a side! I beseech again the
Father of lights to give them a better mind; and us all grace thoroughly to
search and try our ways; and to see and acknowledge our errors.

the present error that is among you, in accusing us of intending to destroy
the Government. Is not that as great an outcry every where, as this of du
Moulin's? I answer sincerely; there are many, I believe, very jealous of you,
and declare it freely: But their suspicions are raised by such kind of writings
as his; which clearly demonstrate, they think, that the Dissenters, at least
such as He, intend to stir up the hatred of the People against the Men of our
Church, as much as against the Papists, if not more: (For He mentions the Lord
Castlemain, p. 26. with far more respect, than he does our Divines) the
consequence of which can be nothing else, than an endeavor to pull us in
pieces.

But for my part, as I said before, I am willing to hope the main body of N. C.
are not so disposed: though there be factious spirits among them (too many)
that would thrust them forward to our, and their own destruction. They
understand better, and are better inclined, I hope, than to pull down a well
settled Government; when, it is apparent, as I have noted above, they can set up
none in the room of it: And the best Demonstration they can give of this, will
be to disown such Writers as L. du Moulin, by some public Declaration: and
therein assure us, that they mean not to disturb the Church of England, as it
is established; but will heartily join with us, against the Papists, to uphold
and maintain it: desiring only to have their own just liberty under that
Government; which they will highly deserve, when they have contributed to its
support.

As for the project of Lewis du Moulin, it is as vain as himself; for were the
Ceremonies (which he most unconscionably reviles as Popish) removed out of the
way, it would not make up the breach: but the main body of Non-conformists
would still remain divided from us; because they will not admit of a prescribed
form of Prayer. Nay, He himself, I have too much reason to believe, would not
be satisfied, unless the Articles of the Church of England be expounded to the
sense of Mr. Calvin: which will never down with very great numbers of the
Dissenters, no more than with them among us, against whom he has spit out all
this venom.

But I must not enlarge upon this subject, having other business that expects
me; now that the Twelve days are expiring. In the midst of which, I told you,
his Book first coming to my hand, I employed the remainder of them, as you see,
in giving this short account of it, and of him. Who may thereby be convinced,
that we are not so ill taught, as to spend our time in the Playhouse, or with
a Pack of Cards: (which he would have you believe is the common divertisement
of our Ministers, p. 36.) though I think that had been far more innocent, than
to be writing such Books as his. For therein I should, at the worst, only have
done a little harm to my self: whereas his business is to abuse the Nation with
false reports; nay to poison it with destructive opinions; and t^ slander those
Divines, as men that satisfy themselves with the profession of a superficial
piety, (p. 35.) who are most laborious in their studies; devoutly attend the
Divine Service; and make it their business by Word and Writing to do good to
Men.

Jan. 6. 1679.
THE END.

