ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE Scotch Covenant. WHEREIN All may receive satisfaction as
to the Illegality of it, and be easily persuaded to the Renunciation thereof.

By J. L.

Ezekiel. 16.61. Then thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou
shall receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger: and I will give them
unto thee for daughters, but not according to thy Covenant.

LONDON: Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in (...), 1662.

Animadversions, etc.
AS soon as I viewed this Sermon and the passages annexed to it though I have
no itch to the Press, (which I wish were more narrowly looked to) yet Facit
indignatio versum, I could not forbear putting pen to paper, that I might
Vindicate my Sovereign and the Church of England. And though I could wish
rather any should have done it then my self, yet better it is that it should be
done by one that is Minimus sacerdotum then not at all. Indeed I was once in
the mind to let it pass with a private Deleatur to the whole, conceiving that
scarce any would be found willing to feed on such sour Grapes, the greatest
part of those who have any Ecclesiastical Function amongst us being weary of
hearing a Charge, and therefore call for a Retreat to be Sounded, desiring a
composure of Church Differences; yet because there are some bad Stomachs that
delight in green Fruit and Trash; and others Weak, who require some greater
satisfaction to the particulars herein contained then they can give themselves;
I hoped that it might have some good success, if not to the former yet to these
latter. And if any thing seem sharp let the Reader blame him Qui laesit prior.
It will be superfluous to Exercise any Charity in raising a doubt of the Author
of this paper, since the Title page bears his name, or of his willingness to
have it made public since we are there told that it was Printed according to
the Authors own Copy, to prevent any counterfeit; against which surely that
care could not make a sufficient provision since it will be evident that the
whole (at best) is no other. But we may well Quaere and easily be resolved of
the Reasons of issuing it out at this time of his Sacred Majesty's coming to
England, that they were no other, then either to engage him to the same here,
and so give an Allay to the Affections of those that had imbarqued themselves
in his and his Fathers Cause, or else upon a refusal to be a Foundation of
Clamor against him by their handful of Associates in England: If these suffice
not, why may we not think that it was proposed as a pattern to some rigid and
refractory Spirits to hold him to the same hard meat here which they had so
liberally fed him with in Scotland. It is plain that as Malice was the Mother,
so Mischief is the intended Daughter.

Others of a contrary Judgment to them have been willing to Lute up their
Mouths and Acquiesce in the Royal determination with the advice of his great
Council, but these Men will never cease to cast in Firebrands amongst us to put
all in Flames; what can we not be a Church unless we be a Kirk? or is all the
World obliged to Dance after the Scotch Bagg-pipe? is either England so Low, or
themselves in so High and Potent Condition, that they should impose upon us? or
is our Peace and Settlement the only object of their Envy? or if they must
needs be attemping a Disunion amongst us in such a juncture of Affairs wherein
all sober minded men labor to make up our many Breaches had they no other
expedient but this paper to do it? as if they were resolved, that his Sacred
Majesty should never be free from Afflictions whether with them or us; or had
they no better Sermon for a Coronation, or to plead their interest then this
pitiful crude piece? Believe it, if the Author were chosen for so great a work
by ability, not faction, we may well pity them with whom the work of Preaching
Runs so Low, and let me add, so full of Dreggs.

It is not agreeable to the more modest and civil Genius of our Nation to be so
bold in the Pulpit with private men how mean soever, as to name them, much
less with a KING; we have learned Parcere personis dicere de vitiis; it is
sufficient that we give the Thesis, let the Auditors Conscience make the
application; or where we think that necessary we cannot but account it absurd
to direct it to any particular Person, a course more fit to blast then instruct
him, nor shall any man ever find this rude way advantageous for the attaining
that end, which is or should be designed by Preachers, the Benefit of the
Auditors; for who is there so publicly reproved whose corruption will not
hatch a dislike of the froward and imprudent instructor; and where this dislike
takes place his Doctrine is like to find but a mean Reception. We know well the
Charge of the Apostle, Those that sin rebuke before all, that others also may
fear, 1 Timothy 5.20. But who does not know that this is not to be understood of
all offenses but those that are primae magnitudinis, and those sins without
Controversy, and publicly known, and that after a Fruitless Trial of all
fair and gentle means, and private admonitions; and when ever used, or if ever
to God's Vice gerent, in silken words. But for every Minister (since he will be
called so) so soon as he hears of any Affairs of State which dislikes his
Fancy, or corresponds not with his Interest, immediately to fly in the Face of
Majesty, and by a satyricall bawling and barbarous Discourse to render it mean
in the eyes of the Subjects, which are of themselves too apt to entertain such
thoughts and discover the bad fruits of them, is neither agreeable to the
Ingenuity of a Scholar, the Prudence of a Christian, or the Gravity of a
Divine. I could muster up here a Troop of practices of this nature, but that I
have no intent to provoke my Reader to laughter by repeating those things which
were never fit to be spoken once, much less in a Pulpit: and yet (which is the
mischief of it) for this only they are thought godly and faithful; And our
Author tells us as much, page 10. For, They spared not (says he) to tell the
King his fault to his Face. Yet this may seem to be a small matter in respect
of another usage they have, which is not only to rebuke (I had almost said rail
against) then Coram, but in their Country Pulpits, before a few walking Clods
to censure all the actions of the Court, and rip up all the imagined faults of
the absent King, who can never be informed by such discourses, so that any
intelligent person must needs conclude, that their proper tendency is to stir
up seditious spirits to resist the lawful Magistrate, for maintenance of their
new Model. And though you will think this enough and too much, yet they rest
not here; for they are so accustomed to revile the living, both present and
absent, that they spare not the very Dead, as you may see in this Author, page
4. There are many sins upon our King and his Family; a little after, I desire
the King be truly humbled for his own sins, etc. the sins of his Fathers House,
which have been great! Page 19. He accuses King James of making a foul
defection; and in a few lines after, says, that He laid the Foundation
whereupon his Son our late King did build much mischief to Religion all the
days of his life. Os impudens! was there none that had loyalty enough to stop
that black mouth? or is it so customary with you, that it is to be esteemed a
Scotch Elegancy? In good earnest that blessed Saint shall hear a Martyr when
the Name of such railing Rabshakaes shall either be forgotten or remembered with
abhorrency.

Again, Page 22. Sir, There is too much iniquity upon the Throne by your
Predecessors, who framed mischief by a Law. And Page 24: I may say freely that
the chief cause of the Judgment upon the Kings House has been the
Grandfathers breach of Covenant with God, and the Fathers following steps in
opposing the work of God, and his Kirk within these Kingdoms. What will you
disturb the Grave, and arraign and sentence the Ashes of the Kings? how can we
expect any Piety where there is a want of that Charity which covers the
multitude of Offenses? nay, where there is that radicated malice that makes
offenses where there are none, and that is not satisfied with a verbal
aspersing the Dead, but by the Press endeavors the transmitting these
Calumnies to Posterity: Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut hi non sunt Christiani,
it is the Apostles rule, Titus 3. v: 2. To speak evil of no man; you have not
the Authority of the Writers of the Canon of Scripture in censuring the Lives
of your KING'S though you take it:

Maintenance of Religion conform to the National Covenant, League and
Covenant; So it seems Religion must conform to that, not that to Religion: this
is that which they make the top of the Crown, its Cross; and then if this be
done, what will they do? he tells you, that They will bestow Land, Life, and
what else is in their power for the maintenance of Religion, and the safety of
his Majesty's person. I like well that God should be set above the King, and so
does his Majesty too; But what the aim of these Men is in prefixing of Religion
to the safety of his Majesty's sacred Person, we know by sad experience; and
find here in their words, Religion conform to the National Govenant: would you
understand what Religion is in their sense? the sum total, is the National
Covenant, the League and Covenant; which being their own device and an
unwarrantable composure how little reason there is, that either that should be
the comprehensive of Religion, or Religion under that Notion stand before his
Majesty, let all sober and discreet Men judge.

Joash, when he comes to make the Parallel betwixt him and the King, he tells
you, Pa. 3. That the wicked Men have risen up, and usurped the Kingdom; And who
were these wicked men? were they not all or most of them Covenanters? did they
not all swarm out of the Hive of Presbytery? and what did your own Country men
do in the days of his great Grandmother? and by what Principles were they
acted, and who set them a work? and what were the Pretenses? we are well
pleased you should condemn these amongst us as much as you will, but desire
that you would pass the same Censure upon all that lie under the same Guilt,
what ever covering they throw over it. For we agree fully with you, That who
ever rises up and Usurps the Kingdom, deserves the Title of wicked; and as you
say in the words following, we say also, that They put to Death the last King
most unnatually: but who brought him low and made the way for his Murder? who
did unnaturally murder him in his Repute and good Name, and so prepared him for
their Cruelty? If you be not able to answer these Questions, every Child can
with us; for the vail is taken off, and you must never think these many Ages to
deceive so much as the Plebeians with the NAME of RELIGION in your sense before
mentioned.

Page 4. That there are many sins upon the King and his Family; the
unhandsomnesse of this expression is took notice of before; and now must add
that which is proper as it lies here; what so young and yet so many sins? what
are they personal? can they see so many, and all the world besides admire they
can find so few? What were they sins in Government? why he never yet came to it
here when these words were spoken; and how long had he governed with you, or
how much did he govern? though you put away most of his Friends from him, yet
we are not ignorant, He that will charge others so Magisterially should look a
little into himself, and those that side with him; and shall we find him or
their Assembly spotless? So much has been printed, so much is known of your
ways and proceedings, that you had need to bewail your own Trible ere you
charge his Majesty so rudely and violently: and if we may trace you in your own
way of censuring, I think we may say; The Event has showed that the Lord has
had a Controversy with you; as well as you say he has with the Royal Family.

Page 5: He is not content to strike at the present King and his dead
Ancestors, but he must discover their wonted dissafection to Kings in General;
for there he gives them this lash, Kings use to be so taken up with their
Crowns that they despise their People. They are always engrafting in the stock
of the people a bad opinion of Kings, which with the heat of their Sermons,
they can at pleasure make sprout out into a Rebellion; and therefore I shall
only tell him to this Passage, that He and his Faction are so taken up with
their novell Discipline, that they despise Crowns, and speak evil of
Dignities, and encourage the People to do the like as thinking it very safe to
speak the Pulpit language.

That which follows in the same Page is to me very strange, when he so
confidently affirms, I know nothing that is good in Government but a King may
learn it out of the Book of God. It is a great sign you know not much. The end
which the Scripture proposes as to us, is to discover the way and means of
attaining salvation, in this Non deficit, so omits not any thing of that which
is needful to acquire this End. But on the other side, Non redundant in
superfluis; for although there be scattered up and down some general precepts
concerning Magistrates and all Relations, yet it being not the end of Scripture
to write Politics, we may boldly say, that all that is good in Government
cannot be learned out of the Book of God: much might be said to this; but
because I mean to make short work with him, I shall choke him with an Authority
drawn from a Patriarch of his own King-lessening Doctrine, Buchanan in his Book
De jure Regni when he comes to answer the Objection, De jure Regni apud Scotos
Page 47.
That however Idolatrous the Kings of Israel were, yet the Prophets never
exhorted the people to take up Arms and to set things right by such crooked
means, Possum (says he) apud multas Nationes plurimas saluberrimasque
recensere Leges quorum in Sacris literis nullum est exemplum; The Government is
by Laws; Laws there are, and good ones too it may be; besides what are there
something it seems by him not only for Government, but for governing him that
has the Government, that yet there is no Scripture for? And he did very
ingeniously to confess they had no Scripture for it; for all their practices
in that are besides the Text, Kings must govern by Scripture, but they think
they may govern them without.

He is pleased a little after to commend the Testimonies of God for the best
Councillors; we deny it not: but why are they so? Because they will tell the
Kings freely both their Sin and their Duty; Why, who should if they should not;
God speaks by them; but sure I am he likes them the better for their freedom
with Kings: but let me tell you, since the Scriptures are so free, you might be
a little modester then you are; and let something else then railing be the
Character of a good Preacher amongst you.

Page 6. with anointing of Kings; and after he has granted that one of he
Cases in which the Jews used it, viz, in the Case of Interruption by
Usurpation, which he confesses was their Case in the present Coronation; yet
then he flies to this, that it was Typical and taken from the Jews without
warrant. They make what they please typical; but though they were anointed,
and Christ were yet thence to infer it was a type, is no sound consequence. The
Jews used Baptism before Christ; Christ makes use of it also; will they say
this is a typical action? if so, why do they not cast that off? the sick were
anointed with Oil, James 5.14. was that typical? as for his other, that it was
taken from the Jews without warrant, I must look upon it as affirmed Gratis.
For in these things where we have not directions in the New Testament, why may
we not have respect to the Old, especially when the action does not deny Christ
come, so will not lay any Jewish bondage upon us: Now to make it more odious,
he tells us how that this anointing was Most in use with the Bishops of Rome,
who to keep Kings and Emperors subject to themselves did swear them to the
Pope when they were anointed; (and yet the Jewish Priests did never swear Kings
to themselves,) as for England although the Pope was cast off, yet the
subjection of Kings to Bishops was still retained; for they anointed the King
and swore him to the maintenance of their Prelaticall Dignity. Very good; Turpe
est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum, What art thou O man, that condemnest
another, and yet do the same things. Sure you were asleep when you delivered
this, I am sure you forgot your self much; look into Page 2: in the Chancellors
Speech, and see what he moves to the King so soon as he had delivered the
desires of the people for his Coronation; That he would maintain Religion,
conform to the National Covenant, League and Covenant; so in Pa. 10. after the
Sermon was done, they put him to renew the Covenant, they had urged him to take
it before: this was but a renewing; for notwithstanding their Articles at
Breda, they knew well how they had used him in this particular, both before he
landed and after, contrary to their first agreement; for no Coronation nor
nothing to be done for him without this; and who is this to Engage him too, but
their Presbytery, that is, themselves; and yet they complain of the Pope and
the English Bishops that they swear Kings to themselves. Accordingly they
fashion the people, Page 21: to bear Truth and Faith to him, and live and die
with him; with this limitation, In your service according to the National
Covenant and Solemn League and Covenant: So Page 23. the Lords one by one did
promise Truth and Faith to him against all manner of Polkes whatsoever in your
service, according to the National Covenant and Solemn League and Covenant.
So, no Covenant, no Obedience, no King. Yet they do not as the Pope or the
Bishops of England; good men! they are guilty of no such practices; indeed they
are not, but of worse they are. Where was your reason when you say that in
England although the Pope was cast off, yet the Subjection of Kings to Bishops
was still retained? wherein or how is the King of England subject to the
Bishops, speak it out Man! do they meet without his Order but with the danger
of a praemunire? have any of them opposed him or railed against him in their
Sermons? or have they undertaken at their Assemblies to order the King, to
order the Army, to direct them when they shall Fight, when not; whom they shall
employ, whom cast out, how they shall keep their King locked up as a Prisoner;
when he shall appear, and when it is fit to take him from the Army; lest by
being seen, he prove too popular, and give a Check to the Kirk? All which
things and many more we know who have done, that pretend to nothing but the
sword of the spirit; Do the Bishops at any time use so much as a bold
Expression to him? do they not acknowledge though not their calling yet the
exercise of it in this or that Precinct to him? do they in their Synods offer
to oblige the people by their determinations, till the things agreed upon have
received the Stamp of Royal Authority, and so made current? can you say that
at any time they have held their Resolution firm in any thing without the
King's Confirmation? do they not acknowledge him and pray for him as supreme in
all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil? do you give him so much, or do
you so pray for him? Lastly, have the Bishops in England since the Reformation,
ever used any violent means to bring the King to their bow? who have you
known, and let them bear the charge of subjecting Kings to their model.

But you go on to tell us how Subjection of Kings to Bishops is still retained
in England; now let the Auditor look for some rare reasons, for which he may
prepare either his laughter or pity, or both, For the anointed, the King; ergo,
he is subject to them: Hear as good an Argument; the Marquis of Argyle the
grand Patron of the Covenant, set the Crown upon the Kings Head, Page 21. will
you say therefore the King was subject to him? I will not say what he and you
would have made him, but a better Providenc has delivered him out of those
storms and a little time will discover the hidden things of that mischievous
League. The latter part is as good and to the same tune; And swear him to the
maintenance of their Prelaticall Dignity: you are much out; for they present
nothing, but what his Ancestors ever voluntarily engaged themselves too by
Oath, and do not force an Oath upon him of their own devising. The Oath is not
of their imposing, but of his own free taking, and thereby he engages himself
to nothing, but what is by Law established: not urged by violence, and threats
and arms. And what if he does engage by Oath to preserve the Rights of the
Church, is the matter so heinous? Yes, Bishops are Limbs of Antichrist. You say
much but you prove little; will you make the Apostles Limbs of Antichrist? Nam
and Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos,
Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum
nominabant Hieronymus ad Evagrium, Epist. 85: was Mark Bishop of Alexandria a
Limb of Antichrist? or Peter at Antioch or Rome, or James at Jerusalem, or
Polycarp at Smyrna? what have all Ecclesiastical Writers agreed together to lie
in a matter of Fact, delivering to us the succession of Bishops in the most
principal Sees? I will not say much to this, the Cause has been handled by
many Learned Pens which either you have not read, or if, which prejudice St
Hierom to whom you attribute more then all the Fathers, because you think he
does least to Bishops; yet if he might determine the Controversy in his
Epistle to Evagrius, he would give it against you. Et ut sciamus traditiones
Apostolicus sumptus de Veteri Testamento; quod Aaron, and filii ejus: atque
Levitae in Templo suerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi and Presbyteri, and Diacani
vindicent in Ecclesia, Epist: 85. I will add no more but look beyond Calvin,
yet anointing, and Bishops must Be put together to the door, never to come in
again: Yes, they may and never ask a Scotch Minister leave; you must not
always think to reign as Kings, and censure as you please, coupling Popery and
Prelacy together without any distinction, on purpose to make all that be of
that judgment in the same condemnation with the Papists, and so fit for your
Sequestration and Violence. But though he cast out the Ceremony of anointing,
yet he undertakes to tell us presently after, how they are anointed of the
Lord, Because by the Ordinance of the Lord their Authority is sacred and
inviolable. Take heed you break not the Ordinance of the Lord; for we shall
have occasion afterward to see how sacred and inviolable you make it in your
opinion and practice. Then you commend unto us in the same Page, The spiritual
Unction which you say is common to Believers; and then That few Kings are so
anointed. There are but few Kings; therefore there cannot be many so anointed
when the whole number is so small: but let me tell you there are many Rebels,
and not one of them is so anointed.

Anon after you come to reckon up the Enemies to the Authority of Kings, and we
could enlarge your Catalogue with another name to the third sort, who you say
are such Who rise against Kings in open Rebellion as Absalom and Sheba, who
said, what have we to do with David the Son of Jesse? To your Tents O Israel;
For at the first beginning of Rebellion amongst us by Tumults, a Treatise
bearing this very Title wast cast into his Majesty's Coach, and by whom they
were excited to this, is evident; so they are Rebels, open Rebels and Enemies
to the Authority of Kings by their own Description.

Page 7. You say the Photinians allow Kings in Profession, but they are against
the Exercise of their Power in the administration of Justice. I have heard of a
Northern People that crowned their King and so allowed Kings in Profession, but
would suffer him to do nothing; so they denied the Exercise of his Power in
the Administration of Justice. Are not these Photinians in Mr. Robert Douglas
judgment? A few lines following he makes a profession, That they are far from
cutting off a lap of that just power and greatness which God has allowed to
the King, and we have bound our selves by Covenant not to diminish. You mean, I
suppose, not to diminish, id est, more then the Covenant does:

Now in the next place, when he comes to the principal Verb the Covenant, that
Covenant which was between God and the King, he refers you to the sum of it, 2
Kings 23: 3. which conteins nothing we can except against; But what is this to
their Covenant he after mentions and the particulars of it; In Josiahs you meet
with none of this muster of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism and
Profaneness, nothing of Incendiaries, Malignants or the like, or engaging to
alter other Nations and reform them; These Men if they meet with but the word
Covenant, they think it is a Blank which they may fill up with what they
please, and then Christen it with the title of a Scripture Covenant. I shall
refer him for this to Oxford Reasons, which when my Scotch. Minister can
solidly answer, we will take it into further consideration, and till then lay
it by.

Now then let him boast what he will, how much Scotland has preference before
other Nations, for their making a Covenant, if they get but as much more by it
as they have already gotten, a blew Bonnet will buy all.

Page is such a bundle of Calumnies that I am willing quickly to skip over this
Dunghill; for the scent is very offensive to any good Subject or modest temper:
Nothing here but of Dissembling Kings, the sins of his Fathers House; the House
of our King has been much defiled with Idolatry: Complaints of a profane
Court in England: If this be to preach, there is none of our Tub-men, that will
not do it as well; for they can make any thing idolatrous or profane, as well
as he; I, even Learning too; and I doubt, if they had their minds, it would be
Idolatry for some men to eat their meat.

Page and in the 9. he comes to the Covenant between the King and the People;
in which he says, Is a Contract between Him and them, containing conditions
mutually to be observed. This he says, but does not prove, nor ever can, that
there was any such Contract between Joash and the people: he may state it how
he pleases; but if he put more into it, then that he should govern them, and
they be obedient, I conceive it is his own Fancy; for nothing is expressed, and
we never find their Kings under any Conditions, but what they owed to God. As
for those other two which you mention; In regard of Laws, and in regard of
Government, you only say it; For first those Laws that are received, may be
altered, and it may be good that they be altered when they prove inconvenient;
and who can alter them but the King? Others may Legem rogare, but he only does
Legem far; and if he do make a Law contrary to what was in use at such a time
of his Oath, will you say he is a Breaker of his Oath by enacting the contrary
that is more advantageous? how is he then limited by them, any longer then he
shall find them beneficial to the People? And in a word, for all you blurt out
against Arbitrary Power and Government, it is impossible to place the Supreme
Power, either in one, or few, or many, but it must be Arbitrary; therefore all
Arbitrary Government is not Tyrannical, though you jumble them together, and
make them all one in the Latter end of the 9. Page. Is it not Arbitrary with
that Supreme Power, whether this shall continue a Law or not? but if you mean
by Arbitrary, an Arbitrary administration of justice in the Execution of the
Law already made, therein I suppose no King will assume to himself an Arbitrary
Power; for not to act by that Rule which was at first the act of his own will,
is to contradict himself; yet withal you cannot deny, but that the King may
dispense with the Execution of the Law by Pardon, and so moderate the rigor of
it.

What you say of Limitation in regard of Government, is little to the purpose;
for though the KING govern not alone, yet all else besides are (to use the
Apostles phrase) sent by him, and their power they have from him, as the
Fountain of all power.

What the Author of Defensio Regia has written, I suppose he is able to make
good against a greater Giant then your self; and therefore I shall not meddle
with what you asperse him, till you have answered his Arguments which will be
long enough.

In the close of this Page, you tell us, That Kings are deceived who think the
People are ordained for the King, and not the King for the People. And I affirm
that those Ministers are deceived that think they are not ordained mutually for
each other; the King to govern the people, and the people to be governed by
their King.

Page, after you have been as bold as blind Bayard with the King, and with
Kings you wipe your lips, and come out with a pretense of Modesty, that You
desire not to speak much of this subject; and afterward you break out into more
then yet you have said: You tell us also that Men have been very tender in
meddling with the Power of Kings; I am sure, you, nor the rest of your Brethren,
are not of those Men that have been so tender; for you undertake in the same
Paragraph to advise, how Subjects (you name them in this general term) should
keep within the bounds of this Covenant in regulating that Power that is the
Kingly Power. Where is the sacredness and inviolableness of their Authority
which you talked of in the 6. Page? for now here you give liberty to the
Estates to control, to oppose Him and to resist Him by Arms; and this you make
a Duty: for you say not only that they may do it, but that they ought to do
it, when the King overthrows Religion, Laws and Liberty; But yet you know this
was done constantly by the Kings of Israel, and sometimes by the Kings of
Judah: yet to speak your own language a little after, I think you cannot show
that the Prophet ever taught such Doctrine, or the Apostles, though under
Heathen Emperors, that the Estates might oppose with Arms, nor any Churches,
but those that Scotize, and the Jesuits; how they agree I will give you a
Taste; for others have given you a full Meal.

Bellarmine in his 5: lib: De Romano Pontifice, c. 7: says, that the
Christians obeyed Nero, Dioclesian, Julian the Apostate, and Valens the Arrian,
Quia de^^ant vires temporales Christianis; So the Author of the Book De just^
abdicatione Regis Henrici 3. says upon the same occasion, Non est eadem ratio
instituendae Ecclesiae atque institutae, add quod id tum non licuit dum
impiorum mu titudo superior esset. And to obey with him in another place is
Laudabile tantum cum resistere nequeas. And he that shall read Buchanan, De
jure Regni apud Scotos, Page 50.55. shall find the same Doctrine. For though
they look several ways, yet like Sampson's Foxes they are tied together by the
tayls; he has there the same sense. Paul says, he wrote of obedience in the
infancy of the Church when there were but few Christians and not many of them
rich, or of ability, or ripe for such a purpose. And a little after, as if a
Man should write to such Christians, as are under the Turk, poor and feeble,
would he not write as Paul did? see the Apostle (as he takes upon him to
instruct him) respected, says he, the Men he wrote too, and his words are not
to be extended to a whole Commonwealth or City. Prodigious Divinity! which the
Church was never acquainted with till the Jesuits and these Men broached it.
Tertullian who lived in the latter end of the second Century, teaches us
another Lesson, in his Apologeticus, Number plures Mauri aut Marco munici, ipsique
Parthi, cui Bello non idonei qui tam libenter trucidamur: were it weakness
only that kept the Christians in subjection, which is most untrue, Christians
would be the worst Subjects and most dangerous to be suffered in any Nation, as
those who would obey no longer then till they were strong enough to resist; but
when they ceased to be weak, would cease to be subject also: no pretense of
Religion should make us irreligious. If you give this Power to the Estates, you
advance their power above the Kings; and then how is he sacred and inviolable
in his Authority, when another Authority under him may resist him by Arms? and
those who though they are higher then others, yet are Subjects having all their
Honors and Places, which sets them above the Common people, from Him: But all
this will not justify the proceeding of the Kingdom, as you say it will
against the late King; for you have only said so much, having given nothing of
reason to satisfy the Conscience in a matter of so great import. But I must
pray you not to call them the Proceedings of the Kingdom; For it was but the
proceedings of a Faction in that Kingdom, a Multitude being driven in to them
merely out of Fear to secure themselves from their Violences, and how much you
and your Brethren here have sinned in violating Men's Consciences by your
imposing upon them the Covenant; you have reason to know in part already, and
will one day know more when you shall come before an impartial Judge: That the
late King (as you call him; but the blessed MARTYR you might,) did in a hostile
way set himself to over throw Religion, Parliaments, Laws and Liberties, is
most false; For all the world knows he died for their Preservation.

You go on to show us next, that For every Breach of Covenant, Subjects should
not lay aside a King, That is, to speak plain, depose him, Except the Breaches
be such as overthrow the Fundamentals of the Covenant with the People: Why,
what then? you do not say in terms they may depose him in that case: but you
imply it; For you say, Except the Breaches be such: So if they be such, or you
judge them such, it seems they may; Yet afterward you think you make amends by
charging private persons, To be very circumspect about that which they do in
relation to the Authority of Kings. It seems they may do something, only they
must be circumspect in it. Yet Page 24. so inconstant is he to himself, that he
honestly says, the Conspiracy of Subjects against their Kings, is a wicked
Course: And he thinks he acquits them very highly, that those Godly Pastors (as
he calls them) in King James his time, did not intermedle in showing their
judgment that the King should be suspended from the exercise of his Royal
Power, though they suffered persecution for their Honesty and Freedom: That
is, for their bold and unreasonable Discourses before the King. But what the
judgment was both of them and of their Master before them, J. Knox is to be
seen in his Writings and theirs; I will not spend time in transcribing many
passages out of Knox, his Treatises are to be had, and in them it is to be seen
that he is for more then Deposing; but for that plain; in his History, Page
37^. Princes (says he) for just Causes may be Deposed: but what those just
Causes are, he keeps close in his own breast; for an angry Assembly, they
conceive, may determine that: Knox to England and Scotland, Fol. 78. If Princes
be Tyrants against God and his Truth, their Subjects are free from their Oaths
of Obedience; which if, then they as well as the Estates may suspend, and what
not.

Buchanan de jure Regni, page 61. Populus Rege est praestantior, and melior
Populo, jus est ut imperium cui velit deferat. And Viretus complains much in
his third Dialogue of white Devils, Fol. 252. That so much Power is put into
the civil Magistrates hands; whereupon he calls them Temporal Popes. Why does
he complain of these Men amongst us for the practice of Regicide, when they and
their Masters have given them the Principle? These are ways to set all the
world in combustion; for when ever any discontented Party shall say the King is
a Tyrant to God and his Truth, then they may fall upon him and Depose him; and
we know there was never much time between the Deposition of Kings and their
being Murdered.

Page, you are to be minded that you recite a Text against Resisting the
lawful Power, and in the 10. you are expressly, For resisting by Arms.

You complain, that the Sectaries cover their Destroying of Kings with Christ's
Interest. And we complain, some Sectaries cover their keeping under and
resisting of Kings with Christ's Interest.

The Author of the Ecclesiastical Discipline, J. C.
and generally all of them, divide the Church into two Moyeties, viz those that
are to govern as Pastors, Doctors and Elders: and those which are to obey, as
Magistrates of all sorts and the people: And Beza against Erastus, speaks
plainly, and tells us, that Princes have no more to do with matters of the
Church, then Ministers have with the Affairs of the Commonwealth. Briefly,
Submittere Sceptra Christo, is with the Roman Catholic, Ponitifici; with
these Men, as the Learned Bishop in his Tortura Torti, Page 34: observes,
Presbyterio; which Beza is bold to call, Tribunal Christi; and this Author,
Page 24. The Kingdom of Christ more then once.

Are to be made for Kings that are not in Covenant. I, and active Obedience to
All in all lawful things is to be performed; where that cannot be, passive must
be yielded:

You say you do not count these Enemies who profess Repentance and declare
themselves for the Cause and Covenant. Are the Cause and Covenant two distinct
things? you should have said for the Cause of the Covenant, though indeed there
be no cause for the Covenant. It is strange you should commend to Christians
Repentance for doing their Duty.

Little Good is to be expected from them; well, and how much good have the
Covenanters done? Every one can tell you they have beggered three Kingdoms, and
are not yet quiet, but would quite destroy them, though they find their
Discipline and Government of this Nation as incurrent as Parallels.

Prayers (says he) are not much in request at Court. He cannot forbear a fling
at King or Court; for ought I know there are the best Prayers, where are the
best Subjects? For never tell us of Obedience to God whom you have not seen, if
you be deficient in the Expression of it to Men whom you have seen.

He says, They deceive Kings, that make them believe Presbyteriall Government
cannot suit with Monarchy. King James who knew these Men Intus and in cute, was
wont to say, No BISHOP no KING; and we have seen the sad Truth of the Apothegme
in our days, so soon as they had gotten out One, they sought to destroy the
Other.

Hampton Court, complained of the Bishops, that they were not Friends to the
Kings Supremacy; yet I believe none Greater, none have maintained it more
stoutly. Indeed we do not allow to Kings Sacerdotalia Officia, but the ordering
the establishing of all things that concern Religion must proceed from Him. He
is mixta Persona cum Sacerdote; and so we see that Moses gives the Ceremonies,
not Aaron; David orders the courses of the Priests, Levites, and Singers, by
those Councils were called Edicts made about Religion and the Affairs of the
Church.

You tell the King, he is obliged to maintain Presbyteriall Government; but
however he should maintain that, I doubt he would sadly find that that will
never maintain him.

He cannot leave his Boldness in undertaking to tell the particular causes of
God's Judgments, which he is often at. Some endeavor to make you reproach
that for which God has punished your Predecessors. Judicia Dei abyssus magna,
you are very confident in such Speeches, and show little of a Divine.

But no marvail; for he pretends to prophecy; For he is so enamoured with this
Government, that he says, Who ever meddles to overturn it, it shall be as
heavy to him as the burdensome stone to the Enemies of the Kirk. Is it not so
to them who submit to it a heavy dull burden? and we have not yet seen his
Prophecy fulfilled; for we have found that this Covenant has ruined as many
of its Servants as Enemies.

Cause, that is, Presbytery. For though you say before, How well Kingly
Government and that agree; you scarce dare venture them together; It was with
much Debate that you yielded to it notwithstanding you sent for him. You are
free in your advice to the King in your story of Modus, but never practice it
your selves; for such Hot-spurs the world affords not; who know no moderation,
and think they have no zeal unless it put the Nation into Flames.

James amounts to nothing; for you never left him till you had gotten him to
Covenant when he was young; and what he said then of England or Geneva, is as
of little consequence as the rest: But what if he never said it, but you for
him? or what if the Church of England do retain some Ceremonies, must they
needs be Popish eo nomine because Ceremonies? Away with these trivial
complaints, the Church of England neither retains so many, as may hinder her
Sons from attending to the substantial part of Religion, nor any so unproper,
as that they cannot procure the End for which they were commanded.

As for Geneva, if they have any Holy days, they may perhaps answer you in the
Apostles phrase, Judge no man in respect of a Holy day. But these hot Northern
Heads, judge, and condemn all the world but themselves. And all the world
besides, thinks them scarce worth seeing or condemning. What King James did
when he came to riper years and more experience, does give a Testimony that he
was under Force in his younger time; And the Foundation he laid and upon which
his Son built, was not To mischief Religion, but to bring the Church to its
ancient splendour, and to keep underneath malipert and disorderly Sectaries; as
Mas Robert; who when he had done his Sermon, and the Action of Coronation is
over, and that he has given the King his Benediction, being conscious to
themselves by what means they had extorted this from him, he falls to his
threatenings, Page 23. able to hold the Crown but that: we have heard of
righteousness that it will stablish a Throne, but never that a forced Covenant
would work such strange Feats. But he tells us then afterward, that If they
keep the Covenant it may be expected that God will keep you out of their hands,
viz: Cromwell and his Party. We know not that any thing was broken of it; for
all was in their hands till Worcester Fight, yet they fell into their Hands,
and the Covenant did not save them.

freely indeed that the chief Cause of the Judgments upon the Kings House has
been the Grandfathers breach of Covenant with God, and the Fathers following
steps in opposing the work of God and his Kirk within these Kingdoms. Do you
know it was Judgments to him who was so unnaturally murdered? to the Nation I
am sure it was a Judgment, but to him a Mercy to be taken away in such a
Cause, and by such Hands as no bad Man could suffer from, and from such a
people, the Tide of whose affections if it had not turned, they had neither
been worth living amongst, nor ruling. And with the like rare confidence you
charge him in Christ's Name, to Keep this Covenant in all points, and if he
break it and come against this Cause, I assure you the controversy is not
ended between God and your Family, but will be carried on to the further
weakening if not the overthrow of it. How dare you charge a King in Christ's
Name to keep that which was made in your own name, and for your own interest?
upon what ground can you assure him that the Controversy is not ended with his
Family, but that it shall continue still to the weakening or overthrow of it?
Yes now I have found the Reason; For if he do not, you and your Party, I do
believe, will do your utmost for effecting what you threatened. You do as the
Rebels did here in England before the War, predict great Troubles, which
themselves were resolved to raise. For though it becomes us to conceive that
all Afflictions are just, and so suppose some Default in us, yet for any Man to
say either of himself or others, that such a Lash is for such a Fault, is more
then we have Warrant for, and a presumptious intruding into the secrets of
God's justice, which such a Boldness may bring at last upon us. You know who
said, That neither this Man has sinned or his Parents, that he was born blind;
yet perhaps had you been there, you would have given a REASON why he had been
born blind.

You promise much, that if he Befriend the Kingdom of Christ, that is, the
Covenant; It may be God from this day shall begin to do you good. Now you are
not so confident as before; but if you break the Covenant, then he is not upon
his may bee's but is very positons.

But ye that Support, and he that is supported will fall together. You give us
that which is very rare, in your Writings (most of them being an Ipse dixit) a
reason why you urge this, because it is a rare thing (you say) to see a King
and great Men for Christ. This being for Christ, is a canting Phrase, which
every Sect takes up at pleasure. For whoever is for the Interest of that side
is for Christ; Sect.
and then Ipsum esse illic est pro mereri, as Tertullian, with you not to do
the Duties of a Christian, but to be for the Covenant; that is, to be for
Christ; and all you are for Christ, and no Body else: Pure Donatists, ubicunque
ipsi ibi Ecclesia, The Church is where ever they are, and no where else to be
found.

At last for a close of all, you tell the King, That he is the only Covenanted
King with God and his People in the world; which is all one, as if you had
said, that he was the only unhappy Prince in the world to fall into such hands
that should crucify him with a Covenant: and you promise very peremptorily,
That if he observe what is contained therein, it shall prove a happy time for
Him and his House. Wherein has it so proved from you? -- where is your Promise
Mas Robert? what ever happiness he has, he owes it not to you or the Covenant
(as all the world knows) but God. For as for his Restoration, It was the
Lord's doing, and it is marveilous in our eyes; For it is he that turned the
Hearts of the People, even of the greatest part of his Enemies, Solo Deo Laus
and Gloria.

How the King was likely to be taken much with that, which took so much from
him, I appeal to the world? and how much the Covenant took from him, appears in
that it was made without him, and obtruded upon him: To take off the Blot which
this Paeper intends to cast upon his Sacred Majesty, let the Christian Reader
that is Liber a partibus, consider a little his Majesty's Case, by that Rule,
Quod tibi fieri non vis; and that others judge not. It was in Scotland, where
he was at more Liberty, and had not yet obliged himself to the contrary in that
Nation, when he was young and in the condition of an Exile, having been
deprived of his Father of ever blessed Memory, by bloody Traitors, in a most
barbarous and unheard of manner, which no History can parallel, despoiled of
three Kingdoms, of all comfort and support, his Friends here were all worried
by the Rebels, those abroad scarce able to sustain themselves in being: And
those foreign Friends he had, entertaining a conceit that he was wanting to
himself in that he did not more readily embrace the Scotch Offers, which he
must do, or undergo the harsh Censure of neglecting his Affairs, and so lose
that little remainder of solace he had left. This forces him to hearken to them
to make an Agreement with them; but when they once had him, then nothing but
such harsh Conditions must be put upon him as will make that Party in the
Nation odious to all posterity; what should he do? there was no way to get out
of their hands, he is kept up rather like a prisoner then a King. If he yield
to them there was hopes that he should, if not govern them; (for let him that
can do that) yet have his person free from danger. If he oppose, how could he
be confident, that they which lay so great a weight upon the Covenant, would
not in their Rage entertain some Bargain with the Enemy? and so they might
enjoy their beloved Helena, and some of our English Money besides, (both which
the English Mahomet was likely enough to yield to,) deliver him up to be
sacrificed by those Tyrants, who never spared Money to shed Blood, nor Blood to
get Money.

And this they could have done with fair pretenses and some formal Articles
(they know the way) that he should not have his person violated, which that
grand Hypocrite would have broken at his pleasure. And now see if there were
ever any strait like His. Put thy self in the same Case, as it is but weakly
expressed here, and then tell me if thou should not think thy self under so
great a Tentation as might render thy yielding; if not, no frailty, yet the
more excusable, and fitter to be relieved by prayers, then trampled on by a
superbous Censure: How many inconveniences is the poor Prisoner forced to yield
to? how unreasonable Agreements to sign, that his Condition may not be worse?
And what person that pretends to man does not account all these Acts, during
his Restraint, and whilst the Force is upon him, a mere Nullity? How often
have we known the honest Traveller, when he falls into the hands of cruel
Thieves, to engage to say or do that for his preservation, which otherwise he
would never be guilty of? I wonder much how any Man that has the Soul of a
Christian, or the Duty and Affection of a Subject, can forbear melting into
tears, when his sad Condition represents it self to his thoughts, and in his
ours. For how can we be said all this while to have lived without the Breath of
our Nostrills? That great God who sits above the water-flouds and remains a
King for ever; as he has Restored, so bless Him with the choicest of his
Blessings; preserve Him to us, and us dutiful to Him, And there will be nothing
wanting to complete our Happiness, but our repeated Praises and Thanksgiving
for so signal a Blessing.

FINIS.

