CLAYTON, Mayor. Martis secundo die Martii 1679. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI
Secundi, Angl', etc. XXXIIo.
THis Court does desire Dr. Littleton to print his Sermon, Preached at the
Guildhall-Chappel on the 29the of February last, before the Lord Mayor
andAldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON BEFORE The Right Honorable THE LORD MAYOR AND The Right Worshipful
THE ALDERMEN OF THE City of London.

Preached on Febr. 29. 16 79/80, at Guildhall-Chappel.

By ADAM LITTLETON, D. D. Prebend of St. Peter's Westminster, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to his MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft, for Rich. Marriott, and are to be Sold by
Walter Kettleby at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

To the Right Honorable Sr. ROBERT CLAYTON, Lord MAYOR of LONDON.
My Lord,
AS Government has been always owned by All, who ever were truly Wise and
Good, to be one of the greatest Blessings, God has vouchsafed to the
Necessities of Mankind; so through the Wantonness or Peevishness of those that
are to be Governed, it is rendered sometimes as Difficult a Province, as it is
Useful and Necessary.

In this Sphere Your Lordship has acted with that Loyalty to the KING, that
Zeal to Religion, and that Moderation to all sorts of People, that You have
fully acquitted Your self to public Approbation.

That Wantonness, I mentioned, proceeds from the abundance and ill use of Peace
and Plenty. That other Cause of disorder, which I named, Peevishness, arises
from any slight Apprehension of doubtful and dangerous Times: which may
possibly be now our Case.

In order to the satisfaction of such Misapprehensions, I have designed this
short Discourse; the Sum of which is to do our Duty, and to trust God with the
Success: which will certainly be the most Rational, as well as the most
Christian way of securing every Man from those wild Fears, we labor under.

My Lord, I dare not question, but that That slender Acceptance, which this
mean Sermon met with at its Delivery out of the Pulpit, that and much more it
will find now in its Publication by Your Lordships Order from the Press.

Your Lordships most Humble and Obedient Servant, ADAM LITTLETON.

PSALM. XXXVII. 5. Commit thy way unto the Lord, [or, Roll thy way upon the
Lord;] trust also in him: and he shall bring it to pass.
IT has been a constant Complaint almost ever since the World began, and that
which has proved a trouble not only to Vulgar Spirits, but has given some
temptation even to the Wise and the Good also; that whereas Justice requires,
ut Bonis sit been, Malis male, that it should go Well with the Good, and Ill
with the Bad; God sometimes, by his providential Dispensations, if not orders,
at least suffers it to be quite otherwise: insomuch that Epicurus and his
Followers, upon this account utterly denied, that there was any such thing as
Divine Providence, to take care of things here below: which yet, from the very
principles of Virtue and common Morality, the Stoics, another sort of
Philosophers, as stoutly asserted and maintained, notwithstanding this seeming
Irregularity in its unequal distributions; which confideration is still further
improved by Christian Philosophy into a ground of Belief of one of the main
Articles of our Religion, to wit, a future State; and has been made use of as
one great Argument and Assurance, beside that of Revelation, to confirm our
Faith of the last Judgment, of a Life after this, and of eternal Rewards.

This Psalm up and down represents the Case, to wit, the flourishing condition
of the Wicked to the great prejudice and hazard of Gods people; and supposing
this might prove a Temptation to the Godly, to entertain such unquiet
apprehensions, as David himself acknowledges elsewhere he had labored under,
till he went into the Sanctuary, that is, till Ps. 73. 17.
he had consulted with the Divine Oracles, and thence received satisfaction and
ease; he persuades us, in such Instances, to confidence in God and patience in
well-doing; and discovers the Estate of Pious and Ungodly men to be as
different, not only in the World to come, but through Gods just Judgment many
times even in this Life, as their Principles and Practices have been.

These are the most considerable Subjects and Parts of this whole Composure; of
which, because they lie scattered here and there, and intermixed with one
another, (a thing usual in Alphabetical Writings, such as this is;) I shall not
go about to present you with an exact Analysis, but fetch in the Royal Prophets
sentiments and observations, as they will fall in kindly into the body of my
Discourse, as we go along.

Indeed the Words, I have now read to you, are a complete Abridgment of the
whole Psalm, or rather a general Aphorism applied here to this particular Case,
by which It, as all others of like nature, ought to be stated and resolved. For
if we are in the general account of Piety, upon all occasions of Danger or
Distress, of Doubt or seeming Desertion, to commit our way unto the Lord, and
to trust in him; then it will behove us no less, in this particular Case of
prosperous Wickedness and oppressed Piety, to have the same deference to God
and confidence in him: and God, who is never wanting to those who trust in him,
will also, in this Case, upon our meek submission to his Will, and faithful
adherence to his Word, support and relieve us, at least do that which shall be
best for us; he will, in his due time, according to his good pleasure, if we
commit our selves and our ways to him, and trust in him, he will bring it to
pass.

There are then in this piece of Scripture three things to be taken notice of;
the one Implied or supposed, the other two Expressed and plainly set down.

1. Here is the supposal of a Case, of a doubtful and dangerous condition; for
so the committing of a Concern to another, and trusting his Wisdom and Fidelity
with the management of it, implies, that a man does not think himself safe
without such a devolution and confidence.

2. A Direction, how we are to behave our selves in a case of such doubt and
danger; Commit thy way unto the Lord, etc.

3. An Assurance of good success upon our so doing: and he will bring it to
pass.

Of these Severals I shall treat with all honest plainness, the Thing it self
being of an universal use and influence, wherein all Persons, all Interests are
concerned; that I may take in all, even the meanest capacities.

I. For the Case supposed; it is but so in the Text, but in the Psalm it self
it is sufficiently expressed and fully represented.

The Psalm, to give a short account of it, is a persuasive to Contentment and
Satisfaction with Providence, which permits wicked men to flourish for a while;
enforced with sundry Reasons, especially this, That Godly men's condition is
however much better than theirs, even at the present, not to speak of
hereafter. So it begins,

Verse 1. Fret not thy self because of Evil doers, neither be thou envious
against the workers of Iniquity. He means, we should not fret or repine to see
them in such a prosperous condition: for so it is expressly said verse. 2. Fret
not thy self because of him who prospers in his way; because of the man who
brings wicked devices to pass. Be not troubled at the prosperity of wicked
men and their strange successfulness, if it should so be, and as it often
happens.

And so he brings it in as an Observe of his own toward the later end, verse.
35. I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green
Bay Tree; yet he passed away.

And indeed were this all, that Wicked men only grew great, acquired power and
wealth, and did no hurt with it to others; this might well enough be born with,
we should not need to fret our selves at them, or to envy them upon this score:
but when they abuse those Advantages to the danger of the Church and the
destruction of Gods Servants, this must needs affect, and go near to the heart
of all those who are touched with any care of Gods honor and the concerns of
Religion. And thus is it here,

Verse 12. The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his
teeth. They lay designs of Treachery and Mischief, as having a natural
Antipathy against those persons, who out of Conscience dare not believe as they
believe, nor do as they do; as the Wiseman in the second Chapter of his Wisdom
has elegantly set it forth. Come, say they, let us lie in wait for the
Righteous; because he is not for our turn; and he is clean contrary to our
doings. He upbraideth us with our offending the Law, and objecteth to our
infamy the transgressions of our Education. He professes to have the knowledge
of God; and he calls himself the Child of the Lord. He was made to reprove
our thoughts. He is grievous unto us, even to behold; for his life is not like
other men's, his ways are of another fashion. We are esteemed of him as
Counterfeits; he abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness, etc. What words
could more graphically express that devilish Animosity, which those of Rome
have against the English and other Reformed Churches?

Well! from Consult they proceed to Action.

Verse 14. The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to
cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of a right conversation.
They make their bloody preparations to ruin those who lived quietly by them,
and trusting to their strength and policy, are forward to venture upon any
thing, be it never so unlawful, that may advantage their Cause, against those
who refolve not to use any unlawful means, though for their own Preservation.

And if they cannot do it by Wholesale, in Massacres; they are content by
Retail to vent their cruel malice upon single persons.

Verse 32. The wicked watches the Righteous; he dogs him up and down; and
seeks occasion to slay him; that is, he uses all arts and attempts of
Treachery to ensnare and trepan him.

This is the Case, as it is here put.

And that this has been the condition of the Church and People of God,
throughout all Ages, ever since there was an Enmity put betwixt the Seed of the
Woman, that is, Christ and all true Believers; and the Seed of the Serpent,
that is, Wicked men, who act under the Devil as his Instruments; is so apparent
from all Church History, that I need not trouble you with a collection. St.
Austin in his Book of the City of God has, as I remember, given a fair account
of this matter at large. Thus Cain slew Abel upon the score of Religion,
because his Brothers offering was accepted, and his own was not: Ishmael the
Son of the Bondwoman, persecuted Isaac the Child of the Promise; and Esau hated
Jacob and vowed his death, because he was better beloved of God and had got the
Blessing from him.

And for this reason the Israelites, Gods select People, were detested by all
the Heathen and Idolatrous Nations, that dwelt round about them; because they
had a different way of Worship from them all, wherewith they worshipped the
true God according to his own Appointment. And yet it pleased God at several
times to give up this People of his for their sins into the hands of their
Enemies, the Moabites, Ammonites, Syrians, Babylonians; and upon their
Repentance to work for them great and signal Deliverances.

And thus, to go no further with the deduction, has stood the Case betwixt us
and our Popish Adversaries ever since the Reformation. -- Many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth up, may our Israel now say. Many a time have they
afflicted me from my youth up, yet they have not prevailed against me, Psalm.
129. 1, 2. They have by Gods providence and our own indulgence been suffered to
live amongst us in better condition, than perhaps other Subjects have; free
from those Penalties the Law had imposed upon them, and quit of those chargable
Duties, that lie upon others; and by this means have had the opportunity of
amassing great Wealth, and carrying on the Catholick-Cause, as they call it;
till at last they were grown ripe, as they fancied, by the contrivance of their
Priests and a kind of universal Combination of the whole Party at home and
abroad, for the Execution of their great Design, which God in his Mercy has
prevented, or I hope will prevent; nay certainly will, if we, as we ought to
do, commit our selves and our ways unto him.

My business is not to blow the Coals, or to raise those popular Jealousies,
which are too apt of themselves, upon occasion, especially if they meet with
any encouragement, to break out into open flames; but rather to allay those
irregular heats. Only I could not but take notice of a matter of fact, which is
so notorious; and I must avow, (for why may I not? it being the sense of the
Nation:) that there is no one, who has any Piety to God, any Loyalty to his
Sovereign, in whose Sacred life all our Interests are involved; any Love to his
Country, or any true care of himself: I say, there is no good Protestant or
true Englishman, but must needs as verily believe the late damnable Conspiracy
of the Papists against us, as he does heartily detest it; and be truly sensible
of the danger we were in, and of Gods Mercy in the Discovery of it.

This then being a Case not only supposed, but publicly declared; the next
thing, which is to be the main of my Meditations, is to show, how we are to
behave our selves, when we are thus beset with Enemies, that profess a
Religion, whose Principles are made up of Superstition and Tyranny, and whose
Practices have been always as full of Treachery and Cruelty. For that is the
true Scope and Purport of this both Psalm and Text, to advise in what manner
the People of God ought to demean themselves under such perilous and
afflictive Circumstances. This is the second part.

II. The Direction or Counsel the Psalmist gives upon the Case, which seems to
be twofold, as being delivered in two Forms of words; but is indeed much at
one: for so rolling our selves or our way upon the Lord, is in the language of
the Psalms the same thing as trusting in him. However for Distribution sake, I
shall consider those Expressions separately and apart. And

First, For committing our way unto the Lord, 1.
though it may be taken to signify the same as casting our burden upon him,
Psalm. 57. and casting our care upon him, as St. Peter has it; 1 Pet. 5. 7.
yet as Way does in Scripture-use denote Vit^ institutum, the course of life,
the method and order of our Conversation; I may be allowed to take it in
somewhat a different Notion, so as to comprehend under it these three things.

An entire Obedience to the Word of God, as the Rule of our actions.

A meek Submission to the Will of God, which governs human Affairs. And

A regular Walking in the Duties of our particular Calling; leaving the rest,
as things which we are not immediately concerned in, to God Almighty's disposal.

Secondly, Trusting in God imports these particulars: 2.


A fiducial Reliance upon his Wisdom and Goodness in the care and conduct of
our Persons, and of all our Concerns.

A Declaration of that our dependence upon him in earnest and frequent Prayer.

And withal honest Endeavors of our own for our Preservation, in the use of
all lawful Means; holding our selves still in that Station wherein God has
placed us, and leaving the Event to him.

That these Interpretations are proper and natural, I shall, as I go, briefly
make out from the body of the Psalm.

I. Commit thy way unto the Lord is a Rule, as I said before, of general use,
to quiet the minds of men, and to secure them either from their Fears or under
their Troubles, whatever they may be, Temporal or Spiritual, Personal or
National; particularly, as it is here limited, to fortify and bear up the
Spirits of pious persons against the apprehension or actual oppression of
prosperous Wickedness. And that is,

1. That they do carefully obey God according to his Word, which he has
appointed for the Rule of our actions; by doing what he has there commanded,
and by avoiding all known sin: and this will certainly draw after it the divine
Protection and all manner of Blessings.

So verse. 27. Depart from evil and do good, and dwell for evermore. This is the
best course, any man can take, either for this World or the next; whereas Evil
doers, on the one hand or the other, be they of what profession or denomination
they will, we are told verse. 9. shall be cut off and rooted out by some signal
Vengeance, or untimely Excision.

Again, verse. 4. Delight thy self in the Lord; let it be thy great delight and
satisfaction, and thy main design, to serve and to please him; and he will give
thee thy hearts desire.

And thus verse. 30. in a fuller account. The mouth of the righteous speaks
Wisdom, and his tongue talks of Judgment. The Law of his God is in his heart:
all his thoughts and discourses are busied about Gods Word, and his own Duty;
and this indeed is true saving Wisdom, and of him it is there said, that none
of his goings shall slide; he stands upon sure ground.

And this we find laid down for a Maxim in the 38th verse, according to our
reading in the Church-Office; and that agreeably to some ancient Translations:
Keep innocence, and take heed to the thing that is right; for that shall bring
a man Peace at the last.

On the contrary for a man, by a designed deliberate Disobedience, to go out of
Gods way, is to put himself out of his Protection; and he that would save his
Soul, his Life, his Fortunes, or whatever it be, by doing against Gods Commands
will find, that he takes the readiest course to lose them.

2. That they meekly submit to the Will of God, in his Providential
Administrations. As there is a will of his Commands, so there is a will of his
Decrees. To that we are bound to pay an active Obedience, to this a passive. By
this He governs the World, by that We ought to govern our selves. That Will of
his is contained in Scripture; this laid forth in Providence.

I know, there were a sort of people, that made great use of Providence, and
governed themselves by it; making Scripture it self subservient to it, and
concluding any thing, were it never so bad, lawful, if it were but successful.
But this was no fair use of Providence, nor was it a right method to expound
Scriptures according to Providence, as they were wont to do; but on the
contrary to interpret Providence by Scripture. For God many times by his
Providence permits those Evils to have effect, the doing of which he has in
his Word forbidden. As then the Evil of Sin cannot be justified by Providence,
so the Evil of punishment, which Providence at any time brings upon us, is to
be submitted to; which the Prophet calls the accepting of our Punishment.

Where this meek Submission is, there will be no Fretting, no Repining or
Murmuring, but a patient Attendance. This we meet with in the front of the
Psalm; Fret not thy self, do not vex and chase and heat thy self, as it is in
the Original: and it is further explained verse. 7. Rest in the Lord, or Be
silent to the Lord, make no complaints, and wait patiently for him; do not fret
or grieve at the man that does after evil Counsels: as if he should have said;
Have patience a while, and thou wilt have reason to admire and applaud Gods
Wisdom and Justice, and his Mercy too in those worst of his Dispensations,
which now thou art too apt to be troubled at.

It was good advice Gamaliel gave, Act. 5. 39. and it took; that if a Counsel
or a Work be of God, it cannot be overthrown; and to oppose it is to fight
against God; which who do, they make to themselves a great Enemy and are like
to have but little peace. But the Meek, as it is verse. 11. shall inherit the
Earth, and shall delight themselves in abundance of Peace.

3. That they keep orderly to the duties of their own Station, and leave other
things out of their Sphere to God and to their Superiors, to take care of.

And this is a Consequent of that Meekness, we spoke of verse. 8. Cease from
anger, forsake wrath; do not be troubled, or discontented: fret not thy self in
any wise to do evil, or, as we read, fret not thy self, else shall thou be
moved to do evil; do not be transported with Passion, so as to go out of the
Road of thy Duty, and to venture upon things that do not concern thee, that no
way belong to thee.

And it is also an Evidence of Trusting in God, as it is verse. 3. Trust in the
Lord and be doing good; thy best and wisest course will be to hold thee to God,
and to order thy self according to his will, by doing all the good thou can
in that place, wherein he has set thee, and whatever the Temptation may be, do
not fall off to Evil irregular courses; and so shall thou dwell in the Land,
and verily thou shall be fed: God will then provide for thy security and thy
comfortable subsistence.

And this he lays down in a Proposition, verse. 23. The steps of a man are
ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way; that is, If his steps be so
ordered, that his Conversation be conformable to Gods Will and Direction, then
God will delight in his way; he will be pleased and kindly accept of him.

However be not so envious against the workers of Iniquity, as to emulate them,
to be tempted to do like them, to take the same course as they do, or to join
with them, because thou see them prosper, and to commit Wickedness and to do
evil also, as the Chaldee Paraphrast has rendered that place.

There are some who out of a tenderness of apprehension imagine, they cannot be
safe from Popery, without running into the other extreme of Schism, (which is,
as the Apostle sets it, to abhor Idols and commit Sacrilege) and yet are ready
enough to take up the same Principles as Papists have, and to do the same
things as Papists do.

The Papists call us Heretics, and upon that score think they can design or
act nothing against us, but what the cause of Religion and the advantage of
holy Church will make good. Let not us be so far Heretics, as to do like them,
and to justify their Principles and Practices, by owning them our selves. Ye
know not, says Christ, of what spirit ye are, when his Disciples would have had
him called for fire from Heaven. It is no Christian Spirit, no Evangelical
temper, this.

It is however a known Rule and generally approved in men's Practice, Vim Vi; to
repel force by force, and to supplant fraud with fraud; but Christianity sure
will not allow of this, telling us that Vengeance is Gods Prerogative, and that
the best way of Revenge is to overcome Evil with Good.

So much for the first part of the Advice.

II. The other part of this Head is to trust in God; to depend upon him, to
make our Applications to him, and what we may lawfully do of ourselves toward
our own safety, not to be over-sollicitous about it, but to leave the event of
it to him, who will never forsake them or leave them destitute, that thus trust
in him. And this implies

1. A fiducial Relyance upon his Wisdom and Goodness; which is that St. Peter
advises; Casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you. And whom can we
better trust than God, in all our Affairs, in all our Concerns? for if he be
for us, who can be against us?

And indeed that is one main design of Gods, in letting the Churches Enemies
prevail over her at any time, in suffering his People to fall sometimes into
danger or distress, besides our Amendment and Trial, to drive us to a closer
Dependence upon himself, and to unhinge us from all secular Confidences.

Now this Relyance includes in it all the three Christian Graces; an Adhesion
of Faith, an Assurance of Hope, and an entire Resignation of Mind and Fortunes,
which is the Compliance of Charity.

2. An Acknowledgment of th^^ our Relyance upon him by the constant and earnest
Addresses of our Prayers to him. For Prayer is the condition of receiving; it is
the Key of David, that sets Heaven wide open for the letting down all manner of
Blessings, especially those of Preservation and Deliverance. He shall call upon
me, and I will deliver him.

And this Jonas owned, when he was in the belly of the Whale, with weeds wrapped
about his head; whose discharge was immediately ordered by God upon his Prayer;
and for a Document to us all, he tells us there, that They who observe lying
vanities, those who take ill courses and use unlawful means to save themselves;
such forsake their own Mercy: for Salvation is of the Lord.

3. Nor yet does Prayer, which seeks Salvation from the Lord, exclude our own
Endeavors, and the use of all lawful Means for the procuring our own Safety.
Ministers may and must Preach and Pray for it; and Magistrates in the several
circles of Society act in order to it, and every common Person may one way or
other be in his place instrumental for the good of the whole Body, whereof he is
a Member.

I say, in his place; for no man ought to go without Commission out of the
bounds of his Calling; be his Intention to the Public never so good.

When the Ark upon David's order was to be removed, and the Oxen that carried
it, stumbled and jolted it, Uzzah, who was one of the Drivers, without doubt
out of a good intention, put forth his hand to hold it up. But he was for this
his rash attempt smitten and died in the place, to the great surprise and
affrightment of David himself, who now stumbled, as much as the Oxen had done
before, that he knew not how to behave himself: nor dared he to bring it home
to him, as questionless he had at first intended.

Suppose our Ark, the Church of God among us, should totter, it is not for
every Cartdriver to offer his helping hand; or if the Vessel of State should
bulge and swag from side to side, it is not for every private person to take
upon him the place of Steersman. Scripture is not of private Interpretation;
nor ought the Law, or the Affairs of State and Mysteries of Government to be so
neither.

We read in Ezekiel. Chapter 10. of a Wheel within a Wheel, that is, I suppose (for I
do not take upon me to be an Interpreter of Prophecies,) the Church within the
State. It is said there, that the Wheels went along, but they did not turn,
they only went as the Head guided them, that is, the Cherub; (for the four
Cherubs had each his Wheel) and the Cherub was a sign of Gods Majestatick
presence. The Moral is plain. We are not to turn these Wheels, but let them go
as the Cherub directs them. Besides, these Wheels themselves, it is said, were
full of eyes, so that they could see which way they went, and did not perform a
blind obedience to the Cherub neither. What may we gather from hence?

We must let God and his Cherubs, his Vicegerents, govern the World, and in
Cases of doubt and danger, refer our selves to the Prudence and Authority of
our lawful Superiors, whose Business it is and their great Concern too, to
look after these things, for they have greater stakes to lose than we
Inferiors have.

But now see our Unhappiness? Every body nowadays sets up for a State-mender,
every Company of ordinary persons, wherever they meet, so manage their
Discourses, as if they were a Committee of Council to regulate the Affairs of
Religion and Government. But alas! this is not the way to mend the Matter or to
order our Concerns, but rather to run us into further Distractions and
Disorders.

III. And thus I have dispatched the second general Head; I come to the third
and last, the Assurance of success, if we follow this Advice, which is, that
God will bring it to pass. How? why, even by his common Providence. How did he
restore our Religion after Queen Mary's short Reign? How did he bring back our
King, our Laws and Liberties after the late Usvrpation? The Wheels of Church
and State moved, as the Heavenly Cherubs guided them, without turning, without
almost the help of man, at least without any Violence or Bloodshed. Further, we
may be assured, that whosoever shall attempt to re-introduce Popery hither,
does but go about to build up the Walls of Jericho. God Almighty will take care
of us, if we be not wanting to our selves, if we but commit our selves to him.

This Assurance is made out in these particulars:

1. As to the Wicked, such as certainly our Adversaries are; for the Laws of
God and Man condemn their Practices.

Their flourishing Condition is but shortliv'd; For they shall soon be cut down
like the grass, and wither or fade away as the green herb.

And for their mischievous Designs and wicked Attempts, God can by strange and
wonderful ways discover, (as he has done) their hellish Plots; he can blast
and defeat their ungodly Projects; he can weaken their Power, or deny them the
opportunity of acting their intended Mischiefs; nay, which we must not deny to
the worst of men, he can, (and I heartily pray, he may) change their Wills,
alter their Minds, and turn their Hearts; at least, he can by his Providence or
his Grace abate their Pride and assuage their Malice, (which put them upon
these wicked execrable Practices) as well as by his Power confound their
Devices.

2. And then as to the Pious, those who commit their way to God and trust in
him, he will either protect them from Danger, or preserve them in it, or
support them under it, and at last give them a good issue out of it; besides
those everlasting Retributions, which will infinitely transcend all the
momentany afflictions of this Life.

And all these several Instances I might furnish with Proofs out of the Psalm
it self, and back them with terrible Threats on one side, and comfortable
Promises on the other; but that I fear I should far exceed my Time and tire
your Patience.

Only as to the Issue of such Trials, let me accommodate to our purpose a
passage or two out of the Story of that Shipwreck, described at large Act. 27.
wherein St. Paul was concerned. It was a great blessing to the rest to have him
in their Company.

When the Storm arose, he tells them, they should not have left Creet; there
they might have rode safe. It Is our Case; we have too many of us quit our
Establishments: had we continued there, were we united among our selves, Rome
durst not attack us. Our Separations and Divisions have laid us open, and given
our Enemies the advantage against us. I wish we could but unite in the common
Interest of Protestants: for there is none of those, that separate from the
Church, but are fond of that Name still; though it is to be feared of some of
them, that by the cunning Insinuation of those juggling Priests, that have crept
in amongst them, they have lost much of the Thing.

The Storm increasing, they are fain to lighten the Ship of her lading, and
throw away her tackle and furniture, and let her drive. However Paul assures
them of their Lives, if they will be ruled, though the Vessel were to miscarry.
The Sailers hearing that, would have got off in the Longboat, and left the
rest to shift. That Paul hinders and obliges them to trust God as well as the
rest; for their deserting the Danger would have been probably, (as I understand
the Story) the flinging up the Deliverance.

On the other hand the Soldiers were as rude as the others fearful, and are as
forward now to cut the poor Prisoners throats, as they were a while ago to cut
the Boat-ropes; for which their only pretense was, that they might prevent
their Escape by killing them, who poor Souls expected every minute to be
drowned. This Storm was allayed by the good natured Centurion.

Thus you see there was a Tempest within, as well as without; and there are two
sorts of People to raise it, the Fearful and the Boistrous. This Storm within
being appeased, the Storm without did them the less hurt; for they all escaped
with their Lives to shore. Whatever we fear from our Popish Adversaries; may
we, I pray God, ever be quiet and at Peace among our selves.

Then let Euroclydon blow, let the Romish Synagogue act with all the spite and
malice, with all the Craft and Force, that Hell can furnish her with, against
the best of Churches; though our Hull should by Gods just Permission lose her
Tackle and be put a drift, I should not altogether despair.

And I doubt not, but we have Magistrates and others, of St. Paul's spirit and
the good Centurions temper, who will by their Authority and Advice hinder and
prevent those Dangers and Disorders, which the fear of some and the fury of
others among our selves may otherwise bring upon us; which, I say, weak
Apprehensions and ungrounded Jealousies on one hand, or boistrous Passions and
turbulent Humors on the other hand, may engage us in. For though every one be
obliged to have a Zeal for his Religion, for his Country, nay for his own
Interest; yet if that Zeal transport us to act irregularly; if it be not a Zeal
according to Knowledge, according to Duty, we do but Christen Frenzy and wild
Rage by the name of Zeal; and what our Adversaries have all along done and
still do, justify and sanctify Villainy, by intitling it to the Cause of
Religion: which is all one, as if we would design to list Satan and his black
Friends into Christ's Militia, and fetch Auxiliaries from Hell to fight the
Lords battles.

After all, may some ill-minded one say, that I have all this while been
persuading you to stand still and suffer your selves to be wheedled into common
ruin. No; I did at first suppose our Danger, and I have been offering the best
Advice that Scripture affords, how we may be safe. For I have throughout the
whole Discourse taken David along with me, a man after Gods own heart; (for so
it is in the Title said to be a Psalm of David) and in his words have delivered
the Exhortation, that you would trust in God, and be patient in well-doing; nor
have I denied our own Endeavors too in the use of lawful means.

And such kind of Counsel you will find every where scattered throughout the
whole Book of Psalms; a Book fit to be daily perused by all pious persons,
especially in dubious and dangerous times.

But then from Scripture they will appeal to the Law of Nature, and will tell
us, that a man is obliged to do any thing, all he can, to preserve himself, and
that every thing in that Case becomes ipso facto lawful.

Self-preservation, it is true, is one of the greatest and tenderest Concerns,
that Nature has; who has by secret and vigorous Instincts taught every Creature
to provide for its Safety and to fly Danger.

But how, to give an Instance, does the little Brood, when they see a Bird of
prey hovering over their head, seek to preserve themselves, but by taking
shelter under the Dams wings? a Metaphor, the Psalmist often makes use of, when
he speaks of Divine Protection; as where he says, Hide me under the shadow of
thy wings, till these calamities be overpast. Whereas should the silly
Creatures take wing and flutter about, they would, instead of saving
themselves, give their Enemy the advantage of making his stoop upon them.

Further, Religion, to which the very Resentments of Nature are to give place,
has instructed us, that even Self is not to be preserved by unlawfulmeans. For
Evil is not to be done, whatever Good may come of it.

Besides, which is the ground of our very Christianity, our blessed Lord has
made Selfdenial the Character and Badge of his Religion. He that will be my
Disciple, says he, let him deny himself and take up his Cross, and follow me:
and He that loves father or mother, house or land, or life it self more than
me, is not worthy of me. Nor do I see, how this Self-denial is any way
reconcilable with Self-preservation, in that sense as some people take it; as
if it were lawful for a man to do any thing, though never so sinful; to take
any course, though never so unlawful, to preserve himself. This way of
preserving our selves may indeed make us Gnostics or Hobbists or Libertines,
but cannot truly denominate us Christians.

When all is done, it is the far better and the more eligible of the two, to
suffer evil, than to do it. And this suffering condition, be it as it will,
will have much more of comfort and security in it too, than any sinful
compliance or wicked opposition can have.

These Directions then of doing our duty and trusting in God, are the best and
only means of securing our selves against those Dangers, our Enemies threaten
us with. For if we act like them, and make no more Conscience of using unlawful
means to preserve our selves, than they have done to destroy us; if we shall be
found alike Evildoers and Transgressors as they are, though in a different
way; we must expect from an impartial God the same Doom, as is in time to pass
upon them, to be cut off and rooted out; when on the contrary the Meek-spirited
shall inherit the Earth: and those who trust in the Lord and continue doing
good and minding their own duty, shall by so doing dwell in the Land, and
verily they shall be fed; they shall be preserved, maintained and provided for;
and the end of the Upright-man shall be peace; and the salvation of the
Righteous shall be from the Lord, who will help them, and deliver them from the
wicked, and save them, because they trust in him; and those who depart from
evil and do good shall dwell for evermore; they shall live happily, they and
their Posterities, in this World, and shall be Blessed in the World to come to
all Eternity.

Amen.
FINIS.
READER,
THere is newly published a Volume of LXI. Sermons, Preached by the same
Author. Printed for Rich. Marriott; and Sold by most Booksellers in London.


