A LETTER, Written by that famous and faithful Minister of Christ MR JOHN
LIVINGSTOUN, Unto his Parishoners of ANCRAM in SCOTLAND.

Dated ROTTERDAM October 7. 1671.

MR LIVINGSTOUN'S Letter to his Parishoners of Ancram.
Well beloved in the Lord,
I cannot excuse my long silence. I have a woeful lazy disposition, and
indisposition for writing; yea, I judge any thing I write, is scarce worthy
that any should look on, or read; besides that my slow and shaking hand is some
hinderance to me: Yet when I consider, that I have an account to make for you
to the great Shepherd, as having labored amongst you in the ministry of this
Word some fourteen Years; and now after neerby nine years banishment age and
infirmities creep on, and through a constant pain of the gravel I have much ado
once a week, on the Lords Day, to go a very short way to the public Worship;
so as there is no great probability, I can see your face in this life; and it
is most fitting for me, to set my face forward toward my last reckoning. I
thought I behooved, in a manner, to make unto you my Testament, and open my
mind concerning my self, concerning you, and concerning the present postour of
affairs in that Land.

And in the entry, notwithstanding of all the sad things, that have fallen out
of late, I would put you in mind of the many good days we have seen together,
both of Sabbath Days and solemn Communion Days, wherein we saw the Lords
Power and his Grace in his Sanctuary; that in remembrance thereof we may exalt
his Name together; and know that though he cause grief, yet he will have
compassion, according to the multitude of his Mercies: ye may easily discern
what a difference is between those days, and such as ye now see; and what an
evil and bitter thing it is, that by our not improving of those days, we have
provoked him to hide his face, and send such an inundation of matchless
Apostasy, Perjurie, Persecution, Profanity, Atheism; yea Darkness,
Distractions, and Despondency amongst his own, in all which we may yet expect
he is waiting to be gracious, and will be exalted that he may have mercy upon
us.

I. For my part, I have peace in regard of these particulars, 1. That not only
since my entry into the Ministry, but even from my infancy, the Lord was
pleased to lead me to an aversion from Prelacy, a stinted Liturgy, the
Ceremonies and other Corruptions of that time; and that in my Ministry, both
in Irland and Scotland, I joined with those, who were straight in the Cause of
God, and testified against these evils: that I joined in the National Covenant
and Solemn League and Covenant, and other parts of the work of Reformation,
that was carried on in the Year 1638. and thereafter, as being assured that the
Lord did then, does yet, and will ever approve of that work and the prosecution
thereof. 2. That I came to Ancram, not out of any worldly end, but from a
desire to do service to God, and to the Souls of his People; and had thereto
the Lords call by your invitation, and the consent and sending of the rightly
constituted Church, that then was, both the General Assembly and Presbytery.
3. That in my Ministry among you, howbeit I came much short of attainment, my
resolution and aim was only to set the Glory of God and good of your Souls
before mine eyes; and that it pleased him so to bless my poor weak endeavors,
as that sundry Seals of the Ministry of his Word were visibly seen, some
whereof are already in Glory, and some are wrestling thither. 4. That when I
appeared before the Council, at what time I was sentenced with banishment, for
refusing to swear the Oath, as they called it, of Alledgeance, and which was
indeed the Oath of Supremacy, and did really contain such a Supremacy, as is
since fully established: that then I did not as was propounded by them, take
time to advise of mine Answer, which I judged could import my unclearness in
the matter; and that it was not so much out of respect to me, as for that very
end propounded; but told plainly, I was fully clear and resolved not to take it.
For these and many such singular passages of the Lords gracious guiding me in
my Pilgrimage, I desire from my heart to bless his Glorious Name, and would
beg help of all his People to join with me therein. But 2. I have challenges,
beside many others, in respect of these particulars, that all along in my
Ministry, I did not so stir up or improve the gift, that the Lord had given
me, nor so carry my self like a Spiritual, Grave, Diligent and Faithful Servant
of Christ, as I ought to have done. 2. That in my Ministry among you, I was
not more frequent in visiting Families, and dealing with Persons in particular,
to bring them to and keep them in the ways of God. 3. That when the late
grievous defection began in the Year 1661. and 1662. I did not stir up my self
and others, whatsoever hazard might have ensued, to appear by Supplications and
public Testimonies, in avowing the Covenant and work of Reformation, which, if
it had been done by Church Judicatories, or but singly by Ministers and
Professors, in the due season, according to our engagements, might both have
glorified God, been a door of hope for the Posterity, procured more Peace to
our own Consciences, yea possibly stopped much of the Defection and Suffering,
that has since ensued. 4. That when I appeared before the Council, I did not
take occasion humbly, yet plainly, to remonstrate the guilt of those things,
which were publicly enactcted, and done against the Prerogative Royal of Jesus
Christ, and against his Church and People; and to give warning of the wrath to
come on them and the Land, without Repentance; but did content my self with
answering what was propounded to me.
For these and such other neglects and miscariages in my life, I would desire
to go mourning to the grave, and would entreat for help from you, and others of
the Lords People, to seek from Himself pardon, and purifying of both private
and public, both sins of Person and Calling.

II. As for you, I may reckon you all in three Ranks: The first Rank, and I
fear the greater number, is of those who, although in general profesours of
Christianity, yet, so far as could be observed, never laid Religion to heart;
and some of these for gross Ignorance and looseness, were always debarred from
the Lords Supper; others although having some knowledge and a civil walk, yet
upon good grounds were always suspected to be void of the Love and Fear of
God, continuing in their natural unrenewed condition, neglecting the Worship of
God in their Families and alone, and showing by all their carriage that their
thoughts and desires never went beyond this World: These, no doubt, are glad of
the change now com'd, that they may cast off Christ's yoke, and be free of the
Word and Discipline, which terrified and tormented them, and may now both swear
terrible Oaths, and drink drunk, which by some will be expounded as a clear
evidence of their loyalty; they may now, after the example of many Great ones,
walk in the lust of uncleanness, mind nothing but how by any means, just or
unjust, to get the World, and then how to spend it on their lusts; and hate,
and to their power persecute all, who will not run with them to the same excess
of riot. Now as I have often in public, with as great earnestness and
tenderness as I could, warned these to flee from the wrath to come; so I would
yet desire them, to stand still a little before they go to the pit, and hear
from a truly loving Friend a few words, which I am confident, in the day of
the great reckoning shall be found a message from the living God. Do you
believe there is a God, or Heaven or Hell? or can ye with all your will and
strength scrape the thoughts of these out of your sleeping consciences? Or do
ye in such sort hate God, that because ye are his creatures, ye will so far be
avenged on your selves, as to sell your selves to his enemy, the Devil, for
naught, to be tormented in all eternity? I am most sure, none of you all can be
sure that ye are Reprobats; and I can give you assurance, greater than the
stability of Heaven and Earth, even the sworn word of him that lives and
reigns for ever, that if ye will forsake your wicked way, and yet betake your
selves to the only Savior of lost sinners, ye are no Reprobates. O! what
advantage have ye, when ye have gained all the World, and all the Pleasures,
all the Riches, and all the Favor of it, and have lost your immortal and
precious Souls? It is utterly impossible, but that sometimes your own heart
tells you, there will be bitterness in the end. Does not Whoredom and
Drunkenness waste the body, take away the Judgment* and leave a sting in the
Conscience? Can any avoid the Curse, that goods gotten by falsehood or
oppression bring upon the man and all he has, yea on his Posterity? Is it not
sad, that Satan can prompt men to Swear, Curse and Blaspheme, and utter that
which he dare not utter himself? And although ye were free of all outward
Outbreakings, does not an unrenewed estate, the neglect of commanded duties,
Sabbath-breaking, and such evils, bind you over to the wrath of Him, who is
coming there in flaming fire to take vengeance on them, who know not God, and
obey not the Gospel? Ye may possibly think, you reso far gone on, that there is
no retreat, and the ways of the Lord are such as your disposition can never
agree with; but how can your disposition agree to burn and consume, and never
consume in everlasting flames, where each of all your fins shall have the own
particular torment? How can ye agree to dwell with Internal Furies? Or will ye
add to all your other wickedness despair, and despising of all the Lords
loving, loud and long continued Invitations? What shall you answer, if
hereafter the Lord shall say to some of you. I would have given thee both Grace
and Glory, if thou had but sough it; thou would not give once two or three
knocks at my door, thou would not open when I knocked often and long at thy
door; by so doing thou have subscribed thine own Reprobation and Condemnation.
Oh let me obtain this much of all and every one of you, for all the pains I
have taken among you in preaching, for all my Nine years banishment from you,
for all the prayer I have put up for you, for all the love which he who knows
all things knows I bear to you, yea let your own souls, and the love you have
to your own welfare here and hereafter obtain it; or rather let him, who for
sinners shed all his most precious blood at Jerusalem, obtain this of you, that
you will take one day each of you alone from morn to evening forbearing both
meat and drink, and go apart rather into some quiet room in an house, or unto
some part of the fields, where you may be most quiet, and having beforehand
marked in the Bible such Places as are fit to be read at such a time, as also
having somewhat searched your way toward God, and his ways toward you, there
set yourselves in his sight, spending the time in Confession of sins, and
Prayer for Pardon and grace to serve him, and save your own souls: and if
(which is not readily to be supposed) ye get no access on such a day, yet
continue thereafter in such exercise and suits; for deliverance from Hell,
Enjoying of Heaven and the Favor of God, are worth more pains then ye can take
all our Life. Now if this so easy and necessary advice shall be rejected,
without prescribing time and place, or measure and manner, but if the main
intent of taking some time to humble yourselves before God, and turning unto
him be rejected. I take instruments, before Son and Moon and all the Creatures,
that I have left this warning, as an indorsed summones fixed on the door of
your consciences, to be called and judged before him, who is ready to judge the
quick and the dead, at his appearing and in his Glory; when beside the
witnessing of all your sins, of your own consciences* and of all the Creatures,
I also, as your lawful Minister, sent to procure your Reconciliation with God,
shall appear to witness that ye got fair warning, but did reject the same, and
would needs choose death. Therefore while it is called to day, take a trial of
Christ's Yoke do but put him to it, and see whether or not he will open the
windows of Heaven, and rain Blessings and Righteousness upon you; come and
see, and taste the goodness of the Lord: ye shall be made to say, He is a rich
and loving Master; once engage your hearts to him, and ye may defye Satan, and
all the allurments and terrors of the World, to draw you from him. Glad would
my heart be to hear, before I go to the grave, that some of you have begun a
new course, and if ye begin indeed ye will not get it suppressed, it will be
heard: I shall as I can pray for it, and desire others here to pray for it, It
is not needful to multiply words, I leave it with you, as ye shall answer to
Jesus Christ, when he shall come in the clouds. The Second Rank is of those,
who either had true grace or seemed to have it, and who went a length beyond
others in an orderly walk, and following the Ordinances at home, and abroad,
but since the late change have either turned loose and profane, or so far sided
with the corruptions of the time, that not one footprint of their former
stedfastness and tenderness does appear, but they are justly reckoned among
those, who will obey whatsoever is commanded by man, although directly opposite
to the will of God, revealed in his Word, and to their own lawfully sworn
Engagements. These, without Repentance and Amendment, are in a large worse
condition, than those of the first Rark; for their practice proclameth that
once they betook themselves to Jesus Christ and his ways, and had some love
and respect for him, but now they repent that ever they did so; for they have
seen something in him, for which they judge, he is not worthy that they should
either do or suffer any thing for him. I am much assured, that Satan has got
such entrance in some of those, who once had a profession, and now are
declined, that they shall not again be renewed unto repentance, but shall wax
worse and worse, having their consciences seared with an hot iron. Oh that my
fears may be prevented! But I have good confidence that some, who have gone a
great length in this course of Apostasy, shall yet, before they go off the
World, glorify God by a free and full Confession of their foul fall. Yea, I
trust that sundry of them want not a gnawing sting even all along, but fear of
shame before the World, and fear of worldly loss (and oh how small a thing of
the World have any of these to have preferred to blessed Jesus Christ!) these
hinder hitherto their coming off their dangerous way. Let all, who have
declined, and who have not willingly and wilfully chosen to remain in
opposition to God, and his righteous ways, and his afflicted People, let them
but compare their present state with what it was before, and answer within
their own heart to God, which of the two they allow as best? Ye had
encouragement beyond many others, in that the Lord enabled three or four of
that Congregation, and these but boys, cheerfully to endure scourging and
banishment, rather then depart from their former Principles and Practice, and
most of these are now in a better outward condition, than before: these shall
be witnesses against you, if ye do not in time betake yourselves avowedly to
your former profession. I have yet by me the Subscriptions to the Covenant of
all the men, that were of the Congregation. Not only that Paper, but the hands
of all both men and women, which, in swearing the Covenant, after reading the
Solemn Acknowledgement of sins and Engagement to duties, were lifted up to
God; these hands, because they will endure forever, shall be everlasting
witnesses either for you, or against you. Ye got warning that such trials would
come, as have since ensued, and seemed to be fortified against them. Remember
the speech I had to you, the Monday after the last Communion, wherein,
presaging what would shortly follow, I in a manner bid you farewell: ye seemed
then to be somewhat moved, and to resolve on all hazards to abide by the Cause
of God; ye seemed to run well, who or what has hindered you, that ye should
not obey the truth? It may be there are few or none in all the Land, who in all
points have kept their Covenant to God, but have neglected some opportunities
of their duty; and the good Lord will pardon such, as see the plague of their
own heart, and turn to him: but to join in the course of defection with
those, who have abjured that Covenant; to countenance an intruded Hireling, and
join with him in that which they call Worship, yea to sit and drink with him,
who was lawfully and deservedly Excommunicated by the Church of Scotland; to
keep Holy Days appointed by men; to withdraw from the fellowship and meetings
of those, who in some degree continue in their integrity; these are such gross
and direct violations of the Oath of God, as can proceed from nothing but a
fearful deserting of God; from a preferring the will of man, to the will of the
living God, and preferring the ease and petty pelf of the world to the
Salvation of your immortal souls. I am fully sure, ye dare not say before the
Lord, that although all feat of inconvenience from man were quite taken away,
yet conscience of obeying the will of God would make you do, as now ye do If ye
were sure within ten days by death to turn your back on all, would ye not
think it fitting, that both God and the world saw a change on you, from your
present way? and ye have no assurance of one day. Think often on Christ's Word,
that who deny him before men, he will deny them before his Father. It is
impossible, it is utterly impossible, to be a Disciple of Jesus Christ, or an
heir of glory, without a Resolution to quite all, even Life it self, for his
sake, when called to it. I am much afraid, when the conscience of some of you
shall waken, that ye shall hardly be kept from some degrees of despair. Come
off, come off in time, be not afraid or ashamed to witness against yourselves,
and the wicked course of the time; give Glory to God get peace to your own
consciences, strengthen the hands, and make glad the hearts of those, that are
seeking God; ye know not but if ye delay, your wakening may come after the door
is shut, and that then shall be no times of refreshing from the presence of the
Lord, As for the poor wretch, that is thrust-in upon you do not hate him, do
not injure him, rather pray for him, and ^^e means, if it be possible, that he
may recover; but do not countenance or join with him; ye may easily be
sensible, he is not a messenger from the Lord, for your spiritual good, but a
snare and hardener of you in unwarranted ways. I may by good ground from the
Word of God affirm, that unless a gracious change be wrought, both he and all
that follow him shall perish Eternally. Now the Lord himself, who only can do
it, open your eyes to see the danger of your way, urge and enable you to take
sometime to mourn before him in secret, and openly to testify, as occasion
offers, before good and evil, that ye are returned to your former Profession;
then shall none of all your Transgressions be mentioned unto you.

The Third Rank is the little handful of those, who in such an evil time have
labored to keep their garments clean, to whom it is given in the behalf of
Christ, nor only to believe on him, but also to suffer, or at least expose
themselves to suffering for his sake: ye have great cause to bless the Lord,
and I and many others will join with you, to bless his holy name, that howbeit
ye have but a little strength, ye desire to keep his word, and not deny his
name; ye have found and will find yet more, that Christ will not be behind
with you, nor sleep in your debt. I trust your consolations abound, far beyond
your fears or dangers or sufferings, your hundred fold is going to the fore for
you and yours, in the Bank of Heaven, when more than an hundred is the interest
for one. Christ was once owned as King of his Church, in that Land, that in
Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, his Laws in his Word should be
the only Rule; and hereunto all from the highest to the lowest had by Oath
engaged themselves; now abjured Prelacy is brought in, Christ's faithful
servants cast out, hirelings thrust-in in his house, the whole disposing of
Church Matters, Persons and Meetings by the Act of Supremacy, referred to the
sole arbitriment of a mortal Creature, and Persecution bended against all, who
go not alongs in that Apostasy and Perjury: and is not then suffering stated on
as important a quarrel, as ever was since the foundation of the world? the
smallest point of Christ's Prerogative royal, is not only worth the sufferings,
but worth more than the Eternal Salvation of all the Elect. Be not afraid but
he, who sits crowned King on mount Zion, knows well how to right himself; not
onl^ a touch of the iron rod in his hand, or the sword that comes out of his
mouth, but a frown or wink of his eye, can dash in pieces all the potsheards of
the Earth: He shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed; this cloud
of Opposition to his work will be scattered, as many others have been before.
He is only taking a trial, what will be every man's part; and not only the
malice of Enemies, but the weakness of some of his own will be discovered. He
will suffer the Opposers of his work to sport themselves a little, as if they
had don their work, and rooted out both truth and godliness; and he will have
his own brought to a necessity both of more vigorous faith depending cleanly
and closse on himself and his word, and more deep humiliation, serious
repentance and amendment: but he has his set time, when he will awake as a
mighty man; and, I hope, build his Palace in that Land, with the addition of
more glory, than ever was before. As for you, I would advertise you of two or
three things. 1. It is not enough to be steadfast in the present controversy,
ye must study to be Holy in all manner of conversation, and shine as lights,
blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke in the mids of a
crooked and perverse nation: an idol entertained in the heart, or a blemish in
the life will make a fearful discovery of unsoundness in the end: let the love
and fear of God be made evident to all onlookers, in all your carriage; so
shall ye go near to convince even Adversaries of the reality of your Religion.
2. Consider, this battle is not at an end, ye have not resisted unto blood, ye
know not what trials may abide you, keep on your armor, strengthen your
resolution to deny yourselves, and all ye have, for his sake; dwell near to and
be always in good terms with the Captain of Salvation, and be not afraid but
ye shall be fournished abundantly what to say, what to do, and how to endure.
3. If the Lord, for such fearful Apostasy, and Breach of Covenant, shall
besides the dreadful spiritual Judgments already poured out, send any common
Calamity in that Land, as Sword, Pest or Famine, I would pray and hope, that ye
may be hid: but if any of these strokes shall reach any of you, do not grudge,
your sins might procure more; it is much if ye get your souls for a prey. 4.
Keep up your meetings for prayer and mutual upstirring, cry mightily to God,
each of you apart; so shall not your meetings be flat or formal: a few
wrestlers may help to keep God in the Land, he is not willing to depart, if any
will but hold him. Seek repentance to the Land and yourselves, stability to
those that stand, recovery to such as have sliden or fallen: let me have some
little share in your prayers, that I may finish my course with joy, and still
bring forth fruit in old age. Seek from the Lord light Zeal, Wisdom and
Tenderness, to deal with any of your neighbors, that ever appeared for him,
and now have declined: if ye prevail with any of them, admit them to your
meetings.
Even the Lord give you understanding in all things.

III. Now as concerning the Condition of the Church, and Work of God in that
Land, ye remember, that although I shuned not, according to my poor measure,
and as occasion offered, and necessity required, to show my mind of public
Matters, Dangers and Duties of the time; yet I used not to insist very much in
such things, as not being much inclined or able for disputing; and having found
by frequent experience, that so soon as any were gained to close indeed with
Christ, and lay Religion to heart in earnest, these generally out of a native
principle became presently sound in the controversies of the time. And in the
present case, several things would rather seem to persuade silence, because
indeed our present Condition ought rather to be matter of lamentation and
mourning before the Lord, day and night, alone and in company, then matter of
discourse amongst ourselves; and because it is very hard to use freedom, and
not displease some, whom a man would be very unwilling to offend; and because
of all men living, I have least reason to think, that I would offer my light as
a rule of any other man's light. But when I consider that as one (although most
unworthie, yet) entrusted by Jesus Christ, as an Ambassador from him to his
people, I am shortly to give account before him of my negotiation, I cannot
decline what light, I judge, I have from him out of his word, anent present
affairs, to open the same to you, as in his sight, in as great simplicity and
ingenuity, as I can.

And First, I need not insist to declare, that notwithstanding of all, that
has fallen out of late, and all the Objections against the Work of
Reformation, all which were both propounded and answered above 30. years ago,
that yet both I and all that Land, and the posterity after us stand bound
before the Lord, to adhere to the National Covenant, the Solemn League and
Covenant, and all the parts and degrees of Reformation and Uniformity, which we
had attained: neither will I conceal, that howbeit thereafter I withdrew from
the meetings of the Protesters, when I perceived the matter like to tend to a
stated Schism; that yet after as narrow search, as I could make, I have no
Challenges, but rather Approbation, that in the beginning I joined in the
Protestation, against the courses taken in the year 1651. and thereafter, for
bringing in the Malignant Enemies of the Work of God, to Counsels and Command.
I am not willing to take in such ashes (Oh if the fire were extinguished and
forgotten!) and I know that some good men, in a day of great darkness and
distress, did what they conceived for the time duty; yet when I consider our
former engagments to the contrair, and that the principles and motives of these
courses would necessarily recoil against former endeavors of purging the army;
and against the Opposition made to the unlawful Engagement in the year 1648.
yea against the Solemn League and Covenant; and by consequence against the late
work of Reformation, yea against the first Reformation from Popery; and that
the bulk of the disaffected Ministers of the Land, some whereof, although born
down, might have been observed in every General Assembly, even from the year
1638. that these did natively join to make up the party, I judge these courses
to have been no small step of the defection of the Church. I could have wished
indeed, that more moderation, and more real endeavors for union in the Lord,
had been used on both sides; but I was also convinced, that the late sad change
was in some respect seasonably sent from the Lord, that faithful Ministers and
Professors should rather suffer by the Prelates, and such as by overturning the
Work of God, brought them in, than by Judicatours of the Church, which in all
appearance would shortly have followed; yea in some places was already begun:
And it is most sad, that when time has brought to light the necessary
consequence of these courses, yet few or none of these have testified any
resentment thereof. Beside clear Demonstrations of the Efficacy of the Gospel,
in converting and confirming sinners, which has been as conspicuous in the
Church of Scotland, as in any of the Reformed Churches, the Lord was pleased
from the beginning to put in the hand of his Servants, in that Land, apiece of
Service, not so directly called-for at the hands of same others of the
Churches, to wit, as Christ's Prophetical and Priestly Office had been debated,
suffered-for and cleared; so they should stand and contend for his Kingly
Office; that he is not only inwardly a Spiritual Head to his Mystical Church;
but externally a Spiritual Politic Head to the Politic Body of the visible
Church of Professors, and their only Lawgiver; to invest them with intrinsic
power to meet for his Worship; and their Officers appointed by him, to meet for
Discipline and Ordering the affairs of his house; that no Ceremony or
Invention of man, that want his stamp, is to be brought into his Worship; no
Officer to be brought into his house, but such as he has appointed in his
Word; and although his servants, and people are to carry toward Gods Ordinance
of Magistracy, where they live, as any other Subjects, and to deny them no
respect or obedience, due to them; yet in their Meetings and Administrations
they are not subordinat unto or dependant on any Civil power. These and such
others were the points asserted, and suffered for by the renowed worthies of
this Church, by Mr Knox, Mr Welsh, Mr Bruce and many others, who now shine in
glory. And although there have been in former times, several sad days of the
defection of Ministers, as in the year 1584 and at other times, yet because
there never was such a black hour and power of darkness, as is now fallen upon
us. I shall in the second place touch some particulars. for which I judge ye,
and I, and many others have reason most bitterly to mourn before the Lord. I.
That in the beginning of this grievous defection. such a base cowardice fell
generally on all* that not one Testimony from any Church Judicatory in
Scotland, was given to the cause of God, and against the horrid violation of a
sworn Covenant; yea some as industriously stopped Testimonies, as if they had
been hired so to do; some whereof pretending, it was not a fit time, when a
most fit time came, and being urged thereto by Authority, yet declined it. It
was first and last the guilt of those, who had the conviction on them, to
neglect the duty, for want of the concurrence of others. True Zeal for the
honor of our Master, or remembrance of our reckoning before him, would have
stirred us up to another sort of boldness: we would not have been so blunt in
our own concernment: the sight of the Fathers danger brake the tack of a Son's
tongue, who was tongue-tacked from the birth. The Lord indeed provided a real
Testimony from some, who had and have yet of their bones witnessing before the
sun. But oh that we did not adventure somewhat for his glory, for our own
peace, for the good of Posterity, yea for the true good and edifying even of
our Opposites! We ought not only to be deeply humbled, and deal much and long
for pardon of such an Omission; but earnestly seek grace and strength to take
hold of any opportunity for reparing such a loss. 2. That some of those
Ministers, who were laid aside by Authority, did in a manner lay themselves
aside, as if they had been exonered of all Charge; whereas such as have any
liberty of a Subject, and feet and tongue loose, ought rather be instant in
season and out of season, and from house to house instruct and warn young and
old both of former Charge, and every where, as occasion offers: It is true,
none are now Apostles, but Ministers have the same charge, that Apostles had,
to feed the Flock of Christ, and are given primarily not to any particular
Charge, but to the Universal visible Church: few of the Apostles, or Apostolic
Men, had either such Churches and Pulpits to preach in, or a settled
maintenance. Love to Christ, and love to the souls of People, that are
perishing in ignorance and disobedience, would banish the love of ease, and the
fear of danger, and the idol of carnal prudence. That however a man, for
maintenance of himself, and his family, might practice medicine, or labor
land, or betake himself to any other employment; yet he is to remember the
ministry is his main employment, and that at his admission he engadged before
God to be diligent and faithful therein. Some have preached out of prison
windows; some have converted their keepers: It were to be wished, that a
Minister in all places, in all company, at all times, were about somewhat of
his Masters work; so shall he hear at last, well done good and faithful
servant. Let us deal with the Lord, that he will deal with the hearts of all
his Servants, and thrust them out into his harvest; as I hope some, who seemed
to be somewhat deficient in that duty, are already begun to bestir themselves;
and others, upon sight of the courses of the time, and the peoples necessity
and willingness to hear, will do yet more abundantly.

3. That after the destroyers of the Lords heritage, had razed the work of
Reformation to the foundation, and had not only invaded the rights that he has
allowed this Servants, in the Government of his house, but, as far as creatures
can do, usurped his own Prerogative Royal; and not at all hiding the snare, but
by the letter to the Council, and the Councels Act opening the design, to have
the Ministry of the Word wholly dependant on the Civil Power and Supremacy;
that yet some Ministers accepted that, which they called an Indulgence of their
Ministry, without any public testimony, either of their adherence to the Oath
of God and work of Reformation, or against these Usurpations. Oh for a head
turned into waters, and eyes a fountain of tears, to deplore day and night such
an indignity, done to the Son of God, without a witness; and such shame cast
upon the Church of Scotland. Our Fathers for far less matters contested with
the Powers of the earth, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with us;
and do we think that our Lord and Master is not able to maintain his own cause?
I have great charity for most of the men, who I suppose may have a sting in the
bosom, for neglect of the opportunity. A Peter and a Barnabas may be carried
away at a time to and by a dissimulation: the credit of the Ministry ought to
be dear to us, but the credit of our Master and His interests ought to be
dearer then all things else. The Ministry of the Gospel is indeed a great
benefit, but nothing hinders why the Ministry of the Gospel might not have
heen had, and may not yet be had without a Pulpit and a Stipend; It is an ill
made bargan, where the one party gets clear gain, the keys of Christ's house in
a manner delivered up to them; and the other is uncertain if God will bless a
Ministry, purchased at such a rate. If any Ministers have had a hand in
contriving or procuring that Indulgence, I suppose, they have done more
mischief to the poor Church of Christ in that Land, then all the Prelates, and
all their Hirelings; and if such an Indulgence should be offered to, and
accepted by all the outed Ministers of the Land, without a public testimony, I
would look upon it as the most dreadful presage, that yet has appeared, of the
Lords totale forsaking of the Land, It is not now Episcopacy and Ceremonies,
that is the Controversy; but whether Jesus Christ be King of his own Church,
which He has bought with His Blood; or if the Leviathan of the Supremacy shall
swallow up all, to which it is all alike whether it have Prelates or Presbyters
subservient unto it, only it must rule according to its own arbitriment
without control, and bring forth yet more and more fruits of all impiety and
profanity. A Minister, that can preach truths, which no man question, and
miskens this grand controversy, or speaks of it so darkly, as that he
discovers he desires not to be understood; I durst not say, that in that he is
a faithful Ambassador of Jesus Christ. Sure, if his own reputation were
touched, he would speak in a more picquant manner; and his Masters honor
should be above his own repute. A bare not agreeing to the Accommodation
propounded is not a sufficient evidence of faithfulness, at such a time. Satan
counts no great gain of the Prelates, nor them that set them up, nor them that
follow them; but outed Ministers and noted Professors would be a great prize
to him: and I am sure, winnow as hard as he can, he shall get none that belong
unto Christ. O how sad is it that some to please men, and those the overturners
of all the work of God, have laid aside that useful part of Reformation and
Uniformity, the expounding of the Scripture, formerly practiced to so much
edification, and others magle it so, as it were as good to forbear it. The
excuse of the short days of winter, or the weakness of ones body, may well
allow a man to make both the Lecture and the Preaching shorter, but on such a
pretext to lay it aside, especially, being in some sort a case of confession, I
fear shall not be allowed before the righteous Judge. If it be said, better
have preaching without Lecturing, nor no preaching at all. True, if there be a
Physical impediment in the way of lecturing, or if all preaching had been by
the Lord astricted to such a pulpit by the indulgence of such a creature: but
when men come to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that they
may bring us into bondage, and would inure us to take one of their burdens
after another, we ought not to give place by subjection, no not for an hour;
for by such arguing, better have preaching without ever citing Isaiah, nor
none; better without mentioning the decree of election, or imputed
righteousness, nor none at all. Alas! the Lord has poured on us the Spirit of
deep sleep, and has closed our eyes, our Prophets and our Rulers, the Seers
has he covered. O what a deep wound was it to my heart, to hear of a Minister,
who I think certainly has both true grace and rare gifts, that he so far
complied with the course of the time, as to keep a holy Day, appointed by men,
and drink about the Bone-fires! what will be the end of those things? What,
when God shall waken the Conscience? Our Ministers were our Glory, and I fear
our Idol, and the Lord has stained the pride of our glory. None of us who are
here, and seem to be dissatisfyed with some things at home want conviction of
our own grievous miscarriages; and it is probable that if we had been at home,
we might have done worse than any others. If it were possible, I would desire
so to speak for Christ and his interest, as not to reflect on any Person, but
Levi's duty and blessing lies otherwise. I profess to you, although I have a
real excuse of my inability to debate and argue, without which the propounding
of ones mind seems too Dictator like, that yet I have apprehension, that my
not writing to some friends, makes the guilt of somethings done or omitted more
mine than theirs. Oh for the day, when all of us, whether together or apart,
without reflecting on any but ourselves, might mourn the mourning of
Haddrimmon, in the Valley of Megiddon, I should look on that, as Scotlands
great delivery: yea it is to be most earnestly sought from the Lord, and
endeavored* that the whole bulk of the people, and even those who have carried
on the defection, might get repentance; so should we be a greater wonder to the
world of his matchless mercy, nor now we are of sudden and shameful Apostasy:
and many such wonders he can work; if he please, and we may suppose will work,
if there were wrestlers for such a blessing, but that also is his own gift: to
him be all glory for ever.

In the close, it will be expected that I give you all some directions, how to
walk in such a time; and as they come in my mind, I shall set them down. 1. In
all things, and above all things, let the Word of God be your only Rule, Christ
Jesus your only hope, His Spirit your only Guide, and His Glory your only End.
2. See that each of you apart Worship God every day, morning and evening, at
least; read some of His Word, and call on Him by prayer, and give Him thanks,
if ye be straightened with business, it is not so much the length of your Prayer
that he regards, as the Uprightness and the Earnestnes of the heart; but
neglect not the duty; and if ye be without the hearing of others, utter your
voice, it is sometime a great help, but do it not to be heard of others; sing
also a Psalm, or some part of a Psalm; ye may learn some by heart for that
purpose. 3. Through the whole day labor to set the Lord always before you, as
present to observe you, and strengthen you for every duty, and then look over
how the day has been spent, before ye sleep. 4. Such as have Families set up
the Worship of God in your Families, as ye would avoid the wrath, that shall be
poured on the Families that call not on his name. 5. As occasion offers of any
honest Minister coming alongs, neglect not the same; and on the Lords Day, go
where ye can hear the Word sincerly preached by a sent Minister, who will
witness against the evils of the time, without which, I apprehend, wharever a
man's gifts be, the Lord will not send the blessing. Oxnam is not far off, and I
hope Mr Scot does, and will declare for the sworn Reformation, and testify
against the present defection; but I dar not bid you hear any of the intruded
Hirelings, whom they call Curats. I know some good men have heard, or do hear
some of them, but I believe, if all fear of inconvenience were removed, they
would do otherwise. If no occasion of a public meeting be, or if ye cannot go
to it, sanctify the Lords Day in your Families, or at least each of you in
your own heart. 6. Give no occasion to the World to say, that ye neglect your
Calling, or are busy bodies in other men's matters, or have any doublness in
your worldly dealings, a faithful carriage free of covetousness is a great
ornament to the profession. 7. Have a care of your Children that they be taught
to read, and have Bibles so soon as they can use them, and take them with you
to hear the Word preached, and instruct them your selves the more diligently,
that public means are scarce. 8. Such as have any leisure, read some good
Books, whereby ye may profit in knowledge and affection: read now and then the
Covenants, the Confession of Faith, and the longer Catechism, and the little
Treatise printed with them. I would recommend to you the writings of Mr Durham,
and Mr Binning, and Mr William Gutrie, and Mr An drew Gray, especially Mr
Rutherford's Letters, (I hope shortly ye shall be supplied with some more
Copies of them) as also any good pieces from England, as Mr Allen, or the like:
I dar not recommend Baxter to you, he is a dangerous Man: let Chasters and
Standhil buy some such as they oan, and lend them to others to be read. 9. Any
thoughts ye have of the business of the time, examine them well by the word,
and present them often to God by prayer; and what ye get so confirmed, be not
easily moved therefrom, although some Ministers should be of a contrair
opinion; for in those days sundry of the common People have clearer light and
steadier practice, than some Ministers; but be not proud, or self willed in
your own opinion. 10 By any means see that ye be not drawn to a contempt of the
Ministry, or Ministers in whom any thing of God really appears, although
some might have sliden in an hour of temptation; but study all lawful ways of
union and healing, yet so as ye approve nothing, which the word and your
conscience condemn. 11. Strengthen your selves in the main grounds of Religion
against Popery, and read some short treatises for that purpose; ye know not but
it may be a great part of the trial of the time. 12. Some Ministers have begun
of late to question Christ's imputed righteousness, look uponthese, whatever
show they may make of moderation and accurat, walking, as enemies to Jesus
Christ and the salvation of souls. 13. Keep you far, very far, from this last
device of Satan's, Quakerisme, which, under color of sobriety and patience,
overthrows all the grounds of Christian Religion; and indeed they should not be
looked-on as Christians; themselves and the light within them, which is also in
all Pagans, is all their Savior: converse not with them: as much as ye can,
avoid conference with them; the evil Spirit that is in them desires no better,
nor continual wrangling: many are much mistaken if there be not much Devilry
among them, as some com'd off from them have testified. 14. I know the course
cease now that was taken, for providing the poor with meat, but after your
ability set apart some of your means for the poor; I mean not the sturdie
Vagabonds, but poor Householders, especially those that have any good in them.
13. Deal in all earnestness and love with any of your Neighbors, whom ye
perceive in a way that will destroy their souls: visit your Neighbors in
their sickness, and drop something for their souls good 16. Let such as have
been Elders, and have not run the wicked course of the time, know that their
obligation cease not, but rather is increased to visit and oversee the
Flock, and warn and comfort, as occasion requires. 17. Forget not Christ's
Command to love your Enemies, and pray for them that persecute you: many a time
our carnal anger and bitterness puts on a disguise, as if it were zeal; true
love to God and our Neighbor would prompt us to many duties, that now are
forgot, and to a better way of doing duties, and yet keep us from being
partakers of other men's sins. 18. Guard your hearts from a carnal disposition,
in speaking or hearing of the miscarriages of others, and let not that be all
the matter of your discourse, howbeit it may be part; but there is more
edifying to be speaking of what is good. 19. I hear there is a rare work of
grace begun of late in some, not far from you, in the borders of
Northumberland, I judge it were for your advantage if some of you, such as are
able, went thither to be acquainted with them: your Friend Henry Hall would
easily make your acquaintance: their fire edge might help to kindle-up old
sitten-up professors; yea if some of you who are yet graceless would go and
see their way, they might be smitted with that blessed disease.


I fear ye shall hardly read my hand, and yet it has taken neerby as many
days to write, as there are pages; but it was not fitting to make use of any
others hand.

Let this Letter be read to all of the Parish, who will be willing to hear it;
and to any that are gone out of it, as Andrew Burkholme and Margaret Walker, or
any that used ordinarily to meet with us, as Mrs Eliot, Isabel Simpson, and
such others. I know there is a great change, since I left you, by the death of
some, and coming in of others but I am sometime refreshed to look over the roll
of the Parish, as it was when I left you. Desire from me Mr Henry and Mr
William Erskin, or any other of that sort, to come now and then to visit and
water you. I could wish that when ye hear of any honest Merchant in Edinburgh,
or any other coming hither, some of you would give them a particular account of
both good and evil, to bring to me; I had a little account lately from John
Tetcha^, that made me both joyful and sad; I shall write when any of my Sons
are to come over, that if they can, they will come to you, a day or two, and
bring me information how it is with you. Now as I oan at this distance, I
embrace you all, and all that used to join with us at our Communions: I salute
you all. I bless you all, I commend you all to God and the Word of His Grace,
which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among all them which
are sanctified. The rich and powerful Grace of the Lord JESUS CHRIST be with
you all. Thus wishes

Your loving and lawful Pastor JOHN LIVINGSTOUN.
Rotterdam 7. October 1671.

