THE DEATH OF Gods Moses's CONSIDERED: Being the substance of a SERMON Preached
at the Funeral of Mr. Francis Johnson, Minister of the Gospel, sometimes Fellow
of All Souls, and afterward Master of University College in Oxford. Who died
in London, October the 9th. 1677.

By J. Ll.

He being dead, yet speaks,

Heb. 11.4. LONDON, Printed for, and are to be sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the
Bible and Three-Crowns over against the Great Conduit at the lower end of
Cheapside, 1678.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
THis Sermon when Preached was not in the least designed for thy view, but by a
true friend of the deceased Person, much against my inclination, is violenced
out of my hands into the Press. The triteness of the Apology will (likely
enough) make it less believed: but sure I am, wheresover, how often soever it
has been false here it is very true. If I deserve not thy belief and so I am
denied it, I cannot help it. Though the discourse does not, assuredly the
subject and the worthy Minister deceased abundantly deserves to be known and
published. In it thou will find somewhat more, and possibly somewhat less than
was Preached: Some will judge here is too much, and some it may be too little:
Censure as thou please, or rather as thou ought. Labor (with me) to
imitate his virtues who is gone, and if this Sermon shall prove instrumental to
the reformation and preparing of any for the serious hour of death, I shall be
very thankful, and I pray God it may. I earnestly beg young Ministers their
favorable interpretation, as well as conscientious consideration of the last
use. I presume only humbly to advise my Juniors, nor them neither as though I
thought not some, so as to years, much my Seniors otherwise. Nor is my advice
intended for any, more or further, than it is for my self: if none else have
any need of it, I am glad of it, and hope they will pardon me that I have used
the Plural, if I ought to have used the Singular Number. What any full fraught
with humor, that yet want ability to be Critics, who have more Brow than
Brain, and more Forehead than Head, more Supercilious Confidence than Modesty
and Understanding, shall say or think of it, I am not at all solicitous.

THE DEATH OF GOD'S MOSES'S CONSIDERED.
Joshua 1.2. Moses my Servant is dead.


YOu may possibly wonder why I chose such a Text concerning so great and so
public a person as Moses was, to speak of, and from him whose death is the sad
occasion of our coming here this day: but when you know and remember how great
and public a person he also has been in former days, though of late years
buried in obscurity; and of what Magnitude this Star that is fallen, was, who
in his last Winter stormy nights of trouble and persecution was indeed
inveloped in the clouds as if quite set, and for ever disappeared, yet in
fairer times gave as great a light in his lesser Sphere, and shone as much in
his more confined Orb, as did Moses in his greater. When you have thought of
this, you will need no Rhetoric to persuade you to abate your marvel; but
readily think the Text enough adapted to the Providence: and sure it cannot be
much amiss to ground his Euneral Sermon, who (as if repute and estimation were
some great afflictions, and to be likely to be valued according to his deserts,
were to be in danger) studiously concealed himself and his great worth from
being known and honored, to ground it (I say) upon him, who was hid in an ark
of Bulrushes.

Joshua, to whom God here speaks, is supposed to have writ, as this Book, which
goes under his name, so the later end of the former from the mention of the
death of Moses.

When God spoke these words to Joshua, whether when the thirty days of mourning
for Moses were expired as some think: or whether after the elapsing of a longer
time (as seems probable from the last clause of the 6. v. of the 34. of Deuteronomy.)
is uncertain.

The words are the great God's little and short (yet full and comprehensive)
account of the great man Moses: and in them we have two parts:

1. His Life, My servant. 2. His Death, is dead.
He wore out, and bestowed all his life in the Service of his God, and so died.
His obedience was not interrupted by any chasin of idleness or apostasy: but as
he lived Gods servant, he took care to die so: He would not die without living,
nor live without dying his.

As to his name (Moses) called by the Egyptians Hermes, by Manetho Osarseph, by
the Grecians with a small alteration of the Hebrew (as some think) Museus:
Whether he was first named by Pharaoh's daughter, being an Egyptian, in that
language Moneys which signifies the same with Moses: whether it be derived from
Mo, water and Hyse Kept, or (as seems most likely) from (...), he drew, because
he was drawn from the water side, with a prophetic intimation, how he should
draw the Israelites out of Egypt, and how much he should rule the Element of
Water in their behalf, and draw them through it, as he was drawn from it:
(Which name or at least the thing signified by it, Orpheus seems to allude to
in that verse which is upon a good reason understood of him (...)) or whether
Pharaoh's daughter being instructed by Moses his mother and sister that he was
an Hebrew, learnt this name from them, and so gave it him. Whether he had any
other name given him before upon his Circumcision, and whether that was Joachim
as Clemens Alexandrinus thinks, (possibly from Numerius the Philosopher) who
says he was so called: or whether he was called Melchi, that is, my King, after
his reception into heaven, as the same Clemens Alexandrinus fancies; and many
such like questions of him, are uncertain, not worth our while to dispute: but
this is certain that a great man he was, so great that some of the Jewish
Rabbis, because it is said, Deuteronomy. 34.7. That when he died his eyes were not
dim, nor his natural force abated, say, that therefore he was an Angel and did
not properly die: and others of them, that with his rod he wan'd off the Angel
of death: insomuch that had not God himself taken away his soul with a kiss, he
could not have died: So great was he in the Jews esteem, that they would not
look upon him as man, and therefore was he privately buried, and for ever hid
that they might not worship him as God, as some conjecture, who from the
Apocryphal writings conclude, that was the cause of the dispute between Michael
and the Devil about the body of Moses, Jude v. 9. and it is not improbable. A
servant of God he was, and a very great and eminent one, and yet die he must,
and though he was so great, and there was no Prophet in Israel like to him;
yet, He that is the least (Minister) in the Kingdom of God, in Gospel times, is
upon some account greater then he: and yet (as we see) they die too. Which
brings me to the Observation, which not only with respect to him upon whose
account we are here, but several other Ministers who very lately have dropped
one after another, almost all together, is much to be observed.

That Gods Servants, even his Moses's die.

In speaking to the Doctrine, I shall show,

1. What Gods servants are or how men come to be so. 2. Further explain the
Text, by describing Moses and proving him Gods servant by, 1. Some of his
actions. 2. Some of the Characters the Scriptures give of him, and speak to
both these as far as they will freely go with us without force compulsion, with
regard to death, and the Reverend Minister we are now concerned with.
3. Show you the Reasons why God's Moses's die, (lastly) make Application.
1. What God's servants are, or how men come to be so? and to this purpose two
things are necessary.

1. A solemn serious choosing and taking God for their Master, and resigning up
themselves to him, to be his thorough faithful servants. Those who would be
avouched by God, to be his peculiar people, Deuteronomy. 26.18. and enjoy the
performance of his promise, must solemnly avouch him to be their God, to walk
in his ways, and to keep his Statutes and Commandments, Deuteronomy. 26.17. Though
they may not mercenarily capitulate with him for his reward, yet they may and
must seriously indent with him for their service, cheerfully undertake it, and
faithfully promise by his assistance to do those works he is pleased to allot
them. Every little resentment of Religion, every faint wish, or small
velleities for holiness will not serve the turn in so great a matter; nor yet
will every real purpose, every true resolution, nor every hearty promise, nor
any of them, nor all of them, wrested by some black and threatening providence,
or some very awakening importunate Sermon that will not be denied, if only
light, transient, and accidental, and not brought into the solemnity of some
such thing as a day of Fast and Humiliation, deliberately and unreservedly to
resign up all to God. Baptism, which is our solemn entrance into the Church of
God, requires our serious and solemn owning of it, and will not be put off with
a small touch by the word, and now and then some good motions of the Spirit of
God, that (it may be) produce a few sighs and tears, and then vanish, and we
hear no more of them. That there are so many rotten professors, so many half
Christians, so many wavering and scandalous Church Members, so many vain
Religionists, and so many disorderly and loose pretenders to holiness: such
multitudes that despond, unbelieve and despair, and so great a plenty of
backsliders and apostates; may (I conceive) be very reasonably imputed to the
general neglect of imbarking into serious Christianity, by private as well as
public days of Fasting and Humiliation. Some such thing our Savior seems to
intimate when he advises us to sit down and consider, Luke 14.28, 29, etc.
when we are about to commence Christians. It is no wonder that they stumble and
fall, and miss to reach the end of their Christian race, that set not out
fairly and considerately. It is not probable that a few faint dispositions and
well-meaning but volatile inclinations to virtue, will ever carry a man to
heaven, unless fixed and brought to a consistency by a deliberate covenanting
with God. Mistake not thy self, man, eternal happiness will never be thy
portion, for all thy good wishes and good meanings, the good will and good
heart, thou say thou have; without solemn and remorseful reflections upon
the past part of thy life, with careful, studied and sincere resolutions
against all thy sins for the time to come: nor will these avail, though never
so hearty and stated, unless thy subsequent demeanours correspond and be
consistent with them: which leads in the next thing that makes men God's
Servants, and how they come to be so, which is 2. A careful and conscientious
practice according to their choice of God for their Lord and Master; doing the
work he consigns them, performing their promises to, and keeping their
Covenants with him. That man is no servant that says he will do his Masters
Will and does it not; how fairly soever he might promise, if he spends his time
in idleness, or in doing his own, and not his Masters pleasure. Such are those
men, who yet will needs usurp the name of Christians, that are very liberal of
their Vows, Promises, and Covenants with Almighty God, but as prodigal of their
violations of them, that break as soon as they make them, that will do what
Christ will have them, so he will be bound to command them nothing, but what
they will have him; and willingly obey his Will, so it be not against their
own: but this is not to be his Servants, but their own Masters; and they that
are so, shall be their own rewarders too. If we pick and choose out of the
Commands of God what likes us best, what suits our humors, or our tempers, our
Callings, or our Opinions, and neglect the rest; we violate our Covenants, and
must not expect to be treated as his Servants, but as his enemies. How often
does he complain of his Peoples Covenant Breaking, and how severely does he
punish them for it? nor are we like to escape his strokes, be our Professions,
be our Promises, be our Prayers, be our Pretenses never so high; If we live
after the Flesh, we shall dye, Romans 8. Let us therefore labor after both these
qualifications: let us seriously bind our selves to God, and faithfully serve
all our time with him. Such a Servant of God was Moses; who was dedicated to
him, and made good his Dedication in the whole course of his life, may we be
such too, so shall we have (as Moses had) his good testimony of us in another
World, which is infinitely better than living in this. God's Enter thou
faithful Servant into the joy of thy Master, is far more comfortable, than the
Sinners, Eat, Drink, and be Merry; his good Word will pass for us through all
eternity. Thrice happy is that Man, whom God styles his Servant, when he is
dead. Men and Angels may be too charitable, and give too favorable judgments
of us; they that see not the heart, may think and say it is very good: Alas!
many are here Canonized for Saints, that in the other World are damned amongst
the Devils; and lavishly commended for eminent Christians, who are condemned by
God for Impenitent Wretches. Men praise they know not what, they know not who,
they know not why: but Gods Elegies tell no lies, nor do his Encomiums flatter
or dissemble. He is a good Man indeed whose Panegyric is made by God.
But Moses was not only a Servant of God, but he was so in a public Station,
he had the care of the House of God, and so he was Typical of the succeeding
Ministers of the Gospel, which is one of our proper concerns to consider at
this time; and therefore from the notice God takes of the Death of Moses, we
also have taken notice of the death of his Successors, and have observed that
his Moseses dye. But,

2. Further to explain the Text, and the Doctrine, I shall describe Moses, and
prove to you that he was God's Servant, and I do both these,

1. By some of his actions, particularly as, 1. The Series of Miracles which by
the Authority and Command of God, he wrought in Opposition to the Egyptians,
and in Defense of the Israelites, Exodus 4.16. to whom as well as to Aaron he
was instead of God; he had the command of Heaven, and the Water, and Earth, and
the Meteors of the Air, and therein as well as in other things was a clear Type
of our blessed Savior, The Wind and the Sea obeyed him; and seemed to have
succeeded or rather exceeded Adam in his Original Power: The Animals come at
his Call to infest the Egyptians, march in Battalia to Pharaoh's Court, conquer
and force him to yield and surrender: without any more words, upon the Kings
refusal he sends an army of Sensitives to subdue him (as he after victualed the
Israelites with a regiment of Quails, and a shower of Manna, Exo. 16.) He had
the disposal of the King of Terrors, killed and saved alive whom and what he
pleased: and yet even he, maugre this strange authority he had over, must be
subject to the Empire, and feel the stroke of death. This great Moses also
died. 2. He conquered Amalek for the Israelites, and yet himself used no
weapon, nor no hostility, Ex. 11. and 13. when the lifting up of his hands did
more injure the Amalekites, and more befriend the Israelites than the lifting
up of Joshua's and his armies, and there was as much fear of the falling of
Moses his hand as there was of the hosts of Israel, and because his hands were
steady, therefore Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people, 12, 13, v. yet for
all this great service he did God and his Church, he was not exempted from
mortality: this so triumphant conqueror, and so select a Servant of God is
dead. 3. He fasted forty days and forty nights: and so typified our blessed
Lord, whose meat and drink was to receive and do his Fathers will: and one
would think, having lived so long, notwithstanding the decayableness of nature
without continued sustenance, he would prove for ever after (as some Jewish
Rabbis fancy he did) death-proof and immortal; but no, it was appointed also
for him to dye. 4. He wrote by the inspiration of God the beginning, the first
five Books of the holy Scriptures: if they hear not Moses, Luke 16.31. says our
Savior: and the Apostle when Moses is read, 2 Cor. 3.15. that is that part of
the Scripture which was written by him. One of the Fathers seems to understand
by the five words of the Apostle in the 1 Cor. 14.19. the five Books of Moses,
as if he were preferring the preaching, the necessary injunctions of the law
before the miraculous gift of tongues. Moses (some think) was born A. M. 2373.
and wrote before Homer the first Grecian writer 540 years, before Sanconiathan
the first Phenician writer 200 years: though in Phenicia some (I suppose
falsely) conjecture letters were first found out. He was the first man the Holy
Ghost ever inspired in writing: yet and though he ever lives in those writings
he must die.
2. The second way I proposed to describe Moses and prove him the servant of
God, was by the Characters the Scriptures give of him: and we find in the Word
of God that, 1. He was a man of prayer, an Israelite indeed, that always
conquered men and prevailed with God, had even what he would of him: and in
some sense reversed the decrees of Heaven: Numb. 32.10, 11, 14. So powerful was
he in prayer, that when God absolutely and peremptorily designs the ruin of a
people, he makes it appear by this Argument that Moses, Jer. 15.1. if he were
praying for them, should not be able to retrieve them, q. d. he who once did
strangely pray my mind toward this people should now fail to do it. And what a
strange spirit of prayer had this second Moses whose departure from us has
brought us here this day! what an unheard of fluency of tears, word and matter
would he altogether pour upon his hearers! how would the Rhetoric of his
boiling affections and most serious earnestness disturb and yet greatly
recommend the oratory of his words! have you not seen rivers of tears running
down his eyes, when he has been confessing and praying for you? with what
brokenness of spirit, with what self-abhorrency, and with what deep reverence
would he speak to God? 2. Moses was a man of learning, which he employed for
God: Acts 22. he was versed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; which (it is
likely)was then couched in Hieroglyphics, if (as some think) they had not then
the use of letters which were not then invented, or at least, they had them
not: though its possible they might have had them from the Phenicians, as they
from Abraham. So was our Moses, though he made no pompous show of it. Amongst
other of his excellencies in learning, he was well read in controversies,
particularly he was an able defender of the Truth against the growing and so
much improved errors of Arminianism: and his learning was the more lovely and
valuable because richly enameled with modesty, for as, 3. Moses was a modest
man, who could by no means be persuaded to think himself fit for so worthy an
employment as God designed him; Exodus 4.10, 13. so was our Moses, his thoughts
of himself were as little, and as low as were his accomplishments great and
high: He was so far from blurting out his knowledge in all companies, or
waiting his opportunity to be guilty of ostentation (as some do) that with too
great care he hid his eminent parts from the view of all, and (just like Moses)
as his modesty was (if there was any unequalness in his graces) one of his most
resplendent virtues: So the excess of it was his most apparent infirmity. How
hardly was he drawn, and how difficultly tolled into that wortk which he was
prompted too by his free and religious education, and wherein he did far
surpass and excel most of the most famed Preachers, and what could be the
reason of this his very injurious unwillingness to be public? what, but a too
modest sense, (I speak what I know) I say a too modest sense of that unfitness,
which from him was always at remotest distance. But to hasten, we find in
Scripture that, 4. Lastly, Moses was a very meek and patient man above all the
men which were upon the face of the earth: amongst the many close and unkind
provocations of a stubborn and refractory people, and very uncivil affronts
that were put upon him by the obstinate children of Israel, we find him but
once guilty of any thing like a passionate word, and that was when they did
abundantly deserve it, at least upon Gods account: and sure it could not be a
sinful (though it were an angry) expression, to call them Rebels, Number. 20.2, 3,
4, 5, and 10. v. who were so indeed: and so plainly and notoriously rebelled
against their God, when they repined and murmured not against Moses and Aaron
only, but against him too, and against him most: and therefore though I know
some Commentators think this one of Moses his faults for which he was excluded
Canaan, yet (with submission) I cannot think so. So patient was Moses, thus was
the Original, and just like him was our Copy. Fancy a man the best of mere men,
who formerly was followed with continual affluences of the things of this
world, through the whirl of Providence, brought to a condition next to poor and
indigent: that was the desired company of the greater and more refined sort,
forced to converse with the poorer and more ordinary: and who governed the
highest rank of men in their advances in the superior liberal Arts and
Sciences, and chiefest Professions, compelled (more indeed to divert a greater
noise than by want and necessity) to sit amidst the cries and clamors of
children, and instruct them in the Rudiments of Reading: and in a word (not to
enumerate, for it would be much too tedious and too sorrowful) fancy one once
encompassed with all the afflictions of Job, and amongst the rest that worst
than all, the dins of a foolish woman: perfectly endued with Jobs patience too,
that bears all with as great an unmovedness of mind as if in the highest Apex
of prosperity: and then will you but begin to think equally of his patience. In
short, none but Moses, Job, and Mr. Johnson would bear what he did. And thus I
have done with the description of Moses and of his second. We now come to show
you,
3. The Reasons why Gods Moseses, his Ministers die, and they are these, 1.
They have the same causes of death with others. These spiritual men have bodies
that contain humors fermentable into distempers as well as others: and dwell in
houses of clay, that are tottering and decaying as others do. They are not
secured by their studies, nor by their employment, nor by their piety from the
miseries of humane nature, but rather the more exposed to them (as I shall show
you under the next head). These Angels of Churches assume, lodge in and inform
material vehicles compounded of divisible parts and easy separable Elements,
that lie open to the wind and weather, sicknesses, pains and casualities, and
often need repair and Physic, which if they miss of, or prove ineffectual,
they take their flight and leave us, they are not yet immortal but must die to
be so. So these Stars that shine in our firmament, will not always keep above
our Horizon, but will at length take time to set and disappear. These men of
God are men, penetrable by the arrows of the King of terrors, not privileged
nor exempted from the common fate of mortality, neither their more elevated
degrees of grace, their more exemplary holiness, nor their continued, though
still ripening preparedness for heaven, can perpetuate their lives on earth.
Their zeal for holiness, their warmest affections, though the flames there
kindled rise never so high toward God, will not preserve them from colds,
those small introductions to all distempers: nor the coolest of their spirits
in opposition to the heats of passion, from burning and malignant Fevers: nor
the most vigorous activeness for Religion from the Gout or Palsy, and though
their hard hearts are never so broken, they may yet meet with the painful
agonies of the Stone: nor groans, nor sighs for sin, nor prayers, nor praises
are any Antidotes against an infectious Air, though sometimes preternaturally
through the Divine Goodness they correct its malignancy. Though our graces are
lively, and though our corruptions are mortified, yet we must die. 2. They have
more causes of dying than others: they lie more in the road of diseases,
dangers and death: their constant studies weary their flesh, and tire their
spirits out of their bodies: their cares and fears (which powerfully wast the
life) are greater and more consuming than those of other employments, because
terminated upon the souls of men, and concerned about Heaven and Hell,
everlasting happiness and everlasting misery. Their anxious cares are that all
under their charge may reach the former, and their continual fears least they
fall into the latter. I doubt not but when we come into another world, it will
be found that more Ministers have dyed of their people than of diseases, the
unkind and undutifull carriages, the irraclamable lives, and the unchristian
demeanors of their hearers, of their communicants, these are the things that
kill and destroy them. The single thought that some who constantly attend their
ministry are like to be damned, and all their pains and labors utterly lost
upon them, this, this breaks their sleeps and their hearts too, and sends them
groaning against you into another world. Besides they have ordinarily more
enemies than others: upon every little stir and disorder, every fear and
jealousy, every ill news and disappointment in the state, they are presently
sought for, harassed and sometimes murdered too. Every storm blows at these
lights and would sain extinguish them: against them are mainly levelled the
plots and contrivances of Earth and Hell. The Devil and his agents, his
diligent and industrious substitutes chiefly desiring their ruin. It is no
wonder then that they whom all strike at, whom every one wounds and whom every
thing conspires to drive out of this world, at length depart and leave us. 3.
God in great love calls them away from the miseries of this world, to secure
them from the evils to come, Is. 57.1. He will not always suffer his Ministers
to be affronted, his Ambassadors to be abused, nor his Representatives to be
rudely treated, by wicked and impenitent people: but mercifully recall them,
and usually he send, in their room some severe calamity to scourge the world:
this therefore is no wonder that God inflicts evils upon those who think the
death of his Minister none, and though it may be esteemed a fanaticall fancy,
yet it is very certain that there is no such sure prognostic of an approaching
judgment, as a considerable mortality of Preachers. Possibly God bids them now
dye in their beds that they may not hereafter be butchered, and massacred by
violent and cruel hands: However he gives them a quietus est, sends death to
sing requiems to their souls, and kindly removs them from their cares, their
fears, and all their pains and studies to receive the reward of their pious
labors. Ministers dye, because death is better than life, thereby God fixes an
eternal period to all their griefs and sorrows, and renders them for ever
impassible. And thus I have done with the doctrinal Part I proceed now to the
Applicatory. And 1. Learn from hence to bewail the loss of your Moseses,
heartily lament the death of your Ministers: and be truly troubled (as well you
may) at their departure. The days of mourning for Gods Moseses are religiously
to be observed: and not speedily to expend but extend as you feel the want of
them: I need use no Arguments to work upon your grief at the extinction of the
lights of Heaven, you may well cloth your souls with blackness and sorrow,
when they depart and leave you in the dark. Yet consider 1. Who they are, and
2. The time of their deaths, and you will dissolve into tears of your selves.
1. Who they are, they are Gods Ambassadors, that treat with you for your
fouls: and whose business is to persuade you to be at peace with him, against
whom its utterly in vain to war; and to be reconciled to him with whom there is
no contesting. Many private Israelites might better be spared than one Moses.
The loss of a Minister is (to appearance) the loss of as many souls as might
have been converted by him. Mourn therefore that they die, for their decease
may be the death of thy soul. 2. The time of their death: when they can least
be spared, and are most dearly missed. That Moses should die at such a time,
when the Israelites were advanced very near the land of Canaan, and just
entering into their rest; that he should so long lead them, and now leave them,
when their hopes and joys were even consummated, was no doubt of it self, a
very fore and pungent addition to their sorrow: and that our Moses should now
die just at his resurrection into public employment should be so to ours.

2. Enquire into your lives whether you have not one way or other, less or more
procured their removal; and lament and bewail your selves as far as you have
been the unhappy causes of their death, and do this, 1. You who are more nearly
concerned by natural relation to him, who is now gone. It happens but too often
that even Ministers have Domestic concauses of their grief, and consequently
of their sicknesses and death: the extravagance of a Wife and the Headiness of
Children are sometimes their greatest and most mortal ails: but usually where
relations live most squablingly, when one of them is dead, the remaining, if
there be any grace, any good nature, any sense of Religion or morality, if the
conscience be not quite seared, and the heart incurably hardened, if it be not
every jot of it adamant: there will then be some relenting remembrances, and
some penitent reflections upon former miscarriages. Bear with me, you know I do
not use to flatter: Are here any that need this advice? if there be, I charge
you if you have been guilty of any disobedience, any undutiful demeanours or of
propagating any calumniating aspersions of this deceased Minister, make have to
be sorry, and sleep in penitential tears, and the more because your reformation
in one sense is utterly impossible, be expeditious and weep heartily for your
selves, if God perhaps will forgive you. 2. You who are more remotely (and yet
near enough) concerned by a religious relation, as you have at any time been
hearers of this departed Minister, take you this advice also. Who knows but
because you did not return to God, when he last preached to you, he is dead,
and shall preach no more. obstinate and unreforming hearers are, in too true
and too sad a sense, the murderers of their preachers: they are more affected
more afflicted with your sins than their own diseases. And will you by your
iniquities murder the Ambassadors of Heaven? will nothing serve you, nothing
satiate you but the blood of Ministers? can you love those your vices that have
laid them bleeding at your feet? O mourn, mourn, drench your selves with tears
and let it be for a perpetual lamentation, not so much that your Moseses die,
as that you have killed them. If this does not call for sorrow, I know not what
does. 3. Use. As you ever loved Gods Ministers, as you honor the remembrance
of them, be careful to imitate (the holiness of their lives) and practically
repeat their Sermons in your heavenly conversations; let them always echo, and
continually reverberate in your ears, praise their virtues by your own, and by
an unwearied practice of, applaud their Sermons. Was he a good man? the viler
wretch art thou, who live so bad. Did he preach, did he pray well? the worse
art thou who live so ill. Do thou commend him? and yet will thou swear or
curse, or take the name of God in vain? Have thou a respect for his memory?
come, let us see it, show it by thy works, what sin will thou leave? what
religious duty will thou engage in for his sake? in vain art thou so lavish of
thy commendations, if thou do not lessen the number of thy sins. My friends,
I am come to speak for, and from him who is in his settled state (of happiness
no doubt) who not long ago spoke to you from Almighty God; and whom you shall
never hear again, unless at the day of Judgment when he shall publicly accuse
those who praised his preaching, but would not live it. And my request from him
is that you would speedily repent and return to God, and oh that his death may
be a means to convert those that his life and labors mist to do! Will you do
it? or will you not? if you could hear him call you out of another World, would
you deny? and will you because you are treated in a more familiar and less
startling way? It would be some allay to the sorrows of this day, if the death
of this Moses might be so far improved, as to augment his own joy and the
Angels with him in the Regions above by the conversion of some Sinners: and our
own here, that we may not only weep for sorrow that he is dead, but weep also
for joy that by his means the Sinner lives. Use 4. Learn from hence to prepare
for your own deaths, if God cuts down the fruitful trees, the barren that
cumber the ground cannot long stand. And to keep to the work of this day all
the arguments I shall use to persuade you to provide for death is, consider how
terrible it will be to you if you do not. Death is the King of Terrors, it
brings to a terrible God, to a terrible Bar, to a terrible work, it plucks
asunder and divides between the two constituent principles of man, draws a
screen of darkness between him and all the light, the goods, the glories of
this world, and fixes an unmovable non ultra to all his temporal employments,
which is very sad and doleful tidings to the impenitent and unprovided sinner,
who has no hopes, no happiness beyond the confines of time. That death is
terrible most that ever past into another World are serious witnesses: and who
of us all fears not greatly this frightful and impartial leveller, and O that
we all did so as we ought! that we might not as we ought not, as we would not,
as we should not. When thou art ill and weak in body, and far worse and weaker
in thy soul: when thy breaths are short and few, and thy vices great and many:
thy life even done, and thou not born again, when the Doctor has given thee up,
and the Divine too: when there is no hopes of thy body, and as little of thy
soul, O how dreadful will the sight of Millions of unpardoned sins be, as
easily and freely as thou now committest them? How grievous and burdensome the
remembrance of a Crucified and so often rejected Savior? And how intolerable
the thoughts of those Sermons which now thou wretchedly neglectest? when thou
shall by thy even extinguished light of the Lord within and almost out of thee,
most sadly see all the sins thou have committed, and the mercies thou have
abused in an eager and a close pursuit of thy expiring soul, crying with most
dreadful and undeniable importunity, Justice, Justice, Vengeance, Vengeance:
above thee nothing but an unreconciled frowning God, and blackest clouds of
fluid flaming Brmstone, even ready to pour upon thee? nothing before thee but an
open Hell, its flames furiously catching at thy trembling soul, where there is
no retreating, but as thy breath grows shorter, thou still approachest nearer:
Conscience violently pushing thee forward: and on each hand and round about
thee, thy weeping friends that now can yield thee no relief at all; and the
Devil and his Angels belching out Sulphurous Flames, waiting for Orders to
tear thee in pieces, or carry thee away into endless miseries. O the horrors
that will then fill thy now unconcerned and careless soul! O that a man could
but see into it! what dreadful sights would there appear? And is it not worth
the while to prepare for so terrible anenemy as death will be, when clothed
with all these dreadful circumstances, that he may be thy friend and stripped of
every thing frightfull? Is it not requisite to make some provision for so
serious an hour? And to hint a Direction how you should prepare: Be prevailed
with to come to Christ: I doubt not but all out of Christ are bound by all ways
they can to make timely provision for their great Change: But I cannot think
any can be sufficiently provided to receive the King of Terrors, that has not
first received the King of Heaven, the Lord Jesus as he is offered in the
Gospel. And to move you toward him: I will only (remembering death is our
present subject) peremptorily prophecy and presage to you, that when you come
to die you will, you must come to Christ, to be for ever disposed of by him,
and therefore the rather do it now, that he may place you in the mansions of
bliss above. Will thou refuse when the Doctor turns Divine, having dreined thy
purse, and to no purpose tried all the Apothecaries shop; feels thy weak, but
hasty pulse in full speed to death; shakes his posed, his pusled head, and his
last prescription is, Take Jesus Christ, make your peace with God, and prepare
for another world, put your house and your soul in order, for you cannot live,
and you must die, when thy friends take the by thy clammy claiy hand, as cold
as are those of great men's statues upon their tombstones, to take their leaves
of thee, and it falls again like a log: when thou have done breathing short,
and art fetching a long groan to Eternity, will thou then refuse to come to
Christ? will thou when thou art passing to God, thy Spirit is going to him that
gave it, when death comes with positive and peremptory orders to bring thee to
the Judgment seat, when forced out of thy bed, secured by a guard of Devils,
and haled before the inexorable Justice to answer for all thy misdemeanors
here: when thy soul is wrested out of thy body, God knows very unwilling to
part: and cruelly pulled along for all thy weakness, for all thy wickedness, to
the great tribunal of that God, whose mercy thou now slightest, whose grace
thou rejectest, and whose tenderest bowels thou wickedly spurnest against, when
the news is gone that thou art dead, and there remains nothing but an empty
body: when thy friends anxiously feel for breath, and with great fear apply the
looking glass to see a little but can find none: Will thou then refuse to go to
Christ? If not, O be persuaded to go now that thou may obtain his pardoning
grace and mercy. Use. Do Gods Moseses dye, then pray for Joshua's to succeed
them. Pray that they may fill their rooms, and pray that they may lead you, and
that you may cheerfully and constantly follow them into the heavenly Canaan,
and to that purpose conscienciously take their advice, and obey their command
from God, always remembering that your Joshua's will also dye, and that you know
not how soon. Some of you its likely remember an expression of this man of God
when he last preached here, to this purpose. I Know not whether I may ever
preach again to you: such kind of expressions do we sometimes drop, and you
esteem them malancholy fancies, hut when neither you nor we are aware we become
prophets indeed, and read our own destinies. Be it fanaticall or no, I cannot
but take notice of the hand of God in your neighborhood that has taken away
his Ministers two in one week and left you but one, and when his mouth also
shall be stopped with earth and worms, he only that knows all things, knows. O
that you would now hear, and be reformed, as sure you would, if he who now
speaks to you, were to go at this time from this pulpit to his grave and
judgment. Well, remember this hereafter, when you are at the funeral of this
body: be it sooner, be it later. 6. The last Use, If there be any Joshua's, any
sons of the Prophets, pardon me, being it lies so dirctly in my way, if I let
fall one applicatory word for you with my self. Do Gods Moseses dye? and are
his ancient servants successively (and indeed by clusters) dropping and wearing
away, succeed them then, and may you have their success and greater too. Jos.
1.2. N. now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, the remainder of the
wilderness: and by your painful ardent preaching, and your holy exemplary
living conduct the people into the holy land. And to this purpose, if I were
worthy to advise, it should be, that we would take a right level of our
reformation, begin it early and high enough, propose to our careful imitation
the commands and example of our Blessed Savior, his Apostles and the purest
primitive Churches, without taking any great notice of the usages and practices
of any since: and yet bear due regard and a becoming charitable reverence for
the whole Christian world, that we would love and honor all, whatever is truly
commendable in all parties but espouse none, that we would profoundly venerate
and highly respect our superiors, predecessors and seniors in the Church: but
not think ourselves obliged to be in all things of their opinion, to be their
seconds, or abettors in all controversies, some of which perhaps were engaged
in, at least fomented by state or secular interests: nevertheless far be it
from us to slight and under value their persons, or scoff and jear at their
Sermons, if they suit not our palates and do not so well accommodate with our
juvenile fancies, lets leave that to the Ishmaels of another Church, that we
would not meddle with state quarrels and affairs, nor embroyl our selves in
needless Divinity duels; nor (like Church Barretors) run our selves into every
Ecclesiastical squabble: that we would endeavor to maintain the scriptuaall
authority and the rightful power of pastors, and yet willingly concede their
just rights and liberties to the people. That we would cheerfully submit to the
church or Magistrates prudent determinations of necessary circumstances: and
yet carefully see what ever pretends to religious decency well proved so,
before we practice. That we would eagerly emulate the gifts and graces of our
departed and our dying Moseses; that we would carefully beware of those faults,
that stateliness, confidence, conceitedness or what ever else we are apt to
blame them for, when we come to their age and circumstances, and also
studiously labor with deepest humility to exceed, to excel, to outvye them.



1. In our Studies. 2. In our Pulpits, and 3. In our necessary Converses with
the world.
1. In our Studies. Let us study peace and love, unity and concord; to find out
healing and not dividing principles. Let us make no more differences than
indeed there are: and by no means magnify those that really are, by the
glasses of prejudice or partiality: but leave them to wrangle about the no or
lesser differences that have nothing else to do, and no greater matters to
mind. Let us hope for Justification upon the sole account of the merits of the
Son of God; and yet (without scolding) about conditions and instrumentalities)
assert the absolute and indispensible necessity of holiness to the beatifical
vision. Let us hold freewill, and not justle out free grace; and our necessary
concurrence to our own salvation, and not depress nor depreciate the
assistances of God by advancing too high the natural abilities of man. Let us
believe that man can do nothing savingly without supernatural infused grace,
and yet that all men can do something, and are bound (as it is very reasonable)
to do all they can. Let us sit up later, and rise up earlier, and suffer our
selves to be diverted seldomer from our Studies than they.

2. In our public approaches to God, let our deportment be grave and reverent,
without too much or too little action: let us not move on all four, as if the
actions of a Thresher and of a Preacher were to be much alike; and we had been
used to the former as a preparatory for the latter: nor yet let us be fixed
like Statues, least we teach our Auditors to be no more moved than Images. Let
us wear and possess in Prayer the lowest humility, in Preaching the
highestawfulness, and most serious but unforced Majesty, and let us do both
with that fervor and ardency in our affections, as well as that cleanness,
masculiness in our expressions, that men may see that we intend their souls
good and not our own applause: not with too formal a setness, an over finess of
words and Rhetoric, like those who all week long anxiously hunt after Plays
and Romances, wherewith to treat their hearers on the Sabbath, as if they
designed the tickling of their fancies and the gratifying their curiosities,
and not the reforming of their lives, and the saving of their souls: nor yet to
make work for jearing debate-makers. Hereafter cloth the great things of God
with rude and clownish speech, like those that Santer up and down, that Chat
and Coffe-house away their time, and then entertain their Auditors with their
sudden effusions and idle impertinences, slovenly metaphors and numberless
tautologies, as if to invoke God, and represent him were the easiest province
in the world. Let us remember both to inflame the affections and lighten the
understanding, and not belabour the one with out regarding the other, let us
offer the promises, and fire the theatningst to draw or to drive men from their
sins, not valueing their jears who scoff at the preaching of grace; nor their
censure of legal preachers who fancy Christ menaces no part of his Gospel. In a
word let us in this (as in all things) make the Apostles our Presidents, since
it is very likely their way of preaching will do most good.

3. In our needful converses with this world, let us make it appear we are of
another: and in providing the necessaries of our pilgrimage that we seek
another country. When employed about the urgent businesses (the little other
things of our selves as men) let us first seek the Kingdom of God; Mat. 6.33.
and not loose our selves and forget our spiritual concerns by too long
parentheses in our secular. Let our flames of love, our beams of knowledge so
burn, so shine as theirs should, who are the burning shining light, of the
world, that others may find by us the way to happiness, that they may see our
good works and glorify our father which is in Heaven. Mat. 5.16. Let there be
no discord, but the sweetest harmony between our instructions and our
conversations.

Let us not forget what we spoke for God, when we come to deal with men, like
those (I hope otherwise) good Ministers, who will make a heavy ado about love
and unity in the pulpit, and then look shy upon one another when they come
down: and talk loudly against divisions and animosiities amongst different
persuasions and yet deny communion to any but those of their own: that in their
prayers confess they are very sorry for the distances amongst good people of
diverse judgments, and yet will not give the Lords supper to any that are not of
their own sise, and that come not full up to themselves. Away Hyprocrisies! Let
us (my brethren) do that which has been long vainly talked of: let us (whether
our opinions jump or no) love, converse and communicate together. Be we strong
and of good Courage; be we not afraid, nor at all dismayed, Josh. 1.6. Come
what can come between this and Heaven. Observe we carefully the laws of God,
turn we neither to the right hand of Popery, Will Worship, and Idolotry, nor to
the left of Heresy, Error and Anarchy: run we not to the Church of Rome nor any
superstitious one for fear of Schism, nor into no Churches. to avoid
Superstition and formality. Meditate we upon the word of God day and night v.
8. and do we accordingly, so shall we prosper wherever we go, so shall we
have good success, and so will the Lord be with us as be was with Moses. He
will not fail us, nor forsake us, Joshua 1.5.

FINIS.
Reader,
THat thou may not wrong either thy self or the Author, be persuaded before
thou read to correct, as thou art here instructed.

Page 2 lin. 17. r. Monios. l. 18. r. be. l. 24. dele a. p. 3. l. 20. r. force
or compulsion. l. 36. r. velliety, p. 7. l. 21. r. words. p. 8. l. 31. r.
whirls. p. 9. l. 17 r. easily. l. 20. r. or they prove. l. 21. blot so before
these. l. 31. r. coolness. 32. r. nor their. p. 11. l. 8. r. expire not expend.
p. 12. l. 10. r. steep not sleep. Some other lessor errors there are which thy
own discretion will correct without giving thee any further trouble here.


