A PRESERVATIVE For Our MONEY; OR A Way proposed, whereby some MONEY may be
kept in ENGLAND which otherwise will all be gone: OR How we may carry on the
War against France with Vigor, and with much better Effect than hitherto, and
yet keep Our MONEY.

By E. L.

LONDON: Printed by B. Motte, and are to be sold by E. Whitlock near
Stationers' Hall. 1696.

A PRESERVATIVE For our MONEY, etc.
OUR Money is running away by Millions, year after year: which will soon bring
us, if it be not done already, to Beggary and Ruin. And now all the Talk is, of
Mending our Money. As if a Man had almost bled to death, and were still
bleeding; and He, observing his Blood to be bad, should be consulting and
contriving how to Mend his Blood. whereas his first Care should be, how to stop
his Bleeding. I confess our Money is not so good as it should be: or rather,
it is as bad as it can be. But yet, upon the whole matter, we should think how
to keep it, before we think how to mend it. For as things now go, whether it be
mended or not mended, it will be carried all away.

It is now evident to all Men (but some Men saw it long since), that our great
Payments abroad, and chiefly those in Flanders, are the main Cause of the
Exportation of our Money. It therefore highly concerns us to put a stop to
those Payments at any rate. For we can bear them no longer: We have lost so
much Blood already, that it is death to lose more. But shall we not assist our
Confederates? Yes, by all means, to the utmost of our power. For otherwise all
Europe must be inslaved to the French, and We among the rest. It is therefore
absolutely necessary that we keep our Money: and it is as necessary that we
powerfully assist our Confederates. Both which things (tho seeming so
inconsistent) may at once be done, by our Assailing the French Coast by Sea: or
in other words, by a vigorous Descent upon France.

A Project of such a Descent I presumed to publish, in the year Ninety one.
which Project was generally approved, that the whole Kingdom was in Expectation
that it would be prosecuted. Also the year next after, a Descent was intended:
and another the year following. tho, as it fell out, those Designs were not put
in Execution. And in the third year was our Attempt at Camaret Bay.

But as to the Project, it is briefly this. That a good Body of Foot (twenty
thousand at least, but the more the better) be Shipped for the Coast of France;
there to move to and fro as they see occasion, and to Land where they find it
convenient: and further to seize and fortify some open Sea-Town, so as it may
contain a great and strong Garrison. Which Garrison being put in a State of
defense, the Naval Army to proceed to new Adventures, and to seize and fortify
other Places in like manner.

Here I am to make good the two things before mentioned: First, that in so
doing we shall keep our Money; and secondly, that we shall effectually assist
our Confederates. To which two things I shall add a third; That the Design is
very feasible, and hardly possible to miscarry.

In the first place therefore, while we assail the Seacoast of France, and
plant Garrisons upon it; tho it be a great Expense, we shall still keep our
Money amongst our selves. For whither should it go? The French have good luck,
if they get any thing from us in this Affair. And none else have to do with it.
At present our Army in Flanders carries our Money thither, (some say a Million
and a half yearly); and our Fleet kept upon the Coasts of Spain, stops Money
from coming to us from thence: and a great Sum goes yearly to Piemont. But by a
Descent upon France our Money will be no way diminished: and what ever is laid
out, will come back and Circulate amongst us. Here will be no carrying out our
Coin and Bullion, nor the horrible disadvantage of Remittances.

In the second place, By a Descend upon France we shall give most effectual
Assistance to our Confederates. If we did nothing else, but overlay the French
at Sea, and thereby destroy their Trade and Navigation; even this thing only
would be an effectual Assistance. For whereas now the French are rampant, by
the immense Riches ('it is their Gazettiers word) which they have taken from us;
they would then be impoverished to such a Degree, as to be no way able to carry
on the War against the Confederates. And this thing we must do in the first
place. For we are ruined unless we powerfully protect our Trade; and the same
Force that protects the Trade of England powerfully, will destroy that of
France. Which things I hope our Parliament has done already, by giving a
larger Sum than formerly for our Sea-Service. I have said before, that our
overlaying our Enemies by Sea, will prove a great Assistance to our Friends.
But if beside this, we also Assail the French Coast with Landforces, that
Assistance will be much greater. For it will make so great a Diversion, taht
both Flanders and Germany, and likewise Piemont and Catalonia, will feel an
exceeding great Ease and Benefit by it. We are not able to maintain an Army in
France: it will bring swift Destruction upon us. But we are able to maintain a
Coast War. And our Confederates must and will be content, if we do for them
as much as we are able. Suppose we take forty thousand Men out of Flanders, to
assail the French Coasts. If these draw away, or keep back, a great number of
Frenchmen, as they will certainly do; it is the same thing or better. And we may
be making Descents in Normandy and Bretagne, before the Armies in Flanders can
take the field. By these Descents we shall touch the Enemy in his most sensible
part, (as His Majesty has been pleased to express it); that is, on his Sea
Coast. How tender they are here, we found at our Bombarding of Havre de Grace.
When we came before that Town, their Militia's and Regular Troops were
commanded thither from all Quarters, with all haste possible: and the Alarm
reached Paris it self. From whence that King (as all our Relations agreed) sent
away his own Guards to the Sea Coasts. What to do? Not to hinder our
Bombardment, for therein they could do no service: but to hinder the Descent of
our Landforces; who were not above seven thousand in number. It was this
handful of Men, that caused all that Terror and Affrightment. We may see
therefore, that tho the Project here offered should fail in the main; though we
should not be able to fortify and make good any Town, nor so much as Land our
Men; yet the very Attempting these things in several places (in one place to
day, and a hundred Miles off to morrow); would so harass and torment the
French, that they would never be able to bear it. But there is no fear that the
Project here offered should fail in the main, or not have its full Effect.

In the third place, the thing proposed is feasible and easy, and hardly
possible to miscarry. It Is hardly possible that the French should hinder our
Landing; it is hardly possible they should hinder our Fortifying; or should take
from us the Places we fortify. I shall speak first to our Landing. And here I
must confess, that if we should resolve to Land at one place precisely; and the
French should discover our Design some Months before hand; and should
accordingly provide for the defense of that place, with a great Body of Horse
and Foot, with Forts and Intrenchments, and with Bombs and Cannon; and we
knowing all this, should attempt that place notwithstanding; we might fairly be
repulsed and baffled, as we were at Camaret Bay. But if we are at large, to
Land where we see convenient, there is no such danger. When we sailed from that
Bay toward Flanders, along by the French Shores, the whole Country was in a
high Alarm: and they brought down all their Forces to Guard their Coast. But
yet, (as I have it from those who saw it with their Eyes), there were a great
many places, convenient for Landing, that had no Guard at all, either upon them
or near them: we seeing far and wide that the Coast was clear. And both our
Landmen and Seamen were most cheerfully desirous to go upon French Ground, if
there had been Orders for it. Nor had they in truth found any Opposition. Sir
Walter Rawleigh does fully demonstrate, that the Landing upon an Enemies Coast
can by no means be hindered. Provided the Assailants be Masters at Sea, and in
case the Coast be large and accessible. Which thing is also confirmed by the
Experience of all Ages. For it is hardly to be found in History, that ever any
Attempt of this kind miscarried, except Ours which I mentioned but now. And
Reason tells us, that our Landing upon France (to speak of that in particular)
cannot be prevented. Suppose we have forty thousand Men embarked, to assail the
French Coast: and the French have fifty thousand to defend it. Their Coast upon
Our Channel, (for That must be the Scene of these Actions) is five hundred
Miles in length. so that here is a thousand Men for every ten Miles. But how
slender a Guard will this be against our Invading Army? Had they a hundred
thousand Men, or a thousand for every five Miles of ground, all would be found
too few to oppose our Landing.

I hope I have made out, that our Landing cannot be hindered by the French. I
must now show that they cannot hinder our Fortifying. It would be very strange,
if such a Body of Men, having the Sea and a Fleet behind them; and having at
least ten days time to Entrench, before a superior or even an equal Force can
be brought against them; should not be able so to cover themselves, as not to
fear the Insults of any Enemy. The Works we cast up at Landen in one short
night, the French Lines in Flanders, and several late Circumvallations, show
what great Things great Numbers can do. But we must not think of Pioniers for
this Work; our Soldiers must do it themselves. And they will do it cheerfully,
if those that labor have some Pay extraordinary. Which was the way of the old
Princes of Orange, the Grandfather and great Uncle of our King. Moreover the
place where we Entrench, will be the place we intend for a Garrison. And the
Line which may be full manned by ten thousand Men, when the Works are
completed; may contain the whole Army for a time. For none of these Garrisons
should be less than ten thousand: the greater they are, the farther they will
command, and the better they will maintain themselves.

And now I come to the point remaining, which is, That it is hardly possible
that the French should take these Garrisons from us. And this is evident of it
self; if the Places be (as they ought) relievable by Sea, and not commanded by
Land. A Place that is completely fortified; that has a great Garrison, with
great store of Cannon, and has room for great Renforcements; and that lying
opposite to England, with a narrow Sea between, may receive these Renforcements
(and all manner of Supplies) with every Snatch of Wind; I say such a Place as
this, may justly be reputed Impregnable.

Thus I am come to the End of the Project: which is the Establishing some
Garrisons upon the Coast of France. There is no more to be done: the rest will
do it self. And as I have said elsewhere; England will then be glorious, when
we have a Range of Garrisons the whole length of the Channel, upon French
Ground, and maintained by French Contributions. Every such Garrison, with a
thousand or two of Horse and Dragoons put into it, would dismember a whole
Province. If Tourville, when he Landed so easily at Torbay, had had an Army on
board him, and had settled a rampant Garrison there, would not the whole County
of Devon (and Cornwall to boot) have been dismembered by it? And had not Deal
(or any place upon the Downs) done the same by Kent; and any place in Sussex,
and another in Dorset, dismembered each of those Counties? Especially if the
French were still Masters at Sea; and had still an Army on board, to pour in
upon us (when they pleased) from any of those places, Consider, what a horrible
Condition we had then been in. and in the same Condition will France be, in
case this Project be duly prosecuted. They will be so distracted and
confounded by it, that they will never be able to resist the Confederates,
assailing them in all Quarters. We may then hope for a good and speedy End of
this War: whereas by keeping our Army in Flanders, there is no hopes of it.
For as things go there, tho our Forces be never so great, tho we overpower the
Enemy never so much, we must account it a Glorious Success, if we take one Town
in a year. But what does this signify toward making an end of the War? At
this rate we may be twenty years in recovering Flanders: And we, for our parts,
shall be ruined in the tenth part of that time. For if our Foreign Payments
continue two years longer, they will entirely Ruin us: and I doubt one year
will do it.

If from Flanders we could carry the War into France, there would be some
hopes. But it is plain we cannot do this, because we do not. Tho it is a great
wonder that we cannot. Why cannot We March into France, as well as the French
have marched so often into Flanders; the Dauphin into Germany two years ago;
and the Grand Vizier to Vienna, a hundred Miles within the Emperor's Quarters?
As for the French Lines, they are a mere Cuckoo Hedge. We might not only fly
over it, (as we did at Namur, to besige that place), but might go beside it:
their Quarters beyond the Maes lying open But as I have said elsewhere, The
great and swift Conquerours in all Ages, never lay pelting at Frontier
Garrisons, but broke into the Countries. We shall never see a good Conclusion
of this War, till the War be carried into France: and since that cannot be
done by Land, we must do it by Sea. which is the End and Drift of the Design
here proposed.

Some loose things are here added, relating to the Discourse above-written.
1. No great number of Horse are required for this Service. For they are not
useful either in Landing or Fortifying: which are the things to be done. It
seems therefore sufficient, that a thousand or two of them be embarked at
first, and about twice as many ly ready in England, till there be occasion for
them: that is, till some Garrisons be settled to which they may go. For to have
them all on Shipboard while the Fleet and Army is upon Wing, and may be plying
to and again for several days, would be too chargeable and cumbersome.

2. It is no way necessary, that the Places we fortify should be good Ports.
The French have few such upon this Coast: and for these Places, it is sufficient
if they are relievable by Sea, and can receive and secure small Vessels. For
the business of these Garrisons is; that we may harrass and torment the French,
from these Garrisons. Perhaps another year, when the French are weakened and
humbled, we may think of Attacquing their best Ports, and of a Voyage Royal.
But at present we should attempt nothing, but what we are sure we can do: for
what we are sure we can do, will sufficiently ruin the French King. It will
cost us some Labor, but we shall run no Hazard.

3. A Voyage Royal, or a main Invasion, will not be of that advantage, as the
desultory Sea War here proposed. In that way we may perhaps do something, if
our Force be throughout superior, and We clearly and for continuance Masters
of the Field: But in the other way, we shall be sure to do something and to
gain our point, tho the Enemies Force should be much superior to Ours. By the
first way, we shall only divide the Enemies Force by dividing our own, without
any further Advantage.

4. Forty thousand of our Men on Shipboard, will do more Service to Flanders by
the Diversion they make, then a much greater number kept there. And it is well
known, how great benefit the Duke of Savoy received, by our Fleet with a few
Land-Men aboard, hovering about Provence last Summer. It drew so many French to
guard that Coast, that the Duke took Casal the while without Interruption.

5. That brave-spirited Prince deserves our highest Regards. And the Assistance
we have given him may seem well bestowed. But we cannot send more Money to
Piemont, whence it will never return. It were better for us to expend twice or
thrice as much in our own Seas: for That Money will return, or rather will
never go from us. And this powerful Revulsive will be felt in Piemont, to its
great Ease and Benefit. But let it be as it will, we must send away no more
Money.

6. Our Silver Coin thar is left, as Mr. Lowndes computes it, may be about five
Millions and a half, (but some think, it cannot be near so much): Whereof four
Millions, being Clipped half way, is in effect but two Millions. And so three
Millions and a half is the Sum effective. What will become of us, if a full
Moiety of this Money be carried to Piemont and Flanders, this very next year;
for the growing Expense, beside great Debts that must be satisfied? And either
the Payments must be there made by Money in specie; or they must be made by
Bills, with most grievous loss, the Exchange being so high against us. So that
'twere better our Money went at once. And Merchants know that foreign Payments,
whether made by Bills or in specie, are the same thing in effect; and carry
Money alike out of the Kingdom.

7. This height of the Exchange against us, occasioned by our great Payments
abroad, is an infinite disadvantage to our Merchants: and will continue as long
as those Payments do. to the ruin of our Trade, and consequently of our Nation.
As for our Clipped Money. That had no effect upon the Exchange, till Guineas
did rise: which was less than a year since. And when our Coin is reformed, that
Effect will cease. But our foreign Payments are the more durable and
substantial Cause. It is these Payments that make Silver more valuable, and
better, and dearer, in other Parts than it is in England. We cannot have weight
for weight: nor receive so many Ounces there, as we pay here. It is most
certain, that our Money never flies from us, but when Silver is more valuable
in other places than in England. Now Silver (as all other Commodities) is there
most valuable and dearest, where it is most in demand. And it is most in demand,
where there are greatest Occasions for it, and the most and greatest Payments
to be made. They therefore that are to make these Payments, must buy the
Convenience of having Money there for that Use, and the Exchange will run high
against them. Which is our present case.

8. I have omitted One Advantage, which we shall have in our Descents upon
France: and that is, that we shall never want Men for this Service. Men will be
as forward and willing to go for France, provided they have good English
Officers; as now they are backward and unwilling to go into Flanders. The
Service in Flanders having got a very ill Name, amongst our common Men.

9. I have also omitted one Leak of our Money, which is to be well considered.
We keep an Army in England, at a great Expense: and most of this Army are
Forrainers. Who living very close, and spending little, lay up a good part of
their Pay. It deserves an Enquiry, whether it be true that is said of them;
That they are continually (even the common Soldiers, and much more the
Officers) sending their Money, which they thus save, to their own Countries. If
it be so, tho the particular Sums be not very great; yet there being many
thousands of them, it may amount to a large Sum in the whole. And it may prove
as bad to keep Forraigners in England as to maintain an English Army in Foreign
Parts. Some think it no way necessary, to have a Foreign Army in England. For
the People of England are so firmly Knit to his Majesty, both by Interest and
Affection, that there is little need of Forrainers to force us to Obedience.
Aristotle is too severe, when he says in his Politics, ( Lib. 5. Cap. 10.),
That foreign Guards are Tyrannical: for just and good Princes may have them.
But some think that in England, under another King, foreign Guards and a
foreign Army might be of dreadful danger to our Liberties. Tho under his
Majesty now regnant, (who has been our Redeemer, and is still our Protector
and Preserver) there is no Cause to fear.

I most humbly submit these things, to the Consideration of our States now
Assembled. It Is They that must take care, Nequid Respublica detrimenti capiat,
That the Kingdom receive no prejudice: or rather, as things go now, That it be
not destroyed. Which it must be, if we part with more Money; and which
therefore we must not do. No Concerting of Measures, no Treaties or Agreements,
can oblige us to Impossibilities; and that which cannot be done without
destroying the Kingdom, is morally and honestly impossible. We may say honestly
and truly, that for us to part with more Money, is a thing that cannot possibly
be done.

SInce the writing of the foregoing Treatise, the Commons with great Prudence
have Addressed the King, that he will be pleased to procure; that the
Commodities and Provisions sent from England to our Forces Abroad, may be
exempted from Duties and Excises. Which is we may presume, in order to the
supplying our Flanders Army with those Things from England, instead of sending
Money for that Use. And this, I confess, will put a great Stop to the carrying
out our Money. But no small Quantities of Money must still go to Flanders. For
tho the common Soldiers may be content with Provisions brought by Sea, yet the
Officers will not. They must fare betten, and live like Gentlemen, and spend
their Money. Which Money thus spent will amount to a large Sum. And what is
spent in Flanders, is lost to England. But in our Descents we shall spend no
Money: and all must be content with what they have from England, or can get
from the Euemy. Moreover, tho our supplying our Flanders Army from England may
lessen the Necessity of a Descent, yet the Convenience and Advantage of it
continues the same. And we may be confident, the French dread it above all
things in the World. According to all humane probability, it will in one Summer
give the French Tyranny a mortal Wound, if not break it to pieces. Especially
if our whole Quota, our whole eighty seven thousand Men, were employed upon it.
And if but forty thousand were thus employed, the rest (if it must be so) being
in Flanders and elsewhere, we might well expect great things.

Some think that a Naval Army might do great things, without the help of
Garrisons. But that is a mistake. For they can do nothing, as to ravaging and
commanding the Country, without Horse; and these cannot readily disbark and
reimbark. Beside, by being long on Shipboard, the Horses will be disabled and
spoiled. And in this way, it will be thought a great Adventure, if we go five
Miles from the Seaside. But if we have nothing to do, but to cross over to a
Garrison or strong Quarter of our own, where we may Land without any
possibility of Interruption, and where a good Body of Horse lies ready to join
us; we may make a much greater Impression.

In case we have only one Garrison, the French may perhaps coop it up with
Lines, after their Flanders fashion. But in case we have several, backed by our
Naval Army, they can never bear up against them. So that tho they had no other
Enemy, and should oppose us with treble our Force; ye we should be too hard for
them, having so great an advantage. And this is the way to put a speedy and
victorious End to the War: without sending out, or carrying out our Money.
Whereas otherwise; this heavy and destructive War is like to continue, our
Money like to be all gone, and the Kingdom to be utterly ruined.

And thus much has been said about Keeping our Money. The Mending I leave to
Others. But the admirable Resolves of the House of Commons, have made that work
short and easy.

FINIS.

