A JOURNEY TO PARIS In the Year School.

By Dr. Martin Lister.

LONDON,

Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges-Head near the Inner-Temple-Gate in
Fleet street, and at Gray's-Inn-Gate in Gray's-Inn-Lane. 1699.

To His Excellency, JOHN Lord Summers, Baron of Evesham, Lord High Chancellor
of England, and one of the Lords-Justices of England.
My LORD,
WIsdom is the Foundation of Justice and Equity, and it seems not to be
perfect, without it comprehends also Philosophy and Natural Learning, and
whatever is of good Relish in Arts. It is certain, my Lord, for the Honor of
your high Station, that the greatest Philosophers of this Age, were of your
Predecessors; nor is your Lordship in any thing behind them; as tho nothing
inspired People with more Equity, than a true value for Useful Learning and
Arts. This has given me the boldness to offer your Lordship this short
Account, of the Magnificent and Noble City of Paris, and the Court of that
great King, who has given Europe so long and vehement Disquiet, and cost
England in particular so much Blood and Treasure. It Is possible, my Lord, you
may find a leisure Hour to read over these few Papers for your Diversion,
wherein I promise my self, you will meet with nothing Offensive, but clean
Matter of Fact, and some short Notes of an unprejudiced Observer. But that I
may no longer importune you, perpetually busied in so laborious and useful an
Employment, I beg leave to subscribe my self,

My LORD, Your Lordships Most Humble and most Obedient Servant, Martin Lister.

THE Reader is desired to Correct with a Pen these Faults, before he begins,
because they obscure the Sense. As for the Literal Faults they are easy to be
mended by the Eye.

Page 39. l. 1. read Metopae. Page 81. line 5. read laminons. P. 93. l. 19. r.
limned. P. 108. l. 29. r. interpolations. P. 139. l. 30. r. had sold. P. 150.
l. 8. r. Shoots. P. 58. l. 7. dele in.
depiction of a species of snail Tab. 3. Cochlea terrestris Americana F. Plumier


depiction of stamps of the heads of emperor Vaballathus and empress Zenobia
Tab ^ Vabalatus Zenobia



Tab. 1.
depiction of a wasp's nest Fig. 1. Vesparum quarundam Canadensium Favus
Etruscan letters from a Roman coin Fig. 2.
inscription on a marble from Greece Fig. 3.




A JOURNEY TO PARIS In the Year School.
Introduction to the Reader.
THis Tract was Written chiefly to satisfy my own Curiosity, and to delight my
self with the Memory of what I had seen. I busied my self in a place where I
had little to do, but to walk up and down; well knowing, that the Character of
a Stranger gave me free admittance to Men and Things. The French Nation value
themselves upon Civility, and build and dress mostly for Figure; This Humor
makes the Curiosity of Strangers very easy and welcome to them.

But why do you trouble us with a Journey to Paris, a place so well known to
every body here? For very good Reason, to spare the often telling my Tale at my
return. But we know already all you can say, or can read it in the Present
State of France, and Description of Paris; two Books to be had in every Shop in
London; It Is right, so you may; and I advise you not to neglect them, if you
have a mind to judge well of the Grandeur of the Court of France, and the
immense Greatness of the City of Paris. These were Spectacles I did indeed put
on, but I found they did not fit my sight, I had a mind to see without them;
and in Matters of this Nature, as vast Cities and vast Palaces, I did not care
much to use Microscopes or Magnifying Glasses.

But to content you, Reader, I promise you not to trouble you with Ceremonies
either of State or Church, or Politics; for I entered willingly into neither of
them, but only, where they would make a part of the Conversation, or my Walk
was ordered me. You Will easily find by my Observations, that I incline rather to
Nature than Dominion; and that I took more pleasure to see Monsieur Breman in
his white Wastcoat digging in the Royal Physic Garden, and sowing his Couches,
than Monsieur Saintot making room for an Ambassador; and I found my self better
disposed, and more apt to learn the Names and Physiognomy of a Hundred Plants,
than of 5 or 6 Princes. After all, I had much rather have walked a 100 paces
under the meanest Hedge in Languedoc, than any the finest Alley at Versailles
or St. Clou, so much I prefer fair Nature and a warm Sun, before the most
exquisite performances of Art in a cold and barren Climate.

Another Reason, that I give you little or no trouble in telling you Court
Matters, is, that I was no more concerned in the Embassy, than in the sailing
of the Ship which carried me over: It Is enough for me, with the rest of the
People of England, to feel the good Effects of it, and to pass away this Life
in Peace and Quietness. It Is a happy turn for us, when Kings are made Friends
again. This was the end of this Embassy, and I hope it will last our days. My
Lord Ambassador was infinitely caressed by the King, his Ministers, and all the
Princes. It Is certain the French are the most Polite Nation in the World, and
can Praise and Court with a better Air than the rest of Mankind. However the
generality of the Kingdom were through great necessity well disposed to receive
the Peace: The Bigots and some Disbanded Officers might be heard at our first
going to grumble, but those also gave over, and we heard no more of them when
we came away; but to the Business.

I happily arrived at Paris after a tedious Journey in very bad Weather; for we
set out of London the 10th of December, and I did not reach Paris till the
first of January; for I fell sick upon the Road, and stayed 5 days at Bologne,
behind the Company, till my Fever abated; yet notwithstanding so rude a
Journey, I recovered, and was perfectly cured of my Cough in 10 days; which was
the chiefest reason of my leaving London at that time of the year, and never
had the least return of it all the Winter, though it was as fierce there as I
ever felt it in England. This great benefit of the French Air I had experienced
3 several times before, and had therefore longed for a passage many years; but
the continuance of the War was an insuperable Obstacle to my Desires. Therefore
the first opportunity which offered it self I readily embraced, which was my
Lord Portland's Acceptance of my Attendance of him in his Extraordinary
Embassy; who ordered me to go before with one of my good Friends, who was sent
to prepare Matters against his arrival.

Now that I might not wholly trust my Memory, in what I saw at Paris, I set
down my Thoughts under certain Heads.

I. Of Paris in General.
THough I had much spare time the 6 Months I staid in that City, yet the
rudeness of the Winter Season kept me in for some time. Again, I believe I did
not see the Tithe of what deserves to be seen, and well considered; because for
many things I wanted a relish, particularly for Painting and Building; However
I viewed the City in all its parts, and made the round of it; took several
prospects of it at a distance, which when well thought on, I must needs confess
it to be one of the most Beautiful and Magnificent in Europe, and in which a
Traveller might find Novelties enough f^r 6 Months for daily Entertainment,
(...) least in and about this Noble City. To give therefore a strict and
general Idea of it, and not to enter far into the vain Disputes of the number
of Inhabitants, or its bigness, compared to London; sure I am, the standing
Crowd was so great, when my Lord Ambassador made his Entry, that our People
were strartled at it, and were ready the next day to give up the Question, had
they not well considered the great Curiosity of the Parisians, who are much
more delighted in fine Shows than the People of London, and so were well near
all got into the way of the Cavalcade. One thing was an evident Argument of
this Humor, that there were some Hundreds of Coaches of Persons of the best
Quality, even some Bishops and Peers which I saw, which had placed themselves
in a file to line the Streets, and had had the patience to have so remained for
some hours.

It Is also most certain, that for the quantity of Ground possessed by the
Common People, this City is much more populous than any part of London; here
are from 4 to 5 and to 10 Menages, or distinct Families in many Houses; but
this is only to be understood of certain places of Trade. This difference
betwixt the two Cities also is true, that here the Palaces and Convents have
eat up the Peoples Dwellings, and crowded them excessively together, and
possessed themselves of far the greatest part of the Ground; whereas in London
the contrary may be observed, that the People have destroyed the Palaces, and
placed themselves upon the Foundations of them, and forced the Nobility to live
in Squares or Streets in a sort of Community; but this they have done very
honestly, having fairly purchased them.

The Views also which it gives upon the River are admirable; that of the
Pont-neuf downwards to the Tuilleries, or upwards from the Pont-Royal; and in
some other places, as from Pont St. Bernard, the Greve, etc. The River Seine
which passes through the midst of the City, is all nobly Bank'd or Keyed with
large Freestone; and incloses in the heart of the City two Islands, which
causes many fine Bridges to be built to pass over them. One of these Islands
called l'Isle de Palais was all Paris for some Ages.

The Houses are built of hewn Stone entirely, or whited over with Plaster:
some indeed in the beginning of this Age are of Brick with Freestone, as the
Place-Royal, Place-Dauphin, etc. but that is wholly left off now; and the white
Plaster is in some few places only colored after the fashion of Brick, as
part of the Abbay of St. Germain. The Houses every where are high and stately;
The Churches numerous, but not very big; The Towers and Steeples but few in
proportion to the Churches, yet that noble way of Steeple, the Domes or
Cupolas, have a mavelous effect in prospect; though they are not many, as
that of Val de Grace, des Invalides, College Mazarin, De l'Assumption, the
Grand-Jesuits, La Sorbonne, and some few others.

All the Houses of Persons of Distinction are built with Port-cochers, that is,
wide Gates to drive in a Coach, and consequently have Courts within; and mostly
Remises to set them up. There are reckoned above 700 of these great Gates; and
very many of these are after the most noble Patterns of ancient Architecture.

The lower Windows of all Houses are Grated with strong Bars of Iron; which
must be a vast Expense.

As the Houses are magnificent without, so the Finishing within side and
Furniture answer in Riches and Neatness; as Hangings of rich Tapestry, raised
with Gold and Silver Threads, Crimson Damask and Velvet Beds or of Gold and
Silver Tissue. Cabinets and Bureaus, of Ivory inlaid with Tortoishell, and Gold
and Silver Plates in a 100 different manners: Branches and Candlesticks of
Crystal: but above all most rare Pictures. The Gildings, Carvings and Paintings
of the Roof are admirable.

These things are in this City and the Country about to such a variety and
excess, that you can come into no private House of any Man of Substance, but
you see something of them; and they are observed frequently to ruin themselves
in these Expenses. Every one, that has any thing to spare, covets to have some
good Picture or Sculpture of the best Artist; The like in the Ornaments of
their Gardens, so that it is incredible what pleasure that vast quantity of
fine things give the Curious Stranger. Here as soon as ever a Man gets any
thing by Fortune or Inheritance, he lays it out in some such way as now named.

Yet after all many Utensils and Conveniences of Life are wanting here, which
we in England have: This makes me remember what Monsieur Justell, a Parisian
formerly, told me here, that he had made a Catalogue of near Threescore Things
of this Nature which they wanted in Paris.

The Pavement of the Streets is all of square Stone, of about 8 or 10 Inches
thick; that is, as deep in the ground as they are broad at top; The Gutters
shallow, and laid round without edges, which makes the Coaches glide easily
over them.

However, it must needs be said, the Streets are very narrow, and the
Passengers a-foot no ways secured from the hurry and danger of Coaches, which
always pass the Streets with an air of haste; and a full trot upon broad flat
Stones, betwixt high and large resounding Houses, makes a sort of Music which
should seem very agreeable to the Parisians.

The Royal Palaces are surprisingly stately; as the Louvre and Tuilliries,
Palais Luxembourg, Palais Royal.

The Convents are great, and numerous, and well built; as Val de Grace, St.
Germains, St. Victor, St. Genevieve, the Grand Jesuits, etc.

The Squares are few in Paris, but very beautiful; as the Place Royal, Place
Victoir, Place Dauphine, none of the largest, except the Place Vendosme, not
yet finished.

The Gardens within the Walls, open to the public, are vastly great, and very
beautiful; as the Tuilleries, Palais Royal, Luxembourg, the Royal Physic
Garden, of the Arsenal, and many belonging to Convents, the Carthusians,
Celestins, St. Victor, St. Genevieve, etc.

But that which makes the dwelling in this City very diverting for People of
Quality, is the facility of going out with their Coaches into the Fields, on
every side; it lying round, and the Avenues to it so well paved; and the Places
of Airing so clean, open, or shady, as you please, or the Season of the year,
and time of the day requires: As the Cour de la Reyne, Bois de Bologne, Bois de
Vincennes, les Sables de Vaugerarde, etc.

But to descend to a more particular Review of this great City, I think it not
amiss to speak first of the Streets and public Places, and what may be seen in
them: Next of the Houses of Note; and what Curiosities of Nature or Art, also
of Men and Libraries, I met with: Next, of their Diet and Recreations: Next of
the Gardens, and their Furniture and Ornaments: Of the Air and Health. We shall
conclude the whole with the present State of Physic and Pharmacy here.

Coaches.
To begin with the Coaches, which are very numerous here and very fine in
Gilding: But there are but few, and those only of the great Nobility, which are
large, and have two Seats or Funds. But what they want in the largeness,
beauty, and neatness of ours in London, they have infinitely in the easiness of
Carriage, and the ready turning in the narrowest Streets. For this purpose,
they are all Crane-Neckt, and the Wheels before very low, not above two foot
and a half Diameter; which makes them easy to get into, and brings down the
Coach-Box low, that you have a much better prospect out of the foremost Glass;
our high seated Coachmen being ever in the point of view. Again, They are most,
even Fiacres or Hackneys, hung with Double Springs, at the four Corners, which
insensibly breaks all Jolts. This I never was so sensible off, as after having
practiced the Paris Coaches for four months, I once rid in the easiest Chariot
of my Lords, which came from England; but not a Jolt but what affected a Man;
so as to be tired more in one hour in that, than in six in these.

Besides the great number of Coaches of the Gentry, here are Coaches de Remise,
by the month; which are very well Guilt, neat Harness, and good Horses: And
these all Strangers Hire by the Day or Month, at about Three Crowns English a
Day. It Is this sort that spoils the Hackneys and Chairs, which here are the
most nasty and miserable Voiture that can be; and yet near as dear again as in
London, and but very few of them neither.

Yet there is one more in this City, which I was willing to omit, as thinking
it at first fight Scandalous, and a very Jest; it being a wretched Business in
so Magnificent a City; and that is, the Vinegrette, a Coach on Two Wheels,
dragged by a Man, and pushed behind by a Woman or Boy, or both.

Besides those, for quick Traveling there are great number of Post-Chaises for
a single Person; and Roullions for two Persons: These are on two Wheels only,
and have each their Double Springs to make them very easy; they run very
swiftly: both the Horses pull; but one only is in the Thilles. The Coachman
mounts the Roullion; but for the Chaise, he only mounts the side Horse only. I
think neither of these are in use in England; but might be introduced to good
purpose.

Recreations and Walks.
As for their Recreations and Walks, there are no People more fond of coming
together, to see and to be seen. This Conversation without doubt takes up a
great part of their time: And for this purpose, the Cour de la Reyne is
frequented by all People of Quality. It is a Treble Walk of Trees of a great
length, near the River side, the middle Walk having above double the breadth to
the two side ones; and will hold eight files of Coaches, and in the middle a
great open Circle to turn, with fine Gates at both ends. Those that would have
better and freer Air, go further, and drive into the Bois de Bologne, others
out of other Parts of the Town to Bois de Vincennes, scarce any side amiss. In
like manner these Persons light and Walk in the Tuilleries, Luxembourg, and
other Gardens, belonging to the Crown and Princes, (all which are very
spacious) and are made convenient, with many Seats for the Entertainment of all
People; the Lacquies and Mob excepted; but of this more hereafter.

Bishops.
No sort of People make a better figure in the Town than the Bishops, who have
very splendid Equipages, and variety of fine Liveries, being most of them Men
of great Families, and preferred as such, Learning not being so necessary a
Qualification for those Dignities, as with us; though there are some of them very
Deserving and Learned Men. I say, They are most Noblemen, or the younger Sons
of the best Families. This indeed, is for the Honor of the Church; but whether
it be for the good of Learning and Piety is doubtful. They may be Patrons, but
there are but few Examples of Erudition among them. It Is to be wished, that they
exceeded others in Merit, as they do in Birth.

Abbots.
The Abbots here are numerous, from all Parts of the Kingdom. They make a
considerable figure, as being a gentile sort of Clergy, and the most Learned;
at least were so from the time of Cardinal Richlieu, who preferred Men of the
greatest Learning and Parts to these Posts; and that very frankly, and without
their knowing it beforehand, much less soliciting him for it. He took a sure
way, peculiar to himself, to enquire out privately Men of Desert, and took his
own time to prefer them. This filled the Kingdom of France with learned Men,
and gave great Encouragement to Study; whereof France yet has some feeling.

Signs in the Streets.
It Is pretty to observe, how the King Disciplines this great City, by small
instances of Obedience. He caused them to take down all their Signs at once,
and not to advance them above a foot or two from the Wall, nor to exceed such a
small measure of square; which was readily done: So that the Signs obscure not
the Streets at all, and make little or no figure, as though there were none;
being placed very high and little.

Hostels.
There are great number of Hostels in Paris, by which word is meant Public
Inns, where Lodgings are Let; and also the Noblemen and Gentlemen's Houses are
so called, mostly with Titles over the Gate in Letters of Gold on a Black
Marble. This seems, as it were to denote, that they came at first to Paris as
Strangers only, and Inn'd publicly; but at length built them Inns or Houses of
their own. It Is certain, a great and wealthy City cannot be without People of
Quality; nor such a Court as that of France without the daily Inspection of
what such People do. But whether the Country can spare them or not, I question.
The People of England seem to have less Manners and less Religion, where the
Gentry have left them wholly to themselves; and the Taxes are raised with more
difficulty, inequality, and injustice, than when the Landlords live upon the
Desmaines.

The City rebuilt.
It may very well he, that Paris is in a manner a new City within this 40 years.
It Is certain since this King came to the Crown, it is so much altered for the
better, that it is quite another thing; and if it be true what the Workmen told
me, that a common House built of Rough Stone and Plaistered over, would not
last above 25 years, the greatest part of the City has been lately rebuilt. In
this Age certainly most of the great Hostels are built or re-edified; in like
manner the Convents, the Bridges and Churches, the Gates of the City; add the
great alteration of the Streets, the Keys upon the River, the Pavements; all
these have had great additions, or are quite new.

Boats upon the River.
In the River amongst the Bridges, both above and below, are a vast number of
Boats, of Wood, Hay, Charcoal, Corn and Wine, and other Commodities. But when a
sudden Thaw comes, they are often in danger of being split and crushed to pieces
upon the Bridges; which also are sometimes ruined by them. There have been
great Losses to the Owners of such Boats and Goods.

It has been proposed to dig near the City a large Basin for a Winter Harbor;
but this has not had the face of Profit to the Government; so they are still
left to execute their own Project. There are no Laws or Projects so effectual
here, as what bring Profit to the Government. Farming is admirably well
understood here.

Lawyers.
Amongst the Living Objects to be seen in the Streets of Paris, the Counselors
and Chief Officers of the Courts of Justice make a great Figure; They and their
Wives have their Trains carried up; so there are abundance to be seen walking
about the Streets in this manner. It Is for this that places of that nature sell
so well. A Man that has a right to qualify a Wife with this Honor, shall
command a Fortune; and the carrying a great Velvet Cushion to Church is such
another business. The Place of a Lawyer is valued a Third part dearer for this.

Monks.
Here are also daily to be seen in the Streets great variety of Monks, in
strange unusual Habits to us Englishmen: These make an odd Figure, and furnish
well a Picture. I cannot but pity the mistaken Zeal of these poor Men; that put
themselves into Religion, as they call it, and renounce the World, and give
themselves most severe Rules of Living and Diet; some of the Orders are
decently enough Clothed, as the Jesuits, the Fathers of the Oratory, etc. but
most are very particular and obsolete in their Dress, as being the Rustic Habit
of old times, without Linen, or Ornaments of the present Age.

As to their Meager Diet, it is much against Nature, and the improved Diet of
Mankind. The Mosaic Law provided much better for Jews, a chosen People; That
was instituted for cleanliness and health. Now for the Christian Law, though it
commands Humility and Patience under Sufferings, and Mortification and
Abstinence from Sinful Lusts and Pleasures; yet by no means a distinct Food,
but liberty to eat any thing whatsoever, much less nastiness; and the Papists
themselves in other things are of this mind; for their Churches are clean,
pompously adorned and perfumed. It Is enough, if we chance to suffer
Persecution, to endure it with Patience, and all the miserable Circumstances
that attend it; but wantonly to persecute our selves, is to do violence to
Christianity, and to put our selves in a worse state than the Jews were; for to
choose the worst of Food, which is sour Herbs and Fish, and such like Trash,
and to lie worse always rough, in course and nasty Woollen Frocks upon Boards;
To go Barefoot in a cold Country, to deny themselves the Comforts of this Life,
and the Conversation of Men; This, I say, is to hazard our Healths, to renounce
the greatest Blessings of this Life, and in a manner to destroy our selves.
These Men, I say, cannot but be in the main Chagrin, and therefore as they are
out of humor with the World, so they must in time be weary of such slavish and
fruitless Devotion, which is not attended with an active Life.

The great multitude of poor Wretches in all parts of this City is such, that a
Man in a Coach, a-foot, in the Shop, is not able to do any business for the
numbers and importunities of Beggars; and to hear their Miseries is very
lamentable; and if you give to one, you immediately bring a whole swarm upon
you. These, I say, are true Monks, if you will, of God Almighties making,
offering you their Prayers for a Farthing, that find the evil of the day
sufficient for the day, and that the Miseries of this Life are not to be
courted, or made a mock of; These Worship much against their will all rich Men,
and make Saints of the rest of Mankind for a Morsel of Bread.

But let these Men alone with their mistaken Zeal; it is certainly God's good
Providence which orders all things in this World. And the Flesh Eaters will
ever defend themselves, if not beat the Lenten Men; good and wholesome Food, and
plenty of it, gives Men naturally great Courage. Again, a Nation will sooner be
Peopled by the free Marriage of all sorts of People, than by the additional
stealth of a few starved Monks, supposing them at any time to break their Vow.
This limiting of Marriage to a certain People only is a deduction and an
abatement of Mankind, not less in a Papist Country, than a constant War. Again,
this lessens also the number of God's Worshippers, instead of multiplying them
as the Stars in the Firmament, or the Sand upon the Sea Shore; These Men
wilfully cut off their Posterity, and reduce Gods Congregation for the future.

Public Cries.
There is very little noise in this City of Public Cries of things to be sold,
or any Disturbance from Pamphlets and Hawkers. One thing I wondered at, that I
heard of nothing lost, nor any public Advertisements, till I was showed
Printed Papers upon the Corners of Streets, wherein were in great Letters, Un,
Deux, Cinq, Dix jusque a Cinquante Louisse a gagner, that is, from One to Fifty
Louises to be got; and then underneath an account of what was lost. This sure
is a good and quiet way; for by this means without noise you often find your
Goods again; every body that has found them repairing in a day or two to such
places. The Gazettes come out but once a week, and but few People buy them.

It Is difficult and dangerous to vend a Libel here. While we were in Town, a
certain Person gave a Bundle of them to a blind Man, a Beggar of the Hospital
of the Quincevint, telling him he might get five pence for every penny; he went
to Nostredame, and cried them up in the Service time, La vie and Miracles de
Evesque de Reims. This was a Trick that was played the Archbishop, as it was
thought, by the Jesuits, with whom he has had a great Contest about Molinas the
Spanish J. Doctrines. The Libel went off at any Rate, when the first Buyers had
read the Title further, and found they were against the present Archbishop,
Duke and first Peer of France.

Streets Lighted.
The Streets are lighted alike all the Winter long, as well when the Moon
shines, as at other times of the Month; which I remember the rather, because of
the impertinent usage of our People at London, to take away the Lights for half
of the Month, as though the Moon was certain to shine and light the Streets,
and that there could be no Cloudy Weather in Winter. The Lanthorns here hang
down in the very middle of all the Streets, about 20 paces distance, and 20
foot high. They are made of a square of Glass about 2 foot deep, covered with a
broad Plate of Iron; and the Rope that lets them down, is secured and locked up
in an Iron Funnel and little Trunk fastened into the Wall of the House. These
Lanthorns have Candles of 4 in the pound in them, which last burning till after
midnight.

As to these Lights, if any Man break them, he is forthwith sent to the
Galleys; and there were 3 young Gentlemen of good Families, who were in Prison
for having done it in a Frolic, and could not be released thence in some
Months; and that not without the diligent Application of good Friends at Court.

The Lights at Paris for 5 Months in the year only, cost near 50000 l.
Sterling. This way of Lighting the Streets is in use also in some other Cities
in France. The King is said to have raised a large Tax by it. In the Preface to
the Tax it is said, That considering the great danger his Subjects were in, in
Walking the Streets in the Dark, from Thieves, and the breaking their Necks by
falls, he for such a Sum of Money did grant this Privilege, that they might
hang out Lanthorns in this manner.

Streets clean.
I have said, that the Avenues to the City, and all the Streets, are paved with
a very hard Sand Stone, about 8 Inches square; so they have a great care to
keep them clean; in Winter, for Example, upon the melting of the Ice, by a
heavy drag with a Horse, which makes a quick riddance and cleaning the Gutters;
so that in a days time all parts of the Town are to admiration clean and neat
again to walk on.

I could heartily wish their Summer cleanliness was as great; it is certainly
as necessary to keep so populous a City sweet; but I know no Machine
sufficient, but what would empty it of the People too; all the Threats and
Inscriptions upon Walls are to little purpose. The Dust in London in Summer is
oftentimes, if a Wind blow, very troublesome, if not intolerable; in Paris
there is much less of it, and the reason is, the flat Stones require little
Sand to set them fast, whereas our small Pebles, not coming together, require a
vast quantity to lay them fast in Paving.

Statues Equestres.
But from the People in the Streets, to the dead Ornaments there: There are an
infinite number of Busto's of the Grand Monarque every where put up by the
Common People; but the Noble Statues are but few, considering the Obsequious
Humor and Capacity of the People to perform.

That in the Place-Victoire is a-foot in Brass all over gilt; with Victoire;
that is, a vast Winged Woman close behind his Back, holding forth a Laurel
Crown over the Kings Head, with one Foot upon a Globe. There are great
exceptions taken at the Gilding by Artists; and, indeed the shining seems to
spoil the Features, and give I know not what confusion; it had better have been
all of Gold brassed over; which would have given its true Lights and Shaddows,
and suffered the Eye to judge of the proportions. But that which I like not in
this, is the great Woman perpetually at the Kings Back; which is a sort of
Embarras, and instead of giving Victory, seems to tire him with her Company.
The Roman Victory was a little Puppit in the Emperors Hand, which he could
dispose of at pleasure; This Woman is enough to give a Man a Surfeit.

The other are Statuae Equestres, of 3 of the last Kings of France, in Brass a
Horseback.

That on the Pont-neuf is of Henry the Fourth in his Armor bare-headed, and
Habited as the Mode of that time was.

The other of Lewis the Thirteenth in the Place-Royal, Armed also after the
Mode of the Age, and his Plume of Feathers on his Headpiece.

The 3d is of this present King Louis the Fourteenth, and designed for the
Place Vendosme. This Colossus of Brass is yet in the very place where it was
cast; it is surprisingly great, being 22 foot high, the Foot of the King 26
inches in length, and all the proportions of him and the Horse suitable. There
was 100000 pound weight of Metal melted, but it took not up above 80000
pounds; it was all cast at once, Horse and Man. Mons. Girardon told me, he
wrought diligently, and with almost daily application at the Model 8 years, and
there were two years more spent in the Moulding, and Furnaces, and Casting of
it. The King is in the Habit of a Roman Emperor, without Stirrups or Saddle,
and on his Head a French large Periwig A-lamode. Whence this great Liberty of
Sculpture arises, I am much to seek.

It Is true, that in building precisely to follow the ancient manner and
simplicity is very commendable, because all those Orders were founded upon good
Principles in Mathematics; but the Clothing of an Emperor, was no more, than
the weak fancy of the People. For Louis le Grand to be thus dressed up at the
head of his Army now adays would be very Comical. What need other Emblems,
when Truth may be had; as though the present Age need be ashamed of their
Modes, or that the Statua Equestris of Henry the Fourth, or Louis the
Thirteenth, were the less to be valued for being done in the true Dress of
their times. It seems to me to be the effect of Mistaken Flattery, but if
regarded only as a Piece of mere Art, it is methinks very unbecoming, and has
no Graceful Air with it.

I remember I was at the Levee of King Charles the Second, when 3 Models were
brought him, to choose one of, in order to make his Statue for the Court at
Windsor; he chose the Roman Emperors Dress, and caused it also to be executed
in that other erected for him in the Old Exchange in London. The like is of K.
J. in Whitehall, at Chelsey-Colledge, our Invalides. Now I appeal to all
Mankind, whether in representing a living Prince now adays these naked Arms
and Legs are decent, and whether there is not a barbarity very displeasing in
it. The Father of these two Kings, Charles the First, was the Prince of this
Age of the best Relish, and of a sound Judgment, particularly in Painting,
Sculpture, Architecture by Sea and Land, witness the vast Sum of Money he
bestowed upon Rubens and his Disciple Vandyke. Also the great Esteem he had for
the incomparable Inigo Jones, who was the first Englishman in this Age that
understood Building. I heard Auzout say, when he had viewed the
Banqueting House at Whitehall, that it was preferable to all the Buildings on
this side the Alps; and I ought to believe him, he having studied Vitruvius
more than 40 years together mostly upon the place and at Rome. Also the Ship
the Sovereign, which was truly the Noblest floating Castle that ever swam the
Sea. Yet after all this, that King had a Statua Equestris of himself erected,
now at Charingcross, cast in the full Habit of his own time, and which I think
may compare with the best of that sort at Paris.

I should beg Leave in the next place to visit the Palaces and Men of Letters
and Conversation; but I must take notice first of the vast Expenses that are
here in Iron Balastrades, as in the Place-Royal, which Square is compassed
about with one of 10 foot high; Of this sort and better there are infinite
every where in Paris; which gives indeed a full view of the beauty of their
Gardens and Courts.

P. Mazarin.
First, therefore, I saw the Palais Mazarin, in which are many good Pictures,
but the Low Gallery is furnished with a great Collection of Ancient Greek and
Roman Statues, and is what I most took notice of; They were most brought from
Rome by the Cardinal. Those which are Togatae and Clothed, are as they were
found; but such as were made Nudae, are miserably disguised by the fond Humor
of the Duke de Mazarin, who in a hot Fit of Devotion caused them to be
castrated and mangled, and then frocked them by a sad Hand with I know not what
Plaster of Paris, which makes them very ridiculous. Cicero somewhere tells us,
that some of the ancient Wise Men thought there was nothing naturally obscene,
but that every thing might be called by its own Name; but our Celsus is of
another mind, and begs Pardon, being a Roman, that he writ of those Matters in
his own Tongue. It Is certain upon our Subject, the Duke should not have
furnished his Cabinet and Gallery with Naked Pictures, but with the Togatae
only; or if it had once pleased him to do otherwise, he should not have
Clothed them; which was at best but a vain Ostentation of his Chastity, and
betrayed his ignorance and dislike of good things; that is, spoils and hides
the noble Art of the Sculpture, for which only they are valuable.

But why should Nudity be so offensive, since a very great part of the World
yet defies Clothes, and ever did so; and the parts they do most affect to
cover, is from a certain necessity only.

It Is plain by these and many other Elegant Statues I saw at Versailles, most
of which were taken out hence, that the Roman Clothing was the most simple
thing imaginable, and that a Roman was as soon undressed as I can put off my
Gloves and Shoes. The Men and Women went dressed much alike; As for the fashion
of the Roman Habit, it is evident by these ancient Statues, (which Oct.
Ferrarius has well and reasonably followed in explicating the several Garments
of the Ancients) that the Tunica or Shirt was without a Collar or Sleeves, and
girt high up under the Breasts; also, that the Toga or Gown was a wide and long
Garment open at both ends, and let down over the Head, and supported by the
Left Hand thrust under the Skirts of it, whilst the top of it rested upon the
left Shoulder; The Right Hand and Arm was naked, and above the Gown, so that
the Gown was ungirt and always loose. Now for the purpose, when a Roman made
himself naked for the Bath, (as he daily did just before eating) he had nothing
to do but to draw up his Left Hand, and the Gown fell down at his Feet; and at
the same time to loose the Girdle of the Tunica, and to draw up both his Arms
from under the Tunica, and that also fell at his Feet.

In the first Ages of the Commonwealth they wore a Toga or Gown only,
afterward they put on next the Skin a Tunica or Shirt, and never added more in
the very Splendor and Luxury of the Empire; all other Matters of Clothing, of
what nature soever, have been invented since.

I much admired, that in the great numbers of ancient Statues to be seen in and
about Paris, I could never meet any one but what was Clothed with a Toga pura,
and no representation of a Bullated one.

This Toga and Tunica both were made of fine white Wool, or Flannel: They had
not a Rag of Linen about them. This Flannel, I say, was very fine, for the
folds are small, and it falls into them easily; and seems to be very light, by
the handling of it, to raise it by the Finger and Thumb only, as is the Air of
some of the Statues, and the whole Garment to be suspended by the left
Shoulder: Upon the least straining of it, the Breasts and Nipples are visible
through it; also the proportions of the Thighs.

This wearing all Woollen in a hot Country, brought on the use and necessity of
frequent Bathing, otherwise they could never have kept themselves sweet and
clean; and the necessity of Bathing kept them to this sort of loose Garment;
and much Bathing brought in Oils, and Oils Perfumes infused in them.

But in my mind a fair Linen Shirt every day is as great a preservative to
Neatness and Cleaness of the Skin and Health, as daily Bathing was to the
Romans. It Is certain, had they not used either simple Oils of Olives, sometimes
unripe and old, for the astringency, and sometimes ripe and perfumed, the warm
Water must have much decayed Nature, and made the Skin intolerable tender and
wrinkled. The Naked Indians and Blacks secure their Skins by Oils at this day
from all the injuries of the Weather, both from Heat and Cold.

But the best Rule of Health and long Life is to do little to our selves:
People are not aware what inconveniences they bring upon themselves by custom,
how they will plead for things long used, and make that pleasant which is very
destructive to their Healths; as in the Case of Clothing, Tobacco, Strong
Waters, Steel Remedies, the Drinking Mineral Waters, Bathing, Tea, Coffee,
Chocolate, etc.

One little Statue I took more particular notice of, for the elegance of the
Sculpture, and the humor of the Dress; it stood upon a Table; it was the
Figure of a Sybil: The Face of the old Woman was cut very deep into the Stone,
within the Quoifure, like a Hood pulled over the Forehead, a very Emblem of an
Oracle, which is hid, dark, and ambiguous, as the Woman her self, who would
have neither her Face seen, nor her Saying easily understood; that is, she is
as it were ashamed of her Cheat.

What was the fancy of the Men of the first Ages to make Old Women
Prophetesses, to utter Oracles, and to interpret the Will of the Gods by the
eating of Animals. To make them Sagae and Veneficae is reasonable enough; for
old Age makes all People spiteful, but more the weaker Sex; To Poison and
Bewitch are the secret Revenges of Impotent People.

The Jews were impatient of the Company of Women in their Religious Rites, lest
they should contaminate and spoil all their Devotion. The Romans on the
contrary thought Religion became Women better than Men, for besides the general
parts they had in common with the Men in Adoration of their Gods, they had also
peculiar ones, where the Men were not concerned. Tully bids his Wife supplicate
the Gods for him; for he tells her, he thought they would be kinder to her than
him. Upon some such Principle, probably, their Prophetesses were in esteem.

M. Viviers.
I saw the Apartment of Monsieur Viviers in the Arsenal; it consists in 7 or 8
Ground Rooms looking into the great Garden; These Rooms are small, but most
curiously furnished, and have in them the greatest variety, and best sorted
China Ware I ever saw, besides Pagods and China Pictures. Also elegant and rich
Bureaus, Book-Cases, and some Paintings of the best Masters.

That which pleased me most, amongst the Paintings, were the Pieces of
Rambramts, that incomparable Dutch Painter.

A Girl with a Cage in one Hand, and looking up after the Bird that had got
out, and was flying away over her Head: She had Fright, Amazement, and Sorrow
in her Looks. The other is an unlucky Lad leaning upon a Table, and looking
with Mischief in his Eyes, or that he watched to do some unhappy turn. The 3d is
a young Gentleman in a Fur Cap en dishabille, after his wonted manner. The two
first are the most natural Thoughts and Dress that can be; but nothing
certainly ever came near his coloring for Flesh and Garments: This part he
studied passionately all his Life, and was ever trying Experiments about it;
and with what success, these and many other Pieces show.

These Three Pictures of Rambrant are all of young People, and are finished with
all the art and perfection of Coloring, as smooth as any Limning; which makes
the Judgment of Philbien of him appear not just, for he fitted his Paint
according to the Age and Nature of the Subjects he wrought. I had the pleasure
of seeing them again and again.

M. le Nostre.
Monsieur le Nostre's Cabinet, or Rooms wherein he keeps his fine things, the
Controller of the Kings Gardens, at the side of the Tuilleries, was worth
seeing. He is a very ingenious old Gentleman, and the Ordinance and Design of
most of the Royal and great Gardens in and about Paris are of his Invention,
and he has lived to see them in perfection. This Gentleman is 89 years old, and
quick and lively. He Entertained me very Civilly. There were in the 3
Appartments, into which it is divided, (the uppermost of which is an Octogon
Room with a Dome) a great Collection of choice Pictures, Porcellans, some of
which were Jars of a most exraordinary size; some old Roman Heads and Busto's,
and entire Statues; a great Collection of Stamps very richly bound up in Books;
but he had lately made a Draught of his best Pictures, to the value of 50000
Crowns, and had presented them to the King at Versailles. There was not any
thing of Natural History in all his Cabinet.

I was several times with him, and once he carried me into an upper Closet,
where he had a great Collection of Medals in 4 Cabinets, most modern; amongst
them there were 4 large Drawers, 3 of which were the Medals of King William,
near 300; The 4th Drawer was of King William's Ancestors and Family; he had
been 40 years in making this Collection, and had purchased many of them at vast
Rates. He has certainly the best Furniture for an Historia metallica, that I
ever saw. The French K. has a particular Kindness for him, and has greatly
inricht him, and no Man Talks with more freedom to him; he is much delighted
with his Humor, and will sit and see his Medals, and when he comes at any
Medal that makes against him, he will say, Sire, voyla une, qu' est bien contre
nous! as though the Matter pleased him, and he was glad to find it to show it
the King. Monsieur le Nostre spoke much of the good Humor of his Master; he
affirmed to me he was never seen in Passion, and gave me many Instances of
Occasions, that would have caused most Men to have raged; which yet he put by
with all the Temper imaginable.

In this Cabinet I saw many very rare old China Vessels, and amongst them a
small Roman Glass Vrn, very thick made, and ponderous, of a blue Sea color,
the two Ears were Feet divided into 4 Claws, but the very bottom of this Vessel
was smooth, and very little umbilicate; and for this reason I cannot tell
whether it might not be cast, and not blown.

Luxemburgh P.
The Palace of Luxemburgh is the most finished of all the Royal Buildings; it is
very magnificent, well designed, were it not for the triflng Intersections or
round and deep Jointings of the Columns, which looks like a Cheesemongers Shop,
and which is below the grandeur of the Orders, so hard a matter it is to have a
true Relish of the ancient Simplicity, and not to add impertinent Ornaments.
And to say the truth, there are not many things in Paris where this Chastity is
strictly preserved; amongst those, where little is to be blamed, are the South
East Front of the Louvre, the Facade of St. Gervais, and the whole Building of
Val de Grace. And this Wantonness in additional Ornaments may perhaps be one
reason, why the Doric is more practiced here at this day, the Modillions
naturally admitting greater variety, and according to the intended use of the
Building.

In this Palace is that famous Gallery, where the History of Maria of Medicis
is Painted by Rubens. Though this was done 70 years ago, it is as fresh as at
the first; so great a Master he was in Coloring. His Flesh is admirable, and
his Scarlet, for which, if he had not a secret, not now understood, he had less
Avarice, and more Honor, than most of our Modern Painters. It Is certain the
goodness of Colors was one of the great Cares and Studies of the late famous
Painters; and that which seems most to have obliged them to it, was the
necessity they put themselves upon, to Paint all their own Designs, and more
particularly the present Dresses. And though Rubens in his History is too much
a Libertine in this respect, yet there is in this very place, which we now
describe, much truth in the habit of his principal Figures, as of King Henry
the Fourth, the Queen, her Son, the 3 Daughters and the Cardinal; though indeed
the Allegoric assistants in all the Tableaux are very airy and fancifully set
out. His Scholar St. Aut. Vandyke did introduce this Novelty too much in
England, where the Persons would bear it; as the Female Sex were very willing
to do, who seem in his time to have been mighty fond of being Painted in
dishabille. 'Twas this that cut out of business the best English Painter of his
time, Cornelius Johnson, and shortened his Life by Grief. It is certain with a
little patience all Dress becomes dishabille; but I appeal, whether it is not
better and much more pleasing to see the old Fashion of a dead Friend, or
Relation, or of a Man of Distinction, Painted as he was, than a foppish
Nightgown, and odd Quoifure, which never belonged to the Person Painted.

But that which led me into this Reflection was, that the Modern Painters have
hereby an opportunity to be idle, and to have others to work under them; it is
sufficient to finish the Face, and to send it out to be Dressed at the Block;
whereas were they obliged in Honor to Paint the whole Dresses, this would make
them accurate in Coloring, through the great variety which would daily occur,
and and that noble Art be in a far greater esteem.

A good Artist might easily reduce it, and command the Purses of those he
Paints, to pay well for his labor and time, for it is the lot but of very few
Men to excel in this Noble Art.

In the Antichamber of the Queens Apartment there are other Paintings of
Rubens, as, in 3 distinct Tableaux, at the upper end of the Room the Ceremonies
of the Marriages of her 3 Daughters, to Savoy, Spain, and England. Also in an
other Historical Tableaux, on the side of the same Room, he has Painted his own
Picture, in a very free and easy posture, next the Eye, up in the very corner,
looking out, as unconcerned in his own Tableaux, upon the 3 Ladies. He has done
his Wife in some of the Tableaux in the great Gallery; but in the last, where
the Queen is mounting up to Heaven, she is drawn up after her; but whether it
be her full and heavy Body, or her Mind, she is Painted in a very unwilling
posture, bending back: It seems her Husband liked her Company too well to part
with her easily, or she with him.

Several of the Rooms of this Apartment were Wainscoted with Cedar, wrought in
Flowers, as her Dressing Room and Oratory; which is rare in Paris. The Floors
were made of small Wood put together in Figures, the inward Knots were inlaid
with Threads of Silver, which have a mavelous effect; but the firmness,
duration, and intireness of these Floors, after so long laying, I most admired:
whereas with us in London, and elsewhere in Paris, they prove so noisy to tread
on, and faulty, that they are in a few years intolerable.

The Louvre.
It Is pity the King has so great an aversion to the Louvre, which if finished,
(which he might easily do in 2 or 3 years) would be the most Magnificent
Palace, perhaps, that ever was upon the Face of the Earth; and, indeed, without
that be done, Paris will never arrive at its full Beauty.

There are two Stones in the Fronton of the South East Facade of the Louvre,
which are showed to all Strangers, covering the very top of it, as Slates do,
and meet in an angle. These are very big, viz. 54 foot long a-piece, 8 foot
broad, and but 14 inches thick: The raising so high these two vast and tender
Stones was looked upon as a Masterpiece of Art, equalling any thing of the
Ancients of that Nature. They were taken out of the Quarries of Meudon, where
Monseigneur the Dauphin dwells.

I saw in the Galleries of the Louvre some of the Battles of Alexander by Le
Brun; which are by the French the most admired Pieces of Painting that have
been (say they) done by any Man on this side the Alps; and of which they are
not a little proud.

Also a large Piece of Paulo Verenese, presented by the Senate of Venice to the
King.

I cannot pass by unmentioned the vast number of great Cases in one of the
Galleries, wherein are the Play things or Puppets of the Dauphin, when a Child:
They represent a Camp in all its parts, and cost 50000 Crowns.

But, indeed, that which most surprised me in the Louvre was the Artellier or
Workhouse of Monsieur Gerardon; he that made Cardinal Richelieu's Tomb, and
the Statua Equestris designed for the Place de Vendosme; he told me he had been
almost 10 years in making the Model with assiduity and daily application.

He has in the Louvre also two Rooms, in one are ancient Marble Statues, and
in the other are Brass Statues and Vasa, and a 100 other things relating to
Antiquity: There is nothing in Paris deserves more to be seen.

In this last, I saw a sort of Egyptian Janus, with Silenus on one side, and a
Bacchus on the other; With many other Egyptian Figures well designed; all of
them with a hole in the Crown of the Head.

Also a Lion of Egypt very large of Brass; but the design rude, and more like
an Indian Pagod. This also had a large square hole in the Back, near the Neck.
The Siamites that came in an Embassiy to Paris, were well pleased to see this
Figure, and said, it was not unlike one of theirs; and that that hole served to
put the Incense in, that the Smoke might come out of the Body and Nostrils of
the Lion. I doubt not but that also was the use of the open Crowns of the rest
of the Egyptian Figures, which I had seen elsewhere, as well as here; and
their Heads served for Perfuming Pots for themselves: and hence also might
arise, that other Ornament of Radiated Heads; as this here, of a bright Flame,
casting Rays out of and round the Head.

There was also a small Image of a Lean Man, Cast bent, in a sitting Posture,
with a roll of Parchment spread open upon his Knees, and he looking down upon
it, Reading it. This was of Solid Brass, the Head and all: This was found
enclosed in a Mummy. He seemed to have a thin Linen Garment on, perhaps such
as the Egyptian Priests used to wear.

Also he showed us the Mummy of a Woman entire: The scent of the Hand was to me
not unpleasant; but I could not liken it to any Perfume now in use with us;
though I make no question, but Naptha was the great Ingredient; which indeed is
so unusual a Smell, that the Mineral Waters of Hogsden near London, (wherein
the true Naptha is Substantially, and of which I have some Ounces by me,
gathered off of those Waters) have imposed upon the ignorant in Natural
History; who would make them come from a chance Turpentine Effusion, or the
Miscarriage of a Chemical Experiment.

Here were also great variety of Vrns and Funeral Vasa of all Materials and
Fashions.

Also an ancient Writing-Pen coil'd up, with two ends erected both a-like,
representing the Head of a Snake.

The Ancient Heads and Busto's in Brass are numerous and of great value. This
Gentleman is exceeding Courteous to all Strangers; especially to such as have
the least good relish of Things of this Nature, to whom he shows them gladly.
It cannot be otherwise, that a Man Educated in that Noble Art of Sculpture, who
shall daily study so great a variety of Originals of the best Masters, but must
far excel the rest of Mankind, who practice without good Example, and by fancy
mostly.

Monsieur Boudelet.
I was to see Monfieur Boudelot, whose Friendship I highly value: I received
great Civilities from him. He is well known by his Books about the Vtility of
Voyages: He has a very choice and large Collection of Books of Greek and Roman
Learning. I made him several Visits, and had the pleasure of perusing his
Cabinet of Coins, and small Images of Copper, which are many and of good value;
as Egyptian, Phrygian, Grecian, and Roman.

Amongst his Egyptian, the most curious was a Deus Crepitus of admirable
Workmanship, with a Radiated Crown: It was an Aethyopian, and therefore bespoke
its great Antiquity, for they very usually represented their Kings under the
Figures of their Gods.

There was also the Skeleton of a Woman of solid Copper, found in the Body of a
Mummy, in a sitting Posture; not unlike that other mentioned above in Monsieur
Girardon's Closet.

An Apis or a Heifer in Copper.

A Phrygian Priapus of Elegant Workmanship: The Phrygian Cap pointed and
hanging down behind, as our Caps in Dishabillie are now worn.

Of all which, and many more, this Learned Antiquary intends to write.

In his Cabinet of Medals I could not find one of Palmyra, for which I
carefully enquired; for I was willing to add what could be found in France upon
this Subject.

He has also many Marbles from Greece; most of which have been published by
Spon; save one, and that is the most Ancient and most Curious of all;
concerning which he is ready to publish a Dissertation. It Is a Catalogue in
Three Columns, of the Names of the most principal Persons of Erectheis, one of
the chiefest Tribes of Attica, that were killed in one and the same year in
five several Places, where the Athenians fought under two Generals, as in
Cyprus, in Egypt, in Phaenitia, in Aegina, in Halies. Here are 177 Names in
the 3 Columns. See Table I.

The Mautis closes the Column, he died in Egypt, that is, the Physician;
Magic and Physic went together in those days; nay, the very Comedians and
Poets, those necessary Men of Wit, fought, for none were exempt from being
Enrolled that were Born in the Kingdom or Republic of Attica.

The Antiquity of this Marble, besides the known History and Names which
justify the time of those Men: The Figure of the Letters are an undoubted
Argument; for there are no double Letters here; no e, no o, but all graved with
e, o; also the Letters, L, P, P, R, S, are very Roman. So that it is also an
Evidence, that the Romans borrowed their Letters from the Ancient Greek
Alphabet.

The Invention and Borrowing of Letters was a great Happiness to Mankind. The
Embarras in which Writing is in China, is owing to the Misfortune of wanting an
Alphabet; so that the Chinese are forced to express every Sentence and Thought
by a different Character, which has multiplied their Writing to 120000
Characters; of which yet they have less need than we in Europe, who perform all
with 24 Letters, (whereof 5 add life to the other 19, says Hippocrates, which
is an Argument of the Age he writ in, the Knowledge of Grammar, i. e. Reading
and Writing, depends upon seven Figures, de Dieta. 1.) the Chinese know much
less than we; they have no other Morals, they have less Philosophy, less
Mathematics, fewer Arts, and yet much narrower Knowledge of Natural History,
because they can know but of that, which they have at home: In what therefore
should they employ this multitude of Characters! It Is, I say, their Misfortune
not to have Thought of an Alphabet: Their common Language is as easily learnt,
and consequently might as easily be writ, as any in Europe.

But to return to Monsieur Budelot's Stores. In this Cabinet I also saw some
Basse-Relieves: One of Praxiteles well designed; one of Musos the Comoedian:
Amongst the rest of the Marbles there is a Basse-Relief, very extant, and
finely finished, of a Cupid asleep, leaning his Head upon his Left Arm; In his
Hand he holds two Poppy Heads. It Is probable the Poppies were Emblimatique from
the Power they have in Love-Affairs. Indeed, most Poisons affect those Parts
chiefly, being the great Sluice of the Habit of the Body, or Circle of the
Blood; and no People use Poppy more, and stand more in need of it, than the Men
who delight in Polygamy, the Mahometans, or understand it better; as Olearius
testifies.

He had an Antic Busto of Zenobia in Marble, with a thick Radiated Crown; of
which he very obligingly gave me a Copy, well designed from the Original: This
was brought out of Asia by Monsieur Thevenot.

He showed me a Dissertation he had written out fair for the Press, about a
certain Ancient Intaglia of Madames, of Ptolomaeus Auletes, or the Player upon
the Flute: In this the thin Mufler is the most remarkable Thing, which covers
the Mouth and Nose. This Head is Ingraved upon an Amithyst.

I enjoyed this Gentleman's Company very often; and had much Discourse with him
about his Books of the Vtility of Voyages; and in one Conversation took the
freedom to Dissent from him about the Interpretation of that Coin in Monsieur
Seguin, which he calls Britannick.

Monsieur Boudelot reads it thus, Jovi Victori Saturnalia Io! or Jovi Victoria
Sat. Io!

I had rather read it thus, Io! Sat. Victoriae Io! upon the occasion of his
returning with the Soldiers, filling their Head-Pieces with the Shells they
had gathered off of the Seashore; and the little use of his new invented
Letter the Digamma, which he instituted or borrowed from the Eolique to express
V Consonant.

The Shells were a Triumph much like this small addition to the Alphabet; which
lasted no longer than his time: that is, Victory enough, (for so stupid a
Prince as Claudius) Let Us return with the Spoils of the Ocean, and Adorn his
new invented Letter with a Palm-Branch; the Reverse of this Coin being a
Lawrel-Crown: Both the Signs of Victory.

About the Boustrophedon way of Writing, mentioned by Suidas and Pausanias, or
turning again as the Ox Plows, or the Racers about the Meta in the Cirque, in
my Opinion it could be nothing else, but the Serpentine manner of Writing found
in Swedeland in Runique Letters.

He showed me also a Stone taken lately out of the Body of a Horse at Paris,
which was his Death; and dying strangely, they Dissected him, that is, certain
Ignorant People; in the lower part of the Body, (probable the Bladder) was
found this Stone: It weighs, as I guess, two Pound; it is as round as a Cannon
Ball; it is laminated like an Onion; for the first Couche was broken up in some
Places, of a dark Hair color, and transparent; or like some Cloudy Agats which
I have seen: It was very ponderous. Such like Transparent Stones I had a
Patient voided often in Yorkshire. I saw another Transparent one, which was cut
out of the Buttock of an Alderman at Doncaster; he was twice cut in the same
place, at some years distance. Another I had in some measure transparent,
voided by a Patient, which was of the very color of a Coffee-Berry when burnt;
but of this Stone Monsieur Boudelot writ me a Letter before I left Paris, which
I design to publish.

Observatoire.
I was by Invitation from Monsieur Cassini at the Observatoire Royal, built on a
rising Ground just without the City Walls; This Building is very fine, and
great Art is used in the Vaulted Cut Roofs and Winding Staircases. The Stones
are laid inside, outside, with the most regularity I ever saw in any Modern
Building; In all this Building there is neither Iron nor Wood, but all firmly
covered with Stone, Vault upon Vault. The Platform a-top is very spacious, and
gives a large and fair view of all Paris, and the Country about it; it is
Paved with Black Flint in small squares, which I make no doubt are set in
Cement or Tarras, that is, the Pulvis Puteolanus.

We were showed a Room well furnished with Models of all sorts of Machines; and
a very large Burning Glass, about 3 foot diameter, which at that time of the
year, viz. in the beginning of February, did fire Wood into a flame, in the
very moment it came into and past through the Focus.

I was indisposed, and so could not accept of the Favor which was offered me
of seeing the Moon in their Telescopes; and to go down into the Vault, which
was contrived for seeing the Stars at Noontide, but without success. I was told
by Monsieur Roman afterward, that there was a Rock formed in the Cave by the
dropping of a Spring of Petrifying Water; of which Nature are all the Wells in
Paris.

In the Flore of one of the Octogone Towers they have designed with great
accurateness and neatness with Ink an Universal Map in a vast Circle. The
Northpole is in the Center. This is a Correction of other Maps upon the latest
and best Observations.

His Nephew Monsieur Moraldi was with him; as for his only Son, he was in
London at that time: I afterward was with him at his Fathers, a very hopeful
young Gentleman, and well instructed by his Father in the Mathematics, and all
other useful Learning.

Triumphal Arch.
The Triumphal Arch out of the Gate of St. Antoine is well worth seeing; for in
this the French pretend not only to have imitated the Ancients, but to have
outdone them. They have indeed, used the greatest Blocks of Stone that could
be got, and have laid them without Mortar, and the least side outward, after
the manner of the Ancients; but I am afraid their Materials are very short of
the Roman, and their Stone is ill chose, though vastly great.

Indeed the Design is most Magnificent; it is finished in Plaster, that is, the
Model of it, in its full Beauty and Proportions.

I suppose it was intended for a Gate or Entrance into the City; for it fronts
the great Street of the Suburbs, and has a vast Walk planted with Trees leading
from it toward Bois de Vincennes.

There is nothing more built but the four Parts of the Foundation of the true
Building, raised only to the foot of the Pedestals; The Foundation is laid 22
foot deep.

Amongst the vast Blocks of Stone, which take up a great compass before the
Building, I found several sorts, all brought from the Quarries not far from
Paris; all of them are of a kind of course Grit, which will not burn into Lime.
They distinguish these Stones into 4 sorts; 1. Pierre d'arcueil, for the first
2 or 3 couches or lays above the Foundation; This is St. Clou, which is good,
and the next best. I did not find by the Blocks designed either for the Walls
of the Building; or the Rounds of the Pillars; that the Beds of Stone of St.
Clou are above two foot thick. 3. That of S. Lieu; this is but indifferent, but
yet much better then that Stone which is taken up out of the Stone Pits, in and
about Paris, which makes the 4th sort of Stone: If it be wrought up into Walls,
as it is taken out of the Pits, it is very apt to be flawed by the Frost; but
if it be laid in the Air, and kept under cover for two years, then it becomes
dry and more durable.

I saw but one Piece in Paris of the Ruins of an Old Roman Building; it was in
La Rue de la Harp. The Vaults are very high and large. The manner of Building
is near the same I formerly caused exactly to be figured and described at York,
and which is published in the Philosophic Transactions; That is, the inside and
outside of the Walls are composed of six Rows of small square Stones, and then
4 rows of flat, thin and broad Roman Bricks, and so alternatively from the top
to the bottom; Which makes it probable it was built after Severus's time, for
this was the African manner of Building, as Vitruvius tells us; and therefore
might well be, what Tradition here says of it, viz. part of Julian the
Emperor's Palace, or Thermae.

St. Innocents.
St. Innocents Churchyard, the public Burying-place of the City of Paris for
a 1000 years, when entire (as I once saw it) and built round with double
Galleries full of Skulls and Bones, was an awful and venerable sight; but now I
found it in Ruins, and the greatest of the Galleries pulled down, and a Row of
Houses built in their room, and the Bones removed I know not whether; The rest
of the Churchyard in the most neglected and nastiest pickle I ever saw any
Consecrated place. It Is all one, when Men, even the Roman Catholics have a
mind, or it is their interest, to unhallow things or places, they can do it with
a good stomach; and leave the Tombs of Chancellors and other great Men without
Company or Care. What no body gets by, no body is concerned to repair; but it is
strange amongst so many millions of dead Men, not one Wonder-working Saint
should start up to preserve it self and neighbors from Contempt and Scandal.
That so much Holy Earth, brought, as it is said, so far off, should never
produce one Saint, but rather spue up all its Inhabitants, to be thus shuffled
and dissipated.

Buco.
Amongst the many Cabinets of Paris there is nothing finer than the Collection
of Monsieur Buco, Gad-eroles du Parliament. You pass through a long Gallery, the
one side of which is a well furnished Library, and also well disposed in Wired
Cases. This Gallery leads into two Rooms very finely adorned with Pictures,
Vasa's, Statues and Figures in Brass, China, and the famous Ennamel Vessels,
formerly made in Poitu, which are not now to be had; and a thousand other
curious things.

I very particularly examined his large quantity of Shells, consisting in near
60 Drawers. There were indeed very many of a sort, and not many but what I had
seen before, and figured; He very obligingly lent me those I had not seen, to
have the designs of them done. He had many very perfect and large ones of Land
and Fresh Water Buccina; but yet a great number were wanting of those very
Tribes of what I have published.

Here were also 2 or 3 very fair ones of that sort of comprest Snail, which
have their Tail on the same side with their Mouth; and the Vulgar Name, by
which those Men of Cabinets distinguish them, is not amiss, viz. Des Lamps.

He showed me a Bivalve, which is not uncommon (in a large Blood red Spondile)
for which the late Duke of Orleans gave 900 Livres, which is above 50 l.
Sterling; and he also assured me, that the same Person offered a Parisian for
32 Shells 11000 Livres; which Sum was refused; but the Duke replied, That he
knew not who was the greater Fool, he that bid the Price, or the Man that
refused it.

I also saw in this Collection an Hippocampus about 4 inches long, the Tail
square, thick Bellied and Breast like a Miller Thumb, Winged not unlike a sort
of Flying Fish, but the Fins were spoiled, the Membranes being torn from the
Bones of the Wings, the Head long and square like the Tail, with a sort of
tufted Musle. This Fish I took to be of the Hippocampus Kind; and (as he told
me) it was given him by my Lady Portsmouth, possibly out of King Charles's
Collection, who had many curious Presents made him (as one of Shells from the
States of Holland, many of which I have seen in other Hands) but he suffered
them all to be dissipated and lost.

Here also was a Vespetum Canadense of a most elegant Figure, and admirable
Contrivance; of which I have a Drawing. This is entire in all its parts; it is
as big as a middle-sized Melon, Pear-fashion, with an edge running round where
it is thickest, from which edge it suddenly declines and lessens into a point;
at the very end of the point, on one side, is a little hole, with pulvinated or
smooth edges inclined inward; otherwise it is whole, and wrought upon the Twig
of a Tree, of a very smooth Sattin-like Skin. Table 1. Figure 1.

Also the Striated Skin of an African Ass, supple and well cured, which I had
never seen before. It is certainly a most beautiful Animal; and, I admire,
after so many Ages that it has been known to the People of Europe, it could
never be Tamed, and made of common use, as the rest of the Horse Kind. This was
only of two colors, viz. broad lists of White and Bay or Chestnut color drawn
from the Back down the Sides to the Belly, which was all White: The lists were
parted at the Back by a very narrow ridge of short Hair; which Lists also went
round the Legs like Garters. The Hair colored Stripes of the African Ass were,
near the Back, 3 or 4 Fingers broad, also the List down the Back was very broad.

Another Skin of a Cap-Ass I afterward saw at Dr. Turnfords; and the Stripes
were the same, but much broader and darker colored; it may be from the
different Ages. This sort of Striping seems to be peculiar to the Ass, for the
most common to be seen with us have all a Black List down the Back; and two
more, that is, on each side one, running down the Shoulders.

Dr. Turnfort.
I saw Monsieur Turnfort's Collection of Shells, which are well chosen, and not
above one or two of a sort; but very perfect and beautiful, and in good order,
consisting of about 20 Drawers.

There was amongst them a very large Land Shell, the same which I have figured
from the Musaeum at Oxford, having its turn from the right hand to the left.
Also many very excellent and large Paterns of other Land Snails; also a
Fresh Water Mussel from Brasil, which I had never seen before; a Pair of them
he gave me; and many Species of Fresh Water Buccina from the Carribe Islands.
Also an Auris Marina Spisse echinata; which was new to me.

Amongst the Shells the Thinn Oister, which shines within like Mother of Pearl,
and has in the uppermost end of the flat Valve, near the Hinge, a Hole. These
he brought with him, and took them up alive, from the Rocks in Spain; he said
they were very offensively bitter to the taste. These being perfect, I had the
opportunity of seeing that Hole shut with a peculiar and third Shell, of the
fashion of a Pouch or Shepherds Purse.

I shall say nothing of his vast Collection of Seeds and Fruits, and dried
Plants, which alone amount to 8000, and in this he equals, if not excells all
the most curious Herborists in Europe. His Herborisations about Paris he gave
me to carry for England, just then Printed off; also he showed me the Designs
of about 100 European Non Descript Plants, in 8 vo. which he intends next to
publish.

He also showed me 10 or 12 single Sheets of Vellom, on each of which were
Painted in Water Colors very lively, one single Plant, mostly in flower, by
the best Artist in Paris, at the King's Charge; Those are sent to Versailles,
when the Doctor has put the Names to them, and there kept: In this manner the
King has above 2000 rare Plants, and they work daily upon others: The Limner
has two Louis's for every Plant he Paints.

I saw there also the Vespetum Canadense Maximum, about 12 inches long, and 6
in diameter; of a Pear fashion; it hangs by a long and broad loop to the Twig
of a Tree; The broad or lower end is a little pointed, and rising in the
middle; The outward Skin is as smooth as Velom, and of a whitish gray, next to
the Pearl color. The Button at the bigger end in this being broken, and the
outward Skin pilled off, I could see a hole of about half an inch diameter in
the very middle, into which the Wasps go in and out; The Cells are sexangular,
but of a very small size, not much bigger then a Duck Quill, or very small
Goose Quill; and consequently appear very thick set and numerous. See the
Figure above.

He showed me also a very great Julus from Brasil, at least six inches long,
and two about, round like a Cord, very smooth and shining, of a kind of Copper
or Brazen color; The Feet infinite, like a double Fringe on each side: This he
had from F. Plumier, who afterward gave me a Design of it drawn by the Life,
and in its proper colors. Table 5.

Dr. Turnfort showed me a Present which was made him by his Country Man of
Provence, Monsieur Boyeur d'Aguilles, of a large Book in Folio of curious
Stamps. This is only the first part of his Cabinet, all Graved at the Author's
Charge; and he is said to be another Peiresk, which would be happy for Mankind,
and a great Honor to that Country to have produced two Moecena's in one Age.

Verney.
I was to see Monsieur Verney at his Apartment at the upper-end of the Royal
Physic Garden; but missing my Visit, went up, with a young Gentleman of my
Lord Ambassador's Retinue, to see Mr. Bennis, who was in the Dissecting Room,
working by himself upon a Dead Body, with his Breast and Belly gutted: There
were very odd things to be seen in the Room. My Companion, it being morning,
and his Senses very quick and vigorous, was strangely surprised and offended;
and retired down the Stairs much faster than he came up: And indeed, a private
Anatomy Room is to one not accustomed to this kind of Manufacture, very
irksome, if not frightful: Here a Basket of Dissecting Instruments, as Knives,
Saws, etc. And there a Form with a Thigh and Leg flayed, and the Muscles parted
asunder: On another Form an Arm served after the same manner: Here a Trey full
of Bits of Flesh, for the more minute Discovery of the Veins and Nerves; and
every where such discouraging Objects. So, as if Reason, and the good of
Mankind did not put Men upon this Study, it could not be endured: for Instinct
and Nature most certainly abhors the Employment.

Monsieur Merry.
I saw Monsieur Merry, a most painful and accurate Anatomist, and free and
communicative Person, at his House Rue de la Princess. His Cabinet consisted
of two Chambers: In the outward were great variety of Skeletons; also entire
Preparations of the Nerves; in two of which he showed me the mistake of Willis,
and from thence gathered, that he was not much used to Dissect with his own
Hand: The Pia Matter coating the Spinal Nerves but half way down the Back, where
it ends: The Dura Matter coating the lowermost 20 pair; which, Willis, (as he
said) has otherwise reported.

But that which much delighted my Curiosity, was the Demonstration of a blown
and dried Heart of a Foetus; also the Heart of a Tortoise.

In the Heart of a Foetus, he showed it quite open, and he would have it that
there was no Valve to the Foramen Ovale; which seemed equally open from the
Left Ventricle to the Right, as the contrary; that it is Diameter well near
equalled that of the Aorta: That the two Arteries, which ascend up into the two
Lobes of the Lungs, (and are the Ramifications of the Pulmonick Artery, after
it has parted with the Canal of Communication, which goes betwixt the Pulmonick
Artery and the lower or descending Branch of the Aorta) both put together, far
exceed, if not double the Diameter of the Aorta it self.

He therefore, not without good Reason assirms, That of all the Blood which the
Vena Cava pours into the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and is thence in a
Foetus forced up into the Pulmonick Artery, a great part is carried by the
Canal of Communication into the descending Trunk of the Aorta, and is so
circulated about the Body, the Lungs (as to that part) being wholly slighted:
Also that of the two remaining thirds of the Blood, which is carried about the
Lungs, when it comes down the Pulmonick Vein, that which cannot be received by
the Aorta, (and all cannot, because the Aorta is much less than the two
Branches of the Pulmonick Artery put together) is therefore discharged back
through the Foramen Ovale, into the Right Ventricle of the Heart, and so thrown
up again with the rest of the Blood, coming from the Vena Cava. So that one
part of the two remaining parts of the Blood is daily carried about the Body,
as in an Adult Foetus, and a third part only Circulates in the Lungs, passing
by the Body or Grand Circulation.

That all this is done to abbreviate and reduce the Circulation to a lesser
compass, is certain; and so for the same Reason and End, that other lesser
Circulation of the Liver is slighted by the Blood, which returns from the
Placenta, by a Canal of Communication betwixt the Porta and the Vena Cava.

The Reason he gives of this, I cannot at all allow of; as being very ill
grounded; and therefore I shall not trouble my self to Confute, or so much as
Name it.

As for the Heart of the Land Tortoise, it was preserved in Spirit of Wine, and
all the three Ventricles thereof slit and opened; so that I had not all the
Satisfaction I could have wished: but the Left Ventricle in this Animal had no
Artery belonging to it, but did receive only the Blood, which descended from
the Lungs, and convey it by the Foramen Ovale into the Right Ventricle: That
the third or middle Ventricle was only an Appendix to the Right, and had the
Pulmonick Artery issuing from it. So that the Blood in a Tortois was in a
manner Circulated like that in a Foetus, through the Body, the Lungs as it were
or in good part slighted.

This Thought of Monsieur Merrie's has made a great Breach betwixt Monsieur
Verney and himself; for which Reason I had not that freedom of Conversation as
I could have wished with both of them; but it is to be hoped there may come good
from an honest Emulation.

Two English Gentlemen came to Visit me, Mr. Bennis and Mr. Probie: They were
lodged near the Royal Garden, where Monsieur Verney dwells, and makes his
Anatomies, who in Three Months time showed all the Parts of the Body to them.
He had for this purpose at least Twenty Human Bodies, from the Gallows, the
Chatelet, (where those are exposed who are found Murdered in the Streets,
which is a very common business at Paris) and from the Hospitals.

They told me, Monsieur Verney pretended to show them a Valve, which did hinder
Blood from falling back into the Right Ventricle by the Foramen Ovale. This
Valve they said he compared to the Papillae in the Kidneys, Musculous and
Fleshy: That if Wind was blown into the Vena Pulmonalis, it did not pass
through the Foramen Ovale, but stop there, by reason of the Valve. That he did
believe, contrary to Mr. Merry, that no Blood did circulate through the Lungs
in an Embrio.

Again, in another Conversation with Monsieur Merry, he showed me the blown
Hearts of an Embrio, and that of a Girl of 7 years old. I saw clearly, that the
Skin of the supposed Valve of the Foramen Ovale, was as it were suspended with
two Ligaments: And that in the Girl's, the two sides of the Foramen Ovale were
drawn one over the other, and so closed the hole; but were easily to be
separated again by a Bristle thrust betwixt them.

Also it seemed to me, that this Membrane in an Embrio might cover the Foramen
Ovale, like the Membrana Nictans in a Brids Eye, that is, be drawn over it, and
so hinder the Ingress of the Blood from the Vena Cava, as often as the Right
Auricle beats: But the Dilating it self might give way to the descending Blood
of the Vena Pulmonalis; and possibly, the Embrio living as it were the Life of
an Insect, can by this Artifice Command the Heart.

I remember in Discourse that day with him, he told me, That Monsieur Verney
had an old Cat, and a young Kitling just Born, put into the Air-Pump before the
Academie Royalle des Sciences: That the Cat died after 16 Pumps, but the
Kitling survived 500 Pumps; which favors in some measure the Command young
Animals have of their Hearts.

At another Visit, Monsieur Merry obligingly procured for me, the Heart of a
Human Embrio, with the Lungs entire. He tried before me the Experiment upon
Blowing, and also Syringing Water into the Aorta, both which filled the
Auricles and Ventricles, and freely came out at the Vena Cava only. Then he
opened the Right Auricle and Ventricle, where the Foramen Ovale was open only
at one corner, not the tenth part of its breadth; and a Membrane drawn over the
rest, which Membrane was fastened to the sides quite round. Then he opened in
the same manner the Left Ventricle and Auricle, and there it was evident, that
that Membrane which closed the hole, had two narrow Straps or Muscles by which
it was fastened to the opposite sides, after the manner of some of the Valves of
the Heart.

I told him, that it must follow from this, that the Foramen Ovale was shut and
opened more or less, at the pleasure of the Embrio, according to the
Necessities of Nature, and the quantity of Blood that was to pass: That it was
probable, that all Insects had a Command of their Hearts, (of which I had given
large Instances elsewhere) by some such passage, which they could shut
altogether, or in great part, as they had a Mind, in Winter, in Fear, or
Fasting for want of Food: That the shutting up of the passage in Adult Animals
was therefore done in an instant, by drawing the Curtain fully, which could
never be again drawn back and opened, because of the great torrent of Blood,
which now entered the Right Auricle, stopped it in that posture, which in time
would altogether stiffen and lose its Motion of Relaxation. As a Hen, when she
Sleeps, draws over the Membrana Nictans; and likewise when she Dies, the same
Membrane covers all the Eye.

Mr. Bennis procured me the Heart of a Humane Foetus, which had but just
breathed; the which I examined with Monsieur Litre of Castres in Languedoc,
another very Understanding and Dextrous Anatomist, and who Teaches Scholars of
all Nations the Practice of Anatomy. The Experiments here were repeated as
formerly described; Both Wind and Water passed the Foramen Ovale, both from the
Vena Pulmonum, and from the Aorta. That which I observed in this Heart more
particularly, was, That the Membrane or Valve on the Left side of the Foramen
Ovale was flat, and extended almost over the hole, without any Limbus round its
edges, because it was nothing but the very substance of the Auricula Sinistra
continued, or a Process thereof: But on the right side the Vena Cava being
joined to the Auricle, it had a rising edge round that part of it, whence it
proceeded; that is, that the two Faces had contrery openings, and being drawn
as it were one over the other, they shut the hole; but not so firmly, but the
hole might be more or less open all a Man's Life. For those two Oval Processes
sticking close together in a blown and dried Heart, that is not to be much
heeded, for I have seen them dry with the hole open; but it has been like as
betwixt unglued Paper, or as the Urethers descend betwixt the Skins of the
Bladder, or as the same happens to the Ductus Bilaris in its insertion into the
Guts.

The same Person brought me the Heart of a Man 40 years old, in which the
Foramen Ovale was as much open, as in a Foetus new born; and the Ligaments very
conspicuous, which tack the sides of the Valve to the Auricle, and go over to
the other side of the Border.

F. Plumier.
I was not better pleased with any Visit I made, than with that of F. Plumier,
whom I found in his Cell in the Convent of the Minimes. He came home in the
Sieur Ponti's Squadron, and brought with him several Books in Folio of Designs
and Paintings of Plants, Birds, Fishes, and Infects of the West Indies; all
done by himself very accurately. He is a very understanding Man in several
parts of Natural History, but especially in Botanique. he had been formerly in
America, at his return Printed, at the King's Charge, a Book of American Plants
in Folio. This Book was so well approved of, that he was sent again thither at
the King's Charge, and returned after several years wandering about the Islands
with this Cargo. He was more than once Shipwrackt, and lost his Specimens of
all things, but preserved his Papers, as having fortunately lodged them in
other Vessels; so that the things themselves I did not see. He had designed and
Dissected a Crocodile; one of the Sea Tortoises; a Viper, and well described
the Dissections.

His Birds also were well understood, and very well painted in their proper
colors. I took notice of 3 sorts of Owls, one with Horns, all distinct
Species from our European. Several of the Hawk Kind and Falcons of very
beautiful Plumage; and one of those, which was Coal black as a Raven. Also
(which I longed to see) there was one Species of the Swallow Kind, very
distinct from the 4 Species we have in Europe.

Amongst the Fish there were two new Species of American Trouts, well known by
the Fleshy Fin near the Tail.

Amongst the Insects there was a Scolopendra of a foot and an half long, and
proportionably broad. Also the Julus very elegantly painted, which I had seen
before in Dr. Turnfort's Collection. Table 5.

Also a very large Wood-Frog, with the extremity of the Toes webbed.

Also a Blood-red Polypus, with very long Legs, two of which I could discern by
the Draught were thick acetabulated. This, he told me, was so venomous, that
upon the least touch it would cause an insupportable burning pain, which would
last several hours.

There were also some few Species of the Serpent and Lizard Kind.

There were but few Shells; but amongst them there was a Murex (See T. 4.)
which dies purple, with the Fish as it exerts it self in the Sea. Also that
Land Buccinum (see Tab. 3.) which I have figured, and which lays Eggs with hard
Shells, and for bigness, and shape, and color, scarce to be distinguished from
the Sparrow Eggs. And because the Murex and this Buccinum was drawn with the
Animals creeping out, I desired a Copy of them, which he freely and in a most
obliging manner granted me; He designed the Buccinum Terrestre in the Island of
St. Domingo, where he found it.

Amongst the vast Collection of Plants, I observed the Torch Kind, and Fernes
were of all others the most numerous; of each of which there were an incredible
number of Species. There were 2 or 3 Species of Goosberries and Currants; and
some Species of Wild Grapes; all which F. Plumier told me were good to eat.

He told me these Drawings would make 10 Books, as big as that he had published;
and Two Books of Animals: He had been often at Versailles to get them into the
Kings Imprimerie; but as yet unsuccessfully; but hoped e're long to begin the
Printing of them. Note, That the Booksellers at Paris are very unwilling, or
not able to Print Natural History; but all is done at the Kings Charge, and in
his Presses.

M. Dacier.
I Visited Monsieur Dacier and his Lady, two very obliging Persons, and both of
great Worth, and very Learned.

I think our Profession is much beholden to him, for his late elegant
Translation of Hippocrates into French, with Learned Notes upon him. I wish he
may live to finish what he has so happily begun. I read over the Two Volumes
he has Printed with great delight.

He seems to favor the Opinion of those, who think, the Circulation of the
Blood was known to him; in which he errs undoubtedly. It Is manifest his Anatomy
was rude, dark, and of little extent; but it is also as manifest, that he knew
very well the effect of the Circulation. As for Example, 2. de Diaeta. c. 12.
All the Body (says he) is purged by Respiration and Transpiration, and what
Humor thickens, is subtilized and thrown out by the Skin, and is called Sweat.

Again, 3. de Diaeta. c. 5. speaking of a sort of foul and impure Bodies, he
says, More is by Labor melted out of the Flesh, than the Circular Motion (of
the Blood) has purged off. There are a great number of Instances of this
Nature. In Conversation I put this to him, which he avowed was all he thought.

He told me he had two more Volumes ready for the Press, and did intend not to
give it over, till he had gone through all the Works of Hippocrates. In which
Volumes will be these Treatises: Of Dreams: Of the Regimen in Acute Diseases:
The Prognostics: The Prorrhetiques: The Aphorisms: The Coaques.

On that Aphorism he seemed to me to have a very happy thought, cocta non, sed
cruda purganda sunt; which makes it of the same sense with that other, Si quid
movendum est, move in principio.

I must needs say this for Madam Dacier, his Wife, though I knew her by her
Writings, before I saw her, the Learned Woman in Europe, and the true
Daughter and Disciple of Tanaquil Faber; yet her great Learning did not alter
her genteel Air in Conversation, or in the least appear in her Discourse; which
was easy, modest, and nothing affected.

M. Morin.
I visited Monsieur Morin, one of the Academie des Sciences, a Man very curious
in Minerals; of which he showed me some from Siam, as Jaspers, Onyxes, Agats,
Loadstones, etc. He showed me also excellent Tin Oar from Alsace. Also from
France a great Block of a sort of Amythyst of 2 or 300 weight. Some parts of it
(for he had several Plates sawed and polisht) were very fine, and had large
Spots and Veins of a deep colored Violet. It was designed for a Pavement in
Marchetterie, of which he showed me a Carton drawn in the Natural Colors.

This puts me in mind of a vast Amethyst I had seen at London, brought from
New-Spain, and exposed to Sale; it weighed, as I remember, Eleven Pound odd
Ounces; and was most perfectly figured both point and sides, after the manner
of a Bristol Diamond, or common Rock Crystal; but this Block here was rude, and
without any shape.

L'Academies des Sciences.
I cannot say much of the meeting of these Gentlemen of the Acad. Royal. de
Sciences, there are but few of them, about 12 or 16 Members; all Pensioned by
the King in some manner or other.

They endeavored in the War time to have Printed Monthly Transactions or
Memoires after the manner of ours in London; but could not carry them on above
two Volumes or Years, for without great Correspondence this can hardly be done.
And ours is certainly one of the best Registers that ever was thought on, to
preserve a vast number of scattered Observations in Natural History, which
otherwise would run the hazard to be lost, besides the Account of Learning in
Printed Books

I heard Mr. Oldenburgh say, who began this Noble Register, that he held
Correspondence with 70 odd Persons in all parts of the World, and those be sure
with others: I asked him, what method he used to answer so great variety of
Subjects, and such a quantity of Letters as he must receive weekly; for I knew
he never failed, because I had the Honor of his Correspondence for 10 or 12
years. He told me he made one Letter answer another, and that to be always
fresh, he never read a Letter before he had Pen, Ink and Paper ready to answer
it forthwith, so that the multitude of his Letters cloyed him not, or ever lay
upon his hands.

The Abbot Bignon is President, Nephew to Monsieur Pontchartrain. I was
informed by some of them, that they have this great advantage to encourage them
in the pursuit of Natural Philosophy, that if any of the Members shall give in
a Bill of Charges of any Experiments which he shall have made; or shall desire
the Impression of any Book, and bring in the Charges of Graving required for
such Book, the President allowing it and signing it, the Money is forthwith
reimbursed by the King. As it was done in Dr. Turnfort's Elements de Botanique,
the Cuts of that Book cost the King 12000 Livres. And the Cuts intended, and
now Graving for another Book of new Plants found in his Voyages into Portugal
and Spain, will cost 100 l. Sterling.

Also, if Monsieur Merry, for Example, shall require live Tortoises for the
making good the Experiments about the Heart, they shall be brought him, as many
as he pleases, at the King's Charge.

These, besides their Pensions, I say, were some of the Advantages they have
enjoyed; but the War, for this Reason, has lain heavy upon the Philosophers too.

Mr. Butterfield.
Mr. Butterfield is a right hearty honest Englishman, who has resided in France
35 years, is a very excellent Artist in making all sorts of Mathematical
Instruments, and works for the King and all the Princes of the Blood, and his
Work is sought after by all the Nations of Europe and Asia.

He more than once showed me (which is his great Diversion) a mighty Collection
of Loadstones, to the value of several Hundred Pounds Sterling.

Some he had as hard almost as Steel, and others soft and friable; yet of these
he had those which were of as great virtue, as any of the hard; That of the
equally hard there were very great difference.

He had one which weighed naked not above a Dram, and would naked take up a
Dram and an half; but shod would take up 144 Drachms of Iron, if rightly
applied, that is, if the Iron to be taken up did firmly and in a plain touch
alike both the Feet.

The best Shod were these that follow.

1. A Slate Loadstone, which I noted not so much for its strength, but because
of its peculiar make, being fairly and distinctly luminous throughout, weighing
One ounce and an half, draws up One pound.

2. A Smooth Loadstone, weighing One dram, two scruples, fourteen grains,
draws up Eighteen ounces, that is Eighty two times its weight.

3. Another Smooth Loadstone, weighing Sixty five grains, draws up Fourteen
ounces, that is, One hundred and forty four times its weight.

There is, a Loadstone no bigger then a Hazel Nut, which took up a huge Bunch
of Keys.

We have a very large Slate Loadstone in the Repository at Gresham-Colledge, at
least 6 inches over; This also is but weak; Whether the Laminae do spoil the
virtue, as though they were but so many distinct Stones packt together. And yet
a Loadstone which takes up ex. gr. 6 pound weight, cut by the Axis in two
halves, and both halves shod again, will take up 8 pound.

It is plain, that Experiments are better made with a Terrella, or spherical
Loadstone, than a square one; and his way of capping the Terrella is very well
contrived.

A square Loadstone made into a Terrella, will near take up as much weight as
it did before, though a great deal of the Stone is lost in the rounding, by
virtue of the different shooing.

He entertained us full two hours with Experiments neatly contrived about the
effects of the Loadstone.

The Experiment of approaching a Loadstone to the Spring of a Watch is very
fine; it causes the Balance to move very swift, and brought yet nearer, to
stop quite and cease moving.

Another Experiment was an inch broad Plate of Iron, turned into a Ring of
about 4 inches diameter, which had evidently two North and two South Poles,
which he said he had seen in a Loadstone, and had contrived this in imitation
of Nature. The working of them with filings of Steel, drigged upon a Plate, set
upon the Ring, did clearly manifest the double Polarity.

Also the suspending of a Needle in the Air, and a Ball of Steel upon the point
of it, by a Thread, which a weight kept down, that it could not ascend higher,
than such a distance within the sphere of the activity of the Loadstone.

Again, the free working of the Needle in Water, through Brass, Gold, Stone,
Wood, or any thing but Iron. He told us, he had a Stone, which would work
through a Stone Wall of 18 inches.

Lastly, he demonstrated by many Experiments, how the Effluvia of the Loadstone
work in a Circle, that is, what flows from the North Pole, comes round, and
enters the South Pole; on the contrary, what flows from the South Pole, enters
the North, and in its way puts in order all such Filings of Steel it meets
with; that is, according to the disposition of its own whirling, and the
circular lines it keeps in its flying about the Loadstone. Indeed, it is
pleasant to see, how the Steel Filings are disposed; and in their arangement
one clearly sees a perfect image of the road, which the whirling invisible
Matter takes in coming forth, and re-entring the Poles of the Loadstone.

He showed us a Loadstone sawed off that piece of the Iron Bar, which held the
Stones together at the very top of the Steeple of Chartres; This was a thick
Crust of Rust, part of which was turned into a strong Loadstone, and had all
the properties of a Stone dug out of the Mine. Man's. de la Hire has Printed a
Memoire of it; also Mons. de Vallemont a Treatise. The very outward Rust had no
Magnetic Virtue, but the inward had a strong one, as to take up a third part
more than its weight unshod. This Iron had the very grain of a solid Magnet,
and the brittleness of a Stone.

These Gentlemen, who have writ of this, have, in my Opinion, missed their
purpose, when they enquire, how it comes to pass to be thus turned; for it is
certain, all Iron will in time go back into its Mineral Nature again,
notwithstanding the Artifice of Melting and Hammering. I have seen of those
Hammered Spanish Cannon, which had lain many years buried in the Ground, under
the old Fort at Hull in Yorkshire, which were thoroughly turned into brittle
Iron Stone, or Mine again; and would not own the Loadstone, no more than the
rest of our English Iron Mine, till it was calcined, and then showed it self to
be good Iron again. Also I have seen, and had by me, a piece of Wood taken out
of Lough-Neagh in Ireland, which was not only good Iron Mine, but a Loadstone
too; so that it is evident, Nature, in this sort of Mine, goes backwards and
forwards, is generated and regenerated; and therefore Mons. de la Hire has well
used the Term of Vegetation in this Affair, which I had done many years before
in my Book De Fontibus Medicatis Angliae, that is, out of Iron, Mine will grow;
and out of Mine, (...) Loadstone; as in the petrified Wood.

I do not relate these things, as though they were new Di^veries; the World has
long since known ^em, by the great In^y of our most Learned Country^ Gilbert of
Colchester, to whom little (...) been added after near 100 years, th^h very
many Men have written of t^ ^bject, and formed diverse Hypot^s to solve these
Phoenomena. A D^chman, Mr. Hartsoeker, one of the Academy des Sciences, has
published a Treat^se of the Principles of Natural Philos^phy, and has accounted
for these and many more Experiments of this Nature, which he had shown him by
Mr. Butterfield, whom he mentions very Honorably.

And yet after all, the nature of these Effluvia are little known, and what is
said by Des Carts of Screw fashioned Particles, and the invisible Channels and
Pores and Pipes of the Loadstone, are all mere Fancies without any Foundation
in Nature. It is well called by some a certain Magnetic Matter, but what
properties it has, is little understood.

It is very strange to me, that a little Loadstone, of that prodigious force,
should have so short a sphere of activity, and not sensibly to affect Iron
above an inch or two; and the biggest and strongest not above a foot or two. We
see the Vortices in Water, how wide they work round about them, vastly
increasing the Circles; and what little resistance the Air can make to a body
of that subtilty, as the Effluvia of the Loadstone, which can with ease
penetrate all Bodies whatsoever, Marble, Flints, Glass, Copper, Gold, without
any sensible diminution of its virtue. Again, we see the Flame of a Lamp in
Oil, or Tallow, or Wax, how short it is; and how long and tapering it is in
Spirit of Wine. If therefore the Magnetic Matter was darted out of infinite
small Pipes, and was of the nature of a more subtle and invisible Flame, why
does it not continue its course in a direct line to a great length, but return
so suddenly? We see the perspiration of our Skins to rise into the Air, and
continue to mount which yet has but a weak impulse from the Heart, being
interrupted and broke off, when it comes out of the Road of the Blood into the
Ductus Excretorii. But the Circle of the Magnetic Matter is without any
impulse, that we know of, from the Stone; and moves in a double circle, and
with a double and contrary stream in the same Pipes, contrary to the Laws of
the Circulation of the Blood in Animals; which has naturally but one Current,
and one Road round; for the whole Mass of Vessels, in which the Circulation of
the Blood is concerned, is but one continued Pipe.

Until the Nature of the Effluvia is better known, no very satisfactory Account
can be given of the most common Phoenomena of the Loadstone, ex. gr. why it
does not draw to it all Bodies alike? why a great Loadstone, though weak,
extends its virtue much farther, than a small one, though strong? Why a
Loadstone communicates its virtue to Iron, as soon as it touches it, nay even
at some distance, and gives it the properties of a Loadstone.

The Truth is, the Earth's being a great Magnet seems to me a mere Vision and
Fable; for this reason, because it is not Iron. It Is true, Iron Mine is the
most common of all Minerals, and found almost in all places; but it holds not
any proportion with the rest of the Fossils of the Earth; and is not, at a
guess, as a million to other Fossils; This seems evident to any one, who has
well considered the Chalky Mountains and Cliffs, the high Rag-stone Mountains
and Lime Stone Cliffs, the several Quarries and Pits sunk into the Bowels of
the Earth for Coal, and Lead, etc. how little Iron there is to be found in
comparison of other Matters. Add to this, that very little of that very Iron
Mine, which is to be found any where, is Magnetic, or capable of obedience to
the Magnet, till it is calcined: Whence therefore should all those Magnetic
Effluvia arise, which are supposed every where plentifully to incompass the
Earth? And why should they be supposed to be every where wandering in the Air,
since it is evident, they make haste to return to the Stone that emitted them,
and are as afraid to leave it, as the Child the Mother before it can go?

Toward the discovery of the Nature of the Effluvia of the Loadstone, such
Particulars as those, in my Opinion, ought chiefly to be considered, and
prosecuted with all industry. The Loadstone is very good, if not the best Iron
Mine. The sole Fusion of the Loadstone turns it into Iron; The Fire destroys
its very virtue, and so does Vitrification Iron. Fire will make Iron Mine own
the Loadstone, and turn to a Magnet; Rust, (into which all Iron will naturally
turn) and the reduction of Iron again to its Mine, will take away all the
Magnetic capacity of Iron. A Loadstone cannot be made to alter its Poles, but
Iron may; nor be destroyed, but by the Fire. A great and long Bar of Iron is
naturally a Loadstone, if held up perpendicularly, and it changes its Poles at
the pleasure of him that holds it: A strong Loadstone loses much of its virtue
by touching Iron, but after a few days recovers it again: A small and weak
Loadstone cannot touch to give its virtue to a great lump of Iron: A Loadstone
exposed to the Air is spoilt in time: The deeper the Vein of Iron Mine is,
where Loadstone is found, the better the Stone, and how far, this holds true;
for I do not doubt, but a very hard Stone may be found near the day, as well as
deeper: A Ruler or long Plate of Steel is much better touched with the virtue
of the Loadstone, than a Plate of mere Iron of the same figure; but on the
contrary a Plate of Iron sticks much faster to the Loadstone, than a Plate of
Steel; so as if a Loadstone draws up a Plate of Steel of 3 Ounces, it will draw
up a Plate of Iron of four Ounces and more. Why Iron fastened to the Poles of a
Magnet does so vastly improve its strength, as to be 150 times stronger than
when Naked.

Since therefore a Loadstone is nothing else but good Iron Mine, and may be
turned into Iron; and Iron most easily, and of its self into Lodestone, the
way to find out the Nature of those Magnetic Effluvia, seems to be to enquire
strictly into the Nature of Iron Mine, and Iron it self; and not to run giddily
into Hypotheses, before we are well stocked with the Natural History of the
Lodestone, and a larger quantity of Experiments and Observations relating to
Iron and its Mine, with all the Difference and Species of them; which I think
has hitherto been little heeded. For Nature will be its own Interpreter, in
this, as well as in all other Matters of Natural Philosophy.

Mr. Butterfield, in another Conversation, told me, He had observed
Load-Stones, which were strong without arming; and being armed, had not that
great advantage by it, as one could have expected: And that on the contrary,
there were others, which had a more incredible Virtue when armed, than they did
promise.

That it seldom happens, that a Lodestone has as much Virtue in one of its
Poles, as in the other; and that a bit of Iron is touched equally well at either
of the Poles of one and the same Lodestone.

That there are Load-Stones which take up much, and which notwithstanding are
incapable of well touching Iron; so that a Stone armed, which takes up seven
Pound, yet cannot Communicate to a Ruler of Iron, the Virtue of taking up a
very small Needle.

That a Lodestone of 10 Ounces, being reduced to the weight of 6 Ounces or
thereabouts, did almost the same effect as before, etc.

I caused Mr. Butterfield to make the Slate Lodestone into a Terella, and when
shod, it was indeed but of little force; but I observed its Poles to lie level
with the Laminae, of which it was composed.

N. B. A strong Lodestone ought to have large Irons, and a weak one but thin
Irons; so that a Stone may be over-shod.

M. Guanieres.
I waited upon the Abbot Droine to Visit Monsieur Guanieres, at his Lodgings in
the Hostel de Guise. This Gentleman is Courtesy it self, and one of the most
Curious and Industrious Persons in Paris. His Memoires, Manuscripts, Paintings,
and Stamps are infinite, but the method in which he disposes them, is very
particular and useful. He showed his Porteseiulles in Folio, of Red Spanish
Leather finely adorned: In one, for Example, He had the General Maps of
England; then the particular Maps of the Counties; then the Maps of London, and
Views about it: Then the Stamps of all the particular Places and Buildings of
Note about it; and so of all the Cities in England, and Places and Houses of
Note of the Counties.

In other Book-Cases, he has the Stamps of the Statesmen of England, Nobility
of both Sexes, Soldiers, Lawyers, Divines, Physicians, and Men of Distinction.
And in this Method he has all Europe by themselves.

His Rooms are filled with the Heads of a vast number of Men of Note in Oil
Paintings, and Miniatures or Watercolors: Amongst the rest, an Original of
King John, who was Prisoner in England, which he greatly values.

He showed us the Habits in Limning from the Originals, done by the best
Masters, of all the Kings and Queens and Princes of France, for many Ages
backwards. Also the Tournaments and Justings at large; and a thousand such
things of Monuments.

He was so Curious, that he told me, he seldom went into the Country without an
Amanuensis, and a couple of Men well Skilled in Designing and Painting.

He showed us amongst other curious Manuscripts, a Capitularie of Charles V.
also the Gospel of St. Matthew writ in Golden Letter upon Purple Vellum. This
seemed to me to be later than that Manuscript I saw at the Abbey of St.
Germains; that is, the Letters less and more crooked, though indeed, the Letters
of the Title Page are exactly Square.

One Toy I took notice of, which was a Collection of Playing Cards for 300
years: The oldest were three times bigger than what are now used, extremely
well lined and illuminated with guilt Borders, and the Pastboard thick and
firm; but there was not a complete Set of them.

Madame de Scudery.
Amongst the Persons of Distinction and Fame, I was desirous to see
Madameoiselle de Scuderie, now 91 years of Age. Her Mind is yet vigorous, though
her Body is in Ruins. I confess, this Visit was a perfect Mortification, to see
the sad Decays of Nature in a Woman once so famous. To hear her Talk, with her
Lips hanging about a Toothless Mouth, and not to be able to Command her Words
from flying abroad at Random, puts me in mind of the Sybil's uttering Oracles.
Old Women were employed on this Errand, and the Infant-World thought nothing so
Wise, as Decayed Nature, or Nature quite out of Order; and preferred Dreams
before reasonable and waking Thoughts.

She showed me the Skeletons of two Chameleons, which she had kept near four
years alive: In Winter she lodged them in Cotton; and in the fiercest Weather,
she put them under a Ball of Copper, full of hot Water.

In her Closet she showed me an Original of Madame Maintenon, her old Friend
and Acquaintance, which she affirmed was very like her: and, indeed, she was
then very beautiful.

Marquis d'Hopital.
The Marquis d'Hopital, one of the Academie des Sciences, whom I found not at
home, returned my Visit very obligingly. I had a long Conversation with him
about Philosophy and Learning; and I perceived the Wars had made them
altogether Strangers to what had been doing in England. Nothing was more
pleasing to him, than to hear of Mr. Isaac Newton's Preferment, and that there
were hopes, that they might expect something more from him, he expressed a
great desire to have the whole Set of the Philosophic Transactions brought
over, and many other Books, which he named, but had not yet seen. He told me,
it was not possible for them to continue the Monthly Memoirs, as they had done
for two years only, because they were but very few in number of that Society,
and had very little Correspondence. Indeed, I did inquire once of some of that
Body, why they did not take in more since there were very many deserving Men in
the City, as I instanced in F. Plumier: They owned he would be an Honor to the
Body, but they avoided to make a President for the Admission of any Regulars
whatsoever.

I repaid the Marquis his Visit: He lives in a fine House, well furnished; the
Garden pretty, with neat Trelliage, wrought with Arches and other Ornaments:

He expressed a great Desire to see England, and Converse with our
Mathematicians, whose Works he coveted above all things, and had ordered all to
be brought him over.

His Lady also is very well Studied in the Mathematics, and makes one of the
Learned Ladies in Paris; of which number are Mad. Dacier, the Duchess of Main,
Mad. Scuderie, Mad. de Vicubourg, Mad. d'Espernon the Daughter, Mad. Pres. de
Ferrand, and others, whose Names I have forgot.

Pezron.
I bought the Works of Pere Pezron, a Benardin, now Abbot de Charmoyse near
Rheims. This is a very Learned and very disinterested Author, and by his free
way of Writing has got him Enemies amongst the Regular Clergy. The Books I
bought were his Antiquities or Account of Time; The Defense of it against Two
Monks; An Essay or Commentary upon the Prophets; The History of the Gospel.

He is now upon giving us the Origin of Nations, where he will show, that Greek
and Latin too, came from the Celtique or Bas-breton; of which Country he is. He
told me he had 800 Greek Words perfect Celtique. I settled a Correspondence
betwixt him and Mr. Ed. Floid; which he most readily granted, and which he said
he had long coveted.

Monsieur Spanheim, now Envoy Extraordinary from the Duke of Branden-bough at
Paris, told me, that the King of France's Collection of Medals is far the best
in Europe, or that ever was made. Having the opportunity of Discoursing him
often, his sick Lady being my Patient, I inquired more particularly of him,
what he had seen of Palmyra, of Zenobia, Odenatus, Vabalathus. He desired a
Memoir of me, which I gave him, of what I would have him search for in the
King's Cabinet, and promised me all the Satisfaction he could give me in that
Affair.

I told him I had met with nothing yet, but a fair Busto in White Marble of
Zenobia, in the Cabinet of M. Boudelot; which was part of Mons. Thevenot's
Collection of Marbles from the East.

Monsieur Vaillant.
I was to wait on Mons. Vaillant at his Appartment in the Arsenal. I found only
his Son at home, who very Civilly Entertained me; and showed me a Book in
Quarto of his Father's of Greek Medals, near Printed off; but without Cutts.
The Title was Nummi Graeci Imperatorum; he goes down no lower than to Claudius
Gothicus. He has added a large Appendix, with References to all the most
Remarkable Heads about the Cities and the People.

I left a Memoir with his Son; and in a second Visit, I found the old Gentleman
at home, very busy in his Flower Garden; of which I shall speak hereafter.

He told me, as to the Memoir I had left, he had never seen any Coins of
Oedenatus; yet he had very lately parted with one of Zenobia to the Duke of
Maine. As for Vabalathus, he had seen some of him in Brass; and one he had in
Silver, which he very obliginly made me a Present of; and that this was the
only Silver Coin he had ever met with of him.

This is his Reading of it. VABALATHUS. V. G. R. IMP. R. Vices gerens Imperii
Romani. Les autres y lisent mal. YCRIMOR.

He gave me also the Stamps of the Heads of Zenobia and Vabalathus, done from
the King's Medals. See Tab. 2. These were designed for a short History of all
the Emperors and Empresses, which he has by him written in French, but not
published. Nothing could be more Civil and Franc than this Gentleman, whom I
believe to be the best Medalist in Europe; he told me he had made 12 Voyages
all over Europe and Asia Minor on purpose; That he had seen and described the
Contents of more Cabinets, than any Man ever did before him; and it is evident
by his Works, that he has made good use of them.

I had a Visit from Mr. Conningham, Tutor to my Lord Lorne, a very Learned and
Curious Man in Books. I asked him (knowing him to have been lately at Rome) very
particularly about the Papers of Monsieur d'Azout. He told me, that he see him
not above half a year before he died, and was very intimately acquainted with
him, and saw him for a Twelvemonth very often. That he told him, that he had
about 80 difficult Passages in Vitruvius, which he had Commented and Explained;
and the Correction of a great number of Errata in the Text. Also that upon
Julius Frontinus (though that was a much less Book) he had much more to say,
than he had upon Vitruvius: What is become of his Papers I could not learn from
him, nor any in Paris.

Monsieur d'Azout was very Curious and Understanding in Architecture, for which
purpose he was 17 years in Italy by times; I do remember when he was in England
about 14 years ago, he showed me the Design of several of our Buildings drawn
by himself; but of that of the Banqueting House at Whitehall, he expressed
himself in very extraordinary Terms, telling me, it was the most Regular, and
most Finished Piece of Modern Workmanship he had seen on this side the Alps,
that he could not enough praise it: That Inigo Jones, the Architect, had a true
relish of what was Noble in that Art.

It is time now to leave the Private Houses, and to Visit the Public
Libraries; and with them such Persons as are more particularly concerned in the
History of Learning.

M. l'Abbe Drouine.
Monsieur l'Abbe Drouine came to visit me at my Lodgings. I returned the Visit
the next day at his Appartment in the College de Boncourt. He had 4 or 5 little
Rooms well furnished with Books; in the biggest he had a Collection of
Catalogues of Books, and of all such who had writ the Accounts of Authors;
above 3000 in all Languages. He told me he had studied the History of Books
with the utmost application 18 years, and had brought his Memoirs into a good
Method; That he had thoughts of Printing the first Tome this year, which would
be of the most ancient Authors, Greek and Latin; That he intended to continue
them throughout all the succeeding Ages down to our times; which he said he had
performed in good part.

He showed me the Catalogue of Authors in 4 very thick Folio's; alphabetically
disposed by Family Names, under some such Title as this: Index alphabeticus
omnium Scriptorum, cujuscunque facultatis temporis, and linguae: Those came to
about 150000.

He also showed me his Alphabetick Memoirs in Sheets of the Authors and Books
they had writ, and in great forwardness. And lastly, the Chronological
Catalogue, in which form he intends to Print the whole.

He is a very Civil and well Tempered Person, very Learned and Curious, and of
a middle Age, fit to continue and finish such a Laborious Work. I was
infinitely obliged to him for his frequent Visits.

Thevenot's Library.
I was to wait on Monsieur Gurnier, one of the Heirs of Monsieur Thevenot, to
see the Remains of that Famous Man's Library. There are a great number of
Oriental MSS. yet unsold.

He showed me the MS. of Abulfeda, with its Latin Version, done by Monsieur
Thevenot; and the Matrices and Forms of Arabic Letters, which he had, at his
own Charge, caused to be cut for the Printing of certain proper Names in it.

He went or designed to go into England and Holland to get it Printed, but was
called back by Monsieur Louvois's Order, to Print it in France at the King's
Charge; but the late Wars coming on, it was set aside, and is like to be so,
for he was turned out of his place of Library Keeper to the King, and died in
Disgrace.

Those great number of Oriental Books he had most from his Nephew, whom he sent
abroad for that purpose, and who died in his Travels.

This Man was, as it were, the Founder of the Academie des Sciences, and was in
his own Nature very Liberal, and gave Pensions to many Scholars.

Amongst other things, I saw there a large Dictionary and Grammar of the
Algonquin Tongue, one of the Nations of the West Indies. The Fugitive Jesuit,
who writ it, dwelt amongst them 20 years. Here it also saw a History, with
large and accurate Descriptions of the Quadrupeds of that part of the
West Indies by the same Author.

As for the Papers of Swammerdam, which indeed were the things I most coveted
to see, they were much beneath my Expectation, not answering the Printed
Catalogue of Thevenot, p. 239. There were, indeed, some Corrections of the
Figures of his general History of Insects, and some Additions, as though he
intended another Edition of that Book.

Also toward a particular History, there were some small Treatises, or rather
some Figures only of the Tadpole. Again, Figures relating to the Natural
History of a certain Day Butterfly; Of the Asilus; Of the Scuttle Fish; Of the
Scarabaeus Nasicornis; and some considerable number of Snails, as well naked,
as fluviatil, and Sea dissected; at least figured with their Bodies exerted,
and some of their Bowels extracted; and which seemed to me to be well
understood and delineated. There were 2 or 3 Stitcht Books in Dutch of 4 or 5
Sheets a-piece belonging to those Plates or Figures. But the Gentleman would
not part with any of them; because, he said, they had been secured by the Abbot
Bignon for the Kings use. However, all these I judge well worth Printing, when
it shall please that Society to do it.

Lastly, I saw in his Custody a fair MS. of Michael Servetus, with a Treatise
at the end of it, which, as he said, was never published; being a Comparison of
the Jewish and Christian Law, its Justice and Charity.

Kings' Libary.
Mons. l'Abbe de Brillac, Almoner to the Prince of Conti, very obligingly
offered to carry me to the Kings Library; but I Civilly declined it, for I had
been told, it was better to make Visits by ones self: for no Stranger but was
very welcome, at all times; not only on the days it was publicly open, as it
is upon Tuesdays and Fridays.

Mons. Clement, the Deputy Library Keeper, made us welcome, and invited us to
come again, and spend a whole day with him: He made me in particular a very
great Compliment, as a considerable Benefactor to that place, showing me most
of the Books and the Names of the rest, I had published in Latin; and showed a
great satisfaction, that he had got the Synopsis Conchyliorum, which he had
caused to be Bound very elegantly. I told him, that I was very sorry to see it
there, and wondered how he came by it; for it was, I assured him, but a very
imperfect trial of the Plates, which I had disposed of to some few Friends
only, till I should be able to close and finish the Design; which I now had
done to my power, and would redeem that Book with a better Copy at my return
into England: The same Promise I renewed to the Abbe Louvois, the Library
Keeper, at his own Instance, when I had the Honor to Dine with him. This young
Gentleman is Brother to Monsieur Barbisieux, Intendant of the Affairs of War;
he takes great care to apply himself to his Studies, and for that purpose has
two of the Sorbone constantly with him to instruct him. He lives great, and has
a House which joins upon the King's Library, of which he is Keeper. We were
Entertained by him with all the Civility imaginable, and freedom of
Conversation.

This Library is now placed in a Private House, and taken out of the Louvre,
but it is intended to be removed to the Place de Vendosme, where one side of
that Magnisicent Square is designed for it. In the mean time it is here most
commodiously disposed into 22 Rooms; 14 above Stairs, and 8 below and above.
Those below are Philosophy and Physic, and the Shelves are Wired, to secure
them: Above are the Books of Philosophy and Human Learning; and it is into
those Rooms only the promiscous Crowd are admitted twice a week. In the middle
Rooms, which makes the great Body of the Library, are, for Example, Catalogues
of Books; Histories in one of England and Holland; in another the Histories of
France and Germany; in another the Histories of Italy, Spain, etc. in other
Bibles of all sorts, and the Interpretations; in another Greek MSS. in another
Latin MSS. in another the Civil and Municipial Laws of all Nations; in another
the Original Papers of State; in another Stamps, where, by the by, the King had
the Collection of Mons. Marolles to divert him, in one of his Sicknesses,
bought in at a vast Sum: The Catalogue alone of these Stamps, no bigger than
two small Almanacks, cost me 14 Livres; so much Strangers are imposed upon by
the Crafty Booksellers of Rue St. Jaques; but it is not in France alone, where
People are made to pay for their Humor.

They have Two Indexes of this Library; one relating to the Matter and Contents
of Books; and another Index of Authors, wherein are all the Works they have of
them, and the Titles of all likewise that they know of, that are wanting, with
an Asterism to such in the Margent; which is well done, that they may know what
they have to buy in. It is indeed a vast Collection, and worthy so great a
Prince. This Library consists at least of 50000 Volumes of Printed Books; and
15000 MSS. in all Languages.

They work daily and hard at the Catalogue, which they intend to Print; I saw
10 thick Folio's of it, fairly transcribed for the Press. It is disposed
according to the Subject Matter of the Books, as the Bibles and Expositors,
Historians, Philosophers, etc. They purpose to put it into the Press this
years, and to finish it within a Twelvemonth.

In the King's Library I was shown an Ancient Greek MS. of Dioscorides, writ in
a sort of thin or narrow Capitals, with the Plants painted in Watercolors;
but the first Book was wholly wanting, and therefore the Animals not there,
which yet was what I most desired to see; for there are some things relating to
them, which we are at this day in great doubt of; and it would have been some
satisfaction to have seen by the Pictures, what the middle Ages, at least, had
thought of them.

In the same Room also we were shown the Epistles; which was one part of the
same MS. which we have at Cambridge, which is the Gospels only. Beza was
possessed of ours, from whom we had it. It is written in square Capitals, and
very short Lines, and much worn out in many places. This comes much short of
the Alexandrian MS. at St. James's for Beauty and Antiquity.

There was another MS. of the Gospel of St. Matthew, which was but of late
discovered; a very fair Volume in a large Folio. This was cut to pieces in the
back, and had been shuffled and bound up again; and another Book overwritten in
a small Modern Greek Hand, about 150 years ago. The first Writing was turned so
pale, that they took no pains to rub it out. One of the Library Keepers
observing this, has reduced it again by paging it anew; and with a little
heeding it is yet very legible. The Letter is as fair a square Capital as any I
have seen. There are some Interpretations very notorious, as about the Descent
of the sick Man into the Pool of Bethesda; which I suppose will be accounted
for by the Industrious and Learned Collator.

I observed the China Manuscripts which Father Beauvais brought this year as a
Present to the King. They are about 44 Packs of small Books, of a long Quarto
fashion, put up in loose Covers of a Purple Satin glued on Pastboard; of
Natural History, of Dictionaries relating to the Exposition of their
Characters, etc.

The King had a Set much of the same before in White-Sattin, with their Titles.

Here also I see the 3d Decade of Livy, a large Quarto in Vellum, without
Distinction of Words in fair large Capitals. It is supposed by Monsieur Baluze
to be 1100 year old.

Yet the Manuscript of Prudentius Hymns, which was also showed us, is a much
fairer Letter, and therefore thought to be older by one Century at least.

Here also I saw a famous Latin Roll or Volume written of Egyptian Paper,
Entitled, Charta Plenariae Securitatis, taken the 38th years of Justinian; it
is fanly Ingraved and Interpreted Letter by Letter upon Copper by Monsieur
Thevenot. I saw the Print thereof: It is writ longways the Roll and not cross;
in three Columns: The Column in the middle is three times as long as the two
end Columns. The Roll is not above a foot broad.

They showed us also in this House, the Apartment of Monsieur Hugeins, which
was very Noble, and well for Air, upon the Garden: But here he fell
Melancholy, and Died of it in Holland. He showed the first Tokens of it by
playing with a Tame Sparrow, and neglecting his Mathematick Schemes. It Is
certain, Life and Health of Body and Mind are not to be preserved but by the
Relaxation, and unbending the Mind by Innocent Diversions. For Sleep is nothing
else that I know off, but the giving up the Reins, and letting Nature to Act
alone, and to put her in full possession of the Body. We have a convincing
instance of this, in being a Bed awake: No Man can lie still 3 Minutes without
turning; and if it come not presently upon us, we must turn again and again;
and at length we become so intolerably weary, that our Bed is a very wrack to
us. Whereas, if we chance to fall a sleep, though we lie in one and the same
posture 7 hours, we shall Wake fresh and without pain, as though the Body did not
weigh at all upon it self in Sleep. It Is certain, the Nerves and Muscles are in
little or no Tension in Sleep; but when we are awake, are always stretched and
compressed, whence weariness: which, if upon our Feet or Sitting, we are not
sensible off, because we remove quick and with ease, and of course; but laid,
we soon find our selves very uneasy, till we change the posture.

But this is not all in the King's Library: There are other things to be seen,
viz. A considerable number of Ancient Roman and Egyptian Antiquities; as,
Lamps, Pateras, and other Vessels belonging to the Sacrifices; A Sistrum or
Egyptian Rattle with three loose and running Wires cross it.

Amongst the great variety of Egyptian Idols, there was one betwixt 2 and 3
foot long of Black Touchstone, with Hieroglyphics engraven down before. I
took particular notice of the Grain of this Stone; and at my return, having had
the Honor of a Paper from Mr. Molyneux from Dublin, giving an account of the
vast and stupendous Natural Pillars to be seen in Ireland, and that the Stones
or Joints which constitute these Pillars, are of the Lapis Lydius, or Basaltes
Kind, having seen one of the Joints at Gresham-Colledge, I easily agree with
him; but much admire, that the Peble Kind should produce such regular Figures;
which is certainly the very hardest Stone to be found in Europe, and which no
Tool of ours will cut.

This also is another Instance (the carved Oblisks being one) of the different
make and goodness of the Egyptian Chisels, of which, and of the retrieving the
ancient Temper of Steel, I have published a Discourse in the Ph. Transactions
some years ago.

I should have had more satisfaction in this Kind, had I met with what I
earnestly sought for, the Egyptian Tombs, which were a long time in the Garden
of Monsieur Valentine at Paris; but were unluckily sent away to his House at
Tours, not long before our coming to Paris: One of these Tombs is said to be of
black Touchstone, to have been brought out of the higher Egypt, and to be full
of Hierogliphicks. Of this in particular Kircher has written.

There is in this Collection a large Piece of Tin Oar from England, very
curious; it has on one side of it a great number of fair and large Opaque
Crystals of Tin, shining like polisht Steel: The plains of those Crystals I
could not easily reckon, but sure I am, having with care examined all the Stone
Crystals, I could meet with, both precious and more common, and also the
Crystals of all Fossil Salts, I never before observed that figure in any of
them, but believe them of a peculiar nature, proper to Tin Oar. I call them
Crystals, though Opaque, because angular and of one constant figure.

P. Hardouin.
I was at the College of Clermont with Pere Hardouin; he showed me the Library
with great Civility; it consists of two long Galleries; The Galleries are well
furnished with Books, having Lights only on one side, and the Windows are not
over large; with Tables under each Light, very commodiously placed for Writing
and Reading. Also certain Closets for Manuscripts, and others for forbidden
Books. In this he showed a great Collection of Jansenius's Original Letters. In
the other a Greek manuscript of the Prophets, of Eusebius's own Hand Writing;
it was in Capitals, but of a different Character from any I had seen; The
Letters very erect, but something thinner, and not so square.

Also a Vulgar Latin in Capitals, very Ancient.

I told him I was well pleased with his Pliny in usum Delphini; and that it
was to the Honor of the French Nation to have labored more particularly upon
that Author; Delachampius first, then Salmasius's Exercitationes Plinianae; and
lastly, this his most Elegant Edition.

The Books are well disposed under Gilt Titles, as Medici in Folio, and
over against them, where the Windows will permit, the Medici in Quarto; in the
other Galley runs a Balustrade, within which are placed the Octavo's and
Twelves.

At one end of the upper Gallery is a very large Tableau, an Original of
Nicolo, of the Massacer of Agamenon; in it there is this commendable, That in
such a horrid Fury, and such variety of Murders in half naked Figures, no one
indecent posture is to be seen.

Pere Hardouin seemed to doubt of the Inscription of Palmyra put out by M.
Spone; That the Greek was faulty, and the Syriac very questionable. I told him
we had had it lately Copied, carefully and truly by one at Rome; Which took
away his Objection of the multiplicity of Letters.

Both he and Valliant agreed, that they had never seen any Medal of Odenatus.
He very obligingly answered my Memoir about Palmyra, Zenobia, and Vabalathus,
with a Transcript of all the Coins he had seen, and had in his possession;
which follows.

Nummi Zenobiae.
EPTIIA NOIA E.. Spes. est apud Seguinum, p. 62. Odenati nullum vidi, nisi apud
Occonem, nullum Palmyrenum. Vabalathi apud Dom. Foucault rei aerariae ac
judiciariae Praefectum in Neustria inferiore. A. K. L. AO. AYPLIANO. E. capite
laureato. Sub ipsum Aureliani mentum litera L. absque anni numero.. AYT. EPIA
OYAALATHO ATHNOY. capite radiato.. AYG. K. L. D. AYPLIANO. E. capite laureato.
L. A.. AYT. EPIA. OYAALATHO. ATH. capite diademate L. D. AYT. K. L. D. AYPLIANO
E. capite laureato. L. B.. AYG. EPIA. OYAALATHO. ATHNOY. capite diademate. L.
E. IMP. C. AURELIANVS AVG. capite radiato.. VABALATHVS VCRIMPR. alii male
VCRIMOR. sic olim interpretatus sum. Vice Caesaris, rector imperii Romani. IMP.
C. VHABALATHVS AVG. capite radiato.. VICTORIA AVG. victoria gestat palmam and
coronam.
Grand Jesuits.
The Library of the Grand Jesuits, near the Gate St. Antoine, is a very fair
Gallery of great length and breadth, and well furnished with Books, on the very
top of the House: They find, that Books keep much drier and sweeter there, than
in lower Rooms, besides the advantage of a clear Sky-light.

P. Daniel is Library Keeper; and was very Civil to me; he showed me a Letter,
which he had just then received from Mons. Huetius, the Learned Bishop of
d'Auranches near Mont St. Michaels in Normandy; wherein he told him, that
having lately received the Catalogues of Books Printed in Holland and England,
during the War; he found, that Learning was much alike at a kind of stand in
Holland and France; but, that it had yet life and vigor in England, which he
rejoiced at.

And, indeed, I had had the same thought from more of the French before. Even
the Jesuits themselves will be little considered, if Learning fall into neglect
and disgrace. Oratory ceased with the Commonwealth of Rome; and so will all
sorts of Learning without Emulation and Rewards.

He showed me P. de la Chaise's Cabinet of Medals.

Also a Vestal of Copper found at Dee in the Country of le Forest.

Also a very entire Loaf or Roman 10 Pound weight of Red Copper, on which was
inscribed Deae. Sec. P. X.

Also a square Stone Urn, or small Tomb, well Carved, and Inscribed. D. M.

l'Abbaie de St. Germains.
I saw the Quire of the Abbey of St. Germains, and the Altar near the lower end
of it; in which Position also I remember to have seen an Altar in the Quire of
St. John's Church at Lions; both plain Tables. Mons. l'Abbe de Villiers, who
has an Apartment in the Convent, a Learned Man, went with me, and to the
Library also; which is two large Galleries well furnished; at the end of one of
them is a large Closet of Manuscripts; also another Armoir in the great
Library, where the most ancient Manuscripts are kept, yet with more care. In
this I saw the Psalter, as it is believed, of St. Germain, who lived in the 6th
Century; it is certainly very ancient; being a large Quarto of fine purple
Velom, and on it are writ the Psalms in large Capital Letters, with Comma's or
Points. The Letters seem to have been of Silver; and the great Initial Capitals
of Gold.

They show also a Psalter in the short Notes of Tyro, Tullius's Libertus; with
a Discourse concerning the use of such Short Hand in the beginning of the
Manuscript; it was writ very fair on Velom, with red Ink, as I remember.

The Codicils or Waxen Table Books of the Ancients; which were thin Cedar
Boards about 14 inches long, and 5 broad, 6 or 8 of them glued together by
Shreds of Parchmen; The Rims were a little raised, with a flat and broad
Border, the better to preserve the black Wax, which was spread over them. I saw
more of these afterward in the King's Library; and by the Letter it is
manifest, they were in use much later, than I could have imagined. This here
was in Latin, and I could read here and there a Word, for the ground was much
torn up, as Pro duobus Falconibus, etc. The Style or Steel Pen had cut through
in many places; so that with a good Eye-glass I could see the board bare. I
take this past to be nothing else, but what the Etchers in Copper use at this
day to cover their Plates with, to defend from the Aquafortis; which is a
Composition of Bitumen and Bees Wax.

Here also I saw a Manuscript of 3 or 4 Leaves written upon true Egyptian
Paper, in which with an Eye-glass 'twas easy to discern, how the flags were
disposed, length-ways and across, one over another. The Letters which
remained, which were but few, were large and fair square Capitals. This
Fragment I take to be the most ancient Writing they have.

P. Mabillon.
I Visited in this Convent, at his Chamber, Pere Mabillon, who has so well
deserved of the Commonwealth of Learning by his Writings, and particularly that
Excellent Book De re Diplomatica; he seemed to me to be a very good Natured and
Free-hearted Man; and was very well pleased to hear, that our Catalogue of
English Manuscripts was so forward in the Press at Oxford. He thankfully owned
the favor of the Cotton Library; and was very sorry to hear of Dr. Bernard's
Death, of whom he spoke very kindly; but he expressed a wonderful Esteem for
Dr. Gale, the Dean of York.

In another Conversation I had with P. Mabillon, (for he was my Neighbor, and
I was often with him) telling him the Account we had brought us of Palmyra, and
the Tracts that were writ of it, and that more was intended to be published
about it, he was much concerned, that those Accounts, which were pure Matters
of Learning in general, were written in English; and he told me, he was afraid
it might be with us, as it was with them, since they cultivated their own
Language so much, they began to neglect the ancient Tongues, the Greek and
Latin.

He showed me certain Figures not ill taken with Red Chalk, of some very
ancient Monuments observed by some of the Fathers of their Order; one of which
was present in the Chamber, upon the Mountain of Framond near Salme, which lies
in the middle of that Tract of the Mountain, called La Vauge, betwixt Alsace
and Lorraine. There were great Remains of an ancient City. These Figures which
the Fathers showed me, were about 12 in all; but 5 or 6 of them were of
Mercury; and Cock at his Foot; a Chlamys knotted upon the Right Shoulder,
hanging at his Back; his Hair laid in curles about his Face, and tied with a
Ribban, whose two ends might be seen on the top of his Head, like Horns; a
Caduceus in his Hand, which was very differently represented in all the Figures
of him; sometimes held up, othertimes the point resting at his Feet; sometimes
the Snakes were twisted about a Stick; and again in others without one, or the
Designer had taken no notice of it; sometimes the Tail of the Serpents spread
and flying about, and again in others close twisted with many braids; a Girdle
came round the bottom of his Belly, and which had in the middle of it two
Rings, one fastened to the other, and hanging betwixt his Legs. These many
Statues of Mercury in a French Country are a confirmation of what Caesar says
of the Religion of the Gauls, in his 6th Book, Deum maxim Mercurium colunt:
hujus sunt plurima simulacra, etc.

There were some few Roman Letters on some of them, which were so imperfect
that I could make nothing of them.

Library of St. Genevieue.
The Library of St. Genevieue is a very large and fair Gallery, upon the very
top of the House, well stored with Books on both sides up to the top, and kept
in Cases wired with Brass; which is a good security, and hinders not the Books
from being seen.

Also it is adorned with fair Busto's of the ancient Men of Learning.

The Musaeum is a little Closet on the side of this Gallery; of which there is
a Book lately published: I saw in it very little of Natural History, that was
remarkable. They keep half a dozen Joints of a large Cornu Ammonis, which they
show as a rarity. But it is well stored with ancient Idols, and Sacrificing
Vessels, Lacrymatoirs, Pateras, Strigils; also ancient Weights and Measures;
Coins, and particularly the As, and its first and latter Divisions.

There we saw an ancient As, with Etruscan Letters of a kind of red Copper; The
Letters seem to be akin to the old Greek Characters. These are the Capital
Letters about the Coin going round, and bringing every Letter before you. See
Table 1. Figure 2.

As quasi Aes; This is very reasonable, for before the Greeks had invented
double Letters, the Romans were skilled in their Writing. So Vitruvius De
architect. l. 7. c. 2. Ed. Barbari.
tells us Aerugo was in the Hetruscan Tongue called Eruca; Whence undoubtedly
by Translation the common Caterpillar had its Name, from its blueness; which
also is an evidence, that the Tuscan Writing was in the old Greek Character.

But nothing pleased me more than to have seen the Remains of the Cabinet of
the Noble Pieresc. the greatest and heartiest Maecenas to his power of Learned
Men of any of this Age.

Amongst the first and very old Brass Roman Coins there was a Sextans with a
Caduceus of Mercury on one side, and a Scallop Shell on the other; probably,
because they might have at first had the use of Shell Money, as some parts of
both the Indies and Africa have at this day, till Mercury, whose Emblem that
Staff is, taught them the use of Metallic Money.

Also in this Cabinet are Wet Measures, as the Ancient Congius, of which they
have an old one, and an exact Copy of that of the Capitol; also a Sextarius,
and a Quartarius. Now the Congius containing 120 Ounces The Sextarius 20
Ounces; The Hemina 10 Ounces; The Quartarius 5 Ounces, I doubt not but the
Cyathus, by reason of the aforesaid Division, held two Ounces and an half;
which is the Measure so frequently to be met with in old Physic Authors, and of
so great concern in Doses.

In that Hetruscan As beforementioned, one Cap coifs or covers the double head
of Janus. I saw an ancient Statue of Mercury in the Garden belonging to the
Kings Library in Paris, where Mercury has upon his Head a long Cap doubled, or
laid double upon his Head, as though there were some affinity betwixt those two
Inventors of Trade, Arts and Learning.

Here also we saw the Steel Dies of the Paduan Brothers, by which they stamped
and falsified the best ancient Medals so well, that they are not to be
distinguished but by putting them into those Molds; which makes them very
valuable, there being a 100 and more of them, and are prised at 10000 Crowns.
They Stamped upon old Medals, whereby the Cheat was the greater; for by this
means they were of the ancient Metal, had the green Coat, and the same ragged
Edges.

I saw a Picture here of about 6 inches over, finely painted in Mosaic, the
very little squares were scarce visible to the naked Eye, but the whole
appeared like the finest Hatchings in Stampes; yet by the application of a good
Eye-glass, I could readily distinguish the squares of all colors, as in other
Mosaiques. This sort of Painting had a very admirable effect, besides the
duration.

Here was also the Leg of a Mummi well preserved, the Toes only bare, black and
shining as Pitch: The Bandage was very curious and was disposed in Oblique
Circles, Decussated; but the Fillating very narrow. I told the Father, that
this was still Flesh; and that Mummie therefore in Venice-Treacle did break
Lent, if given at that time; He answered, he did not believe it: I told him how
he should be convinced, viz. If that Leg was kept a good while in a damp
Cellar, it would yield and stink like very Carrion, though it was at least 3000
years old; which thing happened to one in London, so carelessly laid by.

There was one thing very curious, and that was an Ancient Writing Instrument
of thick and strong Silver-Wire, wound up like a hollow Bottom or Screw; with
both the Ends pointing one way, and at a distance; so that a Man might easily
put his Forefinger betwixt the two Points, and the Screw fills the Ball of his
Hand. One of the Points was the Point of a Bodkin, which was to Write on Waxed
Tables: The other Point was made very Artificially, like the Head and
Upper-Beak of a Cock, and the Point divided in two, just like our Steel-Pens;
from whence undoubtedly the Moderns had their Patterns; which are now made also
of fine Silver and Gold, or Princes Metal; all which yet want a Spring, and
are therefore not so useful as of Steel, or a Quill: But a Quill soon spoils;
Steel is undoubtedly the best, and if you use China Ink, the most lasting of
all Inks, it never rusts the Pen, but rather preserves it with a kind of
Varnish which dries upon it, though you take no care in wiping it.

M. Colberts Library.
I saw the Library of the late Monsieur Colbert, that great Patron of Learning.
The Gallery wherein the Printed Books are kept, is a Ground-Room, with Windows
on one side only, a-long a fine Garden. It is the neatest Library in Paris,
very large, and exceedingly well furnished. At the upper-end is a fair Room,
wherein the Papers of State are kept; particularly those of the Administration
of Cardinal Mazarine, and his own Accounts when he was in Employment: These
make up many hundred Folio's, finely Bound in Red Maroquin and Gilt.

The Manuscript Library is abovestairs, in three Rooms, and is the choicest of
that kind in Paris: It contains 6610 Volumes. The Catalogue of them Monsieur
Balure showed me; which he said was designed shortly for the Press.

He showed me many rare Books, Carolus Calvus's Bible, a vast Folio in Vellum,
and his Prayer Book or Hours, all writ in Gold Letters.

Also the Missa Beati Rhenani, whereof all the Copies were burnt but four. The
Original Deed of the Agreement of the Greek and Roman Church at Florence. The
Regalia agreed upon at Lions, and many others which I have forgot.

I saw neither Greek nor Latin Manuscript but what had the Marks of the Goths
upon them: that is, the Letters maimed, and consequently not very Ancient.

He showed us Servieto's Book, for which he was Burnt at Geneva; which cost
Monsieur Colbert at an Auction in England, 25 Crowns. The Title is, De
Trinitatis Erroribus Libri 7. per Michaelam Serveto alias Reves ab Aragonia
Hispanum 1531. I had forgot the particular place where the Circulation of the
Blood through the Lungs is mentioned: but he told me very Civilly, I should
have it Transcribed at any time.

We told him, we came to see him as well as the Library: He replied, It was his
hap to have more Reputation than Merit. He was a little old Man, but very
cheerful and of a quick Wit.

He complained much of the Refusal of the Emperor's People concerning the
Manuscripts of Vienna, in order to the publication of the Capitulaires: For he
said, Letters were never at War: That for his part he had most willingly given
leave for at least Twenty four Manuscripts to be Collated for Dr. Mill's
Edition of the Testament.

Library of the Sorbonne.
The Library of the Sorbonne is a very long and large Gallery, reasonable well
stored with Books; no Catalogue Printed.

Amongst the Manuscripts, they show, Titus Livy in French, upon Vellum, in a
very large Folio, Bound in two Books: The first is almost throughout
Illuminated with very fine Miniatures. The Book is Dedicated to King John, by
Pelon. Berchorius: And in the Title Page is a very curious Design of that King
receiving the Present from the Author of the Translation.

Amongst the Illuminations and Ornamental Pictures in the Margent, I could not
but take notice of a Brass Cannon fired, well Painted, with two large Arms or
Gudgeons, one on each side near the Touchhole; which Evinces Cannon to have
been in use at that time.

This Manuscript confirms the loss of Titus Livy, and that it was deficient in
that Age, as to what is now wanting, there being nothing more in this than what
is in the Printed Copy. This was the Gift of Cardinal Richlieu to the Library;
who in a manner Rebuilt the whole College, and Beautified it as it is. His Tomb
is in the middle of the Quire, before the great Altar, in White Marble; and is
for plainness and exquisite Performance, the best thing of that kind I ever saw.

Library St. Victor.
I see the Library of St. Victor: This most Ancient Convent is the best seated
of any in Paris; has very large Gardens, with shady Walks, well kept. The
Library is a fair and large Gallery: It is open three days a week, and has a
range of double Desks quite through the middle of it, with Seats and
Conveniences of Writing for 40 or 50 People.

The Catalogue was not finished, nor intended to be Printed; which yet I think
is always necessary in all Corporations, for check of loss of Books, for the
use of Strangers, for Benefactions.

In a part of it, at the upper end, are kept the Manuscripts; they are said to
be 3000; which though not very Ancient, have yet been found very useful for the
most correct Editions of many Authors. This is one of the pleasantest Rooms
that can be seen, for the Beauty of its Prospect, and the Quiet and Freedom
from Noise in the middle of so great a City.

In this Convent is very prettily lodged, in an outward Court, Monsieur Morin,
another Physician of that Name. In his Apartment, he has a large and excellent
Collection of Physic Books and Natural History. He Saluted me with the
greatest Kindness imaginable; and at first word, asked me, If there was any
more of Sir Francis Willoughby's Works Printed besides his History of Fishes,
and that other of Birds; both which he had. He had in another Room a well
stored Musaeum of Natural History, of all sorts, and of comparative Anatomies:
A Cabinet of Shells, another of Seeds, among which were some from China:
Variety of Skeletons, etc.

Celestins.
I saw the Celestins. The Library is an Upper-Gallery, very pleasant, and
plentifully furnished with Books. This is a very fine Convent; with the noblest
Dortoire, having open Galleries round: also, very large Gardens, with Alleys
and shady Groves; and diverse Kitchin-Gardens, well Cultivated. Also a Vineyard
of White Wind Grapes, well kept; which is the only thing of that Kind within
the Walls of Paris.

Here I also saw the Closet or Cell of P. Hochereau; who had a very choice
Collection of Original Paintings, of very many of the best Masters: Amongst the
rest, I took notice of the Originals of Rambrant, excellent Pieces, St. Peter
and the Cock: The Nativity of our Savior: And, The Massacre of the Innocents.
His Coloring is not to be imitated: his Invention great and natural, and the
Design most correct.

(...) de l'Oratoirs. P. Mallebranch.
I was to Visit Pere Mallebranche of the Fathers of the Oratory: They live very
neatly together in a kind of Community, but under no Rule: He was very
handsomely lodged, in a Room well furnished: He is a very tall, lean man, of a
ready Wit and cheerful Conversation.

After an hours discourse, he carried me into the Public Library of the House:
A fair Gallery well lighted, and well furnished with Books; with an Apartment at
the upper end for Manuscripts, where were many Greek and Hebrew. Amongst the
rest, the Library Keeper showed us the Samaritan Pentateuch, of which Morin
made use. It seemed to me to be much later than that of Sir John Cotton's
Library with us, because it was of a much smaller Letter, and more broken in
the Writing, which was all I am capable to judge by.

They were busy in Reforming the Disposition of the Library; and making a good
Catalogue, according to the Method of the late Archbishop of Rheims; and which
I like well of, they had drawn out some Hundreds of Books, and exposed them in
the middle of the Library, upon a long Table, for Sale, as being Duplicates;
and from the Sale of them to furnish themselves with what they wanted.

The Books which were written by Protestants, I observed, they were locked up in
Wired Cases, not to be come at without particular leave.

The Freedom and Nature of this Order puts me in mind of what I heard of a
certain rich and learned Man, Monsieur Pinet, of the Law; who put himself at
length into Religion, as they say, amongst the Fathers; but first persuaded his
Cook to do so too; for he was resolved not to quit his good Soupes, and such
Dishes as he liked, whatever became of his Penance and Retirement. This
Compliment the Elegant and Learned Monsieur Peletier, in Monsieur Colbert's
place, Controller General of the Finances, made his Guests at his Country House
near Choisy, having voluntarily quitted all his Employments at Court: He said,
He reserved his Cook, though he retrencht the rest of his Retinue; they might
therefore expect a slender Philosophers Dinner, though well dressed.

It is wonderful to consider how most of the rest of the Orders abuse
themselves for God's Sake, as they call it. Hunger and Ill-Diet not only
destroys a Man's Health, but Maugre all his Devotion, puts him out of Humor,
and makes him Repine and Envy the rest of Mankind; and well if it do not make
him also Curse in his Heart his Maker; Job is not every Man's Roll to Act. The
Original and Rise of Natural Philosophy and Physic was to Invent a more
wholesome and better Food, than the Beasts have, and to Eat Bread and Flesh
instead of Herbs and Corn; to Drink Wine instead of Water; those, and a
thousand other things were the Blessings of Physic, and still the good
management of these things, both in Health and Sickness, are under the
Directions of the Physicians. Now for a sort of Melancholy and Willful Men, to
renounce these Comforts, and destroy their Healths, and all this upon a
pretended Principle of Religion and Devotion, seems to me, I confess, great
Ingratitude to God the Author of it.

Indeed, I heartily pitied F. P. an industrious honest Man, after his return
from the Indies, who was nothing but Skin and Bone; and yet by the Rules of his
Order he could not Eat any thing that was wholesome and proper for his Cure;
nothing but a little slimy nasty Fish and Herbs: And though he took, as he told
me, Hypocochoana five times, it had no effect upon him. It Is true, I never
heard him complain; But what will not blind prejudice do against all the Reason
of Mankind.

I know some of these Men have been useful to Mankind by their Studies; but the
very same men would have been much more, had they staid with their Neighbors,
and Taught the World by their Conversation and Example; Wisdom, and Justice,
and Innocence, and Temperance, which they highly pretend to, are not things to
be hid in Corners, but to be brought forth to Instruct and Adorn the Age we
live in: To abandon the World, and all the Conveniences of Life and Health, is
(let them say what they please) the height of Chagrin, and not Religion.

There were some other Public Libraries I saw, as that of the Grands
Augustins, College Mazarin, College Navarre, and great many more I did not
see for want of an opportunity; but there is nothing particular I remember
about them.

There is such a passion of setting up for Libraries, that Books are come to
most unreasonable Rates.

I paid to Anisson 36 Livres for Nizolius; 20 Livres for the Two small Quarto's
of the Memoirs of the Academie de Sciences, that is, as I may say, for two
years Philosophic Transactions; for they began those Monthly Memoirs in
imitation of ours, out of the Registers of the Academy, but did not think fit
to continue them above two years.

As to Stamps, I had a mind to have bought a complete Set of Melans, that
incomparable Master; but I was asked 200 Livres, and 12 excepted, which might
amount to as much more; for some of his Gravings in Octavo done at Rome, they
asked me a Pistol a-piece; and for the Head of Justinianus a Louis; which yet is
his Masterpiece.

I was at an Auction of Books in the Rue St. Jaques, where were about 40 or 50
People, most Abbots and Monks. The Books were sold with a great deal of
trifling and delay as with us, and very dear; for Hispania illustrata And.
Sciotti, of the Francfort Edition, from 20 Livres, at which it was set, they
bid up by little and little to 36 Livres; at which it was sold. The next was a
Catalogue of French Books in a thin Fol. in an old Parchment Cover by De la
Croix de Maine, 8 Livres. And so I left them to shift it amongst themselves.

After having said so much of the Public Libraries, I cannot but congratulate
their happiness, to have them so well secured from Fire; it being one of the
Perfections of this City to be so built and furnished, as not to have suffered
by it these many Ages; and, indeed, I cannot see how Malice it self could
destroy them, for the Houses here are all built of Stone, Walls, Floors,
Staircases and all, some few Rooms excepted; no Wainscot; Woollen or Silk
Hangings, which cannot be fired without giving notice by the intolerable
stench, and the supply of much Fuel. It Is well for us in London, that there are
very few public Libraries, and those small and inconsiderable, and that the
great number of Books are distributed into a thousand hands, (no Country in
Europe can compare to us for private Libraries) for if they were together in
such vast quantities as in Paris, Learning would run the hazard of daily
suffering. Here with us, methinks, every Man that goes to Bed, when asleep,
lies like a dead Roman upon a Funeral Pile, dreading some unexpected
Apotheosis; for all is combustible about him, and the Paint of the Deal Boards
may serve for Incense, the quicker to burn him to Ashes.

In the next place I will Account for what I saw, that seemed to me singular
and new in the Improvement of Arts, or wanting in our Country.

Potterie of St. Clou.
I saw the Potterie of St. Clou, with which I was marvellously well pleased, for
I confess I could not distinguish betwixt the Pots made there, and the finest
China Ware I ever saw. It will, I know, be easily granted me, that the
Paintings may be better designed and finished, (as indeed it was) because our
Men are far better Masters in that Art, than the Chinese; but the Glazing came
not in the least behind theirs, not for whiteness, nor the smoothness of
running without Bubles; again, the inward Substance and Matter of the Pots was,
to me, the very same, hard and firm as Marble, and the self same grain, on this
side vitrification. Farther, the Transparency of the Pots the very same.

I see them also in the Mold, undried, and before the Painting and Glazing was
applied, they were as white as Chalk, and melted upon the Tongue like raw
Tobacco Pipe Clay, and felt betwixt the Teeth soft like that, and very little
gritty; so that I doubt not, but they are made of that very Clay.

As to the Temper of the Clay, the Man freely owned to me, it was 3 or 4 times
well beaten and wet, before it was put to work on the Wheel; but I believe it
must first be melted in fair Water, and carefully drawn off, that the heaviest
part may first sink; which also may be proper for Courser Works.

That it required two, and sometimes 3 or 4 Fires to bake it, to that height we
saw it in the most finished Pots: Nay, some of them had had 11 Fires.

I did not expect to have found it in this perfection, but imagined this might
have arrived at the Gomron Ware; which is, indeed, little else, but a total
Vitrification; but I found it far otherwise, and very surprising, and which I
account part of the felicity of the Age to equal, if not surpass the Chinese
in their finest Art.

As for the Red Ware for China, that has been, and is done in England, to a far
greater perfection than in China, we having as good Materials, viz. the Soft
Haematites, and far better Artists in Pottery. But in this particular we are
beholding to two Dutchmen Brothers, who wrought in Staffordshire, (as I have
been told) and were not long since at Hammersmith.

They sold these Pots at St. Clou at excessive Rates; and for their ordinary
Chocolate Cups asked Crowns a-piece. They had arrived at the Burning on Gold in
neat Chequer Works. He had some Furnitures of Tea Tables at 400 Livres a Set.

There was no Molding or Model of China Ware, which they had not imitated; and
had added many Fancies of their own, which had their good effects, and appeared
very beautiful.

Mons. Morin in Conversation told me, that they kept their Sand as a Secret to
themselves; but this could not be for other purposes than Coloring: Also he
said they used Salt of Kelp in the Composition, and made a thing not unlike
Frit for Glass to be wrought up with White Clay; neither could this be, for I
did not taste it in the Raw Pots.

The Ingenuous Master told me, he had been 25 years about the Experiment, but
had not attained it fully, till within this 3 years.

Glasserie.
The Glass-house out of the Gate of St. Antoine well deserves seeing; but I did
lament the Fondery was no longer there, but removed to Cherborne in Normandy
for cheapness of Fuel. It Is certainly a most considerable addition to the
Glass-making. For I saw here one Looking-glass foiled and finished, 88 inches
long, and 48 inches broad; and yet but one quarter of an inch thick. This, I
think, could never be effected by the Blast of any Man; but I suppose to be run
or cast upon Sand, as Lead is; which yet, I confess, the toughness of Glass
Metal makes very much against.

There they are polished; which Imploys daily 600 Men, and they hope in a
little time to employ a 1000 in several Galleries. In the lower they grind the
course Glass with a Sand Stone, the very same they Pave the Streets in Paris;
of which broken they have great heaps in the Courts of the Workhouses: This
Stone is beat to Powder, and sifted through a fine Tamis. In the Upper Gallery,
where they polish and give the last Hand, they work in 3 Rows, and 2 Men at a
Plate, with Ruddle or Powdered Haematites in Water.

The Glasses are set fast in White Puttie, upon flat Tables of Stone, sawed
thin for that purpose. The grinding the Edges and Borders is very troublesome,
and odious for the horrid grating noise it makes, and which cannot be endured
to one that is not used to it; and yet by long custom these Fellows are so
easy with it, that they Discourse together as nothing were. This is done
below, and out of the way of the rest.

It Is very diverting to see the joint Labor of so many Men upon one Subject.
This has made Glass for Coaches very cheap and common; so that even many of the
Fiacres or Hackneys, and all the Remises have one large Glass before.

Artificial Pearl.
Amongst the Bioux made at Paris, a great quantity of Artificial Pearl is to be
had, of diverse sorts; but the best are those which are made with Scales of
Bleakes. These Bleaks they fish in the River Seine at Paris, and sell them to
the Pearl-makers for that purpose.

Mons. Favi, at the Pearl d'Angleterre, told me, that he paid for the Fish
only of the little River Yier of Ville Neuve St. George, 4 Leagues off of
Paris, by the year 110 Pistols. This Fish in French is called De la Bellette:
Sometimes in Winter he has had 30 Hampers of the Fish brought him, for the
Scales only which he uses in Pearl-making. He sells some Strings for a Pistol;
and they have formerly been sold much dearer. This sort is very neat and
lasting.

Enquiring of a Goldsmith, a great Dealer in Pearl, about those which were made
of the Scales of Fishes, he told me, that it was so; That the Scales were beat
to Powder, and that made into a Liquid Past with Icing-glass, and cast into the
hollow Glass Beads, and so gave the color by way of foil from the inside.

I asked him, if he had any Fresh Water and Muscle Pearl; and he forthwith
showed me one of 23 Grains, of a blush color or faint Cornation, perfectly
globular; he told me, he valued it at 400 l. for that it would mix or match
better with the Oriental Sea Pearl, than the bluish ones. Further, he assured
me he had seen Pearl of 60 odd Grains of Fresh Water Muscles; and some Pear
fashioned. That in Lorrain, and at Sedan, they fisht many Pearls in the Rivers
thereabout.

The Gobelins.
The formerly so famous a Workhouse, the Goblins, is miserably fallen to decay;
perhaps, because the King having furnished all his Palaces, has little more to
do for them.

Here I saw the making Marble Tables, inlaid with all sorts of colored Stones.

Also the Atteliers or Workhouses of Two of the famous Sculptures Tuby; in
which was a Lacoon Copied in White Marble admirably; also that other of
Quoisivox, in which was, amongst other rare Pieces, Castor and Pollux, in White
Marble, exceeding beautiful and large; a Copy also after the Antique.

Hubins.
At Hubins the Eye-maker, I saw Drawers full of all sorts of Eyes, admirable for
the contrivance, to match with great exactness any Iris whatsoever: This being
a case, where mis-matching is intolerable.

He himself also formerly wrought in false Pearl, and affirmed, that the Glass
Pearls were painted within with a Paste made of the Scales of the Bleak only;
which he said was a good Trade here to the Fishermen, who sold the Scales for
so much the Ounce. These Necklaces were formerly sold at great Prices, 2 or 3
Pistoles a-piece.

La Platrerie.
I saw the Platrerie or Plaster Quarries near Montmartre, and the manner of
burning of it. It Is burnt with open Fire, set up against it; The hardest Stone
is burnt enough in 2 or 3 hours time.

The top Band or Bed is very hard like a Freestone, they distinguish the Beds
by several Names, i. e. 1. Mutton, 2. Lane, 3. Busier, 4. Clikar, 5. Grosban,
6. Pillier noir, etc.

That which they call Lane is like Talk or Selenites transparent, and splits
in thin flakes; but there is but little of it, and the Beds are small; This
seems to be but a Fluor to the greater Beds of gray Stone. This Rock is covered
with a kind of gray Sand to a great depth; which is not of the nature of
Plaster.

Though this Plaster burnt is never used (that I could learn) to fertilize
either Corn Ground, or Pasture, as our Limestone is; yet I see no reason, why
it may not, it being full of Nitre, if it has lain long in damp Caves.

This is not peculiar to Paris only; for I have seen Quarries of it near
Clifford-Moore in Yorkshire; where it is called Hall-Plaster.

Millstones.
I cannot omit the Millstones, which they grind their Wheat with at Paris, as
upon the River of the Gobelins out of the Gate St. Bernard, where it falls into
the Seine, and all throughout Picardy down to Calais, where I have seen great
numbers of them.

These Millstones are very useful, and so sweet, that not the least grit is
ever found in their Bread: They are mostly made up of pieces, 2, 3, or more set
together by a cement, and hooped round with Iron to keep the pieces faster
together: They are made of a kind of Honeycomb Stone, wrought by the
petrification of Water, or Stalactites. The very selfsame Stone I have seen
Rocks of on the River Banks at Knarsborough, at the Dropping Well in
Yorkshire: therefore I advise my Countrymen to put these excellent Stones in
practice; for certainly no place stands in more need of it; for the Bread in
the North of England is intolerably gritty, by reason of those Sand or Moore
Stones, with which they grind their Corn.

These Stones are sold at 500 Livres a pair; whence they come I forgot to be
informed.

In the next place we will see how the Parisians Eat, Drink, and Divert
themselves.

Of the Food of the Parisians.
Bread.
The Diet of the Parisians consists chiefly of Bread and Herbs; it is here, as
with us, finer and courser. But the common Bread, or Pain de Gonesse, which is
brought twice a week into Paris from a Village so called, is purely white, and
firm and light, and made altogether with Leaven; mostly in 3 Pound Loaves, and
3 d. a Pound. That which is Baked in Paris is courser and much worse.

As for the fine Manchet, or French Bread, as we call it, I cannot much commend
it; it is of late, since the quantity of Beer that is Brewed in Paris, often so
bitter, that it is not to be eaten, and we far exceed them now in this
particular in London.

The Gray Salt of France (which there, at Table, is altogether in every thing
made use of) is incomparably better and more wholesome than our White Salt. This
I the rather mention, because it seems not yet to enter fully into the
consideration and knowledge of our People; who are nice in this particular to a
fault. But I must take leave to tell them, that our Salt spoils every thing,
that is pretended to be preserved by it, be it Fish or Flesh. For whether
boiled from the inland Salt Pits, or the Sea Water, it is little less than
Quicklime, and burns and reeses all it touches; so that it is pity to see so
much good Fish, as is caught upon the Northern Line of Coast, particularly the
God and Ling and Herring, now of little value, which were formerly the most
esteemed Commodities of England. It Is certain there is no making good Salt by
fierce and vehement boiling, as is used; but it must be kerned either by the
heat of the Sun, as in France; or by a full and over-weighty Brine, as at
Milthrope in the Washes of Lancashire; for in no other place in England I ever
saw it right made; but yet that is not there understood to purpose, for they
also boil the Brine, which possibly by some slight Artifice might be brought to
give its Salt without stress of Fire.

White Kidney Beans and Lentils.
In Lent the common People feed much on White Kidney Beans, and white or pale
Lentils, of which there are great Provisions made in all the Markets, and to be
had ready boiled. I was well pleased with this Lentil; which is a sort of Pulse
we have none of in England. There are two sorts of White Lentils sold here; one
small one, from Burgundy, by the Cut of Briare; and another bigger, as broad
again from Chartres; A 3d also much larger, is sometimes to be had from
Languedoc. Those excepted, our Seed Shops far exceed theirs, and consequently
our Gardens, in the Pulse Kind for variety; both Pea and Bean.

Long Turnips.
The Roots differ much from ours. There are here no round Turnips; but all long
ones and small; but excellently well tasted, and are of a much greater use,
being proper for Soupes also; for which purpose ours are too strong; we have,
indeed, of late got them into England, but our Gardners understand not the
Managing of them. They sow them here late after Midsummer; and at Martinmas or
sooner, before the Frost begin, they dig them up, cut off the tops, and put
them into Sand in their Cellars, where they will keep good till after Easter,
nay, till Whitsuntide; Whereas if the Frost take them, they are quite spoilt,
and that piece of ill Husbandry makes them to be despised here; having lost
their taste, and they soon grow sticky in the Ground. The Sandy Plains of
Vaugerard near Paris, are famous for this sort of most Excellent Root. After
the same manner they keep their Carrets.

After we had been 2 or 3 days Journey in France, we found no other Turnips but
the Navet; and still the nearer Paris the better. These, as I said, are small
long Turnips, not bigger than a Knife Haft, and most excellent in Soupes, and
with Boiled and Stewed Mutton. I think it very strange, that the Seed should so
much improve in England, as to produce Roots of the same Kind 6 or 10 times as
big as there; for I make no question, but the long Turnips, of late only in our
Markets, are the same.

Potato.
The Potato are scarce to be found in their Markets, which are so great a Relief
to the People of England, and very nourishing and wholesome Roots; Jerusalem
Artichokes.
but there are store of Jerusalem Hartichokes.

Cabage.
They delight not so much in Cabage, as I expected, at least at the Season while
we were there, from December to Midsummer. I never saw in all the Markets once
Sprouts, that is, the tender Roots of Cabages; nor in their public Gardens,
any Reserves of old Stalks. The Red Cabage is esteemed here, and the Savoy.

But to make amends for this, they abound in vast quantities of large Red
Onions and Garlic. And the long and sweet White Onion of Languedoc are to be
had also here. Also Leeks, Rockamboy, and Shallots are here in great use.

It has been observed, that the Northern People of Europe much delight in
Cabage, as the Russes, Poles, Germans, etc. It Is certain the Cabage thrives
best in cold Countries, and is naturally a Northern Plant, and the Keel is to
be found wild upon the Maritine Rocks, as I have seen it at Whitby, and the
Cold ripens it, and makes it more tender and palatable.

The Southern People are pleased with the Onion Kind, for the same reason, for
that the great Heats meliorate them, but give a rankness to the Cabage. The
Leeks are here much smaller than with us; but to recompense this, they are
blancht here with more care and art, and are 3 times as long in the white part,
which is by sinking them early so deep in mellow Earth. There is no Plant of
the Onion Kind so hardy as this, and so proper for the cold Mountains; witness
the use the Welsh have made of them from all Ages; and indeed it is excellent
against Spitting of Blood, and all Diseases of the Throat and Lungs.

Lettice.
Though the Lettice be the great and universal Sallet, yet I did not find they
came near our People, for the largeness and hardness of them; indeed, about a
week before we left Paris, the long Roman Lettice filled their Markets, which
was incomparable, and I think beyond our Silesian.

White Beets.
April and May the Markets were served with vast quantities of White Beets, an
Herb rarely used with us, and never that I know of, in that manner for Soupes.
The Leaves grow long and large, and are tied up, as we do our Silesian or Roman
Lettice to blanch, and then cut by the Root: The Stalks are very broad and
tender, and they only are used, stripped of the green Leaves; They Cook those
Stalks in different manners.

Asparagus.
The Asparagus here are in great plenty, but for the first month they were very
bitter and unpleasant; from whence that proceeded I cannot guess; afterward I
did not much perceive it.

Sorrel.
They are so great Lovers of Sorrel, that I have seen whole Acres of it planted
in the Fields; and they are to be commended for it; for nothing is more
wholesome, and it is good to supply the place of Lemons, against the Scurvy, or
any ill habit of the Body.

Mushrooms.
But after all, the French delight in nothing so much as Mushroomes; of which
they have daily, of which they have daily, and all the Winter long, store of
fresh and new gathered in the Markets. This surprised me; nor could I guess
where they had them, till I found they raised them on hot Beds in their Gardens.

Of Forced Mushroomes they have many Crops in a year; but for the Months of
August, September, October, when they naturally grow in the Fields, they
prepare no Artificial Beds.

They make in the Fields and Gardens out of the Bar of Vaugerard (which I saw)
long narrow Trenches, and fill those Trenches with Horse Dung 2 or 3 foot
thick, on which they throw up the common Earth of the place, and cover the Dung
with it, like the ridge of a House, high pitched; and over all they put long
Straw or long Horse Litter; Champignons.
Out of this Earth springs the Champignons, after Rain, and if Rain comes not,
they Water the Beds every day, even in Winter.

They are 6 days after their springing, or first appearance, before they pull
them up for the Market.

On some Beds they have plenty, on others but few, which demonstrate they come
of Seed in the Ground; for all the Beds are alike.

A Gardner told me, he had the other year near an Acre of Ground ordered in
this manner, but he lost a 100 Crowns by it; but mostly they turn to as good
profit, as any thing they can plant.

They destroy their old Beds in Summer, and dung their Grounds with them.

They prepare their new Beds the latter end of August, and have plentiful Crops
of Mushrooms toward Christmas, and all the Spring, till after March.

Moriglio's.
I saw in the Markets the beginning of April, fresh gathered Moriglio's, the
first of that Kind of Mushroom, that I remember ever to have seen; though
formerly I had been very curious and inquisitive about this Kind of Plant, and
had distinguished and described 30 Species of them growing in England, yet I do
not remember ever to have found this Species with us; it is blackish, and
becomes much blacker, when boiled, whence probably it had its Name; but there
are some few of them that are yellow. They are always of a round Pyramidal
Figure, upon a short thick Foot-stalk; The Footstalk is smooth, but the outside
of the Mushroom is all deeply pleated and wrinkled like the inside of a Beasts
Maw. The Moriglio split in two from top to bottom is all hollow and smooth,
Foot, stalk, and all. In this hollowness is sometimes contained dangerous
Insects. The taste raw is not ungrateful, and very tender. This Mushroom seems
to me to be produced of the Tree Kind.

This sort of Mushroom is much esteemed in France, and is mostly gathered in
Woods at the foot of the Oaks; There were some of them as big as Turkey Eggs.
They are found in great quantities in the Woods in Champagne, about Reims, and
Nostre Dame de Liesse.

They string them, and dry them; and they seem to me to have a far better
relish than the Champignons.

The French say there are no bad Moriglio's; but there are bad Mushrooms. At
first I was very shie of eating them; but by degrees, and that there was scarce
any Ragouts without them, I became pleased with them, and found them very
innocent. I am persuaded the harm that comes from eating them, is from the
noxious Insects and Vermin that feed upon them, and creep into them; I have
often found them full of such Animals. Possibly the Garden or forced Mushrooms,
being that is done in Winter, and in the Spring, may be much freer of this
mischief, at what time Insects are dead, or not much stirring, than the wild
Mushrooms of August.

Fish.
This City is well served with Carp, of which there is an incredible quantity
spent in the Lent; They are not large, and I think are the better for it, but
they are very clean of Mud, and well tasted.

They have a particular way of bringing fresh Oysters to Town, which I never
saw with us; To put them up in Straw Baskets of a Pecke suppose, cut from the
Shell, and without the Liquor; They are thus very good for Stewing, and all
other manner of Dressing.

There is such plenty of Macreuse, a sort of Sea Ducks, in the Markets all
Lent, that I admire where they got so many; but these are reckoned and esteemed
as Fish, and therefore they take them with great Industry; They have a rank
fishy taste, yet for want of other Flesh were very welcome. I remember we had
at our Treat at the King's Charge at Versailles a Macreuse Pie near two foot
diameter, for it was in Lent; which being high Seasoned, did go down very well
with rare Burgundy. There is a better Argument in Leewenhoeke for Birds
participating something of the nature of Fish, though their Blood is hot, than
any the Council of Trent could think of, and that is, that the Globuli of the
Blood of Birds are Oval, as those of Fishes are; but this will take in all the
Bird Kind; which also in time those Gentlemen may think fit to grant.

Flesh.
As for their Flesh, Mutton and Beef, if they are good in their Kind, they come
little short of ours, I cannot say they exceed them. But their Veal is not to
be compared with ours, being red and course; and I believe no Country in
Europe understands the Management of that sort of Food like the English. This
was once proper to Essex; but now it is well known, that nothing contributes
more to the whiteness and tenderness of the Flesh of Calves, than often
Bleeding them, and giving them much Food of Milk and Meal, besides sucking the
Dam. By much Bleeding the red Cake of the Blood is exhausted, and becomes all
White Serum or Chyle. The same effect Cramming has upon Poultry, so as the
Blood is well near all Chyle; and the Livers of Geese so fed by force, will
become, for the same reason, vastly great, and white and delicious.

I cannot but take notice here of a great Prejudice the French lie under, in
relation to our Flesh; It Is generally said amongst them, that our Meat in
England will not make so strong Broth, as the French, by a third part. If they
say, not so salt and savoury, and strong tasted, I agree with them; and yet the
French Meat is never the better. For first their Meat is mostly leaner and more
dry, and (which is all in all in this matter of Soupes) is long kept before it
be spent, which gives it a higher and salter taste; for as Meat rots, it
becomes more urinous and salt. Now our People by custom, covet the freshest
Meat, and cannot endure the least tendency to putrefaction; and we have good
reason to do so, because our Air is twice as moist as theirs, which does often
cause in the keeping of Meat a Mustiness, which is intolerable to all Mankind;
whereas the Air of France being so much drier, keeping of Meat, not only makes
it tender, but improves the taste. So that could we secure our Meat, in keeping
it from that unsavory quality, it would far outdo the French Meat, because
much more juicy.

I don't remember I eat of above two sorts of Flesh, but what we have as good
or better in England, and that was of the Wild Pigs; and the Redleg'd
Partridge. Of these last I eat at St. Clou, taken thereabouts; as to bigness;
they are much degenerated from those in Languedoc, and less; but far excel the
gray Partridge in taste.

Fruits.
As for their Fruits our Journey was in the worst time of the year, from
December to Midsummer, so that we had little save Winter Fruits; some few Bon
Chritiens we tasted, not much better than ours, but something freer of Stones;
the Virguleus Pears were admirable, but to our sorrow, they did not last long
after our arrival.

The Kentish Pippin, as we call it, was here excellent; but two other sorts of
Apples stock the Markets. The Winter Calvil or Queening, which though a tender
and soft Apple, yet continued good till after Easter. Also the Pome d'Apis,
which is served here for show, more than use; being a small flat Apple, very
beautiful, very red on one side, and pale or white on the other, and may serve
the Ladies at their Toilets for a Pattern to Paint by. However this tender
Apple was not contemptible after Whitsuntide; and which is its property, it
never smells ill, though the Ladies keep it (as sometimes they do) about them.

I never met with any thing peculiar in their Sweet Meats, but a Marmalade of
Orange Flowers; which indeed was admirable; 'Twas made with those Flowers, the
Juice of Lemons, and fine Sugar.

The Wines follow, and Water to Drink.
Wines.
The Wines about Paris are very small, yet good in their Kind; those de Surene
are excellent some years; but in all the Taverns they have a way to make them
into the fashion of Champagne and Burgundy.

The Tax upon Wines is now so great, that whereas before the War they drank
them by Retail at 5 d. the Quart, they now sell them at 15 d. the Quart and
dearer, which has inhansed the Rates of all Commodities, and Workmens Wages;
and also has caused many thousand private Families to lay in Wines in their
Cellars at the cheapest hand, which used to have none before.

The Wines of Burgundy and Champagne are most valued; and indeed, not without
reason; for they are light and easy upon the Stomach, and give little
disturbance to the Brain, if drawn from the Hogshead, or loose botled after
their fashion.

The most esteemed are Vin de Bonne of Burgundy, a red Wine; which is Dolce
Piquante in some measure, to me it seemed the very best of Wine I met with.

Volne, a pale Champagne, but exceeding brisk upon the Palate. This is said to
grow upon the very borders of Burgundy, and to participate of the Excellency of
both Counties.

There is another sort of Wine, called Vin de Rheims, this is also a pale or
gray Wine; it is harsh; as all Champagne Wines are.

The White Wines of value are those of Mascon in Burgundy.

Mulso in Champagne, a small and not unpleasant White Wine.

Chabri is a quick and sharp White Wine well esteemed.

In March I tasted the White Wines called Condrieu, and d'Arbois, but found
them both in the Must, thick and white as our Wines use to be, when they first
come from the Canaries; very sweet, and yet not without a grateful flavor;
they clear toward Summer, and abate much of the flavor and sweet taste. Those
Wines thus in the Must are called in the Prints Vin des Liqueurs.

There is a preparation or rather stifling of the White Wine in the Must, used
in Burgundy and elsewhere, which they call Vin Bouru; it gives a sweet taste,
and it is foul to the Eye; those also are called Vin des Liqueurs. This is only
drunk a Glass in a morning, as an equivalent to Brandy.

Vin de Turene en Anjou of two years old, was one of the best White Wines I
drunk in Paris.

Gannetin from Dauphine: This is a very pale and thin White Wine, very like the
Verde of Florence, sweet, and of a very pleasant flavor, especially while it
is Des Liqueurs.

The Red Wines of Burgundy, Des quatres feuilles, as they say, or of 4 years
old, are rare, but they are esteemed much more wholesome, and are permitted to
the Sick, in some cases, to drink of; they are fine, and have a rough, but
sound taste; not pricked, as I expected. This Term Des quatre feuilles, is used
also to Volne, or any other sort of Wine which is kept any time.

There are also in esteem stronger Wines at Paris, as Camp de Perdris.

Cost Bruslee, both Red Wines from Dauphine, of very good taste, and hot upon
the Stomach.

De l'Hermitage upon the Rosne.

But the most excellent Wines for strength and flavor are the Red and White
St. Laurence, a Town betwixt Toulon and Nice in Provence. This is a most
delicious Muscat. These are of those sorts of Wines, which the Romans called
Vinum passum, that were made of half Sun dried Grapes: for the Grapes
(especially the White Muscadine Grapes) being usually sooner ripe, than the
common Grapes of the Country, called Esperan, viz. the latter end of August,
(as I have seen them in the Vintage at Vic, Mirabel, and Frontiniac, 3 Towns
near the Sea in Languedoc, where this sort of Wine is made) they twist the
Bunches of Grapes, so breaking the Stalks of them, that they receive no longer
any nourishment from the Vine, but hang down and dry in the then violently hot
Sun, and are in few days almost turned into Raisins of the Sun; hence, from
this insolation, the flavor of the Grape is exceedingly heightened, and the
strength and oiliness, and thick Body of the Wine is mightily improved. I think
the Red St. Lauren was the most delicious Wine I ever tasted in my life.

Besides these, here are also the White Wines of Orleans, Bourdeaux Claret, and
those Excellent Wines from Cahors: also Cabreton, White and Red, from about
Bayone, strong and delicious Wines: and all sorts of Spanish Wines, as Sack,
Palm, Mountain Malaga, Red and White, Sheries, and indeed the French are, of
late, very desirous to drink of the strongest Wines.

Ratafia's.
Besides Wines, there is no Feasting without the Drinking at the desert all
sorts of Strong Waters, particularly Ratafia's; which is a sort of Cherry
Brandy made with Peach and Apricock Stones, highly piquant, and of a most
greeable flavor.

The pungent and acrimonious quality of these and such like Kernels was not
unknown to the Ancients, and very poisonous to some Animals. Dioscorides tells
us, a Past made of the Kernels of Bitter Almonds will throw Hens into
Convulsions, and immediately kill them. Birds have but little Brain, and so are
the stronglier affected with this Volatile Venom. Not unlike effect it is
possible Ratafia may have in some tender and more delicate Constitutions, and
weak and feeble Brains, and may be one cause of so many sudden Deaths, as have
been observed of late.

Vattee is a sort of Perfumed Strongwater from Provence, made (as it is
pretended) of Muscat Wine distilled with Citron Pills and Orange Flowers.

Fenoulliet de l'Isle de Ree, is valued much, it is much like our Aniseed Water.

These and many more sorts of Strongwaters, and strong Wines, both of France
and Italy and Spain, are wont to be brought in, at the latter end of the Desert
in all great Feasts, and they drink freely of them; Which Custom is new: when I
was formerly in France, I remember nothing of it. But it is the long War that
has introduced them, the Nobility and Gentry suffering much in those tedious
Campagnes, applied themselves to these Liquors to support the Difficulties and
Fatigues of Weather and Watchings; and at their return to Paris, introduced
them to their Tables. Sure I am, the Parisians, both Men and Women, are
strangely altered in their Constitutions and Habit of Body; from lean and
slender, they are become fat and corpulent, the Women especially: Which, in my
Opinion, can proceed from nothing so much as the daily drinking strong Liquors.

Coffee, Tea, Chocolate.
Add to these Drinks the daily use of Coffee with Sugar, Tea and Chocolate,
which now is as much in use in Private Houses in Paris, as with us in London:
And these Sugared Liquors also add considerably to their Corpulency.

I must not forget, that amongst the Drinks that are in use in Paris, Cider
from Normandy is one. The best I drank of that Kind, was of the color of
Claret, reddish or brown; The Apple, that it was made of, was called Frequins,
which is round and yellow, but so bitter, that it is not to be eaten; and yet
the Cider that is made of it, is as sweet as any new Wine. It keeps many years
good, and mends of its color and taste. I drank it often at a Private House of
a Norman Gentleman, of whose Growth it was; otherwise, if I had not have to the
contrary, I could not have believed, but that it had been mixed with Sugar.

There are also very many public Coffee-houses, where Tea also and Chocolate
may be had, and all the Strongwaters and Wine abovementioned; and innumerable
Alehouses. I wonder at the great change of this Sober Nation, in this
particular; but Luxury like a Whirlpool draws into it the Extravagances of
other People.

'Twas Necessity, and the want of Wine, (either naturally, as in a great part
of Persia and the Indies; or from their Religion, as in Turkey,) that put Men
upon the invention of those Liquors of Coffee and Tea: Chocalate, indeed, was
found out by the poor starved Indians, as Ale was with us. But what else but a
Wanton Luxury could dispose these People, who abound in Excellent Wines, the
most cordial and generous of all Drinks, to ape the necessity of others.

Mighty things, indeed, are said of these Drinks, according to the Humor and
Fancy of the Drinkers. I rather believe they are permitted by Gods Providence
for the lessening the number of Mankind by shortning Life, as a sort of silent
Plague. Those that plead for Chocolate, say, it gives them a good Stomach, if
taken two hours before Dinner. Right! who doubts it? you say you are much more
hungry having drunk Chocolate, than you had been if you had drunk none; that
is, your Stomach is faint, craving and feels hollow and empty, and you cannot
stay long for your Dinner. Things that pass thus soon out of the Stomach, I
suspect are little welcome there, and Nature makes haste to get shut of them.
There are many things of this sort which impose upon us by procuring a false
hunger.

The Wild Indians, and some of our People, no doubt digest it; but our Pampered
Bodies can make little of it; and it proves to most tender Constitutions
perfect Physic, at least to the Stomach, by cleansing that into the Gutts; but
that wears it out, and decays Nature.

Gage.
It is very remarkable with what greediness the Spaniards drink it, and how
often in a day, 5 times says Gage, at least. The Women drank it in the
Churches, and the disorder could scarce be remedied.

The old Romans did better with their Luxury; they took their Tea and Chocolate
after a full Meal, and every Man was his own Cook in that case. Caesar resolved
to be free, and eat and drink heartily, that is, to excess, with Tully; and for
this purpose Cicero tells his Friend Atticus, that before he lay down to Table,
Emeticen agebat, which I construe, he prepared for himself his Chocolate and
Tea; something to make a quick riddance of what they eat and drank, some way or
other.

There are two sorts of Water which they drink at Paris; Water of the River
Seine, which runs through the Town; and the Water brought in by the Aqueduct of
Arcueil, which, by the by, is one of the most Magnificent Buildings in and
about Paris, and worth going to see: This noble Canal of hewn Stone conveys the
Water 15 miles to Paris.

The River Water is very pernicious to all Strangers, not the French excepted,
that come from any distance, but not to the Natives of Paris, causing
Looseness, and sometimes Dysenteries. I am apt to think, the many Ponds and
Lakes that are let into it to supply the Sluices upon the Canal De Briare, are
in part the cause of it. But those who are careful of themselves purify it by
filling their Cisterns with Sand, and letting it sink through it; which way
clears it, and makes it very cool and palatable.

As for the Spring Water from the Maison des Eaux, it is wholesome in this
respect, and keeps the Body firm; but it is very apt to give the Stone, which
the People of this Town are infinitely subject to. An Instance of this I had by
chance, when coming from seeing the Aqueduct of Arcueil, in the very Road near
the Wall of the Aqueduct, a great number of Earthen Pipes, which had served to
convey that Water to some House, were cast to mend the Highways. I observed,
that of 4 inches diameter the hollow of the Pipes were all stopped up to the
breadth of a Shilling, with a firm Stone petrified; so that they were forced to
break up the Pipes being altogether useless. Now what Petrifies in the
Water-Pipes is apt in some weak Constitutions to Petrifie also in the Kidneys
and Bladder.

In the next place we will see how the Parisians divert themselves; which
consists chiefly in Plays, Gameing, Walking, or Coaching.

The Plays here are divided into two Houses: One for the Operas, and the other
for the Comedies.

Opera's.
I did not see many Opera's, not being so good a Frenchman as to understand
them, when Sung: The Opera, called l'Europe Gallante, I was at several times,
and it is looked upon as one of the very best. It is extremely fine, and the
Music and Singing admirable: The Stage large and magnificent, and well filled
with Actors: The Scenes well suited to the thing, and as quick in the removal
of them, as can be thought. The Dancing exquisite, as being performed by the
best Masters of that Profession in Town: The Clothing rich, proper, and with
great variety.

It is to be wondered, that these Opera's are so frequented: There are great
numbers of the Nobility that come daily to them, and some that can Sing them
all: And it was one thing that was troublesome to us Strangers, to disturb the
Box by these voluntary Songs of some parts of the Opera or other; That the
Spectators may be said to be here as much Actors as those employed upon the
very Stage.

Comedies.
The Comedies have another House in another part of the Town; for the Opera's
are under the Roof of Monsieur, and it is part of the Palais Royal.

The Disposition of the Theater is much the same; but something less: And here
the Stage it self is to be Let; where for Strangers, the Places are most
commodious, to hear and see.

I heard many Tragedies, but without gust for want of Language: But after them,
the Little Plays were very Diverting to me, particularly those of Moliere,
Vendange de Suresne, Pourcegnac, Crispin Medecin, le Medecin malgre luy, le
Malade Imaginaire, etc.

In this all agree, that though Moliere's Plays have less of Intrigue in them;
yet his Characters of Persons are incomparable, so true and just, that nothing
can be more: And for this Reason, so many of them are only of two or three
Acts; for without an Intrigue well laid, the Characters would have failed him,
in which was his Excellency. However, this is now so much become a Custom on
the French Stage; that you ever have one of these little Pieces tacked to the
Tragedy, that you may please your self according to your Appetite.

It Is said, Moliere Died suddenly in Acting the Malade Imaginaire: Which is a
good instance of his well Personating the Play he made, and how he could really
put himself into any Passion he had in his Head. Also of the great danger
strong and vehement Passions may cause in weak Constitutions, such as Joy and
Fear; which History tells us, have killed many very suddenly. He is reported to
have said, going off the Stage, Messieurs, Jay joue le Malade Imaginaire; Mais
je suis veritablement fort Malade; and he died within two hours after. This
Account of Moliere is not in his Life by Perault, but it is true: And he yet
has blamed him for his Folly, in persecuting the Art of Physic, not the Men,
in diverse of his Plays.

Moliere sent for Dr. M --, a Physician in Paris of great Esteem and Worth, and
now in London, a Refuge. Dr. M -- sent him word, he would come to him, upon two
Conditions; the one, that he should Answer him only to such Questions as he
should ask him, and not otherwise Discourse him; the other, that he should
oblige himself to take the Medecines he should prescribe for him. But Moliere
finding the Doctor too hard for him, and not easily to be Dupt, refused them.
His Business, it seems, was to make a Comical Scene in exposing one of the
Learnedest Men of the Profession, as he had done the Quacks. If this was his
Intention, as in all probability it was, Moliere had as much Malice, as Wit;
which is only to be used to correct the Vitiousness and Folly of Men pretending
to Knowledge, and not the Arts themselves.

This I must needs say, That Obscenity and Immorality are not at all upon the
French Stage, no more than in the Civil Conversation of People of Fashion and
good Breeding.

Preaching.
One Afternoon in Lent, I was to hear a Sermon at La Charity, preached by an
Abbot, a very young man. His Text was about the Angels Descent into the Pool of
Bethesda, and Troubling the Waters. I am not so good a Frenchman as to
understand all he said, but he had many good Arguments about the necessity of
Grace, and the means to attain it. I was strangely surprised at the Vehemence
of his Action, which to me appeared altogether Comical, and like the Actors
upon the Stage, which I had seen a few days before: Besides, his Expressions
seemed to be in too Familiar a Style: I always took a Sermon to the People to
require a grave and ornate kind of Eloquence, and not Verba Quotidiana, with a
certain dignity of Action; but it is possible this way here best suits with the
Customs and Manners of the People; who are all Motion, even when they say the
easiest and most intelligible Things,

Gameing.
Gaming is a perpetual Diversion here, if not one of the Debauches of the Town:
But Games of mere Hazard are strictly forbid upon severe Fines to the Master of
the House, as well private as Public, where such Playing shall be discovered.
This was done upon the Account of the Officers of the Army; who, during the
Winter used to lose the Money, which was given them to make their Recruits, and
renew their Equipages in the Spring. And indeed, such quick Games, as Basset,
Hazard, etc. where Fortune in a manner is all in all, are great Temptations to
Ruin, by the sudden Passions they are apt to raise in the Players: Whereas
Games, where Skill and Cunning, and much Thought are employed, as well as Luck,
give a Man time to Cool, and recover his Wits, if at any time great Loss shall
have Dismounted his Reason; for he must quickly come to himself again, or
forfeit his Skill and Reputation in Conducting the Game, as well as Husbanding
his Money.

Fair of St. Germains.
We were in Paris at the time of the Fair of St. Germain; It lasts six weeks at
least: The Place where it is kept well bespeaks its Antiquity; for it is a
very Pit or Hole, in the middle of the Faubourg, and belongs to the Great Abbey
of that Name. You Descend into it on all sides, and in some places above 12
Steps; so that the City is raised above it 6 or 8 Foot.

The Building is a very Barn, or Frame of Wood, Tiled over; consisting of many
long Allies crossing one another, the Floor of the Allies unpaved, and of
Earth, and as uneven as may be; which makes it very uneasy to Walk in, were it
not the vast crowd of People which keep you up: But all this bespeaks its
Antiquity, and the rudeness of the first Ages of Paris, which is a foil to its
Politeness in all things else now.

The Fair consists of most Toy-shops, and Bartholomew-Fair Ware; also Fiance
and Pictures, Joiners Work, Linen and Woollen Manufactures; many of the great
Ribban Shops remove out of the Palais hither: No Books: Many Shops of
Confectioners, where the Ladies are commodiously Treated.

The great Rendezvous is at night, after the Play and Opera are done; and
Raffling for all Things Vendible is the great Diversion; no Shop wanting two or
three Raffling Boards. Monsieur, the Dauphin, and other Princes of the Blood
come, at least once in the Fair-time, to Grace it.

Here are also Coffee-Shops, where that and all sorts of strong Liquors
abovementioned are to be Sold.

Knavery here is in Perfection as with us; as dextrous Cut-Purses and
Pick-Pockets. A Pick-Pocket came into the Fair at night, extremely well Clad,
with four Lacqueys with good Liveries attending him: He was caught in the Fact,
and more Swords were drawn in his Defense than against him; but yet he was
taken, and delivered into the Hands of Justice, which is here sudden and no
Jest.

I was surprised at the Impudence of a Booth, which put out the Pictures of
some Indian Beasts with hard Names; and of four that were painted, I found but
two, and those very ordinary ones, viz. a Leopard, and a Racoun. I asked the
Fellow why he deceived the People, and whether he did not fear Cudgelling in
the end: He answered with a singular Confidence, that it was the Painter's
fault; that he had given the Racoun to Paint to two Masters, but both had
mistaken the Beast; but however, (he said) though the Pictures were not well
designed, they did nevertheless serve to Grace the Booth and bring him Custom.

Elephant.
I saw here a Female Elephant betwixt 8 and 9 foot high, very lean and ill kept.
Nothing could be more Docil than this poor Creature. I observed, she bent the
Joints of her Legs very nimbly in making her Salutes to the Company: Also that
the Nails of her Fore-Toes, were large and almost five Inches long. This was
from the Continent, having the Ears entire. I had seen one about 13 years ago
in London much less, from the Island of Ceylon, of another Species with
Scallopt Ears, and the Tail with two rows of large, thick, and stiff black
Hairs.

Coaching.
Coaching in Visits is the great and daily Business of People of Quality: But
in the Evenings, the Course de la Reyne is much frequented, and a great
Rendezvous of People of the best Fashion. The Place indeed is very commodious
and pleasant, being three Allies set with high Trees of a great length, all
along the Bank of the River Seine, enclosed at each end with noble Gates; and
in the middle a very large Circle to turn in. The middle Alley holds four lines
of Coaches at least, and each side Alley two a-piece: These eight lines of
Coaches, may, when full, supposing them to contain near 80 Coaches a-peice,
amount to about 6 or 700. On the Field side, joining close to the Allies of the
Coaches, there are several Acres of Meadow planted with Trees, well grown, into
narrow Allies in Quincunx Order, to walk in the Grass, if any have a mind to
light; and this must needs be very agreeable in the Heats of Summer, which we
staid not to enjoy.

One thing this Course is short of ours in Hide-Park, for if full, you cannot in
an hour see the Company twice you have a mind to see, and you are confined to
your line; and oftentimes, the Princes of the Blood coming in, and driving at
Pleasure, make a strange stop and embarras.

Besides, if the weather has been Rainy, there is no driving in it, it is so
miry and ill gravelled.

Those which have a mind to drive further out of Town for the Air, have Woods,
one to the West, and another to the East, most convenient. I mean, the Bois de
Bologne, and the Bois de Vincennes; this last is very opaque and pleasant.
There are some Ancient Roman Statues in the first Court of this House.

But for the Castle in the Bois de Bologne, called Madrid, it was built by
Francis the First, and it is altogether Moresque, in imitation of one in Spain;
with at least two rows of covered Galleries running quite round, on the
outside the four faces of the House; which sure in a very hot Country, are
greatly refreshing and delightful: And this is said to be built on purpose for
a defense against a much hotter Climate, than where it stands; which that King
had no mind to visit a second time.

Walking.
But let us return to Paris; Toward 8 or 9 a Clock in June most of them return
from the Course, and land at the Garden Gate of the Tuilleries, where they Walk
in the cool of the Evening. This Garden is of the best Ordonnance, and now in
its full beauty, so that Mons. Le Nostre has seen it in its infancy, for it is
all of his Invention, and he enjoys his Labors in perfection. Certainly the
Moving Furniture of it at this time of the Evening, is one of the Noblest
Sights that can be seen. The Night I came away from Paris, a Lady of Quality,
Madam M -- when I took my Leave of her, asked me, What I had seen in Paris that
most pleased me; I answered her Civilly, as I ought to do; but she would not
take my Compliment, but urged me for a further Answer: I told her, (since she
would have it it so) that I just then came from seeing what pleased me best;
that was, the Middle Walk of the Tuilleries in June, betwixt 8 and 9 at night;
I did not think that there was in the World a more agreeable place than that
Alley at that hour, and that time of the year.

And now we are got into the Gardens of Paris, I shall give you a short taste
of all of them of Note, at least of such as I saw.

Tuilleries.
This of the Tuilleries is vastly great, has shaded Tarrasses on two sides, one
along the River Seine, planted with Trees, very diverting, with large Parterrs
in the middle, and large Fountains of Water, which constantly play; one end is
the Front of that Magnificent Palace the Louvre; the other is low, and for
prospects, open to the Fields; The rest is disposed into Alleys, and
Grass-Plots, and Copsies of Wood; with a great number of Seats upon Down in all
parts, for the Accommodation of the Weary.

In the Tuilleries there is one thing which I much liked, and that was an
Amphitheater, with the Stage, Pits and Seats, and the Scenes leading into the
Stage very pretty; from all sides close Alleys leading into it.

Nothing can be more pleasant than this Garden, where in the Groves of Wood the
latter end of March, Black Birds, and Trostles, and Nightingales, sing most
sweetly all the morning, and that as it were within the City, for no Birding is
suffered here near this City, and the Fields round the Town, are all, every
where, full of Partridges, and Hares, and other Game.

The Garden of the Palais of Luxenburgh is also vastly great, and has something
of champatre in it, like St. James's-Park; it is also filled with People daily
of good Quality; but because the hard Winters have destroyed many of the Walks,
by killing the Pole Hedges, it is not so frequented, as formerly; yet it has
its Fountains and Parterres, and some well shaded Allies; and for Air, I prefer
it before the Tuillieres, because it is seated upon a high Ground next the
Fields, in the Faubourgh of St. Germains.

Physic Garden.
As to the King's Physic Garden, it is a very great Piece of Ground, well
furnished with Plants, and open also to walk in, to all People of Note. There is
great variety of Ground in it, as Woods, Ponds, Meadows, Mounts, besides a vast
Level, by which it is fitted for the Reception and Growth of most sorts of
Plants.

I first saw it in March with Dr. Turnfort, and Mr. Breman, a very
Understanding and Painful Gardner. The Green Houses well stored with tender
Exoticks, and the Parterrs with Simples; though but few of them then to be
seen; yet by the Trees and Shrubs, and some Plants which did not lose their
Heads, I could well judge of the Furniture.

Dr. Turnfort told me, that he showed a 100 Plants every Lesson, and he had in
the Summer 30 Lessons, which made 3000 Plants; besides the very early and late
Plants, which he reckoned could not be less than a 1000 more.

I took particular notice of these Plants in the Green Houses at that time.

Jasminum Asoricum flore albo viridarii Regis Lusitanici. Marum Cortusii, which
had been Potted 30 years. Caryophyllus Creticus arborescens. Smilax fructu
nigro. Iris bulbosa flore luteo. Symphytum minus Boraginis flore. Fraxinus
Americana florida. Staechas folio serrato Bochini.
This Garden is endowed by the King and Duke of Orleans, and has 2000 l. a year
Sterling Rents belonging to it, whereof 500 l. is given to the chief Physician
who over-looks all, and the rest to the Botanic Reader, Dr. Turnfort, and
Under-Gardners, with Lodgings for all.

Mr. Breman told me, he had in the beginning of April made an end of Sowing his
Hot Beds, and had put into the Ground 2000 Species of Seed.

From the Mount in the Kings Garden, on the other side the River, upon the
declivity of a high ridge of Hills, I had a fair view of the Palace or
Country House of Father la Chaise, the Kings Confessor; it is very finely
seated against the South Sun, and well Wooded on both sides: A fit Seat for a
Contemplative Person.

Garden of the Palais Royal.
The Garden of the Palais Royal, considering it is in the middle of the Town, is
very large, has 2 or 3 great Basins with their jet d'Eau, but not well kept;
nor has any thing elegant in it, but the good order and disposition of its
shady Walks and Parterrs: It is ever full of good Company.

Garden of the Arsenal.
The Garden of the Arsenal is much larger, and finer kept; has the prospects of
the Fields, and lies open to the Ramparts: It is also much frequented for the
beauty of its Walks.

There are also diverse Convents which have spacious and well kept Gardens,
which are always open and public to People of any Note; as the Carthusians,
which is vast and Champestre. The Celestins, very fine and large; That of St.
Genevieve, which is great, and very well kept; and the Tarrasse for length and
breadth is incomparable, extremely well planted with Horse-chesnuts; having
also on the South side upon the Tarrasse, 3 or 4 square Copses of the same
Trees; which have a mavelous effect for Shade in Summer.

These Private Gardens I saw in Paris.
D'Aumont. Its Green House opened into the Dining Room: The Orange Trees seemed
to have suffered, and had their Leaves withered; for the Room was too broad by
half.

The Treillage, at the upper end of the Garden, was very well adorned with
Gilding, and had in the middle a Pavillon, in which was an old Roman Statue of
a young Man, very well preserved: The fashion of the Toga here was so evident,
that it might well pass for a conviction to those, who have thought it to be a
Plade, or a Garment open before like a Cloak.

This Treillage is performed with that variety of Ornaments, that it resembles
Filegreen Work, and is large. The Painting of these Works in green is not well
performed in all places alike; it is either too yellow, or of a sad dirty
green, or Sea green; few have hit the right Grass green color. To do it well,
it is to be primed in yellow, and then to be covered with Vert de Montagne or
Lapis Armeniacus; of which last color we have plenty in England about Maulham
in Craven in Yorkshire.

This is the great benefit of Treillage in Cities, that besides the beauty of
it to the Eye, it takes away and hides the ill prospect of the Neighboring
Houses.

Here were very many Fig Trees well grown in square Boxes; and Parterrs well
stockt with Flowers; each sort by themselves; as Tulips apart; Junkills
apart; Anemonies apart; Ranunculus's apart; Daffadills apart.

Puissart. This Garden is very neat, and open at the end to the Tuilleries. The
Treillage Walk or Arbor at the upper end is very fine, 70 Paces long, and 8
broad, has 3 Pavillons all open at the top. It is all of Iron, painted green,
and cost 15000 Livers.

The Gardner was an Artist; and had some Plants in Cases in good order, not to
be seen elsewhere, as large Rosemary Bushes, Jacobaea Maritima, Marum Syriacum,
etc.

The Walls were well covered with Fruit Trees; he had not cut his Peaches; when
I asked him the reason, he told me, it was his way, not to cut them till after
flowring, which he found by Experience to improve the Fruit; whereas he said,
the early cutting Stockt them, and impaired the Fruit.

The Orangery here was the most beautiful Room, for the bigness, I had seen,
paved with Marble, and neatly Wainscoted with Oak, from the top to the bottom,
after our English manner. I make no doubt it served to eat in in Summer, when
cleared of Trees.

Bouvillier. I found not any thing more remarkable here than the Trellage at
the end.

Comartin. The Trellage in this Garden was most admirable in the fashion of a
Triumphal Arch; half of it was an Aviarie, with a Fountain in it, well stored
with Birds.

Here were large Iron Vasa's upon Pedestals, the first I had seen of the Kind,
painted over of a Copper color.

Les Diguieres. This is the only House in Paris, I saw kept in all the parts of
it, with the most exact cleanliness and neatness, Gardens and all.

In the Garden there were several pieces of Trellage; that at the upper end was
very noble, and cost 10000 Livres; another piece of it cost 6000. But I saw a
small one all of Iron-leaves painted green, the only one of the Kind. Here also
were great Vasa's of Trelliage upon Pedestals.

The Fountains in this Garden were very curious, though small, with proper
Ornaments, which had a mavelous effect, when the Spouts played off.

The first Court was set about with Cases of extraordinary large Laurus Tinus,
and in the Gardens there were some cut into square Pyramids.

A Person of Quality came into the Garden to me, who with great Civility
conducted me up to the Apartments.

In the Apartment of the Duchess, which was all of her own Contrivance, and
had an Air of State and Agreeableness beyond any thing I had seen, I observed
hanging down in the middle of the Bedchamber the finest Crystal Candlestick in
France: The Pieces were all bought single by her, and the Contrivance and
setting them together was her own; it cost 12000 Crowns.

But before I left the Garden, in an obscure Parterre I saw the Tomb of a Cat,
viz. a Black Cat Couchant upon a White Marble Cushion, fringed with Gold, and
Gold Tassels hanging at the corners upon a square Black Marble Pedestal: On one
of the sides of that Marble is writ in Letters of Gold. Cy gist Menine la plus
aimable and la
Plus aimee de toutes les chattes.
On the other side. Cy gist une chatte jolie
Sa maistresse qui n'aimoit rien
L'aime jusques a la folly
Pour quoy dire! on le voit bien


This is not the first Instance of this kind of folly; I have seen something of
it in England; and have read much more in History.

If you blame me for Transcribing this Epitaph, I will submit; but I could
never have forgiven my self, if I had Transcribed the many fine Inscriptions I
met with at Paris, though in most Elegant and truly Roman Words; others in pure
Court French. You may read them in the Description of Paris.

De Lorge. We had the good fortune here to find the Marshal himself walking in
his Garden; who Entertained us with great Civility, viz. the Dean of Winchester
and my self. This Garden was not finished, and the House it self was but
building; but it is one of the finest in Paris, and has the advantage of a most
free and extended prospect of the Fields and Montmarter: At the end of the
Garden rises a Tarrass equal with the Rampart.

That which was in this House and Garden very commodious and noble was, that
betwixt the two Courts the Coaches drive through a stately Hall upon Pillars,
and might land on either side, up a step or two, which leads to the Staircases
and other Apartments; and then in the furthest Court, which is only divided
from the Garden by high Pallasadoes of Iron, they turn, and take up the Company
again; so that no Weather offends them. Which is much wanting here; and more
with us at London, where we most need it.

This Hall is open upon Arches to the Garden, and the Staircase it self is so
contrived, that you enjoy a full prospect of the Garden and Montmarter in
descending.

The Marshal very obligingly showed us his own Apartment; for all the rest of
the House was full of Workmen; and in his Bedchamber his little Red Damask
Field Bed, which he lay in now, and which also served him, when he commanded
upon the Rhine.

He showed us his great Sash Windows; how easily they might be lifted up and
down, and stood at any height; which Contrivance he said he had out of England,
by a small Model brought on purpose from thence: There being nothing of this
Poise in Windows in France before.

He also had us into a Set of small Closets or Rooms, after the English
fashion, very prettily furnished, neatly kept, and retired, with his English
Keys to them, as he told us; and from thence we descended a back Pair of
Stairs: We did all we could to hinder him from seeing us take Coach: He sent
his Page after us, to invite us some day to Eat with him.

Hostel Pelitier. The Garden here was very neat, with a Trelliage at the end
after the manner of a Triumphal Arch, but not very high, nor well Painted; yet
its Beauty and Finishings differ much from any I had seen before. In the two
Niches were placed great Iron Vasa's or Flower Pots, right before the middle of
a Basin of Water, which was set a Playing for our Entertainment, which is a
Compliment the French are willing to oblige Strangers with.

In the Orangerie were very large Trees, and two pair of Mirtles in Cases, cut
Globe-wise, the best and biggest I had seen: Large Bushes in Pots of Marum
Syriacum. Great store of Tulips, Anemonies, Ranunculus, and other Flowers in
Beds, in the Parterre, each by themselves.

Also Anemonies and Ranunculus's in little Earthen Pots, as with us; but in
very light Mold. Great and very fair Laurus Tinus's in Cases. And, which was
singular, a-long one of the Garden Walls were planted Abel Trees, whose tops
were disposed and spread by an Iron Trelliage into Arches at equal distances,
which had a very good effect.

Hostel-sullie.
The Garden of the Hostel-sullie had nothing remarkable in it.

Louvois.
The best Piece of Treillage of Iron Bars and Wood intermixed, is that in the
Garden of feu Mons. Louvois. And this is one of the neatest Gardens in Paris.
The whole upper end is adorned with a noble Treillage after the manner of a
Triumphal Arch; it cost a great Sum of Money: There are 4 Statues disposed on
Pedestals under it, which have a good effect; these are Antique, rarely good.
One of the first Empresses, a Diana, an Apollo, etc. Here the Walks are hard
Gravel, but not Rolled. On one side of the Treillage is a large Aviary well
stored with Birds.

The Walls of the Green House are Matted; and large Pans of Iron hang down in
the middle of the House, at equal distances, to every Window one; They have
Pullies to let them down or run them up to what height they please. This way
may very well correct the moistness of the Air, which the breath of the Plants
cause, and sufficiently warm them. Hot Beds puff up Plants; yet a warm Air over
their Heads may be as useful to refresh and nourish them in Winter.

Furnier.
The last Private Garden I saw, was that of Mr. Furnier, a few days before we
left the Town, nothing could be prettier. At the upper end a noble Treillage,
two great Vasa's of Iron painted of a Brasscolour and gilt.

Here I saw an Apple Tree Potted, as the Figs and Oranges use to be; it was the
White Queenen, (or Calvil d'Este) the Stem of the bigness only of my Thumb,
full of Fruit the first of June.

Many Pots of Sedum Pyramidale, now a most elegant Ornament. But nothing is
here so pompous as double red and stripped stocks; which they multiply with
care; and their Pains are justly Rewarded. With a thousand other things, which
my short turn in the Garden would not give me leave to remember.

There are great numbers of these Private Gardens in Paris, which deserve
seeing; but the Season of the year not much favoring our Curiosity, we did not
much enquire after them.

Hitherto I have given a short Account of what I saw mostly in Paris, as to the
People, abroad and at home; The Country, round about it, is full of populous
and neat Towns, and many Palaces of the King and Princes of the Blood; which
are not to be equalled with any thing we have in England. But I am unwilling to
lead you any further, it being much out of my way and humor to go to Court;
but because it was my fortune to be at Versailles, St. Clou, Marli, and Meudon,
I will venture to say something of each.

These 4 Royal Palaces and their Gardens possess a barren and hilly Country, as
big as most Counties in England: Two of them, Meudon and St. Cloud, have the
Prospect of Paris under them; but the former has it much more open and fully,
than the latter.

This District may be said to be Le Berceau des Roys, or the Nursery of Kings;
for the chief of the Blood Royal are lodged here, viz. the King, Monseigneur
the Dauphin, and the 3 Grandsons, the Dukes of Burgundy, d'Anjou, and Berry,
Monsieur or the Kings Brother, and his Son the Duke of Charlres, and
Mademoiselle his Daughter. All these are, or will be (as it is easy to guess
by the growth and proportions of the youngest) very large and well shaped
beautiful People. The other Branch of the Blood Royal, of the House of Bourbon,
as the Prince of Conde, the Duke of Bourbon, and the Princesses his Daughters,
the Prince of Conti, are all of less Stature, but very well shaped and handsome.

The Duke du Maine and the Conte de Toulouse I did not see; but the Princess
Dowager of Conti often, who is without dispute one of the most graceful and
handsomest Women in France, and methinks exceedingly like the King her Father,
as I remember him in his full beauty, when I first saw him in the year-65.

These 4 Palaces are all entirely built and furnished in this Kings time, and
all the Gardens, and what belongs to them.

St. Clou.
St. Clou is the nearest Paris, and the Castle is very magnificent, and most
commodious. The Great Salon and the Gallery are extremely well Painted.

The Gardens are a vast Extent, 12 or 15 miles in compass.

The Natural Woods on the South-west side the House, are well Husbanded, and
cut into small and bigger Alleys, to save the Trees; which they have had so
great a care of, they have kept them standing not only in the Alleys, but in
the very Steps of Stone, which are made to descend into the Alleys.

In the other parts of the Garden the Alleys are mostly treble, and well
shaded, run out in vast lengths of several miles, every where Basins and Jetts
d'eau; but there is a Cascade, which I saw several times play, and is said to
be the most beautiful and best furnished with Water of any in France. In the
middle of the large Basin amongst the Woods, I saw a Jet d'eau, which threw up
a Spout of Water 90 foot high, and did discharge it self with that force, that
it made a mist and coolness to the Air a great compass round about, and gave
now and then cracks like the going off of a Pistol; such force the vent of Wind
in the Pipes had.

The Pipes which convey the Water are composed of Iron Cylinders 3 foot long,
some 10, some 20 inches diameter, till they divide; and then they are of Lead.

I was once kindly invited to St. Clou by Madam's Physician, Monsieur Arlot,
who sent his Coach for me to Paris, and nobly Treated me: Before Dinner he
carried me in his Coach (for this privilege is granted him) into all parts,
and round the Gardens; which were well furnished with Alleys and Walks, adorned
with Cypress, Pines, and Firrs, cut into Pyramids; and Waterworks every where
playing in abundance, particularly the Gerbes d'eau were very fine, that is,
great and thick, seeming Streams of Water thrown up into the Air; This is done
to husband the Water by a great number of small Pipes like a Sheaf, to
represent a solid Pillar of Water.

Monsieur has added, and taken into this vast Garden, a new acquisition of a
Mountainous Plain, which over-looks all the Country round; and will, no doubt,
when it is modelled by that admirable Contriver Mons. le Nostre, make one of
the most delightful Places in the World.

From the Balustrade in the Upper Garden, the River Seine, and a vast Plain
bounded by Paris, is to be seen, and makes a most delightful Prospect.

These vast riding Gardens are unknown to us in England, and se promener a
cheval, on en carosse, is not English. We cannot afford to lose so much
Country, as those Gardens take up. I see in some of the Quarters not only
Partridge and Hares plentifully, but, which I wondered at, 5 Biches or Female
Red-Deer feeding.

The Orangery belonging to this Garden is very large and magnificent, paved
with Marble, and was filled with vast Trees in Cases, not to be brought in or
out without proper Engines, but in it there was nothing but those Orange Trees,
Oleanders, and Laurus Tinus's. He goes out of the end of his Appartment, that
is, the noble painted Gallery is continued upon a level with the Orangery,
which leads directly into an ascending Walk of a vast length; and also fronts
or flanks all along the Parterre or Flower Garden; where they are disposed of
in Summer. At this Treat I eat of a Preserve or Wet Sweetmeat, made of Orange
Flowers, incomparable; and the Lady obliged me with the manner of making it.

Though there were high and proper Walls for Fruit in many parts of the Garden,
yet nothing of that nature was to be found, only ordinary and infructiferous
Greens were fastened to the Treillage, which are the Linings of most Walls here.
In the Garden are many Arbours of Treillage, Pavillons, etc. of Iron mixed with
Wood, painted Green, with Honey Suckles running up them. These Gardens have
above 150 People always employed to keep them in order; which stands in 40000
Livres a year.

Another time I Dined with the Captain of the Castle, who showed me all the
Apartments at leisure. I eat here of the Red Legged Partridge taken here upon
these Hills; They are much less here than in Languedoc, but yet far better
tasted, than the Gray Partridges taken in the same place. This was the
beginning of April, and we drank our Wine in Ice, which I was not aware off,
till I found the bad effect of it in my Throat; and the next day much more; but
it went off again without any great trouble. There is no Animal that abuses it
self in Meat and Drink, as Man does; we daily drink excessive hot and excessive
cold; in other Creatures it is Instinct that guides them, but as for us we
neither act by Instinct, nor Reason; but betwixt both loosely, and therefore
oftener are caught, to our own destruction.

At the end of the Apartments of Monsieur, are a fine Set of Closets; The first
you enter is furnished with great variety of Rock Crystals, Cups, Agats upon
small Stands, and the sides of the Rooms are lined with large Panes of
Looking-glass from top to the bottom, with Japan Varnish and Paintings of equal
breadth intermixed; which had a mavelous pretty effect. The other Room had in
it a vast quantity of Bijou, and many of very great Price; but the Siam Pagods,
and other things from thence, were very odd.

There was also one very small Roman Statue of White Marble, not 10 inches
high, which cost 20000 Crowns; one Leg of it was a little injured. It seemed a
Piece of admirable Workmanship. It was a Boy, who had in the Skirt of his Tunic
a Litter of Puppies, and the Bitch lying at his feet and looking up.

Meudon.
I cannot say much of Meudon, because I was not within the House or Park; it
will require yet some time to bring it to that perfection which is designed,
for that Monseigneur has been but lately possessed of it; The Road from Paris
to it is yet unpaved; but the Situation is admirable, and the Splanade before
the House is like a vast Bastion, and commands the full view of all the
Campaign, and Paris under it. The Gardens are very great, but I only coasted
them, and the House.

Versailles.
As to the Palace of Versailles, (which is yet some miles further within the
Mountainous Country, not unlike Black Heath or Tunbridge) it is without dispute
the most magnificent of any in Europe; Yet what of it was first built, and much
admired 30 years ago, is now no longer relisht: However this King intends to
rebuild it, where it is faulty. It Is, as I said, placed in a very ungrateful
Soil, without Earth proper for Herbs, or Water; but he has brought that to it
in abundance, and made the Ground too to be fruitful.

There are Books writ to describe this famous Palace in every part; to which I
refer the Reader. The Way to it is new, and in some places the Mountains are
cut down 40 foot, so that now you enjoy it a mile in prospect before you come
to it; it opens and closes in 3 Courts, the more remotest narrower and
narrower; which is a fault; and is, as I was told, designed to be pulled down,
and made into one noble large square Court of the same order of building, as
that magnificent Front is, which looks upon the Gardens. The Gilded Tiles and
Roof have a mavelous effect in prospect. The Splanade toward the Gardens and
Parterres are the noblest things that can be seen, vastly great, with a very
large Basin of Water in the middle, walled round with white Marble, on which
are placed a great number of incomparable Brazen Vasa, and large Brass Figures
couchant, of the best Masters in Sculpture; it were endless to tell all the
Furniture of these Gardens of Marble Statues, and Vasa of Brass and Marble, the
multitude of Fountains, and those wide Canals like Seas running in a straight
line from the bottom of the Gardens, as far as the Eye can reach.

In a Word, these Gardens are a Country laid out into Alleys and Walks, Groves
of Trees, Canals and Fountains, and every where adorned with ancient and modern
Statues and Vasa innumerable.

May the 17th the Waters were ordered to Play for the Diversion of the English
Gentlemen. The Playing of the Spouts of Water, thrown up into the Air, is here
diversified after a thousand fashions. The Theater des eaux, and the Triumphal
Arch are the most famous Pieces. But in the Groves of the Left Hand, you have
Aesop's Fables, in so many Pieces of Waterworks, here and there in
Winding-Alleys. This might have been said to be done in Vsum Delphini. It Is
pretty to see the Owl washed by all the Birds; the Munkie hugging her young
one, till it spouts out Water with a full Throat, and open Mouth, etc.

The Orangery, or Winter Conservatory for Tubs of Winter Greens, is what
corresponds to the greatness of the rest. It Is a stupendous half square of
underground Vaults, like the Naves of so many Churches put together, of
exquisite Workmanship in hewn Stone, well lighted and open to the South Sun. It
contains 3000 Cases of Greens; whereof near 2000 are Orange Trees, and many
hundreds of them are as big as generally they naturally grow in the Earth:
Hence amongst them are some, which are said to be in Cases from the time of
Francis the First.

They did not think fitting to put them out this year till the latter end of
May; and indeed their Oleanders, Laurels, Lentiscus's, and most other Greens,
had suffered miserably.

In the Pottagerie (which is part of these Gardens, and has its magnificence
also) there are 700 Cases of Figs, besides Wall Fruit of all other Kinds: By
all the Gardens in and about Paris, I perceived they are very fond of this
Fruit.

I observed in small Fiance or Painted Pots a vast number of the narrow leaved
Laurus Alexandrina; also Thlapsi flore albo, Leucoii folio latifolium; also the
Sedum Pyramidale; These are not yet Ornaments in our Gardens, that I know of.

Marli.
The 15th of May my Lord Ambassador went to Marli, where the Waters played for
his Diversion.

I must needs say it is one of the pleasantest Places I ever saw, or, I
believe, is in Europe; it is seated in the bosom or upper end of a high Valley,
in the midst of and surrounded with Woody Hills. The Valley is closed at the
upper end, and gently descends forwards by degrees, and opens wider and wider,
and gives you the prospect of a vast plain Country, and the River Seine
running through it.

Marli is a square House raised upon Steps, and Terrassed on all sides; The 4
Fronts all alike; and the Doors opening into the Garden all the same. In the
middle an Octogon-hall, running up Dome-wise, in which all the side Rooms meet;
which are all Rooms of State. Above are 12 Lodgings, with a narrow Gallery
leading to them. In the lower Rooms at Marli, particularly in the Octogon
Salan, are extraordinary large (6 foot at least) Marble, or rather Agat Tables;
To the best of which they may be compared. They are veined like Wood, and of an
Amber color; These are the admirable effect of Petrification. Of this very
Stone I have seen great Blocks in the Banks of the Dropping Well at
Knaresborough in Yorkshire. I forgot to ask here whence they had them.

In one of the Ground Rooms was a Semicircular Gilt Bar or Rail, which took off
and enclosed the upper end of the Room: Within the Bar was disposed several
Rows of Porcellain or fine China on Gilt Shelves. Here at the Corners, within
the Bar, opened two small Doors, whence the Ambassador and his Retinue were
plentifully served with Chocolate, Tea, and Coffee, in a most obliging manner;
Many of the Nobility and Gentlemen of France were ordered to attend him there.

The two side Fronts of the House have in prospect great Alleys cut through the
Woods, and paved for the more commodious coming down to the House; which is
descending all the way.

On each side the Valley, close under the Woods, run along in a line, six
square Pavillons or smaller Palaces of the very same figure and beauty with the
Mother House; at equal, but large distances, as 500 Paces. The 6 on the right
hand the Garden are for the Men; The other 6 on the left are for the Women of
Quality; whom the King weekly appoints, upon a List given, to attend him, and
enjoy the Pleasure of this Retirement, as I may say, from Court. Before those
Pavillons, and betwixt them, are the finest Alleys and Walks imaginable, with
Fountains, and all the Decorations of Treillage and Flowers. Such a show of not
ordinary Tulips in broad Beds, of a 1000 Paces long, every where, all this vast
Garden over, in their full beauty, was a most surprising sight. I could not
forbear to say to the Duke de Villeroy, who was pleased much to accompany me in
this Walk, That sure all the Gardens in France had contributed to this
Profusion of Flowers; which he took so well, that the Marishal his Father;
afterward detached himself to single me out, and very obligingly embraced me,
and saluted me with a Kiss, and followed it with very kind and familiar
Discourse.

The Cascade coming down from the brow of the Hill, on that Front of the House
which respects and stands near it, was new and singular, and of the Kings own
invention, as, indeed, all the Garden besides. From the House it appeared a
Broad River, quietly gliding down the Hill; but when I went near it, I found it
composed of 52 large square and shallow Basins of Water, disposed at right
Angles, and not declining, but falling over one into another.

In the Garden were many Fountains, nobly adorned, and had variety of Water
Pipes playing up into the Air in them. Here are some Gerbes of a singular
fashion, with a Circle of a great number of large Pipes, within at least two
foot diameter; which made the appearance of a vast Pillar of Water. There was
one Jet d'eau in the bottom of the Garden, which we were told threw up Water
120 foot high; for of 50 and more Fountains, we saw but those on the side
Alleys to play; most of the great Basins in the middle were mending, and dry.
To furnish all this Water, there is a most stupendous Machine, which was
invented by 2 Liegois. This Machine forces the Water up 560 foot, from the
River Seine, to the top of the Tower or Aqueduct. It throws up 500 inches of
Water by almost continued Ructations, or quick Pulses. It is wrought by 14
Wheels of 32 feet diameter each, set in the River, and carried about night and
day by its Stream.

This Invention is the same with what is practiced in the deep Coal-pits about
Leeds in Lower-Germany; so that to see the Engines, and a great number of Iron
Cylinders or Water Pipes, lying bare above ground, and running up a vast
Mountain, is to imagine a deep Coal-Mine turned wrongside outward.

The Tree most in use here, was the small leaved Horne-Beam; which serves for
Arcades, Berceaus; and also Standards with Globular Heads: At the foot of which
they have planted little Sprigs of the same of a foot and half high; and also
in some places in like manner, whole areas full of them; which cut smooth and
level, make the finest green Hedges I ever saw; Some of these low Hedges were
12 foot broad, and in a barren and dry Climate supply very artificially the use
of Grassplots.

It Is certainly very commendable in the King, who pleases himself in Planting
and Pruning the Trees with his own Hand, to make use of no other Trees, but
what the Neighboring Woods afford; so that it is admirable to see whole Alleys
of Pole Hedges of great height, and long Rows of goodly Standard Globes of 18
months growth only.

If this great King, as he grows older, should take a fancy to place himself in
a warmer Climate, (and he has a good one of his own, as any under the Sun, in
Languedoc) as he does his Winter Greens in proper Houses; (and, methinks, this
Instance alone should be sufficient, to convince him of the necessity there is
to cherish decaying Nature, and that a Naturally warm Air is a better fence,
than Clothes or Fire) what Wonders would not his Purse and Passion for Planting
do there?

The next Woods in Languedoc would afford Laurel, and Myrtles for Pole Hedges;
Lentiscus's and Phylarea's in as great abundance, as Hazel or Thorn with us.
Also Jasmins for Arbors and Treillage; Cistus's and Rosmary, and a hundred
other sweet smelling Woody Shrubs grow every where in the Fields, to furnish
the Pots and Vasa.

There the tall Cypres's grow of themselves, to 60 and 100 foot high, like so
many Towers; and also Tonsil at pleasure, for the most beautiful Pole Hedges
imaginable. The very Fields are most Excellent, and well furnished Parterrs of
Flowers, and are Naturally Pottageries, or Kitchen Gardens. The Vineyards are
very Orchards; and all the most tender Fruits with us are there Standards; as
Figs, and Grapes of all sorts, Apricocks, Peaches, Nectorins, Jujubs, etc. The
delicious and large Cherries; and, whatever has been said to the contrary,
Pipins and Pears there are in far greater perfection, than with us, or in any
parts of France else, besides that happy Climate.

What was it for so great a King to make a Walk from Marli to Montpelier, or
(if I might choose) to Pescenas, seated in the bosom of a well Watered Valley,
enclosed with perfumed Hills. It Is not half so far as betwixt Lahor and Agria,
two Seats the Mogul has thus joined. This would Eternise his Name, above any
Palace he has yet built, and bring to himself much Health in his old Age. The
Gardens of the Hesperides, and the Labyrinths of Cande, so famous in History,
would be nothing to such wonderful Performances, as his Abilities and Happy
Genius is capable of. For besides the Natural Product of the Country, the
Climate also is capable of producing, and nourishing with small Art and
Expense, what ever Plants both the Indies can afford. Whereas, at this end of
the World, we drudge in vain; and force a Pleasure which is dead, and gone
before we can well enjoy it: We have indeed a kind of show of the Summer
Delights, but all on a sudden we drop into a long and tedious Winter again.
But we love the Places we are used to, or born in. Man, to say the truth, is a
very Animal, as any Quadrupede of them all; and most of his Actions are
resolvable into Instinct, notwithstanding the Principles which Custom and
Education have superinduced.

The pleasure of seeing is scarce to be tired; but yet after 2 or 3 hours Walk
in so fine and great a Garden, I was forced to make a halt behind the Company,
and glad to retire to the gilt Bureau in the Palace again, to refresh my self;
where I found some of the Kings Officers waiting, and some other Gentlemen of
the Household, who had made several Campagnes in Flanders. I had now more a mind
to a Glass of cool Burgundy, than the insignificant Indian Liquors; which
though I knew was against the sanctity of the place, yet nothing was denied me
a Stranger. Here being alone, we fell into Discourse of the English, and of
their King. They willingly allowed the English to be truly Brave; and now in
Peace they found also, that they were as Civil, and well Bred, as Brave; That
no Nation had given the King and his Court that satisfaction, that the English
had done; being curious and inquisitive after all good things; They did see a
great difference betwixt them and other Nations; They did not stare, and
carelessly run about, or hold up their Heads, and despise what they saw; but
had a true relish of every good thing, and made a good Judgment of what was
Commendable; and therefore the King took pleasure to have them showed every
thing. This Discourse of the English they concluded with a great Encomium of K.
William.

As for their own King they were much in the Praise of him, as one may easily
imagine: That his Retirement hither was mostly for his Health; That he left
Versailles every Tuesday night, and came hither with a select Company of Lords
and Ladies; That he returned not till Saturday night, and sometimes intermitted
10 or 14 days; so that he spent half of his time here in Repose; That he was
the most affable Prince in the World, and never out of Humor, of a pleasant
and open Conversation where it pleased him; easy of access, and never sent any
one away discontented; The most Bountiful Master in the World, of which there
were Ten thousand Instances; nothing of Merit in any Kind, but he most readily
and cheerfully Rewarded, ever, of late years at least, preferring the Virtuous;
so on the other hand, he never spared the Rebellious and Obstinate; That the
Government of his People could not be carried on with less severity and
strictness; nor the Taxes which was necessary to support it, raised; That he
delighted not in Blood or Persecution; but that the Art of Government had
different Rules, according to the Climate and Nature of the People, where and
upon whom it was to be put in practice. His great Wisdom appeared in nothing
more, than in preserving himself amidst his Troops, his Converts, his Court and
numerous Family, all in a manner fit for the Throne. The greatness of his Mind,
and Magnificence, in his Buildings. This was the Sum of the Discourse these
Gentlemen were pleased to entertain me with.

The Pipinerie.
At my return to Paris I was to see the Pipinerie, or Royal Nursery of Plants,
in the Fauxbourgh of St. Honorie; where I met the Master or Controuler of it,
Monsieur Morley, one of the Ushers of the Bedchamber to the King.

He, like the rest of the French Nation, was Civil to me; and showed me a
Written Almanac of Flowring Plants for the whole year, which he said was an
Original; it might, indeed, be so in French, but we have had Almanacks for
Fruit and Flowers, for every month in the year, Printed diverse times, for above
this 30 years, thanks to Mr. Evelyn.

This Ground enclosed with high Walls is vastly big, as it ought to be, to
supply the Kings Gardens; Here are several Acres of young Pines, Cypresses,
Vues, etc. also vast Beds of Stock July-Flowers, of all sorts of Bulbes, as
Tulips, Dafidills, Crocus's, etc. and therefore I could easily believe him,
when he told me, he had sent from hence to Marli alone, in 4 years time, 18
millions of Tulips, and other Bulbous Flowers; for which he offered to show me
his Memoires.

He further told me, that the furnishing the Trianon, (a peculiar House of
Pleasure, with its Parterres at the end of the Gardens at Versailles) with
Flower Pots in season, every 14 days in the Summer, took up no less than 92000
Pots from hence.

Also from hence he could Plant and furnish in 14 days time, any new Garden the
King should cause to be made.

Here besides the Plants common to us and them, I saw a multitude of Pots well
conditioned of Staechas citrina folio latiusculo.

Also a sort of Cotila, which bore large Sun Flowers or Marigolds, propagated
by Slips, called by him Amaroutre.

In this Ground are several Houses to lodge the tender Winter Greens; amongst
the rest there is one very large, which I may call the Infirmery of sick Orange
Trees; which coming from Genoa by Sea, are here deposited in a peculiar Green
House; and there were in it, and then actually carrying out into the Air, (it
was the 22th of May our Style) 300 Trees in Cases as thick as a Man's Thigh;
but after 10, and some after 17 years cherishing, had not yet got Heads decent
enough to be removed, and to appear at Court, they being often forced to lop
both Tops and Root, that they might recover them.

After all, it must be said, that this Magnificence, and the number of these
Palaces and Gardens, are the best and most commendable effect of Arbitrary
Government. If these Expenses were not in time of Peace, what would be this
Kings Riches, and the extreme Poverty of the People? For it is said, that every
3 years, some say much oftener, he has all the Wealth of the Nation in his
Coffers; so that there is a necessity he should have as extravagant and
incredible ways of expending it, that it may have its due circulation amongst
the People.

But when this vast Wealth and Power is turned to the Disturbance and
Destruction of Mankind, it is terrible; and yet it has its use too: We and all
Europe have been taught, by the Industry of this great King, mighty
Improvements in War; so that Europe has been these 12 years an Over-match for
the Turk; and we for France by the continuation of the War. The 40 Millions
Sterling which the late War has, and will cost England, before all is paid,
was well bestowed, if it had been for no other end, than to teach us the full
use and practice of War; and in that Point to equal us with our Neighbors.

It was observed by Polybius of the Romans, that wherever they met with an
Enemy, that had better Weapons than themselves, they changed with them; This
Docility gained them the Empire of the World. On the contrary, those late
Eastern Tyrants have despised Learning, and consequently must submit to the
more refined Valor of Europe. I say, the Effects of Arbitrary Government, both
in War and Peace, are Stupendous.

The Roman Emperors, because absolute Lords of the People; far out-did the
Commonwealth in Magnificent Buildings, both Public and Private. Augustus left
Rome a Marble City, which he found of Brick only. Nero burnt it and rebuilt it,
and a Golden Palace for himself, like a City. Vespatian and Titus built
Amphitheaters and Baths far surpassing any Buildings now upon the face of the
Earth; in one of which 120000 Persons might see and hear, and be seated with
more convenience, than upon our Stages. Adrian visited most parts of the World,
on purpose to build Cities. Trajan had his Name on every Wall, which he either
restored, or built. His Pillar and Bridge over the Danube are Stupendous
Monuments of his Expenses.

The Egyptian Kings built them Monuments, wherein they slaved their whole
Nation, and which are the Wonders of the World to this day, the Obelisks I
mean, and Pyramids.

The Asiatick Emperors of China and Japan have outdone the Europeans in this
kind of immense Buildings, as the Wall in China, the Cut Rivers and Sluices and
Bridges there. In Japan the Buildings are no less incredibly great.

Of this Absolute Dominion we have Examples even in those two American Empires,
of Mexico and Peru. In this last, mere Nature forced Impossibilities without
Art, Tools, or Science. The Cusco Fortress was a Masterpiece, where Stones
were laid upon Stones, which no Engine of ours could carry, or raise up; or
Tools better polish, and fit together; where a Country near as big as all
Europe, was turned into a Garden, and cultivated better than Versailles, and
Waterworks brought to Play and overspread some thousands of miles, where it
never Rains. This was the only Arbitrary Government well applied to the good of
Mankind, I ever met with in History; where Roads and Storehouses of Food and
Raiment were the Guides, and numbered the miles for the Travelers, and the
whole Empire turned into an useful and intelligible Map.

As for the Turks, Persians, and Mogul, the whole Empire is intended solely for
the Pleasure of one Man; and here even Tyranny it self is foully abused.

Yet I should be loath to see them in any kind exemplified in England. In our
happy Island we see such Palaces and Gardens, as are for the Health and Ease of
Man only; and what they want in Magnificence, they have in Neatness. There is
not such a thing as a Gravel Walk in or about Paris, nor a Rowler of any sort;
when it Rains the Tuilleries are shut up, and one walks in Dirt some days
after. The Grass Plots, or, as they call them Bowling Greens, are as ill kept,
they clip them and beat them with flat Beaters as they do their Walks. This
puts me in mind of what I saw in the Garden of the Prince of Conde in Paris;
where there was a Grassy Circle of about 4 foot wide, round one of the
Fountains in the middle of the Garden; to keep this down, and make it of a
finer Turf, the Gardner had Teathered two Black Lambs, and two White Kids, at
equal distances, which fed upon it. What ever the effect was, I thought it
looked pretty enough; and the little Animals were as Ornamental, as the Grass.

All the Paintings and Prints made of late years of the King make him look very
old; which in my mind is not so; for he is plump in the Face, and is well
colored, and seems healthy, and eats and drinks heartily, which I saw him do;
This is certainly an injury to him, and possibly in complaisance to the
Dauphin, or worse. This is the meanest Compliment I have known the French
guilty of toward their Prince; for there are every where Expressions of an
other nature all over Paris. See The Description of Paris, where they are
collected and at large. The Romans under Augustus, (the first Absolute Master
of that People, as this King is of the French) had upon this Subject from the
People a much finer thought, and wish, De nostris annis tibi Jupiter augeat
annos.

However it be, the King seems not to like Versailles so well as he did; and
has an Opinion, that the Air is not so good, as elsewhere; he leaves it (as I
said) every week on Tuesday night, and goes mostly to Marli, or Meudon, and
sometimes to the Trianon, which is but at the end of the Gardens, and returns
not to Versailles till Saturday night: Besides his extraordinary removes to
Fontainbleau. I wonder no body puts him in mind of that Paradise of France,
Languedoc, where he may be with ease in 4 days, at the Rate that Kings use to
Travel. I had this Discourse at Table with one of the Introducteurs to the
Ambassador at Versailles; but he could not bear it, it being against the
Interest of all settled Courts to remove, though it were never so good for
their Princes Health. I remember but of one Instance in History, and that was
Aurenzebe the Great Mogul, who in his middle Age fell desperately sick, and
long languisht at Labor; but took Advice of some body about him, and went in
his own Kingdom a progress of 1000 miles to Casimire, a very mild and temperate
Climate, where he recovered, and lived to almost a 100 years old.

The King now seldom or never Plays, but contents himself sometimes with
looking on; but he has formerly been engaged, and has lost great Sums.
Monsieur S. Rookt him of near a Million of Livers at Basset, by putting false
Cards upon him; but was imprisoned and banished for it some years.

Before I give over the Business of Gardens and Country, I will add some
Remarks, which seemed particular and new to me.

In the Kitchen Gardens at and near Paris, are a great number of Apricock
Standards; but kept low; very full of Blossoms, and good Bearers.

They make a Conserve of the Fruit; which I like above any of their Wet
Sweetmeats; it was made by cutting them into thin slices, and throwing away the
Stone; which our People spare sometimes, and leave in the Flesh entire, and
spoils the Sweetmeat, and sets it a fretting.

They employ the Stones in Brandy, and distill them in Spirits.

In the beginning of April we had store of Sparagrass, but they were often so
bitter, to me at least, that there was little pleasure in eating them. It Is
certain they were much worse, than ours in England in that particular. Which
puts me in mind of the Wild Sparagrass, which grows plentifully with us on the
Sea Coast in Lincolnshire. This is very fair to the Eye; yet no culture of our
Gardens, by often transplanting, could make it eatable. I fancy the Sparagrass
recovers something of its natural force in a warmer Climate; for the sweet is
as it were degenerated. If they would have them good here, they must renew the
Seed from England or Holland.

The Wild Sparagrass of Languedoc is another Plant called Corruda.

I procured out of Languedoc a sort of Praecox Vine, about 50 Plants, by the
Clermont Carrier; the which I gave to Mr. London, our Kings Gardner, for my
Lord Ambassador. This Grape is White, very thin Skinn'd, and clear as a drop of
Water; it is usually ripe at St. Johnsmass in July at Montpellier, where it is
called Des Vnies.

There are also in this Town Praecox Grapes, as Dr. Turnfort told me, in the
Physic Garden; but whether the same with the Vnies, I know not.

I have said they delight much in Figs in Pots or Cases; but here is another
way of preserving the Fig Trees set in the Ground, which is much practiced; and
that is to lap, and tie them up in long Straw, from top to bottom; for which
they are placed at a little distance from the Walls. This also is practiced to
such Trees as stand in the middle of the Parterre; they did not open them till
Mid- May.

The Exotic Trees, which the Parisians most delight in, for their Garden Walks,
and for the Shade in their Courts, are the Maroniers, or Horse Chestnuts, of
which they have innumerable; for the Fruit ripens very well here, and comes up
of it self. Also the Acacia Rovini, which is very common, and makes pretty
Alleys, and which they lop and turn to Pollards, with good effect; but of these
last the Leaves are late in putting forth, it being the 15th of May our Syle,
when these Trees were scarce green.

May 25, when I took my Leave of Monsieur Valliant, I found him in his Flower
Garden; he showed me a Parcel of Ranunculus's, in full Flower, which he had
received but two years before from Constantinople; They were very beautiful and
rare, at least such as I had never seen; as pure White, White and Green, White
and Stripped with Carnation, Pure Carnation or Rose-colour, Stripped Carnation,
etc.

Of these he had sold some a Pistol a Root, and hoped in a year or two to be
more plentifully stock't with them, that he might afford them cheaper. I did
see afterward a few of them in the Royal Pipinerie, and also in the Seedsman's
Garden, Monsieur le Febre; but both came from him.

I also took notice of his Iron Cradles or Hoops over his Beds, which were
removable, and to be made higher and lower, according to the height and nature
of the Floors they were designed to cover. This, me-thoughts, was far beyond
all the Inventions of Wooden Covers, and might with Sail-Cloths and Mats well
serve for a sort of portable Green House, to the less tender Plants.

I saw Le Febre's Flower Garden May 9. The Tulips were in their prime; indeed,
he had a very large and plentiful Collection. The Panachee or Stripped Tulips
were many, and of great variety. He observed to me, that from his large and
numerous Beds of self-flower'd Tulips, that is, of one color, as Red, Yellow,
etc. they expected yearly some Stripped ones, which if perfect, that is, stripped
in all the six Leaves, would but doubtfully continue, and perhaps return to
their former state the next year; but if they labored, or did not finish the
stripings of all the six Leaves the first year, there were better hopes of
their continuing in that state.

Though I had no mind to descend into the Stone Pits, which are like our Mines,
Well-fashion, and the Stones wound up with great Wheels, to husband the Soil
over them: Yet I went to Vanre, 3 miles from the Town, which is a ridge of
Hills that runs along to the Observatoire. Here the Quarries are open on the
side of the Hill, as with us. In those I observed 2 or 3 layers of Stone, 2 or
3 foot thick, mostly made up of Shells, or Stones in the fashion of Shells.
Amongst these Shell-stones the most remarkable for bigness was a certain smooth
and long Buccinum, tapering with very many spires. I measured one whose first
spire was 8 inches diameter, the full length I could not so well come at; yet
holding proportion with those of the kind which lay flat, and which we could
see in their full length, it must have been a foot long at least. There is no
Buccinum in any of our Seas a quarter so big. Here are many of this Species.
Also other large Turbinated Stones, which come near some of the West India
Kinds of Music Shells, of which Genus yet there are none in the European Seas.

These Layers of Stone mixed with Shell-figured bodies, are at certain distances
in the Rock, and other Rocks void of Shells interposed.

Fanciful Men may think what they please of this matter; sure I am, until the
History of Nature, and more particularly that of Minerals and Fossils is better
looked into, and more accurately distinguished, all Reasoning is in vain. It is
to be observed, where Men are most in the dark, there Impudence reigns most, as
upon this Subject: They are not content fairly to dissent, but to insult every
body else. In like manner upon the Subject of Mineral Waters; How many
Scriblers have there been, without any knowledge of Fossils?

I know not whether it be worth the noting, but it shows the Humor of the
French, that I saw in some Country Towns near Paris, the Church Wall near the
top, had a two foot broad Mourning List, which compassed the whole Church like
a Girdle, and on this was at certain distances, painted the Arms of the Lord of
the Manor, who was dead.

I shall conclude, what I have to say further, with the Air of Paris, and the
State of Health and Physic there.

Air.
The Air of Paris is drier than that of England, notwithstanding the greatest
part of the City is placed in a dirty miry Level; The Muddy Banks of the River
Seine witness this; also the old Latin Name of Paris, Lutetia; but some of them
are unwilling to derive it from Lutum; though there are several other Towns in
France, formerly more considerable than it, of that very Name; but from the
Greek Original, as Tolon, Tolousa, which in that Language signify Black Dirt.
We have an undoubted Experiment of the different Temper of the Air in our
Philosophic Transactions; where it is demonstrated, that there falls twice as
much Rain in England, as at Paris; Registers of both having carefully been
kept, for so many years, both here and in France.

From this quantity of Rain with us, our Fields are much greener; and it was a
pleasing surprise to me at my return, sailing up the River of Thames, to see
our green Fields and Pastures on every side; but we pay dearly for it, in Agues
and Coughs, and Rheumatick Distempers.

The Winter was very rude and fierce, as was ever known in the Memory of Man;
The cold Winds very piercing; and the Common People walk the Streets all in
Mouffes, and Multitudes had little Brass Kettles of Smallcoal kindled, hanging
on their Arms; and yet you should scarce hear any one Cough.

I never saw a Mist at Paris in the 6 months I staid there, but one; though a
very broad River runs through the middle of the City, nor any very strong
Winds; but this may be accidental, and the Temper of some one year by chance.

We were very sensible by the 20th of February our Style, though the Nights
were cold, and the White Frosts great in the Mornings, that the Sun at Noon had
a much stronger force and heat, than with us, at that time of the year.

Another Argument, of the Dryness of the Air at Paris, we had from the
alteration of Health; such as were thick Breathed, and Cought and Spit much,
soon recovered; and the insensible perspiration of the Skin was so clear and
free, that the Kidneys had little to do; so that it was observed by most, that
though we drank pretty freely of the thin Wines of Champagne and Burgundy, yet
they never broke our sleep to get shut of them; and that very little passed
that way in the morning.

Lastly, a sign of the Dryness and great goodness of the Air of Paris is, the
vast number of Iron Bars all over the City; which yet are mostly entire, and
the least decayed with Rust, I ever saw in any place; whereas ours in London
are all in a few years all over rusty, and miserably eaten.

Water.
We were sufficiently alarmed at our first coming to Paris, with the
unwholesomeness of the River Water, and cautioned against drinking it; and yet
it was almost impossible to avoid the bad effects of it, for within the month
two thirds of the Family fell into Fluxes, some into Dysenteries, and some very
ill of it. The French that come out of other remote Countries suffer as well as
the Strangers. We were told boiling it was a good Remedy to prevent its Griping
Quality; but that is a mere Notion, for we know Mineral Waters boiled have a
stronger effect, and this quality can proceed from nothing less.

The Well Waters here are much worse than the River Waters, because more
Mineral. But our safety was in the Water brought from the Maison des Eaux,
where the Aqueduct of Arcueil empties it self to serve the great Palaces and
City Fountains.

Dysentery.
The Disease of the Dysentery being one of the most common in Paris,
Hypopecouana.
the most celebrated Drug for its cure is now the Hypopecouana; though I never
once made use of it to any of our People, but cured them all as soon, and as
well with our usual Remedies. Indeed they have great need of it here, for the
poorer sort of People, through ill Diet, this Water, and Herbs, are very
subject to it; This Root is said to cure it with as much certainty, and as
readily, as the Jesuits Powder an Ague; Of this most of the Physicians and
Apothecaries agreed. They give it in Powder from 10 grains to 40, which is the
largest Dose. It most commonly Vomits, and sometimes Purges, but both gently.
It Is sold here from 20 to 50 Crowns a Pound. They divide it into 4 sorts,
according to its goodness.

The Stone.
Another popular Disease here is the Stone; and there are Men well practiced in
the Cutting for it. There are also two Hospitals, where great numbers are cut
yearly, as La Charity, and Hostel-Dieu, in both of these there are Wired Chests
full of Stones cut from Human Bodies; and in the Chest of La Charity is one,
which exceeds all belief; it was cut from a Monk, who died in the very
Operation; it is as big as a Child's Head. It is but the Model or Pattern of the
Stone which is kept in the Chest; which has this Inscription on it. Figure and
grosseur de la pierre, pesant 51 ounces, qui font trois livres trois ounces,
qui a este tiree dans cet Hospital au mois de Juin 1690, and que l'ou conserve
dans le couvent de la Charity.

But that which I shall here most insist upon is the new way, practiced by Pere
Jaques, a Monk. About the 20th of April he cut in the Hostel-Dieu 10 in less
than an hours time: The 3d day after, all were hearty and without pain but one.

He cuts both by the grand and little Appareil; in both he boldly thrusts in a
broad Lancet or Stilleto into the middle of the Muscle of the Thigh near the
Anus, till he joins the Catheter or Staff, or the Stone betwixt his Fingers;
then he widens the incision of the Blader in proportion to the Stone with a
Silver Oval Hoop; if that will not do, he thrusts in his 4 Fingers, and tears
it wider; then with the Ducks Bill he draws it out.

I see him cut a second time in the Hostel-Dieu; and he performed it upon 9
Persons in 3 quarters of an hour, very dexterously. He seemed to venture at
all; and put me into some disorder with the cruelty of the Operation; and a
stouter Englishman than my self. However I visited them all in their Beds, and
found them more amazed, than in pain.

Pere Jaques cut also his way in the other Hospital La Charity, much about the
same time, 11 at twice. Here Monsieur Marshal, the best of the Surgeons for
this Operation now in Paris, harangu'd against him before the Governors, who
coldly answered, they would be determined by the Event, which way was best.

Atque hac ratione Faeminis Calculi omnium facillime exciduntur; nempe
scalpello intra vaginam uteri in vesicam adacto. Of those cut in La Charity one
died; and being dissected, it was found he had his Bladder pierced in 4 or 5
places; also the Museulus Psous sadly mangled; also the left Vesiculae
Seminales cut.

Notwithstanding this, if this Method was well executed by a Skilful Hand, it
might be of good use to Mankind.

This way of Cutting for the Stone, puts me in mind of what I formerly writ and
published in the Phil. Transactions, about Cutting above the Os Pubis, in the
Fund of the Bladder.

Also of that Experiment of Cutting for the Stone of an Alderman of Doncaster
in the Gluteus Major, he was twice cut in the same place, and outlived both. I
saw the first Stone, which was very large, and in some measure transparent,
Crystal like. This Experiment is Printed in Dr. Willies Scarborough Spaw, 14
years ago at least, and is a fair hint for this new Method.

Since my return I had a Letter from Mr. Probie, a very Learned and Industrious
young Gentleman, who was with me to see the Operation, that part relating to
this Matter I shall here transcribe. Indeed, I mightily longed for an Account
of this Matter, the success of which I came away too soon to learn any thing
for certain.

Paris, Aug. 2. 98.
PEre Jaque's Reputation mightily slackens, out of Forty five that he cut at
the Hostel-Dieu, but sixteen of them survive; and of Nineteen in the Charity,
but eleven. He has practiced at the Hospitals at Lions, but, it is said, with
worse success than at Paris. I am sensible he has got abundance of Enemies,
which makes me very often question, what I may hear said of him. Dr. Fagon, the
Kings Physician, told Dr. Turnfort, when he went to present his Book to him,
that he had cut Seven at Versailles, and that six of them are alive, and as
well as if never cut. The Person that died was so Distempered, that he was not
expected to live, and 'twas thought, if he had not been cut, he had not lived
so long: The Surgeons have a great mind to cry down the Man, though they
practice his Method. For Marshal has since cut after Pere Jaque's Manner, only
with this difference, that Marshal's Catheter was cannulated. Le Rue, the
second Surgeon of the Charity Hospital cut after the old Manner, at the same
time when Marshal cut Pere Jaque's way, but had not so good success as Marshal
had; for all that Marshal cut are alive and very well, whereas the other lost
one or two of his number; besides, those that lived were not so soon cured, no,
not by a month or six weeks.


Thus far Mr. Probie.

Pox.
The Pox here is the great Business of the Town; a Disease which in some measure
has contributed to the ruin of Physic here, as in London. This Secret
Service has introduced little Contemptible Animals of all sorts into Business,
and has given them occasion to insult Families, after they had once the
knowledge of these Misfortunes. And it is for this reason the Quacks here, as
with us, do thrive vastly into great Riches beyond any of the Physicians, by
treating privately these Calamities.

It was a pleasant Diversion to me to read upon the Walls every where about the
Town, but more particularly in the Fauxbourgh of St. Germain, the Quacks Bills
Printed in great Uncial Letters.

As, De par l'ordre du Roy.

Remede infallible and commode pour la gerison des maladies secrets sans
garder la chamber.

Another, Par permission de Roy.

Manniere tres aisee and tres sure pour guerir sans incommodite, and sans que
person en appercoive, les maladies veneriennes, etc.

Another, Par privilege du Roy.

L'Antivenerien de medicin Indien, pour toutes les maladies veneriennes, tells
quelles quissent estre, sans aucun retour, and sans guarder la chamber. Il est
tres commode and le plus agreeable de monde.

Another, Remede assure de Sieur de la Brune privilege du Roy, etc. sans qu'on
soit contraint de garder la chamber, etc.



By these Bills it is evident, there is yet a certain Modesty and Decorum left
in the Concealing this Disease, even amongst the French; They would be Cured
secretly, and as though nothing were doing; which those Wretches highly
promise. But this is that Handle which gives those mean People an occasion to
insult their Reputation, and injure them in their Health for ever.

Every body here puts their helping Hand, and meddles with the Cure of this
Disease, as Apothecaries, Barbers, Women, and Monks; yet I did not find by all
the inquiry I could make, that they had other Remedies than we. Nay, there is
something practiced in the Cure of this Distemper in England, which they at
Paris know nothing of; but this old Verse forbids me to say any thing further.
Artem pudere proloqui, quam factites.


Apothecaries Shops.
The Apothecaries Shops are neat enough, if they were but as well stored with
Medicines; and some are very finely adorned, and have an Air of greatness, as
that of Monsieur Geofferie, who has been Provost des Merchands, in the Rue
Burtebur, where the Entry to the Basse Cour is a Port-cochier, with Vasa's of
Copper in the Niches of the Windows; within are Rooms adorned with huge Vasa's
and Mortors of Brass, as well for sight, as for use. The Drugs and Compositions
are kept in Cabinets disposed round the Room. Also Laboratories backwards in
great perfection and neatness. I must needs commend this Gentleman for his
Civility toward me; and for his Care in Educating his Son, who came over with
Count Tallard, a most Hopeful and Learned Young Man; whom our Society at
Gresham-Colledge, at my Request, honored with admitting him Fellow, according
to his Deserts.

Physicians.
I had the opportunity of Conversing with many of the Physicians in this City;
who all agree in the low Condition and Disesteem it was in, from the boundless
Confidence and intruding of Quacks, Women, and Monks. Monsieur d'Achin, the
late chief Physician, has been ill thought on for taking Money, and giving
protection to these sort of Cattle; but the chief Physician now, Monsieur
Fagon, is a Man of great Honor and Learning, and very desirous to promote the
Art.

It is here as with us, some practice out of mere vanity, others to make a
Penny any way to get Bread. The cause of all this is, I think, the great
Confidence People have of their own Skill, an arrogance without thinking. To
pass a Judgment upon Cures, and the good and evil practice of Physic, without
doubt is one of the nicest things, even to Men of the Faculty; but a Jury, that
is, the very ordinary Men in England, are suffered now to undertake the
Question; when I may truly say, that I have ever found, no disparagement to
them, the most Learned Men of the Nation, the most mistaken in these Matters;
and can it be otherwise in so Conjectural an Art, when we our selves scarce
know, when we have done ill or well.

Another cause of the low Esteem of Physic here, are the sorry Fees that are
given to Physicians; which makes that Science not worth the Application and
Study. The King indeed is very liberal, as in all things else, in his Pensions
to his chief Physician, and gives his Children good Preferments.

Also Mr. Burdelot, who is also well Pensioned, and lodged at Versailles,
Physician to the Duchess of Burgundy, a Learned Man; he is perfectly well
Skilled in the History of Physic; and we may shortly (as he told me) expect
from him, another Supplement to Vauder Linden, of many thousand Volumes, which
have escaped that Catalogue, and are not accounted for.

Monsieur, and the Dauphin, and all the Princes of the Blood, have their
Domestic Physicians; some of whom I knew, as Monsieur Arlot, Monsieur Minot,
to the Prince of Conty, of my acquaintance formerly at Montpelier. The Two
Morins very Learned Men; also Monsieur Grimodel, etc.

Others have the practice of Nunneries and Convents, which gives them Bread;
others have Parishes; and some such Shifts they make; but all is wrong with
them, and very little encouragement given to the Faculty.

April 14. the Prince of Conty sent his Gentleman and Coach at midnight to
fetch me to his Son, and to bring with me the late King Charles's Drops to give
him. This was a very hasty call. I told the Messenger, I was the Prince's very
humble Servant; but for any Drops or other Medicines I had brought nothing at
all with me, and had used only such as I found in their Shops, for all the
occasions I had had to use any. I desired he would tell him, that I was ready
to Consult with his Physicians upon his Sons Sickness, if he pleased to command
me, but for coming upon any other Account I desired to be excused; but I heard
no more of the Matter, and the young Prince died. By this it is evident, there
is as false a Notion of Physic in this Country, as with us; and that it is
here also thought a Knack, more than a Science or Method; and little Chimical
Toys, the Bijous of Quacks, are mightily in request. This Heresy has
possessed the most thinking, as well as the ignorant part of Mankind; and for
this we are beholden to the late vain Expositors of Nature, who have mightily
inveighed against and undervalued the ancient Greek Physicians, in whose Works
only this Art is to be learnt, unless single Persons could live over as many
Ages, as those Wise Men did.

Men are apt to prescribe to their Physician, before he can possibly tell, what
he shall in his Judgment think fitting to give; it is well if this was in
Negatives only; but they are prejudiced by the impertinence of the Age, and our
Men, who ought to Converse with the Patient and his Relations with Prognostics
only, which are the honor of Physic, and not play the Philosopher by fanciful
and precarious Interpretations of the Nature of Diseases and Medicines, to gain
a sort of Credit with the Ignorant; and such certainly are all those that have
not studied Physic thoroughly, and in earnest.

Those Drops were desired of me by other Persons of Quality, as the Princess
d'Espinoy, the Duchess of Boullon, Monsieur Sesac, etc. and having bethought my
self how my Master, the late King Charles, had communicated them to me, and
showed me very obligingly the Process himself, by carrying me alone with him
into his Elaboratory at Whitehall, while it was Distilling. Also Mr. Chevins
another time showed me the Materials for the Drops in his Appartment newly
brought in, in great quantity, that is, Raw Silk. I caused the Drops to be made
here. Also I put Dr. Turnfort upon making of them; which he did in perfection,
by Distilling the finest Raw Silk he could get. For my part I was surprised at
the Experiment often repeated, having never tried it before. One Pound of Raw
Silk yielded an incredible quantity of Volatile Salt, and in proportion the
finest Spirit I ever tasted; and that which recommends it is, that it is when
rectified, of a far more pleasant smell, than that which comes from Sal
Armoniack or Hartshorne; and the Salt refined and cohobated with any well
scented Chimical Oil, makes the Kings Salt, as its used to be called. This my
Lord Ambassador gave me leave to present in his Name; and the Doctor now
supplies those which want. Silk, indeed is nothing else, but a dry Jelly from
the Insect Kind, and therefore very Cordial and Stomachick no doubt. The
Arabians were wise, and knowing in the Materia Medica, to have put it in their
Alkermes.

This must be said for the Honor of this King, that he has ever given great
Encouragements for useful Discoveries in all Kinds, and particularly in
Physic. It Is well known he bought the Secret of the Jesuits Powder, and made
it public; as he lately did that of the Hypococana.

To Conclude, it was my good Fortune here to have a Bundle of Original Papers
of Sir Theodore Mayerne, and his Friends, who Corresponded with him, presented
me by the Reverend Dr. Wickar, Dean of Winchester, who Marrying his Kinswoman
found them amongst other Writings of Law Matters. I have not yet had the
leisure to peruse them, but those who know the Worth of that great Man, will
desire they may be made public; which if they are, they shall come forth
entire, and not disguised, as some of his other Papers have been, to the great
detriment of Physic; and I think it is the first Example of this Nature, that
Posthumous Papers were ever abreviated, and made what they never were, before
an entire and full publication.

FINIS.
depiction of a species of snail Purpura Americana F. Plumier
depiction of a species of millipede Iulus Americanus F. Plumier
depiction of a species of centipede Scolopendra Americana F. Plumier


BOOKS Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head near the Inner-Temple-Gate
in Fleetstreet, and at Gray's-Inn-Gate in Gray's-Inn-Lane.
THE Poetical Works of Mr. John Milton, containing, Paradise Lost, Paradise
Regained, Sampson Agonistes, and his Poems on several Occasions, together with
Explanatory Notes on each Book of the Paradise Lost, and a Table never before
Printed. The Works of that Famous English Poet Mr. Edmond Spencer, viz. The
Fairy Queen, The Shepherds Calendar, The Hist. of Ireland, etc. with an Account
of his Life, and several Pieces of his never Printed till the Year 1679. Ovid's
Love Epistles Translated into English by the E. of Mulgrave, Sir Carr Scrope,
Mr. Dryden, and several Eminent Hands, adorned with several Copper Cuts. The
Odes, Satyrs, and Epistles of Horace, Translated into English by Mr. Creech of
Oxford. Miscelany Poems, containing a new Translation of Virgil's Eclogues, and
several parts of his Aeneid's, Ovid's Love Elegies, several Odes of Horace, and
Parts of Lucretius, with variety of Original Poems written by the most Eminent
Hands, and Published by Mr. Dryden. Dryden's Works in 4 Volumes in Quarto.
Syphilis; Or, a Poetical History of the French Disease; written in Latin by
Fracastorius, and Englished by Mr. Tate. Poems upon several Occasions, with a
Voyage to the Island of Love: Written by Mrs. Behn. A Critical History of the
Old Testament, in 3 Books, written in French, and Englished by H. D.
Contemplations upon the Remarkable Passages in the Life of the Holy Jesus, by
Joseph Hall late Lord Bishop of Exeter. The Royal Commentaries of Peru, in Two
Parts, adorned with several Sculptures, by Sir Paul Rycaut Knight. Love Letters
from a Nobleman to his Sister, in 3 Volumes. The Works of Virgil, containing
his Pastords; Georgicus and Aeneids Translated into English Verse by Mr.
Dryden, adorned with a Hundred Sculptures. The Second Edition. The Satyrs of
Decimus Junius Juvenalis Translated into English Verse by Mr. Dryden, and
several other Eminent Hands; Together with the Satyrs of Aulus Persius Flaccus,
made English by Mr. Dryden, with Explanatory Notes at the end of each Satyr; To
which is prefixed a Discourse concerning the Original and Progress of Satire.
Dedicated to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Dorset, etc. The Second
Edition, adorned with Sculptures. Davenant's Essay upon Ways and Means for
Supplying the Wars. The Old Bachelor, Double Dealer, Love for Love, and
Mourning Bride; all 4 by Mr. Congreve. Amendments to Mr. Collier's False and
Imperfect Citations from the Old Bachelor, Double Dealer, Love for Love,
Mourning Bride, by the Author of those Plays. Five Books of Manelius in English
by Mr. Creech. Seneca's Morals by Sir Roger L'Estrange. The Seventh Edition.
Tully's Offices in English by Sir R. L'Estrange. Temples Works. Suckling's
Poems. Cowley's Works. Eachard's Roman History, in Two Parts. Charron of
Wisdom, in Two Parts.

