OBSERVATIONS UPON THE WAR OF HUNGARY.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Randall Tailor, near Stationers' Hall;
and Tho. Newborough, at the Golden Ball in S. Paul's Church Yard. 1689.

THE PREFACE.
THese Observations were written, soon after the Things were done: that is,
toward the latter end of that Winter, which followed the Taking of Newhausel.
And they have now lost much of their Relish: in regard the Actions are less
fresh in memory, and the Ideas of later Events and Accidents have taken
possession of Men's Minds. But the delay could not be avoided. For in the late
Reign they would by no means be suffered to be Printed. though they had been
severely Garbled by some Friends; and though they were submitted to any further
Expurgations; and lastly though nothing could be Objected, against the truth of
the Matters here delivered. However there were several Written Copies went
abroad. Some whereof were perused by the most Eminent in the late Court, and
particularly by the French Ambassador. Who freely declared, that he agreed
with the Author in every point. But you may imagine, those passages were then
struck out, which seemed to touch too hard upon his Master the French King; or
that Kings Masters, the Jesuits.

Perhaps it may seem presumptuous, to give any Judgment of the Actions of great
Men. But the thing well considered, it is no more then what every body does.
Every body does that in Discourse, which is here done in Writing: that is, He
says what he thinks, of such Occurrences as he reads or hears of. They that
have the Glory to appear publicly in the Eyes of Mankind, do at the same time
come under their Judgment. and as in the common Stages, so in the Grand Theater
of the World, the most principal and greatest Actors must undergo the Censure,
even of the meanest and most unskilful Spectators.

You will say; We cannot give a Judgment of those Actions, of which we do not
know the reason. But if this hold good, none can judge of Actions, save only
They that designed them: for They only have a full knowledge of the Reasons.
And at this rate, the Lookers on may not dislike the play of the most bungling
Gamester. Also it would hence follow, that all Actions must be esteemed alike,
and we must give an implicit approbation of every thing that is done. So that
our Expedition to the Isle of Re, which (as some think) had as many Errors as
Actions, must be thought a piece of as good Conduct, as the Conquest of Egypt
by Sultan Selim.

But we do well know that very famous Commanders are noted and confessed to have
had their Mistakes. I forbear to enlarge upon this Subject (which it were easy
to do) and shall instance only in Pompey: who was one of the greatest Captains
that the World has known. Caesar observes, that he acted unskilfully in the
Battle of Pharsalia, when he ordered his Men to stand their ground, and receive
their Enemies Charge. whereas plainly it adds Courage to the Soldier, to be in
motion and advancing upon the Enemy. But Tully (who pretended to judge of few
things which he did not well understand) condemns Pompey for fighting at all.
Signa tirone and collectitio Exercitu cum Legionibus robustissimis contulit.
And he tells us what led him into that Error. Quadam ex Pugna (that of
Dyrrhachium he means) coepit suis militibus confidere. And then he adds; Ex eo
tempore Vir ille summus, nullus Imperator fuit. There was yet a greater Error,
though no notice be taken of it, which Pompey committed in this Affair. And
that was; That he staid at all in Greece, after that Caesar and his Army were
got thither. There he staid, as if he had been tied by some Charm, to be
bearded, and besieged, and at last beaten; when, being Master at Sea, and his
whole Naval Force being come to him, he might with the greatest ease have crossed
over into Italy, and have shut Caesar out of it. And nothing could then hinder
his Marching to Rome: where he might have had his full Revenge upon the adverse
Faction. Which was the thing he longed after. For the same Tully writes of him;
Animus ejus Sullaturit and Proscripturit jam diu. He that would know the
Intrigues of those Affairs, must read Tully.

We must beg pardon of the Illustrious Hero of Lorrain, if his Conduct
sometimes has not been understood. But this may be said in his Vindication
once for all; that there is great reason to believe, that he was too often
bound up by strict Orders. The giving of which sort of Orders is a thing that
has been always condemned, and will be always practiced. It is a fine thing to
sit contriving in a Cabinet, and cutting out work for those that must undergo
the labor and the danger. But if Princes will have their work well done, (with
the lowest Submission be it spoken); they should either go themselves, or trust
those they send. If ever any Council were qualified to manage Wars by
particular Orders, it was the Roman Senate: which was composed, for the most
part, of Persons that had been in high Command. it was in effect a Council or
Assembly of Generals. Yet they never took upon them to prescribe to, or direct,
the Persons they employed; but left them to their full liberty, to act
according to their own Judgment and Discretion.

The Author cannot promise a Continuation of the Work here begun. He has made
some farther Remarks upon things that have happened in the progress of this
War. and he has imprinted them in his Mind. But it is uncertain, whether he
will have the leisure to digest them, and to make them fit for public View. If
he do proceed, Prince Lewis of Baden (for any thing yet appears) will be the
prime Favorite of those Observations.

OBSERVATIONS UPON THE War of Hungary.
CHAP. I. TECKELY.
WHile his Imperial Majesty is engaged in a War with France, by the Instigation
of the Jesuits (as it is constantly affirmed), who therein served the French
Interest, great Severities are used against his Protestant Subjects of Hungary.
who till then, and for a long time, had enjoyed the liberty of their Religion,
established by Law. but both their Religious, and likewise their Civil
Liberties, (as themselves complain) were now invaded and subverted. After
extreme Sufferings, and to avoid a total Destruction, the Hungarians take Arms,
Count Teckely being their Head: and maintain a War with various Fortune. The
Emperor concludes a Peace with the French King: and his Forces (now grown
stronger in Hungary) having some Successes, impale their Prisoners. The others
in Revenge impale theirs. and both sides grow weary of Impaling. But the
Hungarians, being pressed very hard, fly to the Turk for Succor. The Grand
Signior takes them into his Protection: and in their Quarrel, sends a mighty
Army against the Emperor, under his Grand Vizier Kara Mustapha. Which the
Emperor opposes with all the Force he can make, commanded by the Highborn
Prince, Charles Duke of Lorrain.

Observations.
1. I shall not here meddle with the Justice of the Emperor's or the
Hungarians Cause. Since is depends much upon the Constitution of that Kingdom,
which I do not pretend to know. That may be just and lawful in Hungary or
Poland, which would be very unlawful in England or France. But surely it is
much doubted, whether his Imperial Majesty did well in point of Prudence, to
suffer his Subjects to be thus provoked, in such Circumstances of Time and
Place. It was in a Time, when he had an Enemy upon his Arm, that was ready to
swallow up all Europe: and it was in a Place bordering upon the Turks, who are
both willing to take, and able to use such Advantages.

2. If the French did secretly incite the Emperor to Severities, and his
Subjects to Resistance, it is no great wonder. For they had then a dangerous
War with Him and his Confederates: and it is thought no Crime to use all ways
and means, to weaken and distract an Enemy. But the wonder is, that the Jesuits
would be the Instruments of so great Mischief to his Imperial Majesty, who had
so great a Favor for their Order. However this may seem less strange, if we
consider that the Jesuits are wise: and regard their Interest, more than their
Inclinations or Obligations. They know that in great Affairs, Gratitude and
good Nature look like foolish things. And therefore they might think fit to
forsake, or even to betray, a Prince that loved them; thereby to gratify a
Prince that was useful to them. The truth is, they wanted the Power of France,
to defend and support them against their great Enemy the Pope. who it is thought
had much rather see the Jesuits rooted out of Christendom, than the Protestants
out of Hungary. So that as things stood, we must not blame the Fathers, if they
could deny nothing to the French King.

3. By the Impaling the Prisoners, and the Success of it, we may observe; that
extraordinary Severities are not to be used to Prisoners of War, where the
Enemy is in a Condition to retaliate. Upon the first Revolt of the Hollanders,
the Duke of Alva caused all those that he took in fight, to be executed by the
hands of the Hangman. But when he saw that the Dutch caused all whom they took,
to be executed likewise without mercy; his dire Soul was forced to submit to
the necessity of fair War. as Grotius informs us, in his most excellent Belgic
History.

4. Count Teckeley is severely censured for calling in the Turk to his
Assistance. And surely if the Emperor's proceedings were just and good, and
Teckeley's Arms unlawful; his joining with the Infidels was a great aggravation
of his Crime. Nor does the Necessity he was reduced to, in any measure excuse
him: since it was a Necessity of his own making. As he that has robbed a Man,
may find a Necessity to kill him too, to prevent pursuit or discovery. Or as
Catiline says in the Play;

The Ills that I have done cannot be safe,
But by attempting greater.
On the other side, if the Imperial Ministers did unjustly persecute and
oppress; the Necessity was then of their making, and the Consequences of it ly
at their Doors. For where a Necessity brings Mischief, the Authors of the
Necessity are the Authors of the Mischief. And to think it unlawful to join
with Infidels against Christians in any case whatsoever, is a very great
Mistake. For if Merchants be set upon by Christian Pirates, and a Squadron of
Algerines come by; who can condemn the Merchants, if they join with those worst
of Infidels to preserve themselves, and to destroy the Christians that would
destroy them? Upon which account the English, at our first trading into the
East Indies, did several times join with Mahometans and Pagans against the
Portugals.

5. The Grand Vizier and the Duke of Lorrain are now entered the Lists. And
surely it is a noble Sight, when two great Champions are engaged against each
other. They draw the Eyes of the whole World upon them, and are the Subject of
all Men's Discourses. Many such Pairs have their Names recorded in the Books of
Fame. But those are most remarkable, who have had a Tug of some Continuance:
whereby they might show their Play, and give the utmost Efforts of their Skill
and Courage. Such were Hannibal and Marcellus, the two elder Scipio's and the
two Hasdrubals, Michridates and Lucullus, Pompey and Sertorius, Caesar and
Vercingetorix, Caesar and Pompey. And after them, Germanicus and Arminius,
Cerealis and Civilis, Trajan and Decebalus. Charlemain and Wittikind, who
fought twelve Battles, may justly claim a room among these famous Combatants.
So may Francis the First and Charles the Fifth: who had almost continual Wars,
and were brave Captains as well as mighty Princes. To whom may be added, the
Great Gonsalvo and Monsieur Lautrec, stiff adversaries in the Wars of Naples:
and in the Wars of Piemont, Dom Ferdinand Gonsaga and the Marshal of Brissac.
Then follow, Henry the Fourth and the Duke of Parma, Maurice Prince of Orange
and Spinola, Gustavus Adolphus and Count Tilly, the same Gustavus and Walstein,
Turenne and Montecuculi. Others I omit, and hasten back to the Hungarian War.

CHAP. II. VIENNA.
THE Duke of Lorrain being first in the Field, sits down before Newhausel: but
upon the Enemies Advance he raises the Siege. And finding himself much
overpowered, he encamps near Raab: upon a River of that name, which there
falls into the Danube. The Grand Vizier comes on: and while his Main Body
confronts the Duke, the Tartars tracing the River toward the head, soon find
or make their way over. For which great blame is laid upon the Hungarians, who
had the Guard of the passages committed to them. But the Duke hereupon draws
off to Raab Town, where he divides his Army. Himself and the Cavalry make their
Retreat directly to Vienna: being shrewdly ruffled by the Tartars, who fell
upon them in their March unawares. The Foot are ordered to pass the Danube, and
to march to the same Place, there being Men first drawn out of them, to make up
very strong Garrisons for Raab, Comorra, and Leopoldstat. Upon the Duke's
arrival at Vienna (from whence the Emperor and his whole Court were now
retired) he marches over the Bridge into an Island of the Danube called St.
Leopold, that lies over against the City. This Post he maintains a while: but
afterward deserts it, for Reasons not known, and marches clear away. Moreover
his Foot arrive also in good time, and before the Grand Vizier could come up
with the Main of his Army. Who laid all things aside, and overlooked all
Difficulties, to attacque this Imperial City. The Siege is carried on for two
Months with all vigor and violence, and with very great loss of Men. Count
Staremberg commanded within the Place, and did well defend it. But however it
was brought at last to great Extremities. Then come the Christian Forces,
commanded by the King of Poland, the Electors of Saxony and Bavaria, the Duke
of Lorrain and Prince Waldeck: who rout the Turkish Army, and relieve the City.
And now Count Teckely desires to submit upon fair terms: but no terms would be
given him. whereupon he renews his Alliance with the Turks. The Duke of Saxony
marches home with his Troops. The rest of the Christian Army advance into
Hungary; and take Gran, Lewents, and other places. The Grand Vizier, having
rallied he remains of his broken Army, and strangled several Bassa's and other
Officers for not doing their Duties; is afterward strangled himself, to appease
the Rage of the Soldiers and People.

Observations.
1. IT must be confessed, that in this beginning of the Campaign, the Duke of
Lorrain had a hard Game to play. as all have that must act upon the defensive,
against a much over-matching Enemy. But the Duke seems to have dangerously
mistaken his measures, in choosing a Post which he was not able to maintain.
which brought all things to the utmost hazard. How could he expect that the
Tartars (of whom the Grand Vizier had thirty thousand) should be stopped by a
small short River; that make it their practice to swim over the Nieper, the
Niester, and the Danube? Nor let the Hungarians be blamed for not defending the
Passes, for it does not appear how it was possible to be done. Had the Duke
strongly encamped under the Walls of Raab, and not at that distance he did,
which was seven or eight Miles; as he had covered the Country in effect as
well, so he had secured his Army much better. And perhaps he had done best, to
have posted himself yet more backward. What though some Frontier places had
been thereby exposed? It had been more advisable to sacrifice a part, than so
greatly to endanger the whole. And this seems to have been the Sentiment of the
Marshal of Crequi, when he managed a defensive War against this Duke, in his
own Country of Lorrain. He posted himself at once upon the Moselle: leaving the
Saar (as good a Stream as the Raab) and all the Places upon it, with the whole
Country between those two Rivers, open to the invading Army. Which he thought a
less Evil, than to grasp what he could not hold; and thereby put his own Army
(upon which the Fortune of France depended) in danger of a hasty and
disgraceful Retreat, or perhaps a total Ruin.

2. In the Duke's retreat to Vienna some People are unsatisfi'd with two
things. The One is, that as his Troops were marching, the Tartars were upon
them and among them, before they were in the least aware of it. Which they
think could not be, if the Duke had not strangely wanted Intelligence in the
Emperor's own Country; and if he had taken care to send out his Scouts in due
manner, and thoroughly to discover the ways by which he was to march, as
cautious and skilful Generals use to do. The other thing is, that when these
Troops were got to Vienna, they never turned their faces toward the Enemy: but
lay in that Island of St. Leopold, as it were without Life and Soul. I confess
they might well be daunted with the disgraces and dangers of their Retreat, and
the dismal condition of Affairs. But then they should have been made to recover
their Spirits by some successful Encounters: of which there were fair
Opportunities by the posture the Turks were in. Who came up in scambling
Parties, their main Body not arriving till several days after.

3. If the Duke of Lorrain had now a hard Game, sure the Grand Vizier had an
easy one. He commanded a mighty Force, which had nothing to withstand or oppose
it: the Christian Army being broken up, and as it were quite vanished. So that
he was now (if I may use an odd Expression) like a Lord in a Hutch; he might
turn himself which way he pleased. There was only one Caution to be used; That
whereas the Christians had mainly provided for the defense of four Towns, let
what will become of the rest; he would for the present forbear meddling with
those Towns. but every where else he might go on conquering and to conquer: no
other place being capable to make resistance. A few Examples of barbarous
Cruelty toward those that stood it out (to which the Grand Visier's nature
would easily have inclined him), and of good usage to those that readily
yielded, would in that terror have opened him the Gates of all those Places.
And in humane probability, he might that Summer have subdued all the Austrian
Dominions on the South side the Danube, the Towns of Raab and Vienna excepted.
Or if he would be content with destroying the open Country, he might have done
it so thoroughly in two or three Months time, as not to leave a House standing,
nor hardly a Man or Beast living. And in the like space of time he might have
served Bohemia so too, and other parts of Germany. It would have been such a
Destruction, as never was since the time of Attila. But the Visier's pride and
folly and evil Genius, made him leave these advantages and these certainties;
to fall upon a strong and populous City, that had a Army in Garrison, that was
a hundred Miles within the Enemies Country, and upon a great River which he was
not sure nor likely to command on both sides. Nothing could break his Army, nor
deliver those Countries out of his hands, but such a Siege

4. As it was a grand Error in the Vizier to undertake this Siege, so he
committed diverse others in the Prosecution of it. In the first place he
destroyed all the Country near him with Sword and Fire: by which means great
quantities of Provisions were destroyed, that should have been preserved for
the sustenance of his Army. for want of which, he was fain to supply himself by
Convoys from Hungary. Also when the Christians advanced to relieve Vienna, he
caused his Men to leave the advantage of their Camp, in which they were
strongly fortified, and to meet their Enemies in the open Field. When as the
Christians could not stay by it: having no Provisions, wherewith the Turks
abounded. Moreover when his Army went out to fight, he went not out with them;
but shamefully stayed behind, and kept at a distance. And when they were
routed, and fled, he fled with the foremost, as fast as his Horse could carry
him. without any offer to rally, or any endeavor to make a Retreat. His
strangling some of the run away Bassa's afterward, did no way purge his own
baseness. take them at the worst, they did but follow his Example. He therefore
seems to have well deserved his ignominious End: going off the stage inglorious
and with the Character of a proud and cruel Coward.

5. I believe most men conclude, that the Emperor did very prudently, in
retiring from Vienna upon the Enemies Advance: thereby securing his own Sacred
Person. And I confess the safety of the Prince is a matter of highest
Importance. But yet sometimes wise Princes do lay aside the thoughts of
securing their own Persons, when all lies at stake. for in such cases, the
place of greatest danger is the place where the Prince should be. The Emperor
Otho did absolutely ruin his Affairs by securing his Person: and by avoiding
present danger, did fall into a total and final Destruction. If the King of
Denmark had retired from Copenhagen, when it was set upon by the Swede; he
might have secured his Person, but he had lost both his City and his Kingdoms.
whereas by his Presence, and personal Gallantry, he preserved all. And surely
it cannot be denied, but that this withdrawing of the Emperor did much weaken
Vienna: from whence above threescore thousand People are said to have retired
or fled upon that occasion. If it be said, that most of these were an unwarlike
Multitude, I will admit they were. But had the Emperor staid, every Man (and
almost every Woman) would have been a Soldier in the presence of his Imperial
Majesty. Moreover it had then been easy to defend the Island of St. Leopold:
whereby the passage over the Danube had been kept open, and a Communication
with all the Countries behind it. Which had made the Emperors stay at Vienna
to be much more safe, and likewise much more honorable; than if he had been
laid up in a place, which the Enemy might have begirt on all sides.

6. Some think that the Duke of Lorrain, notwithstanding the withdrawing of the
Emperor, and of those that went out with him and after him, might well enough
have defended the Island of St. Leopold. This Island lies close to Vienna:
being made by the Danube, and about four English miles in length. There is a
Bridge into it from the City: and from it you pass on, over two other small
Islands and three other Bridges, to the most Northern bank of the River: the
City standing upon the most Southern. In the Island first mentioned the Duke
placed himself, as has been related. But he departed thence when the Grand
Vizier came up with his whole Army; which was seven or eight days after.
Concerning which departure I shall set down the words of John Peter a Valcaren,
Judge Advocate of the Imperial Army: who has given us a particular account of
this Siege. and I think it is the best we have. The Duke of Lorrain, says he,
who hitherto remained with the Cavalry in the Island of St. Leopold, and as we
thought did not intend to stir from thence, altering his resolution, marched
over the Bridges that lead toward Moravia with these Regiments, etc. And
afterward he adds; As for those that were besieged, they wished nothing more,
than that the Duke would have staid in the Island of St. Leopold: which would
have preserved a free Communication and Intercourse, as well with the Emperor,
as with the territories of Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, and other parts of the
Empire, from whence we might have received Supplies of every thing we needed.
This was the opinion of the besieged, who afterward felt those hard. ships,
that were brought upon them by the quitting of that place. But however we are
not to doubt of the sufficiency of the Reasons, that moved the Duke of Lorrain
to hasten his departure thence.

If the Author knew those sufficient Reasons, he did not well to conceal them.
for it highly concerned the Duke's honor, that Satisfaction should be given to
all men in this matter: whereas now, many remain unsatisfied. For the Duke of
Lorrain had his whole Cavalry with him, which could not be less then eight or
nine thousand. And there was come to him the Prince Lubomirski with 4000 Polish
Horse, and General Schultz with 3000 Germans. He had also a great River between
him and the Enemy. for though the Danube do there divide it self into four
Branches, yet every Branch is a large and deep Stream. And of this he had but
four English Miles to guard: two above the City, and two below it. Then as to
Forage, it is hard to believe but that all the one side of the Danube might
maintain fifteen or sixteen thousand Horse, as well as fifty or sixty thousand
were maintained by the other.

7. Though the Islands of the Danube were thus unhappily quitted, yet still
(the Christians commanding the River, as having all the Vessels both above and
below the City); the best and easiest way to relieve it, seems to have been by
those Islands. Had Maurice Prince of Orange been now alive, and directed these
Affairs, (who as he had all the Arts of War, so particularly he seemed in his
Element when he was amongst great Waters; and both exquisitely knew, and could
most dexterously use, all the advantages of commanding them): he would very
proprobably have gone this way, and have done his business without much hazard.
The Turks had no Camp on this side, so fortified as that on the other side was.
Nor would their vast numbers (particularly of Horse) have stood them in much
stead amongst these small Islands. And though they might possibly have defended
these their Quarters, yet so great a Force must be upon this Duty, that the
Siege must in the mean time have stood still, or at least could not be carried
on with requisite Vigor. Moreover the Christians might have attempted a Relief
this way, much sooner than the other. for which they were so long preparing,
that the City was in great danger to be lost in the mean time. But the
Christian Army went the plain way to work: that is, they crossed the River, and
marched in fair Order along the Southern bank of it, openly and directly upon
the Ottoman Camp. And their glorious Success seems to have justified their
Counsels. But yet we must bear in mind; that they had certainly miscarried, if
their Enemies had not been quite mad; and by a prodigious Error quitted the
advantage of their Ground.

8. The Christian Army had such Illustrious Commanders, and so many great
Princes were there engaged in person, that few Armies in the World can show the
like. The King and the two Electors commanded their own Forces, Lorrain
commanded the Forces of the Emperor, and Waldeck the Forces of the Empire. And
they all did their work substantially and bravely. It must likewise be granted,
that the Turks on their part left nothing undone for the gaining of their
prize; and that they strained themselves to the utmost, to take the City before
the Relief came up. continuing also to press very hard upon it, even while
their Army was routing, and their Camp forcing. Nevertheless if their whole
Carriage of the Affair be well considered, we may observe in them more Industry
and Pertinacy, than either Skill or Valor.

9. By the raising of Vienna's Siege, and the destruction of the Ottoman Army,
the Scene of Affairs was quite altered. and the Emperor's Condition was now as
high, as it had been low before. He could now think of nothing less, than of
beating the Turk out of Hungary, and afterward out of Europe. which later is
the easier of the two. To accomplish which glorious and dazzling Enterprise, it
much concerned him to make up with his own revolted Subjects, upon any
reasonable terms. Which the King of Poland, and likewise the Pope himself (as
it is confidently affirmed) did advise and exhort him to. The Pope (whom all
his actions declare to be a wise man) might well consider, That the giving ease
to a few underling Protestants for a time, was an Inconvenience of no value:
when it would bring with it such vast advantages another way, and so great an
enlargement both of the Emperor's Temporal, and his own Ecclesiastical
Dominion. Moreover the Hungarians were now very inclinable and desirous to make
their peace. in order whereunto, they made humble and repeated Aplications to
his Imperial Majesty. But no Treaty with them would be hearkened to: and they
were given to understand, that they must submit without Conditions. It Is true,
they had afterward a Pardon granted them: with a promise to preserve their
Civil and Religious Liberties. But the Terror of Vienna was then over: and they
had renewed and strengthened their Confederacy with the Turks: and they were
then more hardened against the Emperor. So that Count Teckely and most of the
chief Men, and all the strong Places, still refused to come in.

The want of a Peace on this side was an infinite prejudice to the Emperor's
Affairs. For the Hungarians, who might have greatly increased his Force, did
now much divide and distract it. The King of Poland was not able to make good
his Quarters in Upper Hungary, where the Revolters had so many Garrisons. And
the Germans, who staid it out, were put upon hard Duty. Also the same
disadvantage continued in the two following Campagnes: a great Force being
employed all along against the Hungarians. They are at last in a manner totally
reduced. But this Work might have been much more difficult, if Teckely's
Imprisonment had not made it easy. And now the Castle of Mongatz, which is the
only place remaining, does still make a considerable diversion, and occasions
no small hardships. Another ill Effect was, that soon after the Emperor's
return to Vienna, the Duke of Saxony went away home with his Troops, being ten
thousand good Men. Which it is believed he did, because the Resolutions against
the Hungarians were so severe and inflexible, and because his Intercession for
them was rejected.

7. Count Staremberg has made himself famous to the Worlds end by his gallant
defense of Vienna. and he is worthily honored for it. But he suffers a little
diminution, in the opinion of some Men, by a Letter he wrote to the Duke of
Lorrain during the Siege. which was also printed and made public. Herein they
are scandalized at it, because it is so abominably Complemental. And truly I
could wish, that this Letter had not been written. Flattering and fawning does
no way become a Man of Honor; and it also blemishes those to whom it is
directed, as if they delighted in it.

CHAP. III. BVDA. 1684.
THE Grand Signior makes Kara Ibrahim Bassa, his Chief Vizier; and Cheitan
Ibrahim Bassa, his Serasquier or General for the War of Hungary. They get
together a sorry Army; most of them being new Men, and as much without Courage
as Discipline. The Duke of Lorrain takes the Field about the same time. His
first Action is the taking of Vicegrad: which is a Castle upon the Danube,
between Gran and Buda. Then he marches back to Gran; and passing the Danube, he
advances toward the Enemy on that side. Part of the Turks Army engage the
Imperialists, and are beaten. Whereupon the Duke possesses himself of Vacia,
abandoned by the Turks; and he batters and takes Pest, which lies over against
Buda. Then he repasses the Danube upon a Bridge of Boats. The Serasquier
retires, leaving in Buda fifteen thousand Men: which place the Duke besieges.
And being incommoded by the Serasquier, who lay at some distance; he marches
against him with his Horse and Dragoons, (which were about twelve thousand),
beats him, and routs his whole Army. Then he returns to the Siege, and falls
close to battering and storming. By which, and by the Sallies of that rampant
Garrison, he soon lost the greatest part of his Infantry. So that now the Siege
was at a stand. In the mean while a Peace is concluded in Flanders: chiefly by
the Mediation and Labor of the States of Holland. By which means the Germans
(whom the Flemish Affairs did much concern, and who therefore kept a good Force
upon the Rhine) were set free to march into Hungary. This they immediatey do:
and particularly the Duke of Bavaria, with a good Army of his own. After these
great Reinforcements, the Attacques at Buda are pushed on with all vigor. and
on the other side the Turks makes an obstinate defense. The Serasquier mean
while rallies and increases his Army. But not trusting to them, he keeps at a
distance. However he hinders the Christians, all he can, from having Forage and
Provisions. By the want of which, and by the approaching Winter, and by other
hardships and difficulties, they are enforced at last to raise the Siege. They
draw off without disturbance: their Army being in very ill condition. and being
got over the Danube; they abandon Pest, leave a small Garrison in Vacia, and
retire to their Winter Quarters. Nor was it long, before Vacia was taken by a
party of Turks out of Buda. During these Transactions, General Schultz (in
Upper Hungary) takes Count Teckely to task, who holds him hard to it. At last
Teckely is surprised: and loses his Baggage, with a good part of his Army. But
yet afterward he makes good his Garrisons, and stands his ground.

Observations.
1. UPon the first Defeat of the Serasquier, and the taking of Pest and Vacia,
the Duke of Lorrain was in the same high Condition, that the Grand Vizier was
the year before. For there was now no Army that durst look him in the face. And
the Turks were shut out of Upper Hungary; having lost their only Pass upon the
Danube, by losing Pest. Also the Duke's advantage was yet greater, when he had
been suffered to lay his Bridge over the River. for now he might act on which
side he pleased. He might March after the Serasquier: and either drive him over
the Bridge of Esseck (and so out of the Country) without fighting; or certainly
beat him, if he had fought. They that were so easily routed by his Cavalry,
would have stood much less against his whole Army. Then for the Garrisons; if
he could but let Buda alone, there was scarce any other that was like to make
any considerable resistance. And Count Lesly being then in those Parts, with a
good Army, and prosperous; the Duke and he joining, must have born down all
before them. Also if the Duke had kept on the other side of the Danube, he had
found things there as easy. only Newhausel was to be avoided at present: there
being then in it an intractable Garrison of ten thousand Men. And perhaps Agria
and Waradine might have held out a week or two. But for the other Places, they
had been nothing in his hands. The easy taking of Zolnock and Saravas afterward
(which are two of the best of them), does plainly make it appear, how weak a
defense they were like to make. So that in all probability, he might in a few
Months have beaten the Turks out of Upper Hungary. And then Teckely's party
must have fallen in likewise: together with the Prince of Transylvania. In this
way the War would in a great measure have maintained it self: and not have
exhausted the Emperor, in that grievous manner that the Siege of Buda did. The
Duke's numbers would also have increased, by the coming in of the Christian
Hungarians, and Men flocking from all parts to the conquering Army. And all
would have been in a flourishing condition.

These things might have come to pass, if the Duke had been pleased, (after the
old Rule), to strike the Nail where it would drive: and had taken care, not to
put any thing to hazard, when he had so much sure play. But nothing would
content him but the Siege of Buda, which was too heavy for him. As if a man
should be amongst Ingots of Gold; most of them portable, and some few not. and
he should choose, rather to break his back at once, with one that he could not
carry; than take away the lesser, at ease, one after another. after which, the
greater, with a little patience, might be broken or melted down. One would
think the fresh Example of the Grand Visier's Fool-hardiness, and the fatal
Consequences of it, should have kept the Duke from committing the like Error.
And it is a wonder how he could expect, that eighteen thousand Foot (for his
Army was reckoned at thirty thousand, and twelve thousand of them were Horse
and Dragoons) could force a City, though not very well fortified, that had
fifteen thousand in Garrison. It is confessed that the Duke had very good Men.
But then it was great pity that they should be so used; so miserably thrown
away. Had they been put upon reasonable services, they might in all likelihood
have crowned themselves with Victory and Honor, and their General with Glory.

The best Army upon Earth may be baffled by an ordinary Enemy, if it attacque
him in his strength. which therefore good Generals avoid. Cambray was the
Frontier against the French, and stood in their very teeth, the best part of
two hundred years. But withal it was exceeding strong, and always very well
manned and furnished. and therefore in all that space they never attempted it,
till now lately the time they took it. When the same French marched against
Holland, Mastricht lay just in their way. and they had threatened it hard. But
since it had got a Garrison of ten or twelve thousand Men; they fairly past it
by, as if there had been no such Town. Afterward, when the Garrison was less
by half, they fell close to it; and had it upon reasonable terms. But if they
had fallen upon it at first, it might have broke their whole Army.

The Rhetoricians tell us, that in Statu deliberativo there are two principal
Questions; an utile? an possibile? and to both these, there must be good
answers given, to make a Design advisable. For it is idle to engage upon things
that are easy, unless they be profitable withal; nor should any prospect of
advantage tempt us to an Undertaking, if the thing be not possible, or (as the
French and We better express it) not feasible. It Is confessed that Buda was
very convenient for the Duke. But must he therefore take it, whether he can or
no? Must he therefore throw away his Army upon it, to no purpose? If a Stone
Wall stand in a Man's way, must the Man run his head against it? The Advice
which Quintilian gives his Orator, may be applied full well to a General;
Consulat vires suas.

I do again confess, that Buda is a place of great importance for carrying on
the War. But is there no other Place worth the looking after? Surely there are
many such upon this Frontier; beside those farther in. There is upon the North
side the Danube, Waradine, and Zolnock, and Agria, and Newhausel: and upon the
South side, there is Alba Regalis, Caniza, and Gradisca. I will allow that Buda
with Pest is more worth than any two of them. But the worst two of them is more
worth than Buda without Pest: which is the present case, the Duke having Pest
already. We can therefore only conclude, that the gaining this City is to be
mainly intended and endeavored, in a reasonable way, and when ever there is
power and opportunity.

That which is extraordinary in Buda is, its situation upon the Danube: and
that the taking it opens this River to the Christians, giving them free passage
farther down for their Provisions and other Necessaries. Gradisca would do the
same upon the Save, and Zolnock upon the Teys. but the Navigation of the Danube
is much more considerable than either of these; it being the grand River, and
coming from the chief Parts of the Emperor's Dominions. But I must take
notice; That since the Christians had Pest already on the opposite bank, it
seems hardly possible to hinder their passage up and down, in so great a
Stream, near their own side, under the favor of dark Nights. Which makes the
advantage of the Water, to be much less to this Town of Buda than was imagined.
Then as for commanding the Land, the Towns before named do far excel Buda, as
it is now without Pest. for it now commands but one side of the River. And
surely it is plain to any that will consider; that a Town which stands upon a
great River, not having a passage over it, is half blocked up. But the Towns
before named command the Countries clear round. especially Agria, Newhausel,
and Caniza: which three are the farthest advanced, and which are the three
Horns that gore the Imperial Territories. And Alba Regalis and Waradine do alse
command far and wide.

But it may be said farther of Buda, that here is the lowest Bridge and Pass
upon the Danube: nor is there any other in Hungary, Gran only excepted. Which
place and Barkan do yoke this River about forty miles higher, in the same
manner as Pest and Buda do here. In the old Maps of these Countries, there is
the Mark and Picture of a Bridge at Colocza, forty miles lower. but there is no
such Bridge now to be found. It appears then, that Gran was of the same
Consideration last year, that Buda is now. But the Grand Vizier (if I may look
back on what I have before omitted) did not do his part in defending it. He had
got an Army together after his defeat at Vienna, by rallying and recruiting:
the Christians giving him leisure to do it. for they made no great haste to
pursue their Victory. Part of his Army he lost foolishly, by fighting the
Christians in their March to no purpose. who thereupon possessed themselves of
Barkan, on which side the Fight was. Then he let them pass the River to
attacque Gran, without Opposition. And which was worst of all, He did not put
Men enough into the Town, when he might have put in what number he would. Had he
filled Gran, as the Serasquier filled Buda, Gran might have been as well
preserved. And indeed much better and easier, because of the Winter then
approaching. But this is a Digression in this place: I return to the Siege of
Buda.

2. It is taken for granted by most Men, that when the Duke of Lorrain had with
his Cavalry defeated the Serasquier, he could do no less than return to Buda,
and push on the Siege. But some are of a contrary opinion. They think, that
having tried the Strength of that Place and Garrison (which was still the same,
notwithstanding the Serasquier's defeat) he had now a fair Occasion given him,
to leave a Siege upon which he had rashly engaged. that he might pursue his
Victory in a more effectual manner, and march with his whole Army after the
slying Enemy. Which if he had done, in all probability he had broke them to
pieces; they could never have made head against him. If they found it so hard
to get an Army again together, though the Siege of Buda gave them so great
respite and leisure; how could they have done it, if they had been closely
followed? But the Duke would have been stopped by the Bridge of Esseck, to which
place the Enemy was fled. I answer, that this Bridge was then in a weak
Condition, being not well fortified at either End. And the farther End being
attacqued by Count Lesley next year, we know how easily it was taken. Also this
Bridge of Esseck is four or five English miles in length; partly over several
Branches of the Drove, and partly over low Grounds. Admitting therefore that
the Ends were not to be taken: yet the middle part could not be defended, nor
the Christians hindered from passing over to it, without great numbers of Foot.
and the Serasquier had scarce any Foot left: the two defeats, and the Manning
of Buda, having taken away most of them.

Moreover it did much sacilitate the Enterprise of Esseck, that Count Lesley
was then in those parts with a good Body of Men. where he had taken Virovitza,
a strong Town upon or near the Drove: between which Town and the Bridge of
Esseck there was no Place of Strength. And Lesley commanded both sides the
River: and had laid (or was about to lay) a Bridge of Boats over it, having
plenty of Vessels for that purpose. And these might have been sent down the
Stream to the Duke at Esseck, as likewise Provisions and other Necessaries. It
appears then plainly, that the Taking of this Bridge was much more seasible
than Buda. And by the taking of it, Buda must fall in short time, and all that
the Turks have in Lower Hungary; this being their only passage to it.

But what if the Duke had found this Bridge very strongly guarded, and the
gaining it very difficult? I answer, That then he must have let it alone as
well as Buda. There was other easy work good store, ready to his hand. and the
more strongly this Place had been guarded, the more unguarded other Places must
be. Also the whole Country had lain open to him. the Country on this side the
Drove, and that between the Drove and the Save, and beyond the Save also. He
might have gone which way he pleased, there being in effect no Army to oppose
him. For as for the Serasquier and his fugitive Rabble, they would have
signified nothing. And all had been full of Terror and Confusion.

Thus the Duke of Lorrain was fairly invited by his Victory to raise his Siege.
Which also he should have done without any such Invitation. He could not but be
quickly sensible, that he had taken wrong measures in attacquing this City. and
to persist in an Error, wise Men say is the greatest Error. Therefore very
famous Commanders, when they have found themselves engaged in a bad business,
have esteemed it their wisest course to get clear of it without delay. I shall
instance only in two. The great Hannibal of old, after he had tasted the
strength of Placentia, made no scruple to leave it. And of later times, the
great Gustavus thought it no dishonor to rise from before Ingolstat, when he
found it too hot for him. Had the Duke of Lorrain done so here, he had been
glorious: and in all probability the Turk had been totally ruined. As the Siege
of Vienna, the year before, was the thing that preserved the German Emperor;
so nothing could now preserve the Ottoman, but the Siege of Buda.

It may seem by the pains I have taken in this matter, that the design upon
Buda is as hard to beat down, as the Walls of it are. But the difficulty is not
yet quite over: for there remains a grand Objection against all that has been
said. They say, That for the Duke to have marched on into the Enemies Country,
leaving Buda behind him with such a Garrison in it, might have been of fatal
Consequence. That Buda must first be taken, to open the way to other places.
And therefore since the attacquing of Buda was necessary, it could not be
imprudent.

To this I answer; First, that where a Frontier carries a breadth of three or
four hundred miles, (and such is the Frontier between the Turk and the
Emperor, it reaching from the northerly parts of Transylvania to the Gulf of
Venice); it were very strange, if there should be but one way for a mastering
Army to break in upon it; and that all should be guarded by one Town, without
the taking of which nothing else could be done. I have already named seven
Capital Garrisons, beside Buda, upon this Frontier. And there are diverse lesser
Places besides. Particularly there is Novigrad and Hatwan: which, after that
the Duke had got Pest and Vacia, seemed next in course; being not far off, and
on the same side the River. But where there is such Choice of Places to fall
upon, it is the use of skilful Generals to learn the condition of each place,
and to fall upon those that are worst provided. for all Places cannot be
provided alike. And surely had the Duke been minded to do the easiest things
first, he might always have been doing the easiest things; or to speak plainer,
he might have found all things easy. whereas now by attempting the hardest
thing first, he has made all things hard. For the Turks do now, by the Example
of Buda, defend their Places after another rate than they did before. But had
the Duke fallen upon likely things; he would, in all probability, have found no
greater resistance any where, than he found at Gran: which we know was very
little. There was therefore no necessity for the Duke to fall upon Buda: since
the Country was wide enough, and he might go either to the right hand or the
left, as far as he could reasonably desire. By going to the Right hand, he had
gone straight upon the Drove, which brings all sorts of Supplies out of the
Hereditary Countries. down which River he had met with no Turkish place worth
naming, till he came to Esseck: of whose weakness I have spoken before, and of
its great Importance withal. On the other side, by going to the left hand he
had gone straight upon the River Teys: which brings all necessaries out of the
Emperor's Upper Hungary. And the Place which the Turks have highest upon this
stream is Zolnock: which we know was very easily taken next year, with diverse
Places about it. all which Places, and many more, might have been taken as
easily now. We see therefore, that which way soever the Duke had turned, he
might have found it commodious. But

Secondly, if the Matteraright, Duke had turned no way, but had marched
straight on by Buda, and left that Place behind him; plainly there had been no
harm nor danger in it. We find the like is frequently done by others. Not to
run upon new Instances, the French (as has been noted) past by Mastricht, and
have often past by Cambray: and even in this War, the Grand Vizier, when he
marched to Vienna, left behind him Comorra, and Raab, and Altenburg, and
Newstat, beside other places. Newstat was near his Camp: and he might have
taken it with ease. which yet he neglected to do, and no harm came of it. It
must be granted, that where the invading Army is opposed by an Army almost as
good, in that case it were very hazardous to engage too deep in the Enemies
Country. because the Enemy by the help and favor of his Garrisons, might
distress them very much, and have great advantaces upon them. But if the Enemy
be quite over matched, and dare not abide within distance; (which was now the
condition of the Turks); there is then no such danger. And Garrisons without an
Army to stand by them, cannot hurt much: nor hinder the Invaders from going or
staying where they please, nor from picking and choosing what work they will
do. But they must take heed of undertaking any long and difficult Siege: as the
Grand Vizier did last year. though he furmounted the Incommodities of it, by
the great Force he had about him. But it may be presumed, that for the most
part their work will be easy. in regard the Places that lie farther inward,
cannot in likelihood be so well fortified and furnished, as the Frontier Places
are.

I confess the taking of the outmost Frontier Garrisons, is a healing Work.
since thereby we clear, and set at peace, such parts of our own Country, as
those Garrisons did before command and harrass. But it must be acknowledged on
the other side, that the Places farther inward do more annoy the Enemy, as
lying within their Bowels. If it be said, that these Places, though perhaps
they may be easily got, yet are hard to be kept, and hard to be relieved; I
answer, that the Christians may keep and relieve such Places, as well as the
Turks do Newhausel, Agria, and Caniza. which though it be done with some
difficulty, yet this is abundantly recompensed by the great Mischief, which
those Towns do to the Emperor. For which reason the Turks do justly set a high
value upon those Towns. And surely I think it will not be denied, but that it
were a very great Service, if the Christians could get three or four Places, as
far advanced as the Towns last named. and which might gall and gore the Ottoman
Countries, as much as the Towns last named do the Austrian. They that are the
stronger, (which the Christians are now), need not be afraid to scatter the
War: but should rather desire it. Since thereby they do more distract the
Enemy, and put him upon a stronger Guard, and make him yet more unable to keep
the Field.

These Notions are easily conceived by any considering Person: they naturally
flowing from the things themselves. but I have found it a work of some
difficulty, to digest and express them, and make them plain. Though perhaps to
those that read, even this also may seem easy, now it is done. Moreover I am
very sensible, that I have been unreasonably prolix upon this Subject. But I
could not work my Matter aright, with fewer words.

3. It was a rare felicity to the Duke of Lorrain, and such as befalls few
Generals; that when he had lost (I may not say destroyed) one Army, he could
sit still till another was brought to him. It calls to mind the Centurion in
Tacitus, whom the Soldiers called Cedo alteram. because when he had broken one
Cudgel upon them, he used to cry Cedo alteram, give me another. But the Duke of
Lorrain if he had had an Enemy any thing near his Match, and if at this time
the Turks had not been strangely weak, could not have had this leisure. Also he
might have stayed and called long enough for a new Army, if the Peace of
Flanders (which happened just at this time) had not given the Germans liberty
to march to him. And this Peace was obtained beyond all Expectation. It was
almost miraculous, that the French should let go so great an Advantage: They
that envy their Greatness, hope they will never have the like again. But to say
the truth, the advantage was lost the year before. Had the French then fallen
upon the Towns with all their Force, instead of Quartering upon the Country,
(which they might have done with equal Justice, and as some conceive with less
Insolence); they might have carried Flanders that very year, or at least put it
out of condition to subsist. But now such Alliances were formed to preserve it,
and so many Mediators had concerned themselves, that perhaps it was not safe to
displease them. However it may be truly said upon the whole matter, that the
French did not pursue their Interest in this occasion, so closely as they use
to do.

Machiavell tells us of diverse Men, that sadly miscarried in their Affairs by
not being perfectly wicked. which he says is frequently the ruin of great
Designs. Some may apply this to the French Ministers: and may think that they
lost their Advantage here mentioned, because they had not the Heart nor the
Face to prosecute it. It seeming a little too horrid, while the Turk was
destroying and devouring on the one side, for Them to do the like on the other.
But it must be considered, that it was not altogether so scandalous to fall
upon Flanders, as it had been to fall upon Germany it self, which was engaged
in the Turks War. Also the Turks, after their defeat at Vienna, were not in an
invading condition. and it was much more tolerable to stop the Emperor's
Conquests, than to promote the Turkish. But moreover, the French Ministers are
of a stronger temper, than to be hindered from doing those things that are
convenient, either by the checks of Conscience, or by the rebukes of Shame.

What was the true Cause therefore of this strange slack Conduct at this time?
If the thing be well examined, it will be found to proceed from the Jesuits:
who we know have a great Ascendant over that Court. They had several times
betrayed the Emperor; and now they thought fit, in requital, to betray the
French King: and to sacrifice his Interests to theirs. It was the Interest of
their Order, that the Emperor should make great Conquests. By whose Favor (he
being their fast Friend) they might well hope to have many new Colleges, and
some new Provinces, of Jesuits. which plainly would be much to the advantage of
the Society. And though this might bring ruin to their great Patron of France,
on whom the Emperor would in all likelihood turn his Victorious Forces, they
did not value it. The thing they mind, is the Interest of their Order. And this
seems the true Reason, why the French King did let slip this golden
Opportunity, of making himself the Universal Monarch.

4. Of all the Mediators that labored in this Peace of Flanders, the Dutch did
labor most: and indeed it did most concern them. The Condition of their
Commonwealth at this time was full of difficulty and danger. for thus it stood.
By the loss of Flanders they must be certainly ruined: the French were resolved
to have a Limb of it, that is, the Town of Luxenburg: and the Spaniards were
resolved to lose all, rather than part with any thing. But they took little
Care, and made little Provision for their defense: and seemed to cast that
wholly upon the Hollander. as making account, that the Preservation of Flanders
did concern Holland more than Spain. And now was the Emperor engaged against
the Turk: Denmark, Brandenburg, and Collen were closely allied with France: and
the rest of Europe seemed cool, and willing to be quiet. This was the perplexed
Estate of Affairs abroad. And it was as bad with the Dutch at home, by reason
of their intestine Divisions. The City of Amsterdam, and the Province of
Friesland, did utterly refuse to engage in the War. and they gave such Reasons
for it, as seem not easy to be answered. On the other side, the Heroic Prince
of Orange, and the rest of the States, were fully determined to hazard all,
rather than the French should get Flanders. Moreover these Divisions, in a
Matter so important and in so dangerous a Conjuncture, were carried on with all
the Animosity imaginable: and were ready to break out into open Hostilities. So
that upon the whole they were brought to very great Straits. their best Friends
gave them for lost: and their Republique seemed to be come to its fatal period.
It may safely be affirmed, that their Affairs were in a worse posture when the
French besieged Luxenburg, then when (some years before) they were possessed of
Vtrecht. But out of this grievous Labyrinth they extricated themselves to
admiration. For by great Patience, Art, and Industry, they at last hammered out
a Peace between the two Crowns; whereby the Spaniards were forced to sit down
with the loss of Luxenburg, and were made incapable to lose or part with any
more. The French being obliged not to take it, either by Conquest, Exchange,
Gift, Cession, or by any other way or Pretense.

This Treaty may, in point of Negotiation, be accounted the Masterpiece of that
Republique. Wherein they showed as much Skill and Dexterity, as they did
Constancy and Fortitude in the time of the French Invasion. for which they will
be admired in all After Ages. They then sustained such a Shock, such a Ruffle,
such a terrible Storm, as never did any People sustain and endure the like. The
Romans put a high value upon themselves, for that when Hannibal lay on the one
side of their City, they sent out at the other side Supplies for Spain. And I
confess it was brave and great. But it may be considered, That they then with
great Force held Capua besieged, which Hannibal had in vain attempted to
relieve: that in the main they had got the better end of the Staff: and that
plainly their City was in no danger. How much more firm and steady were the
Dutch, who though they had a mighty Enemy in their Bowels, that was quite too
strong for them; though most of their Country was over run and subdued, and to
save the rest they were fain to lay a good part of it under Water; though at
the same time they had a dreadful Concussion within themselves, having with
Violence changed their Government, not only into other Hands, but into another
Form; Yet in the midst of these dismal Circumstances they carried on a War at
Sea, as if nothing had ailed them, as if they had had nothing else to think on.
Where they sought three Battles this very year, against the conjoined Forces of
England and France. I must crave pardon if I could not pass this by, though it
be a little beside my Subject.

5. Upon the Grand Visier's defeat at Vienna, and afterward his death, two
things had been proper for his Master the Great Sultan to do. The first was, to
go to the Hungarian War in Person: the Occasion being so important, and all his
Fortunes lying now at stake. How could he expect that others should fight for
him, if he would not fight for himself? And how could he trust his Empire, and
the very Being of the Ottoman Race, in other men's hands and to the Conduct of
others; and himself ly lurking amongst his Concubines? His Presence would have
given Life and Vigor to his Affairs: and raised up the Spirits of his dismayed
and drooping Subjects. Nor is there any Office so proper to a Prince, and
wherein he appears so glorious, as to lead his People to Battle. The other
thing was, that if he could not go himself, he would take care that he that did
go (in Chief), should be invested and irradiated with the highest Authority. Or
to speak plainer, That none less than the Grand Vizier should be General in
that War. So that if the Grand Vizier was not the very fittest to be General,
he that was fittest to be General was to be made Grand Vizier. For this was not
a time to advance Favorites, but to employ the best Men to most advantage. The
want of the Sultan's presence would have been made up in good measure by the
presence of so great an Officer. His Army (on which all depended) would have
been better supplied, being supplied by him that commanded it. And the General
Himself would have been better followed and obeyed, having the full Power of
Rewards and Punishments. We know the Romans, in times of extreme danger, made
Dictators with absolute Power. Ferdinand the Second had never stopped the
Swedish Torrent (which then was very impetuous); if he had not given absolute
Power to Walstein his Generalissimo. It seems therefore a Mistake in the Great
Sultan here, that he committed this so important Service to an Underling
General: not giving him Authority suitable to the occasion. For he made one Man
his Grand Vizier, and another Man his Serasquier. To the one he gave the Honor
and Authority, and expected the Service from the other. He appointed one Man
for Preparations (which sort of People Sir Walter Rawleigh does contemn), and
another for Action: and this Preparation-Man was to command the Man of Action.

6. It must be avowed, that this Serasquier did extraordinary things,
considering the disadvantages he lay under. He not only wanted Authority
requisite, that is, the whole command of the whole Turkish Empire; but also he
had in effect no Army. For the People he had about him did not deserve that
name. They were partly such as had fled from the Rout at Vienna, where all the
best Men had been cut off; and partly raw undisciplined People. And all of them
(together with that whole Empire) were under exceeding Discouragement and
Consternation. So that the Duke of Lorrain had gained no great Honor, though
he had totally beaten a General so ill followed, being so well followed
himself. But though the Serasquier were in this low condition, yet he bore up
for two Summers, and maintained his ground without considerable Loss: when in
all likelihood he must have lost all. Which must be ascribed to his own good
Conduct, as well as to the Errors of his Enemies. That which he did this year,
was the relieving of Buda: which was a signal Service. He durst not come within
danger of fighting with the Christians. for he could not trust his Men: finding
they would not stand, and having been already twice routed. But he chiefly
effected his Design by lying at a distance from his Enemies, and cutting off
their Forage and Victuals. whereby he greatly distressed and disabled them.
Gustavus Horn advised, that the like might be done at the Siege of Ratisbon:
but his Counsel was not followed. And some think that the Duke of Lorrain might
have done the like at Vienna: and not ly at Lintz, a hundred miles off, as he
did the most part of that Siege.

Though the Serasquier's Conduct in the Main were excellent, yet in some
particulars it is thought he did not do well. He should not have been so
forward (or so easily forced) to fight, when there was no occasion for it. And
he should not have suffered his Enemies to lay a Bridge and pass over the
Danube, in the face of his Army, without fighting. He seems also to have lost
Pest too easily: while Himself and his whole Army were on the other side the
River, with a free passage to it over the Bridge. Whereas he should have
engaged his whole Force, together with his own Person, in defense of that
Place. For it was of very great Consequence; Buda being without it but like a
half-fac'd Groat, if I may so express the Matter. And he could never expect to
cope with his Enemy at better advantage. Nor could he hope to recover the
Place, when he had thus lost it, so easily as he did soon after. There was
another thing that did more offend his great Master, and for which he was in
disgrace for some time: and that was, his not falling upon the Christians when
they drew off from Buda. But others think, that he was not to be blamed, if,
notwithstanding the ill Condition of the Enemy, he could not yet trust his Men:
that he might well be content with the great Success of raising the Siege, and
had now no reason to hazard all by fighting. And surely it was much wondered
that the Sultan should frown upon his Preserver: when it was rather expected,
that the highest Rewards and Honors should be heaped upon him.

7. Since the Duke of Lorrain could not obtain what he principally designed, it
concerned him the more to keep what he had gotten: namely Vicegrad, Pest, and
Vacia. Of these Pest was the most considerable, in that it held Buda still in
fetters, and pinned it up to one side of the Danube. And the Men there in
Garrison might be supplied with all Necessaries down the Stream, with almost as
much ease as Quartered in Austria. And the more Men were there, the farther
would they command, and the more Forage, Victuals, and Contribution would they
get. We are therefore to learn the Reasons, why this important Place was
quitted; and that without Burning or Demolishing. When there could be no fear
of a present Siege, the Winter being so far advanced; and when the Enemy could
not easily come at them, by reason of the River between. Pest being thus
abandoned, one would think they should have the greater care of Vacia: which is
also a Port Town (as I may call it) upon the Danube, and now the farthest
advanced into the Enemies Country. But such a paltry Garrison is left in it,
that after a few Weeks were past, a Party from Buda seizes it, almost without
resistance. These After-Claps, though they made no great noise, doubled the
disasters of the Campaign. For Vacia and Pest may be accounted of equal value
with Buda: and the losing of these was as bad, as the not gaining the other.

8. The Hungarians of Teckely's party that have been in England, have given him
a very high Character. Extolling his Courtesy, Courage, and Conduct, and
likewise the Comeliness of his Person. It must be confessed, that by the great
Resistance he has made, and the great Authority he has maintained amongst his
Party in a Condition so ruinous, he appears to be no ordinary Man. But he lost
his Honor by suffering himself to be shamefully surpised: whereby his Forces
were shrewdly shattered, himself hardly escaping. The best Commander may
receive a Defeat: but to suffer a Surprise is inexcusable. On the other side,
this Count showed a notable Resolution, in that after such a terrible Blow he
still stood firm; and undauntedly continued his defense, against an Active and
vigorous Assailant.

CHAP. IV. NEWHAVSEL. 1685.
THE Duke of Lorrain begins the Campaign once more with the Siege of Newhausel:
having a brave Army of between fifty and sixty thousand good Men, and the
Garrison within being now but two thousand. The Place is fiercely defended: and
in one of their Sallies, the Duke is put to the Exercise of his Personal
Valor, to save his Batteries from ruin. However in a Months time or
thereabouts, the besieged are brought into an ill Condition. In the mean while
the Serasquier, with an Army not much outnumbring that of the Christians, had
invested Gran and Vicegrad. To relieve which Places, the Duke (with the Elector
of Bavaria) marches with about two Thirds of the Army: leaving the rest, under
the Count Caprara, to continue his Siege. The Turks, having taken Vicegrad in
three days, rise from before Gran, fight the Duke with their whole Force, and
are beaten. However, they make their retreat to Buda, pass over the Bridge
there, and threaten to march straight to Newhausel and relieve it, with the
hazard of a second Battle. But now they hear that the Place was taken by Storm:
where all were put to the Sword, save the Governor and a few Officers.
Nevertheless, the Serasquier still gives out, that he is resolved to fight. But
when the Christians with their whole Army were coming up to him, he repasses
the Danube at the same Bridge, having first demolished and abandoned Vacia and
Novigrad. Being got to the other side of the River, he continues there with his
Army for some Weeks: and then, for want of Forage and Victuals, retires to
Belgrade. While he staid, he sent several Messages to the Duke with Overtures
of Peace: which were rejected. Upon the Serasquier's repassing the Danube, the
Duke of Lorrain marched up to the place where the Turkish Army had lain, and
there Encamped for about a Month. And Forage growing scarce, he draws back his
Army, and encamps for another Mouth between the Rivers of Gran and Ipol: having
first sent the Count Caprara with a Detachment toward Agria. While the Turkish
Forces are drawn from all parts to the Serasquier, Count Lesley marches to the
Bridge of Esseck and having routed the Forces that made head against him, he
takes the Town of Esseck (which lies at the Bridge end) by storm: and burns it,
with eight or nine hundred Paces of the Bridge. Which done, he returns to
Virovitza. The Works of Newhausel are repaired with all diligence, and neither
labor nor cost is spared: but Novigrad and Vacia are not thought worth the
repairing. General Schultz does again fall close to Teckely, is soundly
repulsed at Unguar, and then takes Esperies after a hard Siege. Whence he
marches straight to Caschaw, Count Teckely's chief Town. Caprara having
bombarded Agria without Success, marches to Caschaw likewise: bringing with him
an Authority over all the Forces there. Whereupon Scultz lays down his Command.
General Mercy and Colonel Heusler, with a Party from hence, fall into the
Turkish Quarters: take Zolnock, Saravas, and several other Places; which they
hold and make good against the Enemy, and are victorious in diverse Encounters.
The Siege of Caschaw going on, Teckely goes to the Bassa of Waradine to solicit
for relief: by whom he is made Prisoner, and sent in Chains to Belgrade.
Hereupon the brave Peterhasi, and all the Chief of Teckely's party, come in to
Caprara. by whose Example and Persuasions Caschaw Surrenders, and all the other
revolted Places, Mongatz only excepted. While these things are doing in
Hungary, the Venetians are not idle on their side. After the Victory at Vienna,
they had joined in a League against the Turks, with the Emperor and King of
Poland. And against the next Summer, they rigged out their Fleet, and filled it
with Land Soldiers, Morosini being Captain General. who took the Island of St.
Maure, together with the Fortress of Prevesa upon the Main Land of Greece. This
Summer they go to Sea again, with greater Force: and make a Descent into Morea.
where they take Corone, Calamata, and some other places. Also they rout the
Turks more than once, and diverse Christian Greeks revolt to them. As for the
Poles, both the last year and this, their Forces are not great, came late into
the Field, and did little.

Observations.
1. THE Siege of Newhausel was carried on very substantially by the Duke of
Lorrain. He first made a great semblance of besieging Novigrad, so that no body
doubted of it: And then he clapped down suddenly before Newhausel. which though
it be usual amongst the Dutch, French, and Spaniards, and other wily Gamesters;
yet in these Wars of Hungary it may pass for a Stratagem. Also before he began
his Attacques, he strongly entrenched himself, and finished his Lines of
Circumvallation. at which he made his whole Army labor for a full Week. And
this being done, he pushed on his Attacques with great Constancy and Vigor.
Moreover he signalized himself by his own Personal Valor, when the Turks (in a
furious Sally) were just upon the point to burn his Platformes and ruin his
Batteries. In which Exigence, the Duke himself did run into the face of danger;
to encourage and direct his Men, and to beat back the Enemy. continuing several
hours in this terrible Service. This was a most Heroique Action. If Alexander,
or Caesar, or Gustavus Adolphus had been here, they could not have done more.
Nor did he thus hazard his Person upon a small or slight occasion. For the
Success of the Siege, and consequently of the whole Campaign, now lay at stake.
Furthermore, when the Duke was called away to the relief of Gran, Caprara did
well supply his place here. And he did not expose and throw away his Men by
vain and multiplied Assaults; but having thoroughly battered the Place, filled
the Ditches, and broke the Defenses, he carried it at once. One thing has been
omitted, which is, that the Duke's Judgment must be approved, in choosing to
fall upon Newhausel, rather than any place else. For it sorely infested the
Emperor's Quarters, and by taking it he cleared a Country as big as Kent. And
though it was believed, that they were already distressed for Victuals, so that
there was no need of Force; yet it was good to make sure of a Place so
important. Nor was their want of Victuals so great as was imagined: as it
appeared afterward.

These are the just Commendations of this memorable Siege. But on the other
side, Some think that it was slow. The Town was but indifferently manned; and
fortified by one single Line, and a Ditch about eighteen foot broad. And yet
they were more than a Month about it. Whereas it is verily believed, that a
French Army would have had it in a Week. They took Mastricht in fifteen days,
which was twice as strong, had thrice as many Men, and was full as well
defended; with an Army no way better, or to speak more truly, not so good. Some
also wonder, that Caprara did spare the Governor Bassa. which looked as if he
had had a mind, to encourage others to hold out with the like Obstinacy. Had
this Bassa had Caprara thus in his power, he would have impaled him. To speak
more calmly, the Bassa seemed no fit Object of Mercy, upon two accounts. First,
because he had been barbarously cruel to his Christian Prisoners: whom he had
made work in Chains in the Mouth of the Besiegers Cannon, whereby most of them
were destroyed. Secondly, because he had stood it out beyond all Reason and the
Rules of War. Which allow not Men to do all the Mischief they can, when there
is no hope left, nor possibility of defense. In such a Case, the Officers ought
to find less favor than others, and the Governor least of all. for that He was
chiefly (if not only) in fault. The Turks, and especially their Commanders,
should be made to fear their Enemies as much as they do their Masters. If they
yield, they are sure to die: and they should be as sure on it, if they yield nor.
which is the way to deal with those People, that fight for fear of death. Some
think that the Bassa's Ransom might incline Count Caprara to spare him. wherein
I am consident they do the Count Wrong. For we must not believe, that so brave
an Officer should omit a necessary and exemplary piece of Severity, out of a
sordid desire of Gain. But this Bassa dyed of his Wounds not long after: and
then they cut off his Head, and set it upon a Pole. Which seemed very idle and
foolish.

2. Let us now consider the Serasquier's Conduct: which surely appears very
neat and clean. He had Orders from the Grand Signior to relieve Newhausel at
any rate, and what ever the hazard were. And these Orders he must obey, whether
they were wise or foolish. But he saw plainly, that to march to that place, and
fight the whole Christian Army, had been certain destruction. they so much
over-matching him in goodness of Men, and the place being so far within the
Enemies Country. He therefore, by way of diversion besieges Gran and Vicegrad,
which ly on the other side the Danube. Upon which, one of these three things
must follow. Either the whole Christian Army must come to relieve these Places,
and then Newhausel had been at liberty; or else they must all continue their
Siege, and then both Vicegrad and Gran had been his own; or part of them must
march against him, and part must stay at the Siege: and then those that staid,
would carry on the Siege but weakly; and those that marched, would be in a fair
way to be beaten. The Christians took this last Course, and divided their Army.
But they proved so strong; that they that staid, were enough to take the Town;
and they that marched, were enough to beat the Serasquier. However it must be
confessed, that he played the utmost of his Game. I know it has been related,
that he was drawn by a Wile to fight. But plainly at that time fighting was his
Business: for without it Newhausel must be lost, and all the Christian Army
would then be upon him. It was therefore much better, to engage part of the
Enemies Force, thereby to save the Town; then sustain their whole Force, after
the Town was lost. Moreover he set upon that part of the Christians which he
was to Encounter, with all the Force that he could possibly get together. And
he brought them up bravely to the Charge, and tried to the utmost what every
part of them could do. But they were beaten every where: not being able to
stand against the Germans, who plainly hewed them down. Being thus totally
routed, he nevertheless got off strangely without extraordinary loss, and made
his retreat to Buda. There he marched over the Bridge, and put on a fresh
countenance of fighting. Which made the Dukes of Lorrain and Bavaria, after
some time, to come down upon him with the whole Christian Army, thoroughly
prepared for a second Battle. And then the Serasquier slipped back over the
River, and left his Enemies at gaze. for truly he was not in a fighting
Condition. The Bridge of Buda stood him now in good stead: and in it he reaped
the fruit of his labors. for he had been repairing it all Winter with great
diligence; it having been ruined, when the Christians held Pest.

3. It may truly be said of the Serasquier, that he lost Newhausel gloriously.
because, to preserve it, he did all that could be done. But it cannot be said,
that the Duke did so by Vicegrad, for it was pitifully lost. This Castle stood
(for it is now demolished) upon the Danube, with a Town under it: almost the
midway between Gran and Buda. And it was the farthest Frontier on that side.
If the French had had this Place, how would they have fortified and furnished
it? And what a tearing Garrison would they have had in it? The Imperialists had
time enough to do what they would to it, it being a year in their Possession.
But it was so miserably unprovided, that first a Party out of Buda surprised
(or seized) the Town, plundered it, and burnt it: for which the Governor was
never questioned. And now a Detachment from the Serasquier took the Castle by
Surrender in three days: in a manner within sight of the Duke and his Army.
Which I confess was a very sensible disgrace. This place and Gran had been
threatened for a Month before, and the Duke might have put into them what Men
he pleased: they standing on the one side the River, and he commanding the
other. It Is true, he put five hundred Men into Gran (when he might and should
have put in five thousand.); but Vicegrad seemed quite forgotten. If he could
not or would not defend it, why did he not slight it? To conclude this Matter,
the loss of Newhausel was far the greater in point of profit, and advantage,
and importance; but in point of honor, the loss of Vicegrad was a hundred
times worse.

4. To the Messages of Peace, which were sent by the Serasquier, the Duke
returned this Answer, That a Victorious Army was not to be amused by such
Messages. But what does he do with this Victorious Army? What Conquests, or
even what Attempts does he make? Why first he encamps upon the Danube, a little
short of Pest. And that he might be sure to want Forage in good time, it was
just in place where the Turks had lain before. Accordingly Forage is wanting,
and he must remove. But now instead of advancing into the Enemies Country,
which lay right before him and open to him, he Marches quite back into his own:
and there makes another encamping between the Rivers of Gran and Ipol. Which
two encampings having taken up two precious Months, and the year being now well
spent (though as yet no hard weather); he sends his Army into their Winter
Quarters. Was ever Victorious Army so employed? Was ever Victory so pursued? If
Alexander, or Caesar, or Gustavus Adolphus had been here, they would have
pursued it after another manner. Caesar's Victory at Alexia, was one of the
greatest that ever was obtained by Man. He had driven a brave Army of fourscore
thousand Men into that Place, and held them there besieged: his own Army being
much less. And two hundred and fifty thousand bold Soldiers came to relieve
them. They fell upon his Trenches, (for here was the pattern of all our
Circumvallations) T they fell upon his Trenches on both sides, with the most
obstinate Fury. But those without, were not only repulsed, but totally routed,
leaving fifty thousand dead upon the place; and those within were beaten back
with great loss, and forced to surrender at discretion. Of this glorious
Victory Caesar had lost the fruit, if he had not closely followed his blow:
keeping his Men upon service, for a good part of the next hard Winter.

All the World condemns Hannibal, for that he did not march straight to Rome,
after the Battle of Cannae. And we find him in Livy cursing and banning himself
for this fatal Omission, when afterward he left Italy (full sore against his
Will) to rescue his own dear Carthage. But though Hannibal did not do that
which was best, yet he did something; whereas here our Duke does just nothing.
It was Hannibal's Error, that he did march to Capua, when he should have
marched to Rome: But Our Duke does march neither one way nor other, takes no
work in hand, but trifles away his Time in idle encampings.

Our Illustrious Duke is justly reputed one of the Greatest Captains of this or
any Age. But we have found by former Experience, that he is a little too much
given to encamping, when the Season calls for Action. When he marched with a
mighty Imperial Army into his own Lorrain, and the French (under Crequi) were
in a manner fled out of the Country; in this so inviting, so provoking an
Occasion, he for several Weeks lay encamped upon the Banks of Saar: when all
Europe expected his progress with impatience. I confess this might have done
well, if he had come only to take the Air: but considering the Business he was
upon, it is hard to be understood. I meddle no further with that unfortunate
Campaign; which went on as it began.

To return therefore to Hungary; it seems very strange (for I cannot yet leave
this Matter) that the Duke of Lorrain, having so great an advantage, did not
bear in upon the Enemy with all his power: and particularly upon the Country
between the Danube, and the Tibisque, or Teys. It is a very good Country, and
was then fresh and untouched: no Army having lain upon it, or so much as
marched through it. And it was close at hand: and lay as open to him, as Kent
does to Surrey. Also there was no Enemy to oppose him. For the Serasquier and
his heartless Rabble were on the other side the River, not daring to look
toward him; and after a while were gone clean away. so that now there was no
Army in Hungary beside the Duke's. These Invitations notwithstanding, he could
not dispose his mind to move that way; though he had nothing else to do. As if
he had been Enchanted; or some Spell had been laid before him, which he had not
the power to pass over. I believe the like Example is no where to be found.
They that favor the Glory of this Highborn Prince, are troubled that he should
lose the Opportunity to increase it. If Mercy and Heusler are so renowned, for
the Conquests they made with a Detachment of a Detachment; how glorious might
the Duke have been by the Achievements of his whole Army? Fifty thousand men
may do a great deal of such Work, where five thousand can do nothing. because
an equal Force (which is easily had) opposing them, will frustrate all their
Attempts. But where five thousand can do any thing, fifty thousand will do ten
times more, if there be so much to do.

How did Hatwan (in particular) as it were invite the Duke to besiege it, lying
close by him? Where he was not likely to find greater Resistance, than Mercy
and Heusler did afterward at Zolnock, a more considerable Place. By the taking
of Hatwan, the Duke had been left without blame for not repairing Vacia or
Novigrad. since he had now a Frontier Town, to cover the Country which the
Enemy had quitted, and to press upon the Country which the Enemy still kept:
which was the thing wanting in those Parts. Also the Communication of Buda and
Agria had been cut off, Hatwan lying between them.

I am not ignorant that a wise Reason is given, why the Duke of Lorrain, laying
aside at present the thoughts of these things, drew so soon into Winter
Quarters. It is, that he might be the sooner in the Field next year. But who
knows what may happen, before the next year comes? Who knows how long the Pope
will live, or whether another Pope will be so liberal? Who knows how long the
King of Spain will live? Or how long the King of France will continue in this
Mind? Or how long this League will last between the Germans, Poles, and
Venetians? Or how soon there may be some Accident, which may disturb the Peace
of Christendom, and by consequence stop the progress of this War? Or whether
the Turks will ever be again, in so bad a posture to defend themselves? The
Proverbial Advice, To make hay while the Sun shines, does extend to all sorts
and conditions of People. Nor should we leave any thing to be done to morrow,
which may be done to day. The Duke had now a precious Opportunity in his hands.
The neglecting of one such Opportunity, may turn the Fortune of Kingdoms and
Empires. Such an Opportunity ought to be embraced and made use of, as if it
were never to return again, nor any like it.

The Successes of Mercy and Heusler (of which I have said something already,
and must say more hereafter) do make it plainly appear; that the Duke of
Lorrain, had it been his hap to try it, might with ease have seized most of the
Turkish Places on that side: and gone near to have cleared the whole Country on
the North of Danube, quite down to Belgrade. But admitting he had found all the
fortified Places impregnable, or at least the attacking them not advisable: yet
by Marching in amongst them, and eating up the open Country (as the French did
in Flanders), he had done great Service. thereby maintaining his Army at his
Enemies Cost, and depriving the Enemies Armies and Garrisons of their
Subsistence. If an Army be but in the Enemies Country (which yet the Christians
in this War seem industriously to avoid, or they have strange ill luck at it),
they are sure to be doing one great part of their Work, and that is, devouring.

Moreover though it should be supposed, that this also could not be done, and
that no Impression of any kind could be made upon the Enemy; yet some are of
opinion, that the Duke had no need to spend his time in idle Encampings, and
then run into Winter Quarters before Winter: since he might have employed his
Army to very good purpose. He might have laid a Bridge upon the Danube,
somewhere near and above Buda, and covered it at each end with a strong and
large Intrenchment: where a good part of his Army might have quartered all
Winter. This Work had been both feasible and profitable. To make it the more
feasible, the Duke had Vessels, and a Bridge ready framed, which came down the
River by him when he marched last against the Enemy. Also his Army was twice as
strong, as it was at the making of his last Bridge. And the Serasquier, who had
not hindered That, was no way likely to hinder This. He did not so much as
Quarter against him or near him: within a while he drew off yet further, and
lay quite below Buda: and a little after he marched clear away over the Bridge
of Esseck. The making of these Intrenchments I confess was a great Work. But
there was the whole Army to do it; and such things have been frequently done by
less Armies. As for the Soldiers Lodgings who were here to Quarter, they might
have made Baraques here, as we find they have been forced to do at Newhausel.
Also they might here have had Victuals and Forage (as before has been noted)
almost as conveniently as in Austria it self, by reason of the easy Conveyance
down the River* and some they would have got out of the Country, commanding it
far and wide. Then as to Profit and Advantage; This Bridge, with these
Intrenchments, would have made large amends for the loss of Vicegrad, for the
not repairing of Vacia or Novigrad, and the not taking of Hatwan. since it had
been better by many degrees, than all of them put together. And this Place,
with the Force within it, would have covered all that large Tract of good Land
lying behind it toward Gran: it would have driven the Turkish Garrisons into
corners, and harrased all the open Country forward, almost as far as the Drove
on the one side, and quite to the Teys on the other. It might have been the
Mastricht of Hungary: that is, might have done the Christians here as much
service, as Mastricht did to the French while they held it. The Turks would
have had a warm Winter on it, having such a Fire in their Bowels. And Pest and
Buda, Hatwan, Agria, and Alba Regalis, and their other Garrisons hereabouts,
had been sorely distressed this Winter for Victuals. We find they have much ado
to subsist, though they have no Enemy near to disturb or annoy them. Moreover
the Christians, by the help of this Bridge so fortified, would have been in a
brave posture to carry on the War next Spring. These advantages the Christians
might have had, if they would have taken some pains to procure them. But it is
too truly observed of them, that in all this War they have been very sparing of
their labor. Whereas the Romans of old, and the French of late, have owed
their Successes as well to their hard Labor; as to their Money, their Skill,
and their Valor.

Before I leave this imaginary Bridge, I must answer an Objection concerning
it: which is this. It is made a chief End of having here a great Strength of
Men; that they might distress and starve Buda, themselves being the while
supplied by the Danube. But since Buda stands upon the Danube likewise, why
might it not be as well supplied the same way? I answer, that there is a very
great and wide difference: in that Provisions, etc. must come up against the
Stream to the Turks, whereas they fall down the Stream to the Christians. Also
the Christian Countries upon the River are much better cultivated, and can
yield far greater Quantities of Provisions, than the Turkish Countries upon the
same River. And we see by Experience, that the Turks make but little use of
this kind of Conveyance, in comparison of the Christians. It is certainly a
mighty Advantage to the Christian Armies in Hungary, that not only the Danube,
but also the Drove, the Save, and the Teys, bring them down all sorts of
Necessaries, out of the Emperor's Countries.

5. The burning of the Bridge of Esseck was a fine Exploit performed by Count
Lesley: who has deservedly the reputation of one of the Emperor's best
Commanders. But in the Conduct of this Affair, there are some things not easy
to be apprehended. In the first place, it seems to have been carried with the
least secrecy, that ever any thing was. The Gazettes gave us advice (from
Virovitza), what Count Lesley and his Council of War had resolved upon. Which
was, To go first to Caniza, and destroy the Country about it, thereby to
incommode and distress that Garrison; and then to march down to Esseck, with
design to ruin that Bridge. And a week or a fortnight after, they tell us from
the same place; That according to former resolutions, Count Lesley had been at
Caniza and done his work there, and was now marching to the Bridge of Esseck.
Who can deny but that this is fair open dealing, and playing above-board? They
let the World know what they intend to do, and they do it accordingly. In the
next place, it is a wonder to some, that he did not keep the Town of Esseck
when he had taken it. Though his Forces were not great, as not exceeding six
thousand Men, yet there was nothing that could disturb or endanger him. For he
had beaten the Enemy out of the Field; those that escaped the Rout he gave
them, being fled quite to Belgrade. And the Serasquier was far off, and engaged
against the Duke of Lorrain: and on the other side the Drove, over which he had
no passage but by this Bridge. Moreover the making good this Town was a thing
of mighty importance. For the Turks had been thereby deprived of their only
Pass into Lower Hungary, and consequently made incapable to defend it or
maintain a War in it. In the third place, if the Town was not tenable, or (for
Reasons we are yet to learn) it was not advisable to keep it, it is still a
wonder he did not do something else. There was not a Man in the Field to oppose
him. And the easy taking of Esseck, and of Michalowitz in his March thither,
makes it appear, how little difficulty he would have met with in other places,
had he had the Heart to try them. Or he might have spent some time in
fortifying and furnishing that same Michalowitz. which (by De Witt's particular
Map of Hungary, for I find it in no other) lies commodiously upon the Drove,
about the half way between Virovitza and Esseck. [but I doubt they have quitted
this Place, because we hear no more of it.] Or at least he might have Quartered
upon the Enemy: all that noble Country between the Drove and Save being at his
Command. and if he would be moving homeward, he might have done it by slow and
easy Marches, and have grazed up the Country as he went. But instead of doing
any of these things. the Count marched straight away to Virovitza with all
diligence. If a great Army of Turks and Tartars had been at his heels, he could
not have gone much faster. Being thus got back into his own Quarters, and out
of danger of being burdensome to any but his Friends; he lay there very quietly
and contentedly all the rest of the Summer, and did just nothing.

6. It was by special Order from Vienna, that Newhausel was refortified. Which
makes some think that the great Walstein was wise: who when he accepted the
Supreme Command against the Swede, made it in his bargain (amongst other
things) that they should send him no Orders from Vienna. for surely these
Orders about Newhausel seem much mistaken. The Place was in a manner totally
destroyed by the Siege. the Assailants had filled up a great part of the Ditch:
the Rampart was beaten down by the Cannon: and the Bombs had so torn and ruined
the Houses, that only twelve of them were left standing. Since therefore in
effect it must be all new-built, it is to be considered, whether the Situation
did deserve that Labor and Charge. It is confessed that Newhausel was a place
important, when Comorra and It were the Christians Frontier on the North side
the Danube, against Gran and Lewentz possessed by the Turks. Gran and Comorra
standing upon the River, and Lewentz and Newhausel ten or twelve miles from it:
and the Turkish Towns being about thirty miles distant from the Christian.
About twenty miles more backward the Turks had Novigrad and Vacia, standing
like the other: the first in the Upland, the last upon the River. and twenty
miles yet farther back, they have Pest, Hatwan, and Agria, all abreast: their
Land on this side the Danube growing now broader. This was the posture till
about forty years ago; and then the Turks took Newhausel. Whereupon the
Christians, to curb this Garrison, newbuilt Leopoldstat, upon the River Waag;
and they strongly fortified Nitria, upon the same River on which Newhausel
stands. Also now lately, and after the Victory of Vienna, the Christians took
Gran and Lewentz: and (to come to the present time) this year they took
Newhausel. Here it must plainly appear to any considering Person, that by the
Christians having Lewentz and Gran, Newhausel was become useless. And it became
more useless by the Turks abandoning Novigrad and Vacia, which happened soon
after. And it had become more useless yet, if the Christians had fortified
Novigrad or Vacia, and had carried on the Frontier so far. [To say nothing of
the Bridge upon the Danube, which I so much fancied in the lines foregoing.] A
strong Garrison there, had covered all the Country behind it, and commanded a
great way forward. But Newhausel is now deep within the Christian Quarters,
being almost seventy miles from any Turkish Garrison. It does not cover one
soot of the Christian Country, nor command one foot of the Enemies. Was it not
therefore a strange Resolution, to bestow nothing upon Places that had been
highly useful; and to labor so much, upon a Place that is wholly useless?
There was more need to slight two or three Garrisons about Newhausel, than to
make more. As things are now, there is not such a Cluster of Garrisons upon the
face of the Earth. Here stands Newhausel: and behind it Leopoldstat within
fifteen miles: on the left hand Nitria in the same distance: on the right hand
Comorra within ten miles, and Raab within ten miles more. Then before it
(toward the Turks) are Gran and Lewentz within thirty miles. And these two
last, which are nearest the Enemy, are almost forty miles from any Garrison
they have. So that this multiplying of Garrisons, in this place, serves to
small purpose.

The condition of Affairs is now such, that the Turks are not likely ever to
come so far as Newhausel. And what if the Scene should be altered? and the
Turks should advance with a mighty Force this way? Were it better in this case,
that Newhausel lay rased to the Ground, or were fortified as now it is, and had
a Garrison (as now it has) of four thousand Men? It seems very plain that it
were better rased to the Ground. For the Town might be well spared, there being
more than enough hereabout besides; and the Men might be made better use of,
either in the Field, or for the reinforcement of the Neighboring Garrisons. A
convenient number of Garrisons, well fortified and well manned, is certainly
the best. Where they are too many, they cannot all be well manned: whereby some
or other will become an easy Prey to the Enemy. But they may prove hard to be
recovered; and the Enemies nestling and fixing in them may prove the
destruction of the whole Country. So that too great a number is not only
impertinent, but also dangerous and pernicious. If therefore a hundred strong
Holds could be had with a Wish in the Christian Hungary, more than now are,
there being (we may presume) enough already; the next Wish should be to have them
all demolished.

That the Mistake in fortifying Newhausel may more plainly appear, I will make
an Instance (by Supposition) in our own Country. Suppose England and Scotland
were under two distinct Kings, as they are now happily united under One. The
Scots take Barwick, and then they take Newcastle, with all the Places between.
And at last they take Durham also. to curb which last, as being the farthest
advanced, the English make several strong Garrisons near it. Afterward the
English retake Newcastle; and all the other Places, Durham and Barwick
excepted. At another time they likewise retake Durham: but having first ruined
it with their Bombs and Cannon. And hereupon the Scots demolish Barwick, and
abandon it. Would not the World think us to be perfectly mad, if we should now
refortify Durham with might and main, when it signifies nothing; and should
wholly neglect Barwick? It is the very same case here. The Danube is their Sea:
Vacia answers Barwick: Gran is Newcastle; and Newhausel is Durham.

7. We must believe General Schultz to be a Person of great Courage and
Activity. One sign of it is this; that he was always in the Field, and at work,
some Weeks before other Men. Nevertheless he made no great progress: having to
do with a tough Enemy, that held him hard to it. The Places that he besieged,
were defended with the utmost Obstinacy: Nor did Count Teckely fail on his
part, to use unwearied diligence in relieving them. At last by the taking of
Esperies, and the investing of Caschaw it self, Schultz seemed to have brought
his Affairs into a very hopeful posture. But now another is set over his head:
and takes his work out of his hands. We cannot blame him for laying down his
Command upon it.

8. Count Caprara is the Man that now Commands at Caschaw. He was first sent to
Agria by the Duke of Lorrain, upon an unusual Errand: which was, To take it (if
he could) with Bombs. And this design was published to the World, some time
before it was put in Execution: for all the Gazettes had it. I think an Example
will hardly be found, of a Town this way taken. Of a small Castle perhaps there
may. The French, it is true, have attacqued some Towns in this manner: as
Oudenard by Land, and Genoa by Sea. But this was not with any hope or
expectation to take the Places. The design therefore upon Agria was not like to
succeed, and it succeeded not.

9. But Agria was only a thing by the by. and though it be one of the chief
Fortresses of the Turkish Empire, yet it was to be taken by a party, in their
passage. We must therefore know, That this Force under Caprara was by the Duke
of Lorrain sent chiefly against Count Teckely. But how comes the Duke of
Lorrain to concern himself thus with Teckely, who had Schultz upon him already?
we thought the Duke had been engaged against the Serasquier: and that the
Serasquier (with the Ottoman Forces) was his Antagonist; with whom he was to
cope, and to try Masteries. And we expected, that since the Duke had already
worsted him, he would never leave him off till either he had beaten him to
pieces, or chased him out of Hungary. But the Duke of Lorrain, it seems,
entertained no such Thoughts: and all that little that he did was against
Teckely. As if a Mastiff, having a Bear by the Throat, should let go his hold
to snap at a Cur.

10. Though Caprara failed at Agria, yet at Caschaw he had great Success:
having that strong Fortress yielded to him in a short time. But for this he was
beholden to Teckely's ill Usage by the Turks. Which was a strange Hit to
Caprara; and made those things smooth and easy to him, which might otherwise
have been exceeding difficult. For surely at the Surrender of Caschaw, they
were found so well provided at all points; that had it not been for Teckely's
Imprisonment, Caprara might have been as well repulsed, as ever Man was.

11. When Caprara had made such quick work at Caschaw, it was expected, that he
would immediately have marched after Mercy and Heusler, (who were now in the
course of their Victories); or at least have sent them a good Reinforcement.
Since the Nail did drive here so well, 'twas pity there should want hands to
strike it. These brave Commanders wanted nothing but greater Forces, to make
greater Conquests: those they had with them, being hardly sufficient to Man the
Places they took. It had therefore been well done by Caprara, if he had sent a
good supply after them. But if he had gone himself, he had gained the Glory of
the whole Action: as well of the things that had been done before his coming,
as of those that should be done after. all would have been ascribed to the
General Caprara. But he seemed little to mind these Matters. All that he now
did, was to ly hatching over his new Conquest of Caschaw, and to put his Men in
Winter Quarters. And this last he did sooner then he needed, the Season being
yet favorable. For we find that Mercy and Heusler continued in Action, and in
the Field, for several Weeks after Caschaw was surrendered.

12. It has been said before, that the Surrender of Caschaw and other Places
was occasioned by Teckely's Imprisonment. And surely the Imprisonment of Count
Teckely by the Turks, was a most horrid Act even amongst Infidels. He fell by
the Fraud of faithless Barbarians, to whom himself had been too faithful. But
the Turks were sufficiently punished for it: since it caused the Submission of
the revolted Hungarians to the Emperor, which to the Turks was one of the
greatest Blows they have received in all this War.

13. Among all the Champions engaged in this War of Hungary, Mercy and Heusler
have born away the prize. It must be confessed they went about their Business
like Workmen. These are they that with a handful of Men, and when the year was
almost quite spent: fell into the Enemies Country, and made very considerable
Conquests. Which they have bravely maintained ever since: upon all Occasions
(and many such Occasions happened) beating and chasing the Enemy. Heusler had
made himself famous before the Campaign began: and had given great proofs of
his diligence and courage in hindering the Relief of Newhausel. for the
effecting of which important Service the Turks made continual Attempts. He was
almost all the Winter on Horseback: while others were in there Stoves, at
Vienna and Inspruck. And now, as Caprara had been detached from Lorrain, so
Mercy and Heusler were detached from Caprara. and with their Party (for it may
not be called an Army) they put themselves upon Action, when the great ones
were got into their Winter Quarters. They took Zolnock first, and afterward
they took Saravas: both which are considerable Passes. the last upon the great
River of Keroz, and the first upon the greater River of Teys. And the potent
City of Debreczen, which before was neutral, they made to be wholly Imperial.
They also took several other Places of less name, cleared a large Country, and
pierced deep into the Enemies Quarters. They showed what the Duke of Lorrain
might have done, if he had pleased with his whole Army to March that way. He
might as easily have taken Waradine, and Segedine, and Temeswar, as they took
Saravas and Zolnock. He might have mastered the whole Country on this side the
Danube, as easily as They did part. And as They Quartered their party upon the
Enemy all Winter, so He might have done by his Army: not needing to send them
so far as he did, some of them to the remotest parts of Germany. To make the
thing shorter; if the Duke of Lorrain, after the Battle of Gran, had delivered
his victorious Troops to Mercy and Heusler; we may well imagine what work they
had made, and how like a Torrent they had born down all before them.

14. When the Venetians broke with the Turk, and joined in the War against him;
a Judgment might easily be from thence made* that he was in a very ill
Condition. For we might well think, that this wary People (who also have
perfect Intelligence of the State of that Empire) would not engage but upon
sure terms. I believe this is the first time that they have been guilty of
taking voluntary Arms against the Turk. they not being much given to that sort
of fooling, which some call Gallantry. This is not spoken in derogation of the
Serene Republique. They deserve great Honor upon several accounts. Nor ought
we to heed the Character given them by Joseph Scaliger, in his Invective Poem.
Which I think is the bitterest Satyr that ever was written, next to that of
Catullus against Caesar. It seems the Pretensions of this Family to Verona, had
filled the Man's Pen with Gall and Vinegar.

The Venetians having thus undertaken the War, let us see how they prosecute
it. Their Terra firma, or Land upon the Continent, lies round the bottom of
their Gulf: within which, upon certain small Islands, Venice it self is
situate. Most of the Land by much, does ly on the Western side: and takes up a
good part of Lombardy. The Eastern Extremity joins upon Dalmatia: some of which
Country they also have, the Turk possessing the greatest part. and this is the
only place, where they border upon the Turks by land. Hither their Armies may
march by land; or be transported cross the Gulf, by a short Cut and at an easy
Charge. and here they might also be supplied at pleasure. Moreover the Country
of Dalmatia lies extended upon this Gulf of Venice, from Istria to Albania,
between three and four hundred miles in length: and it would be to the
Venetians a thing of mighty importance to be sole Masters of it. It lies just
at their doors: It would make their Dominion almost as weighty on this side of
the Gulf as on the other: and it would establish and secure their Soverainty
over that Sea, something better then their yearly m^rrying their Doge to it. Of
all the places in the World it lies most convenient for them. one foot of
ground in Dalmatia is worth two or three elsewhere. And since the Enemy had
likewise the Germans and Poles upon him, against whom his utmost Endeavors
were required, and probably would be all too little; it could not otherwise be,
but that Dalmatia would be very slenderly guarded. And it proved so in the
Event: the Turks Forces there being inconsiderable.

It was therefore with reason expected, that the Venetians would make it their
principal Care, to get a good Army in Dalmatia. Which if they had done, it was
hardly possible for them to fail of Success. So that in all humane probability
they might have made an easy Conquest of that whole Country. And then, their
Forces being increased by the accession of the Christians there, and maintained
in great measure by the Country they had conquered; they might have carried the
War into Albania, or Servia, or Bosnia: which border upon it, and would have
been found as much unprovided. But in stead of this, they fall with might and
main to Rigging out their Fleet, for which there was no occasion: and they fill
it with their Land Forces. As much neglecting Dalmatia out of Choice, as the
Turks did out of Necessity. The Turks could not have a Force there, and it
seems the Venetians would not. And the second Campaign was worse then the
first. For in the first they had there an Army, though it were small and
inconsiderable: but in the second, they had none at all.

And what did they do with their Fleet, in which we see was all their
Confidence, and which took up all their Care? The first Summer was almost all
spent in Preparations. At last they got to Sea: and took a small Island, with a
Fort near it upon the Main. And this was all they did that year: which did no
way answer the Charge. The next year, as their Force was greater, so also they
got out sooner. And they carried their Army to the farther part of Morea, above
a thousand Miles from Venice. It cannot be denied, but that they did their Work
here very substantially and Soldier like. And they had as much Success as could
be expected from such an Army. Which also was a good Army, considering how far
they were carried on Shipboard, and how great the Charge was of the Fleet that
attended them. But here lies the Wonder, that they should send an Army so far,
when with the same Expense they might have had one in Dalmatia three or four
times as big. as it is well known to those, that know the Charge of a Fleet.
What could they promise to themselves in Morea, more than in Dalmatia? Did they
hope to find them unprovided there, and a small Force there to oppose them?
they could not be worse provided then in Dalmatia, where there was no Force at
all. Also the Places in Morea were as well fortified as in Dalmatia: and the
Christians were as likely to come into the Conquerors, and revolt from the
Turks, in the one Country as in the other. The Matter therefore in short stands
thus demonstrable. Forty or fifty thousand Men in Dalmatia could do much more
then twelve or fifteen thousand in Morea: But forty or fifty thousand might as
easily be had in Dalmatia, as twelve or fifteen thousand in Morea: Therefore it
had plainly been more advisable, to fall upon Dalmatia then Morea.

For a further Illustration, let me make another Instance at home, and suppose
once more that we had War with Scotland. In a time also when they were under
great discouragement and disorder, had other Enemies upon them, and were very
weakly provided to defend themselves. And We were willing to make the best use
of such an Opportunity. Would it not now be a rare Contrivance, if in stead of
pouring a main Army into the South Parts of that Kingdom, which border upon us
and ly open to us, we should send a great Fleet with a small Army, round by Sea
to the farthest North? There to ly Hawking after Ports, when we might the while
have been Conquering whole Countries. The Cases are exactly parallel: only with
this difference, that whereas We should have gone two or three hundred miles
out of Our way, the Venetians have gone a thousand out of Theirs. I might also
instance in the French: and show how contrary their Sentiments are to the
Venetians in this matter. When They are minded to invade the Spanish Kingdoms,
they never dream of carrying Armies by Sea, to Cales, or Gibraltore, or other
places remote; but fall directly into Catalonia or Biscay. The Dutch, it is
true, in the great War of the Confederates against the French; though they had
work enough in Flanders, yet they sent a Fleet with some Land-Men in it, to the
farther parts of France. But they did this but once: they never thought fit to
repeat it. Well perceiving, that the Money which such a Fleet must cost, would
be much better bestowed upon increasing their Army in Flanders. Beside, they
did not design to make any great Conquests, or carry on a War at Land, as the
Venetians do: but merely to alarm and infest the Sea Coasts. I cannot but
observe by the by; that the Dutch did manage this Affair, in the Execution of
it, as weakly, and awk wardly, and unskilfully, and unlearnedly, as ever did
Men. I know this may seem incredible: but I could make it plainly and
particularly to appear, if it were not too long a digression.

It must be confessed, that a Fleet and Army have notable Advantages by the
Swiftness of their Motion: especially where a large Seacoast lies exposed to
them. For it is impossible to hinder their Landing, as Rawleigh does well
demonstrate. And before their Opposers can come up, they will for some time be
Masters of the Field: so as to be able to ravage the open Country, and likewise
to possess themselves of some Ports. which being relievable by Sea, will not
easily be recovered. By this way, he that is Master at Sea may put great
hardships upon an Enemy, that at Land is much stronger then himself. And wise
Men are of opinion, that the English might shrewdly trouble France this way, if
a War should happen. But the Venetians were now above these things: and had a
better Game to play. A Country of the Enemies lay open to them, at their doors,
and but weakly guarded, and joining to them by Land. I think there cannot be
stronger Invitations. What greater Advantage can be desired, then to have a
good Army in the Enemies Country, clearly Master of the Field? And this they
might certainly have had, if they had employed their main Force upon Dalmatia.
To be Master of the Field, though but for a time, is the End and Aim even of a
desultory Sea-War: as it has been already noted. And surely if the temporary
advantage be so desirable, to have it constant and permanent must be so much
more. The Venetians moreover had not now a stronger Enemy to deal with*
considering the Circumstances he lay under, he was much weaker then themselves.
And therefore they had no need to run a Wild goose Chase, when they might carry
their Business sure before them, the plain way.

It must also be confessed, that it was necessary the Venetians should have a
Fleet at Sea. But a much less had been sufficient. We find that the Fleet or
Squadro, which Molino commanded in the Archipelago, was more then the Turks
could deal with.

But here it will be objected, That the Venetians could not bring this great
Army into Dalmatia, for want of Men to do it with. To this I answer; That the
Money they spent in equipping and maintaining their great Fleets, would have
drawn Men to them from all parts of Europe. And the fame of so hopeful and
glorious an Expedition, would have roused up the most effeminate even of their
own Subjects.

It may be objected also, That regard must be had to the general Interest of
the Confederates. And this is best served by giving the greatest diversion to
the Turks. And the diversion is greater by attacquing Morea, which is far from
Hungary the chief Scene of Action; then by attacquing Dalmatia, which is near
it.

To this I answer; First, that the greatest Force makes the greatest Diversion:
and therefore since there might be a much greater Force in Dalmatia then in
Morea, the Diversion would be much greater in Dalmatia. Or according to what I
said before, forty or fifty thousand Men in Dalmatia, would give the Turks a
greater Diversion, then twelve or fifteen thousand in Morea. Secondly, As I
have said upon another occasion, that Diversion is as good as Conjunction; so I
say here and now, that Conjunction is as good as Diversion: and therefore it
cannot be hurtful, that the Christian Armies be near one another. It is the
common Interest of Confederates, that they all fall on where they can act with
the greatest Strength and Vigor. but whether near one another, or a great way
off, is no way material. Thirdly, It is confessed, that Dalmatia being near to
Hungary, if those were the places chiefly attacqued, the Turkish Armies that
defended them might relieve and assist each other, as there was occasion. And
would not the Christian Armies, that act in those parts, have the same
Convenience? Fourthly, It is confessed likewise, that the Turks that defend
Morea are quite divided from the rest. but so also are the Christians that
attacque it. If therefore we distract the Enemies Force by distracting our own,
where lies the advantage? Fifthly, Herein the Turks had the advantage, that
their Forces were found ready in Morea; which must have marched as far as
Dalmatia, if that had been vigorously invaded. And so they were saved the
labor of some Months, which that long March had required. Sixthly, If the best
way of Diversion be to go far off, then the farther the better. And therefore
the Venetians should have sent their Fleet and Army, another thousand Miles
farther. which they might have done. Egypt or the Holy Land lay very fitly for
their purpose: and this had been a rare Diversion. But if we will speak
seriously, no man can think that such a Project had been advisable.

Thus we see that the common Interest did not oblige the Venetians to go so far
as Morea. And as for their own Interest, it plainly led them to Dalmatia, as
the most commodious, which thing has been noted before. It may now be added,
that if they could get Dalmatia, they might keep it: but except the Turk be
beaten out of Europe, he will find Opportunities to beat the Venetians out of
Morea. And in the mean time, let them do what they can, it will be a Charge and
a Burden to them. whereas Dalmatia would maintain and defend it self. It Is
granted, that the Conquest of Morea would finely enlarge their Sea Dominion:
but there is nothing like securing their Gulf, which is done by the Conquest of
Dalmatia.

Admitting therefore that the attacquing of Morea were better for the Austrians
and Poles, and would more facilitate their Conquests: yet clearly the Venetians
are to do what is best for themselves. They are not bound to be beating the
Bush, while others catch the Hare: nor to hold the Man's hands, while others
rifle him: nor to be making Diversions, while others are making Conquests.

They must not think that those others, who have chosen the better part, will
allow them any share in Their Acquisitions: nor must they reckon that they
shall gain any more by the War, then what Themselves get possessed of.

The Venetians, it is believed, have advanced more Money toward this War,
since the time they engaged in it, then the Emperor has done. And they might
have had as good Armies at least, and have been in a fair probability to make
as great Conquests; had they not gone the wrong way to work, and begun at the
wrong end. You will say the Emperor was vastly helped by the Popes Money. But
the Venetians might have had an equal share with him, if they had made their
bargain wisely.

They that would excuse the Venetians Conduct, are still of opinion, that they
were obliged to it by Agreement with their Confederates. But we do not know
this: nor is it to be presumed. It being much more usual, that Confederates in
these cases be left at liberty, each to make the best of his own Game. But if
there were such an Agreement, it was their great Error to consent to it.

It has been observed of the House of Austria, that they have a particular
faculty of putting hard Conditions upon their Allies. But the Venetians were
not now to be imposed upon. For they came voluntarily into a War, in which the
others were engaged before: and therefore might have had what terms they
pleased. So that it was their own great fault if they were not good ones.

It is the opinion of some Men; that the wise State of Venice, in this Affair,
were over swayed by natural Inclination: which it is very hard to withstand.
They are much better provided for a War at Sea then at Land. which might make
them apt to turn their Forces that way. We see all Creatures, by a certain
Instinct, love to make use of that Part, which Nature has most strongly armed
them withal. And the Venetians did now as naturally make use of their Fleet,
as Bores use their Tusks, or Bulls use their Horns, or Horses their Heels.

I cannot leave the Venetians without one Remark more. It was much wondered,
That when they had been victorious in Morea, and remained Masters of the Field,
they yet carried their Army thence, to their own Neighboring Islands for
Winter Quarters. As if they had thought it a breach of good Manners, to quarter
upon an Enemies Country. Or as if they had made Hungary their pattern: where
all were highly Civil in this kind, two rude Fellows ( Mercy and Heusler)
excepted. But what could the Venetians get by so doing? Certainly the Victuals
which the Army consumed in their Quarters, would have done as well if it had
been brought to them at Morea. And why should not the Victuals be carried to
the Men, as well as the Men to the Victuals? Moreover had the Army staid here,
if they could not have maintained themselves wholly, they must have got
something toward their Maintenance. And the Winter in Morea is mild and
gentle: it being the most Southern part of all the Continent of Europe. Also by
their stay they had better protected the poor revolted Greeks: who contrariwise
were in a very hard Condition, when they were abandoned by their new Friends,
and left to the rage of their old Masters. And this, as the case here stands,
is one great Evil of a desultory Sea-War. The Greeks are ruined by the
Christians, if they come not in to them; and by the Turks, if they do. Such a
War being fit to infest and destroy, but not to protect.

This sending Men so far to Winter Quarters, seems to be a new fashion. And so
does the proclaiming beforehand the time and place of Rendezvous. Caesar was
nine years in conquering Gaul: but we cannot find that ever he did either of
these things. If he had drawn back his Army every Winter, to Quarter in Italy;
he might have been nineteen years about this Work, and left it undone at last.
But his way was, to Quarter them in the midst of their Business, and either
upon his Enemies, or as near them as he could, in several Camps which they
strongly entrenched. And when Spring came, he did not use to make a formal
appointment of a Rendezvous; but by close Orders, and without noise, he drew
his Men together; and fell in among the Enemies, where he was least expected,
as sudden as a Clap of Thunder. Commonly the first notice they had of him, was
by seeing their Country in flames.

The Prince of Orange has, of late years, given us a Pattern of a Rendezvous.
and it was at the Siege of Bon. To which Place he made his Army march, from
several Quarters and by several ways: none of them knowing or guessing, whither
they were going or what they were to do, till they all met at one and the same
time (their Marches being so admeasur'd) under the Walls of the Town. We heard
they had invested the Place, before we heard that they were marching toward
it; and we heard they had taken it, almost as soon as we heard that they were
before it. This important Success may justly be accounted the first step of
Holland's deliverance from the French.

To show the advantage yet further, of keeping an Army close up upon the Enemy
all Winter, if it may possibly be done; I shall here bring a domestique
Example. though the memory of it I confess is not pleasing. Our rebellious
Rumpers got their Victory at Dunbar in September: after which they took in
Edenburg, Lies, and some other places; with the Countries on this side
Sterling. and then the Winter came on. They now well saw, that these new
Conquests would not be able to give Winter Quarters to their Army. But did they
therefore draw them back into England? No, not a Man of them: they kept them
all in Scotland. And moreover they were sending them Recruits all Winter: with
the addition of diverse new Regiments. Then for their Subsistence; they sent
them by Sea, both Victuals for their Men, and Hay for their Horses. So that
against Spring, their Army was more then doubled, upon the place, and ready for
Action. Here now were Fellows that prosecuted their Business to the utmost. And
surely without this vigorous Persistance, they had not brought that Kingdom so
soon under their Yoke; nor forced the King to that most Glorious, (but withal
most hazardous, and only not fatal) March into England. To apply this Example,
I do affirm; That the Christian Armies might as easily have been kept all
Winter in Hungary or Morea, as the Blaspheming Army (so the Scots elegantly
called it) was in Scotland.

15. The Magnanimous King of Poland is not to be blamed for the slack
Proceedings of that Kingdom. but all the fault must be laid upon their unhappy
Constitution: which seems to be merely a trial of Skill, how far Monarchy and
Republique being mixed together, may enervate and confound each other. And it
is from the wretched defects in their Government, that so mighty a Country
makes so small a figure in the World. This King, after the Relief of Vienna and
the defeat of the Grand Vizier, (in which glorious Service he had a principal
hand); and after the taking of Gran and some other Places; retired into his own
Kingdom. the Quarters assigned him in Upper Hungary being made too uneasy by
Teckely's Garrisons. Now the Poles consult how to prosecute the War. And since
they join upon the Turk themselves, they resolve to employ their Forces upon
their own Frontier. Which surely was well considered* for now they might work
for themselves: whereas in Hungary they must work for another. And as to the
Common Interest and Service, Diversion and Conjunction are equipollent. or to
speak more at length, It does as much good to divert the Enemy, as to join with
the Friend.

The Turks border upon the Poles in Moldavia: which is a Christian Country, but
tributary to the Turks, and at their Command. being also Governed by a Vaivod
or Hospodar, appointed by the Great Sultan. It was formerly dependent upon
Poland: and it is divided from it by the River Niester. Into this fertile
Country the Poles resolve to March. where they could meet with little
opposition; almost all the Turkish Forces being drawn into Hungary. And we may
be sure the Christian Inhabitants were not unwilling to be freed from their
Servitude: especially if fair terms were offered them. But the Polish Levies
and Recruits went on so exceeding slowly, that it was toward the end of
September, before they got into the Field. And then they were about a Month in
laying a Bridge over the Niester. So that by that time they were got into
Moldavia, it was toward the end of October. And after they had been there some
five or six days, without doing or attempting any thing; they found the Winter
come on so fast, that they concluded it their best way to March back into their
Winter Quarters. And they did March back to their Winter Quarters accordingly.
Was not this a most famous Expedition? We may defy all Places and Ages to show
the like. The next year they got sooner into the Field, though not with so good
an Army. But the Turks, having now recovered their Spirits, brought such a
Force against them, and beset them so close, that they had much ado to make
their Retreat.

By what has been here related and observed, it plainly appears; That the
Christians have lost the greatest Opportunity, that ever they had against the
Turks. These last, by the destruction of their Army at Vienna, were brought to
such a condition; that they were no way able to resist the united Powers of the
Germans, Poles, and Venetians. Whose Force also was much increased by the great
Sums of Money advanced by the Pope. And the whole Turkish Empire was in a
strange Consternation and Confusion. But in this so favorable a Conjuncture;
the Germans engaged themselves before Buda, against Sense and Reason, where
they were held in Shackles: the Poles were asleep, when they should have been
most active: and the Venetians spent their time and their Money, in rigging out
a Fleet to no purpose, and then in playing at small Game. Had the Christians on
all sides, and with their whole Power, pressed briskly and vigorously upon the
Enemy; it is probably believed, That the Duke of Lorrain might (the very first
year) have beaten them out of Hungary; the Venetians might have conquered
Dalmatia, and the adjoining Countries: and the King of Poland might have seized
Moldavia, together with Valachia which stood upon the same terms, and Marched
to Constantinople.

FINIS.

