LETTERS, AND Diverse other mixed Discourses in Natural Philosophy,

Many of which, were formerly Published in the Philosophical Transactions of
Mr. Oldenburg, and part in the Philosophical Collections of Mr. Hook, and
else where.

ALL Which are now Revised, Augmented, and to them are Added very many other
matters of the same Nature, not before Published.

ALSO, An Entire TREATIS of the Nature and Use of COLORS, in OIL PAINTING.

Written by M. Lister, F. of the R. S.

YORK, Printed by J. White for the Author. 1683.

Some Observations Concerning the odd Turn of some Shell-snailes, and the
darting of Spiders, communicated to Mr. J. W. and Published in the
Philosophical Transactions N. 50. 1669.
Sir,
I Can deny you nothing, and you may do what you please with the Notes I send
you. You would know of me (you say) what I have observed concerning the Odd
Turn of some Shell-snailes with us in England, and the Darting of Spiders.

I will tell you then of the first, that I have found two (a) sorts of them,
easily to be distinguished one from the other, and from all besides, because the
Turn of the wreathes is from the right hand to the left, contrary to what may
be seen in common Snailes. They are very small, and might therefore well escape
thus long the more Curious Naturalist; neither of them much exceeding, at least
in thickness, a large Oat-corne.

The first I thus describe: The open of the shell is pretty round, and the
second turn of wreaths is very large for the proportion, and the rest of the
wreaths, about the number of six, are still lesson'd to a point. This Turbin or
Conical figure is well near a quarter of an inch; the color of the shell is
duskish, yet when the shrunk animal gives leave, you may see day through it,
and then it is of a yellowish color. These shells are extreme brittle and
tender, so that I cannot send them in a Letter: You may guess at the figure, if
I tell you, they are som^thing like those of Aldrovandus de Testaceis, marked P.
359. Turbinum levjum.

Of the second sort (b) I send you enclosed at aventure half a dozen; (you
see, in that I can so plentifully repair the loss of the former, that they are
not very rare;) they seem to be much stronger and thicker shel'd; they are well
near half as long again as the other, and as slender they have the exact
figure of an Oat-corn, being as it were pointed at both ends, and the middle a
little swelled. The open of the shell is not exactly round there being a
peculiar Sinus in the lower part thereof. I think, you may number above 10.
Spires, having their turn from the right hand to the left. The color of the
Shell is of a dark and reddish brown.

There are two sorts of this make described, and with their respective Cutts,
in Fabius Columna; but ours agree not with them in any thing more than the odd
Turn: though it is true, that the other, the third there described, and called
by him Cochlea Terrestris turbinata et stirata, (c) is very frequent in the
road 'twixt Canterbury and Dover, and likewise in some woody parts of the Woles
in Lincolnshire. There are odd differences in this very Snaile very
remarkable, as its having but one pair of horns (if I mistake not,) as also a
hard shelly cover; its manner of wearing that cover etc. which I leave to
another opportunity and place.

And to return to our two new described Snailes, they, when they creep, lift up
the point of their shells toward a perpendicular, and exert with part of their
body two pair of horns, as most of their kind do.

In March they are still to be found in paires, Aristotle affirms all these
kind of creatures to be of a spontaneous birth, and no more to contribute to
the production of one another, then Trees, and therefore to have no distinction
of Sex. I have no reason to subscribe to his authority, since I have seen so
many of them paired, and in the act of Venery. That they engender then, is most
certain; but whether those, that are thus found coupled, be one of them a male,
and the other female, or rather, as you first observed, and published to the
World in the Catalogue of Plants growing wild about Cambridge, that they are
both male and female and do in the act of generation both receive into
themselves, and immit alike penis (as it seems probable to any man that shall
part them) I leave to further and more minute discovery to determine.

Moreover we find in Aristotle a Circle of other parts, but of those we find no
mention at all. However the Romans knew something extraordinary of these kind
of Animals, that made them so choice of them as to reckon them among their most
delicate food, and use all care and diligence to breed and fat them for their
Tables at large discribed to us by Varro. Their taste and relish is none,
methinks, of the most agreeable.

Of late, comparing Bussy's Historire Amoureuse de Gaul with Petronius
Arbiter, out of whom I was made to believe, he had taken two of his Lettes word
for word, beside other Love intrigues; I find, in running him over, what
satisfied me; not a little in this very subject of Snailes; viz. That these
very Animals, as well as other odd things in Nature, as Truffs, Mushroms, and
no doubt too the Cossi or great worms in the Oak (another Roman dainty) were
made use of by the Ancients to incite Venery. You Will there find, that the
distressed and feeble Lover prepares himself with a ragoust of Snailes necks,
(cervices Cochlearum;) and indeed in this part it is that these strange penes's
are to be found.

Mr. Hook does as it were promise the Anatomy of this Insect. It were surely
worth his pains, and the Learned World would be obliged to him for a piece of
this nature; nothing, accuratly done of the inward part of any Insect, being
yet published When this was written, Malpigius de Bombyee was not not published.
These Snailes are to be found frequent enough under the loose bark of Trees,
as old Willows, and in the ragged clefts of Elmes and Oak etc. And in no other
places else, that I could observe.

You tell me, that it is generally concluded by Philosophers, That the reason
of the usual Turn of Snailes from the left to the right, is the like motion of
the Sun, and that especially more Northward, there have not been hitherto
discovered any in our parts of the contrary Turn to the Sun's motion. But this
is not the only case, where they are out, who consult not the Stores of Nature,
but their own fancy. What I am further about to tell you concerning Spiders,
is as evident an Instance against them.

The long Threads in the Air in Summer, and especially toward September, have
been a strange puzel to the wiser World. It would ^^ert you, though you know
them as well as I, if I (...) ^^ckoned up the ridiculous opinions concerning
them; but I omit them, and proceed to tell you the certain and immediate Anthors
of them, and how they make them.

I say then, that all Spiders, that spin a thread, (those which we call
Shepherds or long-legged Spiders, never do;) are the marks of these threads,
so much wondered at, and in such infinite quantities every where.

I sent you the last Summer a Catalogue of thirty sort, of Spiders, that I had
distinguished here with us in England; and I must confess, I had well near
completed that number, with many other Experiments concerning them, before I
discovered this secret. You must not expect from me any thing more, then what
you demanded of me; for as for other Experiments, I reserve them till our
meeting.

I had exactly marked all the way of Weaving, used by any sorts of them, and in
those admirable works I had ever noted that they still let down the Thread they
make use of; and draw it after them. Happily at length in nearly attending on
one, that wrought a nett, I saw him suddenly in the mid-work to desist, and
turning his tail into the wind to dart out a thread with the violence and
stream, we see water forced out of a squirt or syring pipe: This thread taken
up by the wind, was in a moment emitted some fathoms long, still issuing out of
the belly of the Animal; by and by the Spider leapt into the air, and the
thread mounted her up swiftly.

And after this first discovery, I made the like Observation in all the sorts
of Spiders, I had before distinguished; and I found the Air filled with young
and old, sailing on their threads, and undoubtedly seizeing Gnats and other
Insects in their passage; there being often as many fest signs of slaughter,
as the legs, wings of Flies etc. on those threads, as in their webbs below.

One thing yet was a wonder to me, viz. That many of these threads, that came
down out of the Air, were not single, but snarled and with complicated woolly
locks, now more now less; and that on those I did not elways find Spiders,
though many times I had found two or three upon one of them: Whereas when they
first flew up, the thread was still single, or but little tangled, or, it may
be, thicker in one place then in another. In the end, by good attention I
plainly found, what satisfied me abundantly, and that was this; That I observed
them to get to a top of a stalk or bough, or sum such like thing, where they
exercise this darting of threads into the air, and if they had not a mind to
sail, they swiftly drew it up again, winding it ^p with their fore-feet over
the head into a lock, or brok it off short, and let the air carry it away. This
they will do many times together, and you may see of them, that have chains to
these locks or snarled thread before them, and yet not taken flight.

Again, I found, that after the first flight, all the time of their sailing
they make locks, still darting forth fresh supplies of thread to sport and
sail by.

It is further to be noted, that these complicated threads are much more
tender, then our house-webbs.

In Winter and at Christmas I have observed them busy a darting, but few of
them sail then, and therefore but single threads only are to be seen; And
besides, they are but the young ones of last Autumns hatch, that are then
employed; and it is more than probable, that the great ropes of Autumn are
made only by the great ones, and upon long passages and Summer weather, when
great numbers of pray may invite them to stay longer up.

But I cease to be tedious: I have many Experiments by me to satisfy many
doubts, that may be made, viz. infinite number of these Insects, and their
numerous Increase; and besides how strangely they are able to furnish and
husband great quantities of matter out of so small a bulk etc.

You may expect all from me after another summers leisure, which at least I
think necessary to confirm to me these; and other things concerning their
Generation and Poison. What I have said at present, is such as I have certainly
observed; and you may take the Truth of these Observations for excuse of the
ill Texture of them.

Note, (a) I have since also found one sort of Snaile of this Turn, amongst the
Aquatik or Fresh Water kind: see my Book. (b) This I have caused to be
elegantly drawn in the Plate, Published in the Appendix to that Book, 1680. (c)
of this see the said Book.

Extract of a Letter, written to Mr. Oldenbourgh, and published in the
Philosoph: Transactions, N. 68. 1670. about an Insect, which besides Pismiers,
may probably yield an Acid juice. Also about the winter Bleeding of the
Sycamore Tree.
SIR, Concerning the Acid liquour of Pismiers, I have very lately received from
Mr. Wray the Account (I suppose you have it by this time,) that was sent him
from Mr. Fisher and Mr. Jessop; wherein these two last Gentlemen make this
further Inquiry, whether there be any other Insect, or Animal, Flesh or Fish,
that will afford an Acid Juice; they having with great industry tried many
species amongst Insects, and other Animals, without lighting on the like Acid
liquor. I am of the mind, there are; and a ready way to find such out, may be,
that having observed, that a Pismire bruised and smelt to, emits a strange
fiery and piercing savor, like the leaf of the Herb, by Botanists called
Flammula, broken at one's nostrills; by this means I have, since Mr. Wray put
the question to me, found an Insect, which I suspect, may yield an Acid
liquour; as well as the Pismire; and that is the Long and Round-bodied
lead-coloured Julus, distinguished from all other Multipeds in that their
innumerable legs are as small as hair, and white and in going they are moved
like waves; not rare amongst drier rubbish; no Scolopendra, ours being an
harmless Insect, and not armed with dangerous forcipes. The body of this Julus
being bruised strikes the nostriis exceeding fiercely; but I have not yet any
opertunity to furnish my self with any quantity of them for farther trials.
The Change of Colors in Flowers, etc. Is a subject I have a little considered,
and you shall have my thoughts an Experimen^s about it more a leisure.

As to the Bleeding of Sy^amore; the last year I wintered at Nottingham, where
I pierced a Sycamore about the beginning of November; the turgescence of the
Buds invited me thereto, and some hopes in improving the notion of
Winter-bleedings, so happily discovered by Mr. Willughoby and Mr. Wray. This
succeeded so well with me, that I did afterward engage my self in keeping a
Journal throughout the whole Winter; from which Journal, I think I may note; 1.
That the wounded Sycamore niver bled, neither in November, December, nor
January, nor February, nor March, (which yet they did above 40. several times,
that is, totally ceasing and than beginning a new,) unless there preceded a
sensible and visible Frost; for I had no other way of recording the temper of
the Air. 2. That the Frost did not always set a bleeding the wounds, they found
made before they came, though sometimes they did; but upon their breaking up,
or very much relenting, the wounds either made in that instant of time, or made
many months before, did never fail to bleed more er less. 3. That particularly
upon the breaking up of the two great and long Frosts (the first of which
hapn'd that year in that Country to be on the third of January; the second,
about the 12 th. 13th. 14th. of February,) all the wounds ra^ mist plentifully:
so that such times may be looked upon as the most proper season of gathering
great quantities of Juice from this Tree. Removing into Cravon the latter end
of March, and thence to London, my Journal was discontinued; I had yet, upon my
return from London unto Craven, some leasvre to prosicute it. Those, I there
wounded the latter end of May, did not bleed neither the remaining part of that
month, nor the following months of June and July, but had the orifice of the
wounds, made with a small Auger, in a manner quite grown up, and would scarce
admit a Pigeons feathers. Wherefore the 30 th. of July I cut out a square piece
of about two inches of the bark of a large and well-grown Sycamore, about my
hight in the body of it: This wound began to run the next morning about 9 a
clock, so as to drop; and that was all, and dried up by 11 in the morning. it
continued in like manner the 21 days following, that is as long as I had the
oppertunity of observing it. The like cut I made in a young Sycamore the 8th of
August; which in like manner bled the next morning, but stopped before 9 a
clock. It did so for 2 or 3 days, but then totally drying. Afterward removing
to York, the first of November I here pierced, and otherwise wounded two
Sycamores; and having observed them my self at times, when, according to my
former Observations made in Nottingham shire, I might well expect to have found
them bleeding; yet they never stirred, that we could observe, to this day.
Since Mr. Wray has assured me, that those of Warwickshire bled the 16th of
November last past copiously; and since the Walnuttres also. And so much for
matter of fact.

To what cause we may truly refer this Anomalous Bleeding, is not easy to say.
For my part, I am not apt to think, that there is such a sudden and extemporary
Ascent of Sap, at such time as these Trees are most disposd to bleed; but
rather, that the Sap, already in all parts of the Tree, is some ways notably
altered in its temper and consistance: And this Bleeding by stress of weather
may in these Trees probably be looked upon as a violence done to their natures
from an unkind Climate; considering the Walnut and Sycamore as strangers, and
not natives of England. It Is indeed true, there are many sorts of English
Plants, which will bleed in Winter; but note also, that such Plants never
refuse to do so at any time of the year, no more than a Man, who may bleed a
vein when he pleases, But let the Hypothesis be what it will, I am persuaded,
we shall have but dark and imperfect notions of the motion of the Juyces in
Vegetables, until their true Texture be better discovered. To conclude this
subject, I now put these two Quaries; 1. Whether the Juice of Trees, whilst
alive and vegete, can properly be said, at any time of the year, to descend, or
to be wanting in any part, or not to be therein in a much like quantity? 2.
What condition the Soil is of, where such Trees are planted, that shall either
bleed or refuse to do so; whether Sandy, as that of Nottingham; or a wet Clay,
as that of the two Trees, I have observed here at York.

An Extract of another Letter written Febr. 8th. 1670. Containing some
Experiments about the Bleeding of the Sycamore, and other Trees; as also, a
considerable Note of Pliny about the Mulberry-Tree. Ibidem.
COncerning the Bleeding of the Sycmore, let me acquaint you with the following
Experiment. The first instant it froze, the Wind at North; the Frost and Wind
continued (some little Snow and rain falling) the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, until
the 7th in the morning, when the Wind came about to the South-East, and the
weather broke up a pace. The Sycamores bled not all this while, but the 7th
about Noon all Trees of that kind bled very freely, both at the Twigs and Body,
and I struck above a dozen.

At this same Critical season I was willing to repeat the Experiment upon other
Trees; and to this end I forthwith struck the Hawthorn, Hazel, Wild-Rose,
Gooseberry-bush, Apple Tree, Cheery-tee, Blather-nut, Aprickcock,
Cherry-Lawrel, Vine, Walnut; yet none bled but the lastnamed, and that faintly
in comparison of the Sycamore. This is consonant to our former Experiments: And
if it did happen (as I said in my former Letter,) that these Sycamores bled not
all this Winter before at the wounds made the first of November, I do now think,
that if new wounds had been still made at every break of Frost, some signs, at
least of our Yorkshire bleeding, might have been discovered before now. But I
affirm no more, than I have seen and tried.

In all the Monuments of the Ancients, collected by the great industry of
Pliny, I find but few instances of this nature. Amongst those few, there is one
that is rgistred with two or three remarkable circumstances to our purpose. He
tells us, that the Physicians of old, when they had a mind to draw the Juice of
the Mulberry-tree, were wont to strike it skin-deep only, and that about two
hours after Sunrise. This Experiment is twice mentioned by him, and in both
places as a strange Phoen^menon. We might make our Comment upon the places, but
for this time are content only to transcribe the Text. Lib. 16. c. 38. Mirum;
hic (cortex) in Moro, Medicit succum quaerentibus, fere hora diei secunda,
lapide incussus manat, allius fractus ficcus videtur. Lib. 23. c. 7. Mora in
Aegypto and Cypre sui generis, ut diximus, largo succo abundant, summo cortice
desquamato, aeltiore plaga siccantur; mirabili natura.

Extracts of diverse Letters, Touching some Inquiries and Experiments of the
Motion of Sap in Trees, and relating to the Question of the Circulation of the
same. Phi. Traus. N. 70.
1. January. 28. 1670. York.
YOu may be pleased to put this Quaerie also, concerning the Bleeding of the
Sycamore: What condition the Soil is of, where such Trees are planted, that
shall either bleed, or refuse to do so: whether Sandy, as that of Nottingham,
or a wet Clay, as that of the two Trees, I have observed here at York. Of both
which, see this Observers Experiments formerly communicated, No. 68. p. 2067,
2608.


2. Febr. 8. 1670. York.
Concerning the Bleeding of the Sycamore, be pleased that I acquaint you with
the following Experiments of very late date. The first instant it froze, the
wind at North; the Frost and Wind continued (some little Snow now and then
falling) the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, 6th, until the 7th in the morning, when the wind
came about to the South-East, and the weather broke up a pace, the Sycamores
bled not all this while; but the seventh about noon, all Trees of that kind
bled very freely both at the Twigs and Body, and I struck above a dozen.

At this same Critical season, I was willing to repeat the Experiment upon
other Trees, and to this end I forthwith struck the Haw-thorn, Hazel,
Wild-Rose, Gooseberry-Bush, Apple Tree, Cherry-Tree, Blathen-Nut, Apricock,
Cherry-lawrel, Vine, Wal-nut; yet none bled but the last named, and that but
faintly in comparison of the Sycamore. This is consonant to our former
Experiments: And if it did happen, as I said in one of my former Letter See No
68. p. 2^68.
, that these Sycamores bled not all this Winter before at the wounds made the
first of November, I do now think, that if new wounds had been still made at
every breach of Frost, some signs at least of our Yorkshire bleeding See the
ground for this distinction in the same Numb. 68. p. 2067. 2^^,.
might have been discovered before now: But I affirm no more than I have seen
and tried.

3. Febr. 15. 1670. York.
To continue our Experiments concerning the motion of the Sap in Trees; Febr.
11th, all was here covered with a white Frost betwixt 9 and 11 in the morning.
The weather changing I made the Experiments, which follow, upon the Sycamore,
Watnut, Maple. A twig cut asunder would bleed very freely from that part
remaining to the Tree; and, for the part separated, it would be altogether dry
and show no signs of moisture, although we held it some pretty time with the cut
end downward; But, if this separated twig was never so little tipp'd with a
knife at the other end, it would forthwith show no moisture at both ends. The
same day, late in the afternoon, the weather very open and warm, a Twig cut
off in like manner as in the morning, would show no moisture at all from any
part. These Experiments we repeated very many times with constant and like
success on all the Trees abvoe-mentioned. I entered this Experiment with these
Quaries for the next opportunity. 1. Whether a Twig, or the small part of a
Root cut asunder, will not bleed faster, upon the breaking up of a Frost, from
the part remaining to the Tree, than from the part separated; and whether the
part separated will bleed at all, and show no more signs of moistule, than a
Twig cut from the top of the Tree, unless that small Root be likewise cut off
at the other end also? 2. Whether when it shall happen, that a Sycamore shall
be found to bleed upon the setting in of a great Frost, the top twigs and small
roots will not both of them bleed freelier from the parts separated, in
proportion to their bigness? 3. And if it shall not so prove in the Trial, that
in cold weather the Sap moves inwards from Root and Branch to the Trunk to the
extremities of both Root and Branch; I say; if this prove not so, whether there
be any different motions of Sap at a time in the diverse parts of one and the
same Tree; and where such motions of Sad begin, and whither they tend? 4
Whether the Sap, when it will run, moves longer in the Branches than in the
Roots; or whether it begin not to move in all parts of a Tree at a time, and
rest every where at a time; 5. When it rests, whether it retires to the Body of
the Tree, from the Roots and Branches, or sinks down to the Root, or is any way
spent by insensible steams, or is quiet and lodged in every part of the Tree in
proportion?

I shall long to hear the success of your Experiments in the Question of the
Circulation of the Sap. I have many years been inclined to think, that there is
some such motion in the Juyces of Vegetables. The reasons which induced me,
are; 1. Because I find, that all the Juice of a Plant is no extravasate and
loose, and like Water in a Sponge; but that there are apparent Vessels in
Plants, analagous to Veins in Animals: which thing is most conspicuous and
clear in such Plants, whose Juice is either White or Red, or Saffron colored;
for instance, in each kind of Juice we propose Latuca, Atractilis, Cbelidonium
majus. 2. Because that there are very many Plants (and these last named are of
the number) whose Juice seems never to be at rest, but will spring at all times
Iteely, as the Blood of Animals, upon Incision.

The way of Ligature by Metalline Rings, by you mentioned is an Expedient I
have not used; but other Ligatures I have, upon a great number of our English
Plants, not without the discovery of many curious Phenomena. The success of an
Experiment of this Nature upon Cataputia minor Lobel. was as follows: I tied a
silk-thread upon one of the Branches of this Plant, as hard as might be, and
not break the skin; there followed no greater swelling, that I could discern,
on the one side than on the other; although in often repeating the Experiment,
some silks were left hours and days unloosed, and yet the dimple which the
thread had made in the yielding branches, had a little raised the immediate
sides, but both alike: the Plant in like manner would bleed very freely both
above and under the Tie. This was also, I thought, very remarkable, amongst
other things, in this Experiment, that in drawing the Rasour round about the
branch just above or below the Tie, the Milky Juice would suddenly spring out
of infinite small holes, besides the made orifice, for more than half an inch
above and below the Tie: which seems to argue, that though there was no Juice
intercepted in appearance from any turgescence, (as in the like process upon
the members of a Sanguineous Animal) yet the Veins were so over-thronged and
full, that a large orifice was not sufficient to discharge the sudden impetus
and pressure of a some-ways streighten'd Juice.

I have endeavou'rd many ways to discover the Configuration of the Veins of
Vegetables and their other constituent parts and Texture; but enough of this in
one Letter.

4. March 17. 1670. York.
To the end that I might satisfy my self about some of the doubts I sent you,
I have been most concerned, according to former thoughts and inclinations, in
examining the Truth of these Quaeries, viz. Whether Saps are not to be found at
all seasons of the year in a much like Consistence and Quantity in the
respective parts of a Vegetable; and what Communication one part of a Plant may
have with another in relation to the Ascent and Decent of Sap?

Now, because Sap is then said to Ascend from the Root, when it is found to
move in Tapping; I lopped off certain Branches of a Sycamore, the morning
betimes of a hard Frost (Febr. 21.) before they would bleed, or show any sign
of moisture. This I did to vary the Efficient, not willing to wait the Change
of the Weather, and the Suns heat; but brought them within the Air of the Fire:
And by and, as I expected, they bled apace, without being sensibly the warmer.

The Experiment repeated afforded me diverse Phoenomena, which follow; and
proved almost an Universal way of Bleeding all sorts of Trees, even those,
which of themselves would not show any signs of moisture.

1. Poles of Maple, Sycamore and Walnut, cut down in open weather, and brought
within the warmth of the Fire, did bleed in an instant. Also Willow, Hazel,
Cherry, Wood-bind, Blather-nut, Vine, Elder, Barbery, Apple Tree, Ivy, etc.
Whicking Egge-berry Tree (i. e. Padus Theophrasti) tried in the same manner in
Craven.

2. Briar and Rasberry-rcds were more obstinate. Ash utterly refused, even
heated hot.

3. Branches, that is, Poles with their tops entire and uncut bled also when
brought to the Fire side; but seem not so freely to drink up their Sap again
when inverted, as when made Poles.

4. The same Willow-Poles, left all night in the grassspot, and returned the
next day to the Fireside, bleed afresh.

5. Maple and Willow-Poles, bleed and cease at pleasure again and again, if
quickly withdrawn and balanced in the hand, and often inverted to hinder the
Falling and and Expense of Sap: Yet being often heated, they will at length
quite cease, though no Sap was at any time sensibly lost. And when they have
given over bleeding, that is, showing any moisture, by being brought within the
warmth of the Fire, the Bark will yet be found very full of Juice.

6. An hard Ligature made within a quarter of an inch of the end of a Wood-bind
rod, did not hinder its bleeding at all when brought within the warmth of the
Fire.

7. Maple and Willow-Poles, etc. quite bared of Bark, and brought to the Fire,
will show no moisture at all in any part.

8. One Barbery, or Pipridge-pole bared of its Bark, brought to the Fire, did
show moisture from within the more inward Circles, though not any from the
outward.

9. Maple and Willow-poles, etc. half barred of Bark, would bleed by the Fire,
from the half only of those Circles, which lay under the bark.

10. Maple and Willow-poles, split in two and planed, would not show any
moisture on the planed sides, but at the ends only.

11. A Pole of Ivy did of it self exudate and show a liquid and yellowish rosin
from the bark and near the pith; but when brought to the Fireside, it bled a
dilute, thin and colour-less Sap from the intermediat wood Circles.

12. A Pole of Willow (for Example) bent into a bow, will ouse its Sap freely,
as in bleeding either spontaneously or by the Fire.

Extract of a Letter, written from York, April 8. 1671. both in relation to the
futher Discovery of the Motion of Juyces in Vegetables, and removing some
difference noted the in next foregoing Letter.
SIR, Yours of the 4th instant came safe to my hands. This last Month has been
a busy time with me in my private concerns, so that I have but a few things to
return to what you have been pleased to communicate to me, in relation to the
further discovery of the Motion of Juyces in Vegetables. And I must acquaint
you, that these Notes following are above 14 days old; for I have scarce
busied my head, or put my hand to any Experiment of later date.

One or both ends of the pith of a Willow-pole sealed up with hard wax, will
yet freely bleed by the warmth of the Fire. This was tried, when the last
Experiment, I sent you, were; and was then, I think, omitted.

March 23th, was the greatest Frost and Snow we have had this Winter in these
parts about York. Some Twigs and Branches of the very same Willow-tee, as
formerly, and likewise of many other Willow-trees, taken off this morning,
March 23th, when brought within the Air of the Fire. would show no moisture at
all; no not when heated warm, and often and long turned.

March 24th, the same Willow-branches, which yesterday would not bleed, and
were thrown upon the Grassspot all night,; did, both they and others, new cut
down by the Fireside, freely show moisture and bleed this morning upon the
breaking up of the Frost.

Ash-poles and branches this day, nor yesterday, would by the Fireside, be no
more moist, than when I formerly tried them.

The same morning March 24th, a Twig of Maple, which had had the top cut off
the 7th of February last past* and which then bled, this day being quite taken
off from the Tree, and brought within the Air of the Fire, and held with the
formerly cut-end down-wards, did not run at all at the end, but held on in that
posture, it did run apace at the other new-cut end uppermost, so as to spring
and trickle down.

Note, That this does well agree with my Experiments made the last year at
Nottingham, where I observed wounds of some months standing to bleed apace at
the breaking up of every hard Frost. For first, in these parts there has been
no hard Frost this year, not comparable to the last year. Again, those
Nottingham-trees I wounded in the Trunk, and they stood against a Brickwall,
and the wounds were on the side next it; and besides had Horse-dung stopped in
all of them for some reasons; which things did undoubtedly defend them much
from the Air and Winds, and keep the wounds still green and open: Whereas the
tops of these Maple-twiggs, spoken of in the last Experiment, were exposed in
an open hedge to the Air and Winds; as also the two Sycamores here at York
mentioned in my former Letter to have been wounded in November last, and not to
have showed any signs of moisture, for that very cause, that they were not
fresh struck at Bleeding times.

Concerning the Bleeding of Poles and entire Branches held perpendicular, Mr.
Willboughby is in the right, and some Experiments in my last to you of March
17th confirm it. Yet it is very true what I observed, though the Cause I did
not then well take notice of, when I first made the Experiment and sent you an
account of it. For, I held the Twigs, which I had cut off, a slope, joining and
holding up the cuts together in my left hand, that I might the better observe,
which part or cut would bleed or not bleed the faster; and because I found,
that the cut of the separated Twig did not in that posture (holding it upwards,
as I said, for the advantage of my eye) bleed at all, when as the Cut of the
Branch remaining to the Tree did freely bleed; I therefore inverted the
separated Twig and held it perpendicular with the cut end downward, and found,
that that little they were exposed to the Air in an upright posture, had so
very much checked the motion of the Sap, that I concluded they would not bleed
at all; and yet striking off their tops, and making Poles of them, I found some
of them, if not all, that I chanced to try, as I remember, would show moisture:
But I am convinced since, that it was was rather some unheeded accident, as
violently bending them, or perhaps the warmth of my hand and season, or place,
which caused this new motiom of Sap, than merely the striking off their Tops.

Some Observations, touching Colors, in order to the Increase of Dies, and the
Fixation of Colors 15. 1670.
TWo things, I conceive, are chiefly aimed at in the Inquiry of Colors, which
subject you desire my thoughs of; the one, to increase the Materia Tinctoria,
and the other, to fix, if possible, those colors we either have already, or
shall hereafter discover for use. As to the first, Animals and Vegetables,
besides other Natural Bodies, may abundantly furnish us. And in both these
kinds some Colors are Apparent, as the various colors of Flowers, and the
juices of fruits, etc. and the sanies of Animals: others are Latent, and
discovered to us by the effects, the several Family's of Salt and other things
may have upon them, Concerning the Apparent colors of Vegetables and Animals,
and the various effects, of different Salts in changing them from one color to
another; we have many Instance in Mr. Boil. And if we might, with the good
leave of that Honorable and Learned person, range them after our fashion, we
should give you at least a new Prospect of them, and observe to you the
conformity and agreement of the effects of Salt on the diverse parts of
Vegetables: Viz. 1. That Acid Salts advance the colors of Flowers and Berries,
that is, according to the Experiments of Mr. Boil, they make the infusious of
Balaustium or Pomgranat-Flowers, Red-roses, Clove-jilly flowers, Meserion,
Pease-bloom, Violets, Cyanus flowers, of a fairer red; also the the juices of
the Berries of Ligustrum, of black Cherris, Buck-thorn-berries, of a much
fairer red: and to the same purpose Acid Salts make no great alterations upon
the white flowers of Jasmin and Snow-drops. 2. That Vrinous Salts, and
Alcaly's, on the contrary, quite alter and change the Colors of the same
flowers now named, and juices of the said Berries also, from red to green; even
Jasmin and Snow-drops. 3. Again, that in like manner Vrinous Spirits and
Alcaly's advance, at least do not quite spoil the colors of the juices of
leaves of Vegetables, of their Wood and Root. Thus Mr. Boil tells us, that
Vrinous Spirits and Alcaly's make the yellow infusions of Madder-roots red; of
Brazil-wood, purplish; of Lognum Nephriticum, blew; the red infusion of
Leg-wood, purple; of the Leaves of Sena, red. 4. That on the contrary, Acid
Salts quite alter and change the said infusions from red or blew, to yellow.

In the next place we would note to you the effects of Salts upon Animals in
the production and Change of colors; but the Instances are very few or none,
that I meet with in any Author; the Purple-fish being quite out of use, and
Cochineil and Kermes are by most questioned, whether they are Animals or no;
but I think, we may confidently believe them both to be Insects, that is, Worms
or Chrysalys's of respective Fly's in proxima faetura. We find then, and have
tried concerning Cochineil (which of it self is red,) that upon the affusion of
most the Oil of Vitriol, that is, an Acid Salt, it striks the vivid crimson
that can be imagined; and with Vrinous Salts and Alcaly's it will be again
changed into an obscure color 'twixt a violet and a violet and a purple. Pliny
somewhere tells us, that the Gauls in his time could dye with Vegetables, what
the Romans with so much danger and pains sought for in the bottom of the Sea.
Indeed, we find many Plants mentioned by the same Author, for dying which
either are not known to us at this present, or neglected.

To what we have briefly observed out of Authors, we will subjoyne some of our
own Considerations and Trials, And first, concerning the Apparent Colors in
Flowers, we think we may insert; 1. That generally all Red, Blew and White
flowers are immediately, upon the affusion of an Alcaly, changed into a Green
color, and then, in process of no long time, turned Yellow. 2. That all the
parts of Vegetables, which are green, will in like manner strike a Yellow with
an Alcaly. 3. That what Flowers are already yellow, are not much changed, if at
all, by an Alcaly or Vrinous Spirit. 4. The Blew seed-husks of Glastum
Sylvestre old-gathered and dry, diluted with water, stain a Blew, which upon
the affusion of Lie striks a Green, which Green or Blew being touched with the
Oil of Vitriol dies Purple; all these three colors stand. 5. On the tops of
Fungus tubulosus, so called by M. Wray in his late Catalogue of the Plants of
England, are certain red knots; these, upon the affusion of Lie, will strike a
Purple, and stand.

As for the Latent Colors in Vegetables and Animals; to be discovered to us by
the affusion of Salts; they likewise, no doubt, are very many. We will set down
only a few instances in both kinds, which have not been, that we know of,
discovered or taken notice of by others. Latent Vegitable colors, 1. The Milky
juice of Lactuca Sylvestris costa spinosa, and Sonchus asper and laevis upon
the affusion of Lie, will strike a vivid flame-colour or Crimson, and after
some time quite degenerate into a dirty yellow. 2. The Milk of Cataputia minor,
upon the affusion of Lie, especially if it be drawn with a knife, and has any
time stood upon the blade of it, will strike a Purple or Bloud-red color, and
by and by change into an ignoble yellow. Latent Animal dies, 1. The common
Hawthorn-Catter-pillar will strike a Purple or Carnation with Lie, and stand.
2. The heads of Beetles and Pismires, etc. will with Lie strike the same
Carnation-colour, and stand. 3. The Amber-coloured Scolopendra will give with
lie a most beautiful and pleasant Azure or Amethystine, and stand.

Lastly, we might consider the Fixing of colors for use; but we are willing to
leave this to more experinced persons, as also the Philosophizing on the
particulars we have produced, to better Heads. Some obvious Inferences we may
venture to take notice of; 1. That in all the Instances above mentioned,
whether Vegetable or Animal, there is not one color truly fixed, however there
may, I conceive, be some use made of them, as they are. I say, truly fixed,
that is, proof of Salt and Fire; for, what seem to stand and be Lye-proofe, are
either wholly destroyed by a different Salt, or changed into a much different
color; which must needs prove a stain and blemish, when it shall happen in the
use of any of them. 2. That both the apparent and latent colors of Vegetables
are fixable: An instance whereof we may observe in the seed-husks of Glastum,
and the Use Diers make of the leaves after due preparation. 3. It is probable
from the same instance, that we may learn from the color of some part of the
Fruit or Seed, what color the Leaves of any Vegetable and the whole Plant
might be made to yield for our use. 4. That the Latent colors are
praeexistent, and not produced; from the same instance of Wood, and likewise
from this that the Milky juice of Lactuca Silvestris does afford it self a Red
Serum. 5. That the change of colors in Flowers is gradual and constant. 6.
That the colors of Flowers, which will not stand with Lie, seem to be wholly
destroyed by it, and irrecovrable: Thus it happens in the Experiment; that one
part of a Violet-leaf, upon the affusion of Lie, is changed very soon into
yellow, and will never be revived into a red by an Acid salt; but if another
part of the same leaf be still green, it will be revived, 7. That the Dryness
seems to be a means, if not of fixing, yet bringing the Vegetable color into a
condition of not wholly and suddenly perishing by the otherwise destroying
Alcaly. 8. That those Plants or Animals that will strike different and yet
vivid colors upon the affusion of different Salts, and stand, as the Cochinel
and Glastum, are probably of all others to be reckoned as the best Materials.

It would have been a much safer way, to have put these Inferences in the
Quaeri't; but besides that I affirm no more but matter of fact, it is lawful
for our encouragement (as my Lord Bacon advises) to set up rests by the way,
and refresh our selves with looking back, though perhaps we have not much
advanced. You will be pleased to excuse the little cohaerence that I have used
in these notes, and attribute it to the readiness and affection I have to
answer such inquiries as you put to me. I never yet did make this subject any
part of my businese, but the desire I have to search after and examine the
Medicinal qualities of things iu Nature, has by the by presented me with such
Phoenomena, as I was not willing to leave unnoted, nor to refuse them you,
though in a confused way, because you desire them. To conclude, how
immethodical and barren these papers may seem; yet the consideration of them
has led me to a way of Fixing colors, which I willingly forbear to relate,
until I may have an oppertunity of showing the Experiment before the R.
Society. I have found out a Color most exquisitely black, and comparable to
the best ink; even in the use of the pen, and which will not change by Fire or
Salt. This an English Vegetable yielded me, and for ought I know (for I have
not repeated the trial on any thing else) the like method will succeed to good
purpose, I am, etc.

An Observation concerning certain Insect husks of the Kermes-kind May 22.
1671. Philosophical Transactions. N. 71.
I Gave you a short account formerly March 17. 1671. I find in my Notes (says
he) that some years ago I gathered off our English Oak round Worm-husks very
like Kermes-berries, but I then made no trial of them. Again, I have often
observed on Plumb trees and Cherry-trees; also on the Vine and Cherry-Laurel
certain patellae or flat Husks containing wo^ms, which (or at least the husks;
for them only I had oppertunity of making the Experiment on) will strike a
Carnation Ly and stand.
of certain matrices or Insect-husks, of the Kermes-kind, which I had some
years since observed on Plum-trees. This instant May has afforded me the same
Observation, and some little improvement of it. I have observed the same
Patellae. Husks indifferently on Vine-branches, Cherry-Laurel, Plvmb-trees, and
the Cherry-tree, also on the Apricock-tree. The Figure of the Husk is round,
save where thy cleave to to the branch; for bigness, somewhat more than the half
of a gray pea. These, I say, cleave to their branches, as Patellae do to the
Rocks: For color; they are of a very dark Ches-nut, extremely smooth, and
shining membran-like. They adhere most commonly to the under side of a branch
or twig, and so are best secured against the injuries of weather, as too much
Sun and Rain. They are well fastened to the branches single, and some will be
double and sometimes many in company. They are seldom found without vermin, as
Pismires, etc. which, I guess, pierce them and pray upon them. Thus much for
the entire Coccum. If you open one of them, that is, cut off dexterously the top
of the husk with a rasor, you will find sometimes five or more small white magots
of the Wasp or Bee-kind, that is, sharp at both ends. When these are carefully
taken out, you will further observe the remainder of their provision of meat,
and a partion 'twixt them and the branch, where, what they excerne, is
reserved. Lastly, if, when you have cleared the Husk of Maggots, Bee-meat, and
excrements, you then rub the inside of the empty membran upon white paper it
will freely and copiously tinge the paper with a beautiful purple or murrey. At
the date of this, none of the Maggots were yet in nympha, so that you cannot
expect from me a description of the Be or Wasp they will turn to, when they
come to perfection. Before the season be over, the Curious may satisfy
themselves forthwith about it, and verify and improve it. Few Cherry-trees, I
suppose, in any place, but will yield them some of these Berries. However, if
they shall not be so fortunate as to light on them, I shall furnish you with
them, etc.

York. Jan. 10. 1670. a Viviparous Fly. Inquiries and a Table about Spiders.
Philosophical Transactions. N. 72.
Sir,
I Return you thanks for your obliging Letter of the third of January, and have
sent you the Viviparous Fly and the Set of Inquiries you desire of me. The Fly
is one, if not the very biggest, of the harmless Tribe that I have met with in
England; I call them harmless; because that they are without that hard Tongue
or Sting in the mouth, with which the Oestrum-kind, or Gad-flyes, trouble and
offend both man and beasts. This Fly is striped upon the shoulders gray and
black, and as it were checkered on the tail with the same two colors: the
Female may be known by a redness on the very point of the tail. The very latter
end of May 1666, I opened several of them, and found two Baggs of live white
worms of a long and round shape, with black heads; they moved both in my hand
and in the unopened Vescicles, backwards and forwards, as being all disposed in
the Cells, length-ways the body of the femal, like a Sheaf of arrows.

Some such thing is hinted by Aldrovandus lib. 1. de I^sect. p. 57. edit.
Bonon. Tiro cum essem (says he) e grandioribus muscis unam albis pict^m
lineis, specie illectus, cepi; ea, in vola manus aliquandiu retenta, plusculos
edidit Vermiculos candidos, mobilitate propria insignes.

This is the only Fly I have observed with live and moving worms in the belly
of it; yet I guess, we may venture to suspect all of this Tribe to be in some
measure Viviparous.

With these Flies I have sent you a paper of those odd turned Snails See Numb.
50. 1011.
mentioned in my former Letter, which perhaps you may think will deserve a
place in the Repository amongst the rarities of the R. Society.

Some general Enquiries concerning Spiders
1. WHat sorts of Spiders to be found with us in England, and what is the best
method to distinguish them and to reduce them to Classes?

2. Whether Spiders come not of Spiders, that is, of creatures of their own
kind? And whether of Spiders are bred Grasshopper, Cicadae, etc. as Interpreters
falsely make Aristotle to say, first Aldrovandus, and lately Kircher (V. Arist.
Hist. Not. lib. 1. cap. 19. Confer Interpret. The: Gazae, Scaliger, Aldrov.)

3. Whether Spiders are not Male and Female; and whether Female Spiders growing
bigger than the Male, be sufficient to distinguish Sexes.

4. Whether all kinds of Spiders be alike, as to the place and number of
Penis's; and whether all the thread-yeilding kinds, are not furnished with a
double penis, that is, if the Cornicula or certain knobbed Horns, by which all
Males are best distingushed, be not each a penis, and used in the Coit
alternatively?

5. Whether the Eggs in Spiders be not formed, and very large before the time
of the Coit?

6. What Spiders breed in Spring, and what in Autumn? what Spiders are content
with one brood in the year, and to lay all their Eggs at a time? What seem to
breed every Summer month, at least to have many subordinate broods; and whether
the Eggs be accordingly distinguishable in several Matrices or Cells in the
body of of the Female.

7. Whether Spiders do not take their form and perfection in the Egg, and are
not thence hatched necessarily at a stated and set time, that is, after a
certain number of days, as 21, complete Animals of its own kind? and whether
the presence of the Female be necessary in order to the hatching the Eggs, at
least for three days, as the Ancients seem to affirm?

8. Whether the perfectly-round eggs of Spiders ought to be called and esteemed
Worms, as Aristotle and Pliny will have them, Aist. Not. lib. i. c. 27. lib. 3.
c. 9.
that is, in Swammerdam's phrase and doctrine, Whether they be Puppets in the
egg, and undergo all alterations accordingly, before they be thence hatched
perfect Spiders?

9. What different colors observable in the Eggs of Spiders, as well of pulps
as shell, as white, yellow, orange, purple, greenish? and what respective
tinctures they will give, or be made to strike with the several families of
Salts?

10. Whether there be not Eggs of some sorts of Spiders, which the Worms of
certain slender Wasps (the kind in general being called by Mouffet Muscae
tripiles) delight to feed on? Arist. Hist. Not. ib. 5. cap. 20.
and whether the Fable of Vespae Iehneumones, told us by the Ancients, be not
to be made out by the same Observation, of these Wasp-worms feeding on the
Eggs, and perfected into Wasps in the very webs of Spiders?

11. After what manner do Spiders feed; whether in sucking they devour not also
part of their prey? How long can they live without food, since they store up
nothing against Winter?

12. Whether Spiders feed only of their own kind of Creatures, as of Insects,
that is, of Flies, Beetles, Bees, Scolopendrae and even of one another? or
whether they kill Snakes too, as the Ancients affirm, for food or delight?

13. Whether some of them choose not to feed on one sort of Fly or other Insect
only; and what properties such have?

14. When, and how often in the year they cast their Skins, and the manner of
their casting it? What variety of colors immediately after the shifting the
Hackle in one and the same species of Spider, that may, if not well heeded,
make the history of them more confused?

15. What mean the Ancients by Spiders casting their threads, Arist. Hist. Not.
lib. 9. cap. 39.
which Aristotle compares to Porcupins darting her quills, or bark-starting
from a Tree; and Democritus to Animals voiding of Excrements?

16. Whether the thread be formed in the Body of the Animal such as it comes
from it; I mean, whether it be, as it were, unwound of a stock or clew, as I
may say, and which indeed to me seems to have been Aristotle's meaning; or
whether it be drawn off of a liquid mass, as in spinning of Glass or melted
Wax, which seems to have been Democritu's sense, in saying it was excrement
corrupted or fluid at certain times?

17. Whether the Spiders-thred being glutinous, every thing sticking to it upon
the lightest touch, be not so much the reason of the Spiders taking his prey,
as the Figure of the Net.

18. Whether a Web be not uninflammable; and whether it can be dissolved, and
in what Menstruum?

19. What difference 'twixt the thread of Spiders, and that of the Silkworm or
Caterpillars? What strength a Spiders thread is of, and what proportion it
bears with the like twist of Silk? Whether there be not stronger thread from
some sort of Spiders than from others, as there are threads from them of very
different colors, as white, greenish, bluish, dark hair-colour, etc. Whether
the strength of the Barmudo nets to hold a Thrush, mentioned in one of the
Transactions, Nu. 50. p. 795.
consist in the thickness only, or much too in the nature of thread?

20. Whether its being to be easily drawn out at any time and at what length
one pleases, and many threads together in spite of the Animal, be not as
advantageous to the working of it up and twisting, etc. as the unravelling the
Cods of Silkworms.

21. Whether either the viscous substance of their Bodies or Webs be healing to
green-wounds, etc. as the Ancients have taught us, and we use vulgarly? and
whether some one kind of them be not preferable, for this purpose, before
others?

22. What use may be made of those Animals, which devour Spiders for their
daily food, as Wrens, Red-breast, etc.? Whether Spiders be a cure for sick
Poultry, as the good Wives seem to experiment?

23. Whether the reason why Spiders sail not in the air until Autumn, be not
because they are busily emplyed the Summer months in breeding, or what other
reasons may be assigned?

The first article of Enquiry I have in part answered, by sending you enclosed
a Scheme, which, after some years observation, I have corrected and enlarged to
what it is: yet I must acquaint you, that such Draughts will be ever liable to
change and improvement, according to the measure of knowledge a continued
Observation may bring us to. However it is the first, that I know of, that will
be extant, on this subject, and it may be acceptable to the curious.

Araneorum Angliae Tabula.
Aranei Octonoculi Aucupes a me dicti; qui scilicet Muscas capiendi causa
tendunt Reticula Scutulata Antiquis dicta; scil. universis maculis in eodem
plano dispositis in modum cujusdam Scuti sive Orbitae. Numero X. Conglobata;
scil. maculis crebris in omnes in circuitu dimensiones precedentibus. Number. VI.
Telas linteoformes; scil. reticulorum filis dense inter se contextis in modum
Veli sive Panniculi. Number. VIII.
Venatorii, qui aperto mart muscas insectantur; cum tamen alias texere
possunt; nimirum telas ad nidificationem and ad hyberna. Lupi proprie sic
dicti. Number. IV. Cancriformes. Number. II. Phalangia, sive Aranei pulices assul^im
ingredientes. Number IV.
Binoculi, fere longipedes, Opiliones quibusdam dicti, telis digitatis sive
forcipatis, cancrorum marinorum more armati. Numero IV.


May 30. 1671; concerning an Insect feeding upon Henbain, together with the
color yielded by the Eggs of the same, etc.
Sir,
YOu may please to annex a late Observation to the last I sent you: both being
chiefly concerning the improvement of colors, and from the Insect-kind.

There is a Cimex of the largest size, of a red color spotted black, and which
is to be found very frequently and plentifully, at least in its season, upon
Henbain: I therefore in my private notes have formerly entitled it, Cimex ruber
maculis nigris distinctus super folia Hyoscyami frequens. This Insect in all
probability does feed upon this plant (on which only we have yet observed it)
if not upon the leaves by striking its trunk (the note of distinction of the
kind of Insect from the rest of the Beetle-kinds) into them, and sucking thence
much of its substance, like as other sorts of Cimices will upon the body of man
etc; yet upon the unctuous and greasy matter, with which the leaves seem to
touch to abound. It is further observable, that that horrid and strong smell,
with which the leaves of this plant do affect our nostrils, is very much
qualified in this Insect, and in some measure Aromatic and agreeable, and
therefore we may expect, that that dreadful Narcosis so eminent in this plant,
may likewise be usefully tempered in this Infect; which we refer to trial.
About the latter end of May and sooner, you may find adhering to the upper side
of the leaves of this plant, certain oblong Orange-coloured Eggs, which are the
Eggs of this Infect.

Note 1. that these Eggs yet in the belly of the Females are white, and are so
sometime after they are laid; but as the young ones grow near their time of
their being hatched, they acquire a deeper color, and are hatched Cimices, and
not in the disguise of worms.

2. As to the color, these riper Eggs yield, if they be crushed upon white
paper, they stain it of themselves (without any addition of Salt) with as
lively a Vermilion or color de seu, as any thing I know in nature; Cochneil
scarce excepted when assisted with oil of Vitriol. Whether this be not
precisely so, I refer to the trial and judgment of the Curious. I have sent you
a couple of the Cimices themselves, though you will scarce find a Henbain-plant
without them. I add concerning the Purple-husks, whereof I gave you an account
in my last, that I have found them since on Rose-tree-twiggs also, and that
very dark colored ones, yiedling an exquisit Murrey: so that I conclude, that
the Tree they may be found on, scarce contributes any thing to the color or
virtue of the husks, but they are the sole work and product of the
Mother-Insect, indifferently choosing a twig of any tree in order to the
convenient placing and hiving her Eggs.

Two Letters Of June 14. 1671 and July 5, 1671. concerning the kind of Insect,
hatched of the English Ke^mes.
THe first Letter. June 10th, I found several of the Patellae Kermi forms
hatched in a Box, where I had purposely put them. They prove a sort, as I
guessed by the figure of the Worm, of Bees, but certainly the least, that I
ever yet saw of that Tribe as not much exceeding in their whole bulk the half
of a Pismire. They are very compact and thick for the bigness; of a cole-black
color. They seem to want neither stings, nor the three balls in a triangle in
their forehead; which yet are things to be referred to the testimony of a
Microscope. That which is very remarkable to the naked Eye, is a white or
straw-colour large and round spot on the back: Of their four Wings the upper
pair are shaded or darked-spotted, the undermost pair are clear. We may entitle
them, according to our custom, Apiculae nigrae, macula super humeros sub-^lave
scente insignitae, e patellis sive savis membranaceis, very Kermes similibus,
suaque itidem purpura tingentibus, Cerasi aut Rosae aliarumve arborum virgis
adtextis, exclusae.

This of the Purple-Husks, and the other History of Scarlet-staining Eggs Of
which latter* See Numb. 72. p. 2176. 2177.
I present you as parallels of our English store to Kermes and Cocheneil; I
mean, additaments to increase the number of agreeable tinging^ Materials and
not Medicaments, unless wary and safe Trial shall discover to us if they have
any Medicinal qualities, as use and custom has made us believe the Exotic have
in an high degree. One of the husks, I sent you, ad hered to a Rose-tree-twig,
and other to a Cherry-tree. But a Rose-bush since has afforded me some scores
of these patellae, many of which are hatched in the box I put them. It is to be
further observed, 1. that those that look the blackest, yield the deepest and
best purple: 2. That as the Bees come to maturity the dye seems to be spent,
and the Husks grow dry. 3. That the young ones make their way out at several
small holes; whereas the true Kermes husk seems to be pierced but in one place.

The Second; The discovery of our English Kermes has very much pleased some of
it the Curious in these parts; who resolve upon Trials of it the next season. I
think I advertised you formerly, that that deep purple or violet, with which
the insides of the husks are lined, is much spent, if the husks be not taken
whilst the Bees are in vermiculo; and the blackest husks are richest in
color. Yesterday in very good company we compared our English Purple-kermes
with the Scarlet-kemers or Grains of the Shops, and found them in every point
to agree save in the color of their Juices; and particularly (finding in some
parcels of the Shops many yet sticking to little twigs of the Ilex,) we
confidently affirm that those as well as ours are only contiguous to the
Ilex-branches, and are not excrescencies of the Tree, much less fruit or
berries; by which abusive names they have been too long known; But that they
are the artifice and sole work of the mother-Bee in order to the more
convenient hiving and nourishment of her young.

Concerning Vegetable Excrescencies, July 17. 1671. from York. N. 75. P. T.
I Understand by yours of the 13 th instant, that M. Ray cannot without much
trouble retrieve the Letter, wherein I gave him formerly my opinion concerning
Vegetable Excrescencies; and yet not wholly to deny you the satisfaction of
what you seem much to desire, I am willing to think again upon the same
subject, at least to recollect part of my former thoughts, as my memory will
serve me.

The occasion then of that Letter was upon the account given us by You in Numb.
57, of the opinion of the Italian F. Redi; Viz. that some live Plants or their
Excrescencies do truly generate some Insects. To which opinion of F. Redi I
told my friend, as I remember, that I indeed had observed, that the By-fruits
of some Vegetables, as of the Oak and wild Rose, for example, did grow up
together with their respective worms in them from small beginnings to fair and
large fruit, some of them emulating even the genuin offspring of the plant, --
and miratur non sua poma,

And further, that I did believe, the worms were furnished with food in and
from them; but not by any Navilconnexion, as that Author fancies, and which I
said, to me was unintelligible, and that I should be glad of a notion, which
might make out to me such monstrous relation, as half animal half vegetable, or
which is all one, Vegetable vessels inserted into an animal, or, the contrary.
Strange Economy!

That it had never been my good fortune (what ever diligence I had used) to
discern Eggs in the Center of Galls, but a worm constantly, even at the very
first appearance, as near at least as my fortune led me. Yet I would not deny,
but that diligence might one day discover the egg it self, which I was of
opinion was affixed to or near the place by the parent-Insect, where the Gall
rose.

That I ever found the worms in all the excrescencies, that I had yet met with,
perfectly at liberty; and for the filaments, our Author mentions, it was very
possible he might be mistaken, it being very hard, and a matter not yet treated
of in my public paper, which and what are the vessels that enter into the
Texture of a Vegetable, as of a large Tree, for example; much more hard would
it be to say, this is a vessel in a small Gall. That there were many By-fruits
of different figure and shape (though perhaps of a like Texture) upon one and
the same plant, every one of which did nourish and produce a different race of
Insects: Whence, I told him, I thought might rather be argued the diverse
workmanship of different Insects, then one and the same principle of vegetation
to be Author of several sorts of Animals.

That the Animals themselves, produced of such Excerscencies, were of such a
Genus many of whose Species were well known to us to be otherwise generated of
animal parents, and therefore it was probable, that these were so too, as well
as their tribe-fellows.

That the Insect-Animals produced of such Excrescencies were Male and Female;
and that, if so, we might argue with Aristotle (lib. 1. c. 1. de Generat.
Animal.) that Nature made not such in vain, and that, if from the coit of these
Animals, which have their birth from no Animals, Animals should be born, they
would either be like their parents and of the same species with them, and if
so, it would necessarily follow (since in the generation of all other creatures
it so comes to pass) that their very parents had such origin too: or unlike
them, and if so (if these also were Male and Female) of this second unlike
offspring a third race of different animals or species would be begot, and of
them a fourth, and so in infinitum. And that these Insects, which he and I had
observed to be produced of the Excrescencies of some vegetables, we had good
cause to suspect they were male and female, since some of them had slings and
were tripilous, and others not (vide Catalog. plant. Cantab. ad Rosam caninam
and alibi.)

These were some at least of the Arguments, as far as I remember I used, when I
formerly wrote on this subject to my friend; but since that Letter, I have
perused the Book of F. Redi it self, and do find, that the said opinion is
barely proposed as thing not unplausible, but the proofs thereof are reserved,
till the publishing of a curious piece, concerning the Excrescencies of the
Oak; and therefore I shall be less earnest in the refutation of that opinion,
which perhaps a more accurate search into Nature will in time make the Author
of it himself find erroneous.

I presume not to venture to decide this controversy, my experience in these
matters being too insufficient, and my leisure and health but little to hasten
a convenient stock of particulars, and a due examination of them; yet before I
leave this subject, I am willing to run over and present you with a few
abreviated instances of some of the several kinds of Vegetable Excrescencies,
and likewise some un-obvious ways of Insects feeding on plants; and these I
shall deliver in confirmation of the following Propositions.

1. That all are not truly Vegetable Excrescencies that are reputed such. And
here we may justly name the Purple-Kermes, for example, whose history you were
pleased to publish in Numb. 73. This, I say, both gives a clear light to the
discovery of the nature of the Scarlet-Kermes, (a thing wholly unknown to the
Ancients, as far as we can see by their writings, and no less ignored by the
moderns, and yet, which is admirable, in very great esteem and continued use
for some thousands of years,) and also is an evident instance, that some
things, confidently believed Vegetable Excrescencies, are no such matter, but
Artificial things merely contiguous to the plant, and which have no other
relation to it than the patella-shellfish to the Rock it cleaves.

2. Generally, Insects Eggs laid upon the leaves of plants, or their respective
feeding on them do not accasion or raise Excrescenies. This truth every body,
that has been the least curious, is an Eyewitness of.

Thus, for example, the Eggs of the common Red butter-fly, laid upon the
Nettle, are thereon hatched without blistering the plant into an Excrescence,
and the stiff haired or prickly Catterpillars hatched from them Eggs, feed upon
the leaves without any ill impression, puncture, or prejudice, save that they
make clean work, and eat all before them. I could produce some hundreds of
instances, if this were to be doubted of.

3. Some Insect-eggs, laid upon the leaves or other parts of plants, do, as
soon as hatched, pierce and enter within the plant to feed. To give you a
convincing instance of the truth of this proposition, take this from my notes.

May 22, I observed on the back or underside of the leaves of Atriplex olida,
certain small milk-white oblong Eggs, on some leaves four, on others fewer, or
more; these Eggs were on some plants yet unhatched, but on many of the same
plants I found the Egg-shells or skins yet adhering to the leaves, and the
little maggots already enterd (through I know not what invisible holes) within
the two membranes of the leaf, and feeding on the inward pulp or substance of
the leaf: in other leaves of that plant, (he that shall make the observation
after me, will find plants enough of this species seized on, to vary, as I did,
the observation in one day,) I found those maggots grown very great, and yet
the two membranes, that is, the uppermost and undermost skin of the leaf,
entire, but raised and hollow like a blather. Note 1. That those maggots were
of a Conick shape. 2. That in July they shrunk into Fly Chrysalis's and
accordingly came to perfection, etc. To this unobvious way of feeding we may
refer all worm-eaten fruits, wood, etc.

4. Worms feeding within some of the parts of some plants do cause
Excrescencies. Thus the head or seed-vessels of Papave. Spont. Sylv. Ger. Emac.
etc. are disfigured for having worms in them, and grow thrice as big, as the
not seized ones. This is also plain in the Excresc. of Pseudo teucrium, and
Barbarea, etc.

5. The substance or sibrous part of many Vegetable Excrescencies is not the
food of the worms to be found in them. The instances given in confirmation of
the last proposition do also confirm this: neither is an Oak-apple properly
worm-eaten, or the Shagged Galls, or Sponges of the Wild Rose, or the Smooth
ones on the leaves of the same plant, or the Baggs upon the leaves of the
yellow dwarf Willow or the Elm, etc.

This is the sum of what I to say at present concerning this subject being very
unwilling to advance further, than my own private observations will suffer me.

York August 25 1671. confirming the Observation in N. 74. P. L. about Musk
sented Insects; adding some Notes upon D. Swammedam's book of Insects, and on
that of M. Steno concerning Petrisy'd Shells.
SIR.
I Have observed the two Insects, which Mr. Ray says, smell of Musk, which
indeed they do in an high degree. The small Bees are very frequent in the
Wooles in Lincolnshire, and about the latter end of April are to be found in
pastures and meadows, upon the early-blown flowers of a sort of Ranunculus, as
You have been rightly informed; but it is something improper to say Bees feed
on flowers: And likewise the same Bees are no less frequent on the flowers of
Dens Leonis, etc. The sweet Beetle, is a very large Insect, and well known
about Cambridge. All the trials I have made to preserve them with their smell,
have proved ineffectual: For, both sorts of these Insects will of themselves in
very few weeks become almost quite sent-less. To these I shall add another
sweet smelling Insect, which is a Hexapodeworm feeding on Gallium luteum.

The Observation of the Vespae Ichneumones, as it has relation to Spiders, I
willingly reserve for other Papers: yet I may tell you in general, that this
kind of Insect is one of the greatest puzzels See more of this in my Notes upon
Goedartious
in nature; there being few Excrescencies of Plants, and very many births of
Insects, wherein these slender Wasps after diverse strange ways are concerned.

Though I be at present from my Books, yet I well remember the passage, which
Mr. Willoughby refers you to in Musset See Numb* 74. p. 2221.
. And he is well able to judge, whether the Observation be made upon the same
sort of Insect. I conceive it a fault not consistent with Ingenious Spirits, to
pass by in silence the Industry of Moderns as well as Ancients Writers;
according to that of C. Celsus: Oportet neque recentiores viros in his
fraudare, quae vel repererunt, vel recte secuti sunt; and tamen ea, quae ab
antiqui-oribus posita sunt, authoribus suis reddere. You can best inform me,
what D. Swammerdam does in a matter of this nature: when I read in the Account
given us by you of his Book, Numb. 64; that Snails are both Male and Female;
that Catterpillars may teach us, by their feeding, the correspondence of the
virtues of Plants, etc; I am defirous to know, whether he quote Mr. Ray for the
former, as having published the Observation ten years ago at least; and for the
latter, the Learned and Noble Fab. Columna, who did propose the way of essaying
the virtues of Plants by the palats of Insects in the beginning of this Age.

But I leave this, Coehlitz, or Petrified shells examined.
and proceed to a remark of my own; and it shall be, if you please, concerning
Petrified Shells; I mean such Shells, as I have observed in our English
stone-Quarries. But Sir, let me premise thus much, that I am confident, that
you at least will acquit me, and not believe me one of a litigious nature. This
I say in reference to what I have lately read in Steno's Prodromus, that, if my
sentiments on this particular are somewhat different from his, it proceeds not
from a spirit of contradiction, but from a different view of Nature. First
then, we will easily believe, that in some Countries, and particularly along
the shores of the Mediterranean Sea, there may all manner of Sea shells be
found promiscuously included in Rocks or Earth, and at good distances too from
the Sea. But, for our English-inland Quarries, which also abound with infinte
number and great varieties of shells, I am apt to think, there is no such
matter, as Petrifying of Shells in the business (or, as Steno-explains himself
p. 84. in the English Version, and alibi, that the substance of those shells,
formerly belonging to animals, has been dissolved or wasted by the penetrating
force of juices, and that a stony substance is come in the place thereof,) but
that these Cockle-like stones ever were, as they are at present, Lapides sui
generis and never any part of an Animal. That they are so at present, is in
effect confessed by Steno in the above cited page; and it is most certain, that
our English Quarry-shells (to continue that abusive name) have no parts of a
different Texture from the rock or quarry they are taken, that is, there is no
such thing as shell in these resemblances of shells, but that Iron-stone
Cockles are all Iron stone; Lime or marble all Limestone and Marble; Sparre or
Chrystalline-shells all Sparr, etc. and that they never were any part of an
Animal. My reason is: That Quarries of different stone yield us quite different
sorts or species of shells, not only one from another (as those Cockle-stones
of the Iron-stone Quarries of Adderton in Yorkshire differ from those found in
the Lead-mines of the neighboring mountains, and both these from that
Cockle-Quarrie of Wansford-bridge in Northamptonshire, and all three from
those to be found in the Quarries about Gunnerby and Beavour-Castle, etc;) but,
I dare boldly say from any thing in nature besides, that either the land, salt,
or fresh water does yield us. It Is true, that I have picked out of that one
Quarry of Wansford very resemblances of Murices, Telinae, Turbines, Cochleae,
etc. and yet I am not convinced, when I particularly examined some of our
English shores for shells, also the fresh waters and the fields, that I did
ever meet with (N. B.) any one of those species of shells any where else, but
in their respective Quarries; whence I conclude them Lapides fui generis, and
that they were not cast in any Animal-mold, whose species or race is yet to be
found in being at this day.

This argument perhaps will not so readly take place with those persons, that
think it not worth the while exactly and minutely to distinguish the several
species of the things of nature, but are content to acquiesce in figure,
resemblance, kind, and such general notions; but when they shall please to
condescend to heedful and accurate descriptions, they will, I doubt not, be of
that opinion, which an attentive view of these things led me into some years
ago. Though I make no doubt, but the Repository of the R. Society is amply
furnished with things of this nature; yet if you shall command them, I will
send you up two or three sorts of our English Cockle-stone of different
Quarries, nearly resembling one the other and all of them very like a common
sort of Sea-shell, and yet if there shall not be enough specifically to
distinguish them, and hinder them from being sampled by any thing of the spoils
of the Sea or fresh waters or the land-Snails; my argument will fail, and I
shall be happily convinced of an Error.

Another Letter, from York Sept. 13 1671. enlarging his former Communications
in Numb. 75. about Vegetable Excrescencies, and Ichneumon-Wormes.
IN my last Paper about Vegetable Excrescencies, I was wholly-silent of the
opinion, which Mr. Willoughby is pleased to favor; and because that worthy
Gentleman has so far made it probable, that now it seems only to depend upon
the good fortune of some lucky Observer, I am willing to reassume my former
thoughts, that all those odd Observations, we have made of the Births of
Ichneumons, do but beget in me a strong belief, that they have a way yet
unheeded, whereby they do as boldly, as subtly, convey their Eggs within the
Bodies of Insects and parts of Vegetables.

A fifth and last proposition of that Paper * was, that the substance of many
Vegetable Excrescencies seemed not to be the food of the worms to be ^ound in
them. See Numb. 75. p. 2254.
My meaning was, that the substance of the Vegetable Excrescencies in which
those Ichneumon worms were to be found, was rather augmented, than diminished
or worm-eaten. And the like conformity of their feeding within Insects is well
observed by Mr. Willoughby See above in this very Tract.
, that the impraegnated Caterpillars seem not to be concerned, though their
bodies are full of Insects of a quite different kind, but go on as far as they
may toward the achievement of the perfection of their own species. Thus I
have seen a Poppy-head fwoln to a monstrous bulk, and yet all the Cells were
not receptacles of Ichneumons, but some had good and ripe feed in them. I shall
not refuse Mr. Willoughby (though you know upon what grounds I have twice done
it to you) the satisfaction of an Answer to my 10 th Quaere, by him resolved
negatively: It is true, the swarms of the Ichneumons, coming out of the sides
of Caterpillars, do immediately make themselves up into bunches, and each
particular Theca, from the Cabbage-Catterpillar (for example,) is wrote about
with yellow silk, as those from the black and yellow- Jacobaea-Catterpillar
with white; but as for web to cover those bunches of Theca's, I never observed
it but in the green Catterpillar so common in our Lincoln-sheir, heaths, which
are affixed to Bents or other plants. These in truth never deceived but my
expectation, for I verily thought I had found, when I first observed them, a
Caterpillar equivalent to the Indian silkworm; but having cut them in two, and
expected to have found a Caterpallars Chrysalis in the middle, there presented
themselves a swarm of Ichneumons. These are as large many of them as my thumb,
that is, at least four times bigger then the Folliculus or Egg-bag of any
English spider that I ever saw yet. By good fortune I have not thrown away the
boxes, wherein I made the Observation concerning Ichneumons feeding upon the
Eggs of certain Spiders. I have had them in several boxes, some 8, some 10,
some 12 days in Vermiculo, feeding upon the very cakes of Spiders-eggs, before
they wrought themselves Theca's for further change; and they seldom exceeded
the number of 5 to one cake of Eggs, etc. so that you may assure Mr.
Willoughby, this is no conjecture, but a real observation accompanied with more
circumstances, than I am willat present to relate.

Some Additions about Vegetable Excrescencies, and Ichneumons Wasps; together
with an Inquiry concerning Tarantula's, and a Discovery of another Musk-sented
Insect: from York in two Letters, of October. 16. and 28. 1671.
The Extract of one of these Letters
THat this Letter may not be all matter of Philosophy, you may take an occasson
to put this Quaere to your correspondents of Italy, viz.

Whether the Tarantula be not a Phalangium (that is, a six-eyed skipping
Spider) as Matthiolus and others seem to tell us? if so, whether some later
Authors impose not on us by giving us a Cut of the Figure of a Net or Reticulm
orbiculatum, which our English Phalangia are never (that I know of) observed to
weave or make use of in hunting? and whether the person bit by a Tarantula, be
not ever, when on his feet, disposed to and actually dancing after the nature
of a Phalangium, which seldom or never moves, but by skipping; even as it
happens with such that are bitten by a Mad Dog, who have been sometimes
observed to bark like a dog, etc. And if so, what we are to think and credit
concerning such and such Musical tunes, said to be most agreeable and tending
to the Cure of persons bit by a Tarantula?

But next among other things, I had the good fortune to present Mr. Willoughby
giving me the honor of two visits, with a Musk-Ant See of two or three more
Musk-Insects Number 74. p. 2220. and Numb. 76. p. 2281.
an Insect observed by me not many days before his first visit: And though I
cannot send you the Insects themselves, as having parted with all I had, yet I
will the Note, viz. September. 2. I found in a Sandy Ditch-bank, the first hollow
beyond the Ring-houses in the high-road to London about a mile and an half from
York, a sort of exceeding small Pismires) by which note alone I think they may
be sufficiently distinguished from all at least that I have seen.) Those
without wings were of a light-yellow or flaxen, and being broken at on's
nostrils they emitted, like others, an acid or sour sent; but those of the
same bank with wings, were cole-black, and these, bruised and smelt to, emitted
so fragrant a smell like musk, that I must confess they were too strong for me
to endure: yet having kept them some time by me, the more delicate sex were not
displeased with the smell. And an Apothecary in this City, famous for his
diligence in Chemical Operations, did compare them (unseem and not yet made
known to him) to an excellent balsom, he is wont to prepare.

Mr. Willoughby informed me, that he had found the Goat chafer or Sweet-beetle
Of which see Numb. 74. p. 2220. and N. 76. p. 2281.
out of season as to that smell; and thereupon asked me, what I had observed as
to the time of their sweetest and strongest smelling? I answered, that I
believed it to be at the time of the Coit, for as much as at that time, when I
took them highly perfumed, I had observed the female full of Egg.

The Extract of the other Letter:
I Send you a second paper about Vegetable Excrescencies; the shortness of the
former Of which see Numb. 75. p. 2254.
and some things therein, perhaps liable to Exception, obliging me thereto.

Concerning the fifth and last proposition of the first paper, it might be more
intelligibly experssed thus, viz. That the substance or fibrous part of many
Vegetable Excrescencies seems not to be the food of the worms found in them: My
meaning is, that the worms in those Vegetable Excrescencies, which produce
Ichoneumons (to which kind of Insect we would limit this proposition, and
therefore expunge all other instances,) these worms, I say, do not seem to
devour the substances or fibrous part of them, as other worms eat the Kernels
of nuts, etc. but that (whatever their manner of feeding is, and we doubt not
but that they are nourish't in and upon some part of them,) the Vegetable
Excrescencies still mightily increase in bulk, and rise as the worms feed.

It is observable (to endeavor a Solution) that some of the Ichneumons delight
to feed of a liquid matter, as the Eggs of Spiders, the juices (if not Eggs)
within the bodies of Caterpillars and Maggots: Whence we conjecture, that those
of the same Genus, to be found in Vegetable Excrescencies, may in like manner
suck in the juices of the equivalent parts of Vegetables. And this the dry and
spongy texture of some of those kind of Excrescencies, seems to evince: For, if
you cut in Pieces a wild-poppy-head, for example, (or the great and soft balls
of the Oak) you will find in those partitions, wherein these worms are lodged,
nothing but a pithy substance like that of young Elder; and if there chance to
be any cells yet unseised, (which I have sometimes observed) the feeds therein
will be found yet entire and ripe. Whence very probably they feed upon or
suck-in by little and little the yet liquid pulp of the tender seeds, and leave
the substance or fibrous part to be expanded into an Excrescence.

As for matter of Fact, to clear the truth of that opinion, that the diverse
races of Ichneumons are generated by their respective Animal-parents, and
particularly that which the diverse Excrescencies of Vegetables produce, are not
plantigenous, I am in great hopes, the instance of Poppy-heads, swollen into
Excrescencies, will favor us the next season. My expectation is chiefly
grounded upon the condition and nature of that plant; which is such, that
nothing can pierce the skin of it and wound it but it must necessarily leave a
mark of its entry, the milky juice springing upon the lightest puncture, and
drying and concreting suddenly into a red scar: And this, I think, I may
affirm, that of the many heads grown into Excrescencies, which I gathered this
Summer, all had more or less of those marks upon them. But our aim is here only
to make way for the Observation against the next season; to which purpose also
we propose the following Quaere's;

1. Whether the shagged balls of the Wild Rose are not Excrescencies grown from
the bud and very fruit of the plant; like as the Wild-Poppy-heads are
apparently not for worms but seed.

2. Whether the large and soft balls of the Oak are not in like manner the bud
and acorn with all the parts of a sprouting branch, thus monstrously perverted
from the first design of nature?

3. Upon what parts or juices the Ichneumons-wroms, supposed to be thrust into
Caterpillars and other Maggots can be thought to feed: And whether there be not
actually Eggs in Caterpillars and Maggots (as there are to be observed in their
respective Chrysalis's) sufficient to serve them for food?

Concerning the name (...) although I could willingly refer you to Mr. Ray, who
is another Hesychius; yet for present satisfaction I shall transcribe what the
Excellent Critique G. Vossius says (c. 16. de Inimicitia;) Ichneumon ( i.e.
Mus Pharaonis sive Aegyptiacus) Crocodili and Aspidis ova indagat, unde illi
Ichneumonis nomen, quasi dic^s Indagatorem ((...)) Reperta utriusque ov^
conterit; ut est apud Oppianum in 30 de Venation^: Nicander tamen ait, cum
Aspidis ova humi mandare.

Now a like Observation of certain Insects of the Wasp-kind, made no doubt by
some of the Ancients, occasioned the application of that name to Wasps, as well
as to that Egyptian Mouse. Yet cannot I remember to have met with, in any of
the Ancients, of more than one text concerning those Wasps; viz. Aristot de
Hist. Anim, 5. c. 20. which Pliny (vid. lib. 11. c. 21.) has rendered in a
manner verbatim, thus: Vespae, quae Ichneumones vocantur (sunt autem minores
quam aliae) unum genus ex araneis perimunt, phalangium appellatum, and in nidos
suos ferunt; deinde illinunt, and ex iis, incubando, suum genus procreant.

How far this relation is true, and agreeable to modern Observations, we shall
have perhaps occasion to discourse of elsewhere; Our design here is only to
tell you, that we have enough to make us believe, that those very Insects, we
have been treating of, are for kind, the Ichneumons of the Ancients.

A Letter. York, Januar. 10. 1671. containing an account of Veins observed in
Plants, analogoue to Humain Veins.
SIR,
I Am very much pleased, when you give me to understand, that something is
published of the Anatomy of Vegetables, and that more is designed by that
excellent person Signior Malpighi This Learned and Accurate Philesspher has
already presented to the R. Society, in a very obliging manner, his Manuscript,
containing the S^m of his Observations and Labors about the Structure of
Plants; and he has also very generously engaged himself, that, upon the
Approbation of that Illustrious Body, he will enlarge his Papers, illustrate
all the particulars, therein contained, with Scheams* and the^ publish the
whole.
. And since the receipt of your last, I have perused the very ingenious Book of
Dr. ^rew and, as far as I have observed these matters, all things therein are
faithfully delivered, and with great sagacity. In turning over my Notes, made
some years ago, I find, among other things of this nature, some few
Observations concerning the Veins of Plants, or such Duct^^'s as seem to
contain and carry in them the noblest juices of Plants. Of these there is
little or no mention made in this curious Tractate, unless under the notion of
Pores. And because I am of the opinion, that they will prove vessels Analogous
to our Hu man Veins, and not mere Pores, they shall, if you please, be the
subject of your entertainment in this Letter; and the rather that, if they
prove Veins (as I little doubt them) they are not to be passed over in silence,
but are early to be accounted for in the Anatomy of Vegetables.

To avoid ambiguity; Those parts of a Plant, which Pliny (lib. 16. 38.) calls
by the names of Venae and Pulpae, are nothing else, in my opinion but what our
late Author, Dr. Crew, calls Fibers and Insertments, or the Lignous body
interwoven with that which he takes to be Cortical, that is, the several
distinctions of the Grain. Now, that the vessels, we are about to discourse of,
are not any of the Pores of the Lignous body (to use the Doctors terms) is
plain in a traverse Cut of Angelica Sylvestris magna vulgatior J. B, for
example; the Veins there very clearly show themselves to an attentive view to
be distinct from Fibers, observable in the Parenchyma of the same Cortical body
together with themselves; the Milky juice still rising besides and not in any
Fiber. Also in the like cut of a Burdock in June, the like juice springs on
this and on that side of the radii of the Woody circle, that is, in the
Cortical body and pith only. Again, where there is no pith, there is none of
these Veins as in the Roots of plants, and Trunks of trees; but ever in the
Bark of either. I need not here enumerate the many Plants, wherein these
particulars are most plainly observable, as in Sphondylium, Cicutaria, many of
the Thi^sle kind, etc.

Further, Neither are they probably of the number of the Pores, described by
our Author in the Cortical body, or Pith. Not surely of those Pores extended by
the breadth, because the course of the juice in these vessels is by the length
of the plant; as I have sometimes very plainly traced in the pith of a dried
Fennel-stalk, following them by dissection quite through the length of the
pith. It remains, that, if Pores, they are of those pores of the Cortical body,
that are supposed to be extended by the length thereof; which yet seems (to me
at least) not enough, but we think them vessels invested with their own proper
membranes, analogous to the Veins of our Human body; for these reasons: 1.
Because they are to be found in the Pith, and sometime in the Cortical body of
a plant, not included within the common Tunicle of any Fibers, as is above
noted: (that Fibers, or the Seminal root are clothed, is most plain in some
plants, as in Fern and Geranium Batrachoides, the Fibers of the former are
coated, at least in some parts of the plant, with a black skin, in the latter
likewise with a red one:) And in these cases, had they not, I say, their own
proper membranes, we see no cause, why the very porous and spongy body of the
Pith and Cortex, should not be in all places filled alike with the juice, and
not rise (as most plainly it does) in a few determinate and set places only,
that is, according to the position and order of these vessels. 2. Again the
Experiment I made, which you were pleased to publish See Numb, 70. p, 2122, and
2123.
, concerning the effect of a ligature on Cataputia minor L^bel. viz. the sudden
springing of the Milky juice out of infinite pores besides the Incision: (the
cause of which Phoenomenon I take be, the dissected veins impetuously
discharging themselves of part of their juice within the porous Panenchyma of
the Bark;) whence it is probable, that, if there was no coated vessel to hold
this milky juice, we might well expect its springing upon the bare ligature, as
when we squeez a wet Sponge; the external Cuticle of the plant, as this
Experiment shows, being actually perforated.

In the next place it is very probable, that these vessels are in all Plants
whatsoever. For as it is truth-like of all the other substantial parts of
plants, though specified by diverse accidents in Figure and Texture; so of these
Veins, which, though they be discernable mostly in those plants where they hold
discouloured juices, yet we may very probably think, that they are not wanting,
where the eye finds not that assistance in the challenging of them. And in
these very plants, where they are least visible, there is yet a time when they
are, if not in all, yet in some parts of these plants, plain enough to the
naked eye: The tender shoots of the Greater and Lesser Maple, in May, are full
of a milky juice; viz the known liquor of these Veins. Again to this purpose,
If you apply a clean knife blade to a travers cut of the like Shoots of Elder,
the Gummy liquor of these Veins will be drawn forth into visible strings, as is
the nature of Bird-lime of the bark of Holly, or the milk of Cataputia minor
Lobel. Further, The leaf stalks of our Garden Rubarb do sometimes shoot (by
what accident, we enquire not here) a transparent and very pure Chrystallin
Gumm, though the Veins, that held this gummy juice, are by no ordinary means
visible in them, and yet by comparing the nature and properties of this Gum,
with that of the Gums of other Vegetables to be of theirs, by the same
comparative Anatomy. Lastly, we think, that even Mushromes (that seemingly
inferior and imperfect order of Vegetables) are not exempt and destitute of
these Veins, some of them yielding a milky juice, hot and fiery, not unlike
some of the Spurge kind, or Euphorbium.

It might be expected, that I should add somethings at least, concerning the
Original and Productions of these Veins, if not an exact description of them,
the course of the juices in them, and their more immediate and primary uses in
the matter of Vegetation: But I must acquaint you, that (besides the season is
not now proper to improve and verify, if I had leisure, the Observations
formerly noted, and that they were things thrown into my Adversaria without
other order, than that nothing should slip from me in the quest of Medicaments,
that might be of light) although I find indeed many scattered particulars
(besides them already delivered) concerning the Position, Order, Number,
Capacity, Distributions, Differences, Figure, etc. of these Veins; you will be
pleased to take it in good part, if I think fitting to reserve them until the
opportunity of another Summers review: It seeming to me no small matter, to
have fairly hinted the existence of them to such curious persons as shall have
the leisure, and find themselves in better circumstances, than I can pretend
to, as to those great advantages of Glasses. Designing, etc.

To conclude with the primary use of these Veins; which is, in my opinion, to
carry the Succus nutritious of Plants, because, where they are not, there is no
Vegetation; as it is seen, if an ingrafted Branch or Arm be bared and stripped
off the clay, etc. in June, all the course of Vegetation will appear to have
been made only by the Bark, and not by the Wood, that is, in the place only,
where these veins are. A secondary use is the rich furniture of our Shops; for,
from these Veins only it is, that all our Vegetable Drugs are extracted, and
infinite more might be had, by a diligent enquiry, and easy means, which I have
not unsuccefully put in practice; witness the black Resin, I not long since
sent you a specimen of.

An Account of a Stone cut out from under the tongue of a Man; sent in a Letter
to his Grace the Lord Archbishop of York.
May it please your Grace,
IN obedience to your Grace's Commands, I have penned the Circumstances of a
not common Medical observation, viz. the Excision of a stone from under the
tongue. And I here with present your Grace also with the stone its self, as I
had it from the person it was taken. This Stone is now in the custody of the R,
Society, to whom it was presented afterward.
As to the occasion and time of its birth, he tells me, (My Lord, you may be
pleased to give firm Credit to every particular, that he has answered me at
your Grace's instance) it was from a winter Sea-voyage, which lasted much
longer than he expected, and wherein he suffered an exceeding cold; and that,
not long after his landing, he found a certain Nodus or hard lump in the very
place whence this stone was cut. There was about 8 years betwixt its breading
and being taken away.

As to its growth, and the inconveniences thence enensuing; he further says,
that upon all fresh-cold taking, he suffered much pain in that part especially;
and yet, that cold once being over, that part was no more painful than the rest
of his mouth. He adds, that toward the 7 th and 8 th year it did often cause
sudden swellings in all the Glanduls about the mouth and throat upon the first
draught of beer at meals; which yet would in a short time fall again.

Lastly, as to the particulars remarkable at the time of its being taken away,
he relates; That it began its work with a sudden vertigo; which vertiginous
disposition continued more or less from Spring 'till August; in which month,
without any praevious cause save riding, the place where it was lodged
suddenly swelled, and ran purulent matter at the aperture of the duct^^^
Whartouianus: that it suddenly stopped of its running (which he cannot
attribute to any thing but Cold,) and swelled with a great inflammation, and
very great danger of choking; it being scarce credible, what pain the party
suffered in endeavoring to swallow even beer or any liquid thing.

This extremity lasted 5 days, in all which time, the party had so vast a flux
of spittle running from him, that it was not possible for him to repose his head
to sleep, without wetting all the bed about him; insomuch as that it was very
much questioned by some friendly visitants, whether he had not of himself, or
by mistake, made use of Mercurial medicines.

The varieties or degrees of this spontaneous salivation were such, that he
urged me not to omit them in the relation I was to make to your Grace, as
thinking them very notable.

The first day, the saliva ran thin and transparent, almost like water without
any bubles. The 2 day it ran frothy; it tasted salt, (which yet he is apt to
think hot rather, than really salt, because that day the inflammation was at
the height). The 3 day it roaped exceedingly; on which day a small pin-hole
broak directly over the place of the Stone and ran with purulent matter as
formerly. The 4 day the saliva ran insipid, sensibly cold in the mouth; (which
again confirms me in that opinion, that the former sharp taste was the effect of
heat, and not the immediate quality of a salt humor;) very little forthy. The
5 day (which was that of the incision,) it ran as on the 4 th but left an
extreme claminess on the teeth, insomuch that they often clave together, as
though they had been joined together with glue.

Upon the inci^ion, which proved not wide enough, the membrances or baggs,
wherein the Stone lay, came away first. As to the Stone it self, it was so hard
as to endure the forcipes in drawing it forth: it was covered over with grass
green matter, which soon dried, and left the stone of a whitish color, as it
is to be seen. It is but light in proportion to its bulk, weighing about 7
grains; and its much of the shape of our ordinary horse-beans. There are
visible impressions upon it of some Capillary and small vessels, it was bred
amongst. Lastly, it is scabrous or rough, sand-like, although the substance is
Tophaceous.

The Accidents accompaning the working away of this Stone, (for the incision
was merely obstetrical,) and the place of its birth give occasion to call the
distemper a Ranula. Yet in truth this was nothing else but one of those Tumors
called Atheroma, and therefore we will name it lapis Atheromatis.

An Extract of a Letter from York April 12. 1672. concerning animated
Horse-haires; rectifying a Vulgar Error.
Sir.
I Cannot discover any thing new and rare in natural Philosophy, but I must
forthwith make you participate of my good fortune; and I assure you, the
relation, I am about to make you, is of a thing very surprising.

It has been credibly reported, that Horse-hairs thrown into water will be
animated; and yet I shall show you by an unquestionable observation, that such
things as are vulgarly thought animated Hairs are very Insects, nourished
within the bodies of other Insects, even as Ichneumons are within the bodies of
Caterpillars.

I will premise the particulars concerning this Ainmal, as I find them
collected by the Industry of Aldorvaudus, and save you the trouble of that
voluminous Author.

This Insect (says he) seems to have been unknown to the Ancients; as it is
called by the moderns seta aquatica or vermis set^rius, either from the most
slender figure of the body; or because it is thought to be generated of an
horse-hair putrefying in water. The Germans call them by a name rendered Vituli
aquatici.

It is bred in corrupt waters; perhaps of horse-hair, for (says Albertus upon
his own frequent trial, as I find him quoted by Aldrovandus,) these hairs, put
into standing water, move and are animated or, as he words it, vitam and
spiritum accipiunt, and moventur. Other have thought them to have their birth
from weeds hanging down from the banks into ponds and Rivers. Others from
Locusts and Grasshoppers (ex Bruchis;) which last though it be near the matter,
yet it is rejected by Aldrovandus himself, as the most unlikely.

They have been fouud in cold and good springs, and elsewhere, (which is a
wonder, says Aldrovandus,) upon a leaf in a Garden. And this, which was there
found, was 5 or 6 fingers-breadth long; the thickness of a bristle Horse-hair,
with a duskish back, and a white belly; and the tail on every side white.

I saw (says Aldrovandus) a black one thicker than the whitish one. Other
Authors otherwise descibe them, as Bertruius, Albertus, etc. Some affirming
them to have been a cubit long; others, two cubits others, 9 inches long at the
least: that they are white of color, and so hard as scarce to be crushed with
ones foot: to be every where of the same thickness: that they move not as
worms move, but snake-like, and knit themselves up into knots: that their skin
is one continued thing without Incisures; and therefore some would exclude them
from the Insect-kind: that they have no head, but swim both ways, and
therefore may be called amphisbaena aquatica: that they are poison, drunk down
into the stomach, but not venom to touch.

And thus much out of Aldrovandus concerning the name of this Insect, the place
of its birth and original, the place where they are to be found, its
description, different species, nature, poison etc.

Our observation is this. April. 2. there was thrown up out of the ground of my
Garden, in digging amongst other things of this nature, a certian cole-black
Beetle of a middle size, and flat shape, and which I have observed elsewhere
common enough. These Beetles I dissected upon the account of some curiosity,
wherein I had a mind to satisfy my self. But I was surprised to find in their
swollen bellies of these Hair-wormes, in some three, in others but one only.
These particulars we carefully noted: 1. That upon the incision they crawled
forth of themselves. 2. That putting them into water, they lived in it many
days, and did seem to endeavor to escape by lifting up their heads out of the
water, and sastning them to the side of the vessels; very plainly drawing the
rest of their body forward. 3. That they cannot be said to be amphisbaena, but
do move forward only by the head, which is fairly distinguishable from the Tail
by a notable blackness. 4. That the three, I took out of the body of one
Beetle, were all of a dark hair-colour with whitish-bellies, somewhat thicker
then hoggs bristles; but I took out of the body of another beetle one that was
mu^st thicker than the rest; much lighter colored; and by measure just five
Inches and a half long; whereas all the rest did not exceed three inches three
quarters.

An Extract of a Letter enlarging and correcting the former Notes about Kermes;
and withal insinuating a conjecture of Cochincil's being a sort of Kermes.
Sir,
WE must correct as well as enlarge our Notes concerning Kermes Compare
herewith, what was published in No* p. 71. 2165 No, 72, p. 2177 especially No.
73. p. 2196.
; and yet there will be much difficulty in resolving the question concerning
the Original and Efficient of Kermes. These things are certain.

1. That we have this year seen the very Gumm of the Arpicok and
Cherry-lawrel-Trees trausudated, at least, standing in a Crystal-drop upon some
(though very rarely) of the tops of these Kermes.

2. That they change color from a yellow to a darkbrown: that they seem to be
distended and to war greater, and from soft, to become brittle.

3. That they are filled with a sort of Mites; that small powder (which I said
to be Excrement,) being Mites as well as that Liquamen or softer pulp (which I
took to be Bees-meat;) concerning both which particulars I am pretty well
assured by my own, and also by my ingenious friend, Dr. Johnsou of Pomsret's
more accurat Microscopical Observations.

4. That the Bee-grubbs actually feed on Mites, there being no other food for
them.

5. That there are other Species of Beesor Wasps besides those by me described;
which are sometimes found to make these Mites their food: Dr. Johnson having
opened one Husk, with one only large Maggot in it.

6. That there are probably different sorts of Mites in these Husks, making
possibly different species of Kermes: For, some I have found to hold
Carnation-colour'd Mites, enclosed in a fine white Cotton, the whole Husk
starting from the Twiggs, shrivelling up, and serving only for a Cap or Cover
to that company of Mites, Other Mites I have seen white, and (which is most
usual) the Husks continuing entire and not coming away from the Twigg they
adhere to, and but little Cotton at the bottom. Those of the first sort are the
white Cob-webbs on the Vine, described by Mr. Hook Micrograph. Obs. 56.

7. That shrivelled Cap to be found upon the Mites enclosed in Cotton, as also
the whole Husk it self, if taken early in April, while so^t, will dried in the
Sun, shrink into the very figure of Coch^^^il: Whence we guess, that Cochineil
may be a sort of Ker^^^ taken thus early and sun-dried.

Hitherto (...) Summers* (...) ^^concerning Kermes, This advantage at least we
may have by (...) the ^^count, taken from M. Verney by Dr. (...) published in
one of the Tran^^^^ (...) is made more intelligible: See Numb. 20. p. 362.
the small Scarlet powder, there mentioned, being to be understood of those
Mites; and they to be distinguished from the Bee-grubbs; which are changed into
the ^^^^ping Fly, that is, the be, (for kind at least) by us described
formerly, I am, etc. York October. 9. 1671.

A Description of an odd kind of Mushr^^^ (...) Milky Juice, much hotter upon
the tongue than Pepper, etc. November, 15. 1672.
THe 18 of August last* I passed through (...) woods under Pinno-moor in
Craven: In the Wood^ I then found an (...) number of Mushroms, some withered,
and (...). They were of a large (...) redgilled eatable-(...) or (...) and
(...) of their shape, that is, with a perfectly found (...) or (...) we
vulgarly call it,) thick, fleshy, not (...) and round Foot stalk, of about 6
fingers breadth (...) above ground, and ordinarily as thick as my (...) If you
cut any part of this Mushrom, it will bleed exceeding freely a Milk-white
Juice, concernig which (...) 1. That this Milky-Juice tastes much hotter upon
the tongue than Pepper. 2. That it is not clammy to the touch. 3. That the
(...) not much discolor it, on the bl^de of a knife; as is usual with most
Vegetable Juices. 4. That it became in the glass viol, I drew it into, suddenly
concret and stiff, and did in some days dry into a (...) Cake. 5. That it then
also when well dried, retained its fierce biting taste and white color.

Fu^^er, I observed these Mushroms, (...) of Juice, not to be endured upon our
tongues, to abound with Fly-maggots. Also, the youngest and tendrest of them,
that is, such as are most Juicy, to have been very much eaten by the Gray
meadow naked Snail, lodging themselves within the sides of the plant.

Concerning this kind of biting Mushrom, I find in a certain late discourse of
the State of Russia these words; Groozshidys Fungorum maximi, palmam lati,
instar Omasi bibuli sunt, crassi and candidi; dum crudi sunt, succo Cla^^^
puta) abundant. Eos sicut Tithymallum muria corrig^^^ R^them; aliter fances and
gu^ter (...). Ipse se^el (...) assato^ (...) non (...) periculo. The reference
to the Cuts or Figures is here confused, and the description too concise, to
say that Ours agrees in any thing with Theirs, save the great ac^imony of the
Juice they both yield.

I may sometime acquaint you with the Medicinal Uses, I have caused to (...)
made of this White (...) the mean time I shall only mind you of the great (...)
has with Euphorbium.

Since this Letter the Author thereof was pleased to give us this further
Account in an other of December. 17. viz.

-- Mr Wray returned me this Answer to my Letter about the biting Mushrom;

At my return to Midleton I found a Letter from you, containing the Description
of a Mushroms by you discovered in Marton-woods unde Pinno moor. I doubt not
but it is that described in Joh. Ba^bin 1. 40. c. 6. under the title of Fungus
piper at us alb^^, lacteo succo turgens. Only he says; 1. That it does in
bigness exceed the Champignon; whereas you write, that there are few of them
much bigger than that: But yet in saying so, you grant them to be bigger. 2. He
says, for their bigness they are not so thick as that; you describe yours to
be thick in flesh. In all other points the Descriptions agree exactly. For the
color, of that it is white, Gills and all; for the place, that it grows in
woods; and for the taste, that its hotter than Pepper. Several particulars
mentioned by you, are not observed or not mentioned by him. I cannot say, that
I have as yet met with this Mushrom.

A futher Account concerning the Existence of Veins in all kind of Plants;
together with a Discovery of the Membranous substance of those Veins, and of
some Acts in Plants resembling those of Sense; as also of the Agreement of the
Venal Juice in Vegetables with the Blood of Animals, etc. Communicated in a
Letter of Januar. 8. 1673. and exhibited to the R. Society.
SIR,
WE have formerly given you certain reasons for the Existance of Veins,
(analogous to those in Animals) in all Plants whatsoever, not Mushromes
excepted: To which we might add others of later notice; as the skin of a plant
may be cut sheer off with part of the spongy parenchyma, and no signs of Milky
juice follow, that is, no breach of a vein. Again, we have stripped the Plant of
its skin, by pulling it up by the roots, and exposing it to the wet weather,
until it became flaccid as a wet thong, without any injury to the Veins, which
yet upon incision would freshly bleed. These Experiments, I say, make against
the general opinion of one only sap loosely pervading the whole plant, like
water in a sponge.

And though we have made these and many other Experiments to facilitate an
ocular demonstration of these Veins; yet we have not been able to effect it to
our mind, and subject them as nakedly to our eye as we could wish, for a
through-information of their Use, and a minute and accurate discovery of all
the particular Accidents belonging to them as such vessels. This, I say, is a
work of much labor and patience; and that which renders matters very
difficult, is the infinite number, smallness and perplexity of these Veins.

In the Transverse cuts of Plants, we see as it were a certain Order and Number
the bloody orifices of dissected veins. We observe also in a Leaf, which we
take to be the simplest part of a plant.

1. That the Veins keep company with the Ribbs and Nerves (as we vulgarly call
them,) and are distributed into all the parts of the Leaf, according to the
subdivisions of those nervous lineaments, and are disposed with them into a
certain network; whether by Inosculations or bare contact only, we pretend not
to determine.

2. That in a Transverse cut of a Leaf, the middle Fiber or nerve, for example,
seems to yield one big drop of a Milkie juice, springing as it were from one
vein; yet the Miscroscope plainly shows us, that there are many veins which
contribute to the making up of that drop.

3. That if a Fiber or nerve be carefully taken out of the Leaf, the Veins will
appear in it like so many small hairs or pipes running along and striping the
nerve.

4. That those many veins are all of an equal bigness, (...) to be more certain
of the ra^^ifications of the Fibers, wherein those veins are, we yet are so,
that those veins do any where grow less and smaller, though probably it may be
so. That which makes us doubt it, is the exceeding smallness of these veins
already, even where we might probably expect them to be Trunk veins and of the
largest size; and being there also in very great Numbers and running in direct
lines along the fiber, we guess, that one or more of them may be distributed
and fall off on either hand with the subdivisions of the fibers, and not suffer
any diminution in their bulk.

6. That we cannot discern any where throughout the whole plant larger or more
capacious veins, than those we see adhering to the fibers of the Leaves; which
do also appear from comparing the bleeding Orifices in a transverse cut. I have
found it a difficult and laborious task, to trace and unravel them throughout
the whole plant.

Our opinion is, that these Veins do still keep company with their respective
Fibers. And as all the Fibers of the Leaf are joined in the Stalk of the Leaf,
and that stalk explicated in clothing the Twig or Stem of the plant, (which we
take to be the reason of the orderly breaking forth of the Leaves.) so do we
think of the Veins, their perpetual companions. And, as we have said, the
Fibers of the Leaves are joined in the Twig; so are those of the Twigs in the
Branches; those of the branches in the Trunk or body of the tree: The like also
in an inverted order we seem to observe in the several Coats and Ramifications
of the Root. This the several Circles of bleeding Orifices in tranverse cuts
seems to confirm.

But more in the Roots of plants, if a simple Coat be separated and exposed
betwixt your eye and the light, the Veins appear to be strangly entangled and
implicate, and not in the simple order, as in the Leaves. The like we think of
the Bark of the bodies of Trees, which we cannot distinguish from the Roots of
plants; though there is, indeed, something (at least at certain seasons of the
year*) in the Root, which is not to be found in any part of the plant besides.

From what has been said, it may well be doubted, whether there is any sinus
or common Trunk, into which all the veins are gathered? But rather, each
existing apart by it self. We indeed have found it very difficult so to exhaust
the plant of its milkie juice, as to kill it, though we have given it very many
incisions to that purpose. Diverse other instances there are, which favor the
Discontinuance of the Veins, and the little relation and intercourse they have
with one another; as one branch of a Tree having fair and well grown fruit,
before the other branches of the same tree and fruit blossom or have leaves;
from the different situation and other circumstances of culture; the indefinite
and perpetual growth of a Tree; the Cyon governing, etc.

And thus far we have taken our information concerning these Veins, partly by
the appearance they make in transverse cuts, and partly by the help of a
Microscope; which last indeed has showed us something of their number,
magnitude, order, distributions, etc. And yet neither of these helps in our
hands has satisfactorily discovered to us other particulars belonging to these
vessels, as external Figure, Coats, Cavitie, etc.

The substance of these veins seems to be as truly Membranous, as the Veins of
Animals: A Leaf will not give way and be extended, but the Veins in a leaf, if
freed of all the woody Fibers, will be stretched out to one third part at
least, and vigorously restore themselves again, just like a Vein, Gut, or any
other membranous ductus of an Animal. Again these membranous Pipes are
exceeding thin and transparent, because they suddenly disappear and subside
after their being exhausted of their Juice; and particularly in that we see the
liquor, they hold, quite through our Veins, or (in Chelidonium majus, for
example) a tincture of Saffron in Crystalline Pipes.

Concerning the External Figure of these Veins and Cavitie, as well as other
Accidents, we thought, they would have been made more apparent to us, if it
were possible to coagulate the Juice they hold without much shrinking the
plant. We were in hopes, Freezing would have effected this; which though it did
not succeed as we promised our selves, in respect of the manifestation of these
Accidents; yet it gave us some further light into the nature of the Juice of
these veins. In the keenest frost, which happened the other winter, we dissected
the frozen leaves of the Garden Spurge. Here we observed, that all Juice
(besides that which these veins hold) was, indeed, frozen into hard Ice, and to
be expressed out in the figure of the containing pores; but the Milkie-Juice
was as liquid as ever, but not so brisk as in open weather.

This Experiment we take to be good proof of the perfection of this Milkie
Juice, and that it has within it self so great a degree of fermentation, that
it preserves it self and consequently the whole plant from the injuries of the
weather; that is, the plant owes it life to it. Thus we have seen Insects (as
Hexapode-worms, etc.) ly frozen upon the snow into very lumps of Ice, which did
not only cause the glass to ring we struck them against, but did endanger the
breaking of it: And yet, put under the glass and exposed to the warmth of the
fire, they quickly recovered their legs and vigor to escape; which we think
could not be, unless the Vital liquor of their veins, as in this Instance of
plants, had been untouched and little concerned in the frost. Further, we hence
also argue the different Uses as well as Natures of these Juices, and look upon
the frozen Icicles or that copious dilute and Limpid sap as Alimental; the
Milkie and not frozen Juice, as as the only proper Venal.

As to the motion of these Juices, these things are certain;

1. That the Milkie* Juice always moves and spring^ briskly upon the opening
of a vein; the Limpid sap but at certain seasons, and as it were by accident,
and not (as I judge) from any vital principle or fermentation of its own.

2. The vena^ juice has a manifest intestine motion or fermentation within it
self; witness (besides what has been just now said of it) its contributing
(and the long continuance of) that motion to the most insensible liquors; and
likewise its thick and troubled bleeding, sike the rising of yeast, which yet
in a few hours after drawing falls, and the juice becomes transparent, as the
Gum of the Virginian Rhus, etc.

I shall not desire any person to acquiesce wholly in a bare fermentation; but
endeavor a happy discovery of the Frame of all the parts of a plant, on which
perhaps this motion may much depend. In the mean time we must indeed needs
think (according to the knowledge we yet have of the parts of plants,) that
these juices move by a far different contrivance of parts from that of Animals;
not yet here discovering any uniting of veins into one common Trunk, no
Pulsation, no sensible stop by ligature, no difference in veins, etc. All which
difficulties notwithstanding may, I hope, in time may be happily overcome; and
the Analogy betwixt Plants and Animals be in all (...) opening of flowers; the
(...) of the heads of Poppies from a pendulous posture, and particlarly the
Vermicular motion of the veins when exposed to the air. Again, the Veins of
Plants may indeed be different, though at present we cannot tell wherein they
are so. The Arteries within our heads are hardy to be known by the eye from the
Veins. Further there are natural and spontaneous excretions or venting of
superfluous moisture in plants, visible and constant, in the Crown Imperial,
Rorella, Pinguicula, etc. As to the Ligature, as it has been hitherto applied
by us, it is not to be relied on for discovery of this motion; the Veins only
of plants being the parts probably distendable.

Lastly we shall not omit to tell you, that either we must take that away from
the other reasons given of the necessity of the Circulation of the blood in
Animals, viz. the hindering of its breaking and clodding; or we must grant the
same motion to the Venal juice in Plants: we having undeniable Experiments to
show, that the Venal juice of Plants and the Blood of Animals agree in this,
that they both, when they are once drawn from their respective veins, do
forthwith break and coagulate, and that the serum in the one as well as in the
other becomes a stiff gelly by a little standing.

But of the different natures of the juices of these viens in diverse Plants and
their motion we will remain your debtor, and acquit our selves when we shall
find it convenient; at present; only acquainting you, what variety of
Experiments has taught us, that probably more useful preparations and
certainly a truer Analysis and (...) and parts of vegetable Drugs may be (...)
whilst they are bleeding and liquid, than after they are once become concrete
and have lost their natural Fermentation.

I am etc.

A Letter dated May 21. 1673. in York, concerning the unalterable Character of
the Whiteness of the Chyle within the Lacteal Veins; together with diverse
particulars observed in the Guts, especially several sorts of Worms found in
them.
-- I Come to your Letter, where the Analogy betwixt the Veins in Plants and
the Nerves in Animals, hinted by Dr. Wallis, is a considerable notion, and I
shall set my self a task e're long to examine them both again on purpose, and
to give you my thoughts. In the mean time, I will entertain you, if you please,
with some Anatomical Observations and Experiments.

It has been long in my thoughts and desires to have discovered the Actual
passage of the Chyle into the Lacteal Veins; of which yet I never doubted, as I
find some do at this day. The difficulty lies in the certain and unalterable
character of the Chyle's Whiteness, especially when received into those Veins.
And yet it is as certain, that in a Diabetes the Urine retains all the
qualities of the liquor drunk. Also in that famous instance of those that eat
the fruit called the Prickle-pear (if I remember aright,) their Urine has
affrighted the Eater with the color of blood, that is, with the not-alter'd
color of the Juice of the Fruit. In these instances at least we cannot doubt
but the Chyle, even in the Lacteal Veins, was qualified according to the food
and drink.

To effect then something to this purpose, we have formerly, and that very
often, repeated the Experiment of injecting highly tinged liquors into the Guts
of a live Animal. It would be too tedious and impertinent, to write down the
circumstances of many different trials: We will only in short tell you the
manner of performing it and the success.

We laced the skin of the Abdomen of a dog loosly for a hands breadth, and then
opening it underneath the stitches, we took out either the duodenum, or any
other of the tennia intestina. The Gut, took out, we opened with a very small
orifice, and having ready the tinged liquor lukewarm, we injected it upward
and downward: Carefully stitching up the gut, and then drawing the Lace, we
unloosed two of the Dogs feet, laying him on his side for what time we thought
convenient. The tinged liquors we used, were good Barbado's Indigo, in fair
water, and filtrated; also lumps of Indigo thrust down his throat; good broth
(as they call it) of a blew fat; Indigo in Milk; Saffron in Milk. Again, we
tried in some Dogs fed before hand, and injected the liquors in the very hight
of the Chyle's distribution; into others yet fasting, and that for a longer or
shorter time.

The Success was so constant, that we cannot say, we ever did find the least
discoloring of Chyle on the other side the Guts, that is, within the Lacteous
Veins, but ever white and uniform. Whence we judge it not very feasible to
tinge the Venal Chyle in a well and sound animal. And He that would demonstrate
the matter of fact to the Eye, must probably do it by giving him some such
thing in the food, as shall cause a Diabetes, or some distemper equivalent to
it.

Though we have observed many odd things in the several Exercises of this
nature; yet we shall not trouble you at present with any other particulars,
than what we have further observed in the Guts, to which we shall confine our
paper. Of these we shall proceed to speak though possibly the the things may be
better known to you already.

As 1. of the Glandul^ miliares N. B. Peyer^^ did not Publish his Book of these
Glandul^ til the Year 1677. viz. more then 4 Years after my discovery of them
and Publication in the Philosophical Transactions.
of the small Guts, which may also in some Animals be well called fragiformes,
from the figure of the one half of a Strawberry, and which yet I take to be
Excretive glanduls, because Conglomerate.

2. The Use of the Intestinum cae^um, subservient to that of the Colon and
Rectum; manifest in such Animals, where Nature intends a certain and
determinate figure to the Excrements.

3. Of some sorts of Vermin, we found in the Guts. And first of the Lumbrici
lati or Tape worm. Of these, I say, we found in the guts of one Dog, perhaps
more than an hundred in all. The duodenum was exceedingly stuffed out and
extended with them. Which also well agrees with an other Observation I made in
a Mouse, where I found the duodenum to be far bigger than the Stomach it self,
by reason of the great numbers of these worms for kind, which were contained in
it: For kind, I say; for these Tape-worms were of a quite different shape from
those of the Dog, or any that I have ever yet seen. To proceed, we found them
also in the Dog's Jejunum and Ileon; but not any one lower than the Valv^ a
coli, nor any higher than the duodenum or within the Pilorus. Below the
duodenum they lay at certain distances one from another, though sometimes by
pairs or more of them twisted together. Near them was constantly to be observed
an Excrement of their own, distinct, for color (the observation being made in
a Dog plentifully fed for other purposes;) just as we find in worm-eaten tracks
of wood, where the Coss^ leave behind them the wood which has passed through
their bodies: These worms lay mostly with the small ends upward, as feeding
upon and expecting the Chyle in its descent. These lumbrici lati were none of
them above one foot long, and most of them of an equal length and bigness. The
one end was as broad as my little finger-nail, and pointed like a lancet; the
other end, coming small gradually for the whole length of the Animal, was
knoted, or ended in a small button like a pin-head. They were everywhere and
in all parts of them alike milk white, of a flat and thin substance like fine
Tape, divided into infinite rings and incisures; each incisure having sharp
angles, on both sides, looking to the broader end standing out beyond each
other: else the sharp corners of the annuli would necessarily hinder the Ascent
of the Animal; whereas, if the contrary be true, they serve to keep it up. Each
ring has also on the one side only, and that alternately, one small
pro^uberance, much like the middle feet of the body of some Caterpillars.

After I have thus described them to you, I desire you to view the Cut of
Tulpius in the last years Edition of his Medic. Observat. l. 2. 42; where he
retracts the first figure, given us in the Edition of that book in the year
1652. And yet I cannot say, that all in this last is true; for, to me, the
rictus and eye in the there supposed head of the animal seem to be the mere
fancies of the painter; not to say, that probably the smaller end is the head,
which, indeed, is in this Cut wholly neglected. Comparing our Animals with that
Cut of Tulpius, it was not very easy for me to observe, because of the great
resemblance, the specific difference of the lumbrici lati of Men, and those of
this Animal.

I was not so happy as to discover any motion in any part of them, in water or
out of it, nor did they seem, if pricked or otherwise hurt, much if at all) to
contract themselves or shorten the Annuli, so that they then appea'd to me as
things without motion or sense.

There is an other sort of lumbrici lati to be met with very ^requently also in
Dogs, called Cucurbitini from the likeness each annulus or link has to a
cucumber seed. I have found of them about half a foot long, but more often
broken into shorter pieces. The former by us discribed is undoubtedly a
complete and entire Animal; but there is great reason of suspicion, that this
is a chain of many Animals linked together. These Animals for Kind have been
observed to have been voided by Men, and found enclosed in a Gut or Membrane of
a prodigous length: And (which is more notable,) a person of great integrity
and worth, Mr, F. I. affirmed to me, that he once assisted at the opening of a
Dog, in which one of the Kidneys was observed to be quite wasted and become a
perfect bladder, and in that bladder they found something like an Animal of a
monstrous shape, which being dissected, was nothing else but a skin full of
these lumbrici cucurbitini. V. Kerkring^^ Spic. Anat. Obs. 59. 79.
It were to be desired, that such as have the oppertunity of such rare
Phenomenon, as of Snakes, Lizards, Beetles, Catterpillers, Toads and such like
things, as we read of in Medicinal histories to have been vomited, whether they
are not the like disguises of this sort of Worms, much assisted by the
surprised fancies of the first Observers.

And because these sort of Worms are sometimes said to be found out of the
Guts, their most proper place, we shall conclude with a very recent observation
of the last month in this City. A Surgeon brought me about 20 worms, which
he had just then taken out of an ulcerated Ankle of a Girl of about eight
years old. I had the curiosity to go my self and see it. I found the leg found
all but the Ankle, which was vastly swelled, and the Girl otherwise hearty and
well colored, She had been in great misery for some months; had been sent up
to London, where she was touched and dressed for the Evil. Sometimes after her
return, her pain continuing, a young Puppy was opened and applied to the Soars.
The Surgeon, who took off the puppy, found it, to his great admiration, full
of worms, at least 60. in number, what those he found in the body of the Puppy,
and what he drew out of the soar Ankle; into which, he said, they crawled down
as worms do into the Ground. The same puppy was again applied, and it was then
(at the second taking of the puppy) that I made the visit, and saw only one
worm got out into the puppy, but a very live and stirring one. Many were
afterward killed injections. These worms I affirm, according to my best
Knowledge, (and I had the oppertunity of comparing them) were of the very
Species of the Lumbrici teretes, which Children familiarly void from the Guts.
They were betwixt three and four inches long; all, about the matter, of an
equal bigness, as of one brood; something thicker than a Ducks quill; very
sharp at both ends; stiff, and exactly round; without incisures, visible at
least, and yet could move and twist themselves readily enough. All the
difference was in the color, these being much whiter than any I have seen from
the Guts. Vid. Barthol. in Hist. 60. Cent. 5. where near twenty worms, as long
as my finger, were found in a Lady's arm, probably of this Species too.

I beg your pardon for my, etc.

Some Papers written about the same time to Mr. Oldenburgh, in whose hands they
remained unpublished.
1. Paper.
THe passage of the Chyle through the Intestines, into the Lacteous Veins, is a
thing hitherto demonstrated to the eye by none. Dr. Lowar ingeniously confesses
the ill success he had in trying with Air or tinged Spirit of Wine, by neither
of which he was able to force a passage. And J. Wallaeus is very positive that
however the Chyle in the Intestines may be diversely colored, yet it is still
white in the Lacteal Veins. (V. Epist. de mot^) Chyle. To this purpose
Diembroock in his late anatomy * affirms "Chylum semper album" inveniri in
vasis lacteis mesenterij, and thoracic is -- viridem vero rubrum alteriusve
coloris in jis a nemine hactenus visum fuisse. p. 37. Notwithstanding which,
and my own Insuccessfull Trials, I did not doubt, but some happy Experiment
would show the contrary; and a purposely colored Chyle might find admittance
into the Lacteal Veins, though not by force, yet by the consent and
introduction of nature her self. The success of some late Experiments we made
to this purpose, we shall further acquaint you with.

1. Experiment, I caused a Dog to be fed, and after 4 hours, or therabouts
(having ready by me a clear Tincture of Indigo dissolved in fair water filtred)
I opned the Abdomen, and making a small incision in the Jejunum, (as was
formerly discribed) I injected one ounce or two. this done, the Gut and all we
stitched up again, and the Dog turned upon his legs. After one hour and one
quarter we cut the stitches, where we beheld a copious distribution of Chyle
and turgid Lacteal Veins, but as white as ever; And yet carefully searching the
Guts, we perceived none of the liquor injected any where.

2. Experiment, An other Dog which was kept fasting 40. hours, a very little
flesh, without water, given him, some 5 hours before the injection of the
Tincture of Indigo, which was done after the same manner, as before related,
only the Tincture was well warmed, and some 12. ounces throughn up the
duodenum, and down the Ileon. Here were empty Guts, nor the least appearance of
any Lacteal Veins in the Mesenterie. After full 3 hours the stiches were cut
again (some occasional business hindering me from doing of it sooner) and
carefully examining the Mesenterie, we found many Lacteal Veins of an azure
color, and cutting some of the biggest of them asunder we did plainly see a
thick bluish Chyle to issue forth, and to spread it self over the transparant
Membrane of the Mesenterie. This is a very truth, which the Surgeon, I
employed to assist me in the Experiment can well witness, and whose eyes I
used as well as my own in carefully examining these matters. whence, although
it has been doubted of by some, yet it is most evident, that the Lacteal Veins
receive, what they carry, from within the Cavitie of the Intestines.

As to the bunches of Glandulae within the Guts, I have observed them in
several kinds of Animals at diverse times, and do therefore think them natural
and not adventitious or morbous, as some were pleased to object. These
Glandulae protuberate, and are thereby visible in any part of the small Guts,
where they are to be found. In the duodenum of a Dog, I have seen many clusters
of them, some as broad as my nail, and all disposed in an oval figure, like the
half of a Strawberry, or Mulberry. They are very visible in the Guts of Mice,
where each grain seems much larger than in a Dog. Again the part, where these
Glandulae are, seems more thin than the rest of the Gut, and therefore the Gut
slit, and held betwixt the light of your eye these grains are very conspicuous.
Further these Glandulae (like the rest of the Conglomerate kind) empty
themselves into the Guts, which is manifest by the comparison of them, and
therefore serve for the excretion of some Saliva-like juices, but whether they
may not also introduce the Chyle, I will not determine here.

A Second Letter writ about the same time; 1673. to the same Person.
I did not think of explaning my sense of the use of the Caecum until I had had
the Leisure and opportunty of purposely examining the I^testines of most kind
of Animals. But because I am much mistaken by the person, who, as you tell me,
is desirous to be anonimous to me, him I mean who raised the scruples you sent
me, upon the Second Paragraph, which says, the use of the Intestinum Caecum to
be subservient to that of the Colon, and Rectum; manifest in such Animals where
Nature intends a certain, and determinate Figure to the Excrements. I shall be
forced to tell you, what I presume may prove, as near the truth, as any one of
the many conjectures extant in Authors, about the unknown use of this part. I
understand by determinate figure. First, the Excrements divided into many small
parts of a like shape, such as Sheep, Deer, Conies, Rats, Mice, Horses
Catterpillers, Some Snailes etc. do void. Secondly, in a greater Latitude, I
oppose figured Excrements to Liquid, as C. Celsus in some place does; Thus the
dung of Pigeons, and Geese, of Men, Dogs, Cats, etc. may be said to be figured.
Now the Caecum, in my opinion, is subservient in some measure to the figuration
of both, but most manifestly in the first kind. My meaning is that probably the
use of the Caecum is to keep the Excrements, that pass into its cavitie (and I
believe all, or most part of them do in sound Animals) so long, until they are
sufficiently drained, baked, hardened, or of a due consistence, (as clay is
temperd for the mould) to receive the Figure to be given from the Colon and
rectum. This use I say of the Caecum, seems to me to be much more manifest in
such Animals, as have figured Excrements of the first kind. In Ratts for
example, (whose Excrements are the most elegantly and constantly a like
figured, of any Sanguineous Animal I have met with) the Caecum is more large,
and capacious, than the stomach it self, and perhaps than all the small guts
put togather. But its use in receiving the Excrements or exhausted Chyle, is
not more apparent, from its large capacity; than that other of further draining
and tempering them to a stiffnesse, for the service of the Colon, from the
admirable contrivance, and structure, of this latter Gut, which is a Phaenomon
that deserves further consideration: it is I say to be noted, that immediately
under the Value of that Gut, in this Animal, are certain Spiral Fibers, which
make a kind of screw. Now it seems to me, that the Excrements, after they are
brought to a due Consistence by the Necessary stay they make in the Caecum,
and being carried out thence into the Spiral folding, or screw of the Colon,
cannot descend in a perpendicular, as formerly through the small Guts, but
still gently glide very leisurly by the vinding of the screw; whence arises
their Figure.

And I am apt to believe, that if the Caecum of a Ratt, or any of the first
kind of Animals mentioned, was tied up, or otherwise hindered from its receipt,
the Animals would unavoidably fall into a Diarrhaea: there being, I say, no
reason, that I can foresee, why the yet liquid Excrements or exhausted Chyle,
such as we constantly find it, even at the very bottom of the small Gut, should
slop at the entrance of the Colon, and not speedly glide through the screw, in
a down right descent, that is, elude the devise of nature, and make the
configuration of that so curiously contrived part useless, we I say supposing
the Experiment to have taken away the necessary Diverticulum and repositarie
of the unprepared Excrements, in tying up the Caecum.

I know not, whether the observation will hold good in general Terms, because I
say, I have not yet purposily examined diverse Animals in nature, viz. That the
more accurately figured the Excrements of any Animal are, the more capacious is
the Caecum, and on the contrary the less figured and liquid they are, the
lesser the Caecum, or none at all. This is true certainly that some Animals,
which are naturally loose have no Caecum at all or very little, as the Talpa,
the Echinus terrestris the Gulo, a certian kind of voracious Woolfe, mentioned
by Bartholine in his Observations.

We shall not trouble you at present with our observations concerning the
different Figure of Excrements in the diverse Species of Animals already by us
examined, nor of the place and of their becoming so figured. Also we shall
pass by our thought for the present of the manner of the Caecums reception and
preparing the Excrements.

For the Colon, we likewise sorbear to offer some doubts we have, concerning
natures end, in the necessary Figuration of Excrements in some Animals, as
first to prevent Diarrhaeas; Secondly to abide hunger the better; thus Snails
in Winter rest with full Intestines; Thirdly to heighten the firmentation and
digestion of the stomach and small guts.

What we have hastly writ at present, being only intended for the better
uuderstanding of that Paragraph, and not all that this subject would incite me
to say.

If it shall be objected, that grant the reception of the exhausted Chyle to be
made in the Caecum, before it pass into the Colon: yet it seems that either we
must give a power of choice to the Caecum, or what just comes in, will first be
thrown out, it still being uppermost, that is, the less prepared excrement. I
answer, that I do not conceive, what choiee or distinction Sheep, can make of
the meat not ruminated, in the stomach, from that, which is but just now
ruminated, and swallowed down, since all the many stomachs of a sheep are but
one stomach and but one Gula, that is, in that respect of ruminating the
stomach and Gula of a Sheep or Cow, is an other Caecum; and yet in ruminating
nature has its aim, and chews not things oftener over, than needs must; the
like we think of the office of the Caecum, which parts only with what is duly
prepared, and retains the yet liquid Excerment.

3 Paper. Some probable thoughts of the whiteness of Chyle; and what it is
after it is conveyed within the Arteries: Communicated much about the same time
with the former. N. B. I am not altogether of the same Opinion Now; yet, they
were my thoughts than.
1. IN digestion of meat in the stomach, there is made a Separation or solution
of Urinous salts; no otherwise, than in the rotting of Animals, or Plants.

2. The Chyle is hughly impregnate with this Urinous Salts.

3. The Whiteness of the Chyle is from the Fermentation it has from its
mixture with Urinous salts; and that if desolv'd with fair water, it is wholly
deprived of that color, the firmentation ceasing.

4. The Salt Chyle is conveyed into the Venal blood, and with it enters the
heart; and it is thence thrown out, Chyle as it comes in by a continued
pulsation into the Artery.

5. That as often as it enters the emulgent Arteries, it there leaves behind it
part of its salinous liquour or Urine, and consequently abates of its color.

6. That when sufficiently freed of its Urinous salt, it becomes a Lympha;
which we think nothing else, but the residue of the Chyle, not yes made into
the nature of blood, as not sufficiently depurate of its Saline Particles.

7. That probably it circulates long under the nature of a Lympha; after
visiting all the parts of the body by the Arteries, and returning again to the
Heart, partly by its own vessels, and partly by the veins.

8. That in defect of Chyle (for we cannot constantly feed) nature continually
supplys the Mass of blood with the Lympha, or old Chyle.

9. That upon every supply of fresh Chyle, much of the old stock or Lympha is
(according to the necessity of parts) converted to this or that use: and not
till than.

10. That there is ever, more Lympha in the mass of blood, than there is need
off for the diluting of it. the Arterial blood (be the Animal never so much
exhausted by hunger) always parting with some upon extravasation and
coagulation.

11. In the Coagulation of extravasate blood there is no praecipitation of
parts, as in curdled Milk etc. for if the Chyle be freshly distributed into the
Mass of blood, it will again separate it self, as Oil will from water; and in
like manner is it with the Lympha or old Chyle, neither of them being as any
essential part of the blood.

12. The Venal and Arterial blood have probably both a like quantity of Lympha
to dilute them; but the Arterial in Coagulating involves within its
Crassamentum more than the Venal: the reason may be, for that the Arterial is
fuller of air, which rarifies and renders the Arterial Crassamentum more porous
and capacious, of lodging the Lympha: which yet as it subsides by long
standing, parts with and lets go more and more Lympha.

13. The great Instrument of Circulation is the Systole or Vibration of the
Heart; which yet would not be sufficient from hindering the Coagulation of the
blood, without a continual supply of Lympha to dilute it.

An Account of two uncommon Mineral Substances, viz. of Bitumen, and a White
Liquor. January 7. 1674.
SIR,
THat this Letter may be the more acceptable to you, I shall communicate some
Excerpta, taken out of the Letters, which that Inqusitive and Learned Gentleman
Mr. Jessop is pleased to honor me with. I will give, (says he) the best
answer I can in short to the Questions, you put to me in your last.

1. The Fungus subterraneous, I sent you a large quantity of, was gotten in a
Rocky Limestone ground, on a Common about two miles distant from Castleton in
the Peake of Darby-shire, 15 or 16 yards deep, in the Old man (as they call a
Mine formerly wrought and stopped up) covered with earth, that had either fallen
or was thorwn in. There is no coal-bed that is knowu of within five or six
miles of the place.

Of this Fungus, by Mr. Jessops procurement, I received a good quantity; and
yet I am not able to say, in what form it grows. It does not seem to me to have
any constant shape; at least the pieces that I received are much like Pears or
Turff, cut up in the high moosr, both in the sooty color and inward
substance; this ouly is more clammy and tough, and dries not. And some of the
fungous substance is very soft and like gel^y. In and about the more solid
pieces, (of which I have some, half a soot square,) are many big lumps of a
bituminous substance. This bitumen is very inflammable like Rosin; it is very
light, it breaks firm, and shines like good Aloes; and for color, it is not
much unlike it, save that it is more dark color'd and purplish; yet there is
much of it of a dark green color. We distilled a parcel of it, which yielded
us an Acidulous limpid water; then, a white liquor, which was, I guess, from
some of the Oily parts precipitate. And in the last place, a copious yellow
Oil, not unlike that of Succinum or Pitch. In the neck of the Retort we could
discern no Volatile Salt, as in the like process upon Amber. Whether this ows
its Original to a Vegetable, or is truly a concret Mineral Juice and a fossil
Bitumen I forbear to determine. I have not read of any such fungous Earth, in
which bitumen naturally grows and adheres: And the finding of it in an Old mine
does much favor the first opinion of being a Vegetable substance; either the
very substance of the props of Wood, they make use of in lining and supporting
the Grooves, thus altered, or certain fungus's growing out of them. That Birch,
(of which there is great plenty and has been vast woods all these mountanous
parts of England over) will yield a bitumen, as limpid as the sap is which runs
from it by tapping, if we now had the skill to extract it, Pliny is very
express, l. 16. c. 18. Bitumen ex Betula Galli exc^quunt. And more-over it is
certain, that much of that wood, if not all, which is dugg up in the high moors
of Craven, and which the people there call and use for Candle-wood, is no other
than Birch, as it appears from the grain and bark; and yet this wood kindles
flames, and exudats a rosin, which makes many pronounce it very Firr-wood.
Whatever this bitumen is, which this Fungus subterraneous yields, it much
differs from the Asphal^um of the Shopps; and you may command a Specimen of it,
that it may be better examined by more skilful Naturalists.

2. There is an other Mineral Juice in these parts of England, which I have
much inquired after, and longed to see; and now I am likely to be satisfied, as
you may think by Mr. Jessops words: Captain Wain, (says he) a diligent and
knowing person in Mines, gave me a White Liquor, resembling Cream both in
color and consistance, which he found in great quantities at the bottom of a
Coal-pit, 49 yards deep, which I reserve for you. But this is not all the
information that has been given me about this White Liquor. Mr. George
Plaxton, a curious and very intelligent person, writes thus to me from Sheriff
Hales in Shropshire: I shall trouble you with an Observation, I lately met with
in our Iron-mines, especially that which the Country people here call the White
Mine, which yields the best Iron-stone. The Miners do commonly, upon the
breaking of a Stone, meet with a great quantity of a whitish milky Liquor,
enclosed in the Center of it; they sometimes find a Hogshead contain, d in one
cavity. It Is in taste sweetish; only it has a Vitriolick and Iron-like twang
with it.

A Description of certain Stones, figured like Plants, York November. 4th. 1673.
IN this paper I send you an Account of some of the Parts of certain Stones
figured like Plants; which Argicola (5 Fossilium) calls Trochitae, and the
compound ones Entrochi; we in English, St. Cutberds beads.

Agricola will have them akin for substance to the Lapides Judaici; and,
indeed, these are of an opaque and dark colored Sparr; though I have of them
from some parts of England of a white Sparr or Cawke, as our Miners call it:
They all break like Flint, polished and shining.

Put into Vinegar (says he) they buble: Atque etiam reperitur interdum qui se
tanquam Astroites moveat de loco. But this is true of all Fossils of what
figrue so ever, that Vinegar will corrode and dissolve as a Menstruum; provided
they be broken into indifferent small grains, and the bottom of the Vessel
hinder not, they will be moved from place to place by it.

The figure of the Trochitae is cylindrical; the outmost round or Circle (we
speak of one single joint, which Agricola calls Trochites) is in general
smooth, both the flat-sides are thick drawn with fine and small rays, from a
certain hole in the middle to the circumference. From the shooting of these
rays like Antimonie, and because a large Piece of this Stone of many joints
resembles the bole of a Tree, Aldrovandus (who yet elsewhere discourses of this
Stone, after Agricola and Gesner, under the name of Trochitae and Entrochi) not
improperly terms it (Musae: Metallici lib. 1. page 188.) Stelechites Stibii
facie; and there gives us a true ^igure of it. Two, three, or more of these
Trochitae joined together, make up that other Stone, which he calls Entrochos.
The Trochite or single joints are so together, that the Rays of the one enter
into the other Furrows, as in the Sutures of the skill. Hitherto we agree to
what Agricola, Gesner, Boethius, Aldrovandus, and Wormius have said of them: We
proceed upon our own Observations, which go much further.

The Places where we find them very plentifully, are certain Scarrs in
Braughton and Stock, little Villages in Craven. The Stones of the abovesaid
described Figure, as many as have yet come to my hands from those places, have
afforded us these Particulars. As to their bigness, I never yet met with any
much above two inches about; others there are as small as the smallest pinn,
and of all magnitudes betwixt those proportions. These are all broken bodies;
some shorter Pieces, some longer, and of them, indeed, Trochitae, that is, but
single joints. I never fonnd one entire piece much above two inches long, and
that very rarely too; in some of which long pieces, I have reckned about 30
joints. And as they are all broken bodies, so are they found dejected and lying
confusedly in the Rock, which in some places, is soft and shelly (as they call
it,) that is, rotten and perished with the wet and air. And though in some
places they are but sprinkled here and there in the Rock, yet there are whole
bedds of Rock of vast extent, which are made up of these, and other figured
Stones, as Bivalve, Serpentine, Turbinate, etc. as at Braughton.

As to the injuries they have received in their removal from the natural
posture, if not place of their growth and formation, they are manifest. For,
besides their being all broken bodies, we find many of them depressed and
crushed, as if the joint of a hollow*

Cae should be trod under foot: These Crushes being also real Cracks of a stone
or glass. Again these stones consisting of many vertebrae or joints, they are
many of them strangely dislocated; sometimes two, three, or more of the joints
in a Piece are slipped and out of order or rank, and sometimes a whole series
of joints, as when a pack of Crown pieces leans obliquely upon a Table. Futher,
others I have that are twisted like a Cord, if this possibly may be reckoned
amongst the injuries. Lastly, some have their joints, indeed, even and in file,
but are yet stuffed with a foreign matter, as when bricks are laid in motrer.

There is great variety as to the thickness of the Trochitae or single joints:
some are so thin, that they are scarce the full of the 24 th. part of an inch;
others are a full quarter of an inch thick; of these latter I only found at
Stock: These, I say, are the extreme proportions, as far as my Observations
have yet gone; there are joints of all measures betwixt those two Extremes.
This is true in diverse Pieces, for mostly the joints are of an equal thickness
in one and the same Piece. Note, that there are slender and small Entrochi or
Pieces, which have as thick joints, as the biggest and fairest Pieces.

There is also some difference in the seames or closing of the joints: Some are
but seemingly joynted; which appears by this, that if they be eaten down a
while in distilled vinegar, the seeming Suturs will vanish, as in some I had
out of Staffordshire, from about Beresford upon the Dove: Others and all here
at Braughton and Stock are really joynted, and the Sutures indented; which
indentures being from the terminating of the rays, they are more fair or
large, according to the differenc of the rays, but even, equal, and regular.

We have said, that generally the outmost Circle of each joint is flat and
smooth; yet are there many other differences to be noted as to that Part: Very
porbably because they are Parts or Pieces of different Species of rock-Plants.

1. That the smooth-joynted (to say no more of them here) are of different
thicknesses as to the joints.

2. On some Entrochi betwixt, Suture and Suture in the middle of each joint,
are certain Knots in a Circle; the joints thus distinguished are very deep and
large, and are very frequent at Stock.

3. There are likewise of these with a circle of knots, which have many knots
besides upon each joint and look rugged.

4. Some with much thinner joints, which yet have a Circle of knots in the
middle of joint; and this also looks as though it was all over knotted, and
these are found at Braughton only, as far as I know.

5. As some have but one Circle of knots, others, are knotted all over the
joint and rought; so are there some others, which have a Circle of larger knots
in the middle of each joint, and a circle of lesser on each side close
adjoining to the border or verge of the Suture. This is huge pretty, and they
are found at Stock.

6. Others betwixt Suture and Suture in the middle of each joint rise with a
circular edge.

7. A smooth Entrochos with a large or much risen edg on the middle of one of
the joints, and a much smaller on the middle of an other joint and that
atlernatively.

8. The same alternate difference, the joints only much rounder and blunt, and
here the joints are visibly one thicker than the other.

9. The same with alternate edges knotted.

10. A double edg in the middle of every joint; this makes the joints look as
though they were exceeding thin and numerous, but indeed they are not so.

11. A double edg in the middle of every joint knotted by intervals, or as it
were serrate edges.

And these are some of the differences, that I have at present been able to
make out. Some of the Pieces of most, if not all, of the differences of these
Entrochi are ramous, having lesser branches deduced from the greater, and that
without order. Some have but few branches on a Piece; others I find so thick of
branches, that they resemble a ragged Staff. These Branches are deep inserted
within the stemm, and by being separated, leave great holes in the sides of it.
The rays in the joints of the branches run cross to the rays of the stemm. On
thick stemms, are sometimes very small branches, but mostly the bigger the Stem
the thicker the branches. Some of these branches are branched again: Yet I find
not any of them above one inch entire, and yet adhering and inserted into its
stock o bole, and for the most part not above a joint or two. The Branches are
known from the stemm, by being a little crooked and something tapering or Conic.

We meet but with few Pieces (besides the branches) that are not exactly
Cylindrical, setting aside the injuries above mentioned, that is, that are not
as thick at one end as at the other, and perfectly round, notwithstanding that
we said, that there are of them of all degrees of magnitude within the
proportions abovenamed.

And, as we said, it is rare to meet with a Piece, that is not exactly
cylindrical; so amongst those few that are not so, some we find tapering at
both Ends, and much swelled in the middle. And this is the other Species of
this Stone, according to the division of Agricola: Entrochi duae sunt Species;
aut enim aequaliter teres est; aut teres quidem, sed part ejus media tumet,
utrumque caput angustius est. But this must not be understood, as though both
ends were complete; for these, are but broken Pieces, as the rest, more swelled
in the middle.

Others there are figured like a kind of Fruit, or Lapis Judaicus; but these
also are truly Entrochi, and are joynted notwithstanding this shape. Upon a
small Stalk of two or three joints is suddenly raised an Oval bottom, broken
off also at both ends.

To these we shall add what seems to have been summitates or fastigia; long and
slender Pieces with a little jointed buttom, hollow on the very top; which top
seems not to have been divided or broken off from any thing else.

I must not forget, that as they are hollow in the middle (and so it was easy
to string them like beads, which gave occasion to the English name;) so these
hollows are someetimes filled with earth, and sometimes an other Entrochos is
enclosed like a pair of screws, and which is (as it were) pith to the other. Of
these inward Entrochi some I have which are transparent. Note, that the hollows
or piths are of different bores, but most are round. And yet there are of them
in great plenty at Stock, whose hollow in the middle is in the elegant fashion
of a Cinquefoil; and the rays of the joints of Entrochi are much deeper and
fewer in number, than of any other yet observed by me. These are
smooth-joynted. This is most surprising, and I know not any Vegetable, whose
Pith is perforate in such a manner.

Lastly we in these Rocks find rude Stones, of the bigness of Walnuts, which
have many impressions of Trochitae upon them, as though they had been the roots
of them. And when these have been a little cleansed in Vinegar, these
impressions appear more than casual; for, the substance that covers them (if
not the Stones themselves) is Sparr, and the impressions are round holes,
which, we said above, the Branches made in the sides of the stock, when broken
out from them. Agricola makes mention of these also: Saepenumero lapis informis
reperitur una cum Trochite and Entrocho, Rotae in se continens figuram; quae in
eo quasi quaedam radix, Trochitis jam abruptis, remansit.

Although there are indeed certain lapides informs, which may with some color
be thought to have been the Roots, from whence some Entrochi have been broken;
yet are not all such lumps of Stone, on which we discern the Vestigia of
Entrochi to be called lapides informs, some of them being most elegantly
figured. One or two of them, which I found entire and complete at Stock,
amongst very many others strangely shattered and defaced, I shall describe to
you.

1. The first is in the fashion of a Pine Apple or Cone, with a hollow bottom:
On the very Top is the round figure of an Entrochos broken off; round about the
bottom or basis are five single feet at equal distances, in the figure of
Crescents. This Stone is incrustate or made up of angular Plates; viz. the
bottom is composed of five plates, which we call Feet; the middle of the Stone
of five other plates, all of a Sexangular figure; and the Top Stone. All other
plates are smooth on the outside.

2. The sccond is a large Stone of the bigness of a Walnut, much after the
pyramidal fashion of the other; the bottom unequal, about one inch and a quarter
over; on the top is the lively impression of an Entrochos broken off, or rather
a Trochites yet remaining; round the Basis are five double points or Feet at
equal distances, all broken of somewhat in the figure of Crescents. This Stone
also is incrustate or covered with Sex-angular plates, which are rough. I can
compare the inc^ustating of these stones to nothing so well, as to the skins of
the Piscis Tringularis, which Margravius describes: Cujus Cutis (nam caret
squamis) figuris Trigonis, tetragonis, pentagonis, hexagonisque mire
distinguitur and notatur.

Of these figured plates I find so great variety in the Rocks, both as to the
number of Angles and other beautiful Ornaments, that it has caused in me great
admiration. And it will not be amiss* since they manifestly belong, as parts,
to the above described stones, to enumerate them, at least, as many as have yet
come to my hands. Some of these angular plates, I said, are yet visible in
their natural place and posture in the described stones: But I find the
greatest part of them broken up and heaped together in great confusion in the
Rocks. And it will be as hard to set them together, as to skill to tell you,
what the figure of an entire Entrochos (or the stone to which all the above
described parts seem to belong) is: But we will omit no part, that we can
justly say belongs unto it. We shall begin with Pentagonous plates.

1. The first is a Pentagonous Stone, as broad as my thumb-nail (we speak of
the fairest of them,) hollow on the one side, like a Dish; unequal on the other
side, where are certain eminent knots, about the bigness of small pinn-heads,
set iu a kind of square order: This plate is somewhat thinn at the edges and
yet blunt.

2. The second is also Pentagonous, and not much narrower than the other: It
is, indeed, somewhat unequal above, but not hollow underneath; it is smooth on
both sides, at least without those eminent knots, which are so remarkable in
the other plate: The edges of these are as thinn as of a knife, and sharp.

3. The third Pentagonous Plate is not near so broad, as either of the former;
yet one I found amongst a 100 of this sort, that is full as any of the above
described: These are all unequal on the one side and somewhat hollow on the
other; thick edged; one of the 5 sides only is indented; the indented side is
ever the thinnest, and the stone is most sloped toward that side. Note, that
there are many amongst these last indented sorts of plates, which are
channelled on the concave side and otherwise notched.

4. All these Pentagonous plates are to be found plentifully at Braughton or
Stock. But I shall not omit in this place the mentioning of one, I by chance
espied amongst certain figured Stons, which I had out of the Quarrie near
Wansford-bridg in Northamptonshire, and it probably belongs to these kind of
plates I am now in hand with. It has one of the five sides thick indented; the
unequal part has in the middle a raised Vmbo, like some ancient shields, and
round about the sides list of smaller Studds. We have since had some plates
much like this from Bugthorp under the Woolds in Yorkshire. We proceed to
remarke some differences in the sexangular plates.

5. All these stones are but small, save here and there one: The first of them
is but little hollow on the one side, and convex-side most elegantly wrought
with raised or embossed work, that is, with an equilateral triangle bestriding
each Corner, and a single right line in the midst; or, if you will, two
Triangles one within another. These we found at ^raughton-fear only.

6. That Plate-stone which is most common in these Rocks, there being a 1000 of
these to be found for one of the other, is sexangular, a little hollow on the
one side and unequal side or scabrous only; some are much thicker than others;
some being as thick as broad, but most are Plate-like; the sides are very
unequal, as in Crystals; sometimes five broader sides and one very small; again
two sides broad and four much narrower, and infinite other differences as to
the inequality of Sides.

Words are but the arbitrary symboles of things, and perhaps I have not used
them to the best advantage. Good Design (and such is that I send you, done by
that ingenious young Gentleman and excellent Artist, my very good friend, Mr.
William Lodge.) or the things themselves, which I have all by me, would make
these particulars much more intelligible and plain to you.

The Explication of the Figures. See Tab. I.
1. A Trochites or single joint with very fine and small Rays.

2. A Trochites or single joint with the pith bored through, in the fashion of
cinquefoil.

3. A Trochites or single joint, of an Oval figure, the rays scarce apparent
and a very small point in the place of the pith.

4. A single joint or two of a middle size, with the pith exceeding large.

5. A pack of single joints dislocated, and yet adhering in their natural order.

6. A very long Entrochos or a piece of many smooth joints with the branches
broken off.

7. An Entrochos with smooth joints not branched.

8. The biggest Entrochos I have yet seen, with stumps of branches.

9. A smooth Entrochos with very thin and numerous joints.

10. The largest or deepest joynted Entrochos, save the oval one noted in the
third figure.

11. An Entrochos with very many disorderly knots in each joint.

12. An Entrochos with one only single Circle of knots in the middle of each
joint.

13. An Entrochos with three Circles of knots.

14. A smooth Entrochos, with a large and much risen edge in the middle of each
joint.

15. Alternate joints round or blunt.

16. A double edg in the middle of each joint.

17. Alternate joints, edged.

18. 19. 20. Certain other differences noted in the Paper, but not pefectly
expressed in the Design.

21. An Entrochos with a branch of a good length.

22. A branch of an Entrochos knocked off.

23. An Entrochos fruit-like.

24. A fastigium or Summitas.

25. A radix of an Entrochos in Prospective: where A is a joint or Trochites
yet remaining, whence an Entrochos was broken off. C. E. F. D. are four of the
double feet; the 5 th. being hid.

26. The same radix to be seen at the best advantage: A the Trochites or basis:
C. B. D. E. F. the five double Feet. Note also the sex-angular rough plates,
which incrustate the stone or cover it all over.

27. A smaller Radix with smooth plates and five single Feet: H. the top stone.
I. one of the five Feet. K. one of the five angular plates which incurstate the
middle of the stone. G. the basis, Also the same stone in prospective. G. the
same with the hollow bottom upwards.

Figures of Plates supposed to incurstate diverse roots.

28. A pentagonous plate knotted.

29. A thinn edged smooth pentagonous plate.

30. An indented pentagonous plate.

31. The Northamptonshire pentagonous plate.

32. A large pentagonous smooth plate.

33. An hexagonous plate imbossed with angles

34. An hexagonous plate, as deep as broad.

35. 37. Odd figured plates.

36. A quadrangular plate ribbed and indented.

A Letter concerning Snails, with Tables about that sort of Insects. York.
March. 12. 1673.
I Herewith send you the first part of our Tables of Snails, and some Quaere's
upon that subject, I reserve by me the Sea-shells and Rock-stones. That part, I
send you at present, being at a stand with me, these other increase upon my
hands daily; which though that be not a sign of perfection (for there is
undoubted work for many ages,) yet it is of good advancement and progress; this
other of the copiousness of the subject. Again, in that part of the Tables, you
have from me, Authors are very little concerned; in the others of Sea-shells
and Stone-like Shells there are many authors, which are to be consulted and
taken in, if possibly we can understand them treating of the same species. As
for Rcok-shells in particular, they come in to me in greater numbers, than I
could ever have imagined. And I can assure you, that of near 30 Species, I have
now by me, found in this County alone, not any one can be sampled by any Sea,
Fresh Water or Land-Snail, that I have, or ever saw. So that you see, I have
still good reason to doubt of their Original, besides many other arguments that
my Observations about Fossils do afford, and which you may possibly one day
see. And that there are the elegant representations of even Bivalve-shells,
which never owed their original to any Animal, I can demonstrate; and think
none, that has considered the thing with me, yet has denied: Of which
hereafter. But whether all be so or no, I choose this method, as the most
convincing, viz. to give a Comparati e view.

Some general Quaere's concerning Land and Fresh Water Snails.
1. Whether there are other Shell-snails at land, than Turbinate;

2. Whether this kind of Insect are truly Androgyna, and equally participate of
both Sexes, as Mr. Ray first observed; and whether both them two, which shall
be found in the act of Venery, do accordingly spawn, or lay those perfectly
round and clear Eggs so frequently to be met with in the surface of the Earth
and in the Water too; and the circumstances of those Eggs hatching?

3. Whether the way of fatting Snails, in use amongst the Romans, that is, to
make little paved places incircled with water, be not also very expedient in
order to the true noting the manner of their Generation?

4. What light the Anatomy of this Kind of Insect may give to the rest?

5. Whether the black spots, observable in the horns of some Snails, are Eyes,
as some Authors affirm, and not rather parts equivalent to the antennae of
other Insect; as the flat and exceeding thin shape, also the branched horns, in
other Species of Snails seem to confirm?

6. Whether the coccinea Snails, which some of our Water-snails freely and
plentifully yield, be not a Saliva rather than an extravasated blood: The like
may be thought of the Juice of the Purple-fish, now out of use, since the great
plenty of Cochineil?

7. In what sort of Snails are the Stones, mentioned by the Ancients, to be
found? And whether they are not to be found (in such as yield them) at certain
times of the year? And whether they are a cure for a Quartan; or what other
real virtues they have?

8. What medicinal virtues Snails may have, as restorative to Hectic persons;
and what credit the Romans may deserve, counting them, especially the necks of
them, highly venereal; Celsus also particularly commending them to be boni
succi, and stomacho aptas.

9. Also inquire concerning the Mechanical uses of the Saliva of these animals,
as in dying, whitening of wax, hair, etc.

Cochlearum Angliae Tabula.
Cochleae Fluviatiles Testaceae, seu testis contectae. Turbina^ae Breviore
figura, testae apertura clausa Operculo e saliva confecto, tantum ad hyemem.
Number. IV. Operculo testaceo Number. I.
Longiore figura, sive Buccina, convolutae a dextra versus sinistram. Number. IV.
a sinistra versus dextram. Number. II.
Compressae Number. III.
Nudae, Limaces quibusdam dictae. Number. III.
Terrestres Turbinatae Validiore testa, operculo testaceo clausa. Number. III.
tenui, pellucid a, semper aperta; convolutae a siextra in sinistram. Number. IV. a
finistra dextram versus. Number. I.
Compressa testa, Coccum sundentes. N. III.
Bivalves, Musculi quibusdam dict. Number. III. Univalvis, Patella dicta. Number. I.


Some Observations and Experiments made, and in a Letter communicated to the
Publisher, For the R. Society. Philosophical Transactions, N. 10.
I Shall venture to entertain you at present with a few loose Notes, which you
will be pleased to take in good part, and dispose of them as you think fitting.

I. Of the Efforescence of certain Mineral Glebes.
I keep by me certain big pieces of crude Allom-Mine, such as it was taken out
of the Rock. I had also in the same Cabinet like pieces of the ordinary
Fire-stone or Marcasite of the Coal-pits, which here we call Brass lumps. In
process of time both these Glebes shot forth Tufts of long and slender fibers
or threads; some of them half an inch long, bended and curled like hairs. In
both these Glebes, these Tufts were in some measure transparnt and crystalline.
These Tufts did as often repullulate, as they were struck and wiped clean off.

Herein these fibers differed in taste; the All^minous very Allomy and
pleasantly pungent; the Vitriolick stiptique and odious. Again, the Allom-ones,
being dissolved in fair water, raised a small ebullition; whereas the
Vitriolick fibers dissolved quietly. The Allom-fibres were generally smaller,
and more opaque, snow-like; the Vitriolick larger, many fibers equalling an
horse-hair in thickness, and more crystalline.

The water, wherein the Allom-fibres were dissolved did give no red Tincture
with Gall; not by all the means I could devise to assist them; whatever has
(and that with great confidence) been said to the contrary, by some of the
Writers of our Yorkshire Spaws: The Vitriolick did immediately give a purple
tincture with Gall.

Having laid pieces of the same Marcasite in a Cellar, they were in a few
months covered over with green Copperas, which was these Fibers shot and
perhapps again dissolved by the moist Air, clodder'd and run together.

Exposing other pieces of the same Vitriolick Glebe in my window, where the Sun
came, they were covered over with a white farinaceous matter, that is, with
these Fibers calcined by the rays of the Sun and warm Air, beating upon them.

Of what figure these Fibers were, whether round or angular, I could not well
discern. But I take these fibrous and thread-like shootings of Allom and
Vitriol to be most genuine and natural; and their Angular shootings, after
solution, into Cubes and Rhomboides, to be forced and accidental; Salts of very
different natures, as well Vegetable as Fossile, by a like process in
crystallizing of them, being observed to shoot into like figures. But this is
not my purpose at this time.

II. Of an odd figured IRIS.
I have not observed any Rock or sort of stone, whether Metalline or more
Vulgar, which has not its different sort of Sparr, shot in some part or other
of its bed or seams. And these Sparrs differ not only in their Colors and
other accidents, but eminently too in their Figure. To pass by diverse, which I
have collected, I shall describe one of a very curious Figure, and which
(though very common in our blew-Lime-stone Rocks, out of which plently of
Lead-Ore is got,) yet is not, that I know of, mentioned by any Author.

These Crystals are mostly of a black water, like the black flint in
Chawk-hills; but there are of them, which have a purplish or amethystine
color; and there are as clear as crystal. They adhere to the seams of the
rock, be it betwixt bed and bed, or wherever there are cross and oblique
veins through the very substance of the bed.

The smaller the veins, the less the Iris. You will find of them as small as
wheat-corns, and others an hundred times bigger. They shoot from both sides the
the seam, and mutually receive one the other.

They are figured thus, viz. a column consists of three quin-angular plains,
very little raised in the middle: these plains too are very unequal. Let them
hug one another, or be any ways straightned and compressed in their shooting;
yet the number of plains meution'd, both of the column and top, is most
certain. The places, where infinite of them may be had, are Rainsborough Scarr
upon the Rible; also in a Stone-quarry near Eshton Tarne in Craven.

III. Glossopetra tricuspis non-serrata.
Mr. Ray in his Travels has these words concerning the Glossopetrae, page 115.
Of the Glossopetrae (says he) I have not yet heard, that there have been any
found in England; which I do not a little wonder at, there being Sharks
frequently taken upon our Coasts. I have had out of the Isle of Shepy in the
River of Thames, very Sharks teeth dug up there; which could not be said to be
petrifi'd; though, at our first receiving them; but they were white, and in a
short time came to their natural color.

In the Stone-quarries in Hinderskels-Park near Malton, I had this stone (the
scheme whereof I send you;) the greatest rarity of this kind I ever met with,
and which I took out of the rock there my self. It is a fair Glossopetra with 3
points, of a black liver-colour, and smooth; its edges are not serreate; its
basis is (like the true teeth) of a rugged substance; it is carved round, the
basis with imbossed work: It has certain emiuent ridges or lines like rays
drawn from the basis to each point.

IV. Of certain Dactili Idaei, or the true Lapides Judaici, for kind found with
us.
The Stones called Dactili Idaei and Lapides Judaici, are brought over to us
from beyond Seas in diverse shapes; and some of them are described in Authors.
We have plenty of them for kind in these parts, as in the Stone-qurries at
Newton near Hemsley, and at Hellingley by Malton. There is some variety in the
figure of them here also; but the most common one in these rocks is after the
fashion of a Date-stone, round and long, about an inch, and sometime longer.
They are a little swelled in the middle, and narrower toward each end: They
are channelled the length-way, and upon the ridges knotted or purled all over
with small knots, set in a quincunx-order. The inward substance is a white
opaque Sparr, and breaks smooth like a flint; not at all hollow in the middle,
as are the Belemnites:

V. Of the Electrical power of Stones in relation to a Vegetable Rosin.
It so happened, that having occasion in July to view certain Fossils, which I
had disposed of into diverse Drawers in a Cabinet made of Barmoudos Cedar, I
observed many of the stones to be thick-cover'd over with a liquid Rosin like
Venice Turpentine. Examining further, there was not a Drawer, wherein there was
not some more some fewer stones thus drenched.

That this could be no mistake, as from dropping, the bottoms of the Drawers
are of Oak. Again, many stones, which were lapped up in papers, were yet wholly
infected and covered with this Rosin. Besides, after diligent search there
appeared no manner of exudation in any part of the Cabinet.

Two thing, I thoughts very remarkable: 1. That of the many sorts of Stones I
therein had, diverse escaped, but not any of the Haematites-kind; having therein
Manganes, Scistos, Botryides, etc. which were all deeply concerned. 2. That
amongst perhaps 500 pieces, of the Astroites here and there one or two in an
appartment, and sometimes more, were seized, and the rest dry; as it fares with
people in the time of the Plague in one and the same house. I further observed,
that stones of a soft and open grain, as well as those of a hard and polish't
supeficies, were concerned in a manner alike.

It Is certain, that the whole body of the Turpentine of the Cedar-wood was
carried forth into the Air, and floating therein was again condensed into its
own proper form upon these stones.

This makes it more than probable, that Odoriserous bodies emit and spend their
very substante. Thus Camphir is said, if not well secured, totally to fly away.
Again, it is hence evident, that there is great difference betwixt the
Distillation of Vegetable Juyces, and the Emission of Effluviums or this
natural Distillation; that really separating and dividing the substance into
different parts; but this carrying out the whole entirely and un-alter'd in its
nature.

VI. Of the Flowers and Seed of Mushroms.
The general received opinion of Botanists concerning Mushroms is that, which
Caspar Bauhinus in his Pinax expresses in these few words, viz. Fungi neque
plantae, neque radices, neque flores, neque semina sunt; sed nihil aliud quam
terrae, arborum, lignorum putridorum, aliarumqe, putrilaginum humiditates
superfluae. I am of the opinion, that they are Plants of their owu kind, and
have more than a chance original. We will instance B. The texture of the Gills
is like a paper pricked full of pin-holes. In August this is very frequent under
hedges* and in the middle of the Moors in many places of this Country. It seems
to me (and, no doubt, it will to any person that shall well examine it, (that
the Gills of this Mushrom, are the very slower and seeds of this Plant. When it
is ripe, the Gills here are easily separated from the rest of the head: Eech
seed is distinct from other, and has its impression in the head of the
Mushrom, just as the seeds of an Artichoak has in the bottom of it. The bigger
end of the seed is full and round; and they are disposed in a spiral order just
as those of the Artichoak. The like we do think of all other Mushroms, however
differently figured.

And if it shall happen to him that shall sow them, that these will not produce
their kind, but be steril; it is no strange thing amongst Plants, there being
whole genus's of Plants that come up, and flower, and seed, and yet their seed
was never known to produce Plants of their kind, being naturally steril, and a
volatile dust, as all the Orchides or Bee-flowers.

We shall not here omit to tell you futher concerning this Mushrom, that, when
fresh gathered, it is of a buff-colour inside outside; and yet, cut through the
middle, it will in a moment change from a pale-yellow to a deep purple or blew,
and stain linen accordingly. A drop of the juice, leisurely squeezed out, will
change, holding it betwixt your eye and the light, through all the colors of
the Rainbow, in the time of its falling, and fix in a purple, as it does in the
springing out of its veins.

VII. Of the speedy Vitrifying of the whole body of Antimony by Cawk.
The several vitrifications of Antimony are either opaque or transparent. To
the first kind I shall add one, which is in it self very curious, and has
these advantages above the rest, that it is done with great ease and speed; and
by it I have performed some things upon Minerals and Metals, which with crude
Antimony alone I could not effect.

Take of Antimony one pound; flux it clear: Have an ounce or two of the
Cawk-stone (by and by to be discribed) in a lump red-hot in readiness. Put it
into the Crucible to the Antimony; contiune the flux a few minutes; Cast it
into a clean and not greased Mortar, decanting the melted liquor from the Cawk.

This Process gives us above 15 ounces of vitrum of Antimony, like polish't
Steel, and as bright as the most refined Quicksilver. The Cawk seems not to be
diminish't in its weight, but rather increased; nor will be brought incorporate
with the Antimony, though flux't in a strong blast.

This Cawk-stone is a very odd Mineral, and I always looked upon it to be much
a kin to the white milky Mineral juyces, I formerly sent you a specimen of: And
this Experiment is demonstrative, that I was not mistaken; for, the milky juice
of the Lead-Mines vitrifies the whole body of Antimony in like manner.

That this Vitrification is from the proper nature of Cawk, I little doubt;
for, I could never light upon any one Mineral substance, which had any such
effect upon Antimony; and I have tried very many Lapis Calaminars,
Stone-Sulphur; or Sulphur vivum, Galactites, Sulphur Marcasite, Allom-glebe,
diverse Sparrs, etc.

Cawk is a ponderous white stone, found in the Lead-Mines; it will draw a white
line like Chawk or the Galactites: And though it be so free yet it is more
firm, and has a smooth and shining grain, Sparr-like, yet not at all
transparent. Of the Spirit, it yields by distillation, and the use that may be
made of it, For casting of Speculums without other mixture, another time. I am,
York, November. 20. 1674. Sir, Your, etc.

Of the Astroites, or Star-stones Jan. 19 1673.
SIR, You are pleased to tell me, that my Notes concerning certain Stones
figured like Plants, found in the mountains of Carven, were well received See
N. 100. of these Tracts.
. This encourages me to give you the trouble of what I have observed of the
Astroites; which are stones also jointed like the other, but not found, that I
know of, in the same Rocks. And we must cross the plain Country, and seek for
them hard under the Yorkshire Woolds: For, what store I could porcure of them,
were brought me from Bugthorp and Leppington. At the fromer place, my self have
seen them dugg out of a certain blew clay on the banks a of small rivulet,
betwixt the Town and the Woolds. There are plenty of them washed into the
brook; but the most fair and solid are those we get out of the Clay.

I pretend not, to discover to you their Original, no more than I did of the
Entrochi; but having used some diligence in causing the places, where they are
found, to be a little more searched than is usual, I was by that means
furnished with a good quantity of them; which gave me the opportunity to make
the following Observations. What light may be hence had, I leave to more
judicious persons, acknowledging my self at persent not to be able to
demonstrate (if they are not Stones of their own kind,) what they have been
before petrification.

It is very little and inconsiderable, what any Author, that I have yet seen,
has said of them; save a very brief description of them in Gesner, and the
like in Wormius; in the rest, all is transcribed.

The Matter and substance of these Stones, if broken, is flint-like of a dark
shining politure; but much softer, and easily corroded by an acid Menstrum. (a)
Vinegar indeed, makes them creep; but a stronger spirit, as of Niter, tosses
them. I doubt not, but they will readily calci^e, as the Belemnites, to a very
strong and white Lime.

These Stones (as we now find them) are all Fragments; as we have noted of the
Entrochi: Either one single joint, or 2, 3, or more joints set together, making
a pentagonous Cylindrical figure or five-sided column. And I have not yet had
any piece much above one inch long, which consisted of 18 joints; but I have
seen one piece, somewhat shorter than the former, which had 25 joints. These
last thin-jointed pieces are quite of a different make, as to all
circumstances, from the other, as will appear.

Every joint consists of 5 Angles, which are either drawn out and sharp, and
consquently the sides of these pieces, made up of such joints, are
deep-channeled; (and this is the condition of some of the thick-jointed pieces,
as well as of all the thin-jointed ones;) or the Angles are blunt and round,
and the sides plain or very little hollowed. There are as big, and as small
pieces of this sort, as of any other more sharp-angled; and therefore I account
them a 3d. species of Star-stones. And of this sort was, I guess, that piece
which Wormius describes; which therefore, he says, is more like the blown
Flower of Pentaphyllum, than a Star. Besides, the manner of the engraving of
the joints in every one of the 3 respective species is also very different, as
will be declared.

Where the joints are thin or deep, they are so equally throughout the whole
piece; yet there are some, but very few, exceptions to this also, of pieces
which consist of joints of the unequal thickness. Many of thick-jointed pieces
have certain joints a thought broader, or a very little standing out at the
Angles, and thereby the joints are distinguished into certain Conjugations of
2, 3, or more joints: And these Conjugations are very observable in the
thin-jointed stones, and are marked out with a set of Wyers; of which by and
by.

The thickest piece, which has yet come to my hands, is not above one inch and
a half about, and those very rare too: From which size to that of a small pin, I
have all the intermediat proportions; and these so exceeding small pieces are as
exactly shaped, as the greatest. Most pieces, if not all, of any considerable
length, are not straight, but visibly bent and inclining. All the pieces of any
sort are much of an equal thickness, or but little tapering; yet one of the
ends, by reason of a Top-joint, is visibly the thickest.

This Top joint has 5 blunt Angles, and is not hatched or engraven, or but
very faintly, on the outside. Every joint else of a piece (save the top joint)
is an Intaglia, and deedly engraven on both sides alike; and will accordingly
serve for a Seal. The middle of each angle is hollow, and the edges of the
angles are thick furowed: The terminations of these hatchings are the indented
futures, by which the joints are set together; the ridges of one joint being
alternately let into the furrows of the other next it. The Hatchings of the
flat-sided pieces are in circular lines; but of the other two species, they are
straight lines, or near the matter.

In the very center of the 5 angles is a small hole, conspicuous in most joints.
Note also, that in the middle of each joint, betwixt angle and angle; in very
future, is another such like small pin-hole very apparent, if the stones be
first well scoured.

Besides all the former particulars, there may be observed, in the deep-jointed
pieces, just under the top-joint, above discribed, the Vestigia of certain
Wyers rather than branches; and sometimes 2, 3, or more of the joints of the
Wyers yet adhering. These Wyers are ever five in number, viz. one in the middle
or hollow part betwixt angle and angle. Again in thin-jointed pieces there are
ever five of these Wyers, or a set of them inserted into every conjugation of
joints; so that it were some representation of the thing, to imagine the stalk
of Asperula or Equisetum. Also I have seen, but that very rarely, (not in one
piece amongst 500,) a set of Wyers in the middle of a deep-jointed piece. One
thin-jointed piece I have by me, where a Wire of 20 joints and upwards (and how
much longer they may be, I know not,) lies double within the hollow side, and
by that accident was preserved in its natural place. Further, some lumps of
Quarry I have from the same place above-named, where the Wyers as well as the
Stones themselves are seen in long pieces. It is no wonder, that these Wyers
are knocked off, and but very rarely found adhering to the Stones they belong
to, being very small and slender, of a round figure and smooth-jointed, being
set together per harmoniam and not indented future. Nothing that I can think
of, is so like these Wyers, as the antennae of Lobsters. Lastly, some of these
Wyers are knotted, and others of them farely subdivided or branched.

I have, by the assistance of Mr. Lodge, illustrated all these particulars with
Figures: Of which this is the Explication;

1. The Top-joint of an Astroites, figured on both sides; on the one it is deep
engraven, on the other the hatches are scarce visible. Also the ends of the 5
Angles are very blunt.

2. A second or sharp-angled joint with fair hatchings on both sides.

3. A piece with very narrow and sharp angles. Also the Top-joint designed, as
it naturally appears smooth and without hatchings.

4. A round-angled joint.

5. A flat-sided piece; where the hatchings are somewhat Circular.

6. A thin-jointed piece: Where note also, that the angles are much narrower,
and of a protracted Oval figure.

7. The biggest piece I have yet seen. Note also its bending.

8. The smallest piece I have yet met with.

9. The longest piece; where every 4th joint is a thought bigger or more
prominent than the rest; as in the 7th fig. also is well designed.

10. A large and round-angled or flat-sided piece; to which belongs that single
joint noted fig. 4.

11. A flat or not hollow-sided piece; of which sort also is the 5th figure:
The 10th and 4th not much differing.

12. A thin-jointed piece; where the conjugations are marked out by the
vestigia of the several sets of Wyers or branches.

13. A piece where the joints are un-equal in thickness.

14. A piece with some part of the Wyers yet adhering in their natural order at
the biggest end of the piece.

15. A thin-jointed; where note on the left side a single Wire accidentally
preserved in its natural place, though snapt asunder.

16. A thick-jointed piece with a set of Wyrs in the middle of it.

17. A good long piece of a Wire, and a single joint thereof.

(a) I have said the same thing above of the Entrochi, and it is true of all
other stones in small Fragments, which vinegar, or a stronger spirit will
dissolve: but I neither s^y here nor there (Phi: Tran. Number. 100) that any sort
of stone whatsoever will make an ebullition with vinegar, as Dr. Grew (Musae.
R.S. p: 273) would have me, and I admire how he could fancy such a thing from
my words, which are as plain and fairly limited, as can possibly be writ: I
appeal to the passage.

Of the Vomiting of strange Worms, Philosophical Transactions. Numb. 117.
A Son of Mr B. living not far from Rippon, about nine years of age, in the
month of February ^ast was afflicted with great pain in his Stomach, and
continual, (...). A Powder was given, wherein (...) a small quantity of (...).
He thereupon (...) up several strange Worms, two of which were brought to me at
York, the one dead, the other alive, and which lived many days after it came
to my hands, and might have lived longer, but that I put it into Spirit of
Wine, to preserve in it its true shape. These Worms were very Catterpillar with
fourteen legs, viz. six small pointed, the eight middle stumps, and the
thickness of a Ducks-quill, thin haired or rather naked, with brown annuli, and
a black head. The very same for kind that I have many times seen on Plants, and
no doubt, these (as those others) would in due time (if the place had not
hindered) have shrunk into Chrysalis's, and changed into Moths.

A Letter containing an account of Antiquities, etc. Philosophical Collections.
Numb. 4.
IN turning over my Papers, I found Notes of something I formerly writ to Mr.
Oldenburg, and which I believed was lost; it being sent much about the time of
his death* They relate to certain Antiquities, which have, for ought I know,
escaped the more curious Antiquaries of this and the last Age, when that Study
was much more in credit: But we shall treat of them here only in the relation
they may have to the advancement of Natural Philosophy and Arts.

1. Roman Vrnes are found in very many places throughout the whole Kingdom; but
the different workmanship of these Vessels, their composition, and places where
they made them, have been little that I know of taken notice of by any. I have
observed what follows of these matters:

Here then are found at York, in the road or Roman-street without Mickle-gate;
and likewise by the River side, where the Brick Kilns now are, Urnes of three
different tempers, viz.

1. Of a bluish gray color, having a great quantity of course Sand wrought in
with the Clay.

2. Others of the same color, having either a very fine sand mixed with it full
of Mica, or Catsilver, or made of clay naturally sandy.

3. Red Urnes of fine Clay, with little or no Sand in it. These Pots are quite
throughout of a Red color like fine Bole. Also many of these red pots are
elegantly adorned with Figures in Basso Relievo, and usually the Workmans name,
which I think others have mistaken [Burtons C. Ant. It. p. 183, 230.] for the
persons name buried therein, upon the bottom or cover; as Januarius and such
like; but that very name I have seen upon several red Pots, found both here and
at Aldborough. After all, these are glazed inside and outside with a kind of
Varnish of a bright Coral color.

The composition of the first sort of Pots, did first give me occasion to
discover the places where they were made: The one about the midway betwixt
Wilbersosse and Barnbie on the More, Six miles from York in the Sand-Hills, or
rising grounds, where now the Warren is. The other Roman Pottery on the
Sand-Hills at Santon, not far off Brigg in Lincolnshire, In the first place I
have found widely up and down broken pieces of Urnes, Slagg, and Cinders. At
the latter place there are yet remaining, (though it is a moveable Sand, and
burried every way by the Wind, and has by that means covered the places all
over) some of the very Furnaces; whose ruins I take to be some of those metae
or sandy Hillocks. Besides here are many pieces of Pots and Urnes of different
shapes, and much Slagg and Cinders; This Potterie having taken up much Ground,
as to one that shall diligently view the place, it will appear. It Is
remarkable, that both the above mentioned Potteries are within less than a mile
of the Roman Road, or Military-high-way. Nothing is remembered in either of
those places, of any Pottery that was known in those parts, nor indeed could I
learn where any good clay for that purpose was to be had near those Sands:
which yet our modern Potteries chiefly seek after, which has made them to be
forgotten and disused; The materials of our modern Pots being much altered, and
consequently the places.

The Roman Urns above discribed differ in these particulars, from what Pots are
now usually made amongst us. (1) That they are without all manner of glazing
with lead, which perhaps is a Modern invention. (2.) That a far greater
quantity of Sand is used than clay, which thing alone made it worth their
while, to bring their clay to the Sand-Hills. (3) That they were baked either
with more leisure after long and through drying, or immoderate contact of the
Flames: which I am induced to believe, because there seem to be fragments of
such things to be found. It Is certain the natural color of the Clay is not
altered by burning: So that both the degrees of heat and manner of burning
might be different. And one of these Potsherds as I have tried, baked over
again in our Ovens, will become red. As to the two last kind of Urns, its
likely the first of them with their particles of Mica in it, were made of a
sandy blue Clay, of which nature there is good plenty among the Western
Mountains of Yorkshire, and particularly at Carleton in Oatley Parish not far
off Ickley a Roman station. The red Urns seem to have been their Masterpiece,
wherein they showed the greatest Art, and seemed to glory most, and to eternize
their names on them. I have seen great varieties of Embossed work on them. And
lastly for the elegant manner of glazing, it is far ^eater indeed, and more
durable than our modern way of Leading, which is apt to crack and crase, both
with wet and heat: and at the fire is certainly unwholesome, by reason of the
fumes Lead usually emits, being a quick vaporable Metal. This ancient glazing
seems to have been done by the Brush, or dipping; for both inside as well as
outside of the Urn are glazed, and that before the Baking. And something of the
Materials of it seems to be remembered by Pliny Lib. 36. C. 19. Fictilia ex
bitumine Inscripta non delentur. The Painting of Pots with bitumen is
indelible. And again, Tingi solidas exbi^umine Statuas. lib. 35. c. 15. The
bitumen he says sinks into the very Stones and Pots, which is something more
tha^ glazing.

The great plenty of these Urns found in many parts of England seems to argue
them also of English Manufacture, but where I cannot guess, unless wrought at
the Bole Mines (of which Clay alone they seem to be made) in Cleveland; for
that that barren tract of Land, called Blackmoor, was well known to the Romans,
the Jet Rings taken up withthese Vrns does sufficiently testify. Now Bole and
Jet are no where that I know of to be found with us in England but in that
Tract; beings Fossils peculiar to those Mountains. Of these Jet Rings some are
plain, and others wrought, but all of them of an extraordinary bigness, being
at least three Inches diameter, and yet the inward bore is not above an inch
and an half, which makes them too little for the Wrists of any Man, as they are
much too big for the Fingers, so that probably they were never worn either as
Armilla or Anuli. One of each sort I have by me, which I carefully redeemed of
the Workman, besides many others which were broken, found about a sort of Urns
in York fields. And since we are upon the subject of Plasticks, or the Roman
Clay-work, we cannot but take notice of the opinion of Cambden; Who will have
the Obelisks at Burrow-Briggs in this County Artificial, when in truth they are
nothing less, being made of a course Rag, or Milstone-grit; but without doubt,
the bigness of the Stone surprised him, either not thinking them portable, or
perhaps not any English rock, fit to yield natural Stones of that magnitude:
But Roman Monuments I suppose none doubt them, because pitched here by a very
remarkable and known Roman station, Isurium.

And then consider what trifles these are, compared with the least obelisks at
Rome. And as to the Rocks whence they might be hewn, there are many of that
Stone near the River Nid, and upou the Forest of Rnasborough; and a little
above Ickly, (another Roman station) within sixteen miles of Burrow-Briggs
there is one solid Bed of this very Stone, whose perpendicular depth only will
yield obelisks, at least thirty foot long. And yet at Rudstone near Burlington
in the Yorkshire Woolds, full forty miles wide of these Quarries, is an
obelisk of the very same Stone, shape and magnitude of these before mentioned.
But we cannot let this pass without noting, That almost all the Monuments of
the Romans with us were of this sort of Stone; As the ancinet walls of this
City, as appears by what remains of the ancient Gates, and the great quantities
of it that is wrought up in most of the Churches, and is still daily dug out of
Foundations: But a most undeniable instance is, a vast Roman head, perhaps of
some of the Emperors, upon a neck or square to pedestal of one solid Stone,
with the point of the square to the eye, of as course a grit as that of the
Obelisks above mentioned. This Stone is now in Mr. Hilliards Garden, and was
dugg out of the Foundations of some Houses thereabouts. The only remaining
Inscription that I could find at Burrow-briggs, yet imperfect as well as odd,
is upon this sort of Stone in the Street Wall of Sir Willam Tankards House.

Also two Roman Alters I have seen of this Stone; one the original of that at
Ickley mentioned in Cambden; Another in the possession of that ingenious
Antiquary Mr. Thirsby late of Leeds.

And this I think sufficient to disprove that mistake of Cambden, That the
Stones at Burrow-briggs are artificial. There is but one only instance that I
ever yet met with of the Romans ever having used in these parts of England any
other sort of Stone; yet is it not the common lime stone, but a certain Stone
had from the Quarries about Malton, because of the Lapides Judaici, by me
formerly described to be seen in the texture of it. It is small but elegant
Alter with Figures in Basso Relievo, of Sacrificing instruments, etc. It has
suffered an unlucky accident by the stupid ignorance of the Masons, who were
ordered by the late Lord Fairfax to place it upon a Pedestal in the Court of
his House at YORK. Yet the Inscription which they had miserably defaced, was by
chance preserved. I. O. M.



An account of a Monstrous Animal cast out of the Stomach by Vomit; Phi: Coll.
Number. 6.
SIR,
I Send you (here enclosed) the true and exact shape of a Worm, which a man
Vomited up here the last week. I found it my self in the Blood, which came up
with it, having caused it to be washed for the more careful examination of it,
much of the Blood, being clods of a kind of skinny and fleshy substance, Haud
aliter, quam in Mulierum molis excernendis accidere solet. Of this kind of
Blood there was about two pound weight saved in the washing, and this odd
Animal amongst it; which was easily discovered by me, being of a dark green
color like a Horse-Leech, and spotted not unlike some of them. I could
perceive (when I fouud it) no life or motion it had; the Girl that washed the
Blood having almost beaten off a Finn, and part of one of the forks of the
Tail; and burst the belly of it; yet it was curiously and regularly shaped in
all its members, as is fully expressed by the pains of a most excellent Artist,
who Limmed it by the thing it self, not two hours after I had it under my eye,
that nothing might be added, but what was very true and natural. The Spirit of
Wine in which I put it, has altogether changed it as to its color: but yet it
still remains perfect enough to satisfy any curious person.

This honest man, a Baker, imagined he drank it the last Summer in pond water;
of which he was used to drink after sore labor in his calling. This is
certain, he had about his Stomach and right side a most exquisite and
tormenting pain, for at least four Months last past; which many times threw him
into horrors and chillness, ague-like; and indeed when he vomited this up, he
was the sickest-man I ever saw not to dye: He also voided Blood by Stool
several days also, and now I do believe, he will recover, although his pains
are not wholly ceased.

To say what this Creature is, I dare scarce venture. You know how long I have
made it my diversion to search into the nature of In^ects, and it is no small
progress I have made therein, yet I am at a loss where to place this Animal;
for that it is not like any thing I ever yet saw in Nature: However it makes me
give more credit than I did to several stories of a like nature which we
frequently meet with in Medical History, and those recorded as very truths by
sober, learned and industrious persons. But though I now believe there was much
truth in most of them, yet I fear little care was taken to describe exactly the
Animals, otherwise than by memory, either in respect of the words or painting,
which has gone a great way in rendering all such stories useless and and
ridiculous.

This Animal was about four inches long, and in the thickest place three Inches
about; it had three Finns of a side, all near the head, and the upper pair most
exactly and elegantly figured, as is described; all these Finns were thick and
fleshy: but the forked Tail was finny and transparent, and to be extended; it
was placed horizontally, not as that of most, (if not all) small Fish, and even
Neuts and Tadpoles or Froggs in disguise, in which particular it differs from
them all, as well as in the fleshiness of the Finns.

Besides this odd Animal I found the head of another of a different shape, as
is expressed; but of a dark green color also as the other: the body of it had
not been lost, or this other so ill treated, if I had expected to have found,
what we never looked for.

But what shall we say this Monster was? give me leave to speak my mind without
prejudice, and with submission to the better Sentiments of the Honorable and
Learned Society: I am apt to think (and I believe few will deny it me) that we
often drink and eat what is alive; and it is certain some things will live on
in our Stomachs in despite of concoction; not to instance in the many sorts of
Gut-worms natural to us, and which are bred with us, perhaps in some Children
even before they are born; these Worms I say, do freely wander up and down the
Guts and Stomach at pleasure, and receive no prejudice from the concoctive
faculty of them: And for this reason we see Insectivorous Birds so solicitous
to kill Worms and all other sorts of Insects, by drawing them again and again
through their Bills as Canes through a Sugar-Mill, that they may be verliy dead
before they swallowed them, and instinct is the great wisdom of undebauched
nature: Again, admirable instances there are of Animals living within Animals;
of which in the Insect kind, the Royal Society shall ere long receive some
notes of mine upon Godartius. And yet I am of the mind that what was
accidentally swallowed by us alive, and that shall have the power to live on
within us, (especially if it shall be young and tender, and yet growing) may
have its designed form and shape monstrously perverted, so as to appear to us
quite another thing than naturally and really it is; and this I take to be the
case of this odd Creature, the present subject of our Discourse: and so this
might have been the Spawn or Embryo of a Toad or Neut.

But we must also account for the much fleshy substance or shinny lumps of
Blood vomited up with it, which I think easily intelligible thus; That that
Spawn or Embryo of a Toad or Neut might well venom the Stomach or Gut, in
which part soever or wrinkle thereof it chanced first to rest or stick, and
cause an inflammation there, and so have it self swelled and closed up within a
Tumor of its own making, which in process of time might gather to this
bigness, and at length burst in pieces and come up together.

Familiar and infinite instances of this nature, we see in By-fruits or Wens
which Insects raise upon Vegetables; which by natural instinct know how to
invenome a Plant, and so compondiously to provide both food and housing for
their young.

YORK, March 1681.
An Account of a Roman Monument found in the Bishopric of Durham, and of some
Roman Antiquities at York, Phil. Tran. N. 145.
I Have with much trouble got into my hands a Piece of Roman Antiquity, which
was but a very few years ago discovered upon the South Bank of the River Tine,
near the Sheilds in Bishopric. It is a very large and fair Roman Alter of one
entire Stone. But after all my cost and pains, I am sorry to find the
Inscription very ill defaced, that much of it is not legible. And I believe it
has been mis-handled by those who endeavored to read it; whereas if the
remainder of the Letters had been exactly measured, and the face blackt and
lightly washed off again, as in Prints, some things more might have been spelled.

As to the nature of the Stone it self, it is of a course Rag, the same of that
with that of the Pyramids at Burrow-Briggs. It is 4 foot high, and was ascended
to by steps, which appears, in that all the sides, but the Front, have two
square holes near the bottom, which let-in the Irons that joined it to the
Steps.

I have carefully described it in all it is sides, and have given the Plane of
the Top also; which if you please we will survey in order.

1. The Backside, opposite to the Inscription; on which is Engraven in
Basse-reliefe, a Flower pot furnished, I suppose with what pleased the
Stone-cutter, for these men need not to be more curious than the Priests
themselves, who were wont to make use of the Herbs next hand to adorn the
Alters. and therefore Verbenae is put for any kind of Herb. Yet if we will have
it resemble any thing with us, I think it is most like, if not truly Nymphaea,
a known and common River Plant.

2. One of the sides, which is somewhat narrower than the Front or Back: On
this are Engraved in Bass-relieve, the Cutting-knife (cesespita) and the Ax
(securis). The Knife is exactly the same with that on the other Alter formerly
by me mentioned in the Philosophical Collections of Mr. Hook; but the Ax is
different; for here it is headed with a long and crooked point, and there the
head of the Ax is divided into 3 points.

3. The other side; on which are engraved after the same manner an Eure
(Vrceolus) and a Ladle, which serve for a Sympullum. This I call rather a
Ladle, than a Mallet, it being perfectly Dish-wise and hollow in the middle,
although Camden is of an other opinion in that elegant Sculpt of the Cumberland
Alter, And the very same Utensil I have seen and noted on the Ickley Altar,
which is yet extant at Middleton Grange near that Town; but the Stone which
Cambden says supports a pair of Stairs there (as at this day it does in the
very Road) is but an ill Copy of it, and not the Original.

4. The Plane of the Top; which is cut in the Figure of a Basin (discus or
lanx,) with ansae on each side, consisting of a pair of links of a chain, which
rest upon, and fall over two Rowles; And this was the Harth.

5. The Front; which has an Inscription of nine lines in Roman Letters, each
Letter a very little more than two inches deep of our measure; now remaining as
in the prefixed Sculpture, Fig. 5. which I would read thus, Dis deabusque
Matribus pro Salute M. Aurelii Antonini Augusti Imperatoris -- votum solvit
lubens merito ob reditum.

The Deae Matres are well interpretted by Seldom. It is much his Safety and
Return both vowed, should be so separated in the Inscription; but I have not
Gr^er by me to compare this with the like. Caracalla say the Historians
Xiphilinus Herodianus etc.
after his Fathers death at York, took upon him the Command of the Army alone,
and the whole Empire; he went alone against the Enemy, who were the Caledonij
inhabiting beyond the Wall, which his Father had built, he made Peace with
them, received their Hostages, slighted their fortified places, and returned.
And this seems to be confirmed by the Inscription; for undoubtedly upon this
his last Expedition of him alone, without his Brother Geta and Mother, was this
Altar erected to him alone, at a place about Two Stations on this side the
Wall. So that the Vow might be as well understood of his Return from this
expedition, as for his Safety and return to Rome; which mi-thinks should be
true, or his Mother and Brother Geta would scarce have been left out, at least
so early. For yet the Army declared for them both, according to their Fathers
Will.

Further, it seems also to have been erected by those who flattered him, and
who were afterward killed by him; and for this reason the persons Names, who
dedicated it, seem to me to be purposely defaced, the 6 and 7th Lines of the
Inscription being designedly cut away by the hollowness of them, and there not
being the least sign of any Letter remaining, and this I suppose might be part
of their disgrace, as it was usual to deface and break the Statutes and
Monuments of persons executed, of which this Monster made strange havoc.

But since worn Inscriptions admit of various readings, because some Letters
are worn out, and some more legible, whereby not prejudiced people may conceive
them diversely, I will therefore tell you an other reading of part of the two
first lines, which I do not disallow, but that it will agree well enough with
the History of Severus, tho his Apotheosis, or solemn deification, was not
performed till he came to Rome, in the manner of which Funeral Pomp Herodian is
very large; it was of that excellent Antiquarie Dr. Johnson of Pomfret

CONSERVATO

RI. B. PROS etc.

The rest as follows in mine,

Which shows the hight of Flattery of those times. So that they paid their
Vows to the lately dead Father the Conservator of Britain, for the safety of
the Son; and the Story tells us how gladly he would have had him made a God
long before, even with his own hand.

I think it not amiss, if I give you the rest of my Observations concerning
these matters, which I have met with in this City.

1. A large Pedestal of the same sort of Stone, found deep in the ground, on
the West side of the River, which by the Stone, and its mouldings, was
undoubtedly Roman, and must have been for a Pillar in some large building.

2. A Broken Inscription in the Church-wall in All Saints North-street, with
the Figure of a Naked Woman in Bass-relieve on the left side of it. The Letters
(as many of them as remain) are exceeding fairly cut, beyond any thing I have
yet seen of Roman Antiquities in England, and the Stone of a finer grain than
ordinary. It is a Monument of Conjugal Affection. -- --



The first stroke is the outside of a great M, and is part of the Dis Manibus.
The three last lines may be read thus, Been merenti Antonio Conjugi: Yet it is
hard to say, whether it was for the Husband or Wife, for it may be read
Antoniae. The Points also betwixt the words are here very singular, but this
was the caprice of the Stone-cutter, who sometimes also use a Leaf, hanging or
erect, a Hand, a Feather, or such odd fancy for Points.

2. A Relation of a Man biten with a mad Dog, and dying of the disease called
Hydrophobia: Philosophical Trausactions. N. 147.
I Have formerly entertained the R. S. with odd cases in Physic; as the Stone
cut from under the Tongue of a Man; of Lumbrici teretes found in the Ancle of a
Child; of a monsterous Worm vomited, etc. And I therefore think by the kind
acceptance of those, this I am about to relate of a man bit with a mad Dog, and
dying of the disease called Hydraphobia, will be welcome. It is by Gods
providence that it is a rare case, for Gallen calls it omnium morborum
pessimus: And since it is in that great Physicians opinion the worst of
diseases, it is an extraordinary blessing to mankind that it happens so rarely;
especially if we consider how infinitely fond we are of so poisonous a Creature,
and what vast numbrs we keep out of mere wantonness and pleasure more then any
real use or service they can do us.

James Corton, a very strong and well built youg man, was bit with a mad Dog in
the right hand, the wound healed of it self, and the thing was forgotten by
himself and wife; but as he said (after the disease of Aquae pauor had seized
him, and that it was given him by me as a reason of his not drinking) he told
his wife he wondered why the Dog, which used to be so familiar mith him, should
then bite him. But this was all forgot; And after about five or six weeks he
complains of Pain all over his bones, but especially his back and round about
his Stomach, looks very pale, hollow eyed, etc. The third day after this
complaint, viz, Sunday in the evening March 11th. 1682, he called for burnt
brandy, drank it, went to bed, and vomited it up; after this he had a restless
night, and in the morning found himself very ill, with a strange rising in his
Stomach, and though no thirst, yet an impotence to drink, and even to swallow
his Spittle, which was death to him as he often said. Diascordium and a bottle
of Cordial water was brought to him by an Apothecary that morning, The
Diascordium he took, but was not able to drink of the Cordial one Spooufull.
This on Monday morning; about one a Clock that day I first saw him, and found
him upon this Bed, his Pulse very slow, and sometimes unequal, but not unless
frighted from the rising of his Stomach; his flesh cold, his tongue not dry,
but flexable and moist, a little white. I caused him to rise off the bed, and
set him full in the light; and then because he mightily complained of I know
not what sickness about his stomach, I offered him of the Cordial, but he
started, and trembled at the approach of it. This I exceedingly admired, whereof
I called for a glass of Wine or Water, and a Tumbler of water was brovght me
up, which I gave him to drink; but he vehemently startled at it, and his
Stomach swelled and rise, after I knew not what odd and strange manner; and I
could then find his Pulse very trembling and disturbed. I still urged him to
drink; But as I put it forwards to his mouth, he the more affrighted drew back
his head, and sighed, and eyed it with a most gashly look, not without
Screeking and Noise. This I most mightily admired, and was at a great loss what
should be the cause of this strange Symtom, when at length it providentially
came into my mind, that this was Aquae pavor; and then I tried him again and
again to drink; and found him more disordered at the sight, especially at the
drink. Wherefore I ask't his mother in Law and the Maid, who stood about him,
where the wound was he last had had; at which question they seemed concerned,
and replied, they wondered what I meant. I then told them he had been bitten by
a Dog; It is true (he said all in a fright,) I was bit by such a Neighbor's
Dog, about five or six weeks ago, here in my hand, but it has been long well. I
then bid him lie down, and so left him, calling his Wife and Mother and Friends
to me below Stares, and telling them that he would certainly dye, that there
was but small hopes of his recovery, it being too late; that none should be
suffered to go to him but keepers, some strong man or two, etc.

I forthwith ordered a Vein to be opened in the arm which was bit, caused the
wound to be scarified and drawn with Vesicatories, and the same Plaster to be
applied unto the neck and legs and the inside of the arms; I ordered the usual
and famed antidotes to be given him as of Theriaca, Cinis cancorum, Ruta,
Agaricus, etc. In Bolus's. For it is to be noted, that solid things in a Spoon
he could take, but yet not without much trembling, and fear, and Caution, and
an earnest request that no body would suddenly offer them to him, but give them
into his hand gently; and then he would by degrees steal his hand softly
toward his mouth, and of a sudden chop the Spoon in and swallow what was in
it, velut canis ad offam; and this he did more greedily and readily then any
other man could do. Of these antidotes in Bolus he took a Dram every hour, and
always in this manner, for at least a dozen times taking; and every like drink
was profferred him in the night, but he could not see it without horror, and
the same motions from his Stomach. Nay he did affirm that as often as he by
chance swallowed any Spittle it went to his heart, even as tho he should die
that very Moment. This night passed wholly without any sleep or rest.

Tuesday morning I viewed his blood, which was both to the Serum and Cake well
colored, and in such proportion as is usual in healthful persons, and of good
consistance.

He had now a violent Feavour upon him, and a very quick Pulse. Water was
offered him by my order, but in vain; He begging he might dye unmolested,
nothing being such a terror to him as the approach of any drink; and that none
might come suddenly upon him, or offer him any thing more, for all things
frighted him; And that he found he must shortly dye, for that his heart began
to fail him; and indeed he looked exceeding pale and hollow and thin visag'd.

I then with much difficulty persuaded him to cast himself cross the bed upon
his belly (for he had his Clothes loosely about him) hanging his head over the
other side; persuading my self that this posture might be advantageous to his
drinking, since that in the erect posture of a man he could not so much as
endure the approach of liquor. In this posture then of a Dog, he suffered a
large Bowl filled with small Beer to be brought under his head, and embracing
it with raptures of joy, he declared he was infinitely refreshed with the smell
of it; that he now saw it with delight, and assured us he should be able soon
to drink it all off. And he that now thought himself a dying man talked
pleasantly, and said many passionate things to his brother, wife, etc.
wonderfully extolling this invention, and thanking me for it. He endeavored
with great earnestness to put down his head to it, but could not; his Stomach
rise as often as he opened his Lips; at length he put out his tongue and made
toward it as tho he would lap; but ever as his tongue never so little touched
the Surface of the beer, he started back affrighted. And yet all this while was
pleased with the thoughts of drinking; and would not suffer the Maid servant to
take it away from nuder his head; and if she did a little withdraw it, he said
he followed it by the smell with delight, snuffing with his nostrils. After a
long time being mightily foiled, he alleged that the faint smell of the small
Beer hindered him from drinking, and therefore desired a Bowl of Ale; which was
brought him; but after much striving, and exerting his tongue a thousand times,
he could not drink of it; and lapping with great affrights, as often as his
tongue touched it he started back with his head, bringing it down again gently
to the Bowl a hundred times, but all in vain. And in this posture, what upon
his belly and what upon his hands and knees, he kept himself at least an hour
thus Tantilizing himself; but it was not in his power to drink. We than gave
him a Quill which consisted of two or three Joints, the one end in his mouth
and the other in the liquor; but he could not manage it, nor suck no more than
a Dog. I persuaded him to give all over and lie down; which he did; and not
long after my going away, he fell into a Convulsion Fit, bit and snarl'd and
caught at every body, and foamed at the mouth. After this was over he took an
Elleborism in a Bolus, which was taken like the rest, and very willingly by
him; it wrought about 3 or 4 times very Plentifully, and he declared himself
wonderfully at ease by it; but yet now and then fell convulsed, and then always
insensible. After four hours I returned to him again, and found the Minister
with him; he talked very sensibly to him, prayed very earnestly with him,
saying the Prayers after him, and desired the Sacrament, which in these
cirumstances could not be given.

He was again solicited to drink, and he now readily enough put himself into
the former posture, and with as much earnestness as ever used all the little
shifts to drink, while the Bowl was under his head; but all in vain. He had a
little Silver Tumbler filled with drink put into his hands, which suddenly,
when he had as it were stolen it near his mouth, he would have thrown it into
his throat, as he did the Bolus's, but it hit against his teeth and fell into
the Bowl. I cannot say he ever went to stool or made water all this time, and
therefore had a Glyster given him; but upon parting with it, which he did
immediately almost as soon as given, he died convulsed: But his not making
water, as well as a troublesome Priapisme which he complained of, when upon his
knees, might proceed from the Blistering Plasters, as well as from his Disease.

That nothing may be omitted which relates to this case; the day after his
interment I accidentlly met with his Cozen Mrs. S. who told me that her
Daughter was in fear, for just that very day fornight before his death she had
been at his house, and he would go home with her to her Mothers; that she
remembered his hand trembled and his body shake'd, that he was in a cold sweat,
and in a great disorder, so that she asked him what he ailed: he told her, that
after his work (for he was an Upholster) it had been of late usual with him:
And which was remarkable the very Dog which bit him came at that time along
with him to her Mothers house; and was alive and well at the man's death.

To this we add that Mr. Widow a Mercer does affirm, that about the very time
that Mr. Corton was thought to be bit with Suttons Dog, a black Dog, which he
verily believes to be the same, came and bit a Whelp of his in his Shop. The
next day the Whelp ran mad up and down the House, and bit both him and the
Maid; him in the hand, and the Maid in the leg, and dyed that very day. About a
month after he was bit he found himself not well, and was troubled with a pain
at his heart, and had a fearfulness and trembling upon him, and got no rest for
three nights, upon which he had had himself blooded, and found himself better;
his Maid does not yet complain of any harm.

Thus far for matter of fact, delivered with care in all circumstances that
came to my knowledge.

It is very hard to give a probable reason of this Aquae pavor: what Galen (de
Theriaca) says of their much coveting water, because of the intolerable thirst
upon them, agrees not with our case. For this man was neither thirsty nor
distracted, as he would have them; he was all the time in his Wits, did very
well consider, and rationally discourse of the thing, and exceedingly admired
at the impossibility of his drinking: was well satisfied with the Minister who
told him of his incapacity of the receiving the Cup in the Sacrament; and did
often say he was not thirsty, which appeared by the moisture and flexibility of
his tongue, (even after his taking many hot and piperate Antidotes,) for this
was by me even to the last carefully viewed. Besides, those who are very
thirsty, and distracted in the most violent Fevers, do not only drink readily
enough without dread; but on the contrary have an exceeding greedy Appetite to
it.

Nor can I well understand what Julius Palmarius (de morbis Contagiosis) means
by the third Paroxism of an Hydrophobia, before which he would have his never
failing Antidote to be given, which our dispensatory calls pulvis Antilissus; I
suspect he took the disease, as he ownes he did the Medicine, upon trust;
indeed it seems to me not to have many things in it of the nature of Antidotes.
This our man certainly had the disease of Aquae pavor upon him continually from
the first Moment to his death, which was near 48 hours without any
intermission; for as often as drink was showed him, or he swallowed his own
Spittle, his disturbance was most grievous and terrible.

Dioscorides in this (as in all things else he treats of) is most sober, and to
be credited; Quidam, qui jam aquae metum sentirent, sumpto Helleboro, simul ac
primum morbi impetum experirentur, sanati sunt: nam and jam vitio tentatos nemo
unquam servare potest. This very well agrees with out case; The latter person
who had a sense of the evil, had it prevented by bleeding; but our man which
had the evil; that is the Aquae pavor upon him, not bleeding, or the most famed
Antidotes, or even Hellebore could in the least save, tho not very untimely
given him.

The case indeed rarely occurs, and therefore cannot well be observed in all
due circumstances in order to its clearer understanding, and consequently cure;
we shall venture however to lay down some few things to salve it by.

First, That J. Corton had some of the organic parts of his body transformed
into, or affected after the nature of a Dog, especially the Gula, Tongue etc;
so that what was offered to him in the erect posture of a man was very
frightful, as well as difficult for him to take, because against his new
nature, as much as it would be for us to get a dog to drink standing upon his
hinder legs.

But yet this is not all, for when he was turned upon his belly, and would have
acted the Dog, he yet could not drink; and though he frequently put out his
tongue and lapt, yet he could not endure to take any thing into his mouth of
liquor, as tho something had hindered him within.

Therefore we may imagine he was also convulsed in those parts, or swelled: but
this we cannot grant, for the contrary does plainly appear, because he could
cast any thing into his mouth and swallow it; as he did very many times stif
Bolus's, more nimbly, as to the swallow, then any man reasonably could be
supposed to do, that was so weakened: for I saw no difference betwixt those he
swallowed an hour or two before his death, and the very first he took.

Secondly, That his Spittle was envenomed; for as often as he swallowed it, (his
Stomach vehemently abhorring it) it went to his heart (as we say), and was even
present death to him; And so liquid things coming nearer to the consistance of
Spittle might the rather movere salivam, and therefore gave him a greater
terror and difficulty to swallow, then solid things.

And that his Spittle chiefly was infected with the venom of the Dog, seems
also. 1. Because the Dog bit him, whose Spittle alone to be venomous to the
touch Gal. de locis affec. lib. 6.
there are many credible instances in Medical History. 2. He was most like a
Dog in the mouth, viz. where are the proper Organs of the Saliva. 3. The bite
of a man so bitten is alike in^^ctions; but otherwise innocent.

But it may be asked how comes it to infect his Spittle, and not other humors
and the blood. I answer, The blood in part was undoubtedly affected, as the
Symptoms arising before the Aquae pavor (which yet is the only true
Pathogmonick ^f the disease) demonstrate. Again the blood is not one liquor (as
is generally thought), but many distinct liquors circulated together in one set
of common Vessels; and so it might infect that liquor, which it was most a kin
to, as the Saliva of a Dog to the Saliva of a man. Concerning the truth of that
proposition, I have formerly writ some things to you; and more I intend to
entertain you with; you will excuse me at present if I do not think it
convenient to anticipate my Papers.

York, March 26. 1683.
An account of part of a Wall, built in the Romans Time.
I Carefully viewing the Antiquities of York, and particularly what might
relate to the Roman Empire; of which this place had been a seat, And the
dwelling of at the least two of the Emperors, Severus and Constantine, I found
a part of a Wall, yet standing, which is undoutedly of that time; it is the
South Wall of the Mint-Yard, being formerly an Hospital of St. Lowrance,
looking toward the River; it consists of a Multangular Tower, which did lead
to Bootham-bar, and about -- yards of Wall, which ran the length of
Conning-street: As he who shall attentively view it on both sides may discern.

But the outside Toward the River is most worth taking notice of, it is faced
with a very small Saxum quadratum of about four Inches thick, and laid in
Levells like our Modern brick-work: This sort of building Vitruvius (Lib. 2.
Cap. 9.) calls after the Greeks, Iso domum, cum omnia Coria aequa crassitudine
fuerint, structa; but the length of the stones is not observed, but are as they
fell out in hewing; From the Foundation twenty courses of this small squared
Stone are laid; And over them five courses of Roman bricks; These bricks some
of them are laid length-waies, and some end-waies in the Wall; And were called
Lateres Diatoni.

After these five courses of Bricks, other twenty two courses of small Square
stones, as before described, are laid, which raise the Wall 3 Foot higher; And
then five more courses of the same Roman Brick are over laid; beyond which the
Wall is imperfect and capt with modern building. Note that in all this height
there is no Casement or Loopehole, but one entire and uniforme Wall; from which
we guess the Wall to have been built some courses higher after the same order.

The reason of this order of Brick-worke intermixed with Stone the same Vitruius
gives, and in this particular the Romans after his time, and upon his
admonition, and recommendation, in all probability, did imitate the Greeks.
Longitudines coriorum (says he) alternis coagmentis in crassitudinem
instruentes, and a little further; inter ponunt singulos perpetua Crassitudine
utraque part Frontatos (latcres) quos Diatonos appellant, qui maxim Religando
confirmant parietum soliditatem; These Bricks were to be as Throughs, or as it
were so many new Foundations to that which was to be Superstructed; And to bind
the two sides together firmly; for the Wall it self is only faced with small
square stones; And the middle thereof filled with Mortar and Pebles; Frentibus
serviunt (says the same Author) and medio farciunt; which Vitruvius discomends
in the Romans of his time; And therefore the later Romans (the builders of our
Wall) did, as I said, correct this Error, and the Greeks.

And least it should seem strange, that Bricks should give a firmness to Stone
buildings, the same Vitruvius testifies, and therefore commends Brick building
before stone (our men indeed, for wholesomeness, which also is true, and to be
much considered in a cold and moist Climate) even for the duration; And
therefore in Rome abatement was ever made for the use of Sone building, none
for that of Brick, provide it kept its level and stood upright upon its
Foundation; And therefore to excuse it he at large gives a relation why the
Romans, suffered not Brick buildings to be made within the City of Rome; as a
thing not of choice, but necessity. Those Brick buildings being certainly in
that great Architects opinion to be preferred, the Law (says he) suffers not a
Wall to be made to the street ward (for so give me leave to interpret communi
loco) above a Foot and a half thick, and partition Walls the same, least they
should take up too much rome. Now Brick Walls of a Foot and a half thick,
(unless they were Diplinthij, or triplinthij), cannot bear up above one Story;
but in so vast and Majestic a City (as Old Rome) there ought to be innumerable
habitations; Therefore when a plain Area, or building of one story could not
receive such a Multitude to dwell in the City, therefore the thing it self did
compel them to it, that the Houses might be raised higher, and therefore they
had strange contrivances of out jetting, and over hanging stories, and
Belconies, etc. Which reasons if rightly considered are great mistakes; Our men
at this day have taught the World better things; And have demonstrated that a
firm building may be raised to many stories height upon a foot and a half
thick wall. The oversight of the Romans was the vast bigness of their Bricks;
for the lesser the Brick the firmer the work, there being much greater
firmness in a multitude of Angles, as must be produced by small Brick, then in
a right line; And this is the reason of the strength of Butresses, and
Mult-angular Towers, etc.

These Bricks are about 17 Inches of our measure long and about 11 Inches
broad, and two Inches and a half thick. This, (having caused several of them
to be carefully measured) I give in round Numbers, and do find them very well
to agree with the notion of the Roman Foot, which the learned Antiquary Greaves
has left us, viz. Of its being of half an Inch less then ours; they seem to
have shrunk in the baking more in the breadth then in the length; which is but
reasonable, because of its easier yielding that way; And so, for the same
reason, more in the thickness, for we suppose them to have been designed in the
Mould for three Roman Inches.

Now that this was properly the Roman Brick, we have the testimony of
Vitruvius, and Pliny: of Vitruvius, "fiunt Laterum tria genera; unum quod Greece
Didoron appellatur, quo nostri utuntur, etc." And of Pliny; " Genera eorum tria
Didoron, quo vtimur longum sesquipede, latum pede;" But we are to note, that
the Copy of Vitruvius, where it describes the measure of the Didoron is
vicious. And is to be corrected by Pliny; And had not Vitruvius's Commentatour
been more a friend to his Author, than to truth, he had not persuaded the
contrary; for the Bricks themselves do demonstrate at this day Plinie's
measures to be right and not that of Vitruvius, as they are extant: which makes
me much wonder at the confidence of Daniel Barbarus affirming the Bricks, now
to be found are all according to Vitruvius and not Plinte's measures; for all
that I have yet seen with us in England, are of Plinie's measures; as at
Leister in the Rome Ruin there, called the Jews Walls; at St. Albons, as I
remember; and here with us at York.

And to go no farther for Arguments, than that Chap. of Vitruvius, the
diplinthij parietes in Rome were against Law, and the single Brick-wall was
only allowed as Standards; viz. A foot and a half thick wall, or one Roman
Brick a length, as was above Noted.

Pliny, lived some time after Vitruvius, and being a professed Transcriber,
and, as it appears from this very place, having taken the whole business of
Brick Verbatim out of him and not differing in any one thing in the whole
Chapter, but in this; viz. in the measure of the Didoron; And the Bricks
demonstrating the truth of that differance, it is but reasonable we should make
Vitru^ius's longum pede, latum semipede, a fault of Vitruvius's Coppiers.

I shall conclude this differance with this remark: That proportion and a
plain Uniformitie, even in the minutest parts of Building, is to be observed,
as this miseserable Ruin of Roman workman-ship shows: In our Gothic Buildings
there is a total neglect of the measure and proportion of the Courses, as tho
that was not much material to the beauty of the whole, whereas, indeed, in
Natures works, It is from the Symmetrie of the very Grain, whence arises much
of the beauty of the thing. Indeed, if I was never to come nearer a building,
and to view it always at such a distance, this might be excused as to me; And
so in Artificial things, as in Pictures, and Carvings to be seen on high: But
yet in my opinion it is but an excuse of Laziness to tell me such and such rude
dashes will have a marvelous effect at a distance; as though things Painted or
Carved to addorn our comparatively low Rooms were distanced. And this Noble
Art, in my opinion, has of late in nothing suffered so much with us as in
admitting of this vile (not to say Impudent) Excuse, whereas indeed, What is
well done and most exactly finished in the most minute parts of a thing
Painted? I am sure if it pleases me near the Eye, it will never displease me
at a distance.

25 Cochlea terrestris turbinata et Striata fab Col.
14. Buccinum exiguum fasciatum et radiatum.
Gall nar.

Aldernensi Insula.

A. Wallia Floid.

39 Buccinum exiguum pullum duodecim orbium.
46. cochlea cinereo rufescens fasciata leuiter umbilicata. POMATIA GESNERI
Cochlen POMATIA, edulis Gesneri.
47 cochlea hortensis nostra, fusca, maculata, et fasciata.
43 cochlea maculala, unica fascia fusca, per medium orbem insignita.
54. cochlea interdum unicolor, interdum uariegata, item uarijs fascijs depicta.
68. cochlea nostras umbilicata pulla.
78. cochlea compressa, umbilicata, fasciata compestris.
79. cochlea Subfusca umbilicata, clauicula modice producta.
A
A
Gall. Nar.
56. cochlea alba leuiter umbilicata pluribus fascis circumdata, clauicula
productiore.

Hisp
Gall. narb.
Cochleae nudae Terrestres Limaces quibusdam dicta'.
101. limax paruus, CINETEUS
102. limax ATER,
103. limax subrufus.
104. limax uanegatus, sieve fascialus, cellarius.
Limax, Succini color, albidis maculis insignitus.
26. Cochlea vivipara Fasciata.
32. cochlea papua, pellucida, operculo testacco; cochleatoque clausa.
an idem cum 21.
21. Buccinum Subflauum, pellucidum, Sex orbium, clauicula admodum tenui,
productiore.
22. Buccinum Subflauum pellucidum quatuor orbium, ore amplisimo mucrone acuto.
23. Buccinum Subflauum, pellucidum, trium orbium
Purpurae Lacustres coccum fundentes.
41 cochlea pulla quatuor orbium.
42. cochlea fusca Limbo circum scripta.
43. cochlea exigua, quinque orbium.
38. Nerites Fluviatilis e. coeruleo uirescens, maculalus, operculo subcroceo
aculeatoque donatus.
39 Patella Fluviatilis, exigua Subflaua, uertice mueronato inflexoque.
Sectio. 1. Musculis ^luviatilibus. Cardine dentato.
a Danubio

1. musculus ex slauo uiridescens medio dorso leuiter RADIAIUS, admodum crassus.

Musculus Fluviatilis e Fluvio Tamesi ad Battersey.
an uitium 2.

2. musculus angustior^* ex flauo uiridescens medio dorso leuiter radiatus
cardinis pinna Sieve denticulo Birido.
3. musculus angustus. Subflauus Sieve Cirriaus.
4. musculus niger Omnium long crassissimus. conchae longae Species gesn.
aldrou.
^. musculus latus maxims et tenuissimtus e coeruleo iuridescens, fere palustri:
Sectio. 2. de Musculis cardine Laevi
8. musculus tenuis minor SUBFUSCUS, latiusculus.
14. pectunculus Subiuridis par^^^s. Subglobosus.
15 pectunculus perpusillus, rostratus.
virgin

Sectio. 1. Cap 1 de Pectinibus. exutraque part aequaliter Auritis, Striatis.
Anglie

1. pecten magnus, albidus, circiter DUODEOEM STRIJS. multis minut i^que
incienris exasperalis donatus.

9. pecten minor ex Croco uariegatus asper et fere Sinuosus et inequalis
leuiter et admodum crebro Steiatus.
17. pecten Sub^ufus Strijs uiginti quatuor ad minimum donatus.
18. ^^em cum Superiore (...) 17
23. pecten paruus ex croco uariegatus, tenuiter ad^modum Striatue alteris fere
Strys paulo minoribus.
27. pecten me^iecris latus, ex rufo uariegatus, circiter uiginti Strys admodum
Striatis distuictus.
28. ^dem cum DENTICULIS Sub aure; et non nisi altera et Infima ualua est.
Sectio. 2 Cap I. de OSTREIS
A^op^vsi plana ^onga, recurua angulo acuto desinente.

Sulenta (...) qualiter utrinque ad cardinem denticulata.

31 (...) altera ualua pla^^a. DENTICULATA.
Sectio 2 Cap 2 de ostracis APOP^YSI breui, SUBTER et quasi in occulto posita
36. ^estrea fere circinata,, Subuiridis leuiter striata.

37. eadem Supina.
ostrea syluestris rondeleti
39. Ostrea laeuis Subpurpurea uel Subaurea instar margaritae intus et extra
resplendens.

A J GarnSEY
69. pectunculus exiguus, albus, admodum tenuiter Striatus.

Chama Glycymeris Bellonij.
A. J. Garnsey. 82. pectunculus ingens, u^riegalus ex rufo.

87. pectunculus cra^^iusculus, albidus.
88 pectunculus latus, admodum planus, tenuis, albidus.
100. pectunculus tenuis, leuiter purpurascens, radiatus, an idem cum Superiore?
mare mediter:

a. D. E. FLOId
105. pectunculus, Superiore paulo planior.

108. pectunculus maximus Subfuscus* ualde grauis.
120 pectunculus fuscus dense fa^ciatus elegatiti quadam pictura undulata
insignitus.
122. pectunculus omnium crassissimus fascijs ex latere bullatis donatus.
mar meciterr.

126. pectunculus rostro productiore capillaceis. fascy: donatus.
154 pectunculus exiguus, Subfuscus.
161. pectunculus orbiculari^, fuscus Strijs medijs ^u^ricatis.
marc adrintico.

169 pectunculus Subfuscus strys (...)
171. pectunculus capite minore, rotundiore, et magis cequali niargin^^.
127. pectunculus dense fasciatus (...) rubro uar^^egatus, et undatus.
J. GarnSEY.

129. pectunculus Subfuscus, tenuiter admodum fasciatus.
136. pectunculus planus cra^sus, ex rufo radi^tus.
J Garnsey
200. musculus Subcoeruleus. fere UirgaTUS.
mytulus RondEL
201. musculus paruus, Subcoerulcus latus, rostro tenui, adunco
202 musculus paruus, albidus, tenuis, angu^tior, rostro tenui, recuruo.


217. tellina Subfusca angustior, intus purpurascens.
218. an eadem cum Superiore. 11. 216^
menis

219. tellina purpurascens margin Sinuoso.
Jamaic

232 tellina lata albida ex rubro radita.
J. Garnsey.

241. tellina ex rufo (...) exasperata
247 tellina fasciata, (...) rubro ueriegata.
J GarnsEY

248. tellina fasciata angustior intus lut^scens, extra radiata
249. tellina fasciata (...) Subaurca radiata.
250. tellina parua* (...) rubra ad alterum latus Sinuosa
251. tellina leuis nitu^ et extra rubra ad latus Sinucsa.
Sectio. 9 Solenis i. d. est. Conchae tenuibus longissimisque. ab utraque part
naturaliter hiantibus
255. Solen major Subfuscus* RICTUS

Solen (...)
259. chama fusca, lata, planior.
264. chama Subfusca augusti^^^na, ad Solenes quodam* mede acceden^.
271 chama fusca Strys te^^sir^is donata
(...).
Sect. 1^ cap. 2. Chamae: Pholad^bus
269. chamoe pholas, latus, ex alter^ part obfusus. Scaber Sieve rugosus.
270. chamoe pholas fasciatus, ex altera part intus ui^lacca.


pholos Striatus Sinuatus ex A altera part.
pholas latus,
rugorus ex dimidio dorso et asper.
pholas paruus, asper.
Pholadum tertia t^sta, aliarum cardin^ Superinjecta.
Saxum pheladibus foratum.
Sectio 2 Conchis quinque Testarum, Anatifer^s plerisque dictis.
280 concha ana^^fe ra Subrotunda bartholini.
(...) mediter
282 concha a natifera, margin muricata.


287 Salanas paruus, Striatus.



