A Living TESTIMONY From the Power and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ in our
Faithful Women's Meeting AND CHRISTIAN SOCITY. Given forth in the Universal
Union, and Approbation thereof, according to our several Proportions of Faith
and Life, in the same Spirit.
THe Spirit of Grace having freely visited all Mankind; the Lord has had
regard unto the low estate of his Servants and Handmaids, notwithstanding the
Enmity and Subtilty and secreet Smitings of that Spirit which seeks to Divide
and lay Waste the Heritage of God, whom he has Quickened, and Raised up Heirs
of Life together, in the Fellowship of the Gospel of Peace, which stands in the
Unity of that Spirit which gives Life; and our Life, Peace and Joy is increased
in the Lord one toward another, whereby we are made Living Members of that Body
which Christ Jesus our Lord is Head, Glory to our God forever.

And we being turned to the Spirit of Grace and Light of Christ do believe in
the Light, and are become Children of his Light, of his Day, and so Members of
his holy Body, of which Christ is the Living and Eternal heavenly Head; and by
the Spirit of Grace we are come into Favor with God, and into the Order of his
Gospel, and are his Daughters, Servants and Handmaids; and we have a Heavenly
propriety in the Light, Power and Spirit of Grace, and the Gospel, being Heirs
of the same; so by Grace we are called into the Work and Service of God and
Jesus Christ, that they require of us in our Age and Generation, and we have
our Wisdom from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Rock of Ages, and the Foundation of
many Generations, who is made unto us Wisdom; and he has enlightened our
Spirits, which is the Candle of the Lord, which his heavenly divine Light,
which is the Life that is in Christ, the Word by which all things were made,
that we might all see and know the Will of God, and do it, and know our several
Works and Services the Lord requires of us in his Church, we are not to put
our Candles under a Bushel, nor to hide our Talents in a Napkin, as the
sloathful do; but we are to have Oil in our Lamps, like Wise Virgins to the
Lord; and our Lamps are to burn, and our Lights are to shine, that we may all
see clearly our Work and Service; namely, To help Families that are Poor, and
have Children, and to see that they are diligent to improve things to the best;
that they are not slothful in their business, no Wasters, and that they put
their Children to some Employment, as soon as they are capable; for the Truth
has a lively operation, it brings People to be diligent in all things, serving
the Lord. For we which have been Mothers of Children, and Ancient Women in our
Families, do know, in the Wisdom of God, what will do in Families, in Truth
and Righteousness, and according to the Families; and so are able, through the
Wisdom of God, to instruct such as want Instruction, and so are Helps to them
in their Families: And as the Apostle says, The Elder Women are to be Teachers
of good things, and instruct and teach the Younger to be Sober, and love their
Husbands and Children, and to be discreet, good and chaste, that the Word of
God be not blasphemed.

So here is a great charge and care lies upon these Aged Women in the Truth,
who are to teach these good things, that the Younger be trained up in that
which is good, sober and discreet, chaste and virtuous; so to be kept before
they Marry, and after they are Married, sober, and to love their Husbands, and
Children, and bring them up in the fear of the Lord, that the Name of the Lord
be not blasphemed. Here we Aged Women in the Truth, have a Gift to be exercised
in (...) and such a care lies upon us, that the Church of Christ be not
scandalized.

A^^ we have a concern, as in Tit. 2. relating to Marriage, both before and
after they are Married; and such Elderly Women in the Truth, are to be
entreated as Mothers, and so not to be Railed upon; and the Younger, as
Sisters, with all Purity, and Widows, that are Widows indeed, are to be
honored; and if they have Children or Nephews, let them learn first to show
Piety or Kindness at Home, and to requite their Parents and Kindred; for this
is good and acceptable before God.

Now this is a good Lesson for the Widows, to instruct their Children and
Nephews to Practice. And so we may see such holy Women, that were taken into
the Number and Society in that day, were to be well reported for good Works,
Lodging Strangers, and Relieving the Afflicted, and if she have diligently
followed every good Work; these were of the Number of good Women, that were
taken into the Number for their good Works and Service in the Church of Christ,
and that were recorded for their Works and Service to the Lord.

Now here is a diligent Practice and Exercise in the Power and Spirit of God,
and to be diligent in every good Work and Service, To relieve the Afflicted,
and to bring up Children in the fear of God; and to be Teachers of good things,
and Instructors of the Younger, that the Name of God be not Blasphemed.

So here you may see the Apostle was of another Mind than those perverse
corrupt Minds, full of Envy and Strife, Railing and evil Surmizing, and some
that wilfully, scoffingly, maliciously and revilingly call the Women's Meetings
an Idol and an Image; but such Raging Waves of the Sea have but foamed out
their own Shame, and manifested they are erred from the Spirit of Grace, which
God pours forth upon Daughters, Servants and Handmaids, which have received
as well as Sons, and are to improve their Talents and measure of the Gift of
God, and not to grieve nor quench the holy Spirit, nor walk despightfully
against the Spirit of Grace, as some do, whereby we are sealed to the day of
Redemption.

And concerning Marriages, it being God's joining, and his Ordinance, we Women
in the Spirit and Grace of God, being living Members of the Church of Christ,
do see with the Spirit of God, our Service concerning Marriage, that both Young
and Old that profess Gods Truth, may go together orderly, first having their
Relations consent; for many times we having seen, and do see more in the Young
People and Widows State and Condition, than some of the Men, because we are
more amongst them; so in that we dare not neglect our Gift in the Spirit of
Wisdom and Grace, but exercise and improve it to this glory and honor, and in
that we are meet Helps in the Spirit of God, to the Men, our Brethren; knowing
that Male and Female are one in Christ; for the Unity and Fellowship of Sons
and Daughters, Widows and Servants, stands in the Spirit of God, and we in the
same Spirit know our great Service to look after and visit the Sick that want
Nurses to help them, and sometimes assisting the Men, our Brethren, to the
placing out our poor Friends Children to Apprentices, and other good Services
that the Spirit of God leads us to, and into the practice of the pure
Religion, and that all such as do profess the Grace of God, may live and walk
godly, righteously and soberly in their Lives and Conversation, all such as
profess the Word of God may be Doers of the Word of God; for all that fear God
and work Righteousness, are accepted with God. And so, the Aged Women in the
Truth were and are to be Teachers of such good things; but such wanton Women or
Widows, that are Tale-carriers and busy Bodies, that speak things they ought
not, and such Men that are in Envy and Strife, and are puffed up with high
swelling Words of Vanity, and vain unruly Talkers, Despisers of them that are
good, having got into the form of Godliness, but not in the Power: Such were in
the Apostles days, as well as now, reproved by the Spirit of God, and turned
away from; and we cannot receive their Chaff and Husks for the Seed, Wheat, or
the Bread of Life; neither their Earthly sensual Wisdom for the Wisdom of God;
and therefore have several of such unruly Spirits printed and written so many
slanderous reproachful Books against us, and made disturbance against our
Meetings, under a false pretense, as though they would call us to our own, as
it was in the beginning; which if they themselves had kept to that that first
convinced them, they would have showed forth a quiet and meek Spirit, who under
a pretense of calling People to their own, have drawn People from their own;
for we are come to our Light, Spirit, Grace and Word of Life, and Anointing
within, which is our own, which at first convinced us, and which does teach us
to be Doers of the Word of God, and to live Righteously, and to practice the
true Religion; and them that do not, the spirit of the Lord moves us, and
teaches us to admonish and exhort them to forsake the Evil, and cleave to the
Good; and them that oppose the Practice and Care, in the Spirit and Grace of
God, of Men and Women in their Meetings, had they kept to the Light, Grace,
Truth and Spirit of God, and Unction within them, they would have been one with
us in the same, and in the practice of the pure Religion, and in the Godly Care
for God's Honor; but many of them are turned Mockers, Scoffers, Writers and
Printers against us, and are become vain Talkers. But we leave them to the
Lord, to deal with according to their Words and Works: And we right-well know
our Services, which the Spirit of Grace has led us to in the Church of Christ.

And as to our orderly proceeding toward Marriage, we say and affirm, the Man
and Woman both ought to appear at the Monthly Meetings, and Meetings for such
Services, where we and the Men may hear what both have to say, that Men and
Women may not be wronged of their Children, and that they are clear from all
other Persons, that the Meeting, and all others concerned, may have
satisfaction, in that Life, Grace and Spirit of Christ, in which is our Unity,
and may be faithful Witnesses both to God and Man, in our own Gift of Grace, in
which God has, and does own us: And all that write, and print, and speak
against our Practice (which the Spirit of Grace has led us to in the Church of
Christ) reach us not, neither are they of any credit with us; For we have put
on the Breast Plate of Faith and Love, and for an Helmet, the Hope of
Salvation. And so our desires are, That whatever things are pure, virtuous,
lovely, sober, honest, and of good Report, and that every one may follow that
which makes for Peace, and that they may study to be Quiet, and do the Lords
Business in his Spirit and Power, and their own in Truth and Righteousness, and
walk as Children of the Light, in the day of Christ, and in meekness instruct
them that oppose themselves, If God peradventure may give them Repentance to
the acknowledgment of the Truth; Greet one another with a holy Kiss of Charity;
Peace be with you all that are in Christ Jesus, Amen, Romans 16. 1 Cor. 16.20. 2
Cor. 13.22. 1 Pet. 5.14.

Now this holy Kiss of Charity is wanting, and not to be found, nor expected
from them that do not walk in the Spirit of God. And the Apostle says, I
entreat thee, true Yoke Fellow, help these Women which labored with me in the
Gospel, with Clement also, and with others my Fellow Laborers, whose Names are
written in the Book of Life, Phil. 4.3. There is one God and Father of all,
which is above all, and through you all, and in you all by his Spirit. So all
may see with his Spirit, the Lord is near unto all to teach them to know their
Service; and if these do lack wisdom, to ask it of God, who gives liberally,
and take counsel of him who is nigh unto you, and walk worthy of the Lords
mercies, being faithful in every good work; for to do good and communicate, is
a Sacrifice well pleasing to the Lord, and we who are made the Sons and
Daughters, Servants and Handmaids, by the Spirit of God, in the same Spirit we
have Unity and Fellowship, though we be absent in body one from another, yet we
are present in the same Spirit, and by the spiritual Eye do see and behold, and
rejoice in our spiritual Order, and one another stedfastness in Christ Jesus.
And so we have a communion in the Holy Ghost, both Sons and Daughters; and if
any thing the Men do see that is more proper for the Women to do, and to look
into, they do let us know of it, as Sisters in the Truth; and if any thing we
see that is more proper for the Men, than for us, then we let them know as our
Brethren in the Truth; so in this we do assist each other in the Spirit and
Truth, and are meet helps in the heavenly spiritual Union and Communion, and
Fellowship and Society, and do know the unity of the Spirit of Christ, which is
the Bond of Peace, and in this heavenly Spirit that reaches through all, and
over all, and is in you all, our dear Sisters every where, in Christ Jesus,
it is you we visit, to whom we recommend this Epistle, Farewell.

Postscript.
WE have been a People that have sought the Lord, and now we have found him, we
are willing to obey him in his Power and holy Spirit, that he has given us to
enable us so to do; and though we are persecuted in spirit, and other ways, by
unruly Tongues that have not power with their hands; such that are Sayers of
the the Word of God, and Talkers of the Grace of God, and of the Righteousness
of Christ, but not Doers of the Word, nor walkers in the Righteousness and
Grace of God, their ungracious Languages and Words, that they have Spoken and
Printed against us, show the Trees and their Fruit, whom we desire may come to
the Light of Christ, that with it they may see themselves, and repent; for we
desire the Salvation and Eternal Good of all.

Signed by us, in the behalf of the rest of our sincere Minded Members of our
Meeting,

London, from our Women's Meeting, gathered out of the City and Suburbs, the
1st. of the 4th Month, 1685. Mary Foster, Mary Elson, Anne Travice, Ruth
Crowch, Susannah Dew, Mary Plumstead.


THE END.

