Imprimatur. Guil. Wigan. R. in Chapter P. ac Dno Dno Humfr. Episc. Land. Sacellan.
June 26. 1671.

A SERMON Preached in Lent-Assizes, Holden for the COUNTY of BVCKS, AT
ALESBVRY. March 8th 1670/1 being Ash Wednesday.

By AD. LITTLETON, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for R. Davis of Oxon. M DC LXXI.

To my Honored Friend, and Worthy Parishioner, Joseph Alston, the elder, Esquire
at Bradwell in the County of Bucks.
Worthy Sir,
IN compliance with your Desires, which, where there is Friendship, have the
weight of Commands in them, (though there wanted not Those neither from Mr.
High Sheriff your Son,) I have at last ventured into the world that Discourse,
at which, in the delivery of it, your domestic Grief having indisposed you for
the Public, you could not be present. It comes forth with this Advantage, if
this be one; that it is somewhat larger by the Accession of many things, which
time would not give leave then to Enlarge upon. If there be any further benefit
or satisfaction may redound to the Reader from it, as it now appears, (which I
dare not hope for) you have a particular Right to challenge the Acknowledgment:
this Sermon having bin begotten under your roof, conceived and born within your
walls, and so of Due belonging to you; the Old Law both Sacred and Civil having
ordered, that Children born in the House should be reckoned into the Master's
Possession; and it being the Usual Course, which the Municipal Law it self
prescribes, that poor Children and Wanderers be sent back to the place of their
Birth to be provided for.

Sir, Having given you some small account of my Obedience, I cannot but think
my self obliged to acquit my self also in some measure upon the score of
Gratitude. Thanks is the least Return can be made: there will be more; the
Prayers of our poor drooping Parish Church, which you by your late seasonable
Kindness have put Life into. For I need not assure you (as one that are so well
acquainted with the purport of Holy Writ, and studied in Gods promises, which
are to None more Ample, then to the liberal and cheerful Giver) that as Charity
in general is the surest way of putting our Wealth out of the reach of Fortune:
so particularly Bounties to Pious and Public Uses have in several regards
peculiar and large Retributions ascertained to them, both in our Temporal and
Eternal concerns. If this Freedom of Mentioning, what you perhaps wish might
have been Concealed, offend; I must mind you, that such Actions as these, where
the very Example many times is as useful as the Benefacture, though they are
not to be done to that End, yet our Savior says they must be done in that
Manner, that men may see our good works and glorify God.

Sir, this sorry Inscription, whatever It is, begs your Acceptance, as a
hearty, though a mean Testimony of those Respects, that are Due to you from
Him, who is

Sir, Your affectionate Servant in Christ our great Lord and Master, A.
Littleton.
Chelsey June 24. 1671.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. l. 30. way, r. may. p. 12. l. 15. Jeshurum, r. Jeshurun. p. 15. l. 11.
ye, r. yea. p. 24. l. 24. so, r. said.

1 SAMUEL VII. 15.16. And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.

And he went from year to year in Circuit to Beth-el, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh,
and judged Israel in all those places.


THE very Notion of Judging implies a Law: there being such a mutual connection
and relation betwixt the Judge and the Law, that they infer one another, and
the denial of one takes away the other also. No Law, no Judge: No Judge no Law.
For how shall Samuel judge, if he have not a Rule laid before him, according to
which judgment is to be made? and that Rule is the Law. And on the other side,
to what purpose serves the Law, if there be not some Person authorized, who may
interpret that Law, and apply it to particular cases, and see it put in due and
orderly execution? and that Person is the Judge. If then there be a Judge, it
follows that there is a Law also, by which as he is empowered, so he is to be
directed. We have a Reverend Judge before us in the Text, on the Seat. It will
be necessary then, in order to their acting, to open their Commission first (as
is usual) and to show the Law, by authority whereof Samuel and all his
fellow-Judges are to Act.

Law is as connatural to Man, as his Reason is. For what is Reason it self, but
a Law and Rule of men's actions? This is that, which constitutes and denominates
us Men. For he that does not govern himself according to the prescript of right
Reason, lives not the life of Man; and consequently does both transgress the
Law, and forfeit the Privilege, of his Creation; either by sensuality and lust
degrading himself into Beast, or by envy and malice and spiritual wickedness
transforming himself into Devil.

Hence out of the source of Reason flows the Law of Nature, jus non scriptum,
the unwritten Law, or rather, as the Apostle terms it, the Law written in every
Man's heart: his conscience accusing, or excusing him, in every thing he does,
according as he in his actions thwarts or complies with this Law. This is that
the great Orator speaks of, Lex non posita, sed insita; non imperata, sed
innata: a Law not speaking to us from without; but implanted in the mind of
Man, and interwoven in his very constitution. To this Law belong all those
Common Notions, by which we are taught to acknowledge the Existence of God, and
to distinguish what is Honest, and Just, and Becoming the Nature of Man
(whether Alone or in Society) and what is otherwise. And by this very Law we
are instructed to order our behavior, as Men, in a fair decorum, piously
toward God, soberly toward our selves, and justly, and modestly, and
charitably too toward other men; for even charity it self is an act of justice
(so the Hebrew terms it (...)) at least the doing that to others, as the Royal
Law bids us do, which were we in their condition, we would have done to our
selves.

To these Heads of Piety to God and Justice to Men, a learned Rubbin, in his
discourse with the King of Cozar, reduces all the Laws of Nature; grounding
them upon those two places of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 10.12. What does the Lord thy
God require of thee, but to fear him, and to love him, and to serve him? and
Mic. 6.8. What does the Lord require of thee, O man, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? And the same Author further tells
us, that these (...) Statuta Intellectualia; (so he calls them, as things which
natural Reason, and humane Understanding of it self, without any prompting,
judges fit to be observed) I say these laws of Nature are necessarily
pre-required, as preparatory exercises, to the knowledge and performance of the
Divine Law; as things, without which no Society can subsist; insomuch that
Rebels and Thieves, though they be unjust to others, yet are forced upon this
principle to practice a kind of justice amongst themselves, that they may keep
their party together upon fair and equitable terms.

This is the Law of Nature then; and truly would we live up to the direction of
That, we should not need any other Law. But upon the fall of man Nature it self
being universally (as it was) corrupted as well as weakened, and the Notions of
Original Righteousness, through prevailing wickedness, which has increased all
along proportionably with mankind it self, being in a manner wholly defaced and
obliterated; it was necessary, that Law should be recovered, and re-imprinted
upon the memory of men, that even vulgar understandings should have their
duties plainly laid out before them: and this to be done by Positive Laws;
which being founded, as near as might be, upon those of Nature, as being the
productions of reason and convenience together, might accommodate general Rules
to particular Instances, according to circumstances of time and place, and the
exigencies of the state of things for the security of government, and the
safety of the people to be governed. This God himself provided for in the
Israelitish Commonwealth; by prescribing them Rules not only for their Moral
behavior; (for these were of perpetual universal obligation to all mankind,
and this was that Law written in the heart, before it was engraven upon stone)
but for their Civil affairs also, and even to the very Ceremonies in his
public worship. The first of these, namely, the Moral Law, as I said, obliges
all men whatsoever; and no less, if not more, now, since Christ is come, then
before: but as to the two latter, the Judicial and the Ceremonial Laws, God has
left particular States and Churches to the liberty of their own determinations,
so to order both Political and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as may be most
expedient; provided they command nothing contrary to that law, which he himself
has given us; I mean, the Moral Law.

To give two or three Instances.

Theft is forbidden in the eighth precept, and by the Judicial Law was to be
punished (amongst the Jews) only with a fourfold restitution of the thing
stolen, in kind, or of the value of it. But in most Christian States, upon trial
or possibly mistrust, that that punishment would not prove a sufficient
restraint; the penalty is altered, and the Thief dies for it: nor is any
allowed to claim the benefit of the Judicial Law, when he breaks the Moral, but
is justly sentenced by the Law of his own Country; that Law having been made
only for the Jews, and every Nation now being to be governed by Laws of its own.

Again, for the Church. The seventh day from the Creation, which is commanded
in the fourth precept to be kept holy, was a thing ceremonial; but the keeping
of one day in seven or some such proportion of time, was perhaps a Moral duty.
The Christian Church therefore has both laid aside the Ceremony, and preserved
the Morality, by changing the day.

On the other hand, the Worship of God is a duty the very Law of Nature
requires of men in Society: Now for Forms and Habits, and the Ceremonies of
Worship, (since God cannot be woshipt otherwise, I mean, without some Form and
Ceremony or other) these are to be ordered by the Churches appointment; and
every Member of that Church (I speak of a National Church) is obliged, unless
he can be sure such appointments are against Gods Law, to obey and comply with
her Orders.

But, what some say, that in Civil concerns indeed we are tied up to the Laws;
but in Church affairs we are left to our own choice and liberty; is no more
vain and frivolous, than it is absurd and irrational. For a man may upon as good
reason demand to fashion the Laws to his own mind, by which he means to Live;
as to shape his Religion to his own fancy and Interest: since he is alike
accountable to the Government for both, and separations in Church may prove of
as dangerous a consequence to the Public, as divisions in State. For he that
has made himself his own God, ('it is an expression of a late Author against
Atheism) will by his good will be his own King too. And it may very well be
suspected, that those who grumble at Church-Orders, would not, if they could
help it, be very well satisfied with the Civil Laws neither, they both having
their Rise from the same Authority. At this pass were things in Israel, when
every man did that which was right in his own eyes, and then it is said they did
that which was evil in the sight of the Lord. And so it was always, when there
was no King in Israel; Wherefore to prevent such disorders, and to deliver them
from those distresses, their disorders brought upon them, God often raised them
up Judges, the last whereof was Samuel here, a Priest and a Judge. And Samuel
judged Israel etc.

In which words consider we him,

1. In his station or Residence, as a Judge upon the Bench: he judged Israel
all the days of his life; and that at Ramah, where his house was, as it
follows, v. 17.

2. In his Journey and Circuit, as a Justice in Air: he went from year to year
in Circuit to Bethel and Gilgal, etc.

Thus like the standing and moving foot of a pair of Compasses; his fixed and
settled judicature was at Ramah, and the occasional exercise of it from year to
year at other places also.

I. As to his constant Residence, wherein four things are to be taken notice
of: 1. His Person; Samuel. 2. His Office; to judge Israel. 3. His Patent; all
the days of his Life. 4. His Seat, out of the next verse, Ramah.


I. First for the character and qualification of the Person. Samuel was Prophet
and Priest as well as Judge, Right Reverend in all his capacities, in all his
functions: Nor was it any objection against him from the people, that he was a
Churchman, and so unfit to serve his Country in a secular charge. Nor was it
to him any scruple of Conscience within his own breast, that he entangled
himself with civil affairs, or took upon him more employments, than one man
could well go thorough. It Is true, he was devoted by his Mother in his long
coats to the Churches service; I have lent him, says she, to the Lord, as long
as he lives, Chap. 1. verse. 28. and accordingly he after Eli's death succeeded
him in the Priesthood. Again all Israel (the Text tells us) from Dan even to
Bersheba knew, that Samuel was established to be a Prophet of the Lord, Chap.
3. verse. 20. And not only so; a Prophet himself, but a trainer up of young
Prophets, the President of a College at Naioth in Ramah. Chap. 19. verse. 20.
And here it is said he judged Israel all the days of his life. These were three
such imploys, as for the attendance they required, could not well be managed by
one Person; as for the consequence and high concernment of them, ought not in
prudence, one would think, be entrusted with any one. Yet this consideration
was so far, from either disadvantaging the public, or disparaging any of those
places, or discouraging the person that undertook them, that his Government
brought great blessings to the People, and honor to himself, and glory to God.
For such was his Sanctity and Wisdom, such his Ability of Judgment and
Integrity of Life, such his Prudence and Conduct, such his constant Piety to
God, and affectionate Zeal for public good, such his Favor with God and his
Reputation with the People; that in all Israel no three men could have been met
with, singly qualified for any one of those three Trusts, as he alone was for
all three. Nor did it make a little for the Peace and Unity and good order of
the Commonwealth, that the same Person was Supreme Governor, both in Church
and State; which else in some cases might clash, and give advantage to a
factious people, one against the other. Nor it seems was this the first time,
that both Powers thus met in one Person: For Eli, who was his immediate
Predecessor in the Priesthood, had been Judge forty years before; nor is it
unlikely, that this civil Office might together with the sacred function be
devolved upon him by succession, as he was Priest; the Jewish Writers telling
us, it was not unusual, that in later times the High Priest, if he were reputed
a Wise and a Good man, was chosen into the Sanhedrim, and made the Nasi, which
is as much as with us the Lord President of the Supreme Court; and in former
times we find in Scriptural Language that Cohen signified both Priest and
Prince. Nor was it for nothing that at first, before Aarons Family was settled,
the Priesthood went constantly along with the Primogeniture; whereupon Esau is
branded for profane, because he so slightly parted with his Birthright.
Afterward indeed Moses and Aaron, being Brothers, did by Divine appointment
divide the Powers, the one managing the Sword, the other the Keys. Nor do we
meet with any Instance, where they were joined again, till Eli and Samuel, who
were Priests and Judges too: But as these, being Priests, had the Supremacy in
State also; so from David downwards, the Kings were Supreme-Moderators in the
Church; as appears by David's and Solomon's Institutions, and by the Reformations
of Josiah, Hezekiah, and the like. And this, though it may not look altogether
so pertinent to this time and place, has howsoever this useful remark, that the
Civil Magistrate ought not to think himself unconcerned in the Interests of the
Church, and that since Priests have formerly done the office of Judges, Judges
on the other hand may think it to be some obligation upon them to take care, as
opportunity shall offer, of the Priest: that so Church and State, whose
Interests have sometimes so fairly met and kindly embraced one the other, being
lodged in one and the same bosom, may ever, though asunder and entrusted into
different hands, yet lovingly agree, and be friendly and helpful one to the
other.

II. From the Person we come to treat of the Office, that he was the Judge of
Israel: and of that 1. In its Nature. 2. In its Power. 3. In its Extent. 4. And
lastly in its Rule.


I. First for the nature of it; as there can be no Judge without a Law, to
authorize and direct him; for without that it might be said to him, as it was
to Moses, before he had his Commission; Who made thee a Prince and a Judge over
us? and our Savior himself, when addressed to for dividing the Inheritance,
asks the same question, though otherwise in all points qualified for the
office, Who made me a Judge? so on the other hand, without a Judge, Law it self
would be of no use: For how would Laws be executed, or public order be
preserved? Wherefore as the God of nature has provided Laws, whereby men are to
be governed, so he has not been wanting to invest some men, in all places and
at all times, with authority, to secure those Laws, and to punish the
violations of them. He himself is the supreme Judge. Next under him, in every
man's own breast, his own Conscience, as Gods deputy, exercises sovereign Rule,
calling him to the Bar, and arraigning him, and either acquitting or condemning
him; to which end that Faculty is furnished with a kind of Omniscience (which
no Judge from without has, that can but Judge Secundum allegata and probata)
she, I say, is conscious to all a man's thoughts as well as actions, alleges
and proves all he has done or said, or so much as designed; and, as God himself
will, not only sits upon a man as his Judge, but Stands out against him too, as
a witness.

But this inward Reflexive Judgment of the Soul of Man upon it self, this
Home-Circuit is not enough to do the business of Society. In this our corrupt
State, wicked men have partly found out ways to bribe, to corrupt and debauch,
this Judge within them, partly have arrived to that impudence and insensibility
in sinning, that they have hardened themselves against the sentence, as well as
against the dictates of conscience, and in the pursuit of what pleases a
vicious appetite, and a depraved will, neither regard the one nor the other,
having by bold and frequent attempts upon conscience worn out all that Awe,
which naturaly every man ows to himself. The case of the generality of men
standing thus, it was necessary, that for external polity, whereby men are
joined together in society, God should depute other Judges, besides conscience,
(since it would have been so dangerous to have left men barely to that) who
might take care, ne quid Resp. detrimenti capiat, to prevent mischiefs that
might befall community from disorderly persons, by restraining at least the
outward actions of men, and bringing them to account for them. And this he has
ever done. Let us a little trace it to the Original. This Judiciary power then
was at the first founded by God in paternal authority; the Father of the family
having then jus vitae and necis, power of life and death, and of dispensing
other punishments upon those of his own family, according to their demerits: as
the examples of Abraham turning out his son Ishmael; of Noah cursing Cham; and
of Judah sentencing his Daughter-in-law to be burnt, etc. do show. One evident
footstep of this parental power appears, even in the Judicial Law, in the Case
of the Rebellious Son, who was to dye with his Father's hand upon him first: so
that, even upon this account, every man, that comes into the world, is born
under a natural subjection. Now when mankind was multiplied, and men were to be
united into larger societies and greater bodies; then all the Families of the
kindred were to be gathered and consolidated under some one head, the Patriarch
or chief Father of all the several Families. And this power by lineal descent
fell to the Eldest Sons; so that the firstborn were, by prerogative of their
birth, Kings and Priests; unless there happened a forfeiture, as it was with
Esau, and Reuben, who were therefore justly put by. Afterward when kindreds
themselves, what with the propagation of their own Families, what with the
commixtion of strangers, were so enlarged, that they became Nations; then the
government was entrusted with Kings, as Gods Vicegerents. For, though there be
other Forms, which I shall not now dispute against, yet the Monarchical has
this advantage at least over them all, that it was the first, and far the most
ancient of them all; as the Historian Justin has observed, that principio
rerum, at the beginning of the world, that is, when the world was first divided
into Nations, it was governed by Kings. This among all other people; but then
God having a special care of his own people, did not at first set up Kingly
Government amongst them, (though afterward upon their desire he did) but to
maintain the Theocracy, his own Government among them, did, upon occasion of
great troubles or imminent dangers, raise them up Judges, who were tantamount
to Kings. Nay Moses himself gives himself the very Title too; Deuteronomy. 33.5. where
he says, that Moses was King in Jeshurum, when the heads of the People and the
Tribes of Israel were gathered together. And thus Sufetes, which is the word
for Judge with the Phaenicians and Carthaginians their descendents, as well as
with the Hebrews, is used by Seneca and others, that speak of those people, for
the Supreme Magistrate.

2. And such was Samuels power, here, as that of all the other Judges before
him, differing from the Kingly rather in name then substance, as to the
exercise of it. Some tell us, it was much-what like that of the ^ictators at
Rome, in that they were raised only upon extraordinary occasions, and entrusted
with an arbitrary power. It Is true, as the occasion was extraordinary, so 'twas
fit their power too in some measure should be. But then these Judges of ours
differed from them in this, that these had extraordinary assistances from God;
not to say, that these having taken upon them once the Government, some of
them, as Eli, Samuel, etc. never laid it down again, nor returned back to their
private condition, as they all did, but JulJus Caesar. By this power then they
were instated in a supremaecy, and were (...) unlimited, unaccountable and
unappealable. They had the universal dispensation of Justice, an absolute right
to make War and Peace, command of men's persons and fortunes, and power of Life
and Death. And all other Magistrates and Officers derived their authority from
them. It is the opinion of some, and those learned, that the great Council of
Seventy, which Moses for his assistance set up by the advice of his
Father-in-law Jethro, to help him in the trial of lesser causes, usually called
the Sanhedrim, or (...), the Jewish Parliament, continued down from Moses
without any interruption till Herod's time; if so, then the Judge was chief over
them. Besides there were lesser Courts too in each City, much like our
Hundred-Court's, and Courts-Leet; to judge of smaller matters; who, as they
received their authority from the Supreme Court, so might be appealed from to
it. And all these inferior Courts subordinate to the great Consistory, and
that it self to the Judge. But I rather incline to GrotJus, who thinks that in
these times all the bands of Government were losened amidst the popular
licentiousness, when every one did what they list, and that there were no
Courts at all kept to call them to account; but that God raised these Judges on
purpose, as well to recall the people to good order, as to deliver them from the
oppression of their enemies: since the History makes it clearly out, that, at
every vacancy or interval of Government, the people fell off a fresh into their
former disorders, and those disorders brought new troubles upon them, which
both occasioned the raising of a new Judge, to rescue them from one and
the other, from their sins, and from their foes. For so we find Judge Samuel in
this very Chapter first call them together to Mizpeh for a Fast and
Humiliation, before he venture them to Battle against the Philistines. However
it were, these Judges had not their power from the people, though sometimes the
peoples consent and desire too was not wanting; but immediately from God
himself. And so is it proportionably with all supreme Magistrates. For that
Ascham's position is not true, that they receive their power by compact and
agreement of the people; this one argument amongst many, is enough to evince;
that no man in the world has power over his own Life; and consequently cannot
transfer that power to another, which he has not himself. Nor has the whole
Community together that power, since the particular persons, which make up the
Community, have no such power, and the whole cannot have more in it, then the
parts had to contribute to it. The Judicatory power then is not derived from
the people, but from God himself transmitted to the King as supreme, and from
him to the Judges, as Ministers of Justice sent by him: the King being the
fountain of Justice and the Soul and Life of the Law.

3. And this to the whole body and every part of it, in all its concerns; which
is the extent of this power. First over all persons: for so it is said of
Samuel, that he gathered all Israel to Mizpeh, and there judged them. The
Church of Rome indeed priviledgeth her Priests from the civil judicature; and
there are Others, though seemingly of far different persuasion, that would fain
have it believed, they are not concerned in Law, or consequently in government,
upon that assertion of the Apostles, that the Law is not made for the
righteous; and in another place, where he speaks of meekness, temperance, etc.
that against such there is no Law: and I agree to them, that if they do well,
as the same Apostle says, Romans 13. they need not fear; but that upon this
condition then, ea Lege, if they observe the Law. For what says the Apostle
elsewhere? Do we then by faith, (and I may say, do we then by our good works)
make void the Law? yea rather we establish it, by performing what it commands.
Further, Innocence it self may be impleaded, and so fall under the inquisition
of the Law; and it is the evidence must fetch her off. The Law then is for
clearing, and acquitting the guiltless, no less then for condemning criminals.
As at a Jail-delivery, the Billa vera casts the Prisoner, the no-evidence of
the fact sets him free.

Again, as this judicial power is over all Persons, so it is in all Causes,
Temporal by the Judge, Spiritual by the Bishop, by each as the Kings Delegate.
And Samuel acted in both these capacities here; so that he had the people upon
a double account obliged to him, for the punishment of crimes, and the decision
of controversies in both Courts, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, according to the
sentence in Deuteronomy. 17.12. where having sent them to the Priest and the Judge, he
tells them, that He that will do presumptuously, and will not harken to the
Priest, or unto the Judge; that does not stand to their award and submit to
their judgment, even that man should dye. Of those who pretend submission to
the Judge, but have not the same obedience for the Priest, and so would own but
half a Samuel, we have spoken before, nor shall we need to repeat any thing
here.

4. As, also we have at large in the very entrance of the discourse treated of
the Rule, to wit, the Law; according to which judgment is to be made; so that
we need not have much more to say. The Law then, by which the Judge is to be
regulated, is in the first place, the Law of Nature, which indeed is no other
then the Moral Law; and to this all mankind stands obliged and accountable.
Whence the Apostle tells us, that very Heathens, by the light of Nature, know
the judgment of God, that they who do such things, i. e. such as are forbidden
by the Law of Nature, are worthy of death. Let me only take notice by the way,
that there are some, who acknowledge no such thing as a Law of Nature; but that
these things we call Laws, were invented upon emergent necessities or politic
designs, and so are only ex instituto and (...), by institution and compact;
and so are impositions rather of the government, or but compositions at best,
of the Subjects, with the government, then Laws. The Poets and some Ancient
Philosophers too, who knew not the original of mankind, make a pleasant story
of it, that men were used at first to fall out and quarrel about their Acorns,
and other such provisions, Nature could furnish them with before the invention
of Tillage; and with fists first, and then with clubs, disputed their rights;
till at last the strongest, to be sure, got the better: but then he, that was
strongest today, by ill hap, many times, meeting with one stronger then he the
next, was forced to resign the booty of his last conquest. By this means being
tired with these daily Frays, and grown weary of their Club-Law; one wiser then
the rest persuades them to quietness, and tells them, if they would agree and
live civilly together, there would be enough for them all. Whereupon the major
part of the weak ones out-voting the strong, who were but few, and would have
been apt to fall out among themselves, and could not, if they had held
together, made good their smaller party against a multitude in league; they
were all content; and presently Articles were drawn up, and Laws made, and
Rules of society consented to; by which all mankind has, ever since, time out
of mind been governed. Nor has a late (I am sorry I cannot call him Christian
Philosopher) mended the matter, but made it much worse: who in his Leviathan
sets down that for doctrine; which with them past only for fancy, or at best
but conjecture. According to this great Master of corrupt reason, every man is
free, and has a natural right to every thing, he can make himself master of:
only men for fear of disturbances, and out of care of self-preservation,
combined into Societies, or else over-powerd by force, (for here lies the
Argument with him, that the longest sword creates the best Title) gave up their
Liberty, and quitting that right, they had by Nature to all things, submitted
to unequal terms for peace sake; choosing rather to sit down by the loss, and
enjoy a little with quietness, then hazard their security by venturing at all.
Hence sprang Propriety; hence Rules of Government and Politic Constitutions,
which are no longer valid, says that Author, then they have power to back and
justify them. But if it be so, that Fear and Force are the principles of
Society, and the grounds of Subjection; then what hinders, but, when a man can
shake off that Force, or be rid of his own apprehension, he may return to his
natural Freedom, and reassume his ancient Rights? At this rate Wives, Moneys,
Estates, all properties are exposed as a prey to the bold; and the Thief, if
his design hit, has a better claim then the Owner; and Rebellion, Murder, Rapes
and Rapines, if attended with success, prove lawful actions; and it is
miscarriage only makes them Crimes. And the main reason, that Author offers
against these practices, is not because they are in themselves unlawful, but
because they are to the designers unsafe. These are impious and dangerous
Tenets. Alas! if we hold together upon no better terms then these, where are
we? we lie hourly at the mercy of those, that dare be wicked: and what
encouragement would this be to wickedness, if men were persuaded once, that, as
they grow prosperous in villainy, they cease to be wicked? But I have showed
before, that there is no such natural Freedom, he talks of; and that we are
born Subjects; and consequently, that natural Right he speaks of, is under
restraints and limitations. It Is true, God made Man a reasonable Creature, and
Lord of the rest of the Creatures. But how? not so, as that any one man should
ingross the whole to himself, and exclude all others, his fellow-men, from a
share in that dominion. That were not reasonable (that where there is an equal
right, there should not be an equal share) and by co^nsequence not suitable to
the nature of Man. For he that made Man reasonable, made him sociable too. He
was to Marry, to beget Children, to maintain and govern a Family, to provide
for those that belonged to him. His Children were to be obedient to him, to
accept of his provisions, to use their own industry; and, when they came to be
Masters of Families themselves, to take the like care of them. Hence came
Proprieties, hence Inheritances, hence Purchases, hence Trades, Callings,
Professions, and other honest courses for getting a livelihood: Thus, we see,
our first Parent bred up his Children, the one to be a Husbandman, the other to
be a Shepherd; Intimating, that every one is by Nature to live by his own
labor, and not by invading another right. These are the great purposes of
Society; and all this agreeable to Nature, whose grand maxim it is, To do as we
would be done by. There is then a Meum and Tuum founded in Nature. There are
such things, as Virtue, Honesty, Equity, Industry, Justice, and the like to be
practiced amongst men, even by the Law of Nature: and they are to be looked
upon as Hosts Humani generis, Enemies to Society, Enemies to Nature, that
would persuade the world to the contrary.

But there are, I said, besides This of Nature, other Positive Laws, which
oblige the external actions of men, and by which men are to be judged; and
those both Political and Ecclesiastical, in the making of which, particular
Commonwealths and Churches are left by Divine Wisdom to their own Liberty: God
himself having provided nothing in that kind for us; only left us a Model of
his own Government amongst his own people, in the Jewish State and Church; to
wit, the Judicial and Ceremonial Law. As to Church affairs, though those
Ceremonies, being only Types and Shadows of Christ, had their end and
completion at his coming, and so we are obliged against them; yet, seeing God
cannot be worshipped without some ceremony, it is not to be imagined, that
public Authority should want power for the ordering of Externals in the
worship of God. But as to matters of Polity, that frame of government, which
God with his own hand set up, deserves our veneration sure; and Calvin further
acknowledges, that many of those Rules and Methods may by any Christian State
be safely imitated, and fairly transcribed into practice.

I shall not here start that question, which Sir Thomas Moor, once Chancellor
of England, and the ornament of his country, in his Vtopia does, why we punish
Theft with death, and not as the Judicial Law prescribes; because I have
already answered it, and the late success has justified the severity.

Only having spoken so much of the Law of Nature, let me add one word (I beg
the Lawyers pardon, if I speak in alieno foro) concerning our Municipal or
Common Law; (neither Law nor Prayer is ere a whit the worse, for being Common)
that there is not any Law extant, either in Books or Practice, which comes so
near the Jus Natural, as Ours does; being a kind of unwritten Law, grounded
upon Custom, and built up by long experience of its Usefulness and Convenience,
having been long before the Conquerours time, (who only put it into a French
dress and livery, as a cognizance of his conquest) practiced here, among the
Saxons, and, as it is more then probable, among the ancient Britans too, whose
Druids, as they were learned men, so were able Lawyers, yet would never commit
any thing to writing.

I have done with the Office: a word or two of his Patent and Residence.

III. His Patent was signed for him durante vita, he was a Judge all the days
of his life: nor was his Judiciary power extinguished or superseded by the
super-induction of the Regal, as may appear by his giving Orders to Saul, and
his calling him to account for his neglect, and his hewing Agag in Gilgal; so
that Saul one might think were till Samuels death only the General, administer
belli, to execute the orders of War. Yet Saint Paul having said, that God had
given the Jews Judges for about the space of 450 years, till Samuel the
Prophet; adds that then he gave them King Saul 40 years; in which account he
includes Samuels time too. Wherefore some thus explain it, all the days of his
Life, from Eli's death, till Readiness being made King. One of the Rabbis asks
how this could be, how he could be Judge all the days of his life; and answers
himself (as that sort of people are full of fancy and confidence) that Samuel
while he was (...) in his mothers belly, was made a Judge, and chosen into the
Sanhedrim. However he was the last of this Order of the Judges, and the power
expired with him; his Sons having been as faulty in State, as Eli's had been in
the Church, as corrupt Judges, as they were scandalous Priests: wherefore as
the lewdness of Hophni and Phineas turned old Eli's Family out of the
Priesthood, so Samuel's Sons by their misdemeanors, outed themselves out of
the Civil Government.

IV. Lastly, His constant Residence was Ramah, a City of Benjamin, where his
house was, and where his Father and Mother had dwelt before. Here he built an
Altar for public worship, which the Jewish Masters tell us, was lawful even
for any private man to do at that time, when the Tabernacle at Shiloh was
pulled down, and destroyed after the taking of the Ark. Once we read, that,
when David came to him from Court, they went and dwelt together at Naioth,
which was hard by; I suppose, for more privacy in his College there. And here
at last he laid his bones. Ramah was his Dwelling, his Retirement, his Seat of
Justice, his Sepulcher. Hither, as long as he lived, all the people of Israel
came up for Justice; for it was a place of high situation, the name imports.
For though there might be Inferior Courts in other Cities, at least
deputations elsewhere: yet here was the supreme Court of Appeals, which
afterward in David's time was translated to Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. Thither the
Tribes go up; for there are the seats of Judgment, seats of the house of David.

And now it is time for me to leave Ramah, and set my face toward Bethel and
Gilgal, and Mizpeh, where I must, having so little time left me, make but a
short Circuit; where first we shall take a vJew of the Places, and then
consider the necessity and reasons of this Itinerant Justice.

I. The Places, where Samuel kept his Assizes, were eminent and remarkable in
story; large Shire-Towns, yet at no great distance neither from one another,
lying in as narrow a compass perhaps as this County, we are now in. Indeed
whole Jewry was no large piece of ground, being, (as I am told by one that
undertakes to correct AdrichomJus) no more then seventy miles long, where it is
longest, and but eighteen over in breadth; yet very populous it was, because
very fruitful.

1. Beth-el a City of Benjamin. Here Jacob saw the vision of the Ladder, gave
it its name, the House of God, and set up a Pillar; at his return was himself
here named Israel, and built an Altar. Here the Ark of the Covenant was, before
it was removed to Shiloh, and Phineas, Eleazar's son, stood before it.

2. Gilgal a City in the plains of Jericho, belonging to Ephraim. Here the
children of Israel were circumcised, having neglected that Sacrament ever since
their coming out of Egypt; and therefore 'twas called Gilgal, because the Lord
that day rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off them. Here the twelve
Stones after their passage over Jordan were pitched. Here Samuel hewed Agag in
pieces before the Lord, because Saul had forborne the execution.

3. Mizpeh a City of Judah, in the valley, as we read Josh. 15. but in the 18.
it is reckoned among the Cities of Benjamin, with Ramah, and Bethel. It Is likely
it might stand in the confines of both Tribes. It was, I take it, Laban's heap
of stones, which he and Jacob had raised, and called Mizpah; that is, a Beacon
or Watchtower, saying, the Lord watch between thee and me. Here was the
Israelites constant Rendezvous. Here they encamped against the Ammonites, when
Jephtha was their Leader. Here they all gathered together unto the Lord against
the Benjamites. Here lastly at the 6 verse of this Chap. all Israel was by
Samuel's order summoned to appear, and kept a Fast, and powered out water before
the Lord, that is, tears of repentance, as GrotJus understands it; and Samuel
Judged them here, that is, punished them for their iniquities, and offered up a
burnt-offering: and then miraculously the Philistines were discomfited.

There were reasons then sufficient, both Politic and Religious, for Samuel to
make, choice of these places, that were thus Innobled and Consecrated by such
Famous and Sacred actions, for his seat of Justice; whence the Lxx render it,
(...), in all these holy sanctified places. And that we may not pass them
without some Observation, Our Reverend Judges, though they go not the same
Stages with Samuel, they go upon the same Designs. They begin at Bethel, the
Church, the house of God, where judgment uses, and ought to begin, there to
enquire of the Lord. They proceed to Gilgal, to roll away the reproach of the
Countries by punishing malefactors; and to Mizpeh, to inquire into
misdemeanors, and see what condition the Public is in. For so they are styled
in Law, Justitiarii deambulantes and perlustrantes, Justices that take a walk,
and make a vJew of the Countries. And at this time I may say we are most
properly met in Mizpeh, upon a day appointed by the Church for Humiliation, to
pour out our water before the Lord, and to bewail our own sins, and the sins of
the Nation, as the Israelites did first, and then Samuel judged them.

II. As to the necessity of this Justice in Circuit, (though Samuel's may be
called an Episcopal Visitation too, he being the High Priest) It is, that
Justice may like the Sun, the great Minister of Nature, Visit all places, and
Influence all parts of the Nation with light, and heat, and vigor: it being as
impossible the Commonwealth should subsist one day without Justice, as the
lower world be maintained without the Sun. It Is so here; he rode Circuit from
year to year; but Josephus tells us, (and I know not, whether the Hebrew may
not well bear that interpretation) that he did it (...), twice a year, as Ours
do.

The Causes of this perambulation I take to be four; two in respect of the
People, and two in respect of the Trials.

1. For the People. It Is for their Ease; that they are not put to the trouble
and charge of bringing up their causes to Ramah, to the higher Tribunal, the
Kings Bench; but have them tried in propriis comitatibus.

2. It throws an Awe upon the Community, when they see justice brought home to
their own doors. DarJus was wont to complain, his Empire was like a raw
Bull-hide; tread it down in one place, it would rise up in another: but where
Justice is sent into all parts of the Land at the same time, and judgment is
alike administered in every district, all is easily kept in order.

Again as to the Causes to be tried.

1. Some are such, as cannot handsomely be judged, but upon the place; for the
convenience of Witnesses, the circumstances of the Thing, and the judgment of
the Voisinage: as it is in the Court of Nisipriu's for matters of Fact.

2. Others admit not of delay; as great and horrible offenses, to be inquired
into and punished, flagrante Crimine out of hand. Thus God himself came down to
Babel, to Sodom and Gomorrha, as it were upon a Commission of Oyer and
Terminer. And this expedition of Justice, and ousting of delays, is given as
the main reason of Itinerant Justice; ad celerem justitiam in ea part
exhibendam.

I come now to Application, and let not Me do it neither, but let Samuel
himself: yet not as a Judge to give the Charge here, but as a Prophet and a
Priest, in humble manner to address himself.

First to my Lord the Judge. You are now at Bethel, in the house of God; may
God direct you. The Judgment is His. Your Persons, your Functions are sacred:
You your selves in Scripture Language are styled Gods, Elohim. God stands in
the Congregation of the Gods. The Confidence, the Law reposes in you, is as
great, as the Trust, she has disposed to you: and That Is no less then the
Lives and Fortunes of all her Subjects. De Fide and Officio Judicis non
recipitur Quaestio, is one of her known Maxims. A Judge is viva Lex, a living
Law; and ought to be like the Law, Without Passion, Without Partiality.


Next to you, the Worshipful, the Justices and Gentry of the Country; who are
entrusted with the Peace, and one way or other, what by Authority, what by
Example, with the Concerns of the Government, that you would make it your
business to encourage and cherish Moral Honesty and Truth in dealings among the
People; and to discover and defeat all knavish and false practices, which
pervert the purposes of government, and cut the very Sinews and Ligaments of
Society, (which consists in a mutual confidence) by bringing men into a general
distrust and jealousy of one another. The Learned Jew, I spoke of before, in
his Book, called Cozri, ingenuously confesses, that it was upon this, that God
was so highly displeased with the Israelites, that they rested themselves upon
their Religious Services, their Oblations and Sacrifices, and other parts and
acts of Gods Worship; whereas in the mean time they wholly neglected the Laws
of Nature, and the Rules of Society: the neglect whereof does by inevitable
consequence tend to the dissolution of the Communities of Men; it being a vain
pretense, any man makes to Religion and the Worship of God, who wilfully breaks
those Obligations and Ties, by which he stands bound to God and Man, upon the
very account of Nature. I wish this were well considered by Those, who make a
great pudder about Religion; and yet are not at all scrupulous of public
danger; and I heartily pray, that common Honesty, and good Morality, that Truth
and Justice, and a due Obedience to Authority, which are the best and only
preservatives of Kingdom and Religion both, may more vigorously and constantly,
more Conscientiously and Universally be practiced amongst us. Till this be
done, we have but small hopes of seeing either Church or State in a flourishing
condition.

To you the Worthy Counselors and other Practisers of Law. You are all in your
Spheres under our Reverend Samuels, Ministers of State too. Your Employment is
Public, your Profession Noble. Shall I tell you the end of the Law? I need
not. I cannot do it better, then in the words of a Worthy Author of your own in
a most excellent Preface he has to Chancellor Ellesmere before his Book of
Reports. It is, he tells you, to Comfort such as are Grieved, to Counsel such
as are Perplexed, to Relieve such as are Circumvented, to Prevent the Ruin of
the Improvident, to Save the Innocent, to Support the Impotent, to Take the
Prey out of the mouth of the Oppressor, to Protect the Orphan, the Widow and
the Stranger. It Is sad, when any Noble Faculty (as yours is) designed for the
Good of Mankind, is made to serve the Practicioners private Advantage, more
then the Benefit of Society.

To you, the Plaintiffs and Parties concerned; that you would study to be
quiet, not to trouble Law with every trifle. I know the Apostle 1. Cor. vi.
speaks of Heathen Judicatures, that he would not have Christians repair to for
Justice. I know the Law in it self and its own purposes is good, and was
appointed to determine controversies, and to put an end to differences: But
it is such Differences, as cannot be otherwise ended. To bring every small
matter before the Judge, that might have been taken up at home, is to abuse Law
and Gospel both, as being a great disturbance to Government, and as great a
breach of Christian Charity. The Apostles reproof, I am afraid, may be applied
to too too many, in the 7th ver. of that Chap. There is utterly a fault among
you, because you go to Law with one another. Why do you not rather take wrong?
Why do you not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? Nay you do wrong, and
defraud, and that your brethren. There are some, it seems, who, as we use to
say, will neither do right, nor take wrong.

In the last place, to you, Witnesses, that you set the God of Truth before
you, and assure your selves, that your souls will go along with your
depositions. He that attests a falsehood knowingly, wounds God in his dearest
Attribute; and where he does not know, he ought not to say. Especially you
Jurors, remember you are sworn men. It must be a Verdict, a true saying upon
your Oaths, you are to give in. It is a shame to consider, how cheap Oaths are
grown amongst us; how the reputation of English Faith and honesty is lost in
this point. An Oath, the Author to the Hebrews says, is the end of all
controversy. Justice cannot be effected, nor Government secured without it.
There are two sorts of men peccant upon this account. Let me beg the favor of
your patience, to speak a word with both of them.

1. Those that refuse to take Oaths at all. 2. Those that will take them hand
overhead, and not care how nor what they swear.
1. There is a sort of men, that will not take Oaths. I have a charity for
them, but I wish it be not upon this ground, because they have formerly broken
their Oaths, or because they are resolved aforehand not to keep them, that
they will not take them now. Let me tell them, this stubborn refusal, if so, is
in it self interpretative perjury; for they are born-subjects, whether they
swear or no. But we will suppose it is out of Conscience of an Oath, as it is an
Oath. They object that Christ and his Apostle James have expressly forbidden it;
Swear not at all, say they. Right: but examine the Context; it stands thus. It
has been said by them of old time; Thou shall not forswear thy self. But I say
unto you; swear not at all.

First then from the opposition, I ask them, whether Christ in this place has
cancelled that Prohibition of forswearing ones self, or no: for so the
opposition stands; It has been said, thou shall not forswear thy self. But I
say, swear not at all. If they say he has; there will follow this absurdity,
that Christ, though he bids us not swear at all, yet he allows us to forswear
our selves. But this prohibition without doubt stands good still; for it is
brought in with the same form of words, as the 6th and 7th Commandments are, Ye
have heard, that it was said by them of old time; Thou shall not kill; Thou
shall not commit Adultery: and I hope, they will not say, Christ has repealed
those commandments. If the prohibition then stand good, it follows that if a
man must not forswear himself, he may lawfully swear; for else how can he
possibly forswear himself? And it were a foolish, idle impertinent precept,
which forbids a sin that it is impossible for a man to commit; to forbid
perjury, and not allow an Oath.

2. From the particular instances, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by
the Earth, nor by Jerusalem, nor by thy Head. It is evident, our Savior meant
only frivolous Oaths, by any of the Creatures, or by any other thing then God:
and so Saint James enlarges it; for leaving out Jerusalem, and ones head, he
adds nor any other Oath, that is, as it must be understood, any other such
Oath; and this is further confirmed by the reason given to each instance, which
refers not to the act of swearing, as it should have done, had Christ intended,
as they say: but to the nature of the thing sworn by. Not by Heaven, for it is
Gods Throne; not by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; not by Jerusalem, for
it is the City of the great King; not by thy head, because thou can not make
one hair white or black. And so as Saint James, not by any other thing. quoth.
These, and the like, are all Gods Creatures, and therefore swearing being a
Religious act, they are not to be sworn by. Now in that he forbids swearing by
Heaven and Earth, etc. because Creatures; can we therefore infer we may not
upon just cause swear by God himself, the Creator? Rather it follows that,
seeing we are forbidden to swear by these things, because Creatures; therefore
we may, and must, when there is occasion, swear by God.

3. From our Saviors design. We must observe Christ's scope and purpose in all
that 5. Chap. of Saint Mat. It was to clear and vindicate the Moral Law, from
those abuses and corruptions, which the Pharisees false Glosses had put upon
it. This appears by those other two. They held, so a man did not kill his
brother, it was well enough; he might be angry with him, he might call him
Fool, and not be guilty of the breach of that command; so he did not actually
lie with a woman, he might look on her, and lust after her, without any
offense. Our Savior contrariwise condemns Murder in the Heart, and Adultery
in the Eye. So here the Pharisees Tenet was, that so a man did not forswear
himself, did not swear falsely, he might swear, as he pleased, and by what he
pleased; as idly as he would. Wherefore it is only such idle, impertinent,
unnecessary swearing that is here forbidden, as well as swearing false.

4. From the close or latter opposition; Swear not at all; But let your
Communication be yea, yea; nay, nay. It Is plain that swearing is here
forbidden, only in ordinary discourse, in our Communication, not upon
extraordinary occasion before the Magistrate; or in a place of Judicature,
where an Oath is to be the end of strife.

5. Lastly, (and I will leave it with them) from Saint James himself; Yea, Yea;
Nay, Nay. Where will they find that Christ himself and his Apostles, or any of
the New Testament Saints used these forms of speech, so as they do even to a
ridiculous superstition. What do you think of St. Paul, who in his Epistles,
which are reckoned familiar discourses, where he is to vouch any weighty Truth,
fears not to use such forms as these, Before God I lie not; I protest by your
rejoicing, and the like. Would he, do you think, had he been called into a
Christian Court, solemnly to bear witness to the Truth, have scrupled an Oath?
would he have answered to an Interrogatory Yea or Nay? No; that was not the
meaning. Saint James will tell them, what Christ meant. Swear not at all, says
he, but let your Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay. i. e. in your conversation be
honest men, and stand to your word, in your dealings, in your assertions, in
your promises; let your word be your word, your yea, yea; and your nay, nay;
and then you need not swear: your word will be taken without an Oath. For it is
commonly seen, that those find least credit, who bind all they say with Oaths;
and that those, who swear most, are least believed.

And this brings us to Those, who make light of Oaths; are very ready to take
them, and more ready to break them. But such must know, that the violation of
an Oath, is the highest violation of Conscience that can be; and that God is
Witness and Judge both; and that it is dangerous to call him to be Witness of a
lie, who will be sure to be an Avenger of it; and that though Perjury perhaps
is got into that practice, that it has lost the Infamy, which does of right
belong to it amongst men, yet it will not miss of divine Vengeance even in this
life; that it is the boldest affront can be offered to Gods Omniscience, to his
Veracity, to his Justice, to his Wisdom, to his Power, to entitle him to
falsehood, and cover it with his holy and blessed Name; and that though they may
elude a Humane Judicature, and escape in this life, yet in the next, when they
appear, as we all must before the judgment seat of God, their injured
consciences will stand out, and witness, and draw uplarge declarations against
them to their eternal confusion, and condemnation.

Now may God the righteous Judge of all the Earth, so direct you all, in what
you go about, that you may have the Blessing, that the Country may have the
Benefit, and that God himself may have the Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

