Imprimatur,

Tho. Tomkyns Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino Dno Gilberto Divina
Providentia Archi-Episc. Cant. a Sac. Dom.
Ex Aed. Lambethanis, Sept. 20. 1669.
THE Churches Peace ASSERTED UPON A CIVIL ACCOUNT.

As it was (great part of it) delivered in a Sermon before the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor, in Guild-Hall-Chappel, July 4.

By AD. LITTLETON, Presbyter.

Opto equidem, ut, si fieri potest, nemo de fratribus pereat: si tamen quosdam
Schismatum Duces; and dissensionis Auctores non potuerit ad salutis viam
consilium salubre revocare; caeteri tamen, vel simplicitate capti, vel errore
inducti, vel aliqua fallentis astutiae calliditate decepti, a fallaciae vos
laqueis solvite, etc. S. Cyprian, de Unitate Ecclesiae.

LONDON, Printed for Philip Chetwind, MDCLXIX.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT IS sad to consider, that, as we owe all our Vnsettlements to our Divisions,
so we our selves are so settled upon the Lees in these our Divisions, that he
that endeavors to remove us, does but put us upon a new Fermentation, and an
exercise of Passion. The charming name of Peace it self is now become an Alarm,
and entertained by most as unwelcom news; and they, that bring any tidings of
it, looked upon, as Enemies, and Ill-affected. The reason of this it is no hard
matter to find out: for seeing many People have engaged themselves into
parties, out of a wrong apprehension of Interest; as long as that prejudice
lies in the way, there is no hope of doing any good; or ever reconciling them
to that, which seems to dis-interest them. Let the best Orator in the world go
to persuade any man against his Interest, he shall but lose his own labor, and
the others good opinion to boot. Wherefore I have in this Discourse endeavored
to und^ceive people b^ evincing, That the particular interests of us all, as we
are Brethren and Companions, are involved in the Churches Prosperity; and that
her Peace, by which the whole and every part, (the Government, and every Person
under the Government) is ^^cur'd, is, at least ought to be, the Center of all
our concerns. If Jerusalem miscarry, if the things of her peace be hid from her
eyes; none of her Inhabitants, whatever their Zeal or their Wealth, their
Religion or their Interest may be, must hope to escape. I do again confidently
say, that mistaken Interest is the main ground and principle of our present
Divisions: because, had they arose out of pure Conscience, that is a more
treatable thing, and is willing (if it be a good conscience) to be informed;
whereas now the humor of most is, to run after things without any examination,
and to cry up one thing, and condemn another, many times, which they have
little or no knowledge of, the one or the other. Now, Reader, to apply to thee;
whether thou art for the Church, or against the Church, this discourse will be
serviceable and useful to thee, upon this mere account, as thou art an honest
Englishman, and wishest thy self well and thy Country no harm. If thou art a
Friend to the Church; here thou will find some Arguments to confirm thy
judgment, and to enable thee in debating with others, that are not Friends. If
thou separatest from the Church; then thou must know, that it is mainly for thy
sake, that this comes abroad, to find thee out: because such discourses cannot
meet with thee, where they are delivered. Whatever thy Opinion be, and whether
it were Conscience or Interest, that made thee take it up (which thou art best
able to resolve thy self) do not prejudge me, but weigh impartially the truth
and reason of things. I desire not to be credited any farther, then I have them
on my side. If thou find the Language any where harsh and severe, do not
presently be offended: it is the nature of truth and reason so to express
themselves; and I do assure thee, my design is only to convince thy
understanding, without any intention of breaking thy head.

One thing, for thy further satisfaction, I must not conceal from thee, which,
besides the importunities of some Friends and others worthy Citizens, which
heard me that day, was in part a reason of this Publication; that some while,
after I had Penned this Discourse, I met with a Sermon in Print of Doctor
Reynolds, the present Lord Bishop of Norwich, Preached in the Parliament House,
Jan. 9. in the Year, 1656. upon this very subject, Entitled, The Peace of
Jerusalem: wherein he has, over and above his pious inlargements upon the
latter part of this Psalm (for he takes all the four last verses for his Text)
in his Exhortation to those then in Power, so Learnedly and Solidly, as his
manner is, by several strenuous Arguments proved, that The Christian Magistrate
has a coercive power in matters of Religion; (Page 23.) showing plainly, it is
but a trick and a design in those that cry it down; (Page 22.) and that the
difference of dispensations in the Jewish and Christian Church, does not a whit
alter the case; (Page 26.) nor Christian Liberty privilege or exempt men from
that Power: (Page 29.) That with me, and I think with any indifferent Reader,
he leaves no place of doubt. I was glad to see that the Church even then, when
her Friends were under hatches, was not in so hopeless and desperate a
Condition, but that her cause was fairly pleaded with acceptance, before her
Adversaries: and This it was encouraged me to entertain some hopes, if not of
the like acceptance of my weak performance, yet of a ready excuse for my
dutiful endeavor, before those, that have been always, and, I hope, ever will
be the Churches Friends. For though that were at such a time, when our
Church Government was laid aside (which yet that Reverend Person, I make no
question, did even then, out of his great Learning, in his Conscience approve
and wish restored) and therefore out of prudence the main Controversy (which
is with the Authors of the division, those that made the first breach) seem to
be waved, and his style particularly directed against those Sects, which
improving the Schism into Heresy, have departed from the Foundation: yet those
weighty Arguments, he brings, are generally applicable to all, and are
apparently of force against the most specious Sect, we have amongst us; and
that upon this ground, (Page 31.) that divisions and sub-divisions in the
Church do exceedingly tend to weaken, to distract; to betray it. To make good
this, I shall apply one of his Arguments, which alone is enough to carry the
Churches cause; (Page 28.) Whatever things are, per se, subversive and
dangerous to the prosperity of States and Nations, come under the proper
cognizance of the Civil Magistrate to prevent; But Heresies, Blasphemies,
Idolatries, Impieties against God (and Schisms too, say I, and so the Reverend
Author himself joins them, (Page 8.) Blasphemies, Heresies, Schisms, Idolatry,
Superstition) do as well endanger the Prosperity of States as sins against the
second Table. 1. Because God is as much provoked by the one as by the other. 2.
Because such sins do more exceedingly divide and unty the bonds of Love and
Amity, then other Civil differences do, and so loosen the hearts of men from
one another.

The Instances, wherein He would have the Magistrate exsert his power, are
these;

(Page 32, 33.) To encourage Orthodox Ministers, and the Schools of Learning.

To take care that all who own Christian Religion amongst us be required to
attend upon the Ministry.

To endeavor to reconcile dissenting brethren, that we may unite against the
Common Adversary.

To secure Fundamental Doctrines, and for that purpose to take care for
Catechizing, etc.

I thought fit to give thee this Intimation, that, if thou think my answers
not full enough to those Objections (which the streights of time would not give
leave for in the Pulpit) thou may know whither to have recourse (as I said)
for thy better satisfaction. I shall conclude with the same profession, as that
Reverend Author does, (Page 34.) that I have not pressed this Doctrine of the
Peace of the Church to the straightning or grieving of any, who love our Lord
Jesus in sincerity. Only I wish, that they, who made the earliest departure
from the English Church in these late times, would (as He does for many of
them) reflect upon themselves and apply that of Hazael; whether they could some
years since have been persuaded to believe, that they should have lived to see
such a trail of opinions and mischiefs break in upon Church and State, upon the
advantage of their (perhaps at first not ill-meaning) discontents. And let thee
and me and every honest Englishman pray for the Peace of our Jerusalem, in His
Paraphrase; (Page 8.) That God would protect his Ordinances, and maintain his
Truth; that he would prosper Fundamental Laws, the beauty and stability of
Religious Government, etc. that the Tabernacle and the Tribunals, Religion and
Policy may jointly flourish, they being the foundations of public happiness,
and which usually stand and fall together.

PSALM. CXXII. Verse. 8. For my Brethren and Companions sakes I will now say,
Peace be within thee.
THE Occasion, upon which this sacred Ode was penned, a Reverend Person in his
Annotations tells us, he believes, was David's return to Jerusalem, to the
Public Service of God again at the Temple, after Absalon's defeat. Calvin is
of opinion, that David made it at the time, when the Ark was settled upon Mount
Sion, and the building of the Temple designed, for the uniform Exercise of the
National Religion. Upon either account it will very well suit with our Meridian.

The whole Psalm is an Elogy or Panegyric Description of the Metropolis of
Judea, the City of Jerusalem: and that not only nor so much upon the Civil
account, that there are set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the House of
David. Verse. 5. That 'twas the Imperial City, where the King kept Court, whence
Laws were issued, and Authority derived for the Government of the rest of the
people. There sat the Sanhedrin, the great Council of the Nation; and there
the supreme Courts of Judicature, which received Appeals from all inferior
Districts: But also and much more upon the Ecclesiastical account; this City
being the Residence of the great King, the Lord himself, who had set his Name
there, and chose the Temple for his dewlling place. Whither the tribes go up,
the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, (or, more exactly to the
Original, according to the testimony for Israel) to give thanks unto the Name
of the Lord. This City then was the appointed place of Gods public and solemn
Worship, whither all the people of that Country were thrice a year, at the
three great Festivals, obliged to come up to present themselves before the Lord
in the Temple, according to the testimony of Israel, i* e. by a perpetual
Statute and standing Ordinance to that people: the Laws of God being usually in
Scripture Language styled Testimonies.

Now that there was by this Testimony or Statute for the Tribes coming up to
Jerusalem designed a strict Uniformity in that peoples Exercise of their
Religion, is of it self clear in the very History; for the Tribes did not every
one bring up a several Form of Worship along with them, but all as one man made
a solemn appearance together at the Temple in one joint acknowledgment and
regular Service. And Mr. Calvin tells us as much, that God appointed one Temple
and one Altar on purpose for the whole Nations use; ne populus in varias
superstitiones difflueret, that the people might not, by being left to their
own liberty in the Worship of God, run loose into a world of wild opinions and
practices about matters of Religion. And that further by Jerusalem, whose Peace
we are here to pray for, is to be understood the Church, as it is the appointed
place of Gods public Worship, appears by the very context of the Psalm it
self, which begins and ends with this Notion, verse. 1. I was glad when they
said unto me, let us go into the house of the Lord: and then in order to this
it is said, verse. 2. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem, that
being the ready way to the Temple: and in the last verse again he concludes,
Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good, i.e. the good
of Jerusalem in its Ecclesiastical State; as the House of God, the Temple, the
place of solemn Assembly, belonged to it. And thus Calvin expounds that of the
third verse, Jerusalem is built as a City, that is compact together; or, as the
common Translation has it, As a City, that is at unity in it self: not for the
uniformity of the building, but, says he, propter civium consensum, for the
unanimity and mutual agreement of its Citizens in the Worship of God and in the
Exercise of Religion.

And that the people should all thus join their affectionate good wishes and
most earnest endeavors for the Peace of Jerusalem thus considered, to seek the
prosperity, and to promote the welfare of the Church, in a fair compliance with
public Order, and in a quiet regular Exercise of the National Religion, the
Psalmist here in the close of the Psalm, bring no less than three Arguments.

1. From every man's personal concern in the Churches safety. Pray for the peace
of Jerusalem; they shall prosper, or, they shall be quiet and at ease, that
love thee, i.e. God will bless such persons with a quiet and a happy life, that
love the Church, and wish her well, and pay a regular obedience to her Orders
and Government. And this upon a mere Natural Principle of self-love implanted
in every man's breast, and of that charity, which, we use to say, begins at
home; the parts being all safe in the preservation of the whole; every private
man's Cabin secure, while the Ship of Government steers right: whereas those,
that by wilful disobedience contrive public disturbances, manifestly hazard
their own prosperity in the general Confusion, and at long run do themselves no
less mischief than they designed the Church, drowning for company in the
miscarriage of the Vessel.

2. For that which ought to be every honest man's next consideration; for the
good of (...) Community: for a Heathen could say, Non nobis solum nati sumus,
etc. we are not born only for our selves, but our Country, our kindred, our
friends, our brethren and companions, challenge a great share in us: so that,
if a man cast up his obligations aright, he ought not so much to live to
himself, as to the Public; and this much more upon the score of Christianity,
where Self-denial is the main Principle, and Charity the grand Duty. And this
Argument is represented in the Text. For my brethren and companions sakes, for
my Friends and Countrymen, for my Neighbors and Relations; I will say, Peace
be within thee, or, as in the reading Psalms, I will wish thee prosperity. And
this is upon a Civil account; the Peace and prosperity of the Church being
likely to procure the settlement of good order and the establishment of peace
in the Civil State: whereas quarrels about Religion seldom or never end there,
till they have involved the Government and Policy of a Nation into dangerous
consequents.

3. From that, which, though set last, ought to be considered and resolved on
in the first place by all pious men, that have any sense of Gods Honor, any
zeal to his Name and Service, any love or kindness to his House and Ordinances;
from the Worship and Respect due to God from his people: Because of the house
of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good. And this upon a Spiritual or
Religious account; to love the Church for the Churches sake, and to do it all
the good we can for the honor of God, as well as for the benefit of our
brethren and companions, that so we may under our King live quiet and peaceble
lives in all godliness and honesty, as our Church has taught us to pray.

Being to speak before this Honorable Assembly, with whom the Care and
Government of our Jerusalem, this once famous City, is entrusted; I have made
choice of the second of these Arguments, which shows how Civil Society is
concerned in a quiet Exercise of the National Religion: wherein the Psalmist
makes it his resolution, and recommends it to us all, to pray for the Churches
peace, and to wish her prosperity, for our brethren and companions sake, in the
behalf of our Friends and Countrymen; as we wish well to our King and Country,
and stand well affected to the Government and the Laws; as we hope to see the
Nation thrive, Trade flourish, the City rebuilt, and all our friends and
acquaintance in a prosperous condition: the peace of the Church and the peoples
agreement in the Service of God, being the only probable means of securing and
ascertaining our Civil Interests and Public tranquillity. For my brethren and
companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee; I will wish thee
prosperity.

In the words we have two things fall under our Consideration.

1. A Duty recommended to us in David's Example and Resolution: which is to wish
the Churches peace.

2. A strong Motive to enforce this Duty: for our brethren and companions
sakes; out of that love and affection, we bear to the Public and to our native
Country.

The Resolution of Duty expressed in the latter Clause of the Verse; I will now
say, Peace be within thee: where, though our English render it as the common
form of Salutation used amongst that people, when they met or parted with one
another: as our Savior ordered his Disciples, when he sent them forth, Luke
10. 5. Into whatsoever house they entered, first to say, Peace be to this house:
and thus our Church has in her Offices for the Visitation of the sick after our
Saviors Example ordered, that the Priest entering into the sick persons house,
shall say, Peace be to this house and to all that dwell in it: and certainly
when ever we address our selves to Gods House, the House of Prayer, it is very
comely and most meet, that we should all of us salute her in this Form, Peace
be within thee. Yet this I take to be too narrow a sense; for the Form of
Salutation was somewhat different from this; and it should have been said, if
that had been all intended, (...) Peace be to thee; not (...) Peace be in thee.
Therefore the rest of the Interpreters take it in a wider sense by a plainer
construction.

I will speak peace, say they, in thee: and thus it may be the Magistrates part
to speak peace with Authority, to command it, and to see it kept.

Say others, I will speak peace for thee, in thy behalf; and that belongs to
the Minister, to preach up the peace of the Church, even with that earnestness
as to quarrel for it: though with Jeremy he become a man of contentions, in a
perverse and froward generation, while he does so, and when he speaks of peace,
others make themselves ready for battle.

The Septuagint and Vulgar read it thus, I will speak peace of thee, or,
concerning thee, i.e. to speak kindly of it, and to wish it well; and thus it
will concern all the People, the generality, every man in the Nation. And I am
afraid there is but too much need, that both Magistrate, and Minister, and
People, and all, should all of us bestir our selves, and contribute our utmost
endeavors for the Churches peace and welfare, if we will but do what we ought
to do, and that out of Interest as well as Duty, for our own and our Countries
sake; for that is

The Motive and Reason, with which this Duty is backed, indeed faced and put
forward with, in the beginning of the verse; for my brethren and companions
sakes; whose good, will they nill they, be they the Churches friends or foes,
is to be sought in the preservation of the Church: for as the Churches peace
depends upon the union and agreement of these brethren and companions, so on
the other hand in her peace and prosperity, is comprehended the happiness and
nearest concerns of us all.

By Brethren is meant Kindred and Relations, the charitates naturales, in a
strict sense; but according to the larger acception of the word in the Hebrew
language all our Countrymen from one end of the Nation to the other, all that
live under the same Laws and Government; especially those that are of the same
household of faith, and profess the same Gospel of Peace.

By Companions or Friends are to be understood those of a stricter and closer
Alliance, with whom we have contracted nearer and dearer familiarities; above
all, those that agree with us in the same Orthodox Judgment, and walk regularly
and lovingly with us, according to the same Rules and Institutions of Gods
public Worship, whose concerns are more immediately united in the Churches
welfare: which we are in that manner to preserve and promote for both their
sakes, as not to exclude either.

And thus much for the coherence and explication, which I have the longer
insisted upon, to gain your full assent to these two things. 1. That by
Jerusalem here is meant the Church. And 2. That by her peace is to be
understood our agreement in religion; since without this agreement there is no
probability, no likelihood of her enjoying peace.

I shall now crave leave to gather up all I have to say into one proposition;
and such a proposition, as the words do naturally without any force put upon
them afford us. And it is this, in the words of the Text, That we ought for our
Brethren and Companions sakes to wish and endeavor the Churches peace. Which
in a brief Paraphrase speaks thus; That it is the duty of every Man amongst us,
whether Magistrate or other, as he is the Governor or Member of a Society,
upon a mere civil account, our affection to our Native Country, and the good
of community in our several places and stations, heartily to wish, and
vigorously to endeavor the peace and prosperity of the Church, in the uniform
exercise of Religion and God's public worship.

And this Proposition I shall make good by three Arguments, taken

1. From the ground of a Peoples happiness, Divine favor and protection; and
that favor not to be procured, but by keeping up God's public honor amongst
us; and that honor no way to be secured, but by our unanimous agreement in his
public worship.

2. From that influence, which Religion is apt to have upon the minds of Men,
both in awing them and uniting them: which aw and union both without the
uniformity of worship, if People be left to their own liberty to worship God
publicly how they please, will infallibly utterly be lost; and when Religion
shall once be brought into a public contempt, and made the ground of an
universal quarrel; when the candlestick is once removing out of the Church,
it is easy to foresee what danger the State will then be in, and what will in a
short time become of such a People.

3. From the particular constitution of our Laws and Government, wherein the
concerns of State are so intimately and closely linked with the Peace and
prosperity of the Church, that they must needs stand or fall together.

First, then for the first Argument, that the Peace of the Church, that is, our
agreement in the service of God, is the only way of keeping up God's public
honor amongst us, and consequently of after-taiming to us the favor and
blessing of God, which is the main and only ground of National prosperity and
happiness, the great concern of all our Brethren and Companions. Wherein I have
three things to make out.

1. That the Divine favor is the main and only prop of a Peoples happiness.

2. That the setting up Gods honor in public amongst us is the only means of
procuring and ascertaining his favor. And

3. That our agreement in the service of God is the only way of keeping up his
public honor.

I say first, That the favor of God is the grand support and alone foundation
of any peoples prosperity and happy estate. This is the Palladium of the
Government; ancile imperii, the buckler of State; when, as the Psalmist
expresses it, God encompasseth us with his favor, as with a shield; whereupon
it is, that by virtue of this divine influence upon his Vicegerents the
Magistrates, they themselves are also termed the shields of the earth. A
learned Frenchman tells us, that the Eastern people were wont, at the building
of any City, according to the positions of Heaven at that time, by rules of
Astrology and other Magical observations, to make Artificial Sculptures upon
Brass, which they called Talismans, and to consecrate them to the auspicious
beginnings and fortunate success of that City: which they fancied, as long as
those Hieroglyphics were preserved, would never miscarry by fire of water, war
or plague. And of this nature and design he takes Laban's Teraphim to have
been, which his daughter Rachel stole away; and those of Micah, which the
boisterous Danites plundered him of: as the pledges of good fortune to those
Families, who were therefore both much concerned in the loss of them. To the
same purpose the Grecians and others (indeed who not) had their Tutelar Gods,
as the guardians of each City: so that the first thing enemies did, that came
to besiege a Town, was to call away their God, either by enchantments enticing
him, or by extraordinary respects out-bidding the Inhabitants, and proffering
the Deity better terms, if he would come over to their side: insomuch that the
Tyrians, when Alexander's Army beleaguered them, upon such an apprehension of
Apollo's leaving them, tied him fast with a Golden Chain to Hercules his Altar,
that he might not stir. And 'twas a great part of policy among these Heathens,
to conceal these their strengths, and keep them close, as the arcana imperii,
that in time of danger they might be sure of them. From these and the like
superstitious usages, this serious truth at least may be learnt, that very
Infidels and Strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel had, from the instincts
of Nature, that sense of a Deity and an overruling Power, that they trusted
not to the situation and strength of their Cities, to the number or valor and
wealth of the Inhabitants, for the defense of them; but wholly imputed their
safety to divine protection. And this much more to be acknowledged by us, to
whom God has made himself so well known in his Word, with whom he has entered
into Covenant, whom he has admitted unto so endearing nearnesses to himself.
Our Royal Author is every where full of these acknowledgments in this his Book
of Public Devotions, calling God a Sun and a Shield, his strong Rock, and
Tower of Defense, and mighty Deliverer; ascribing all his deliverances and
preservations to the light of his countenance and the saving strength of his
right hand. Particularly in Psalm. 144. where he does ex professo handle this
Argument, he says, it is he that gives Victory unto Kings; and then having
recited the several instances of a peoples outward prosperity, That our sons
grow up as young plants, and our daughters as the polished corners of the
Temple; that our garners be full and plenteous with all manner of store; that
our sheep bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets; that our oxen
be strong to labor and in good plight; that there be no invasion upon us, no
leading into captivity, and no complaining in our streets; he closes this
account with an acclamation, wherein he resolves the sum of all into divine
favor, as the ground and original of all these blessings and advantages: Happy
are the people that are in such a case: happy, I say, are the people which have
the Lord for their God. But yet more closely to your purpose in Psalm. 127. he
tells you; Except the Lord build your houses, they labor in vain that build
them. If God be not the Master Builder the great Undertaker of the Work, you do
but aedificare in ruinam, build up your ruins to farther ruins: And then too,
unless he keep the City, when it is built, the watchman waketh but in vain. May
he build your houses for you, to be habitations of peace, and preserve your
City; make it beautiful for situation, and the joy of the whole Land: may God
be well known in her Palaces for a Refuge; may he love her Gates, and may the
most High establish her, and raise up his own Tabernacle in the midst of her:
may he make it the City of God, and the Mountain of his Holiness. God does,
that I may with reverence speak it, by the very inclinations of his own nature,
peculiarly affect man; and then further he that said, It is not good for man to
be alone, he has a more then ordinary care and regard for societies of men.
Well governed Cities and well ordered States are the special objects of
Almighty Gods singular providence. And as he has this care for our good in
community; so it must be our care to keep up his honor in public: since,
which is our next,

2. The setting up Gods honor amongst us in public is the only means of
procuring and ascertaining his favor. The condition of his covenant with all
Nations, as well as his own people, is, I will be their God, and they shall be
my People; when we cease to be his people, we must not hope that he will
continue to be our God. All just governments are influenced and supported by
him; but, if we abuse those influences and neglect those supports, it is just
for him in displeasure to withdraw the light of his countenance and the saving
strength of his right hand, and to leave us in the dark to the weakness of our
own counsels and undertakings. He will honor them that honor him; 'twas a
pitiful request of Saul, to desire to be honored before the people, when he
himself had dishonored God before them. When Governors are like God, and act
all to his glory, as he himself does; then blessings are showered down upon
them, and from them to the whole community. This was Christ's own case: Thou
love righteousness, and hate wickedness; therefore God thy God has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows, Psalm 45. 7. It Is not
the Crown and Scepter, the Purple and the Mace, that distinguish the Magistrate
from a common man; but the oil of gladness, the divine benediction upon his
doing righteous things. Then all his Garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes, and
Cassia, out of his ivory palaces; when the fragrancy of public example
commands at once the veneration and imitation of all that are about them:
whereas upon wicked Nations that forget God, and such families as call not upon
his name, he pours out his severest indignation. This the very Poet could
observe to his Countrymen the Romans, Dis te minorem quod geris, imperas; Says
he: that they owed their success to their piety, and were made commanders of
the world for their obedience to their Gods. Nor is it strange, that God
should, even in false Religions, bless people with outward prosperity and
temporal success, for that honor they did him under wrong names and
mis-apprehensions; since at bottom of all their vain conceits and idolatrous
practices there lay metus numinis, the awe and reverence of a supreme infinite
power, wherein the notion of Religion in general consists. And he goes on, and
tells them, that all their miscarriages, and all the calamities, that had of
late befaln that City and State, were to be imputed to their neglect of
Religion. How much more happy should we be, that have the truth of Religion
amongst us, if we would but be true to it our selves? And if a pretended zeal
for God's honor has, in our remembrance, made Usurpation thrive, and heaped
Palms and Laurels upon an unrighteous Cause: what advantage would real devotion
do to the establishing of a just Government? And on the other hand, how much
more miserable and improsperous must we expect to be, then any wicked Heathens
or backsliding pretenders, if we, having such advantages and such reasons both
of advancing God's honor amongst us, fail in our duty, and do not, as we ought
to do, for our brethren and companions sake, with one common consent and mutual
agreement, praise God for his mercies, and fear him for his judgments, which he
has shown in the midst of us. That Is the last thing of this head.

3. That our agreement in God's service is the only way of keeping-up his
public honor amongst us. When Cities and Societies here below look like the
Seeds beatorum, the blessed company of Saints and Angels above, wherewith the
Heavenly Throne is environed, all serving God the same way in perfect harmony
of worship: This is doing, that the Apostle bids us, having our conversation in
Heaven, by bringing Heaven down to us, and being all of one mind, as we shall
be there. For brethren thus to dwell together in the unity of profession and
practice, is, as the Psalmist compares it, like the consecrating oil upon Aaron
's head, that ran down to the skirts of his garment, that is, all over from the
head to the foot; the meanest person of the Nation equally sharing with the
highest in the advantages of the Priesthood and one common service. This is
that dew of Sion, the Church, where God commanded the blessing, the blessing of
peace and plenty. A Church, as ours now is, without this unanimity, is but like
the Ship, where Jonas was, tossed and tumbled with winds of doctrine and waves
of faction; till, at the upshot of all, when they all apply themselves to their
several gods, in their several ways of Worship, the Jonas, the only true
Religion amongst them, is to be flung overboard. God is a God of order and
peace, and accounts himself highly dishonored by our confusions. 'Twas Baal,
that delighted to be served with loud cries and furious slashings. It was the
Devil with his forked foot, first brought in Heresy and Schism; that, by
multiplying Religions, he might make the world believe, there was no such
thing; and if there were, that people might not trouble themselves about a
thing, where it would be so difficult not to mistake in the choice. Thus, when
this enemy of God and man saw, that the crucifying Christ would not be
sufficient for the disgracing of Religion; he fell presently, even in the
Apostles times, to divide him, for the puzzling of it. It has been observed,
that Travelers, that have been abroad, and seen Religion in its various
dresses and forms, in the several Countries, where they have been, and in what
different manners they serve God, are apt at last to turn Scepticks, arrive at
a quiet indifference, and think it a matter of no great concern, what Religion
they are of, or whether they be of any at all. But alas! we have now in this
Church that disadvantage, without traveling for it. Our people stay at home,
and see fashions; and some (as Travelers use to put on the habit and garb of
each Country, they go through) have appeared in all shapes, taken up all
Opinions and Forms, and done exercise in them all; till at last they have taken
the degree of Doctors in the Scorners Chair, and have turned professed Atheists.
How do the Romanists triumph in our dissensions, make Bonfires out of our
flames, and daily get ground of the Protestant Cause; whilst we Protestants our
selves do their work for them, by unnatural quarrels destroying our common
Mother the Church? How do profane persons make themselves merry at the
miscarriages of the Church, and harden themselves in their Atheistical
Reasonings against God himself; when they see so much ado made, such zeal and
heat shown on all sides, about Forms of Worship and the Circumstances of
Religion: when the mean while the great Duties of Christianity, wherein the
life and power of Religion lies, are by most of us of all persuasions
neglected? and how can they choose but think Religion it self a trifle, if that
be it, that makes us so earnest about trifles, and yet so regardless in those
things, which the worst of Atheists themselves confess are necessary for the
preservation of men, whether singly in their own persons, or jointly in
Society: such as are Justice, Temperance, Charity, and the like? What can
Neighbour-States and Churches abroad think of us, that, after God had so
wonderfully restored us, to the astonishment of the world, we have so strangely
and with no less astonishment, to the dishonor of God and our own shame, lost
the Miracle and let it fall to the ground, and given up the Cause in a manner,
to which God by his extraordinary Providence and his Anointed our late
Sovereign the blessed Martyr by his unparalled sufferings gave such
testimony? And at last what can we our selves look for now, that God will yet
work more Miracles for our preservation, who have, by our divisions in his
Worship and our Spiritual fornications, not only forfeited his protection, but
procured his displeasure, and at once both disobliged his mercy and provoked
his Justice? To me, to speak what I apprehend freely, it appears, in the
posture we now stand in, a very shrewd symptom and a dangerous indication, that
God himself and Religion and all are now about to take their solemn leave of
the Country, together with the Churches peace. And then what will become of our
brethren and companions, for whose sake we are to endeavor the Churches peace;
when God has once forsaken the Land? And thus I have done with the first
Argument.

The second is, that the peace of the Church in the uniform Worship of God is a
necessary expedient, to make Religion the happy instrument of Government, by
securing that influence it has upon the minds of men, in awing Subjects to
obedience, and uniting our brethren and companions in love: without which
obedience and love, it is impossible, that any people should hold together, and
prosper; since, where discontents and divisions prevail, a Society must needs
of it self naturally tend to dissolution. A House, a City, a Kingdom, divided
against it self, cannot stand; is a State-Aphorism, we have from the mouth of
Truth it self. So then, whether 'twere fear or love, was the Principle, which
gathered mankind into Nations and Commonwealths, and brought them to live in
Community under the same Laws and Privileges, we find them both in Religion.
Whereupon it is the remark of a Roman Historian, that, as Romulus founded the
City by Arms, so Numa settled it by Religion, and then came Ancus and found
leisure to adorn it with Temples and public Buildings. Thus Religion secured
the acquists of the Sword on one hand, and prepared the design for the Truel on
the other. And till Religion be in a better condition amongst you, then for
ought I see it is now in, I cannot not tell, what you may think of your
Building. It Is true; it seems to me, in our present divisions, that, much what
like the Jews after their return, we rebuild our City with a Sword in one hand,
and a Truel in the other: but so, as if that Sword were to be used against our
selves, not against an Enemy, as theirs was. I wish heartily, that the peace of
the Church may be so settled amongst us, and the rubbish of our late ruins
there removed, that you may lay your Foundations upon fair even ground, and
raise the Superstructures with comfort and honor; that, when you have built up
your Walls and your Palaces, Peace may be within your walls, and plenteousness
within your palaces: which would then most certainly be, when, as you are
obliged to an Uniformity of building the City, so the Citizens themselves would
join all in an uniform Exercise of Religion; whose first Character it is, that

1. It aws the consciences of men, and binds them up to their good behavior,
in a strict attendance upon the duties of every one in his place, and a careful
obedience to the Law in common. And thus Machiavil himself tutours his Prince,
that he will put on the show at least of Religion, to make his Government
dreadful; though he hold it dangerous to his interest to be bigoted into it,
and would have him take up no more of it, then will serve his turn. But if the
mask and vizard, the bare appearance of Religion be, in the esteem of carnal
worldly Policy, so considerable a help to Government: how serene and awful
would it be in its genuine native countenance? with what rays of Divinity would
the truth and power of it cloth the Magistrate; that the people would behold
him as an Angel of God? For since all Government derives its power from God,
the more of God it shows, the more powerful it must needs be. Wherefore, if
once Religion grow mean amongst a people, no wonder, if they grow familiar and
saucy with the Government, and, having got the reins of conscience upon their
neck, run away with their Rider, and it is well if not dismount him too. When
men are suffered to set their mouths wide open against Heaven, to blaspheme God
and deny him in a breath, and to droll in Scripture Language, and jeer at
sacred things; how can it be expected, that earthly Majesty should preserve its
reverence with the people, but that God will suffer some to be as bold with
their Governors, as they have suffered others to be with him: that by way of
Reprisal he may recover his lost Honor, and those, that have slighted him, may
be meanly esteemed. For, as God subdues the people under their lawful Prince,
so it must be the Princes care to subdue the people to God, by keeping up the
aw and port of Religion.

And this is done in the uniform and unanimous Exercise of Religion. Then the
Church shows like an army with banners; For the Church triumphant, no body
doubts but it is so: but this is spoken of the Church militant; it should be so;
a well ordered and disciplined body of men. Without discipline and good order
and uniformity of Exercise, it may be a tumult, a mutiny, a crowd or throng of
men, but not an Army: or if an Army, it is but a broken routed one, and needs
rally and recruit. And such an Army must I call our Church, with her broken
Ranks; when so many fly daily from her Banners, and repair to other Standards;
when some are so hardy to make themselves Commission-officers, and appoint
Rendez-vous, and make Musters in private corners; indeed, in public
Assemblies, to the defiance of the Church and Civil Authority at once. Truth
is; Our divisions have made Religion a ridiculous thing; whilst every Party
priding, it self in the glare of its own spiritual knowledge, looks upon the
rest with contempt. The Sects wonder at us, that we stick where we do, and not
come up after them: we as much wonder at their unkindness in leaving us, and
their confidence in going so far. And the wonder goes round: for they all
admire and pity one another ignorance. All of them see a great light in the
way they walk in, and conclude they are got into Goshen; when all the rest of
the world, as they fancy, are still sitting in Egyptian darkness. Thus we
censure, one another, and, when we have hoodwinkt our selves with our own form,
think our selves the only seeing people, and all else, that are not as we are,
blindfold; to the merriment of bystanders, but withal to some peril, lest
from these giddy reflections, we make upon one another, they conclude, we have
no light at all amongst us in the English Church, but that we are now in Egypt,
more then ever we were. What pastime and advantage our divisions give Atheists
and Papists, I showed before: I am now speaking of us amongst our selves. Nor
do these differences only stir the spleen, but the choler too, and fill all
Parties, as with spiritual disdain of one another ways, so with zealous
passion too against one another persons. The Sectaries are scandalized at
Church-musick, and look upon our decent Rites and Ceremonies as trumpery, and
reckon our Solemnities of Worship contemptible things. The Orthodox on the
other hand are justly offended at their slovenly familiarities with sacred
things, and indeed with God himself. So that it is clear, by dividing from one
another, Religion has lost all its awe amongst us, every sort of it being looked
on, as mean and despicable, by all those that are of any other sort. Nor must
the National Religion think to find better treatment, then the rest, but rather
worse; as lying under this peculiar disadvantage, that those, who adhere to
that, though never so conscientiously, lay themselves open to a general censure
of all dissenters, that they, in that they side with the Government, are
pleasers of men, and time-servers. Besides, this is that, they all in strict
judgment account to be to them Antichrist, that which holds back and hinders,
that no one of them can get up in to absolute power. And certainly they must be
so good-natured, as to pity the Governor himself, if his conscience be not of
their model: I, and should he be but half so severe in the maintenance of his
way, as they are zealous in theirs, perhaps hate him too, at least have but
little kindness for him, who, as they fancy, keeps Christ out of his Throne.
Thus we see, if Religion be not tied up to rules, if it grow lawless, it will
quickly become awless too, loose all its respects, and not be able to assist
the Government, in the protection of our brethren and companions, whose
concerns lie bound up in the Churches peace.

Nor Secondly, Will Religion avail in its second property, which is to Unite;
unless God's worship amongst us be uniformly exercised. Religio a religando;
Religion has its name from binding up men, not only in themselves, binding up
their spirits so as to restrain them from public disorders; but as to one
another too, binding their hearts together in mutual offices of love and
kindness. And thus, when we can walk together, as brethren and companions, to
the house of God, and there take sweet counsel together; this is a kindly
Union: when all the members of the civil society are guided and governed by the
same spirit of the mystical body, and hold the faith in unity of spirit, in the
bond of peace, and in righteousness of life. This is the true cement, which
conjoins neighbors and friends closer, then any legal privileges and
obligations can do. Without this, you build your City with untemper'd mortar:
nor will it well bear the weather, when the floods shall beat, unless it be
thus compacted together, and be at unity in it self. And how can it rationally
be expected, that Religion should bind us together, if it self be left loose
and tied to no rules and orders? I confess, the Unity of the Catholic Church
may consist, without the uniformity of particular Churches among themselves;
and thus, notwithstanding some differences, they have in ordering their own
affairs prudently to their best convenience, and accommodating themselves to
the necessities of time and place, still holding to the Analogy of Faith, and
sound Doctrine, and the rule of God's Word: I say, notwithstanding these
differences in externals, we do own the communion of Saints, as an Article of
our Faith. But to say, that every particular person or party, in the same
Church, has, by virtue of his Christianity a liberty to disobey the public
orders of that Church, whereof he is a member; and to serve God, as shall,
notwithstanding those orders, seem good to that party or person; (for, as the
party breaks, it will come to persons at last:) to take liberty in this notion
is to make it but another name for confusion. Wherefore, what they say, is not
true, being applied to fellow members of the same particular Church; that,
according to our Christian liberty, and that latitude, God has left things in,
if the Church would leave them so too, and not bind, where he has not bound,
this would prove the best expedient of peace, and unity: for the way would be
wide enough for every one to walk in; we should not need justle one another;
but though we used not all one form in our serving of God, we might be all of
one mind, as to our civil concerns at least. It were well, if dissents in
judgment could be so managed, as not to beget distances of affection; but this
is a thing rather to be wished, then hoped for. For, whilst every party thinks
it self obliged in conscience, to advance it self, even to the prejudice and
ruin of the rest; Conscience being a principle of that violence, that, right
or wrong, it acts, like nature, ad extremum virium, to the utmost of its
strength and opportunity: hence it comes to pass, that odia religionum
acerbissima, those heats and animosities, which are grounded upon the cause of
Religion, are the most dangerous and irreconcilable; by reason Conscience is
engaged in the quarrel, whose tenderness of apprehension is worse then the
jealousies of love or power, which will admit of no rival, cannot endure any
competitor. Thus it was betwixt the Jews and Samaritans, that did, upon the
score of their Religions, so abominate one the other, that they would not so
much as eat and drink together, or buy and sell, or converse in the ordinary
civilities of Good morrow or Good even. So nice and squeamish distasted
conscience is, out of fear of partaking with others sins, and fancying it can
never be at distance enough from what it conceives a dislike to.

Nor is that a sufficient Salvo, to keep up Unity amongst us, that we agree in
Fundamentals; (I wish we all did that) and that we differ only in some things
of smaller allay; the more to blame they, that fall out about such things, and
to the hazard of public Peace, make endless differences and quarrels about
things indifferent. I must commend the generous Charity of some, that profess
to love all that have faith in Christ Jesus, whatever their Form be: and I am
of their mind, that our Charity is not to be confined to a Party, but to be
extended to the whole Community, the Body of the Church. But then it is a gross
mistake, to think the Church it self, in its establishments, a Party in these
our divisions; who is to be looked on, what S. Paul says of Jerusalem here, as
the common Mother of us all: and herein lies the main of our Charity, to seek
and secure the Churches peace, in endeavoring to appease divisions, and to
reconcile her disobedient Children. This, I say, is right Catholic Charity. As
to those persons, who are seduced and live in error, the greatest Charity can
be showed to them, is to reclaim them, or at least, if that may not be, for our
brethren and companions sakes, to keep them quiet. For to see the humor of
Schism, after it has once broke off from the Church, how restless a thing it
is, and how quarrel is apt to beget quarrel, till it have brought all into
confusion. The Sects, we have amongst us, do no more disagree from the Church,
then they do from one another: it is Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses
against Ephraim, as well as both against Judah. And though they all agreed,
time was, too well against the Church, as a common Enemy; and, whilst her ruin
was contriving, held together: yet no sooner had they obtained that, which was
the common design of them all, but they fell out among themselves about their
particular ends: and when they had pulled down that, which they maliciously
termed Babylon, the English Jerusalem, their language was so divided, that they
could none of them build up a Babel of their own. For the same Arguments, which
the Presbyterian Party had fiercely used against the Bishops, were by the
Independents unanswerably managed against themselves: and then there succeeded
more subdivisions; the Baptized Churches got up and bore sway; the
Fift-Monarchy-men made a bustle for the Rule; then at last arose the Quakers, a
spreading Party, and feared by all the rest. What should I speak for
Free-willers, Ranters, Bedel's Followers and Naylor's crew? it shames me thus
to discover the nakedness of my Country; but it grieves me more, to think,
these pretenses are still on foot, and most of the Parties still owning
themselves in their distinctions: who, though, in the general, as Sects, and
equally obnoxious to the Laws, do by a kind of Syncretism unite; yet, had any
one of them power in their hand, would be far enough from looking on the rest,
that dissent from them, as Brethren and Companions, or showing that savor to
any of them all, as the Church of England does now to them all together. And so
the case stood with their Forefathers at Frankfort, Amsterdam, etc. where, in
opposition to our Liturgy and Discipline, setting up purer Forms of their own,
they could not agree; but were so zealous in their divisions (though it highly
concerned them, for credit of their newfound way and comfort of their exile,
to have held together) till at last the Son excommunicated the Father, and one
Brother the other. So giddy and lost a thing Conscience is, when it is once
stepped aside, and gone out of its way. I could wish, the moderate and sober men
amongst them would consider this; that, if God should, in his just Judgment to
the Nation, give them an opportunity of another trial, they may easily, if not
blinded with self-conceit, foresee the event, and in public ruins read
aforehand their own disappointments. But, they say, they have no such designs;
they are quiet and peaceable men, desire only to seek and to serve God; but
that some of unquiet fierce Spirits amongst us will not let them alone: they
intend no disturbance to the Government, but the Government disturbs them, in
their religious Exercises and Meetings. The same Plea will serve for the worst
of Malefactors; that, if the Law would let them alone, they an^ very quiet men:
but, pray, who breaks the peace? he that looks after the execution of the Laws,
or he that disobeys them? he that disobeys, certainly is the Aggressor. I
cannot say but Ishmael and his Mother were hardly dealt with, and did suffer a
kind of persecution; and yet the Apostle tells us, that Ishmaels self was the
Persecutor, for but mocking of Isaac: but this, were it sport or contempt,
reflecting on the Heir of the Family, the Son of a Princess, (who in the
Allegory is Jerusalem here) is interpreted Persecution; while the turning out
of Ishmael is owned as just punishment. And in like manner it is the Sects
persecute the Church, by derisions and contempts; not the Church, that
persecutes them. But if they are so well inclined to Peace, why then do they
not do what they acknowledge may lawfully be done, and submit in those things,
where their Conscience may give them leave; i.e. in such things as God in his
Word has not forbidden? The Magistrate has bid them come to their
Parish Church; bid men of my Order renounce the Covenant: God has no where
commanded to the contrary. Why should not they come? why should not we
renounce? There can be no scruple in the case: for in things, where God himself
has given no order, we are to obey the Magistrate, not only for Fear, but for
Conscience sake. We read, that our Savior himself, kept the Feast of the
Dedication, though no where appointed by God himself, no where mentioned in the
Old Testament (an Apochryphal Feast) and taught daily in the Temple and in
their Synagogues; and that some of his Apostles, after the Ceremonies were dead
and buried, came up to the Temple still at the hour of Prayer: to set us an
example, that in such things, where there is no express command of God against
them, though there be no express command for them, we are to comply with
public order and decent custom. If they would but do thus ingenuously, there
would be some likelihood of Peace. But they would have the Church submit to
them; and then all should be well. Which of them? for they cannot all be
complied with; that is impossible: for to take in one, and leave out another,
will be the ground of further discontents; and to gather all at a cast into the
comprehension, would possibly be to please none of them, at least to displease
the better half. If they would but once agree among themselves and say what
they would have; they would then have some fair pretense to be considered. But
here is the misery on it: it is very hard for them themselves to define what will
satisfy Conscience: because that, being not engaged upon certain Rules, may to
morrow judge that necessary, the necessity whereof to day it does not foresee;
and if any men's Consciences are to be satisfied thus at random, the Church will
never know, when it has done, but be still to seek upon new emergencies.
Whereas would they come to some certainty of demands, wherein the whole party,
in all its subdivisions, would agree, they might the better be treated with:
there would be some hope in time of a good understanding. But if their meaning
is to be left to such a latitude, to do whatsoever they shall upon occasion
find agreeable to their Conscience, i.e. possibly sometimes to their interest
or humor to do: there is no body so void of reason, but must needs see of how
dangerous a consequence it is to any Government, to leave any sort of men
(whatsoever their Principles be, be they never so honest) to such a Liberty.
And such a Liberty, if they had it, would be so far from composing differences;
that those everlasting quarrels and irreconcilable animosities, they have
purely out of Conscience taken up one against another (which are now, partly in
kindness to the common cause they are engaged in, for the reputation of Schism;
and partly for fear of the Laws, smothered and kept in) would then instantly
break out with violence into open flames: whilst some, sticking rigidly to
those measures, they have already attained, and comparing themselves with
themselves, severely censure those, that, upon pretense of greater light and
more plentiful effusions of the Spirit, walk beyond their line and rule: And
those on the other hand priding themselves in their Spiritual Privileges, and
the purity of Ordinances, despise their Brethren, as carnal and narrow-spirited
men, that still keep close to outward forms, and walk according to the flesh,
and the will of man, in the beggarly rudiments of the world. Thus you see, if
we do not come to an agreement, as I do not see, how we ever shall (unless
authority interpose) in the exercise of Religion, the hearts of Englishmen are
never like to be united, either in brotherly love to one another, or in common
affection to our Country: but that, the awe and union of Religion being lost,
the hazard of the Churches Peace threatens disturbances also to the Civil
State; which is our third and last Argument, Taken from the particular
constitution of our Government, wherein the Civil and Ecclesiastic State are
so nearly united, that, like Hippocrates twins, they are both well or ill
together, and run the same hazard of health, and must take share of the same
fortune: so that, who wishes well to the Government, to the concerns of our
Brethren and Companions, must by unavoidable consequence favor the prosperity
of the Church.

To prove this, I shall not pretend to the Law (though however unkind Lawyers
may be to the Churches interest in its Jurisdiction) there is enough in the Law
it self to this purpose; nor shall I quote King James his Apophthegm, though he
must be acknowledged a wise man, and one that well understood the nature of
Government; nor shall I tell you out of our own Stories, that men of this Robe
have usually undergone the greatest Offices of State, and public employments;
which it is very uncharitable wholly to impute to Churchmens ambition, and to
allow nothing of merit in the case, upon which those preferments and public
trusts were grounded; nor what great benefactures some of them left behind them
to Community from those secular advantages, they were assisted with; nor yet
shall I insist upon our own experience (an irrefragable proof) in the late
times; when the design seemed levelled only at the Hierarchy, but was carried
on to the ruin of Monarchy it self, and the overthrow of Prelacy was so
zealously prosecuted, that they brought all Orders into confusion, and
Mar-prelate proved the Mar-all of the Nation. And if we did not buy wit then,
at a rate dear enough, we may, if we please, make farther trial to our greater
cost.

I shall only make a general Propose. That Magistracy and Ministry are the two
Pillars and supports of Society, there is no body, I think will deny; and if
either of these Pillars fail, the whole Structure is in danger of falling: nor
can public order be secured, unless the two Swords, the Sword of Justice, and
the Sword of the Spirit, assist each the other in the administration of
affairs, and in the execution of their several off^^s. Now for any man to take
upon him to be a Minister, or, if he be one, to exercise that Function, without
the approbation and against the plain sense of the Law, is as irrational and
irregular a misdemeanour, and must needs be of as dangerous a consequence to
the public, as for any man to create himself a Magistrate, or to execute the
office of a Magistrate without Law. I say, for one, that has no Commission, or
has been put out of the Commission of Peace, to act notwithstanding, as a
Justice (let him be as wise and as honest a man as he will) is sure a high
crime: I know not how the Law may call it. And it is the very same, or worse,
in the Ministry; because this office has a more immediate influence on the
Consciences of men, the most busy and sturdy principle in humane Nature. It Is
confessed on all hands, that a man cannot exercise the office of a Minister
without a Call. Let me ask then, whether theirs be an ordinary or extraordinary
Call? If extraordinary (by the way, it is Enthusiasm to say so) let them make it
appear by Miracles and Languages. If Ordinary, certainly they knew aforehand,
before they came into Orders (for to such I speak) what the legal constitution
requires of them, is their Canonical Obedience; if they did know this, and yet
came with a resolution to disobey; this is manifest prevarication: if they did
not know, and their ignorance betrayed them into a snare; the men are to be
pitied, but their ignorance is by no means to be excused: if they knew it
before, and were then satisfied, but have been enlightened since, and changed
their mind; they must know too, that that power, which gives men in public
place leave to act; may upon public inconvenience suspend their acting; and if
then they do act, it is an unjustifiable disobedience. Nor is it with them as it
was with Saint Paul; Woe be unto me if I preach not the Gospel: he had another
kind of Call, but for these there is a Woe belongs to them, if they do. It Is
otherwise too, now the Church is settled under Christian Magistrates, and
governed by Christian Laws, then at that time, when it was to be planted under
the Government of Heathen Emperors. The Church now, with all her
subordinations and dependencies, in all her jurisdictions and powers, owns the
King her Supreme. She challenges nothing to her self, but what the favor of
her Prince, and the Laws of the land have allowed her. Thus Bishops, as to the
execution of their Office, are sent by the King as Supreme, and act in their
Courts by the Kings power, as Civil Courts do: the King deputing Archbishops,
and Bishops, to be Judges under him in causes Spiritual, and in his name to
govern the Ecclesiastical State; as he makes Lord Keepers, Chief Justices, and
other Judges of the Land. For had the Church any power in it self in Civil
affairs, besides what the Laws give her; I dare say, there is never a Bishop in
England, but would speedily redress those scandals and grievances, possibly
brought into their Courts by Lay-Officers, which people so much clamor
against. But now what can they do? they are tied up by Law. All of us, that are
of the Clergy own the Civil Power, pay the same obedience to the Laws, as any
of you do; and in First Fruits, Tenths, and Subsidies, make as chargable
acknowledgments, as any of the populacy.

I know, it is said though; what need of such a pompous costly Religion, of a
Church with so great an allowance of means? This ample Revenue exhausts and
weakens the State: smaller stipends would serve turn very well. But can any
one, with any show of ingenuity, fairly reason against the encouragements of
Learning, and the rewards of desert? Let it be considered that several of this
Order, had they gone another way, might (with submission I speak it) have sat
in your Seats, and been clad with your Purple. After all our pains, and time,
and strength, and charges too, spent in studies, do not think that what the Law
allows us, we have by doing nothing for it. These things are proposed publicly
as the Acquists of Industry, and may be got and enjoyed, as legally, as any of
your Estates. And is it not fit, do you think, a National Church, wherein the
honor and reputation of Religion is to be kept up, should be secured from
poverty, and that contempt, which always accompanies meanness? It were to be
wished that, as Kings are to be the Nursing Fathers of the Church; so Princes
and the Sons of Nobles would fit themselves for her dignities: that they might
bear up the honor of Religion with their personal attendence. It has been so
heretofore, when the two great Offices were united in the same person;
Melchisedek King of Salem, and Priest of the living God: and they were kept
pretty near in the persons of Moses and Aaron, brethren; and the Priest elder
brother to the Prince. And hence the Hebrew word (...) Kohen (whence we have
King) signifies indifferently Prince and Priest: whereupon the Apostle, Romans
13. calls the King, in Ecclesiastical terms, (...), and (...), Gods Minister,
say we for both; it is Gods Liturgie-maker, and Gods Deacon; to show too, that a
Christian Magistrate, as such, has power to order religious affairs, in the
Service of God. This I say, has been, and 'twere well, if it could be so with
us: however, must the Church alone be held up by a precarious dependence? Is it
not this, that makes Religion a Prostitute to the humors of the people? when
men of mean spirits and parts shall, out of fear, comply, for a paltry
livelihood, to preach things that may please; and others of ambitious minds,
and voluble tongues, to serve an interest, shall lead the people to their own
hurt. But some will say; what would you have men do, that are not otherwise
considered? since there is that unequal distribution of Church-favours, that
some go away with all, and others get little or nothing. Judge in your own
case, whether this be a reasonable ground of quarrel. Shall the inequality of
Estates amongst you make the meaner Citizens quarrel the Government of the
City, because they have not all the wealth of Aldermen? Shall I, or any of my
brethren and companions, because we have not that place and esteem in the
Church, as we, out of the pride of our own hearts may think we deserve, go in a
sullen arrogance, and set up for our selves in a distinct interest from the
Church; and fly in the face of our Mother, and put undutiful affronts upon
her, for not being so kind, as we would have her? No. Genesis 49. 6. O my soul,
come not thou into such men's secret; unto their private assemblies, mine
honor, be not thou united. Let them for me be divided in Jacob, and scattered
in Israel; that, in their anger and self-will, practice such things. To go on,
I know it has been seriously discoursed, and p^inted too, that the largeness of
the Church-revenue in any Nation impoverishes the State, sets the people
behind-hand, and puts them out of a thriving condition: and no less then
demonstration offered, that, if it were retrenched, Trade would flourish,
Manufactures and growths receive wonderful improvements, and the people
generally grow rich apace. But to Answer that Author; those Commonwealths, he
speaks of, and ours are not alike, in the constitution and nature of the
Government; and God forbid, they ever should. But it may be ones wonder, why
our people cannot now, with much more case, make those improvements; since the
Church keeps little in her own hands, and for the most part lets easy
penny-worths: nor can it be any reason, that the Church drains the peoples
money; since, if the Church had not what she has, some body else would in the
Churches right; nor would the people be much the better. How our
Neighbour-States order their Church affairs, I suppose, ought to be no
precedent of Policy to us: though they, to keep up a National Religion, by
which those, they admit into public trust, are brought to test; and, for the
securing public peace, amidst the differences of Religion, maintain a standing
Army; Further, why our dissenters should not, upon their own bottoms, be
comprehended within the legal settlement of the Church, they themselves give a
very just occasion: for the very best Party amongst them have such Principles
of Policy and Government, as are utterly inconsistent and incompatible, not
only with any other Form, but with Monarchy it self; as has been clearly
evidenced from their own writings and practices: and others there are, that do,
in effect, loosen the bands of all Society, by excusing that duty, Servants owe
to their Masters, Children to their Parents, Wives to their Husbands, under a
pretense of seeking God, justify disobedience by the Corban of Religion; and
for any command of their Superiors, they like not, have a ready answer, that
they are to obey God rather than man: whereas, on the contrary, there is no one
thing, that the English Church does in her Doctrine more positively affirm, or
in her Offices more zealously express, then obedience to Governors, and her
duty to her Sovereign. To draw to an end in this Argument; some there are, that
fear not to charge the Church it self with Sacrilege; and truly I must grant,
that Churchmen may be guilty, by imbezilling and mis-imploying Church-revenue,
which sure enough was mainly designed for Pious Uses: but may not a man, that
faithfully serves the Public in his place, have some regard to himself too, in
fair provisions for his own Family? The Apostle tells us, that he, that does
not, is worse then an Infidel. To shut up all, and to drive this nail to the
head; I do freely acknowledge, that the Church never flourished more under
Pagan Governments, then when it was in the poorest condition for it is
temporals; when it lay under Pressures and Afflictions, and had the
Heathen-State its Enemy.

But shall any Christian Magistrate now design the Perscution and Ruin of the
Church therefore? This were to Argue with the Apostate Julian, to strip Bishops
and Priests of their livelihood, and to turn them out of all they have; that
they may be poor in imitation of their master's Example, and in obdedience to
his command may learn to contemn the World. But, thanked be God, we live not
now under Heathen Emperors and Pagan Governors: though, if we did, it were
our duty to pray for them, and to thank God for then too, and to obey them in
all lawful commands, and where we can not safely obey, cheerfully suffer for a
good Conscience. Neither is, nor ought the Church to be so now, as it was in
the Primitive times, before it was settled under Christian Magistrates; though
then too there was fair liberal allowance; and there is no Minister, we have,
but would be contented to Preach at the Primitive rates, were our Auditors as
free and open-handed, as they were then. In the close of all, these sacred
Morsels, though they may seem sweet, yet leave gravel behind them: and this I
dare boldly say, that the decay of the Church, and the disrepute of Religion,
amongst any people, is a certain token, and an infallible character of that
People's approaching Ruin; Sic profanatis sacris
Peritura Troja perdidit primum Deos.


So that from the complication of Church and State, and the extreme hazard,
each of them runs in the other's perils, we stand obliged, upon a mere Civil
account, for our Brethren and Companion. sakes, to wish the Churches prosperity
and welfare, in our mutual Agreement among our selves.

Before I make an end, I think it necessary to take notice of an Objection or
two, which may seem to overthrow the purpose and design of this whole
Discourse. For though it has already been cleared out of the Context, that by
Jerusalem here must be meant the Church; and that the Churches Peace, which for
his Brethren and Companions sakes David resolves to wish and endeavor, did
consist in that People's uniform Worship of God: as appears further by that
Churches sad experience, when Jeroboam drew off the Ten Tribes from their
Allegiance, and (which is reckoned his great sin, which he made the Children of
Israel to sin) had, by setting up new forms of Worship, made their return, as
well to the Thrones of David at Jerusalem, as to the Temple, impossible, and,
by a subtle contrivance of an established Schism to render his Rebellion
perpetually successful, divided them from their brethren in Religion, and made
the breach irreconcilable; then by degrees the poor Samaritans fell off into
all kinds of Superstitions and Idolatries, the Statutes of Omri and Ahab, and I
know not what else gallymawfreys of Religion: and all this grounded on the fair
pretense of that Precise Sect, the Karaei, who would admit of nothing, in the
Worship of God, but what they found expressly commanded in the Law of Moses. I
say, though thus it stood with the Jewish Church; I foresee an Objection may be
made, that our case is much different from theirs: for first, Theirs was but a
Typical Ceremonial Service, which in the Gospel state has no place; since our
Worship now must be in Spirit and in Truth: and then again, for these very
Types and Ceremonies they had a Divine Command, and were by strict precept
obliged to that uniform attendance upon the Temple; whereas such a precept or
command now we have none, to tie us up in like manner to any one form of
Worship.

To the first part of the Objection, that that was a Typical Service in the
Jewish Church; but that the Holy Jesus has to the Christian Church brought
Grace and Truth, which do not tie us up to such severe observances in external
things, but have instated us into a Liberty, wherein we are commanded to stand
fast; and therefore we are not to part with it upon any terms; I answer, that,
though the Ceremonies of that Religion be abolished, yet the substance of it
remains still in the Christian Church: for the shadow and the truth were to
answer one another; and those Types and representations are therefore now to be
made out answerably by us in real performances; so that the Uniformity of
Worship is as agreeable, and perhaps more necessary, now to the Substance, as
'twas then to the Shadow; and the obligation proportionably the same upon us,
as upon them. For though God did, by the death of his Son, rent the vail of the
Temple, and break down the Partition Wall, and so has brought us Gentiles into
the Fellowship of the Church; it was, that we should in the same orderly manner
serve him in substance, as they did in Germony, and in suitable methods
accomplish their Types with the Truth of our services. They brought their
Calves and their Lambs to the Priest, and had them by his hand offered in the
Temple: Christian Religion has, for their Priests and Levites, distinct orders
likewise of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and instead of a Temple, Churches,
where the People, by the Ministration of the Priesthood, are to offer up their
Prayers and their Praises, which are our morning and evening Sacrifices. And
thus for their Temple, their Sacrifices, their Sabbaths, their Priesthood, and
almost all considerable Instances of their Worship, there is a perpetual
uniform Analegy throughout betwixt them and us. Only their Worship was
performed in the shadow of the Law; ours in the light of the Gospel: and if
this light proves to us darkness, how great will our darkness be? For alas!
that liberty they talk of, and that light, which so dazzles their eyes, that
they cannot see their way, is quite mistaken by them. That light was indeed
designed, to lead them out of the shadow; but not to lead them into the fire;
for of that nature all Schism and division is: and that liberty as it released
them from the bondage of the Ceremonial Law, so it does not at all disoblige
them from the Moral Law, but rather engages them to it with faster ties of
gratitude. Now, as I take it, the Fifth Commandment, which enjoins obedience to
the Magistrate, was never looked upon as a part of the Ceremonial Law, but
always accounted to have a Moral and a perpetual indispensible obligation in
it. And I must assure them, that disobedience to a lawful Governor, in things
not simply in their own nature unlawful (as most of them confess our Liturgy
and Rites to be) is a great sin and of dangerous consequence, to their own
Souls, as well as to the Peace of the Church. So that that answer, they make
the Magistrate in this case, is not proper; that they are not free to obey him:
for they are by all Laws both of God and Man Free nay more, obliged and bound
to obey. Only let them, I advise, take heed of making that Liberty they pretend
to, a Cloak of Maliciousness.

Again, as to what they say, that the Jews had a peremptory command from God
himself for their Uniformity; but we can produce no such for ours. I grant
them, nor am I so fond to say, we have an express command, set down in God's
Word, for every rite and usage, our Church has thought fit, for Decency and
good Order, to retain. Nor is it at all necessary, it should be so. No, neither
had they for all theirs; as appears by David's and Solomon's ordering the Quire
of the Temple, in the course of the Singers, making forms of devotion, and
prescribing them for public use, and instituting several other things, as
occasion required, in that service. And the like may be said of Asa and Josias
their Reformations. And this those godly and wise Governors thought, they
might with a safe Conscience do, even in that service, which God himself had
appointed; and that Church was never in a more flourishing condition, then it
was then. And are they able now to produce any reason, why we should not
believe, the Governors of our Church (of whom we own the King as Supreme) to
have the same power now, as they had then, upon the like occasions; and that
the People stand equally obliged to accept the Proposals of public Authority,
in things of the same nature, that concern the Worship of God. Especially,
since Christ at his promulgation of the Gospel, in his own person, took care
only for the weightier things, and left those of lesser alloy, which tend only
to the convenience and beauty of the Church, not to the Essence of Religion, to
the care and prudence of the Apostles, and so from them to others, their
Successors, Governors of the Church; to order the Affairs of each Church, as
would be most expedient for the necessities of each Church in its Plantation.
And some of these Apostles sure, if I understand any thing, have left not only
commands, but Examples behind them too, which reach our case. For what means
that, which is said of the Primitive Christians, that they continued together,
and were all of one mind? They were not sure met, some in one place, and some
in another, in different forms to exercise their Religion: one part kneeling,
another standing, a third sitting at the breaking of the bread. Let not such
unhandsom thoughts enter into our hearts. What means the Apostle, when he
chides some, that sunk and withdrew from the Public Assemblies, as the manner
of some was? but that he would have them keep close to an uniform Worship, and
not separate, and set up for themselves, in new fangle ways of their own.
Indeed what mean those many vehement persuasions to like-mindedness and
brotherly love, which we meet with every where in the Apostles writings; but
agreement in Religion? Since that love can be no way so well expressed, as in
such an agreement; and upon trial 'twill be found impossible, it should be
maintained and preserved amongst us otherwise. In a word, if that general Rule,
the Apostle does authoritatively set down, have not in it the force and purport
of a Command; I am to seek, what a Command is; Let every thing be done decently
and in order. And how in the same Church every one might have liberty of his
own Methods to serve God by, and yet the Decorum of Religion, and the good
Order of the Church, be nevertheless kept up; I must confess, I am still
further to seek for my understanding. In a word; let them talk of Christian
liberty, as they please: that cannot reasonably by pretended, to justify
public disorders in any Christian State. This may be rational to suppose, that
the several Churches, according to the nature of their several constitutions,
in several Countries, were left to a liberty, upon prudential reasons, to order
their own affairs, to their own convenience, in things indifferent, whether in
matters of Government, or Worship, or Discipline: keeping still to the Analogy
of faith and sound doctrine, and to the Rule of Gods Word. And hereupon it was,
that the English Church, when it threw off the tyrannous yoke of Popery as it
did, with prudent Zeal, and by public Authority, reform the abuses and
corruptions of Doctrine, and abolish all superstitious and idle Ceremonies; so
of them what were found not contrary to Scripture-rule, and agreeable to
primitive practice, it thought fit to retain, for decency and good order, in
her Liturgy and Public Service. And though some were even then discontented,
that no more was done; and called for a farther Reformation; yet this was but
according to the British Proverb, which tells us, that the Saissons (so they
call us) never know, when a thing is well; but will be mending still, till they
mar all: as our late times plainly show; when, under pretense of reforming
Religion, we had put our selves into the ready way of losing it quite, and had
scarce the face of a Church left amongst us. Upon this ground Calvin himself
(as judicious Mr. Hooker tells us) erected his Model at Geneva, applying
himself to the exigents of that time, and those people, he had to do with:
though others since, besides; his first intention, have, with violent zeal,
endeavored to impose that Form upon other Churches also, as matter of
Conscience; which was designed by him, merely out of prudence and convenience.
And no question, but Calvin might look upon Government, (though he had for his
own part as much Authority, as ever Bishop of Geneva had; and Presbytery it
self is little else then a multiplied Episcopacy, setting up in every Parish a
Diocesan) I say, he might probably look upon Church Government, as an
indifferent thing, as well as he did upon the Lords day it self, which he was
about (as Martin Bucer reports of him) to have changed from Sunday to Thursday,
for the convenience of that people, in their marketings. Again, hereupon it is,
from this liberty, whereby the Churches may each order its own affairs in
Christian Policy, that the Reformed Churches themselves, though agreeing, as to
the main, in doctrinals; yet in other things differ so much among themselves:
and yet with that fair regard nevertheless, that, as all the Reformed Churches
abroad do highly magnify the constitution of the Church of England, and
approve her Methods; as being the main Rampart and Bulwark against the Romish
Tyranny; So, on the other hand, the English Church is very far from condemning
them, for accommodating themselves to the necessity of their conditions, but
embraces them all with a hearty friendship. And herein, I say, if I mistake
not, lies the very ratio formalis, the nature and extent of Christian liberty,
so much talked of; that the several Churches indeed may, in externals and
circumstantials, square themselves to the necessity of times and places, and
order their affairs accordingly. But to say that every particular person or
party, in the same Church, has, by virtue of his Christianity, a liberty to
disobey the public Orders of that Church, whereof he is a Member, and to serve
God, as shall, notwithstanding those Orders, seem good to that party or person,
(for, as the Party breaks, it will come to Persons at last:) to take Liberty
(as I said before) in this notion, is to make it but another name for
confusion. Wherefore, since Churches are now constituted, and it is clear, they
are no more to be under the peoples Government, then the Civil States are; but
that the ordering of both belongs to the Christian Magistrate as the Guardian
of both Tables; I say, since it is so, it necessarily follows, that for any man
to affirm, that, what the Magistrate, upon grave deliberation, requires of us,
in Gods public Service, is an intolerable imposition upon conscience; and that
things indifferent, and in their own nature lawful to be done, being once
commanded and recommended by lawful Authority, become eo nomine, upon that very
account, unlawful; is a most absurd defiance, and not to be endured. For these
are such Theses, as, although some have been bold to publish them, and are
still confident enough to act according to them; yet have no footing, either in
the Word of God, or in right Reason, (upon which two, Societies are founded,
and the right of Government stands) as being destructive at once, not only to
the Peace of the Church, but to the purposes of the Civil Power too.

That I may make all clear; I shall, to omit that of Korah, the Son of Levi,
who might possibly otherwise be looked upon as a godly and able man, as having a
great opinion amongst the people, and an interest in many of the Princes, and,
for ought as we read, was guilty of no other fault but Nonconformity and
murmuring against Aaron, Numb. 16. 11. Indeed Dathan and Abiram, Laymen, Sons
of Reuben, went further against Moses himself, in verse. 13, 14. though these
State-Reb^ls too, as well as that disobedient Levite, had the luck upon the
very morrow after that dreadful execution upon them, to be esteemed at verse.
41. by all the Congregation, the people of the Lord. Though this look too much
like our case; yet, I say, to pass it by; because that was a severe example, I
shall give you two milder instances; the one, in the Jewish Church, long before
the building of the Temple, that of Micah: the other, of a famous Christian
Church, planted by S. Paul, that of the Corinthians.

The Story of Micah is, that he made an Ephod and Teraphim and consecrated one
of his Sons to be his Priest, Judge. 17. 5* upon which the remark is, in the
next verse; that in those days there was no King in Israel; but every man did
that which was right in his own eyes, Nor was the matter mended, when he got a
young Levite to be his Father and his Priest: for in the very beginning of the
next Chapter, it is again said: In those days there was no King in Israel; so
that it is clear, that this is taxed as a scandal of those loose ungoverned
times, when there was no King; that any man should set up for himself a private
Form of Worship, to which it should seem the people of the neighbour-houses
resorted, Chap. 18. verse. 22. This practice then of Micah's was a fault without
doubt; which, had there been a King in Israel, a lawful Authority in being, to
have taken order about such things, would not have been suffered.

That of the Corinthians is yet more plausible, and yet not faultless neither:
they kept to their public Ministers; yet, because they preferred one to
another, and some liked better of Paul's performance, others of Apollo's, in the
same common work; he taxes them of carnality, i. e. of Schism. 1 Cor. 3. 3. for
so he gives the reason; For, says he, whereas there is among you envying and
strife, and divisions or factions, are not ye carnal? why? what factions or
divisions are these, he speaks of? he tells you, verse. 4. For while one says,
I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollo; are ye not carnal? and yet Paul and
Apollo were excellent Persons, both of them; not only Orthodox sound men, but
men of eminent abilities both, and extraordinary graces. But Paul and Apollo
were but Ministers, as he tells us in the next verse, that employed those
gifts, and exercised those graces for the Churches good, as the Lord gives to
every one. If this be envying, and strife, and division or faction, what would
Paul have said of us? how carnal are we, who do not gad after the Paul's and
Apollos? I wish they were, for their own and their Hearers sakes, all such,
whom people nowadays so eagerly follow; but quite Kim-kam leave the regular
Assemblies of Orthodox men, and run a wildring after every Will-in-the-wisp,
that comes in our way, and have such persons in admiration, as are, many of
them, neither Orthodox nor able; and further, some of us take up dangerous
Principles at any rate, and exercise Religions of our own making, in such a
manner, as must needs in the end (might such things prevail amongst us) prove
destructive to Christianity it self.

And thus I have answered that Objection at large, taking in the ground of the
main Controversy, as far as I could, which is in debat^ at this day among us.
There is another too, which I must not le^ go without its Answer, (and I shall
be brief) That these reasons (...) mine for Uniformity will serve indifferently
for all Religions of al^ Countries, as well as ours; and that Mahumetans and
Papists are, by this Doctrine, no less obliged, then we, to keep up their ways
o^ Worship amongst the people, for the honor of God, the reputation of
Religion, and the safety of the Government: since we ought not in stark Charity
to suppose, but that they, who profess the worst of Religions, do, in their
conscience, and according to their Principles, take it to be the best in the
world. I hope there is no one in this Assembly, will make so uncharitable a
reflection upon my Discourse, as to imagine, that has been the drift of it, to
countenance the bloody practices and cruel persecutions, used, either in the
Popes Dominions, or the Grand Signor's Territories. Far be it from me to plead
the cause, either of the one or of the other. Yet I do in my Conscience think,
that some of those the most violent Princes of either Religion, that have been
the most zealous Persecuters, were in their Conscience persuaded, that they
were in the right. You Will say, that is fair for me to grant: Our Savior says the
same; they shall kill you, and think they do God good service by so doing: and
yet I say Positively, and I would have it taken notice of, because it may
concern some, who may think themselves far enough from being in the same form
with Turks and Papists; I do Positively say, that this their acting according
to their Conscience will by no means excuse them. For my proof, I have both the
great Apostles Rule and his Example too. His Rule is set down, Gal. 4. 18. It
is good to be zealously affected, always in a good thing. The case, he brings
it upon, is not so clear; I suppose upon the account of some false Teachers,
which endeavored to alienate them from that Doctrine, which he had taught
them, and to withdraw them from the Church for their own advantage; and this
with a great show of zeal, in the foregoing verse: They zealously affect you
(says he) but not well: yea they would exclude you: or, in another reading,
they would exclude us, that you might affect them. I wish our People would
beware of such, who with a great deal of zealous affection carry on their own
designs. But whatever the particular case was, the Rule will hold in general.
It Is good to be zealous, if a man's cause be good, and if the man be convinced,
his cause is so. Otherwise Zeal without knowledge, or in a wrong cause, is a
ridiculous and mischievous thing; and is upon this score reckoned amongst the
works of the flesh. And thus is it with those Idolatrous People, who, the more
zealous they are, the more they have to answer. I confess it is a sad thing, for
any man to have an erring guide to follow; I mean an erroneous Conscience. For
which way soever he take, either with or against Conscience, he is concluded to
an unavoidable necessity of sinning; and I must acknowledge too, that it is
safest to sin on Conscience side; and yet the mistake of Conscience will not be
a sufficient plea for unjustifiable actions. And thus it was with Paul, who, in
the time of his Pharisaism, was a zealous Persecutor, and thought he did well;
but after his Conversion, for that very thing condemns himself, as the worst of
sinners, and yet was no less zealous for the Religion he turned to. Now does
his Zeal, whilst he was a Pharisee, which was his great sin, make his Christian
Zeal e're a whit the less commendable? No sure. No more does Nero's or
Dioclesian's Persecutions of the Saints blemish any Christian Magistrates
severity, in defending the Faith against Heretics, or the Order of the Church
against Sectaries. Alexander's killing of a Friend in his drink could be no
Argument against his putting a Traitor to death by sober advice; nor could the
execution of a Traitor excuse the murder of a Friend. To retort it upon the
Objectors: if they are so zealously affected, that, rather then their conceits
shall not carry, they will venture the pulling down. Church and State about
their ears; let any one judge, is not the Magistrate, whom God has entrusted
with the care of his Church, obliged to be as Zealous for the preservation of
Church and State, in the vigorous defense of Truth and Peace? To make a
familiar instance: an honest man in possession shows a just courage in
maintaining his right, and is commended for it; whilst the injurious invader,
let his courage be what it will, is apprehended and deservedly punished by Law,
unless he grow too strong for the Law; and then that is a sad case.

I have done with the Arguments, wherein I could not but think it my duty, as
to plead the Churches Peace, so to vindicate her against Objections, which are
usually made; and now shall only desire, that, as you have hitherto attended me
with an obliging patience, so you will extend that patience a little farther,
whilst I make an earnest and affectionate Address to you, in a short
Application, with which I shall close all. Let me then press it upon you, Right
Honorable and Worshipful, the Magistrates and Patriots of this great City, and
you worthy Citizens, of what rank and degree soever, which hear me this day
(and I could wish, my voice could reach from one end of the City to the other)
that you will all of you put on Public Spirits, and lay to heart the concerns
of your Brethren and Companions, and every man in his place exsert his
Authority and Interest, contribute his Prayers and endeavors for the
Prosperity of the English Church, and the composure of our unnatural
irreligious differences in Religion. Your City is the Metropolis of the Nation,
the Royal Seat of the Government, and the great Staple of Trade; which spreads
its universal influence into all parts of the Land; and your Example gives law
to all the rest of the people. It Is your Justice, which holds the balance in
all National dealings, it is your mode of Religon here, that is followed every
where; yonr fashions of serving God, that are taken up and retayl'd into the
Country. The union of this City would unite us all. O do not be wanting to so
Pious, so Necessary, so Charitable a Work. If you have any regard to God's
Honor amongst us, if any care of Religion, if any love to your Native Country
and the Government you live under; if any kindness to your own Persons and
Families, to your Wives and little ones, to your Friends and Relations; if you
have any hopes left, after all those heavy Judgments that have gone over you,
of enjoying Peace and Liberty and Plenty in your new dwellings; if all these
dear concerns do, as I know they needs must, lie near your hearts; act then in
the name of God, for his sake and your own, in a full and vigorous sense of
these things, and study the Churches Peace, which is to secure them all to you
by your unanimous Agreement in God's Worship and Service. Your public Justice,
and Regulation of Trade, and Reformation of Abuses in Civil Affairs, and the
prudent and vigilant administration of the Government of the City, are things
make you worthily spoken of: but if this be all, if there be not a like zeal
for Gods House, and the cause of Religion, we may say, as he did, Arcem
perdimus, dum castella defendimus; We have lost the main sort of our happiness,
the Churches Peace; while we take care of the outworks, things less
considerable. Pardon me; It Is not flattery, will uphold a Government. I speak
it out of hearty affection to my Country, and a due respect to this famous
City. My heart bleeds within me, and my bowels earn, to think, in what a
posture our Jerusalem now stands. You are very now building in the Flames; they
have seized your Suburbs, and are got within your Gates, and are smothering in
the midst of your Ruins. Let us do, as is usual, when a Fire breaks out: every
one bring his Bucket, and help to quench: unless such a Stupor and unactive
astonishment has overtaken us, as did in the late Conflagration, and we tamely
give up all to the Fury of the Merciless Element. And this sure is the far more
deplorable Fire of the two, as laying wast the Consciences of men, and burning
up our main strengths and greatest ornaments, and laying us open to dismal
expectations. I pray read the 28. of Deuteronomy, and apply it to our case;
that, if they did not observe the Commandments and Statutes, God appointed them
to walk in, (by which was not meant the Moral Law alone, for that has an equal
obligation upon all mankind; but those National rules and institutions, by
which they were made a People and a Church) they should be cursed in the City,
and cursed in the Field; they should build Houses, and not dwell in them; they
should be pursued with Plagues, and at last given up to the insolence of
Forreiners, and plucked off from the Laud of their Nativity. What then can we
look for at last, after so many methods, God has lost upon us, after so many
praeludia of his displeasure, but some determining exterminating Judgment? But
God forbid! I have some hopes still of Gods mercy to this our Jerusalem, and
his pity to her, as she lies in her dust. Nor is the thing it self, I am
persuaded, past remedy, were it applied to, and we would take Saint Iude's
advice, Jude 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. verses, where he tells us of those, that
separate themselves; that, for all their pretenses, have not the Spirit. But ye
Beloved, (says he) building up your selves on your most holy Faith, praying in
the Holy Ghost, (which may most certainly be done in the public wholesome forms
of Church-Devotion) Keep your selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And of some have compassion, making
a difference: and others save with fear, his meaning i^, by rugged means;
pulling them out of the Fire. This Schism then and Separation is a Fire, in the
Apostles Language; and some are to be pulled out of it by force. The ingenuous
will be shamed, the meek will be convinced, the considering will be reasoned
out of it; but some there are, it seems, must be roughly dealt with; and awed
by Authority. Let us, like Brethren and Companions, take up the business
between our selves. Come; We are Men. It Is the privilege of the blessed Angels
to be free from error; but the infirmity of humane nature to commit mistakes;
to persist in errors though, even to public mischief, is the character of the
Devil's pride and malice; but to return and repent, is the glory of the Saints
of God. Why should any one of us be ashamed of that which is his glory, and
will be his Eternal comfort? We are Brethren and Friends; we live under the
same Laws, and profess the same Gospel of Peace; why should we disagree, and
fall out in our greatest concern, and quarrel one another into common Ruin?
Jerusalem is the mother of us all; let not us by our Divisions make her a
Samaria, a Seminary of Sects and Factions: let us not make our Mother a harlot.
What have we to do with the Statutes of Omri and Ahab, and the sin of usurping
Jeroboam, which he caused Israel to sin? They are dead and gone, and let their
Statutes dye with them. You are Citizens of London, a People of great Credit
and Reputation all the World over, for your Prudence and good Government, for
your vast Trade and Dealings; and you are allied to most of the considerable
Families of the Kingdom* let it not be said of you; that you are grown weak and
mean, a fluttering and unsteady People; that you have quit your establishments,
and are perpetually to seek for your Religion, and are ready like Children in
your streets, to be caught up by every Spirit, and to run after any one, that
pretends to be a Guide. London, an Ancient and Noble Mart, long talked of in the
world, before ever there was Dam or Dike in Holland; let it not truckle under
Amsterdam, and be made a Magazine of Opinions, and new fangled Religions. For
shame do not justify that advantage, the Enemies of our Church have taken from
666. to clap the name of Babylon upon your City; but wipe off the reproach, and
fling it back into the face of them, as they deserve it; by uniting all, as one
man, in the service and worship of God, and in the common defense of the
Protestant cause. And then, when you are thus agreed, when your minds are as
uniform, as your buildings are like to be; then shall ye be blessed in the
City, and blessed shall ye be in the Field; blessed shall be your Basket and
your Store: then the Lord shall establish you a holy people unto himself; and
all people shall see, that ye are called by his name, and they shall be afraid
of you. Then the Lord shall open unto you his good treasure, and shall make you
plenteous in goods; and he shall command the blessing upon you, in your
Storehouses, and in all that you set your hands unto. And then, when your
Example, has prevailed with the rest of the Nation (as it will in a very short
time) that having our hearts united in God's fear, and laying aside all
animosities and unnecessary quarrels, we may serve him with one heart and with
one shoulder, and with one voice confess his holy name and his word, and, being
like-minded, we may unanimously seek those things, which tend to public peace,
and to the good of community; Then, when we are thus united, all other
disorders will easily be regulated, all grievances redrest, and all scandals
removed, to the honor of the Government, and the welfare of the People; Then
shall the Earth bring forth her increase, and God, even our own God, shall give
us his blessing: Then shall we see both Church and State, once more in a
flourishing condition: when God shall make all our Officers righteousness, and
with his favor shall encompass us, as with a shield: Then shall this floating
Island be settled upon sure and lasting grounds; Then shall Albion again be the
praise and terror of the Nations, nor shall her white cliffs, or her wooden
walls, or the embraces of her beloved Ocean, so much secure her, as the Divine
protection, and agreement of her Inhabitants: Which God in his good time, of
his Infinite Mercy, grant, for his Churches, and for our Brethren and
Companions sake. Amen, Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. Line 13. read of community. p. 13. l. 18. will r. would. p. 20. l. 18.
form r. forms. p. 22. l. 22. r. of the Land, in Civil affairs, and leave out in
Civil affairs in the next line. p. 25. l. 12. r. persecution. p. 27. l. 31.
indispensible r. indispensable. p. 28. l. 38. sunk r. slunk, p. 30. l. 7. ^ok
r. look.

FINIS.

