A Peaceable Enquiry INTO THE NATURE.E OF THE Present Controversy Among our
United Brethren ABOUT Justification.

PART I.

By STEPHEN LOBB, A Lover of Peace and Truth.

Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife, or vain glory, but in lowliness
of mind let each esteem others better than themselves.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey. 1693.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER
Reader,
BE not surprised, or wonder, that some Controversy is risen among our United
Brethren: For when such a Subject as this is started, it is no fault to be
striving, who shall be most concerned in it.

It has been observed of the Christians, that when they were freed from
Heathenish Persecution, they fell into pieces among Themselves: And when were
there greater stirs about the Religion now ours, than at the beginning of the
Reformation?

It has pleased God, at this time, to open a Door to the Dissenters, for
Liberty: And it has pleased the same good God also, we hope, to give us that
Grace, to make a better use of it, than they under Constantine; seeing the
great advantage, or fruit, which we have made our business to reap from it, is,
an open published Concord; a Concord, which some of the wisest, both of
Presbyterian and Independent have sought formerly under diverse Conjunctures of
Providence, and could not obtain: A benefit, which the strength in Union, the
beauty in Truth, the life in Love, the interest in Number, the comfort in
Fellowship do proclaim: A Blessing, which none of us are worthy of, and none
can sufficiently prize, but by a suitable endeavor to preserve it.

As for the Difference between some of us (which I would rather call a
Contention only who shall be most Orthodox,) it is no Bone cast among the
Brethren (as some would suggest) to break our Union; for the Rise of the
Controversy was before the Union. It was (we know) upon the Printing over
again Dr. Crisps Works the Offense was given, or taken. The Dr. being a holy
good man, there are several of our Brethren were willing to have them heartily
received: When Gataker, and others abroad, have branded them for Antinomianism.

The truth is, that freedom which England has had (those Disputes a while
lying dead) for some late Years from being exercised in Polemical Divinity,
has given occasion to our Divines for their attending of Practical, which is
much for our Advantage, seeing this Nation is, herein, allowed, above any, to
excel: Nevertheless, while these Controversies have slept, there are some, who
think, the Enemy has come, and sowed Arminian, Socinian, and Antinomian TARES,
and we by disuse are hard put to it to discern between them, and the Wheat; and
consequently by mistake are loading one another with Charge of Error.

I do not like (I must confess) this Censorious Spirit, wheresoever I meet it:
But the Zeal I find in our Brethren generally for the Reformed Doctrines
according to the Articles of the Church of England, the Assemblies Confession
of Faith, and the like, against each of these Errors mentioned, (which we look
on, really, as dangerous to men's Souls; and therefore are so shy of them) I do
own and approve. And it is the very design therefore of my Writing, to
Vindicate them herein, that howsoever they differ in their Conceptions or
Explications of the same Doctrines, there are none of them truly chargeable
with such Error, when they would fasten it one upon the other.

I begin with Antinomianism in these first Sheets, because that gave the
Occasion; and the very same Method which you see me take in that, and I need
not tell it, I intend to take also with Arminianism, and Socinianism.

I feel no delight in filling my Margin with Quotations; but such is the Nature
of the Discourse, that the many Authorities used for my Readers satisfaction,
became necessary, and must be my Apology.

From my Study at Hampsted, July 26. -- 93. S. L.

ERRATA.
PAge 24. line 6. dele the; p. 26. l. 4. dele and; p. 48. Marg. l. 14. r. Apol;
p. 90. l. 4. r. Jurists; p. 110. l. 1. r. Notion; p. 115. l. 30. r. two.

A Peaceable Enquiry INTO THE Nature of the Present Controversy among our
United Brethren about JUSTIFICATION.
CHAP. I.
The Excellency of Peace and Love. Luther's Opinion of it. The Mischief of
Strifes and Contentions in the Church, Instanced in the Rise, and Progress of
the Meletians, and Arians; The Cure Difficult, yet Necessary to be Endeavored.

THE Churches Peace is a Blessing so very Great, and Valuable, that he, who
sets but a Right Estimate on its Real Worth, cannot think much to hazard even
his own Private Quiet, Particular Interests, and Good Name, (which it is like
to cost him) to Obtain, or Defend it.

By Peace, I do not mean only a Freedom from Persecution, which is a Mercy, for
which we should not cease Praising God; but the Peace of Christians between
themselves, so often mentioned in the Holy Scriptures, Commanded, and Encouraged.
Be of one Mind, Live in Peace, and the God of Peace shall be with you. The Lord
of Peace himself give you Peace, 2 Thessalonians. 3.16.
always by all means.

As Christians are United unto Christ their Head by Faith, so should they be by
Love United to one another, Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the
Bond of Peace. Ephesians. 4.3.
Love, Concord, and Peace are the support of all Societies of what kind soever.
The Heathen Philosophers were sensible of it. Jamb. Vit. Pyth. Id. Protropt. c.
19.
Pythagoras esteemed Amity, Love, Friendship to be the most effectual Bond,
that Cemented his Followers. And many amongst the most Barbarous have zealously
exposed themselves to great Calamity out of officiousness to their Particular
Communion. G^^ial. Dier. lib. 7. c. 26.
Alexander ab Alexandro gives several Instances hereof. He begins with the
Arvall Fraternity, who were Joined by such a Bond of Friendship together, that
neither Prosperity, nor Adversity nor any other thing but Death could Dissolve
it; and tells us of some others, that were so linked in Love, that they would
not only Mourn with such as were in Adversity, and Rejoice with those in
Prosperity, but Die for One another, and frequently would Die with them that
Died, for which reason they were called COMMORIENTES.

Peace among Christians, as it is the Support of Societies; so, it sets forth
the Beauty and Glory of Christian Religion to all Observers, and by Uniting us
in our Affections, Prayers, Counsels and Practices too (so far as Agreed)
enables us the more successfully to serve our Lord Jesus; Whence it is, that
the most Eminent for Learning and Piety, have in all Ages of the Church
strenuously Contended for it: Among the Reformed Luther himself, though a Man of
a hot Temper, and much Imbroyl'd, not only by the Papists, but the Zuinglian
and Calvinistical Reformers, at last with much Fervor in a Letter to the
Helvetian Churches Pleads thus for Peace and Concord. I have, (says he)
Perused your Letters with the Greatest Pleasure and Delight, Rejoicing to
Understand by them, that your Ministers have, not only most heartily Resolved
to lay by their Jealousies, and Bitter Invectives, but to do what in them lies
for Peace, and Concord. The God and Father of all Peace and Love, give a Happy
Issue to those Pious Resolutions, according to that Promise, When a Man's ways
please the Lord, he will make even his Enemies to be at Peace with him. -- We
must count upon it, that some on both sides, will Dislike our Endeavors for
Concord, and entertain hard thoughts and suspicions of us: But, if we, who are
Cordial and Sincere in our Desires, do with Constancy, and Diligence Prosecute
this Design, Certe quicquid ad promovendam concordiam faciet, id pro virili ita
agam, ut ne quid in me possitis desiderare, novit hoc Deus quem testem invoco
per animae salutem, Epist. Luth Consul. Helveti^e, Tiguri, etc. A.D. 1537.
Our Gracious God and Father will soon give us his Assistance, and in a little
time the Remaining Heats will be over -- I humbly beseech you to believe, that
I shall do whatever may be expected from One, that is serious and Hearty in
this Matter, that in this Cause of Promoting Concord, I will to the utmost of
my Abilities satissie your Desires and Expectations, The Truth of this God
knows; whom I call for a Record upon my Soul. For these Dissentions have
neither Profited me, nor any body else, but have been Prejudicial to many, so
that not the least good could have been, or can be hoped for from them.

Thus far Luther, who gives me a fair Occasion to Consider the Mischievous
Effects, of Discord, and Contentions among Christians, How the Ignorance, Rash
Zeal and Peevishness of some; the Selfish Designs, Private Interests, Pride and
Malice of others have given the Devil opportunity to turn the Churches into
Disorder, and Confusion.

I will instance in the Quarrel between Peter of Alexandria, and Miletius; and
touch the Rise and Progress of Arianism.

The Contest between these two, though differently Reported by those, who lived
nearest these Times, was in the esteem of all managed with that Indiscretion
and Heat, as brought on them all that Mischief they endured.

That they were both sound in the Faith, and their chief difference about the
time to be given for the Trial of the Repentance of such as under the
Persecution Revolted from the Truth cannot be denied. Socr. Hist. Eccles. l. 1.
c. 3. 6. Nic^^h. Caliist. Hist. Ecclis. lib. 8. c. 5. T^^d^r. Hist. lib. 1. c.
9. and H^^ret. Fa^ul. lib. 4. de Me^^^is.

S^^om. Hist Eccl. l. 1. c. 23. Aust de Haeris.


And although Ashanasius, Socrates, and Nicephorus Callistus report, that
Meletius apostatized, and Epiphanius, with whom St. Austin seems to agree,
represents the Matter quire otherwise, yet it is past doubt, that the Different
Opinions of these Orthodox Guides of the Church, in the one Grounded on a Zeal
for Truth, in the other on Compassion to the Souls of the Weak, occasioned a
very wide Breach amongst those Christians when they were Groaning under the
Violence of a Bloody Persecution. For whilst in Prison the Fire brake out to
that Degree, as to issue in an angry Separation, no wonder if it continued
after, Peter's Martyrdom, and when Constantine gave Liberty, was much Increased.

It Is true, Alexander, who succeeded Achillas, Peter's immediate Successor,
did, during Meletius his life time, carry it kindly to the Meletians; but after
Meletius his Death, he violently Persecuted them, who were thereby provoked to
send some of their Bishops with a Petition to the Emperor for Liberty, which
being Rejected, they apply themselves to Eusebius of Nicomedia, then great at
Court, and a Favorer of Arius. Eusebius refuses to help them on any terms,
short of their admitting the Arians to their Communion; to which, that they
might Escape the Cruel Persecution of their Orthodox Brethren, they yielded,
and had the Grant of Liberty. By this means the Arians gained so great an
Advantage, and grew so Strong, that in some Years after, they spread themselves
so far as to Cover almost all the Christian Churches in the World.

It is amazing to consider from what a small spark the Arian Fire, that turned
the whole Christian World into a flame, had its rise, 'twas only from the
subtle and over curious Discourse of Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, the undue
Suspicion of Arius, and the Indiscreet Heat of Both; Hist. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 3.
for, says Socrates, Alexander enjoying much Peace at Alexandria, calls
together his Priests, and with them did so very nicely and subtly Discourse
of the Unity in the Trinity, that Arius, one of the Priests, a Man of great
Learning Suspecting him to be a Favorer of Sabellius, who held, that the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost were but Three Names of one and the same Person, did
in opposition to him affirm, the Son to be so Distinct from the Father, as to
have a Beginning. From whence it follows, that he had his Subsistence from
Nothing; that he was a Creature, not Coeternal, nor Consubstantial with the
Father. This Controversy was managed with so much Bitterness, that, to use
Socrates his own words, (...), Soc. Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 3.
from a very little Spark a great Fire broke out, disturbing the Peace of all
Egypt, Lybia, the Upper Thebais, and many other places.

The Flame having thus got head, Alexander with the utmost Vehemence Endeavors
the suppressing it. He Excommunicates Arius, writes to the Bishop of
Constantinople, complaining of his Pride and Covetousness, prays him not to
suffer Arius, nor any of his Followers to Preace within his Jurisdiction. He
calls in the Help of his Colleagues, who Approved of what he had done against
the Arians. (...), etc.
Arius provoked hereby, does also write to several Bishops, giving them an
account of his Faith in words so very like the Orthodox Confessions, Cum
Alexander literas ejusmodi ad Episcopos passim in sineulis ^ivitatibus
scripsisset, Latius Propterea serpevat malum, quod hi qui erant illis literis
certiores facti, consentionis and Discordiae incendiis inter ipsos conflagrare
caeperunt, nam alii literis suffragari, iisdemque subscribere, alii penitus
adversari. Socr. ubi sup.
that he is by some Grave and Judicious Bishops esteemed sound in the Faith.
This nettles Alexander, who sends forth his Circular Letters throughout the
whole Catholic Church, with a Catalogue of the Arian Errors, and the Names of
those, who adhered unto them, by which means Arianism (says the Historian) was
strangely Propagated all the World over.

Constantine, observing how the Contentions spread from one Part to another of
his Empire, and how much, Violent Methods contributed hereunto, makes use of
more calm ones. He writes a Letter to Alexander, and Arius, which he sent by
Hosius Bishop of Cordovia, Declaring it to be his Opinion, That the
Controversy being about what was Incomprehensible to both Parties, and, in
which, if they both understood one another, 'twould appear, they agreed in the
main, did not well to contend so violently and Break the Churches Peace. Not
that he would oblige them in every Particular to be of the same Mind: But he
thought they might honorably enough, and without disturbing the Peace,
entertain different Apprehensions about lesser Matters. A Regard must be had to
the different Abilities, Tempers, and Constitutions of Men. Thus it was with
the Philosophers, who, notwithstanding some different Opinions amongst
themselves, lived Peaceably together. How much rather should Christians, Men of
the same Heavenly Family, though they differ in some things, cherish, Love,
Peace, and Concord one with another.

So far Constantine, who, you see, apprehended the Controversy at first to
have been about Matters of Less Importance. But it soon came to be about
Greater Points, and the Heats too high to be composed by the Emperor's single
Endeavors, or Authority. He therefore calls a Council, which sat at Nice in
Bythinia. This Council drew up a Confession of Faith, to be Subscribed by all;
and Excommunicated and Banished Arius, for not Subscribing it. They also
deposed and drove those Bishops into Exile, who, though they Subscribed the
Confession, Refused to consent to Arius's Condemnation; because, as they
Protested, he was not in their Judgment, Guilty of the Errors charged on Him.
However, in a little time Arius by some means was Recalled, Eusebius of
Nicomedea, and Theognis of Nice, making Application to the Emperor, were
Restored to their Bishoprics; the Controversy seemingly at an End, and all
Agreed. But notwithstanding this appearance of Agreement, and the Protestations
of Sincerity in their Subscriptions, the Quarrel was only for a while covered,
not quenched, it soon brake out again. The Arians grew strong, Prevailed, and
most barbarously Persecuted, Tormented, and Murdered Multitudes for abiding
faithful to the Truth.

From these Intimations, it does appear what a Mother this want of Candor is
to Controversy. It is these Prejudices Undue Suspicions, and Evil Surmizings,
ensnaring Good Men to fasten an ill sense upon the words, and Practices of one
another, and Charging each others Notions with Unseen and Disclaimed
Consequences; which does Drive men to Opinions, beyond what they before were
inclined to, if not make such: Impressions on their Minds as to Provoke them to
Embrace those they Detested. Besides, these Contentions being managed with so
much Heat and Violence, did at that time fill the Jews with Joy, (...). Socr.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 3.
and exposed the Christians to the Contempt and Scorn of the Heathen. From
whence it arises, that Peace among Christians is not so Great a Blessing, but
Divisions, Strifes, Contentions and Broils are as Pernicious and Hurtful.

To Prevent the Breach, or Heal it, when made, to procure Peace, and preserve
it when got, is a work attended with unaccountable Difficulties. There are such
Remainders of Pride and other Lusts in the Hearts of the best, that Satan no
sooner throws before them a Hurtful Temptation, but they catch at it. And it is
so Natural for Learned and Pious Men to be Assuming and Dogmatical, that they
can neither bear a Reproof, nor a Dissenter; and others so full of Suspicion
and Jealousy, that Healing Attempts cannot escape the Censure of being Trick
and Ill Design. There is such a narrowness in the Minds of most, that they
cannot see any thing to be True or Good, but what falls within a very small
compass. What is not agreeable to their own confined Thoughts and Expressions
is Unsound and Heretical, and whoever endeavors to convince them of their
Mistake is their Enemy, and shall be treated accordingly; whence in all Ages it
has been the Lot of Peacemakers to suffer Reproach: Though they are sincerely
concerned for the Glory of God, and the Defense of Truth, as well as the
Churches Peace; yet because they cannot be within the same Circle with them,
but are more Charitable and speak favorably of their Adversaries, they must be
of the number of such as betray the Truth. He that will deal uprightly with
all, and flatter none, must count on the being neglected by all. None more in
danger of being Scorched by the Flames, than they who most heartily labor to
quench the Raging Fire. Nazian. in Orat. 14.
Nazianzen, long ago observed, That whoever, studious of Peace, do undertake to
mediate between Contending Parties, are sure to be ill treated by both.

However Peace is so Excellent a Thing, that we must be content to give the
utmost, (next Truth,) for its Purchase. Gain it we must, or the Church, the
Souls of Men and Christ himself will be the Losers, but Gain it we never can,
unless we be more Merciful and Compassionate in Judging One another. We shall
never find the Right way to Peace, until we Cast off Inveterate Prejudices,
Unjust Suspicions, Jealousies, Surmizings, and Put on that Charity which
envveth not, but is kind, suffers long, hops all things, endures all
things: We must Judge others with that Candor we would they should Judge us,
and in all Doubtful Cases take the most Benign Interpretation, In dubiis
Benignior Interpretatio accipienda semper; favendum Reo.
and Favor the Accused Party.

A Regard to these Rules in Conjunction with a Just Care to Secure and Defend
Truth, will Reduce the many Controversies in Matters of Religion among
Protestants to a smaller Number, without giving Countenance to the least Error.

CHAP. II.
The Improvement to be made of former Divisions. An Enquiry into the Present
Controversy, whether about the Substance of Truth, or the Manner only of
Declaring it. That Great Divisions have been among such as have agreed in the
same Principles. This the present Case among our Brethren Proved.

THE Excellency of Peace, the Mischief of Divisions, and what hinders the
one, and cherishes the other being well considered, we may see good Reason to
Advance this Conclusion, viz. That a Temperate weighing the Points at this time
Controverted, and the Manner of Handling them with an Impartial Enquiry after
Truth, variously and in Different ways Delivered is absolutely Necessary.

As it is our Advantage to come into the World in a time, wherein we have an
Opportunity of Understanding How Divisions have Arisen, how Carried on, and
Maintained, Age after Age; so it is our Duty and Interest to do our Part, that
we split not on the same Rocks our Fathers have done. Have too strict
Adherences to a Peculiar way of Delivering a Doctrine, Undue Suspicions and
Jealousies, and Inordinate Passions, been a great Occasion of the Rise and
Progress of Contentions heretofore? Let us then take heed we fall not into the
like Evils now. Have many Orthodox Divines, and Christians, such as the
Meletians, Audaeani, and the like; fallen under the Unjust, as well as Rash
Censure of being Heretics, merely through the Extravagant Heats of some
Leading Men? Let us beware lest it be so again.

The Present Controversy being about the Great and Important Doctrines of the
Gospel, and managed as it has been; Not only many Weak, but some Wise and
Judicious Christians have been tempted to think our Differences to be
Fundamental; and, that it is not easy to arrive to a Certainty about the Truths
most Necessary to Salvation. I will therefore lay by all Prejudices, and in my
Search observe the Christian Rules but now mentioned, if possible to
Understand, whether the Differences be so Momentous as by some Apprehended?
whether they be about the Substance of the Doctrines in Controversy, or only
about the Way and Manner of their Declaration?

It Is very clear to me, as well as to Men of Great Learning and Judgment. That
though it has Pleased God very Plainly to Reveal unto us, those Doctrines, that
are necessary to Salvation; yet such has been the Industry, and Craft of the
Tempter, and such the Darkness and Infirmity of our Minds, that they who
Consent unto their Truth, have fallen into Diverse Mistakes about the most Proper,
and Exact way of Stating them. Thus it has been amongst Protestants, touching
Justification it self, who therefore have been Represented by Bellarmine out of
Osiander, to hold no less than Fourteen, or Twenty Distinct Opinions about it,
as if the many Different ways of Declaring the same Doctrine had been as many
Different Doctrines. Dr. O. Of Justis. p. 77, 78, 79.
But it has been some time ago observed by a late Reverend and Leading Divine,
That as to the Way, and Manner of the Declaration of this Doctrine, [ viz. Of
Justification] among Protestants themselves, there Ever was some Variety, and
Difference in Expressions. Nor will it otherwise be, whilst the Abilities and
Capacities of Men, whether in the Conceiving of things of this Nature, or in
the Expression of their Conceptions, are so various, as they are And it is
acknowledged, That these Differences of late have had as much Weight, laid upon
them as the very Substance of the Doctrine generally agreed in has had; P.
293, 294.
such is the humor of some. In another Page, the same Author very judiciously
gives this Suffrage, That though Protestants have Differed in the Way, Manner,
and Methods of the Declaration of this Doctrine, and too many Private Men were
Addicted unto Definitions and Descriptions of their own, under Pretense of
Logical Accuracy in Teaching, which gave an Appearance of some Contradiction
among them, yet they generally agreed in the Substance of the Doctrine. So far
this Good Dr. unto which I add, That there has not been so much Variety among
us in the Terms and Expressions used in the Stating our Doctrine, but there is
much greater among the Papists themselves about the same Points, and their
Greatest Doctors misrepresented by one or another of themselves.

Vasquez is Positive that Merit in a strict sense is not, held by the most
Learned of the Roman Church, but Arriaga, in Express Opposition to him will
have it, Arriag Disp Th^ol. in 1. Tho. Tract. de Just. Disp. 1, 31. Sect. 2,
etc.
that the most Learned of their Communion, are for the Meritoriousness of Good
Works by the Rules of Commutative Justice. Alfonsus a Castro, who calls the
Doctrine of the Reformed about Justifying Faith, a Pestiferous, and most
Pestilential Haeresie, affirms, A Cast, advers. Haeris. lib. 7. Verb. Gratia.
Haeres. 3. and lib. 12. Verb. Preadestinatio. Haeres. 2. Cassand. Consult.
Artic. IV.
that 'twas embraced only by Claudius Guilliandus, and One, or Two more in the
Council of Trent: On the other hand George Cassander Proves, that the same
Notion Protestants have of Faith, was generally owned by Men of the Greatest
Learning in their Church. That 'twas approved of by a Provincial Council at
Colon, as appears by their Publishing the Enchiridion of Christian Religion, in
which this Doctrine is asserted, with the Decrees of that Council, and highly
applauded by their most Learned Divines throughout Italy, and France.

Differences about Religious Matters have not been Confined to any one Party of
Christians, but have stretched themselves to the utmost Bounds of Christendom,
so that no one Party can Upbraid the other with their Divisions. We are so much
in the Dark, that wherein we are Agreed de Re, we cannot always Perceive it, so
that many a time, when a Controversy, only de nomine, arises, we Pursue it as
vehemently as if it had been Real. Men of the same Particular Denomination, are
so Unreasonably suspicious of one another, as to take it for granted, That
every Obscure or Unpleasing Phrase is Heterodox; whereas were we more Exact in
our Disquisitions, more mindful of Humane Frailty, and more Compassionate and
Charitable, we should with Greater Temper, and more Justice Judge both of
Persons and Things, and find an Agreement much Greater than now we can Imagine
it to be.

To come more close to the Controversy before us, I am very sensible, that our
Contending Brethren, and some others, esteem the Differences among us, being
about the weightiest Matters indeed of the Gospel, to be such that the Two
Poles may as soon meet, as their Doctrines be found in Substance the same. The
Noise, I confess, is, That the most Important Doctrines of the Christian Faith,
have received a Wound almost, if not altogether Incurable; But I must humbly
crave leave to whisper to the Reader, that I think otherwise, and do hold my
self in Charity obliged to believe they mean the same thing for the Substance
of it. In my closest Converses with each Brother, He who seems to be most for
the Exaltation of Free Grace, abhors nothing more than to give the Least
Encouragement to an Elect Person's Living in Sin, or Expecting an Enjoyment of
the Future Glory, though he die under the Reigning Power of his Lusts,
Unregenerate and finally Impenitent: And the other Brother, who so much presses
the Necessity of Faith, Repentance and a Holy Life, detests nothing so much as
in any one Instance to Diminish the Glory of Free Grace, or to add any thing of
our own to Christ's Righteousness in our Justification.

Besides, They have both Subscribed the same Propositions, which do not only
contain in them the Truths, about which the Contest has been, but are so
framed, as to Provide fully against the Errors, they have been supposed to
Embrace. The Errors about which many have been Apprehensive are the Antinomian,
Arminian, Popish, and Socinian Errors; all which, with the greatest Caution
Imaginable, are Really Renounced by the Subscribers. Their Renunciation is so
full, that there is no Room left them for coming off with that Distinction of
Subscribing them as Articles of Peace, and not of Faith.

The words of the Agreement are these, namely, P. 2, 3.
That in order to the more effectual Composing of Matters in Controversy, we
all of us, having Referred our selves to the Holy Scriptures, and the Doctrinal
Articles of the Church of England, the Westminster, and Savoy Confessions, the
Larger, and Shorter Catechisms, do Subscribe These following Propositions, as
what do most fully Provide against the Arminian, Antinomian, Socinian and
Popish Errors; and shall always be Content, that any Sermons, or Books of ours
be Interpreted by the said Articles and Confessions; Desiring all others, if
they meet with any Expressions that are to them of Doubtful Signification, they
would Judge of them, and Interpret them by the Holy Scriptures, the said
Articles, and Confessions. It is further Declared, That they Subscribe to all
the main Parts of Doctrine contained in the forementioned Articles,
Confessions and Catechisms, as Judging them Agreeable to the Word of God.

The Import therefore of the Subscription to this Agreement cannot be less than
to the Doctrines contained in these Propositions as exactly true, according to
the Word of God; and so Providing most fully against Antinomian, Arminian,
Socinian and Popish Errors; and that even as a Rule, by which Our Sermons and
Books are to be Judged, and Interpreted, which is enough to Evince, that
whatever Doctrines may be found in any of our Writings or Sermons Contrary
unto, or Dissonant from the main Doctrines contained in these Propositions, are
really Disowned, Renounced and Exploded.

For this Reason, although it cannot be Denied but that many in their Opposition
to Antinomianism, have fallen in with the Arminian, etc. and that Diverse in
running from Arminianism, etc. have plunged themselves into the Antinomian
Gulf, and that they who bend their Strength against the one Error, are in
danger of being accused for Inclining too much toward the other; yet in the
Case before us, we are bound in Justice, according to the Desire of our
Brethren, to Judge and Interpret their Writings by the Subscribed Propositions.
Though it may be Difficult to Conciliat some Expressions with these Articles, yet
we must not charge them for holding Doctrines Contradictory unto them. The
Allowance, that is to be made for the Different Abilities, Educations, and
Peculiar ways of Expression, which some Men Use, will sufficiently Vindicate
our Charity from being too Extensive in this Matter.

It is undoubtedly our Duty to forbear severe Reflections, and hard Charges; to
Lament our many weaknesses, which make it very near an Impossibility for us to
understand one another, and at the same time Adore the Wisdom and Grace of God,
that our Worthy Brethren, who have not been able to Agree, about the sense of
one another Writings, can Join in Subscribing the same Doctrines, as Delivered
by others.

CHAP. III.
Intelligent, and sincere Subscribers, to the abovementioned Propositions,
cannot be Antinomians. What Antinomians are, Their Principles laid down out of
Melchior Adamus, Lucas Osiander, and Luther. Luther's Disputations against them
Abridg'd. The Perniciousness of Antinomianism Detected. Its Agreement with
Libertinism. Hoonbeeck's Account of English Antinomianism Its Mischievous
Consequences. Its Inconsistency with the Subscribed Propositions. What is not
Antinomianism, yet branded with that Odious Name.

TO make this the more clear, and Evince not only the Possibility, but
Certainty of an Agreement in all the Substantials of the Gospel, I will, with
the greatest Plainess I can, show, what the Antinomian, Socinian, Arminian, and
Popish Errors are, and how inconsistent with the Subscribed Propositions.

In the first place then to begin with Antinomianism, which, because commonly
Joined with the Libertine Notions* I will consider as Agreeing, and Differing
from them, and lest any who are really tainted with this Poisonous Error, think
me Partial, and too much inclined to the Arminian Party, etc. I will deliver
nothing but what is Reported by such as have been the most Opposers of the
Arminian, Socinian, and Popish Notions; such as Calvin, Luther, and their
Admirers, about the Doctrine of Justification.

In the Year 1538. See Sleidan, Comm lib. 12. p. 312.
Johannes Agricola Islebius, an Intimate Friend of Luther, was the first, that
after the beginning of the Reformation, did in Germany broach the Antinomian
Errors, of which Melchior Adamus, in the Lives of Luther and Agricola, give
this short Account: The Antinomians, (says he) held, that Repentance was not
to be Preached from the Law, oppugning those, who were for awakening Men's
Consciences by the Law, before they would Publish the Gospel unto them, and
affirmed, that How wicked, and Impure soever the Life of any Man was; yet, if
he believed the Promises of the Gospel, he was Justified. He was also for the
Restoring Unction, saying, That if it might be, he doubted not but that the
Gift of Healing would accompany it, for since his Return from Augusta, he had
by it Recovered Four from Death to Life.

Hornbeck in his Summa Controversiarum is more full, Lib. 7. de Brownistis.
speaking distinctly of them, as distributed into three Periods of time, to
wit, the Primitive in the Fourth Century; the Beginning of the Reformation in
Germany; and since amongst us in England. That in Germany Agricola was against
the Preaching of the Law in this Gospel Day; That we were not now under the
Law, as a Schoolmaster to be frightened by it is Threatenings; But under Grace;
That the Gospel only is to be Preached. We must believe, that though a Man be a
Fornicator, an Adulterer, or the like, yet he is in the Way to Salvation, if he
does but lay hold on Christ. That we must indeed beware of Sin, and work
Righteousness; Not in Obedience to the Law, but as Exercising our Christian
Liberty, and notwithstanding our Living in Sin, must Apply Christ, and his
Promises, as belonging unto us.

Lucas Osiander in his Epitome, says, Hist. Eccles. Cent. XVI. lib. 11. c. 39.
That Johannes Agricola Islebius, who A. 1530. did with Melancthon, and
Brentius, Defend the Augustane Confession; and after the Small Kaldican War with
Julius Pflugg, and Michael Sydonius Framed that Unhappy Book, in which there
was a Composition of the Popish, and Protestant Religion, as a mean for
Accommodation, until a General Council should be Indicted, and therefore called
the Interim; This Agricola, (as Osiander expresses it) was in the Year 1538.
stirred up by the Devil to broach a New Heresy, affirming, That the Law of
Moses (to wit the Decalogue) was not to be Taught in the Church; That the
Doctrine of the Law does not work Repentance in the Hearts of Men, but the Holy
Ghost does it by the Preaching of the Gospel, which shows us the Filthiness
of Sin, that the Gospel Properly is the Preaching of Repentance. That by
Schlasselburgius many other horrid Errors are charged upon the Antinomians,
viz. That the Law is not worthy to be called the Word of God, If a Whore, a
Fornicator, Adulterer, or any other such wicked Person, does only Believe, they
are in the way to Eternal Life. The Law teaches not Good Works, nor is it to
be Preached, that we may do them and many others of a like Nature.

Against these Errors the Famous Dr. Luther did at Wittiberge Publish Six
Disputations, which are Extant in the first Tome of his Works. Islebius being
by Luther's Endeavors convinced of his Error, makes his Recantation in a
Public Auditory at Wittiberge, and Prints it: However after Luther's Death, he
Returns to his Vomit, reassumes his old Errors, and drew some Learned Men to
close with them. Laboring to get Countenance to them by wresting some Passages
in Luther's Writings; so that, whereas Luther had in his Commentary, on the
Galatians, said, That the Penitent Sinner ought not to hear Moses, by the Law,
accusing him of Sin; but should rather cast his Eye on Jesus Christ his
Savior, who by the Gospel heals the Broken and Contrite heart; Islebius, and
his Followers, would from hence infer, That the Law was not at all to be
Taught; and thus would they Palliate their Own Errors by fathering them on
Luther. So far Lucas Osiander.

Luther, on Genesis, does in several Places show what the Antinomians are, Cap.
19.21.
affirming, That they throw the Law out of the Church, and will have it that
Repentance is to be taught by the Gospel; That they Darken Paul's Doctrine
about the Remission of Sin, and so magnify Grace as utterly to Extinguish it,
and expose Men to the Wrath of God by Persuading them to such a Security
concerning the Divine Displeasure and Judgment as if there had been no Sin, no
fear of Death and Hell.

These Antinomians seem to be the followers of Muntzer, who teach, that all Sin
is wholly taken away, nor are we to Endeavor the convincing any of Sin, or
terrify them by the Law. They, like the Ishmaelites, who because the Thigh of
their Father Abraham was Holy, believe Every thing to to be Holy. Though they
carefully endeavor to conceal thus much, yet are they not afraid to entertain
such Monstrous Opinions. Sin being forgiven, there is in them nothing Damnable,
Sin therefore is nothing or at least it is taken from them.

This Error they would fasten on the Doctrines of the Apostles. He that is born
of God sins not. I believe the Remission of Sin, In Genesis c. 24.
by which they understand the taking away of all Sin.

The Papists Preach nothing but Terror, In Gen c. 19.
and these false Prophets will have nothing taught but the Gospel, and the
Promises; which Error of theirs is much more hurtful than that of the Papists.

In the First Tome of Luther's Works, to which Osiander directed me, I have not
only met with Luther's Six Disputations, but with a Paper containing the
Particulars of the Antinomian Errors, drawn up by One of themselves, as was
then Generally believed; which for the Reader's greater Satisfaction I will
faithfully Transcribe, and add unto it, an Abridgment of Luther's Disputations
against them.

Unto the Antinomian Positions, Luther sets this Preface.

Martin Luther to the Pious Reader. There came to my hands Certain Positions
(so is the the Title) of an Unknown Author, scattered among the Brethren;
which, lest I be thought to approve of them, I would so Publish as to give the
fullest Testimony of my Abhorring them, which God willing I will soon do by my
Disputations.

A. D. 1538. The Positions of a Certain Antinomian.
REpentance is not to be Taught from the Decalogue or any Law of Moses, but [
Ex Violatione filii per Evangelium, which I presume thus to Render] from the
Sufferings of Christ by the Gospel.

2. For Christ says, Thus it behoved him to suffer, and Rise again from the
Dead, that Repentance, and Remission of Sins should be Preached in his Name
among all Nations.

3. And Christ in the Gospel of John, says, that the Spirit shall convince the
World of Sin; Not the Law.

4. The same is Taught in the Last Sermon of Christ, Go Preach the Gospel to
Every Creature.

5. Paul to the Philippians says, Let the same mind be in you, which is in
Christ Jesus, that with Fear and Trembling ye may work out your Salvation,
which words do fully establish this Truth, viz. That Repentance, (which he
calls Fear, and Trembling) is to be taught from the Mind of Christ, not from
the Law.

6. From the Discourses of Paul, and Barnabas, it sufficiently appears, that,
there is no need of the Law, for any One part of Justification.

7. That without which, the Holy Spirit is given and Men are justified; is not
necessary to be Taught, either for the Beginning, Middle, or End of
Justification.

8. But the Holy Ghost of Old was given, and still is, that Men might be
Justified without the Law, by the Gospel of Christ alone.

9. Therefore it is not necessary to Teach the Law of Moses, either for the
Beginning, Middle, or End of Justification.

10. The Major is evident from the Experience, which Paul and Barnabas mention.

11. And we must Judge the Minor to be true, 11. Idem Judicabimus de Minore,
nam Spiritus Sanctus cecidio visibili specie super Gentes.
because the Holy Ghost in a visible shape fell on the Gentiles.

12. What shall we then say of some who without the Word, yea, Contrary to it,
and the Example of the Apostles, do make the Law the first Part, yea, a
Necessary one to the Doctrine of Justification.

13. For which reason, that we may maintain the Purity of Doctrine, we must
oppose them, who Teach, That the Gospel must not be Preached, but to those, who
are convinced by the Law.

14. For they, that put on the words of Christ an Improper sense, and say, that
first the Law, then the Gospel is to be taught, and do Pervert the words of
Christ, nor is their Interpretation consistent with the Simplicity of Christ.

15. As we are to adhere unto the simple sense of Christ's word, when he says,
[This is my Body] so must we abide by the Simplicity city of those words. [Go
Preach the Gospel, Baptizing] etc.

16. The Law does only convince of Sin, and that without the Holy Spirit, and
therefore convinces to Damnation.

17. But there is need of that Doctrine, which is Efficacious, not only to
Condemn, but also to Save. Thus the Gospel does conjunctly Teach Repentance,
and Pardon of Sin.

18. For the Gospel of Christ does make known the Wrath of God, from Heaven,
together with the Righteousness of God, Romans 1. for it is the Preaching of
Repentance in Conjunction with the Promise, which our Reason does not
Naturally, but by Divine Revelation Receive.

These are the Antinomian Positions, unto which Luther in his Disputations has
a respect.

The first Disputation of D. Martin Luther, against the Antinomians about
Repentance.
1. Repentance, by the Testimony of all, and by what is undoubtedly True, is a
Grief for Sin, with an adjoined Purpose of a better Life.

2. This Grief, Properly, is not, nor can it be any thing else, than a deep
sense of the Law in the Heart or Conscience.

3. For, though many hear the Law, yet because they have not that sense, nor feel
the force of the Law, they Grieve not, nor Repent.

4. The first Part of Repentance, to wit, Grief is Only from the Law; The other
part, namely, a Good Purpose, cannot be from the Law.

5. For a man Terrified at the Sight of Sin, cannot, in his own Strength
Purpose any good thing; for he is neither at Peace nor Safe:

6. But confounded* and overwhelmed by the Power of Sin, falls into
Desperation, and Hatred of God; or, (as the Holy Scriptures have it) Descends
into Hell.

7. To the Law therefore the Promise, or Gospel is to be added, which do quiet
and revive the terrified Conscience, and broken Heart, that it may Purpose what
is Good.

8. That Repentance, which is Only from the Law, is but the half, or Beginning
of Repentance, or Repentance by a Synecdoche, because there is wanting the good
Purpose.

9. If it be Persevered in, it becomes the Repentance of a Cain, a Saul, a
Judas, and of all such as Distrust of the Mercy of God, and Despair; that is to
say, who Perish.

10. These Sophists learned their Definition of Repentance, viz. That it is a
Sorrow, and Purpose, etc. out of the Fathers.

11. But they understand not the Terms of this their Definition, [Sorrow, Sin,
Purpose] etc.

19. Nor need we wonder at this their Ignorance, for they neglecting and
slighting the Scriptures, cannot be thought to know, what is Law, or what Gospel.

20. Indeed quite bound up in Humane Commands and Injunctions, they only Dream,
when they Judge of Sacred, and Divine Things.

21. But the Gospel teaches us in Opposition to these Masters of Despair, that
Repentance ought not to be a mere Horror and Despair.

22. But that Penitents must hope and trust, and hate Sin out of love to God,
which is the only Good Temper and Purpose of Mind.

23. This some, Unmindful of any Proofs or Reason, and indeed Heedless of the
Matter in Hand, assert to be contrary to the Law of God:

24. And very erroneously teach* that the Law of God is totally, and without
any Distinctions or Limitations to be taken out of the Church: which is
Blasphemous, and Sacrilegious.

25. But the Scriptures throughout inform us, that Repentance must be begun by
the Law, which likewise, the Order and Nature of the thing it self requires,
and common Experience proves.

26. They ( viz. the Scriptures) say, Let all them be turned into Hell who
forget God: and, Set, O Lord, a Lawgiver over them, that Men may know, etc.

27. Fill their Faces with Shame, that they may seek thy Name, O Lord: and the
Sinner is caught in the Works of his Hands.

28. And this is the Stated Order, that Death and Sin are in us before Life and
Holiness.

29. Nor are we now Righteous and Alive, to be delivered over to Sin and Death,
but actually and in our Present State Sinners and Dead in Adam, to be Justified
and made alive by Christ.

30. Wherefore we must be first taught the first Adam (i. e. Sin and Death) who
is the Figure of him who was to come, i. e. Christ, now in the second Place to
be Preached unto us.

31. Sin and Death must of Necessity be shown us out of the Law, and not by the
Word of Grace, and Comfort.

32. And experience clears it: Adam first stood convicted a Transgressor of the
Law; was afterward Restored to Hopes by the Promised Seed of the Woman.

33. And David, was first struck dead by the Law, telling Him by Nathan, [Thou
art he] is afterward Saved by the Grace of the Gospel, saying, [Thou shall not
Die.]

34. Paul trembling under Law-Stroaks, first heard, [Why Persecutest thou me?]
then was Enlivened and Quickened by the Gospel, Arise, etc.

35. And Christ Himself says, Mark 1. Repent and Believe the Gospel, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at Hand.

36. Likewise, it behoved that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be
Preached in his Name.

37. Thus the Holy Spirit convinces the World first of Sin, that it may teach
Faith in Christ, ( i. e. Forgiveness of Sins.)

38. Paul in the Epistle to the Romans observes this Method, he teaches first,
that all are Sinners, to be Justified by Christ.

39. Luke, in the Acts, informs us of the same thing, that Paul taught both
Fews, and Gentiles, that no man can be Justified but by Christ.

The Second Disputation of M. Luther against the Antinomians.
'Of the Law'.
1. The Law is not only Not-necessary to Justification, but also manifestly
Unprofitable and altogether Impossible.

2. And to them who keep the Law with a Respect to be Justified by it, it
becomes as Poison and most Pernicious.

3. When we discourse of Justification, we cannot say too much of the Weakness
of the Law, and against a most Dangerous Confidence in the Law.

4. Neither is the Law given that it may Justify, or give Life, or any way to
Help unto a Righteousness.

5. But to show us Our sin, work Wrath, and convince the Conscience of our
Guilt.

8. In short, Heaven is not more distant from the Earth, than the Law must be
separate from Justification.

9. Nothing is to be taught, said, or thought on in the Matter of
Justification, but only the Word of Grace exhibited in Christ:

10. And yet nevertheless it does not follow, that the Law is to be abolished,
and not to be Preached in the Church.

11. But it is the more needful it should be taught, by being Useless, nay,
Impossible for Justification.

12. That so, Proud Man, confident of his Abilities may be instructed that he
cannot be Justified by the Law.

13. For Sin and Death are therefore to be shown us; not that they are
Necessary for Life and Innocence.

14. But that Man may be sensible of his Unrighteousness, and lost State, and
so be humbled.

15. If we see not our Sin, we conceit our selves Innocent: as is visible in
the Heathen, and Pelagians.

16. If Death were unknown to us, this Life would be the only Life to us, nor
should we look for a future one.

17. But since both are taught us only by the Law, it is evident, that the Law
is very Necessary, and Profitable.

18. Whatever shows us Sin, Wrath, or Death, that belongs to the Law, whether
it be in the Old, or New Testament.

19. A Discovery of Sin cannot be but by the Law, and is its proper Effect and
Force.

20. The Law, Manifestation of Sin, and Revelation of Wrath are Reciprocal
Terms, as much as Man, and Risible, or Rational.

21. To take away the Law, and Retain the Revelation of Wrath, is as if one
should Deny Peter to be a Man, and yet affirm Him to be a Risible, Rational
Creature.

22. After the same sort, do they Reason, who take away the Law, and then hold
that Sin remains to be forgiven.

23. Whereas the Holy Spirit in the Scriptures teach, that Sin is Dead without
the Law; and where there is no Law, there is no Transgression.

24. So that it is Impossible, that Sin should either be, or be known, without
the Law either Written, or Unwritten.

25. Whence it follows, that seeing on the taking away of the Law there Remains
no Sin, there can be no Christ, to Redeem from Sin: for Christ Himself says,
they that are whole need not a Physician.

26. And seeing Christ came, not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law, he came in
vain, if there be no Law to be fulfilled in us.

27. And it being the Law of God, that Requires our Obedience toward Him,
those (...), those Fighters against the Law, do thereby take away that
Obedience, which is due to God.

28. From whence it is manifest, that Satan by these his Instruments does but
Verbally teach, that there is Sin, Repentance, or a Christ.

29. But in good Earnest, they deny Christ, Repentance, Sin, all the Scriptures
together with God their Author.

30. And do more effectually than ever Epicurus Himself, settle Men in a most
Pestilential Security, Contempt of God, Confidence of Impunity, and in
Perpetual Impenitence.

36. Take away therefore but the Law, and we are free from Sin, and need not a
Mediator.

39. To hold that it is not the Work of the Law to Convince of Sin to
Condemnation, is Notorious Madness.

40. For this is the Strength of Sin (as Paul affirms) That Sin is the Sting of
Death, and the Law, the Strength of Sin.

41. Let us therefore Eat and Drink, and, according to the Doctrine of these
Men, say, Let him Perish, that cares for the things of to Morrow.

42. For, Take away the Law, the Strength of Sin, Death and Hell will cease to
be.

44. All therefore that they [ viz. the Antinomians] say of Sin, Repentance,
Christ, and Pardon are Abominable Lies, worthy of none so much, as of the Devil
himself.

The Third Disputation of D. M. Luther against the Antinomians.
'Of Repentance.
17. The Lord's Prayer, Delivered to the Saints by Christ himself -- is full of
the Doctrine of the Law.

27. This very Prayer does Teach us, That the Law was before, under, etc. the
Gospel, and that Repentance has its beginning from the Law.

28. For he that Prays for any thing, does first confess, that he has it
not, and expects that it be given him.

30. The Enemies therefore of the Law must at the same time Vacate the Law, and
lay aside the Lord's Prayer too.

The Fourth Disputation of D. M. Luther against the Antinomians.
We must beware of the Popish Doctrine of Penance, But be more afraid of the
Antinomians, who leave no Repentance in the Church.
14. They are against the Preaching of the Law in the Church, and really, and
in Truth cannot be for any Repentance.

15. That Argument, viz. Whatsoever is not necessary to Justification, neither
in the Beginning, the Middle, nor End, is not to be Preached, signifies
Nothing.

16. If you ask, what they mean by these words [ Beginning, Middle, and End;]
you will find, that they themselves do know nothing of it.

'The Sixth Disputation of D. M. Luther against the Antinomians, 1540.
1. That Consequence of St. Paul, where there is no Law, there no
Transgression, is not only Theologically; but Politically, and Naturally Good.

2. In like manner, so are these Consequences, where no Sin, there no
Punishment, no Pardon.

3. Where no Punishment nor Pardon, there no Wrath, nor Grace.

4. Where no Wrath nor Grace; there no Divine, nor Humane Government.

5. Where nor Divine, nor Humane Government; there nor God, nor Man.

6. Where nor God, nor Man, there nothing unless perhaps the Devil.

7. Whence it is, That the Antinomians, the Enemies of the Law, are plainly
either Devils or the Cosen-Germans unto Devils.

8. Nor will it help them, that they make their Boast of God, of Christ, of
Grace, of the Law, and the like.

9. It Is no New, nor Infrequent thing, for the Name of God to be taken in Vain,
even by the Devils themselves.

10. The Confession of the Antinomians is like to that of the Devils, who cried
out, [Thou art the Son of the Living God] Luke 4. and 8.

19. Wherefore they are to be abandoned, and forsaken, as the most Pestilential
Guides to Licentiousness, and all manner of Wickedness.

20. For they Serve not our Lord Jesus, but their own Belly, seeking Glory, and
Praise from Men Only.

Thus Luther, the first Reformer, that most Gospel Preacher and Admirer of
Free Grace; who in his day excelled in the Explicating the Doctrine of
Justification by Christ's Righteousness received by Faith in Opposition unto
that by Works; This Luther, observing, how much some Endeavored to wrest his
words, that they might, if possible, give Reputation to Aminomianism, does with
the greatest Zeal Express his Abhorrence of that Error, discovering the Poison
covered with the Glorious Titles of Free, and Gospel Grace.

The Antinomian Cry was against the Law and Legal Preaching, and for Free
Grace, and Pure Gospel: but their Error, according to Luther, Subverts the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus, even all Religion, Natural, as well as what Depends
on Positive Revelation, setting up in its room and stead nothing but Diabolism.

The Vitals of Antinomianism lie in these Particulars:

1o. The Vacating the Law. 2o. The Suppressing all Preaching of Repentance from
the Law. 3o. The Confining the Doctrine of Repentance, and Revelation of Wrath
to the Gospel. 4o. The Extending the Grace of the Gospel to all manner of
Sinners, who can but Confidently Persuade themselves, that Christ is theirs.
The Mischievous Tendency and Poison of these Errors, Luther does thus Detect.

If there be no Law (says he) seeing the very Nature of Sin lies in its being
the Transgression of a Law, there can be no Sin; If there be no Sin, there can
be no Wrath due for Sin, nor no Guilt, for that lies in an Obligation to Wrath
for Sin; Nor Pardon, for Pardon is the Dissolving the Obligation to Wrath, and
where no Obligation, there can be no Dissolving it; nor no Redemption from
Wrath, because no Wrath to be Redeemed from.

If there be no Redemption there can be no Redeemer.

If no Law, no Sin, then no Repentance for Sin; if no Christ, then no Faith in
Christ.

Thus, by laying aside the Law, the Christian Religion* is made void, for there
is hereby no Sin, no Wrath, no Guilt, no Pardon, no Redemption, no Redeemer, no
Christ, no Repentance, no Faith.

Again; If no Law, as no Sin, so no Duty, no Obedience, for that is to a Law,
no Government, for that is by Law, and, If no Government, no Governor; If no
Rewards, nor Punishment, nor Heaven, nor Hell; No Providence with the Epicure,
no God with the Athiest.

Thus by laying aside the Law, not only Christianity, but all Religion is made
void: for there is hereby, no Sin, no Duty, no Reward, no Punishment; no
Heaven, no Hell, no Providence, no God, no Religion; Nothing therefore remains,
says Luther, but the Devil.

The Reins (you see) are let loose, and Encouragement given to all manner of
Licentiousness, and Debauchery, which has not been only in the Notion, but
woefully in the Practice; which is the True Reason why the Antinomian and
Libertine have been by Godly Judicious Divines put together. Antinomian
Principles produce Libertine Practices. If it had not been too Notorious to
admit the least doubt, I would never have Pressed it. But the Reproach it
brought on the Reformation, and the Ruin, Destruction, Havoc, and Devastation
it made on the Souls of Men, as it was enough to awaken Luther, Calvin, and the
other first Reformers; so it may well Provoke any Man, fearing God, that has
known what are the Dismal Effects of Antinomianism, to caution the Unwary
against it, especially considering, how apt well meaning People, are to be
taken with the vilest Errors, when clothed with the Beautiful and Splendid
Names of Free Grace, and Gospel Truths.

Hieronymus Kromayer, Artic. 13. De Lege.
in his Theologia Positivo-Polemica, assures us, that the Libertines are very
near a kin to the Antinomians; and are Exactly Described by the Learned Calvin,
in a Particular Discourse against them.

The History Calvin gives of them is to this Effect; namely, that Coppinus, a
Man born at Lisle in Flanders; an Illiterate, but bold Fellow, did first
Publish the Libertine Errors in his own City: But Quintinus, of Hainault, soon
after excelling him, Gained the Reputation of being Head of the Sect in France,
to which Country he went, when driven from his own for some Misdemeanors, (as
Stephen a Fabrica told Calvin). Claudianus Persival, and Anthony Pocquius,
Joining themselves unto Quintinus, in a little time they spread their Errors
throughout a great part of that Kingdom.

Their Error though covered with the Taking-Pretence of Spirituality and
Gospel-Liberty, yet was, in its Nature and Tendency very Pernicious. Some of
their Principles were.

1. 'That the whole Law is abolished, Sublata omni Distinctione, totam Legem
abolere (...) ulunt Calv. instruct. advers. Libertinos, c. 19.
and no further to be Regarded by us. 2. 'That every one ought to follow his
own Inclination, Vnumquemq oportere naturalem Inclinationem sequi. Call. ubi
sup. c. 20.
and do what is Right in his own Eyes; And yet they Confess, 3. That we cannot
be the Children of God, except we be born again, Vid. Cap. 18.
And after a very Magnificent and Splendid manner, they extol Regeneration;
affirming, That if we be the Sons of God, the Old man must be Crucified in us,
our Flesh mortified, The World Destroyed and Sin Reign no more in us: However,
when they explain themselves, the Poison appears; For, they hold, 1. That
Regeneration is the Restoring that Innocence, in which Adam was before the
Fall. 2. That the State of Innocence consisted in Knowing Nothing; in not being
able to Discern between Black, and White, it being, Adam's Sin to Eat of the
Tree of Knowledge, of Good, and Evil. 3. That to mortify the Old Adam, is
nothing but to be Unable to Discern, or know what is Evil; That we must be, as
little Children, who cannot Discern between Good, and Evil; but follow their
Senses, and Natural Inclination.

If therefore any be troubled in Conscience for Sin, they thus express
themselves. O Adam, Do thou yet Discern between Good, and Evil? Is not the
Old man yet Crucified?

If, they find any One to Tremble for Fear of God's Judgments, They say, As yet
the Taste of the Apple remains, Beware lest it choke thee.

If Sin be Grievous to any, They say, That Sin as yet Reigns in them, and they
are held Captive by the Lusts of the Flesh

4. Sin. the Flesh, the Old man are nothing with them, but an Opinion, a
Thought, or Imagination: Let 'em forbear to think it is, and it is not. Whence
it is, That in the Last Result. Regeneration with them is a laying aside the
Sense of all things, and a living according to their own Inclination, and Lust.
And they that have no Sense of Sin, taking it to be Nothing, are New Creatures.

In a word, the Libertines do really Defend the Absurd and Blasphemous
Consequences, with which Luther charge the Antinomian Principles, Differing
from them in this, That they are more Free Openly to Avow what the other wants
Courage to Divulge, or Sense to Understand.

The Libertines seem to see through the whole of their Notions. How one Part is
Linked unto the other: What Is their Connection, and Dependence, and How one
Point necessarily flows from the other, and so go on to Embrace the last,
though a very Absurd Consequence, and frame their Practices accordingly.

The Antinomians, though some of them, yet all do not so, they neither see what
naturally follows from their Principles, nor are their Practices so Gross as
are their Doctrines. And yet the Agreement in many thing is so Exact and Full,
that it is Probable enough, they are but the Effort of one and the same
Contrivance.

The Methods, which Quintinus, Persivall, and Pocquius, took to Insinuate their
Errors into the Minds of others, compared with what some Practical Antinomians
have done, do make thus much very clear.

'Twas the way of both for a while to conceal the Licentious Part of their
Opinions, and make a strict Profession of Gospel Purity. They would carry it so
fairly as to get into the Conversation of the most Eminent Reformers, and other
Professors of the Truth. Pocquius, who, at Geneva, was acquainted with Calvin,
would fain have got a Testimonial from Him, of which, though he failed, yet
obtained one from the excellent Martin Bucer, by which means he gained great
Reputation amongst many Honest and Well-meaning Protestants.

Quintinus ejusque Socius exsartoribus Doctores facti. Calv. Vb. Sup. cap. 4.
Their Teachers were such as had been Tailors, and Shoemakers. Quintinus
Himself and his Companion were such. [A great Snare to Weak and Talkative Men,
who from an Itch after Preaching are Tempted to do their utmost for the support
of them, who will encourage their Hasty Entrance into the Ministry.]

Totus Eorum Sermo de spiritis est, Ideomate quodam adeo Peregrino Lequuntur ut
qui ipsos audiant, prima facie stupesiant.
Their Sermons were about high and lofty Matters, full of Peculiar and Uncommon
Phrases, delivered with so much eagerness and fervor, that oft-times their
Hearers would be transported into Amazing Ecstasies.

Obsirvandum est cum istos audire cap^ris parum absuturum quin Ecstasi
aliquan^o supra nubes raptos fuisse putes, c. ^.
They were much for 'Allegorick Interpretations of Scripture, and New
Revelations. They pretended to more than ordinary Measures of the Spirit, In
Allegorias Scripturam converterent, c. 3.
and to such Raptures, as if their Converse had been with Angels.

By these Arts they seduced many Sober Protestants, leading them into a most
dissolute way of Living, and to as Pernicious a Security.

Besides Agricolas Islebius, who in the Year 1537, Subscribed the Articles,
drawn up by Luther at Smalcald, in which the necessity of the Law to true
Repentance is expressly asserted, did A. D. 1538. start Antinomianism in
Germany, but, on Luther's Endeavor, publicly recanted, Michael Sidonius was a
Rigid Papist, Pflugg, neither severe for Popery, nor much against Protestancy.
Osiand. Epit. Hist. Eccles. Cent. XVI. lib. 2. c. 68.
though soon after Luther's Death. which was 1546. returned to his old Antinomian
Vomit, and in 1548. ran to the other Extreme, joining with some Papists in
composing the Interim, in which the Doctrine of Justification is framed
according to the Popish Model; which yet he would have Bucer subscribe unto,
and was a great Stickler for miraculous Cures by Anointing with Oil.

Thus the Reader may see from what Manner of Men these Errors have had their
Rise, by what Methods propagated, and how Pernicious their Tendency is to the
Souls of Men.

The Antinomians, that got into New England, are so fully set forth in their
proper Colors by Mr. Welde, that I need do no more than Recommend that Account
given of it. And go on to consider what Errors have been held by them in this
Kingdom.

And because the Learned Hoornbeeck, in his Summa Controversiarum, does with
much Respect unto them, make his Enquiry after their Principles, being a great
Enemy to Arminianism. I will lay down the State, he gives of their Notions,
which he Reduces to these Six Heads.

1. That Christ in Suffering for our Sins, did not only bear their Punishment,
and Guilt, but moreover had our Sins themselves Imputed to Him.

2. That Christ did Redeem all and every Man.

3. That the Soul is United to Christ, and in Covenant with Him, before any
good Quality be wrought in it, and can equally apply the Promises of Grace unto
it self, whilst unregenerate as when a Believer.

4. That a Man Believes after he is justified, his Faith following his
Justification.

5. That in order to our being Comforted by the Promises of Christ and our
making them sure, we ought not to Grieve, and Repent of the Sins we have
committed from sights of the transgressed Law, and of the deserved Punishment,
and so to be humbled in Heart.

6. That the Moral Law must not be Preached to Believers and Regenerate Persons.

This is the Account Hoornbeek gives of the English Antinomian: who, in the
first Question, is more Kind to them, than Just to the Truth, in saying, they
hold, That Christ in Suffering for our Sins, did not only bear the Punishment,
and Guilt; but moreover had our Sins themselves Imputed to him: whereas the
Imputation of Sin, and otherwise than in its Guilt is Impossible; and the
Author whom he chiefly consulted, is Positive, That though he had diligently
searched the Holy Scriptures, could not in any one Place find, Trat Sin was
laid on Christ by Imputation, farther affirming. That Guilt is not only
inseparable from sin; but is the sin it self, the Fault, the (...), simply sin
In answer to an Objection laid down in these words, For that Objection about
Guilt, that the Lord lays the Guilt and Punishment, but not Simply, the Sin it
self: It is replied, For ought that I can see, it is a Simple Objection -- I do
not think as some do, that Guilt differs from Sin.
.

In this Assertion, there is a Complication of Errors of diverse Kinds, even
Popish, Socinian and Libertine. Not that I dare charge every one, that holds
this Principle with the mischievous Consequences that too easily flow from it:
That is nor fair, nor just, for they may not see the Connection, there is
between the one and the other; and may Renounce and Disclaim the more offensive
Part. However, in the Oppugning an Error, and Defense of Truth, for the sake of
the Unwary, It is necessary, to show in the Point before us, How Error of one
kind is linked to that of another; which is thus:

By making Guilt to be, not only Inseparable from the Sin it self; but to be
the same thing with it, the (...), the Fault it self, as it respects the
Command, 'twill unavoidably follow.

1. That the Pardon of Sin is the same with Mortification; and that in
Justification there is more than an External, and Relative; there is an
Internal, and Physical Change wrought on the Justified Person, whereby it is,
as the Papist would have it, confounded with Sanctification.

To clear this, we must observe* That Sin essentially Relates to a Law, it
being a Transgression of it. The Law has its Preceptive and Threatening Parts.
And Sin, Properly, and Formally considered, is a Transgression of the Precept,
and whatever is a Transgression of the Precept, or the (...), it is formally,
and Properly Sin.

To Understand yet more fully wherein lies the True Nature of Sin, it being a
Relation, our Enquiry must be after its Subject, Foundation, and Term.

The Inclinations, Propensions, Dispositions, Acts, Habits, Thoughts, Words,
and Works of a Rational Being are the Subject. The Term is the Preceptive Part
of the Law, under whose Regulation the Inclinations, etc. do fall. The Ratio
fundandi, or Foundation, from whence the Relation Immediately Results is the
Contrariety, Disconformity, Deviation, or Dissonancy of our Inclinations,
Propensions, Dispositions, Acts, Habits, Thoughts, Words, Or, Works to the
Preceptive Part of the Law. When either our Inclinations, Propensions, etc. are
contrary unto, or Dissonant from the Precept, which is Pure and Holy, we Sin,
are Unclean, Filthy, and Impure. The Contrariety, Dissonancy, or Obliquity is
the Uncleanness, the Filth and Impurity; It is Sin Properly, and Formally.

To Distinguish therefore between the Filth of Sin, and the Sin it self, and at
the same time make Guilt to be the Sin it self the (...), or Dissonancy to the
Command, is too Intollerably Gross, and Absurd, to admit of a fair
Construction; It is to Confound the Precept with the Threatening, to Change the
Natures of things, and Pervert the Plainest Truths, it is to call Light
Darkness and Darkness Light.

For the Filth of Sin is Contrary to the Precept, Intrinsic to the Sin,
Inseparable from it, it is an (...). But Guilt is Extrinsick to the Sin, it is
only an External respect of it to the Threatening of the Law; It Is not (...).
it is not contrary to the Command, but it is God's Will, and Pleasing unto him
that he who Commits the Sin, be liable unto Wrath, that is, be Guilty; But the
Filth of Sin, is in no sense Pleasing unto him. Besides, Guilt is separable
from the Sin.

On this Distinction, between the Sin, and its Guilt, the Reformed do found
that other between Justification, and Sanctification, holding, that
Justification imports only an Outward and Relative Change, whereby the Soul is
freed from Guilt, etc. That Sanctification Denotes an Inward Physical Change by
which the Filth of Sin is taken away, and the Sin itself mortified. But by
making Sin, and Guilt the same, Pardon of Sin, also, and its Mortification must
be the same too; and that in Justification an Inward and Physical Change is
wrought on the Soul. In a word, in that Great Controversy, the most Important
One, agitated between Us and the Papist, even touching the Glorious Doctrine of
Justification, the Cause is in Fact given up by the Antinomian unto the Papist.
Thus in running from Popery, they continue their flight so long till they
return to that very Point from whence they did at first set out, and Unwarily
give Life to the Error they seem mostly to abhor.

Again, if Guilt be Inseparable from the Sin, there can be no taking away the
Guilt by Pardon, but the Sin it self, the Fault cease to be, and
consequently, if the Sin of our Nature, with those Inclinations and Lustings
after Evil be Pardoned, they cease to be sinful, a Notion that will exceedingly
Please the Roman Catholics, who deny Concupiscence to be Sin, in those that
Believe.

2. The Imputation of Sin is made Impossible, either from Adam unto Us; or from
us unto Christ. A Notion no way ungrateful unto the Arminian Party, who hold,
That Adam's Sin was in no other sense Imputed unto his Posterity, Fatentur
(vid. Remonstrantes) Peccatum Adami Imputatum Dici Posse Posteris ejus,
quatenus Deus Posteros Adamo Eidem malo cui Adamus per Peccatum obnoxium se
reddidit, obnoxios nasci voluit, sive quatenus Deus malum, quod in Paenam Adamo
Inflictum fuerat, in Posteros Ejus dimanare and transire permisit. At nihil
cogit Eos dicere, Peccatum Adami Posteris ejus sic fuisse a Deo Imputatum,
quasi Deus Posteros Adami ^^vera censulsset Ejusdem cum Adamo peccati and
culp^e quam Adamus commiserat REOS. Imo nec scriptura, nec Veritas, nec
Sapientia, nec Bonitas Divina, nec Peccati Natura, etc. permittunt ut sic
Imputatum peccatum, Adami, etc Malum Culpae non est, quia nasci plant
Involuntarium est, ergo and nasci cum hac vel Illa labe, etc. Si malum Culpae
non est, nec malum Paenae, quia Culpa and Paena sunt Relata. Rem. Apol* ad
Censur. c. 7. 4.
then as they are by Birth made subject to the same Calamities with Adam. An
Imputation of the Guilt of Sin they deny, as contrary to the Holy Scriptures,
the Divine Truth, Wisdom, and Goodness, the Nature of Sin, as well as the
Formal Reason of Righteousness, Although we are born without an Original
Righteousness, yet there is not (say they) either the malum Culpae; nor the
malum paena, the Evil of the Fault, nor of the Punishment, on any of Adam's
Offspring by Birth: Not the Evil of the Fault, because not Voluntary; and if
not the Evil of the Fault, it cannot be the Evil of Punishment; the Fault, and
Punishment being Relata, and Inseparable. That those Acts, which follow the
Privation of Original Righteousness, are not formally Sins, or, what is the
same, Nam Remonstr. negant actus illos, qui sequuntur Destitutionem, sive
Privationem illam divinam, esse Formaliter Peccata, i. e. illos valide Obligare
ad Poenam. Eos, qui actus istos patrant. Non negant quidem actus illos
Materialiter Peccata dici posse, quatenus actus sunt Dissormes voluntati
Divinae, at negant eos formaliter esse Peccata, quae sc. ad Paenam obligent
eos, a quibus fiunt Sitpol. Vbi sup.
are not such acts, as oblige to Punishment. That they are materially Sins,
that is, Disconform to the Divine Will, they do not Deny, but formally, they
are not Sins, for they Oblige not to Punishment. Whereby it is evident, they
make Guilt, which is the Obligation to Punishment, to be Formally the Sin, and
therefore Inseparable from it. What Differences soever there may be between the
Antinomian, and Arminian in the Method taken to advance the Notion, of Guilt's
being Inseparable from Sin, yet they agree in the Assertion, that Guilt, and
Sin are Inseparable.

But Dr. Owen gives a truer Account of this Matter, Dr. O. Of Justificat. p.
284, 285.
when he tells us, That there is in Sin a Transgression of the Preceptive part
of the Law, and there is an Obnoxiousness unto the Punishment from the Sanction
of it. -- Sin under this Consideration, as a Transgression of the Preceptive
Part of the Law, cannot be communicated from One unto another, unless it be by
the Propagation of a vitiated Principle, or Habit. But yet neither so will the
Personal Sin of one, as Inherent in him, ever come to be the Personal Sin of
Another. To which I add, That as the Sin it self cannot Pass from one to
Another; in like manner, if the Guilt cannot be separated from the Sin, then
the Guilt of Adam's Sin could not pass from Him to us. It could in no sense be
made Ours; Not the Sin it self, for that is Impossible; nor the Sin in its
Guilt, because, as they affirm, it is Inseparable from the Sin it self.

Socinus, Smalcius and Ostorodius, in Peltius his Harmony, deliver themselves
to the same Purpose, giving us Light enough about the True Reason, Commentum
illud de Peccato Originis, seu Parentum Culpae, fabula est Judaica, and ab
Anti-C^risto in Ecclesiam Introductum, ad stabiliendum Perniciosa Dogmata,
nempe Dei Incarnationem, Infantium Baptismum. Socin. Dial. Justif. f. 11. Pelti
Har. Remonst. and Socin. Artic. 8. Parag. 4. f. 69.


why they Deny Original Sin; For, (say they) the Doctrine of Original Sin is a
Jewish Fable, brought into the Church by Antichrist, to establish (as Socinus
blasphemously expresses it) these Pernicious Dogmata, viz. The Incarnation of
God, and Infant Baptism. And in Peltius they Declare, That if the Question be;
Whether, seeing our Descent is from Adam, we are by Birth obnoxious to any
Punishment, or Fault for Adam's Sin? The Answer is, That to the being Faulty,
it is necessary there be some voluntary Act done by him, who is Faulty; And
Punishment there cannot be, where there is no such Anteceding Fault, we are not
therefore born, either Faulty or Obnoxious to Punishment.

This Agreement between the Antinomian, Arminian, and Socinian about the
Inseparableness of the Sin it self, and Guilt, is not only Inconsistent with
the Doctrine of Original Sin, but strikes at the very Root of Christ's
Satisfaction. A Physical Translation or Transfusion of Sin from One to another,
being Naturally and Spiritually Impossible, there can be no Imputing the Guilt,
nor Inflicting the Punishment of our Sins on Christ. The Links of the Chain lie
thus: If Christ did not endure the Punishment, and suffer for our Sins, he
could not make Satisfaction for them; If the Guilt of Sin was not Imputed, the
Punishment could not be Justly inflicted; If the Guilt be Inseparable from the
Sin it self, and that Impossible to Pass from us to Christ (as really it is)
the Guilt cannot be Imputed. Thus if no Guilt be Imputed, no Punishment can be
by a Righteous God Inflicted; if no Punishment Inflicted, nor Suffering for our
Sins, no Satisfaction can be made. And if Salvation may be without
Satisfaction, what need of the Incarnation of the Son of God?

This Assertion then, that the Sin it self, and Guilt are Inseparable, does not
only give Advantage to the Papist by confounding Justification with
Sanctification; but to the Arminian, in making it Impossible for the Guilt of
Adam's Sin to be Imputed unto his Posterity; and to the Socinian by subverting
Christ's Satisfaction, necessarily driving Men, either into the Horror of
Despair, or into Libertine Practices.

If Guilt be Inseparable from the Sin it self, The Guilt of Sin is an External
Respect of it, with regard to the Sanction of the Law only. This is SEPARABLE
from Sin, if IT WERE NOT SO, no One Sinner could either be Pardoned, or Saved.
Dr. O. of Justif. ub. sup.
so long as Sin Remains in us, a Pardon, which lies in the Removing Guilt,
cannot possibly be obtained, which Fills many with Despair.

But if on the other hand, we suppose, the Pardon of Sin Possible,
notwithstanding Guilt is made Inseparable from the Sin, it must then be
Granted, that when ever the Guilt is Removed, and the Sin Pardoned, the Sin it
self is Destroyed, It Is formal Nature is taken away and what Leudness soever
they Commit, there is no Sin in them. All Sin, Past, Present, and to Come,
being (as they hold) forgiven them, there is no Sin in their Drunkenness,
Murder, or Adultery. They may do what they list, they may Rob, Plunder, Oppress
the Fatherless and Widow, commit Sodomy and all the Outrages Imaginable; but
according to this Principle, Sin they cannot, than which what Greater
Encouragement can there be given to Libertinism?

By this little, we may see, what Poison is within the Compass of this first
Antinomian Error, to wit, Their making the Sin it self, the (...), the
Obliquity or the Fault; and Guilt to be Inseparable, if not the same thing. And
affirming, that not only the Punishment and Guilt of Sin, but moreover the Sin
it self, was laid on Christ; the worst of Popery, Arminianism, Socinianism, and
the Libertine Abominations flow from it; And, the other Parts of their Scheme
are of the same kind, as I will endeavor Particularly to Evince.

The Second is for Universal Redemption; which they are Unawares led into, by
their holding Justification to be before Faith, and their making the Preaching
the Gospel necessary for the Relief of Distressed Consciences. If Justification
be before Faith; then, nor Unbelief, nor any other obstinate Reigning Sin, can
be a Bar unto it. The Absence of what follows Justification cannot hinder your
being Justified; for your being Justified before it, necessarily infers your
Justification in the Absence thereof, which therefore can be no Impediment, or
Hindrance unto it. And if, on the Absence of Faith, Justification is not
suspended, But notwithstanding the Reigning Power of Unbelief and other Lusts
the Sinner is Justified, what need of Preaching the Gospel; Or, of what Use can
Gospel-Promises be to any? Whether the Elect be troubled for Sin, or not, they
are by these Men placed in a very safe State, as free from Wrath, as the Saint
in Glory; But if any such be troubled, what is there in the Promise for their
Comfort? or, what Right, what Title, what Interest has any Man of a Troubled
or Distressed Conscience, in a Promise? He knows not to whom the Promise does
belong, and therefore cannot say, he has any Title to it. If it be said, It
belongs to the Elect, as such, this cannot help him, nor remove the Cause of his
Sorrow. He Believes it shall be well with the Elect, but knows not that he is
Elected. He is rather afraid he is not, what then must he do for Comfort? Must
he look into his own heart, and try himself by marks, and signs? Must he
Enquire, whether he has been convinced of Sin, humbled in the sense of the
Evils thereof, sensible of his Lost Estate out of Christ, and of a Necessity of
closing with him on his own Terms? No, This is too much, for it is, Legale, and
disposes Men to make a Christ of their own Righteousness. Must they Repent, and
Believe, that they may be Pardoned? There are many Elect Persons who cannot see
they have Repented, or Believed. They have no Faith they are sure, and how
shall they be Comforted? For the Comfort of these, the Antinomian Declares, The
want of Faith can be no Bar to their Justification, or Pardon, that the Promise
is made to Sinners, as such, as they are Sinners, and that no one Sin, or many
Sins, how Obstinate soever, can hinder their Interest in the Promise. Are they
Sinners? that cannot be denied; It Is then, (they say) sufficient. Let them come
to Christ, Let them Come, though under the Reigning Power of Blasphemy, and
Unbelief; Let them come to Christ, and be Comforted; Let them be but persuaded
that their Sins are Pardoned, and it is so; for the Promise is to Sinners as
Sinners, and therefore to all and every Sinner.

This is the Duty (they say) of every Man to look on the Promise, as made unto
them, that is, All must believe, that their Sins are Pardoned, because the
Promise is unto all, which cannot be, Unless All be Redeemed. The Pardon of Sin
is not given to any but such as are Redeemed. If all must believe, that their
Sins are Pardoned, because the Promise of Pardon is to all Sinners, as such,
then all are Pardoned, then all are Redeemed.

Thus you have the Reason, why Hoornbeek charges the English Antinomian, with
holding Universal Redemption; to which their Third Principle is Conform.

3. That the Soul is United to Christ, and in Covenant with him before any Good
Quality be wrought in the Heart, and that it can Apply the Promise of Grace, as
well whilst Unregenerate, as when a Believer.

The Promise, being made to the Sinner, as he is a Sinner, and therefore to
every Sinner, he may, whilst he is a Sinner, apply the Promise, as well as when
a Believer, or indeed rather better, because the Promise belongs not to him, as
he is a Believer; but, as he is a Sinner, and yet the Promise belonging to him
as he is a Sinner, he must be in Covenant, for the Extent of the Promise is
not, nor can be any larger than that of the Covenant, and being in Covenant,
partaking of Saving Benefits, they must be United unto Christ whilst Sinners.
None so in Covenant with God, as to be actually Interested in the special
Blessings of it, but such as are United unto Christ, which according to this
Antinomian Principle, Men may be many Years before they aright believe, or are
Regenerated: For, (as in their Fourth Assertion)

4. Their Justification is before their Faith, and their Faith follows their
Justification.

Thus much must be asserted, or all that had been formerly said, would have
signified nothing, as is obvious to a Common Capacity, and that which is as
necessary a Link in this Chain, as the other is; The Fifth viz.

5. That in order to our being Comforted by the Promises of Christ, and making
them sure, and certain to us; To Grieve and Repent of the Sins we have
Committed, from Sights of the transgressed Law; and the Deserved Punishment, is
not necessary.

The Reason is manifest. The Promise being made to Sinners, as Sinners, their
Comforts, and Assurances must arise from the Consideration of their being
Sinners; and not from their Grief for Sin, their Repentance, or Humiliations.
To them as Penitent, and Humbled, the Promise is not, but as Impenitent,
Unhumbled, and Unbelievers; and the Promise being unto them, as such, their
Comforts, and Assurances must arise from them.

But of what use then is the Law? It is of none, especially unto Believers, or
Regenerate Persons, as is held by them in their Sixth Assertion.

6. The Moral Law must not be Preached to Believers, and Regenerate Persons.

It might have been added by them, that the Preaching of the Law is of no use
at all unto any; For Sin, and Guilt being made by them Inseparable from One
another, the Guilt being, in Pardon, Removed, whilst Unregenerate, and under
the Power of Unbelief. there is no Sin left in them; No formal Sins to Repent
of, which makes the Preaching of the Law to be altogether Useless unto
Unbelievers.

Thus, Sin, and Guilt, being made Inseparable, not only the Guilt, but the Sin
it self, was laid on Christ and taken from the Elect, and the Promise being to
Sinners, as Sinners; all Sinners are Redeemed, actually Redeemed from the Wrath
to Come, United unto Christ, and in Covenant with him, their Sins Pardoned and
they Justified, and may apply the Promises to themselves, whilst under the
Reigning Power of Sin, as well as when Believers; and therefore Sorrow for Sin
and Repentance arising from sights of the Law, and of Deserved Punishment is
not Necessary to their Comfort, and that therefore the Preaching of the Moral
Law, is not to be allowed.

This is the English Antinomianism as full of Horrid Consequences, naturally
flowing from it, as is the German, and as near a kin to Libertinism, as I have
shown in my Remarks on their first Principle.

This Particular Account of the Antinomian Errors, which is taken from the
Reports made of them by the Greatest Adversaries to Arminianism, Popery, or
Socinianism, is (as every body may see) directly opposite to the Doctrinal
Articles of the Church of England, the Westminster, and Savoy Confessions, the
Larger, and Shorter Catechisms, and Undoubtedly nothing more Detested by our
Reverend Brethren, than these Abominations. They are far from making Sin and
Guilt the same, the one Inseparable from the other; Or, of holding, that the
Promise of Justification, or Pardon; Adoption and Glory belong to Sinners as
such; or, that all Sinners are actually in the sight of God Pardoned, and
Redeemed; Or, that the Elect, qua Elect, have a secret Hidden Right to the
Heavenly Inheritance, for this would be to vacate the Satisfaction and Merit of
Christ, which is the only foundation of their Right. And this they have, not,
merely as Elect; but as Christ's Seed, in which sense the Covenant of Grace is
made with them. Besides, the Right, Resulting from Christ's Righteousness, and
made theirs, as they are Christ's Seed, is theirs, and no otherwise, than as
they themselves are Christ's, which is after a Twofold manner, Virtually, or
Actually. All the Elect being given to Christ their Head, are Christ's
Virtually, ever since Christ was set up to be a Head or second Adam; and as
such can only have a Virtual Right. But, when Born again. Spirit of Spirit, and
are actual Descendents from Christ's Loins: United to him by Faith, then, and
not till then, have they an actual Right to the Heavenly Inheritance. This, I
am persuaded, is the utmost our Brethren mean, and is the same Truth asserted
in the subscribed Propositions, where it is express.

1. That the Covenant of Grace was made with Christ as the second Adam, and in
him with all the Elect, as his Seed.

2. That in this Covenant of Grace, Salvation by Jesus Christ is Freely offered
to Sinners, He requiring of them Faith, as the Condition to Interest them in
Himself.

3. That though God did from all Eternity Decree to Justify all the Elect, and
Christ did in the Fullness of time die for their Sins, and Rise again for their
Justification; yet nevertheless they are not Justified, until the Holy Spirit
does in Due time actually apply Christ unto them, and the Spirit Applies to us
the Redemption Purchased by Christ, by working Faith in us, and thereby Uniting
us to Christ in our Effectual Calling.

4. That we may Escape the Wrath, and Curse of God, Due to Us by reason of the
Transgression of the Law, He Requires of us Repentance toward God, Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ. That Repentance unto Life is an Evangelical
Grace, the Doctrine whereof is to be Preached by every Minister of the Gospel,
as well as that of Faith in Christ. That it is of such Necessity to all
Sinners, that none can Expect Pardon without it.

5. That the Moral Law does for ever bind all, as well Justified Persons, as
others, to the Obedience thereof; and that not only in Regard of the Matter
contained in it; But also in respect of the Authority of God the Creator, who
gave it; neither does Christ in the Gospel any way Dissolve, but much
Strengthen this Obligation. That this Law is of great Use to Believers as well
as others, in that, as a Rule of Life, informing them of the Will of God, and
their Duty, it Directs, and Binds them to walk accordingly; Discovering also
the sinful Pollutions of their Nature, Hearts and Lives; so as Examining
themselves thereby, they may come to further Conviction of, Humiliation for,
and Hatred against Sin; together with a a clearer sight of the Need they have
of Christ, and the Perfection of his Obedience. It is likewise of Use to the
Regenerate, to Restrain their Corruptions, in that it Forbids Sin, and the
Threatenings of it serve to show, what even their Sins Deserve, and what
Afflictions, in this Life, they may expect for them, although Freed from the
Curse thereof Threatened in the Law. The Promises of it in like manner show them
God's Approbation of Obedience, and what Blessings they may Expect, upon the
Performance thereof, although not as Due to them by the Law, as a Covenant of
Works; so as a Man's Doing Good, and Refraining from Evil, because the Law
Encourages to the one, and Deterreth from the other, is no Evidence of his
being under the Law, and not under Grace.

These Propositions are so directly opposite unto the Antinomian Doctrines,
that it is Impossible for an Intelligent, and sincere Subscriber to Approve of
Autinomianism. The vacating the Law, and making the Preaching thereof Useless,
the actual Justification of a Sinner in the sight of God before Faith, and the
like, are in words expressly Exploded by the Assembly, and ought to be witnessed
against by Sound and Faithful Ministers.

Thus much may suffice for the clearing our Brethren from the Charge of
Antinomianism, whose Principles are to be Judged by their Subscriptions; and
not by an Inaccurate, Obscure or Perplexed Passage in a Sermon, or Polemical
Discourse.

What Antinomianism is, and How Inconsistent with the Subscribed Articles, and
Confessions, has been Particularly Declared, and yet it is further necessary,
before I Proceed to the Consideration of the Socinian, and those other Errors
in Controversy, that I do my Part to clear some Important Truths from the
Reproach of Antinomianism, and Vindicate the First Reformers from the Unjust
Charge of Espousing so Gross an Heresy, which that I may the more Convincingly
do, I will in several Instances show what is not Antinomianism.

First then, 'It is Not Antinomianism to Assert, That Jesus Christ is a Second
Adam, a Public Representative of a Spiritual Seed; and, that the Covenant of
Grace was made with Christ, as a Second Adam; and with the Elect, as his Seed.

This is a Notion expressly affirmed by the Westminster Assembly, and not only
so, but directly Opposite to several main Branches of that Antinomian Error,
Supplying us with Invincible Arguments against it.

If Jesus Christ be a Second-Adam, it must be granted, that there is a
Similitude, a Resemblance, and Agreement in some Third between him and the
First-Adam. That this Agreement lies in these Particulars, namely, As the One
is a Father of an Offspring; so the other: And, as the Offspring of the One
bears the Image of their Father; so is it with the Offspring of the other; And
as the Posterity of the First Adam derive any thing from him, after the same
manner do the Posterity of the Second from him.

Thus the First Adam is a Type, or Figure of the Second, Romans 5.19.
who was to come. And, as we have born the Image of the Earthy Adam; so shall
we bear the Image of the Heavenly: 1 Cor. 15.
And, as by the Disobedience of one many are made Sinners; so by the Obedience
of another, are many made Righteous. Whence it follows, 1. That as Guilt, the
Immediate Result of Adam's Sin (and not his Personal Sin) was made the Guilt of
all his Posterity, descending from him by Ordinary Generation: So the
Righteousness, the Immediate Result of Christ's Personal Holiness; and not the
Personal Holiness it self, is made the Righteousness of Christ's Spiritual
Offspring. 2. As the Seed of the First Adam may be be considered either as
Virtually, and Seminally in him; or as Actually Descended from him; and as
Seminally in him, they are only Virtually Guilty; As Actually born of him are
actually Guilty: In like manner the Seed of the second Adam must be looked on
as Virtually, and Seminally in him; or as Actually born of him. In the first
sense, they can be but Virtually Justified, and not Actually till actually born
of him by a Spiritual Regeneration. 3. As the Imputation of Adam's Guilt to all
his Offspring is founded on a Natural, and Faederal Union between Adam, and
his Posterity; so the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to his Spiritual
Offspring, is grounded on a Spiritual, and Faederal, or Covenant-Union between
him, and them. Whence it follows,


That no Elect Person, merely as Elect, can be, either Actually or Virtually,
Justified, That Justification, which is by Christ's Righteousness Imputed and
by Faith Received, does Immediately flow from the Elect Persons being Christ's
Seed.

The Covenant of Grace being made with Christ as Head; and with the Elect; not
merely as Elect, but as Christ's Seed; Justification, the Great
Covenant-Blessing belongs to none, but as they are in Covenant with Christ,
that is, as they are Christ's Seed.

A Decretive Justification belongs to the Elect as such: But this gives no
Right to the Heavenly Inheritance, The utmost Import of i^ is, that God did
from all Eternity ^^urpose in himself, that such and such Particular Souls
should be Christ's Seed, and as such be Justified. This Inward and Etern^^
^^urpose, though, it be a Topic from whence the certainty of the Justification
of the Elect in the Way, and manner Ordained of God, is clearly Inferred: Yet
does it not give any Being thereunto. So that notwithstanding the Decree, which
nihil ponit in esse, an Elect Person may be so far from having any Right,
secret and hidden; manifest, or known, that he may be the Child of the first
Adam, and as such, Really Guilty, that is, obnoxious, and liable to the Curse,
which is wholly incompatible with a Real Right to Impunity; or the Reward.
Nothing more manifest than that a Right to an Estate results not from an
Internal Purpose of giving it. It is not the Purpose, but the Promise, that
gives Right, and the Promise is not to the Elect, as such, but to the Elect, as
Christ's Seed.

That all the Elect are given unto Christ, is manifestly True, but their Right
Results from their being Christ's, who as such have the Promise made unto them.
2 Timothy 1.9.
According to the Eternal Purpose, Tit. 1.2.
was the Promise given us in Christ before the World began.

The Decree not giving Being to what is Purposed, it does not hinder the
Execution of that Part of the Counsel of God, according unto which the Elect
are the Offspring, both of the First, and Second Adam, which cannot be at the
same time, but successively it is. Though Virtually and Seminally, in different
Respects, an Elect Person may be considered, as the Seed of the First, and
Second Adam; and when actually a Descendant from the First Adam, he may be
looked on as Virtually the Seed of the Second: yet Actually, he cannot be at
the same time the Seed of both. On his being born of Christ he cease to be a
Child of the first Adam, and of Wrath, but not till then; He must be actually a
Descendant from the second Adam, and be by Faith United unto Christ, before he
can be actually Justified, which is a Truth, that strikes at the very Sinews of
Antinomianism, and therefore whatever the Arminian or Socinian may affirm of
it; Or how much soever the Antinomian may Abuse it; it is most Opposite unto
Error, It Is Orthodox, and Sound.

Secondly, To affirm, That not only the Punishment, but the Guilt of Sin was
laid on Christ, is not Antinomianism.

The Papists will have it, that Christ bore the Punishment of our Sin, but not
the Guilt. The Socinians, who see the Connection there is between Guilt and
Punishment, how that wherever Punishment is Justly laid, there Guilt must be,
are Positive, that nor the Guilt nor the Punishment of Sin was on Christ. The
Guilt, and Punishment are Relatives, Relative enim sunt Paena and Delictum: ita
ut ubi delictum non est, ibi poena esse nullomoda possit. Socin. de Servat.
Part 3. c. 10.
so that where no Guilt, there (says Socinus) no Punishment can be. And it
must be yielded. That Punishment has an Essential respect unto Sin, it must be
for Sin, or it cannot be Punishment; and it cannot be for Sin on whom no Sin
is, either Inhaerently; Or, by Imputation. Sin Inherently could not be in him,
who knew no Sin. Nor can there be the Imputation of Sin, but by transferring
its Guilt unto him.

That Christ suffered, was wounded, and bruised for our Sins is in too many
Places, throughout the Holy Scriptures, asserted, to admit of a Denial. But
Christ could not justly suffer for our Sins, unless in a sound sense, he bore
the Guilt of them. To Punish the Innocent as Innocent, is Injustice. Jesus
Christ therefore though Innocent in himself, voluntarily becoming our Surety,
took on him the Guilt of Sin, and suffered Justly; because as being Guilty.

To clear this, is the Difficulty, and many, in the Attempt, fall into
dangerous Mistakes. They who make Sin and Guilt the same thing, by asserting
the Guilt to be laid on Christ, Quantum in se, do make Christ Inherently a
Sinner, which is Antinomianism; and they, who say the Punishment of Sin was
laid on Christ, but not the Guilt, give up the Cause to the Socicinian; For if
not the Guilt, then nor the Punishment; whence no Satisfaction.

The Guilt lies between the Sin and its Punishment. It is an Obnoxiousness
unto Punishment for Sin; which, as it Results from the Sin, or Fault, is called
the Guilt of the Fault; But, as it respects the Punishment, being an Obligation
thereunto it is Guilt of Punishment.

This Guilt is not Intrinsic to the Sin; The Sin is Entire without it; It is
only an External respect of it to the Sanction of the Law, and Separable from
the Sin it self, the (...), so that though the Sin Remain in us, the Guilt
Passes from us to Christ.

The Entire Nature of Sin lies in a Respect unto the Preceptive Part of the
Law, being (as has been already Observed) a Transgression, or a Want of
Conformity unto it. The Sin, is in its Formal Nature, Entire, without any
Regard to the Sanction. From this Sin, as it respects the Threatening, Results
Guilt; which is an Obnoxiousness unto Punishment; or, the Dignitas Paenae
propter Culpam, and is Extrinsick to the Sin, separable from it, and may be
laid on him, who never transgressed the Commandment. Nor can it morally Defile,
or Pollute the Person on whom it is laid.

Christ therefore, though in him there was no Sin, might bear the Guilt of our
Sins, and nevertheless remain Pure, Harmless, Undefiled, and without Spot;
which is sufficient to Vindicate this Doctrine from Antinomianism, and those
other Absurdities that flow from the making Sin, and Guilt the same thing, and
yet hold it to have been laid on Christ.

What I have here delivered amounts to no more than what is carried in that
Common Distinction of our Sins being laid on Christ, not Inherently, but by
Imputation. If the Sin, in its formal Nature, had been on Christ, there would
have been Ground enough for that Charge of Blasphemous Consequences, which
Bellarmine, and the Socinians load us with. That would, indeed, be to make
Christ Inherently a Sinner, ^ay, Filius Diaboli. But to deny this; and affirm,
that Christ was made Sin, Duly by Imputation, that is, by the laying the Guilt
of our Sins, not only the Punishment, but the Guilt on him, is consistent with
his Freedom from all Moral Filth, or Defilement; and is necessary to Defend the
Gospel Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction against the Socinian; for, Kromayer.
Theol. Pol. Pos. Art. xi. De Justif. p. 631.
as KROMAYERUS well expresses it, Absque Peccatorum Imputatione, and Paenarum
Perpessione, Satisfactionem hic nullam cogitariposse.

CHAP. IV.
What Antinomianism is not, in some other Instances Cleared, To Deny the
Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace, not Antinomian. The State of this
Controversy, as managed by the Papists, and First Reformers. The sense of the
Arminians, and Socinians about Condition. Faith a Condition, Asserted. In what
sense.

IT is not Antinomianism to Deny the Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace.

There is not, it may be, any one Point in the Body of Divinity of greater
Difficulty than this about the Covenant of Grace, and its Conditionality. They
that search deeply into the many Controversies agitated between us, the Papist.
Arminian, Socinian, and Antinomian; will find that the most Important Parts of
it Turn on this Hinge. The Papist, Arminian, and Socinian cannot see, how the
Covenant of Grace could be made with Jesus Christ, as a Second Adam; and with
the Elect, as his Seed, which is One Reason of their many Mistakes. And the
Antinomian fixes his thoughts so very much on the Covenant of Grace's being
made with Christ, that there is no Room left him to Consider, how it can be
made also with his Seed; which occasions their Asserting, That Christ performed
the whole required of us in order to our being actually Interested in him, and
his Benefits; as well as make Satisfaction by his Sufferings; and Merit by his
Righteousness for them that Believe: That Christ Believed, and Repented for us,
as if there had been no other Reason for our Doing either, than to Obtain the
Knowledge of our having what actually was ours, whilst under the Power of
Unbelief, and Impenitency.

But, it not being my Province to enter on a Large Debate of these things, I
will only show, that there are such Senses, in which the word [Condition] is
used by the Papists, Arminian, and Socinian, as do Confound Gospel Grace with
the Law of Works, and establish Merit; Destroy the Doctrine of the Spirits
working the First Grace; and subvert Christ's satisfaction, and so make it
Evident, That One, who Detests Antinomianism, may yet Deny the Conditionality
of the Covenant of Grace.

If the word [Condition] when spoken of the Two Covenants, namely, of Works,
and Grace, be taken in the same sense in both, the one will be Confounded with
the other.

To Evince thus much, I will show the Import of the Condition of the Covenant
of Works, and how it agrees with the Popish Doctrine of Merit, and leave it to
the Judgment of the Impartial Reader to consider the Truth of my Assertion.

The Condition of the Covenant of Works is ea res, quae Praestita, dat Jus ad
Praemium. It is that Obedience, to which the Promise was made; and from the
Performance of which, a Right to the Reward immediately Results, and for which,
in Justice, it is due.

This Condition, being Perfect Obedience, was to a Law, enforced with Rewards
and Punishments, which Obedience, the Reward becoming due to it, ex Justitia,
is Meritorious. And as, on the Rendering the Required Obedience, the Reward is
Justly Due; so, seeing the Performance of the Condition, is the same with the
Render of Perfect Obedience, the Blessing Promised is thereon Justly due unto
it; and the Performing the Condition is meritorious, for Merit is nothing but
that Actio qua Justum est, ut Agenti aliquid Detur.

There is much, much variety (I must confess) amongst the Papists in stating
their Doctrine of Merit, but the Prevailing Opinion is, Meritum and Merc^s ad
Idem referuntur, Tho. 1 a, 2. e. Q. 114. Art. 1.
That Merit, and Reward, Essentially Respect one another. That Merit is a Good
Work freely done, Exhibitio at MERITI and Redditio MERCEDIS, actus ad alterum,
sunt secundum aqualitatem Rei ad Rem, scil. Meriti ad Mercedem, and e converso,
Cajet. in Loc.
to which some Reward as a certain Price is Justly Due, that between the Merit
and the Reward there is some sort of Equality. Meritum est opus bonum liberum
cui ex-justitia Merces Debetur. Medin. in Loc.
Thus Aquinas, Cajetan, Medina, and Gregory de Valentia.

The Reward, Gregory de Valentia has it thus, -- Per aliquem Justitiae modum,
aliquo munere Compensari a Deo deveat. In Tho. Disp. 8. Quaest. 6. Punct. 1.
being made ex justitia, Due, Merit of Congruity is denied to be Merit in a
Proper sense. So Gregory de Valentia, Merit of Congruity is but Improperly
Merit. Meritum improprie dictum -- vocatur Meritum de Congruo Val. ubi sup.
The Distinction of Merit into that of Congruity, Aliqui Scholasticorum Meritum
de Congruo prorsus Rejiciunt, tanquam id, quod Meritum dici nequaquam meretur:
Propterea, quod idi neque ex dignitate sua, neque ex Lege debetur Praemium, sed
ex sola congruitate, gratis acceptatur ad Praemium. Alfons. a Castro de
Haeresib. Lib. XI. in Verb. Opera. Haeres. 4.
and Condignity, is not (says Alfonsus a Castro) held by all the Schoolmen,
for some Reject Merit of Congruity, as what can by no means be truly called
Merit, because in this instance the Reward is not Due, either from any worth in
the Work it self; nor made Due by the Law: but only from a mere Congruity or
Condecence, Alterum Meritum de Congruo Proprie non habet rationem Meriti, sid
tantum cujusdem Congruentiae, ac proinde non est necesse de to Disputare. Nihil
enim ceril de eo affirmare possumus. Sic enim videri potest NOBIS congruum, and
conveniens, ut Deus hoc vel illud praeslet huic vel ini homini; Ita e contrario
non defunt DEO Rations congruentes, cur id nolit Praestare, quod alioqui
apparet Congruum, ut Praestet. Becan. Opusc. Theol. Opusc. 7. cap. 3. P. inibi
203.
a Reward is freely given. Becanus affirms the same, for (as he words it) The
Reward does not certainly belong to him, who is said thus to Merit; for though it
appears to Us very Congruous for God to Reward this or the other Person, for
this or the other thing, yet on the contrary there are Reasons Congruous to God
for his Not Rewarding them.

But that the Work may be Properly Meritorious, and the Reward be Justly due to
it, It must be Eree, not Forced; Forced acts being more Brutal, than Rational
cannot Please God: It must be a Work done in Obedience to God's Law; by One that
is in via, and Reconciled unto God. All others being full of Sin can Merit
nothing but Punishment, whence the Meritorious Work must flow from Grace, which
is freely bestowed, and not merely from the Intrinsic virtue of the Work it
self, but from the Ordination and Promise of God.

The Schoolmen Generally Distinguish Merit ex Justitia into that which is, De
Rigore Justitiae, and what is ex Condigno. Sanctae Clara, Scio enim viros
Theologos Eckium, Marsilium apud Vegam Q 4. Et Bellarminum, and alios negare
Omne metitum de Condigno, licet concedant de Digno, respectu Beatitudinis,
Sancta. Clar. Dues Not. and Great. Prob. 18. de Merit. p. 113.
indeed says, That Eckius, and Marsilius, in Vega, as also Bellarmine, with
some others, Deny Merit, de Condigno, holding a Merit only ex Digno. Not to
trouble our selves with these Niceties, I must observe, that (whatever Arriaga
suggests to the contrary) Merit, ex rigore Justitiae, is what arises from the
Work it self, Meritum de Rigore Justitiae est quod non innititur gratiae, aut
Miserecordiae sed habet valorem ex sese, and ex Persona offerente, quale est
Meritum Christi, Medin. in Prim. Sec. Q 114. Art. 3.
and Worth of the Person, that does it, and not from God's Gracious and
Merciful Acceptance. This They Assign to Christ alone. So Medina.

Sancta Clara, who gives us the sense of the Scotists, speaks much to the same
purpose, Meritum quidem Christi potest dici Meritum ex Justitia, ratione
Personae offerentis, and sic non innitebatur Gratiae acceptantis, sed dignitati
suae personae, and rei Oblatae, secus autem valde est in nobis, ubi ex part
personae, and rei Oblatae, SVMMA PAVPERTAS, si excludas Dei Promissionem
acceptationis, vel Pactionem Retributionis. Santc. Clar. Ubi sup.
The Merit of Christ (says he) may be called Merit Ex Justitia, because of the
Excellency of the Person, offering it, whereby, it does not Depend so much on
the Grace of God accepting it, as on the worth of his Person. It Is much
otherwise with us, whose Persons, and Works, considered in themselves, abstract
from the Promise of a Gracious Acceptance, and the Covenant of Retribution, are
Poverty it self.

Alfonsus de Castro, and Gregory de Valentia delivering the Sense of the Church
of Rome with much Clearness, and Candor, I will, to find out their Genuine
sense, if possible, Give what they write of it.

Si Lutherus accipit meritum pro tali opere quod ex sua natura, and ex se ipso
aequale est Praemio, certe illius sententia non est de errore notanda, quoniam
non est aliquod opus nostrum ex se tal^ quod aequari possit Gloriae aeternae.
Alfon. a Castro. Avers. Haeres. Lib. X. p. 23.
If Luther (says Alfonsus) takes Merit for such a Work, as in its own Nature,
and of it self is Equal with the Reward, and in that sense Denies it, He is not
to be blamed. For there is no Work of ours, that can thus be Equal with the
Eternal Glory. For, as the Apostle, I Reckon, Si nostra opera sint ex se
indigna Gloria, and nos per illa nullum ius habere poteramus ad Gloriam
Aeternam -- tamen quia Misericors Deus Promisit servanti mandata sua -- post
talem Promissionem DEBET Deus dare gloriam -- Quod Debitum in Deo non Oritur ex
nostris Operibus, sed ex Benigna ejus voluntate, qui Promittens nobis, seipsum
obligare voluit -- non dicimus Deum Obligari aut esse Debitorem nostris
Operibus, sed cum Obligari EX PROMISSIONE SVA, and esse DEBITOREM PROMISSIONI
SVAE. Quod a. Promisit ipse, simpliciter, and absolute Tribuendum est GRATIAE.
De Cast. ub. sup.
that the Sufferings of this Present Life are not to be compared with the
Glory, which shall be Revealed in us. But Merit is not always taken to Import
such an Equality and Natural Obligation. In the case before us, it Denotes only
such an Equality, as arises from an Agreement, Compact, or Covenant; on which
account that Work, which before was not Equal with the Reward, now is made so:
And what was not a Debt before, is made a Debt; which Debt, in God, does not
arise from our Works, from any Dignity in them: But from the Benignity of God,
who making Gracious Promises Obliges himself, whereby he is indebted, not to
us, but to his Promise. -- This Promise is Simply, and Absolutely, to be
Ascribed to his Grace.

Satis est ut Praemium Debitum sit EX LEGE. Nam Lex potest facere paria, quae
ex natura sua erant Imparia. Lex naturae docet, ut omne Promissum fit Debitum.
The Reward is not always made a Debt by the Nature of the Works, it being
sufficient if made Due by the Law. And the Law can make those things Equal,
which in their own Nature, were not so. The Law of Nature teaches us, that
Every Promise is a Debt, whence it comes to pass, that by the Promise, those
things, which were in themselves Unequal, are made Equal.

We are not so Ignorant, nor so much Elated in our Conceit, Data hac
Promissione, and sacta nobiscum Conventione, Opera hona hominis cum Adjutorio
Gratiae Dei siunt Digna vitae aeternae, and illi aequilia, quae seclusa illa
Dei promissione, fuissent tanto Praemio Indigna. Et haec fuit, illa suprema Dei
Misericordia, a qua pendet totum meritum nostrum, etc. De Castro ubi sup. in
Verb. Opera. Lib. XI.
as to Equalize the Intrinsic Value of our Works, which are most
Inconsiderable, with the Transcending Excellency, and Immense Worth of the
Heavenly Glory. It is from the Promise and the Covenant made with us that our
Works which we are Enabled through the Grace of God to Perform, that makes them
worthy of Eternal Life, which separated from the Promise, would be altogether
Unworthy. We are therefore wholly owing to the Unspeakable Mercy of God for our
Merit, that he has made so Glorious a Display of his Grace in this, That when
he Owed us nothing, he did of his abundant Goodness to Enrich us, make himself
a Debtor. -- Nor let any calumniate us, as if we Detracted from the Merit of
our Blessed Redeemer: Quod a homines and bona illorum Opera sint Deo Grata, and
ad vitam aeternam acceptata, hoc habent ex MERITO CHRISTI, qui pro illis
Passionem, and mortem suam. Deo Patri Obtulit, and pro illis omnibus quos
scivit esse ad gloriam Praedestinatos, oravit. Vb. sup.
None but they who understand not our Doctrine, can talk after this Rate. We
have often Declared, It is not of our selves, that our Good Works Merit Eternal
Life: But we, and our Works, are Raised to this Dignity merely through the
Divine Clemency, by which he Promises to them, who Obey him, Eternal Life. --
And that they are thus Raised, is through the Merit of Christ, who offered
himself a Sacrifice, and Prayed Earnestly for all them he knew were
Predestined to Eternal Life. From this therefore, as from the Chief and
Principal Merit, all Grace and Glory is Derived, and from this, it is, that
Just Men, and their Works are freely Ordinated to Eternal Life. De solo Merito
ex Condigno lequimur. Alfons. de Cast. Vb. sup.
This and much more has Alfonsus de Castro about Merit de Condigno, which is
highly applauded by Gregory de Valentia, whose Endeavors are to Raise it to a
Merit by the Rule of Commutative Justice. Not that he thinks our Good Works
have any such Intrinsic worth in them, as Equalizes them with Eternal Glory,
for he grounds that on the Gracious Ordination and Promise of God, (as the
Papists generally do) and illustrates it thus. Ac possumus hoc totum Exemplo
facili declarare. Nam si Pecunia jussis Principis, fiat ex vili aliqu^^
^ateria, quae Vid. ex Natura sua considerata non tantum valeat, quantum Res
quae pro illa sunt Commutandae, tunc quidem si Pecunia haec, absolute sint
Respectu ad Principis Constitutionem Consideretur, certum est, Eam secundum
justitiae Commutativae Rationem, non esse Equalem iis Rebus, quas potest
aliquis pro Ea Cons^qui: been autem si Consideretur, ut substat Constitutioni
and Legi Principis, qua decretum est, ut qui hujusmodi Pecuniam exhibu^rit,
Consequatur Res Necessarias secundum factam Pecuniae taxam Nam si hac Ratione
Consideretur hujusmodi Pecunia, tanti merito aestimabitur, quanti Res ipsae
quae pen Eam Comparari possunt. Ita prorsus se habet Res in proposito. Nam
sibonum opus Justi consideres praecise ex se, non est aequale Gloriae; Si autem
ut substat divinae Pronissioni ob quam per illud certo potest Comparari Gloria,
tanti potest aestimari, quanti illa atque eatenus est aequale Gloriae. Greg. de
Valen. p. 1275.
Suppose a Prince by his Ordinance puts an Extraordinary Value on Money of a
base Alloy, by this means, though the Money in it self, and abstract from the
Regal Constitution, falls very short of the thing, for which it is Commuted;
yet, by Virtue of the Royal Ordinance it is made of Equal Price with it; and so
it must pass in Bargains by the Rules of Commutative Justice. The same he says
of Good Works, which, considered in themselves separate from the Divine
Ordination, and Promise, are not to be compared with the Glory, yet having so
great a Value put upon them by God's Ordination, they are after a sort made
Equal with Eternal Life, and Merit according to Commutative Justice.

To Improve what is taken out of these Popish Writers, about Merit of
Condignity, it must be observed;

1. That although the Reward Infinitely excel the Work in its own Nature
considered; and that the Promise be simply and absolutely Free, and it is
Impossible for a Just Man to do the good Work, without the Help of God's Grace;
yet the Work thus done may be Meritorious ex Condigno. All these things they
allow, and yet make good Works Meritorious. 2. That this Merit lying in a
Duness of the Reward to the good Work ex Justitia, it is founded in the
Promise. We are, say they, under a Law, which has, not only a Preceptive, but a
Promisory Part, whence because of the Connection there is between Obedience to
the Precept, and the Promise, a Right to the Reward immediately Results from
the Obedience, or good Work. The good Work gives Right to the Reward, that is,
it Merits the Reward, and the Reward is justly due for that Obedience.
But here they are at a Plunge, how to state this Matter so as to make the
Reward due ex Justitia, the Promise as a single Promise being insufficient for
their Purpose.

Dices, si Actus Meritorius est talis solum Promissione Divine seu ejus
acceptatione, ergo non ex justitia, sed ex fidelitate praemiabitur. Quod est
Contra Definitionem Meriti de Condigno. Respondeo quod adimpletio Promissionis
nudae est solum Actus Fidelitatis; adimpletio vero Promissionis, quae habet
Naturam Pacti, id est ubi a Promissario exigitur Conditio, ficut inter Dominum
and servum, ubi Dominus promittit stipendium ex Condition servitutis
adimpleuio illius Promissi est ex justitia. Sic in Cas^. Sancta Clar. Deus.
Not. Great. p. 111.
The Objection that lies against them is this, If the Meritorious Act be so,
only from the Divine Promise, or God's Gracious Acceptance, then the Reward
cannot be ex Justitia, the good Work may be done, and God not obliged in
Justice to give the Reward. The utmost that can be said is this, God in
Faithfulness is bound by his Promise to Reward the Doer, but not in Justice;
and yet unless God be in Justice bound, the Work cannot be meritorious ex
Condigno. To this Objection their Answer (as I find it in Sancta Clara) is,
that the fulfilling a Naked Promise, is only an Act of Fidelity and
Faithfulness: But, the fulfilling a Covenant Promise, which is made on
Condition, as between a Master and Servant, where the Master Promises a Reward
on Condition of such a Service, here, for the Master to fulfill the Promise to
his Servant on his Performing the Condition, is an Act of Justice, which is
(say they) our Case.

Thus to make good Works meritorious, they assert a Law, with a Promise; making
the Dignity of the Work to lean on the Promise: And that the Reward may be Due
ex justitia, the Law is turned into a Covenant, where Obedience to the
Preceptive Part is made the Condition, that gives Right to the Reward. So that
it is that Conditionality of the Covenant, on which the Merit of Condignity is
Founded. All which is undoubtedly true of the Covenant given Adam. For if he
had but rendered the Perfect Obedience required by the Preceptive Part of the
Law; or, which is the same, if he had Performed the Condition of that Covenant
made with him; it would have given him a Right to the Reward, it would have
been in Justice due to him, that is, he would have merited it Ex Condigno.

Though his Temporary Obedience fell infinitely short of the Reward of Eternal
Life; yet because of the Promise made on a Covenant-Condition, giving Right;
the Reward, on his performing the Condition, would have been Due to him ex
justitia (i. e.) he would have merited it Ex Condigno.

In like manner, if the word [Condition] when assigned to the Covenant of
Grace, be taken in this sense, viz. for that thing, which, being Performed,
gives Right to the Reward, the Covenant of Grace is Confounded with that of
Works, and Merit of Condignity effectually established.

It Is Confounded with the Covenant of Works, and made a Covenant of the same
kind with it, for in both, as there is a Precept enjoining Duty, and a Promise
of Reward; even so, notwithstanding the Work falls infinitely short of the
Reward, yet the Reward being Promised on a Condition, giving Right; A Right
unto it Results from the Performance of the Condition, and the Reward is due ex
justitia, and so Merit of Condignity is also established.

Nor can it signify any thing to say, we exclude all Merit from our Good
Works, by ascribing all to the Grace of God, enabling us; and nothing to our
own Strength, making their Rewardableness to Lean on the Ordination, and
Promise of God, That Grace is necessary to Merit the Papists industriously
endeavor to Prove. Gertum ex side est (says Gregory de Valentia) Meritum
Condignum esse Proprium effectum Gratiae. Probatur. 1. ex Script. ad Romans 6.
Gratia Dei vita aeterna. Vbi non est sensus, Vitam aeternam dari GRATIS, sed
dari eam pro meritis, quae contulit GRATIA- Sine me nihil potestis facere.
Possemus enim sine aliquid facere, si vitam aeternam promereri valeremus, non
insiti per gratiam Christo, tanquam viti Palmites, ut ipse ibi Loquitur.
Valent. ubi sup. Suu^ma igitur est, quod actus me^is dicitur meritorius, quia
elicitus, seu Imperatus a Gratia, ex Pactione Divina acceptatus ad Praemium,
unde ipsa acceptatio est Intrins^^a actui. Sanct. Clar. ub^ sup.


For the Papists make all these Necessary to Merit ex Condigno; affirming, That
unless the Work proceed from Grace* it cannot be meritorious of Eternal Life,
and that they give not any Dignity to their Good Works, but acknowledge that in
themselves considered and Precise; as separate from the Ordination of God they
are of no worth, that their Rewardableness is founded on the Promise.

In these things lie the very Nature of Merit; for which reason, to deny our
Works to be meritorious because their Rewardableness is founded on the Promise,
it is as if, you would deny Peter to be a Man, because he is a Rational
Creature.

This being the Doctrine held by the Papists about Merit, one Great Point
Controverted between them, and first Reformers, Si quis hominem Justificatum --
dixerit non teneri ad Observatiam mandatorum Dei, and Ecclesiae: sed tantum ad
Credendum, quasi vero Evangethum sit nuda and absoluta Promissio vitae
aeternae, sine Condition Observationis Mandatorum: Anathema sit. Council. Trid.
S^ss. 6. Can. 20.
was about Our Works being a Condition of Eternal Life, and accordingly in the
Council of Trent it is Decreed with an Anathema, That if any hold -- we are not
bound to Observe the Laws of God, and the Church, but only to Believe, as if
the Gospel was but a Naked, and Absolute Promise of Eternal Life without a
Condition of Observing the Commands. Let him be Accursed.

In the Scholia of the Reformed, on this Canon, as Lucas Osiander Represents
it, Epit. Hist. Eccles. ub. sup.
their sense is manifest, for say they, The Assertion of the Council, that the
Gospel is a Promise of Eternal Life on Condition of keeping the Commands, is
altogether False, the Gospel Promise of Eternal Life leans not on a Condition
of keeping the Commands, But Requires Faith, whereby we lay hold on the Mercy
of God offered to us. If that Promise lean on such a Condition, no Christian
can be certain of his Salvation.

Calvin, on this very Canon is Positive, That the Apostles Placing the
Difference between the Law and the Gospel is this, Antidotum in Conc. Trid.
that the Gospel does not Promise Eternal Life on the Condition of Works, as
the Law did, but to Faith; is a standing Truth, that can never be shaken. What
can be more clear than this Antithesis? The Righteousness of the Law is such,
That the man that does these things shall live in them: Romans 10.5.
But the Righteousness of Faith is after this manner, Romans 4.14.
He that Believes, etc. To the same Purpose is that other place. If the
Inheritance be of the Law, then is your Faith Vain, and the Promise of no
Effect, therefore it is of Faith, that of Grace, the Promise may abide Firm to
every one, who believes.

I might give many Authorities more, but these are enough to make it Evident,
that the First Reformers denied the Gospel to be a Promise of Eternal Life on
Condition of our keeping the Commandments, which must be Understood to be in
that sense, in which the Papists held it; that is, they denied our Good Works
to be such a Condition of Eternal Life, as gave Right unto it, as a Reward,
which may be done by them who are not Antinomians, which is very clear from the
Scholia of the Reformed on the Nineteenth Canon of the Council, which is to
this effect. Let him be accursed, who holds, that nothing is Commanded in the
Law, but Faith; That all other things are Indifferent; and, that the Ten
Commandments belong not to Christians. To which they Answer, That there is no
such Dogma held by the Divines, who Subscribed the Augustane Confession, that
none but one Islebius was tainted with this False and Wicked Opinion, that
Luther oppugned and confuted this Error, and brought its Author to a
Recantation, and that the other Divines rejected it.

2. The word [Condition] is also taken in this very sense by the Arminians, who
argue so very Plausibly from the Grant of it, against some Important Doctrines
of the Christian Faith, that many Orthodox, and Judicious Divines are afraid to
Use it.

They make it (If I may use the word) a Legal Condition, that is, Obedience to
the Preceptive Part of a Law, giving Right to the Reward. It is that thing,
which being Performed, gives Right to the Blessing Promised. Or, Conditio,
quatenus praestita est, aliquomodo Medium sieri dici potest, quo Consequimur
Rem quae sub Condition Promittitur. Exam. Censur. Cap. 10. P. 112. Conditio,
cujus Praestatio Medium sive causa salutis aliquomodo dici potest, non modo est
Gratiosa per se; sed and Gratia ad Eam praestandam perpetim necessaria est, and
Praemium Praestanti promissum extra and supra omnem Comparationem est. Vb. sup.
Cap. 8. P. 95.


it is that which being Performed, is a means by which we attain to what was on
Condition promised. Again, Condition, whose Performance may be called a Mean,
or Cause of Salvation, is, not only in it self full of Grace; but Grace is
always necessary for the Enabling us to perform it, and the Reward Promised
thereunto Infinitely exceeds it.

However, from the Grant, that our Faith is such a Condition of Eternal Life,
they triumphantly oppugn some Important Truths. Particularly, Si enim Christus
nobis meritus dicatur Fidem and Regenerationem tum Fides, Conditio esse non
poterit, quam a Peccatoribus Deus sub Comminatione Mortis exigeret; imo tum
Pater ex vi meriti istius obligatus fuisse dicatur necesse est, ad Conferendum
nobis Fidem, and Essiciendum in nobis omnia, quae nobis sub Comminatione Mortis
praescribit, quo nihil absurdius Cogitari potest. Exam. Cens. Cap. 8. P. 59.
they thus argue against Christ's Meriting Faith and Regeneration for the
Elect. If Christ merited Faith, and Regeneration for us, (say they) then Faith
cannot be a Condition, which God exacts from Sinners, under the Commination of
Eternal Death. They go Higher, affirming, That if Christ purchased the First
Grace for Us, then the Father by virtue thereof, is obliged to give us Faith,
and work all these things in us, which are prescribed under the Threatening of
Death. Than which nothing can be more absurd. Such a Collation of Faith,
flowing from Christ's Merit, does effectually destroy the Divine Constitution,
by which Faith is enjoined Sinners, with a Promise of Life and Threatening of
Death. Thus much from the very Nature of the thing is most apparent -- If
Christ be in this way our Savior, he cannot be our Lawgiver, nor can our
Faith, or Obedience be Acts of Duty, they can be but Effects of Christ's Merit.
Again they add, That the Prescription of a Condition, and an Efficacious
working it in them to whom it is prescribed, are Incompatible. That Condition,
is not a Condition, Conditio non est Conditio, quae ab Eo, qui Eam praescribit,
in Eo cui praescribitur, efficitur. Merus Effectus Praescribentis non potest
esse Conditio Praescripta, nedum Praestita. Exam. ub. sup. P. 106.
which is wrought in Him to whom it is prescribed, even by the Prescriber. The
mere Effect of a Prescriber cannot be a prescribed, much less, a Performed
Condition. He that gives a Condition to another, will, that it be performed by
that other. If it be wrought in Him. Haec Actio ludicra tota and vix Scaena
digna est.
it cease to be a Condition; and he that wrought it, does by that very Act
null it is being a Condition, because he will not have it done by that other,
but will Himself work it in Him. Right Reason dictates thus much unto us -- No
Wise Man will act thus, Legislator serius, totam suam Legislationem ludibrio
exponit, cum Conditionem Praescribit, iis quos irrevocabiliter Praemio afficere
and in quibus, quam Praescribit Conditionem, ipse efficere vult.
nor can any thing be more ludicrous, these things are scarce fit for a Play.
That Lawgiver, who prescribes a Condition to them, whom he has Irrevocably
Design^d for a Reward, will expose his Legislation to the utmost Contempt.

They carry it yet further, asserting, This Condition to be Inconsistent with
the Particular Election of a Select Number of Persons. A Condition, Conditio
omnis Stulte and Ridicule Proponitur iis, qui nominatim and praecise jam ante
destinati sunt saluti. Exam. Cens. c. 9. p 102. Destinatio Irrevocabilis ad
vitam, and Promissio vitae sub Condition, non nisi Stulte Conjunguntur. Exam.
Voi sup. p. 104.


say they, is Foolishly, yea, Ridiculously Proposed to them, who are
Particularly and by Name Ordained to Salvation. An Irrevocable Decree of
Salvation, and the Promise of Life on Condition, are most weakly Put together.

A Condition, they say, is that which when Performed, gives Right unto a
Reward, That there is Grace glorified, in that the Reward Excels, Infinitely
excels what is Required of us as a Condition; and that help is vouchsafed for
the Enabling us to Perform it. But then they add, That what is a Condition of
our Interest in Christ's Merits, must be what was not merited for us by Christ.
To make that a Condition of our Interest in the Benefits merited by Christ,
that was merited by Christ is an Inconsistence; Or, to Affirm that to be a
Condition Required of us, which is not Performed by us, but wrought in us by
him that Prescribes it, is the Greatest Folly; Or, to make the Salvation of any
to Depend upon a Condition, that may, or may not be Performed, and yet assert
the certainty of their Salvation flowing from the Unalterable Decree, is
Ridiculous.

This is the Improvement the Arminians make of the Gospels being a Promise of
Eternal Life, on Condition, namely, the denying Christ's meriting the first
Grace, and the Spirits working it, and the Doctrine of Particular Election.

What Strength there is in their Arguments; or how Naturally these Consequences
flow from the Assertion, [That Eternal Life is Promised us on a Condition of
our own Performance; and, that it is the Result of our Obedience,] is not my
Business at this time to Enquire: Only thus much is Clear; That they, who run
not to the Antinomian Extreme, may, to Avoid these Arminian Rocks, Deny the
Conditionality of the Covenant of Grace, at least in the sense the Arminians
use the word [Condition]: Especially, considering, the Plausibleness of their
Reasoning. Undoubtedly Men, Orthodox in the Faith, may be Influenced to
Conclude, That the making Faith the Condition of an Interest in the Merits of
Christ, and yet a Part of the Merit are so Inconsistent, that they cannot be
both True; and that therefore, being Convinced, that Faith is merited by
Christ, they cannot but Deny it is being a Condition. Besides, they may think,
that this sort of Condition must have so much of our own in it, as interferes
with the Spirits working the First Grace in us, and they Believing the First
Grace to be Absolutely Bestowed on us, and effectually wrought in us, by the
Spirit must necessarily Deny its being such a Condition, as this, we are
Discoursing of. In fine, Condition, as Explained by them, and, as by some
Jealous and Overwary Persons, supposed to be held by all, that Use that word,
cannot stand with the Doctrine of Particular Election. For their Condition does
necessarily Infer Salvation to be Undetermined and Uncertain, it may be, or it
may not be, Just as we our selves Determine.

The Socinians do not strive a little to subvert Christ's Satisfaction, from
this very Consideration, That the Remission of Sin is offered on Condition. A
Zeal for the Advancement of Holiness, and the Checking Debauchery, Provokes
them (as they tell us) to Insist on the Conditionality of our Faith and
Repentance, and Oppugn the Doctrine of Satisfaction.

This, among others, is one Cause, why (says Smalcius) we Reject the Dogma
about Satisfaction, Et heac una est inter alias Causa, ob quam, Dogma
satisfactionis prorsus sit Repudiandum. Quia scilicet hominibus Persuadere
possit, non esse opus ulla Resipiscentia, si quidem pro peccatis plane
satisfactum est. Smalc. contra. Smeglec. c. xi. p. 286.
viz. Because Men are apt to Conclude, That if a Full Satisfaction be made for
their Sins, there is no Need of their Repentance. Besides, they Pressing
Repentance, as a Condition of Pardon, find themselves under a Necessity of
Denying Satisfaction.

To evince thus much, 'twill be sufficient to consult once morce Smalcius, who
having affirmed; That to Require Repentance of them, for whose Sins full
Satisfaction had been made, was Unnecessary, Smiglecius replies, That
Satisfaction does not exclude Conditions from him, for whom Satisfaction was
Offered. For (says he) who will Accept of Satisfaction for an Injury; if he,
who did it, Persists in his Enmity. To this Smalcius Rejoinds; Assuring us,
That Smiglecius does not Prove, nor is it Probable, that Conditions may be
Prescribed to him, for whom a full Satisfaction is made. In this case the
Creditor is bound to Discharge his Debtor, without any Regard to his Future
Demeanor. Of this, Smiglecius, being aware, changes the Terms, saying,
Satisfaction does not interfere with the Imposing a Condition on him, for whom
Satisfaction is Offered, whereas, in the present Case Satisfaction is not only
offered, but said to be Really made and Finished. Whence it is manifest, That
seeing Conditions and such a full Satisfaction are Incompatible, and yet
Conditions, for the Obtaining the Remission of Sins are strictly Enjoined,
there can be no True, Real Satisfaction, There can be only a Free forgiveness
of Sin without any Anteceding Satisfaction. This Assertion excludes not; but
necessarily Infers Conditions. God freely offering us the Forgiveness of Sins,
we must Repent and be Servants to our Lusts no longer; for, if we Repent not,
the Offered Pardon will not be Given us. So far Smalcius, whose Argument can be
of no force, unless the Condition Import somewhat that Gives Right to Pardon.
If the Pardon of Sin be not the Immediate Result of Christ's Satisfaction only,
but somewhat in us is moreover necessary to Give Right unto it, the
Satisfaction is not Full, and if not full, it is none at all. If it be Adequate
and Full, the Right Results only from it, and not from any thing ^n us, not
from our Faith, Repentance, or any other Good Works. The Right ^o Impunity must
Result from Christ's Satisfaction only; or not at all. If there be somewhat
else from which it must Result, then has not Christ made Full Satisfaction: a
Condition therefore giving Right; Or Christ's Satisfaction must be laid aside.
They can never be together. The setting up the One, is a casting down the other.

This being the true State of the Case, the Socinians Unable to see, how the
Necessity of our Holiness, and Good Works, can be maintained consistently with
the laying aside Conditions; chose rather to part with the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction, than deny Faith. Repentance, etc. to be the Conditions, giving
Right to Pardon.

If there be a full Satisfaction made by Christ for any Sinners, a Discharge
(say the Socinians) must be immediately given them. They cannot see any middle
Way between themselves and the Antinomian. Justification must flow either
Immediately from Christ's Satisfaction to the Elect whilst in the Height of
Iniquity, or from a Condition Performed by them, Giving Right thereunto. If the
former that is Antinomianism; If the latter, then no Satisfaction, which is
Socinianism.

Thus you see in what sense the word Condition is taken by the Papist,
Arminian, and Socinian, and diversely Urged to Establish the Doctrine of our
Merit, and Destroying those other about Christ's Meriting the First Grace, his
Spirits working it, Particular Election, and Christ's Satisfaction, which
Considerations may frighten Men, sound in the Faith, from the Use of the word;
and Provoke the Generation of the Just to Reject it, unless, when Used, it be
with an Explication.

What the Learned Dr. O. has on this Occasion is worthy of our weightiest
thoughts, who speaking of the Term [Condition] is Express, That the word is no
where used in the Scripture in this matter: which I argue no farther (says he)
but that we have no certain Rule, or Standard to try, and measure its
Signification by. Wherefore, it cannot first be introduced in what sense Men
please, and then that sense turned into Argument for other Ends. For thus on a
Supposed Concession, that it is the Condition of our Justification, some
heighten it into a Subordinate Righteousness imputed unto us antecedently, as I
suppose, unto the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, in any sense,
whereof it is the Condition: And some, who pretend to lessen its Efficiency, or
Dignity in the use of it in our Justification, say, it is only Causa sine qua
non, which leaves us at as great an Uncertainty as to the Nature and Efficacy
of this Condition as we were before. Nor is the true sense of things at all
Illustrated, but rather darkened by such Notions.

Conditio in the best Latin Writers is variously used; answering (...), in the
Greek; That is, Status, Fortuna, Dignitas, Causa, Pactum initum. In which of
their Significations it is here to be understood, is not easy to be
determined. In common use among us, it sometimes denotes the State and Quality
of Men, that is, (...); and sometimes a valuable Consideration of what is to be
done, that is, (...). But herein, it is applied unto things in great variety;
sometimes the Principal-Procuring-Purchasing-Cause, is so expressed. As the
Condition whereon a Man lends another an Hundred Pound, is, that he be Paid it
again with Interest. The Condition whereon a Man conveyeth his Land unto
another, is, that he Receive so much Money for it. And sometimes, it signifies
such things as are added to the Principal Cause, whereon its Operation is
suspended. As a man bequeaths an Hundred Pound unto another, on Condition, that
he come or go to such a Place and Demand it. This is no valuable Consideration,
yet is the Effect of the Principal Cause; or the Will of the Testator suspended
thereon. And as unto degrees of Respect unto that, whereof any thing is a
Condition, as to Purchase, Procurement, Valuable Consideration. necessary
Presence, the Variety is Endless. We therefore cannot obtain a determinate
sense of this word, Condition, but from a particular Declaration of what is
intended by it, wherever it is used. And although this be not sufficient to
exclude the use of it from the Declaration of the way and manner, how we are
justified by Faith; yet it is so to exclude the Imposition of any Precise
signification of it, any other than is given it by the Matter treated of.
Without this, every thing is left Ambiguous, and uncertain whereunto it is
Applied.

For Instance; It is commonly said, That Faith and New Obedience are the
Condition of the New Covenant. But yet, because of the Ambiguous signification
and various use of that Tern (Condition) we cannot certainly understand what is
intended in the Assertion. If no more be intended but that God in, and by the
New Covenant does Indispensably require these things of us, that is, the
Restipulation of a good Conscience toward God by the Resurrection of Christ
from the Dead, in order unto his own Glory, and our full Enjoyment of all he
Benefits of it, it is Unquestionably true. But, if it be intended, that they
are such a Condition of the Covenant, as to be by us performed antecedently
unto the Participation of any Grace, Mercy, or Privilege of it, so as that
they should be the Consideration, and Procuring Causes of them; that they
should be all of them, as some speak, the Reward of our Faith, and Obedience,
it is most false, and not only contrary to express Testimonies of Scripture;
but Destructive of the Nature of the Covenant it self. If it be intended, that
these things, though promised in the Covenant, and wrought in by the Grace of
God, are yet Duties Required of us in order unto the Participation and
Enjoyment of the full End of the Covenant in Glory, it is the Truth, which is
asserted. But if it be said that Faith, and New Obedience, that is, Works of
Righteousness, which we do, are so the Condition of the Covenant, as that
whatever the one is ordained of God as the means of, and in order to such or
such an End, as Justification, that the other is likewise ordained unto the
same End, with the same kind of Efficiency, Dr. O. Of. Justific.
or with the same Respect unto the Effect, it is expressly contrary to the whole
Scope, and Express Design of the Apostle on that Subject.

But, notwithstanding the various senses the word [Condition] is Capable of;
and how mischievous soever the Popish, Arminian and Socinian Usages of it are;
there is a Sound Sense in which the Word may be used.

Relativa Quis, Qui, Quae, Quod Juncta verbo futuri temporis faciunt suum
Antecedens' Conditionale. Ot. Phil. Zepper. Cynos. Legal.
That Faith is a Condition (if we may in our Interpreting of Scripture, observe
the Rules of the Juncts) is as certain, as if it had been expressly mentioned in
the Holy Scriptures. These words [He that believes shall be saved] Import a
Condition. For, Relativum junctum Verbo futuri temporis conditionem facit:
which, our Modern Divines, who Reject the abovementioned Errors, do yet
approve; but in what Sense, is our Business at this time to Explain.

Condition then may be Distributed into Legal, and Gospel, or Testamentary. A
Legal Condition is Obedience to the Preceptive Part of a Law, giving Right to
the Reward; such was that of the Covenant of Works made with Adam; and of this
sort are the Popish, Arminian, and Socinian Conditions. A Gospel Condition is
of the same Kind with what Peculiarly belongs to Testamentary Disposition. It
is, (say the Civilians) Lex Negotio apposita, unde Ipsius Eventus pendet. Or,
Lex addita negotio quae donec praestetur suspendit Eventum. Which, (says Dr.
Owen) signifies such things, as are added to the Principal Cause, whereon its
Operation is suspended. As a man bequeaths an Hundred Pound unto another, on
Condition, that he come, or go to such a Place, and Demand it. This is no
Valuable Consideration, yet is the Effect of the Principal Cause, or the Will
of the Testator suspended thereupon.

To understand this Testamentary Condition, we must consider that there is a
Principal Cause, whose Operation is suspended, till a Rule, added thereunto, be
observed. There is the Promise, or Donation of a Legacy, which must be given
according to the last Will of the Testator. But to this Promise, or Donation,
there is added a Rule, that must be Regarded, viz. That this Legacy be given
either in such a time or Place, or in such a way, or manner. This is the Lex
addita Negotio that must be observed before the Legacy be actually given. It is
the Condition, which, till Performed, suspends the Event; namely, the giving of
the Legacy. And (as the Learned Mr. Baxter explains it) it is only the Modus
Promissionis Donationis, Cath. Thiol. lib. 2. p. 248.
vel Contractus; where, the fulfilling of the Promise, is as Really suspended
until this Modus be observed, as if it had Resulted from the Observation of it.
Dispositio enim facta sub Condition vel modo nibil valet, nisi Conditio and
Nodus adimpleatur. Nunquam ^nim actio in Essictu competit nisiprius oblat a and
praeslit a Cautione de made adimplendo, quia alias locum habet Exceptio doli --
Mode deficiente extinguatur debitum perinde ac si deficeret Conditio: Or. Phil.
Zepper. Cynos. Legal.


A Disposition made on Condition, or sub modo, signifies nothing until the
Condition or Mode be performed. Though it has no Causality in Producing the
Effect; yet, is the Effect, as Really suspended thereby, as if it had. Thus it
has Pleased the Testator to dispose, and his Disposition none can disannul.

In this sense, seeing Justification is Promised, in the Last Will, and
Testament of our Lord Jesus, to Him, that Believes, Faith is the Modus
Promissionis, vel Donationis So that although Justification be not the Result of
our Faith, but of Christ's Righteousness alone; yet Faith being made by the
Testator, a Modus of the Disposition or Donation, there can be no Justification
without it. The Operation of Christ's Righteousness, which in this Case, is the
Negotium, or Principal Cause of our Justification, is by the Nonperformance of
Faith suspended, and so long we remain Unjustified.

It has pleased God to fix such an Order in the Dispensation of his Blessings,
that the one necessarily antecedes the other, and what goes before another
has an Influence upon that other, as it is so settled, and established by the
Ordinance of God. Not that the former gives Right unto the latter; but so it is
appointed of God, that such an Order be observed in the disposing of these
Blessings, that he who has not the first, shall not have the second; He that
has not Faith shall not be Justified.

But whether it be a Condition of the Covenant of Grace; Or, a Condition in
this Covenant; Or only a Condition of our Justification, though our Divines have
different Sentiments about it, yet it is generally held, that Faith is a
Condition of Justification. They that scruple the use of the Word, own the
thing signified thereby.

The Learned Author of Anti-sozzo says, that Faith is a Condition in the
Covenant of Grace, though not of it, and they, who hold, that the Covenant of
Grace was made with Christ as a Second Adam, do assert, that it is also made
with the Faithful, the Members of Christ, Discourse of the two Covenants, lib.
3. c. 3. p. 162.
for which the Judicious Mr, Strong gives several Reasons; namely, That the
Saints may see that they are as strictly bound to Obedience in their own
Persons under the Second Covenant, as they were, under the First. And that the
Doctrine of the Gospel, though it be a Doctrine of Liberty, is not a Doctrine of
Licentiousness; and that they may stand in awe of the Threats of God. This
Doctrine (says he) I do the rather pitch upon in Opposition to the Licentious
Tenent of the Antinomians, who say, that all is Required of Christ, and nothing
of Us.

This Notion of a Condition, as it does most fully Provide against
Antinomianism, by Inferring the Necessity of Faith's being in Order of Nature
before Justification; so, it does as effecctually secure us from the Popish,
Arminian, and Socinian Rocks, in that it is not a Legal, but a Testamentary
Condition, that cannot Establish the Merit of Good Works, nor Interfere with
Christ's meriting, or the Spirits working the First Grace; nor Subvert the
Doctrine of Satisfaction, or Particular Election. All Testamentary
Dispositions, whatever be the Modes of Donation, are of Free Grace, not of
Metit, and being Given to us, as the Children of a Testator, the Merit and Gift
of the First Grace, which is necessary to our being such Children, cannot be
Destroyed by such a Modus, or Condition.

These things will Appear with much more Clearness if we consider, that the
Holy Scriptures Represent Christ as a Second-Adam; the Father of a Spiritual
Offspring.

Two things Christ did, as a Second-Adam. He undertook to beget a Seed, and
Raise that Seed unto Glory. This Seed Christ Purchased, and on his Purchase
they are given him by the Father according to the terms Agreed on between the
Father, and the Son in the Eternal Compact.

That Christ begets a Seed, and by his Word and Spirit Governs, and Raises them
unto Glory, is so far from being inconsistent with his Meriting, and Giving the
First Grace, that it is in Pursuance of it. Christ merited a Seed; and, that he
may have what he merited, a Seed is Given him; which is by the Fathers drawing,
the Sons gathering, and the Spirits working Grace in them.

Christ also, as a Second-Adam, made satisfaction for his Children; who, as
soon as they do spiritually by Regeneration Descend from him, have a Right to
Impunity. If the Satisfaction had been made by Christ, as a Mediator for the
Elect, as such, then indeed, as soon as they had any Being, they would have
been Discharged from the Debt. But Christ making Satisfaction for the Elect as
his Seed, they cannot partake of the Right resulting from it, but as they
become his Seed. As they are his Seed Virtually, they have a Virtual Discharge;
but an Actual Discharge, they cannot have, till they are Actually born again.

Moreover, the Covenant of Grace being made with Christ, as a Second-Adam, the
Promises are made unto Christ, as the Reward of his Obedience, but for his
Seed; so that in Christ you must be by Faith, that you may be Pardoned, and
Saved; and yet your Pardon and Salvation Results not from your Faith; but from
Christ's Righteousness: whereby, it is manifest, that Gospel-Promises are
Powerful Motives to Engage us to do our utmost to Believe and Repent, and must
be Preached to this Very-End, and Purpose.

Thus the Doctrine of our Merit is laid by, Christ's meriting and working the
First Grace, and his making Satisfaction to God's Justice, and the necessity of
our Faith, Repentance and Sanctification are abundantly cleared by this
Gospel-Representation, that is made of Christ, as he is a Second Adam, with
whom the Covenant of Grace is made, and with his Seed, as such, which is so far
from destroying Particular Election, that it establishes it. For the Elect
were Promised unto Christ, merited by him, and given unto him, as the Reward of
his Sufferings, whereby it is made sure; that the Death of Christ shall not be
altogether in vain. He shall see the Elect as the Travel of his Soul, and be
satisfied.

Thus as in Opposition to Popery, Arminianism, and Socinianism, Legal
Conditions are Justly Rejected; so in Contradiction to the Antinomian Error
Testamentary Conditions are here explicated and asserted.

CHAP. V.
The Notion the first Reformers had of Justifying Faith, not Antinomian. Their
Dectrine in Opposition to the Papist, Arminian, and Socinian Described. That
they did not hold Justification to be before Faith, Nor did they Exclude all
Doubtings from Faith; nor hold that we might live, as we list, and whilst so,
Believe, and be Justified.

To Assert, [That Faith is a Certain, and Full Persuasion wrought in the Heart
of Man, through the Holy Ghost, whereby he is Assured of the Mercy of God,
Promised in Christ, that his Sins are Forgiven him] is not Antinomianism.

THE Antinomians, (I mean such as are really so) have had too much Honor given
them by such as Grant, that their Notion about Faith is supported by the
Suffrage of the First-Reformers: Whereas, on a Diligent search, 'twill Appear,
that the Difference between them is very great; the Antinomians holding Actual
Justification in the Sight of God to be before Faith, and the Others Deny it.

To Vindicate the First Reformers from this Unjust Charge, I will impartially
propose what they held of it, and show, how they have opposed the Papists,
Arminians, and Socinians, and wherein they differ from the Antinomians.

The Account they give of Faith is the same with what I have laid down, they
make it to be a Firm Persuasion, wrought in the Heart of Man, that his Sins are
forgiven him.

Luther defines it thus. Faith is a Firm, and Certain Knowledge, Fides est
firma, and certa cogitatio, seu fiducia de Deo, quod per Christum sit
Propitius, quod per Christum Cogitet de nobis Cogitationes pacis, non irae.
Luth. in Genesis c. 15.
or Persuasion, that God is propitious through Jesus Christ; and that through
him, he has thoughts of Peace, and not of Wrath concerning us.

Melanchton, in the First Part of his Works, says, That Faith is, not only a
Knowledge of the Scripture History, Fides significat non tantum Historiae
notitiam; sed FIDUCIAM miserecordiae Promissae propter filium Dei.
but a Persuasion of the Mercy of God Promised in and through his Son -- That
the Knowledge of the History would terrify, and frighten us, unless we fix it
in our Souls, That Christ is our Propitiator, who will lead us to the Father.
To clear thus much, he assures us, he could Produce Authorities Innumerable.
And, amongst many others insists on the Testimony of -- Addam and Bernardi
Testimonium -- Necesse est privio omnium credere quod Remissionem Peccatorum
habene possis nisi per Indulgentiam Dei, sed add ut Credas and hoc quod per
ipsum Peccata Te TIBI donantur. Melanch. Oper. Pat. 1.
St. Bernard, who affirms it to be necessary in the first Place to believe that
the Remission of Sins is to be had only through the Mercy and Grace of God, and
then to Believe, that the Pardon of Sin is Given to Thee; Melanchton also adds,
That to Place Faith in a Fiducia, a Persuasion, or Confidence of the Mercy of
God in Christ, is, according to the sense of the Reformed Churches; That the
first and chief Object of Faith is God Reconciled according to the Promise; or
the Promise of Reconciliation. That Paul takes Faith to be that, by which we so
Embrace the Promise, as to Believe, Melanct. Oper. Pars 2.
our Sins in Particular are forgiven, and that we are Reconciled.

Calvin in his Institutions makes Faith to be a Certain, and Firm Knowledge of
the Mercy of God toward Us, Nunc Jacta Fidei Definitio nobis constabit, si
dicamus esse Divine erga nos Benenolentiae firmam certamque Cognitionem, etc.
Instit. lib. 3. c. 2.. 7.
Founded on the Truth of the Free Promise in Christ, made known, and sealod to
our Hearts by the Holy Spirit. And his Catechism, Translated into English, and
Joined to the Form of Prayers, etc. used in the English Congregation at Geneva,
in Queen Mary's Reign, has it thus: Faith is a sure Persuasion, and a steadfast
Knowledge of God's Tender Love toward Us, according as he has plainly uttered
in his Gospel, that he will be both a Father, and a Savior unto Us, through
the Means of Jesus Christ.

Beza thus. Quaest. and Resp.
That we may Distinguish the Children of Light from the Children of Darkness,
we must not make Faith to lie only in that Knowledge, which is Common to us,
and the Devils; whereby we know all those Things to be True, which are
contained in the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles: But moreover, in a Firm
Assent of the Mind, whereby we do in a very Peculiar manner so Apply the
Promise of Eternal Life, as if it had been Actually fulfilled. More fully, in
his Annotations on Romans 1.16. Faith is that certain and full Assurance, by
which he, that believes, is persuaded, Fidem esse disinimus fermam illam and
constantem, animi (...), id est, certiorationem, qua certus est apud se
unusquisque sidelium -- Promissiones Dei de Gratuita per Christum
Reconciliatione -- sed etiam istas per praedicationem and Sacramenta sibi
oblatas- CREDIT AD SE PROPRIE, ac PECULIARITER pertinere. Bez. in Romans 1.16.
not only, that the Word of God in General, and more especially, the Promises
of Reconciliation through Christ are firm and sure; but that these Promises, in
the Ministry of the Word, and Sacraments, offered unto him, do properly, and in
a peculiar manner belong unto him. Faith is that, by which the Promise of
Eternal Life, Purchased by the Blood of Christ for every one that Believes, is
particularly embraced and applied to ones self.

Peter Martyr, though he Defines not Faith thus, Loc Com. Clas. 3. c. 3. 10.
yet holds, That every saving Believer is Persuaded, he is by Adoption the
Child of God, and chosen to Eternal Life. In like manner, Zanchy, affirms, That
he is not a sound Believer who is not with a strong Confidence persuaded, that
God is a propitious, Tom. 8. Loc. 7. De fide, p. 713.
and merciful Father unto him. -- Nor can he be esteemed to hope in God aright,
who does not Confidently believe he is an Heir of the Heavenly Kingdom.

But Paraeus, on the Romans says, That Faith is not only a General Assent to
the Doctrine of the Gospel; but a certain Knowledge, Assent, and Belief of the
Gospel Promise concerning the Blessings procured by Christ for every Believer;
and therefore as belonging to me in Particular. Or, It is a Certain and Firm
Assent unto the Doctrine of Christ, with a full Persuasion of the free Pardon
of our Sins, Parae^s in Romans 3.21.
and Eternal Life through Jesus Christ.

Hemingius is of the same Mind. And, who ever will, Herping. Opusc. in his
Enchir. Theol Clas. 1 c. 12.
may see, in Le Blank, many others, making Faith to lie in a Firm Persuasion,
that our Sins are Forgiven.

Dr. Willet affirms it to have been held by Blessed Martyrs in Henry the
Eighth, These. Theol. de Fid. Justif. Not. Symp. Papis. Contr. 19. Part 2.
Quest. 2.
and Queen Mary's Reigns, and by the later Helvetian, Saxony, and Bohemian
Confessions: And, sure I am, that it is very Express in our Book of Homilies,
established by Act of Parliament.

This Notion of Justifying Faith, the Lutheran, and Calvinian Reformers
insisted very much upon, in their Opposition unto the Papists, who held Faith
to be but an Historical Assent: And yet, it must be acknowledged that Cassander
offers some Considerations of great weight to Prove, Consul^. Art. 4.
that the Generality of the most Learned in the Church of Rome agreed with the
Reformed herein, No^ recte Protestants Ecclesi^m pras^^tem incusant, quod
doctat and jubeat, de gratia Dei, and vita Aeterna dubitar^, atque hane
blasphemam (ut aiunt) Doctrinam, inter praecipuas Causas po^unt, cur ab ea
Discedendum sibi putent.
blaming us for insinuating, as if they taught the People to doubt of the Grace
of God, and of their Salvation, and then make it a Reason of the Separation.

In the Enchiridion of Christian Religion, Published by the Provincial Council
at Cologne, A. D. 1536. it is (says Cassander) expressly granted, That to our
Justification it is Required, not only to believe in general, that Sins are
forgiven all, that Repent; but that my sins in Particular through Christ by
Faith are forgiven me. That this very Explication of Faith is in the Emperor's
Book, drawn up at Ratisbone, and Approved; where it is thus. It is sound
Doctrine to hold, that a Sinner is Justified by a lively Efficacious Faith. By
a Lively Faith, we mean, a Motion of the Holy Ghost, Firma and sana Doctrina
est, per fidem vivam and efficacem Justificari peccatorem, Vocamus autem sidem
vivam, motum Spiritus Sancti, quo vere poe^itentes veteris vitae, eriguntur ad
Deum, and vere apprehendunt miserecordiam in Christo promissam, ut jam vere
sentiant, quod Remissiorem Peccatorum, and Reconcitiationem propter meritum
Christi, gratuita Dei bonitate acceperunt, etc. Cassand. Consult. Art. 4.
whereby they, who Repent of their past Life, are turned toward God, and do
truly apprehend the Grace Promised in Christ; so as that they do Really
perceive, they have Obtained the Pardon of their Sins, and Reconciliation
through the Merit of Christ.

However, Alfonsus de Castro will have it, that not many of their Church were
of this Opinion, that the Enchiridion of Christian Religion was not much to be
regarded, because Hermannus, the Archbishop of Cologne, who called the
Provincial Council, by which 'twas Published, was an Heretic; But, Binius,
Consiliam Coloniense Provinciale Auctoritate Hermanni Archiepiscopi (qui POSTEA
in Haeresin lapsus est) pro Reformatione, etc.
in the Title, prefixed to this Council, says, 'twas after this that the
Archbishop fell into Heresy: And yet nevertheless, it must be yielded, That
'twas greatly Controverted between Papist and Protestant, Whether Faith was a
Fiducia, and lay in a firm Persuasion of our being Pardoned; Or, only a General
Assent?

And as the Reformed Defended this Notion about Faith in Opposition to the
Papists; so they did it also against the Arminian, and Socinian.

Bodecherus, Bodecher. Socin. Rem. 6.11. p. 79, 80.
in his Sociniano-Remonstrantismus, does out of the Remonstrants Confession and
Writings of Socinus show an Agreement between the Socinian, and Arminian, in
their Denying this Fiducia, or Persuasion to be Saving Faith.

Johannes Peltius in his Harmony, out of Arminius; Episcopius; Arnoldus; the
Remonstrants Conference, at the Hague; their Confession, and Apology, etc. as
also out of Ostorodius, and Socinus puts it out of all Doubt, that the
Arminians and Socinians concur in their oppugning Faiths being such a firm
Persuasion: And out of the Belgic Confession, and Catechism, and the National
Synod at Dort. He makes it manifest, that the Reformed held Faith to be a
Persuasion that our Sins are Pardoned.

Polyander, Rivet, Walaeus, and Thysius in their Censure of the Remonstrants
Confession, having shown the Parallel between the Arminians, and Socinians, are
Positive, that the very Hinge of the Controversy between them, Nobiscum
Remonstrantes consentiunt, quod fides sal^ifica FIDUCIA, dicatur and sit, quam
etiam Sociniani, ut vidianes, VERAM FIDUCIAM esse dicunt. Sed in quo talis,
Fiducia consistat, and quodnam sit ejus Objectum proprium, in eo totius
Controversiae, quam nunc omnibus Eccless^s Reformatis movent, vertitur CARDO.
Cersa c. 11. p. 158.
and the Reformed Churches Turn on this Point. That Saving Faith is a Fiducia,
or full Persuasion the Socinians themselves, (as these Great men Express it) do
Confess; But the Enquiry is, What is the Proper Object of this Fiducia, or
Persuasion? Whether it be the Special Mercy of God, through the Merit of
Christ, which he, who Believes, does by this Fiducia, Apply unto himself? or,
what? To this, these Authors of the Censure, in Opposition unto the Papist,
Arminian, and Socinian, do give it as the sense of the Reformed, that the
Remission of Sin, de praesenti, is the Proper Object of this Fiducia, or
Persuasion, and that Justifying Faith lies in such a Persuasion, as that by
which we Believe, our Sins in praesenti are Forgiven us.

Against this Doctrine Bellarmine, Socinus, and the Remonstrants raise several
Objections, Exposing the Notion, and all that Defended it to the utmost
Reproach, and Contempt, as if hereby the Pardon of Sin was made a Necessary
Antecedent unto Justifying Faith, and none could have Faith but they, who had a
Comfortable Assurance, and that whoever could but Confidently Persuade himself
his Sins were Pardoned, how wickedly soever he lived, had Saving Faith, and was
Justified. Besides, amongst Protestants themselves, there have been of late
years too many, who not searching diligently enough into the Writings of the
First Reformers, have too hastily condemned them, and given too much
Countenance to the Unrighteous Accusations of Papists, Arminians, and
Socinians, and Encouraged the Antimonians to go on the more boldly in their
Error, as if they had Luther, Calvin, and all their Followers to Abet it;
whereas, on a fair and equal Trial, these Charges will appear to be Groundless,
and Unreasonable, which with much clearness may be evinced, if we consider, How
the First Reformers held, That Justification is not before Faith. That many
Fears, and Doubtings are consistent with it. And, That none, who continued to
live under the Reigning Power of their Lusts had; or, whilst so, could have
Saving Faith.

These things, for the Readers greater Satisfaction; I will, with all the
Plainness I can, particularly Prove.

To the First, That Justification is not before Faith.

1. Thus much necessarily flows from their Asserting Faith to be the
Instrumental Cause of Justification. If Faith be a Cause, though but a less
Principal One of Justification; Justification cannot be before it. 'Twould be
the Greatest Injustice Imaginable, to Insinuate, that the first Reformers,
affirmed, That Justification was before Faith, and yet Faith any Cause of
Justification. They could not be so grossly Ignorant as to think the Effect had
an Existence before its Cause.

That they insisted on Faiths being the Instrumental Cause of Justification is
so much the Burden of their Writings, that whoever consults them, cannot find
room for the Least Doubt concerning it. De Reconcil. Par. 1. lib. 2. c. 11.
Our Learned Wotton instances in Calvin, Vrsin, Hannius, Bastingius,
Chemnitius, Bucanus, Willet, and Perkins, as Asserters of it, And he might have
added Paraeus, Beza, Peter Martyr, Zanchy, and many others.

Quenstedius, Theol. Didact. Polem. Par. 3. c. 8. 2. q. 6.
a Lutheran, mentions Gerhardus, Battus, Dorscheus, Kester, the Theologi
Giessenses, Hulsemannus, Calovius, and Dannhawerus, as Men of Great Learning,
who made Faith to lie in a firm Persuasion of the Pardon of Sin, and yet
Affirmed it to be the Instrumental Cause of Justification. But,

2. This will appear with more Conviction on an Equal Proposal of what the
Reformers themselves have Delivered in Explicating the Notion, they had of
Justifying Faith, whose Disquisitions, for the Investigation of Truth, were
very Close and Profound: They weighed the Difficulties on every hand, and their
Determinations were after much Consideration, and with Great Judgment.

But this thing having been already done by the Learned Le Blank, I must
beseech my Reader to have Recourse unto him; And yet, for the help of such as
have him not, I will out of him, and some other Judicious Writers on this
Subject, give the sense of the Reformed.

The Learned Robert Baronius, in Le Blank, Explicates the Notion about Fiducia,
thus: First, The Object of this Persuasion is not (says he) only the Pardon of
Sin to be Impetrated, and had; De objecto igitur sidei salvificae haec tenenda
sunt. Primo tenendum est, Objectum fiduciae non solum esse Remissionem
peccatorum impetrandam, and obtinendam, sed etiam torum Remissionem jam
Impetratam. Secundo, Fiduciam in haec duo tendere per duos distinctos actus,
quorum alter praecedit Justificationem, ut ejus causa Instrumentalis; alter eam
sequitur, ut ejus effectum, and Consequens. Tertio, actum fiducialem, qui
Justificationem praecedit, ut ejus causa, esse persuasionem de Christi
satisfactione pro nobis in particulari, and deremissione peccatorum
obtinendaper and propter ejus satisfactionem. Quarto, Actum fiducialem, qui
Justificationem sequitur, esse Persuasionem de remissiane Peccatorum jam
Impetrata, and de nostra Perseverantia in eo statu, usque ad finem vitae.
Baronius in Le Biank. These. de fid. Justif. Not. LXII.
but also as already obtained. Secondly, That this Persuasion respects these
two Objects by two Distinct Acts: The one of which goes before Justification,
as its Instrumental Cause: The other follows it, as its Effect, and
Consequent. Thirdly, The Fiducial Act, which Precedes Justification, as its
Cause, is a Persuasion of the Satisfaction of Christ for us in Particular, and
of the Remission of Sins to be obtained by and for his Satisfaction. Fourthly,
This Fiducial Act, which follows Justification, is a Persuasion of the
Remission of Sins already Impetrated, and of our Perseverance in that state to
the end of our Lives.

Maresius, says, That there is a Threefold Act of Faith, distinctly to be
Considered in our Justification. The first Dispositive, whereby I believe, that
Christ has merited the Pardon of Sin for them, that are his, etc. The Second
is formally Justificatory, whereby I, who am now Sorrowing for my Sin, and
Purposing Amendment of Life do believe, that all my Sins are at this present
Forgiven: The Third Consolatory whereby I Believe, that all my Sins have been
Pardoned, and that I shall never more be in a State of Condemnation. In the
First sense, Faith is before Justification. In the Second, Simultaneous with
it; In the Third, it follows it. Paraeus expresses himself to the same
purpose. Before the Act of Justification, (that is to say, in order of Nature,
not of time) Our Faith or Persuasion has for its Object this Proposition, de
futuro, [ My Sins shall be Forgiven me on my believing.] In the very Act of
Justification, it has this Proposition de praesenti, [My Sins are Forgiven
me;] After my Justification, this de Praeterito. [My Sins have already been
Pardoned.]

The Authors of the Censure, Omnes autem isti [viz. Bellarmious, Socinus, and
Remonstrantes] adversus Vmbram suam pugnant, and contra Chimaeram, quam sibi
confixerunt, tela sua, dirigunt; supponentes nos statuere peccata nostra quoad
efficaciam, deleri, priusquam credamus, etc. Censur. Conf. Rem. c. 11. p. 159.
do on this occasion declare, That the Remonstrants Fight against their own
Shadow, against a Chimaera of their own feigning, when they insinuate, as if we
held, that our Sins were efficaciously blotted out before we believe; and that
then we are Justified when we Believe, that they are blotted out. From which
absurd Opinion 'twould follow, that the Remission of Sin was neither the whole,
nor a part of our Justification; but, that our Justification was somewhat after
it. Which cannot be allowed, unless Justification be taken for the Sense of
Justification in our selves; or for a Manifestation, or Declaration of it unto
others. We do not therefore say, That, that Persuasion, by which we are
Justified, is of the Remission of Sins already had; Or, that the Object of this
Persuasion is the Pardon of Sin before obtained: But that Persuasion, by which
we all believe our Sins to be in praesenti forgiven us, not properly in
praeterito, or in futuro, although both belong to Justifying Faith, yet not to
the formal Act of Justification, as we usually Express it. Wherefore when the
Mercy of God and the Pardon of Sin is offered to us in the Gospel through
Christ, we are not only in the General Persuaded, that all, who believe, shall
have their Sins forgiven them: But, he that savingly believes, does firmly
persuade himself, that the Promise of Pardon does belong to him, and is
received by that very Act of Faith, and accordingly then his Sin is forgiven
him; and that Blessedness spoken of in Romans 6.7. made his -- Thus the Remission
of Sin, and a Persuasion of that Remission are in a Saving Believer at the same
time; But he, who is Persuaded, that if he believes, he shall be Justified, is
not therefore as yet Justified, Unless he does Actually and in praesenti
believe, That that Righteousness is given him, which he Receives with the same
Act of Faith. What he afterward believes de praeterito does not Justify him,
but supposes him to be already Justified. All these Acts are of one and the
same Justifying Faith. The First Disposes for Justification: The Second
Properly Justifies: The Third Quiets Conscience according to that in Romans 5.1,
2.

From what has been here said, it is apparent, that there is no force at all in
this Socinian, and Arminian Objection against us, for they oppose us, as if we
assigned to Justifying Faith one only single Act, whereas nothing can be more
manifest than that we make them three Distinct Acts; whence, it is easy enough
to Conceive, how Justifying Faith is a Persuasion of the special Mercy of God
to be, de futuro, obtained; and which in praesenti, by the very Act of
Believing, is Perceived.

This Fiducia, or Persuasion, as Described by the Remonstrants to be a firm
Belief, that it is not possible for any to escape Eternal Death, and attain to
Everlasting Life, any other way than by Jesus Christ, and as he has
Prescribed; is not a Justifying; it is but an Historical, or Dogmatick Faith.
It only respects what is Future, not what is Past, or Present; nor does it
beget in the Minds of Believers any thing certain of the Impetration of
Salvation; but only of its Possibility, Manner, Censur. Confess. Rem. c. 11. p.
158, 159, etc.
and Reason, etc. So far the Censure of the Remonstrants Confession.

By what I have here gathered out of Le Blank, and some others, it is manifest,
That though the Reformed took into the Description they gave of Justifying Faith,
the Persuasion of the Pardon of Sin, yet Generally they Agreed in Denying
Justification to be before it. The Methods they took for the clearing thus
much, you see, were diverse.

Zanchy, Bucerus is lib. de Reconcil. Ecclesiarum i^ Artic. de Justific. mul
it is Demonstrat fidem (...) fiducia differ: quan quam sempe sint ambae in
separabiliter Conjunctae Zanch. Oper. Tom. 7. de Persever. Sanctor. p. 354.
following the Excellent Martin Bucer, held Faith, and Fiducia to be
Inseparably conjoined, but yet the one different from the other. Beza and
Garisiolius took this Fiducia or Firm Persuasion to be an Inseparable Effect of
Faith. And, they, who made it the the Formal Reason and the Justifying Act,
considered the Objects of this Persuasion distinctly, as the Pardon was either
Future, de praesenti, or de praeterito: As it was a Pardon that either should
be; Or, as then actually had; Or, as what had been before: and so made the
Persuasion of a Pardon to be had, Antecedaneous to Justification; But as de
praesenti obtained, Simultaneous with it; And the other after it, That though
they Defined it by Persuasion of a Pardon already had; yet made it not the
Justifying Act. The utmost Point, to which they went, was, That this Fiducia,
or Particular Persuasion of Forgiveness de praesenti, was Simultaneous, and in
the same Instant of Nature with Justification, which is a Motion contrary unto,
and destructive of the Antinomian Error, as hereby it is made impossible for an
Elect Person to be actually justified in the sight of God one Instant of Nature
before he be by Faith United unto Christ, that every such person, so long as he
is in a state of Unbelief and Unregeneracy, is unjustified is in a state of
Condemnation, and under the Curse of the Law.

This particular is very clearly expressed by the Learned Dr. Ames, who says,
That this Justifying Faith does, Fides ista Justificans sua Vatura producit,
atque adeo onjunctam secum habet specialem ac certam persuesionem, de gratia ac
miserecordia Dei in Christo: unde etiam per istam persuesionem Fides
justificans non male saepe describitur ab Orthodoxis, praesereim cum impugnant
generalem illam Fidem, ^ui omnia tribuunt Pontisicii. Ame. Medul. l. 7. c. 27.
19.
of its own Nature, beget, and therefore has conjoined with it a special, and
sure Persuasion of the Grace and Mercy of God in Christ; whence it is often
described by the Orthodox to be such a Persuasion, especially, when they oppugn
that General Faith, to which the Papists ascribe every thing. Or, as Le Blank
has it. If any enquire, Sed siquis jam quaerat, cur Fidem Justificantem
difiniunt ^b Actu, qui revera non ju^tificat, sid siquitur jamfictam
Justificationent potius quam ab ^^lo, quo revera justisicamur, ad ^stud ^o
videntur inducti, quod ^ctus iste posterior praecidentem supponat, and clarius
Fidei per^ectionem explicet, and ad co^solationem sidelium maxim fa^iat, etc.
These. de Fid. Just. ^at. 68.
why they define Justifying Faith by an Act that does not really justify, but
follows Justification, rather than by an Act, by which we are justified? It
seems very evident, they were induced thereunto by these considerations;
namely, That that last Act praesupposes the former, and does more clearly
explicate the entire nature of Faith, and contribute more to the comfort of
Believers. In a word; this Assurance of the pardon of sin was the more insisted
on by the Reformers, because so much opposed by the Papists, with whom the
Controversy then mostly was. So far Le Blank.

To give a more particular Account of the the Lesser Differences among the
First Reformers, as well as among our Modern Divines, and show how they
variously explicated the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, being more to
gratify the Curiosity of some, than satisfy the Consciences of any, I will
wave it, and go on to

The second; That many Fears and Doubts are consistent with Justifying Faith.

Though they made Justifying Faith to be a firm persuasion of the pardon of sin,
yet they meant not such a persuasion as was so exclusive of all Doubts and
Fears about our Salvation, that whoever in the least doubted, was destitute of
Faith.

This Persuasion (says Dr. Ames) as to the sense of it, does not always
accompany Faith: For, it may be, and often is, either through the weakness of
Judgment, or by reason of many Temptations and Troubles of Spirit, that he, who
savingly believes, and is by Faith justified in the sight of God, may, for a
time, judging of himself by what he feels, conclude that he neither savingly
believes, nor is reconciled to God.

Thus much the Dr. adds immediately after he had told us, that many who were
Orthodox described Faith by a persuasion of the Grace and Mercy of God in
Christ, whereby he seems to insinuate a distinction to be between the
Persuasion of Pardon, and the sense of that Persuasion; as if they who had not
the sense of it might yet have the persuasion. And it must be granted, that
there is somewhat of this nature obvious to the Experience of those Divines,
who are most conversant with troubled Consciences. For, it is commonly observed
by them, that godly persons, even when under the Horror of Despair, crying out,
They shall be damned; if asked, whether they will part with what Interest they
have in Christ, will answer, they will not do it for a World; which intimates, as
if they had a secret persuasion of pardon, though they wanted a sense of it;
which the first Reformers explained by distinguishing between the Habit, and
Act of Saving Faith. True Justifying Faith (say they) may be taken in a
twofold sense: 1. For the Habit it self, or for that power which is by the
Holy Ghost infused into the hearts of the Elect. Or 2. For the Act, which
proceeds from that Quality, Habit or Power, by which we are said Actually to
believe in Christ: Or that by which we do by an actual persuasion believe in
him.
That Faith in Scripture is often taken for an Act, no one doubts: That it is an
Habit, Power or Quality, those Scriptures evince, which say, The Just shall
live by Faith: And, Without Faith it is impossible to please God. For the Just,
when asleep, and by an actual Faith, think not on Christ, do yet then live by
Faith, and please God. Faith is also in the Scriptures called, Science,
Knowledge, a full Persuasion; all which reside in the heart, when we do not
actually think of God. As Scientia is by Philosophers put into the praedicament
of Quality. Thus a Child, in whom can be no Acts of Knowledge, Sense or
Persuasion has yet the Spirit, the Power or Habit of Faith, as All the Learned
do confess; particularly Martin Bucer. Besides, they are very particular and
distinct in their Endeavors to make it manifest that Faith, and Fears are
consistent. For they suppose Faith to be often conflicting with Doubts and Fears,
which they, to continue the use of Zanchy's words, thus solve: There is no
absurdity in asserting Faith to be a firm Persuasion, and yet the Believer
disturbed with afflictive doubts; for there being in ever^ Believer Flesh, as
well as Spirit; when the Spirit prevails, there is a sense of goodness, sweetly
refreshing the Soul; a looking to the Gospel-Promise, a relying on it, an
apprehending Eternal Life as prepared for him, rejoicing in it. But when the
Flesh conquers, there is a sight of sin and misery filling the Soul with the
anguish of sorrow; a view of its obnoxiousness to death, at which he trembles,
fearing lest he die eternally, which is occasioned by the weakness of our
Faith, which never, whilst in this Life, arrives to that degree of Perfection,
Zanch. Oper. Tom. 8. ^e 7. de Fide.
as to cure the Believer wholly of his Unbelief and Diffidence. It Is true, the
first Believers have not explicated Justifying Faith as distinct from Assurance
so clearly as our more Modern Divines have done; amongst whom the Westminster
Assembly in their Confession, as Le Blanc has well observed, have excelled.
However, they did carefully endeavor to express their Sentiments so, as to
prevent the despair of such, who, though sound Believers, were afflicted with
many fears and doubts about the pardon of their sins, and their interest in the
Mercy of God. They insisted on a persuasion, a firm belief of the forgiveness
of sins; but on such a persuasion as admitting of different degrees was in many
so weak and feeble, as not to be always perceptible. A Notion, as they
explicated it, easy enough to be understood. For in other Instances, what more
common than to distinguish between Acts and Habits? That the Acts are seen,
when the Habits from whence they flow lies undiscovered. Every one knows
whether he believes this or the other Report; loves this, or the other person;
as well as whether he sees this, or the other Object. The Acts of the
Understanding, and Rational Appetite, when exerted, are as perceivable in their
way, as our Sensitive Acts. But then it should be minded, that these Acts are
often looked upon in their Habits, and when actuated, are commonly blended with
such other as are conversant about contrary Objects, and their prevalence over
these other so inconsiderable, that it is not at all times discernable, to which
if we add, the consideration of the World's Allurements, Satan's many subtle
Temptations, etc. it cannot but be that true Believers fall into great
perplexities about the forgiveness of their sins; which though great, destroy not
their Faith, nor are they inconsistent with this firm persuasion. Strong fears,
and many doubts may consist with a moral certainty of the same Truths. How many
have a moral certainty of the Immortality of their Souls, and yet grievously
tormented with amazing frights about it?

This very Point the Learned Mr. Baxter in discourse with me did thus
illustrate: It is (says he) as with a Man so firmly chained to the top of a
high Spire, as to have the Greatest Certainty of his Fastness, yet looking
down, could not but fear a Fall.

We may then easily perceive, that from the making Faith to lie in a persuasion
of the pardon of sin, it cannot be justly inferred, that whoever doubts of
God's Mercy in Christ, is destitute of Justifying Faith: for this persuasion
may be in the Habit, where not in the Act, and is consistent enough with strong
fears, and many doubts, as the first Reformers expressly affirmed; which is
enough to free them from the Reproach of driving by their Doctrine every sound
Believer who has any doubts about his being pardoned, into the Horror of
Despair.

Nor did they so describe Justifying Faith as to give unto any an occasion to
expect Heaven, whilst they lived under the Reigning Power of their sins. On the
contrary they held,

III. That none, who continue to live under the Reigning Power of their Lusts
had, or whilst so, can have Saving Faith.

'Twas constantly asserted by them, That to true Justifying Faith, whether
strong, or weak, Life, and Perpetuity were too essential, and inseparable
Properties; the first is necessary, that it may be a Living Faith, exciting in
the Believer the Life of Christ, that is to say, such a Life as stirred up in
his heart such new, and heavenly motions, thoughts and desires, conform to
God's Law, as drove out all earthly Affections. Thus much, they said, was the
Import of those Scriptures, which speak of purifying the heart, mortifying the
flesh, quickening of the spirit, crucifying, and burying the Old Man, putting on
the New. The Holy Ghost in the Sacred Scriptures does so very much press this
one thing, especially in the Epistles of James and John, that it must be
acknowledged, that this is so Essential a Property of Faith, that it cannot be
true Justifying Faith without it, as all of us unanimoustly hold.

These are the words of the Learned Zanchy, De Persev. Sanct. Confess. p. 349.
who in answer to an Objection against the Perseverance of the Saints, carrying
in it this very Calumny. [That the Protestant Doctrine is such as makes
Repentance of nouse, lets loose the Reins to all manner of Profaneness,
rendering men so very secure, as to embolden them to venture on sin contrary to
the convictions of their Consciences] does further declare That true Justifying
Faith cannot be where sin does reign; that sound Believers, although they sin not
as the wicked do, Ipsorum [vid. fidelium] lapsus suapte natura, aterna morte
esse dignissimos; item displicere Deo; item punitum iri a Deo, etc. Zanch. de
pers. Sanct. p. 159.
yet the sins they fall into, are in their own nature most worthy of Eternal
Death. Displease God, and are punished by him: The Fervor of the Holy Spirit
in them much abated; the flames of their Faith quenched; their minds troubled;
let them therefore repent of their sins, return to the Lord, as Children to
their Father, not cut off from Christ, nor wholly forsaken of the Holy Spirit.
Again; This is the nature of true Faith, to stir up in us true Repentance,
Zanch. Oper. Tom. 6. loc. 5. de Fide, p. 43.
and inflame our hearts with Love to God, and a Zeal to please him, and promote
his Glory, to provoke us sincerely to love our Neighbor, that as much as in us
lies we may live peaceably with all men; that it fill our Souls with a love to
true Holiness, a hatred unto all sin, and that in all things we walk worthy of
the Gospel of Christ.

But the sense of the Reformed may be more fully seen in our Book of Homilies,
touching the Doctrine of Justification, Sermon 3d of Salvat.
highly approved of by the generality of the Reformed, where it is thus; Now you
shall hear the office and duty of a Christian-man unto God. Our office is not
to pass the time of this present Life unfruitfully, and idly, after that we are
Baptized, or Justified, not caring how few good works we do, to the Glory of
God, and Profit of our Neighbors: Much less is it our office, after that we be
once made Christ's Members, to live contrary to the same, making of our selves
Members of the Devil, walking after his Inticements, and after the Suggestions
of the World, and the Flesh, whereby we know, that we do serve the World, and
the Devil, and not God. For that Faith, which brings forth (without
Repentance) either Evil Works, or no Good Works, is not a Right, (...) and
Lively Faith, but a Mean, Devilish, Counterfeit and Feigned Faith, as St. Paul,
and St. James call it. -- For the Right, and True Christian Faith is, not only
to believe that Holy Scriptures are true, but also to have a Sure Trust, and
Confidence in God's Merciful Promises, to be saved from Everlasting Damnation
by Christ; whereof does follow a loving heart to obey his Commandments. And
this true Christian Faith neither any Devil has nor yet any Man, which in the
outward Profession of his Mouth, and the outward Receiving of the Sacraments,
in coming to the Church, and in all other outward Appearances, seems to be a
Christian-man, and yet in his Living and Deeds shows the contrary. For, how
can a Man have this True Faith, this Sure Trust and Confidence in God, that by
the Merits of Christ his sins be forgiven, and be reconciled to the Favor of
God, and to be partaker of the Kingdom of Heaven by Christ, when he iveth
ungodly, and denies Christ in his Deeds? Surely, no such ungodly man can have
this Faith, and Trust in God. For, as they know Christ to be the only Savior
of the World; so they know also that wicked men shall not enjoy the Kingdom of
God. They know, that God Hates Unrighteousness, that he will destroy all those
that speak untruly, that those that have done good works, (which cannot be done
without a Lively Faith in Christ) shall come forth into the Resurrection of
Life, and those that have done Evil, shall come unto the Resurrection of
Judgment: Very well they know also, that to them, that be contentious, and to
them, that will not be obedient unto the Truth, but will obey Unrighteousness,
shall come Indignation, Wrath, and Affliction, etc. -- These great and merciful
Benefits of God, (if they be well considered) do neither minister unto us
Decasion to be Idle, and to live without doing any good works; neither yet
stireth us by any means, to do evil things: But, contrary-ways, if we be not
Desperate Persons, and our hearts Harder than Stones they move us to render our
selves unto God, wholly, with all our Will, Heart, Might and Power, to serve
him in all good Deeds, obeying his Commandments during our Lives, to seek in
all things his Honor and Glory; not our Sensual Pleasures and Vain Glory,
evermore dreading willingly to offend such a Merciful God, and Loving Redeemer
in Word, Thought, or Deed.

Thus much and more to the same purpose in the Book of Homilies, evincing how
that the First Reformers were far from encouraging any to please themselves
with hopes of Heaven, whilst they remained lovers of their Pleasures, more than
lovers of God. For, as they often declared, that Justifying Faith was a lively
working Faith; that Faith without Repentance* Love to God, and a Holy Life, was
a Dead, a Devilish Faith: So although they denied the meritoriousness of Good
works, yet asserted their necessity; even such a necessity of their presence,
of their following Faith, as made it certain, that no Salvation could be had
without them. They who were offended with their being made necessary to
Salvation, fearing lest such an Assertion should introduce the merit of good
works, held good works necessary necessitate Pracepti, as also necessitate
Medii, taking the means not for an Ethical, but Physical, or Mathematical,
middle between two extremes, as the Equator is between the two Tropicks; and
the Ecliptic Line in the Zodiak, affirming them (to use the words of Cromayer)
to be necessary Ante, though not Ad salutem.

To give my Reader a clearer light into this matter, I will acquaint him with a
Controversy, that disturbed the Churches Peace, soon after the Beginning of
the Reformation.

George Major, who, as Melchior Adamus in his Life reports, being an Intimate
of Luther, and Melancthon, and chosen with Martin Bucer, Brentius, Sed cum
nihit sit, quod non made into pretando possit depravari^ in^^rrit and Major in
Grarislimam Invi^^am and Odium: quod aliquando, ut fuit Zelotis and
Sanctimoniae Commendator summus, dixerat, FIERI NON POSSE VT QVI NON STVDE ANY
BONIS OP ERIBVS SALVTEM CONSEQVANTVR AETERNAM; and BONORVM OPERVM STVDIVM ESSE
NECESSARIVM AD SALVTEM. Adversarii enim ejus, de quibus Antesignani suerunt
Matthias Flacius Illvricus, Nic. Gallus, Nic. Amsdorffius, pup sitionem hanc,
Bona Opera necessaria sunt ad salutem, interpretari sunt ira; quasi statutrat
Major jurta Origenicam, and Pontiticiam Synecdochen, BONA OPERA CVM FIDE MERERI
REMISSIONEM PECCATORVM and ESSE CAVSAM JVSTIFICATIONIS CORAM DEO. Melch. Adam
Viz. Geor. Major.
and Erhardus Snepsius to concert matters Religious at Ratisbone with Petrus
Malvenda, Eberbardus Billicus, Johannes Hofmeisrerus. and Johannes Cocklaus,
was a zealous Promoter of Holiness, asterting, that he, who was not studious
of, good works, could not obtain Eternal Life; and that the study of good works
was and necessary to Salvation.

This Great Man, though extraordinary useful in carrying on the Reformation,
having laid down these Assertions, could not escape the Hatred, the Malice and
Rage of Good Men, but soon feelingly knew, what were the Fatal Effects of Evil
Surmisings, and Rash Censurings, for no meaner persons than Flacius Illyricus,
Nicholaus Gallus, and Nicholaus Amsdorffius affirmed, that according to the
Origenic, and Popish Synecdoche, Major meant nothing less than that Good Works
with Faith do merit the pardon of sin, and are the cause of our Justification
in the sight of God.

In opposition unto Major, Amsdorffius, who with Hieronymus Schuffius a Lawyer,
and Justus Jonas a Divine, accompanied Luther to Worms, held Good Works to be
Noxious and Hurtful to our Salvation.

This Controversy in its first Appearances is great; Milch. Adam. in Vit.
Nich. Amsdorf.
and through a warm and peevish management, in its Effects, was very
pernicious; and yet, if, as in Charity we are bound, we do but believe George
Majors Solemn Protestations, and Regard what the more moderate judged of
Amsdorffius, we shall see enough to oblige us to think they meant the same
thing, and that the Controversy was more owing unto the mistakes and
misrepresentations made of one another than to any Real Differences amongst
them.

George Major, to vindicate himself from the Charge brought against him, Major
in Confessione Public edita, and Disputationibus; testatus est nunquam se ita
sensisse, nunquam ita docuisse; sed totum Justificationis nostrae negotium, and
salutis Beneficium in solidum acceptum retulisse, and refer miserecordiae
Divinae, atque unici Salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi merito; idque sola fide
a^cipi, quam bona opera, ut fructus certissimi, sequantur. Quin imo diserte
testatus est; se positione illa, qua videret aliquos offend, deinceps non
usurum. Melch. Adam. Vit. Major.
emits a Confession of his Faith, and at Public Disputations declares, He
never taught as Illyrious, etc. suggested, nor ever held any such Doctrimes;
but always believed, That the whole of our Justification and Salvation must be
ascribed to the Mercy of God, and Merit of Jesus Christ our only Savior; and
that it is received only by Faith, attended with Good Works as indubitable
Fruits thereof; further protesting, that seeing this Proposition [Good Works
are necessary to Salvation] was offensive, he would never use it more.

On the other hand Kromayer mentions some excusing Amsdorffius, they being of
Opinion, Sunt qui Amsdorffium excusant ac si bona opera perniciosa dixtrit ad
salutem per accidens, quatenus Fiducia in Operions collocetur. Krom. Theol.
Pos. Po. Art. 12. de bon. oper.
he held Good Works to be pernicious to Salvation only by Accident, as men
place their Trust and Confidence in them. And adds, that Amsdorffe in a Book,
written in the German Tongue against George Major, complains of his being
unrighteously reproached by Major. George Major (says he) so interprets me, as
if I had taught, that Good Works are a hinderance to Salvation, and a shame to
a Christian. God forgive him; I never believed, nor so much as thought that our
Opinion should have been so falsely and untrully reprepresented -- Such ungodly
words should not be mentioned or heard in a Christian Church.

Thus they both complain of Misrepresentation, which gave little or no Relief;
for there being amongst 'em many Forming of Parties and Factions, what he, who
best understands his own sense, avers, is not to be regarded. The Accuser, though
under the Government of his Passions, and knows least of his Adversary, obtains
the greatest Credit with the generality, which occasioned Adamus to say, Sed,
quae est hominum Credulitas, ac calumniae efficacitas! effugere suspicionem
Doctrime diversae nunquam potnit. Adeo verum est illud. Calumniare Audacter;
semper aliquid haeret. Melch, Adam. Vit. Maj.
That such is the Credulity of most, such the power of Calumny, that Major
could never wholly free himself from unjust suspicions. So true is that saying,
Calumniare audacter; semper aliquid haeret.

However, though there were different Opinions amongst them managed with most
violent Heats, they were rather about words, and lesser matters, than about
what was substantial, Kromayer. ubi supra.
as the Formula Concordiae in Kromayerus has it. The first Schism, amongst
certain Divines, was occasioned by some men's asserting Good Works to be
necessary to Salvation, that it is impossible for any to be saved without them,
and no one ever was: And others taught, that Good Works were hurtful. Another
Schism arose amongst some about the words [ Necessary, and Free] one Party
holding, that the word [Necessary] is not to be affirmed of our New Obedience,
for that is not to proceed from Necessity, or Constraint; but from a Free
Spirit: Others plead for the Retaining this word, because New Obedience is not
left to our pleasure to render it as we list; for the Regenerate themselves are
bound to New Obedience.

This being the true state of the several Controversies about Good Works; which
were held to be Necessary to Salvation by George Major, to be Free, by Andreas
Musculus, and to be Hurtful, by Amsdorffius, The Formula proceeds to a Decision
thus. We reject and condemn these following Phrases, [Good Works are necessary
to Salvation. No one was ever saved without them. It is impossible to be saved
without Good Works]. We do also reject, and condem that most offensive Phrase,
as pernicious to Christian Discipline [That Good Works hinder our Salvation.]
We Believe, Teach^ and Confess, Credimus, docemus, and proficemur, omnes quidem
homines, praecipue vero eos, qui per Spiritum Sanctum Regenerati sunt, and
Renovati, ad BONA OPERA facienda DEBITORES esse. Et in hac sententia vocabula
illa NECESSARIVM, DEBERE, OPORIERE, recte usu^pantur, etc.
that all men, more especially they who are Regenerated, and Renewed by the
Holy Spirit, are bound to do Good Works. And, that in this case these words
[Necessary, Ought. Obliged] are rightly used even with respect to them that are
Renewed, and are agreeable to the Form of sound words. And yet nevertheless
these words [Necessity, Necessary] when spoken of the Regenerate, must not be
understood as if they imported the same with Coaction, or Force; but only of
that Obedience, which is Due, to which we are Bound, and Obliged; which true
Believers, as Renewed, do perform, not by the Compulsion and Force of the Law,
but spontaneously, with a Free Spirit, in as much as they are no longer under
the Law, but Grace.

They condemn not the men as Embracers of Unsound Doctrine, but reject and
condemn the usage of some unsafe and hurtful Phrases, all holding Good Works to
be a Duty, to which we are obliged by the holy Commandment, not to be performed
by Force, and Constraint, but freely; not to be trusted in for our
Justification or Salvation; and yet springing out necessarily of a True and
Lively Faith, are acceptable unto God.

From what has been collected out of the Writings of the first Reformers, we
may see that the Antinomians can find no place to shelter themselves under
their shadow; for though they asserted that Justifying Faith lay in the
persuasion of the forgiveness of sin, yet they did, consistently enough with
this Notion, deny that Pardon was before Faith, or that Fears and Doubts, and
Justifying Faith, could not stand together; or, that a man, whilst remaining
under the Reigning Power of his sins, could have Faith: They were positive,
that the Justifying Act of Faith was in order of Nature (as most) antecedent,
or, at least, simultaneous, (as others) with Justification; that true Believers
were continually conflicting with Fears, and Doubts; and, that that Faith,
which was not fruitful, in producing Good Works, was not a Saving, 'twas a
Devilish Faith. Nor did they make it the duty of all men in the World
immediately to believe their sins were pardoned: But held convictions of sin,
arising from the Knowledge of the Law to be necessary, and that there were some
Acts of Faith Dispositive, and therefore Antecedent to Justification, and to
the Justifying Act of Faith, of which I design, if God will, to treat more
fully in my second Part.

CHAP. VI.
The sense of the Papists, Arminians, and Socinians, about the Subject of
Faith. The different Apprehensions of the Orthodox about the same. Camero,
Amyrald, Dally held, that the Understanding was the only Subject of Saving
Faith; yet not Antinomians. How they hereby were enabled to oppose
Justification by Works, as held either by Papist, Socinian, or Arminian.

THE denying Saving Faith to be an Act of the Will is not Antinomianism.
Touching the Subject, or Seat of Faith, whether it be the Understanding only,
or the Will, or both, the Learned have different Apprehensions. And some great
Men, sound in the Faith, are positive, that it is only in the Understanding.

The Papists, who for the most part make an Historick Faith to be Saving,
confine it to the Understanding: And yet Estius, conform to the sense of
Aquinas, yields, that it has its Rise from the Will, by which the
Understanding is inclined to believe. Contarenus goes further, holding, that
it does also terminate in the Will. Cajetane is for Faiths being an Act of both
Faculties; which according to the account Bonaventure gives of it, has been
the Opinion of the Ancient Schoolmen: And as Le Blanc, Nam si Sermo sit de fide
viva, and per dilectionem operante, quam formatam appellant, dubitari non
potest, quin illa etiam ex eorum mente, non intellectum tantum, sed voluntatem
etiam occupet, and in ea sedem habet. Le Blanc These. de Subj. Fid. p. 239.
out of whom I have taken these passages, the Papists, if they speak of their
Living Faith, their Fides formata, must place it in the Will, it being Love, an
Act of the Will, that, according unto them, is the Form of Faith.

Limborch, giving the sense of the Remonstrants, Nos dicimus Fidem nec esse
merum Intellectus, nec merum voluntatis Actum; sed mixtum, partim Intellectus,
partim Voluntatis. Limb. Theol. Christ. lib. 5. cap. 9. 23.
says, That Faith is not merely an Act of the Understanding, nor merely of the
Will, but mixed partly of the one, and partly of the other.

Crellius, the Socinian, in his Christian Ethics, Fides dusbus modis
considerari potest; vel sola, vel cum suis effectis conjuncla; adeoque auplex
iterum oritur fidei significatio; altera Propria; altera Figurata, in qua
Meconynda cum Synecdoche concurrit. De Priori jam satis. dictum; iaque
intelligitur, 1 Cor. 13. ubi Fides a Spe, and Charitate distinguitur.
Posterior, quae ad Voluntarem, aeque, aut magis, quam ad Mentem pertinet; est
fiducia in Deum, aut etiam Christum collocata, quae est Asser. sus firmus Dei
Promissis adhibitus, cum vehementi desiderio conjunctus. Itaque haec fides spem
quoque in se compleclitar. Crel. Christ. Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 5.
tells us, That Faith may be considered after a twofold manner, either as it is
in it self alone; or as in conjunction with its effects; whence it has a
double signification, the one proper, the other figurative, in which a Metonymy
does meet with a Synechdoche. The first has been often spoken unto; it being
that Faith mentioned in 1 Cor. 13 where it is distinguished from Hope, and
Charity: The other is that, which does as much, if not more, belong to the
Will, as to the Understanding, etc.

This Point has been of late years much controverted amongst the Orthodox. Le
Blanc brings in Chamier, Le Blanc ubi sup.
VVendelin, Bucanus, Rivet, and Altingius as holding Faith to be seated both in
the Understanding, Hoornb. Vet. and Nov. l. 3. c. 12.
and Will. Hoornbeeck adds to these as concurring with them the Dutch
Catechism, Vrsine, Paraeus. Trelcatius, Tilenus, and amongst our English
Divines Preston and Ball.

Davenant, and Wotton, though they are for Faiths being a Fiducia, yet
distinguish it from that which imports a firm Persuasion, and make it to be a
Relying on Christ for Pardon, and an Act of the Will, and to belong to both
Faculties. Dr. Ames in Le Blanc fixes it only in the Will.

Cloppenburg says, Clip. Compend. Socin. Consat. c. 7. Le Blanc. ubi sup.
Hurab. ubi sup.
that it is a Problem amongst the Orthodox, whether the Understanding or Will be
the Subject of Faith. Le Blanc thinks that this Controversy is but
Philosophical, and may be passed by without Division. Hoornbeeck, though he
places Faith in the Understanding and Will, yet does not esteem it necessary
to contend about it. Nanne omnis difficultas tolleretur, etc. Wits. Oecon.
Foed. l. 3. c. 7. 4.
Would not (says he) every Difficulty be removed, and the whole Controversy
so much agitated amongst Divines about the Subject of Faith the composed, if,
as well we may deny any real. Difference between the Understanding and Will, or
between these Faculties and the Soul?

However there are amongst the Reformed, some Great Divines, highly valued for
their Learning, who lay much stress on this Controversy and are Zealous for
Faith, being only an Act of the Understanding.

Baronius, See L. Blanc ubi supra.
though he looks on Faith to belong to the Will in several respects, as it has
its Origin and Rise from it, assent it self being an Imperate Act of the Will,
and therefore may be denominated a Voluntary, Free Act; as also with respect to
the Acts annexed unto, and concomitant with Faith; for, in that very instant
Faith in the Understanding assents to Gospel-Promises, and with a firm Judgment
applies them to ones self, the Will with an ardent Love embraces the Grace and
Favor of God. Lastly, with respect to its Fruits, Sanctification, and softning
of the Will, follows the Illumination of Faith in the Mind; yet Faith properly,
subjectively, and with respect to its Essence, is only in the Understanding.

Camero, discoursing of Effectual Calling, refers to that Promise in Ezekiel
36. for the taking away the Heart of Stone, and giving a Heart of Flesh, says,
That the Heart of Stone is, by the Apostle Paul, interpreted by (...), a Carnal
Mind. In another place the Apostle is more express, affirming the Gospel to be
written in the Fleshly, [not Stony] Tables of the Heart, which cannot be
understood of the Will; [the Law is not written in the Will] but in the Mind,
whose part it is to understand it. Besides, to understand in Scripture is
attributed to the Heart. So it is Romans 1.21. (...), a Foolish Heart, or a Heart
without Understanding. So Deuteronomy. 29.4. the Lord has not given you an Heart to
Perceive; and in Romans 10. With the heart man believes to Righteousness, where,
by the Heart, the Mind undoubtedly is meant; for to Believe is an Act of the
Understanding; that is to say, to Believe is an Act that has Truth for its
Object, and therefore must be in the Mind. Our Lord Jesus Christ, who promises
Eternal Life to Faith alone, defines Faith by Knowledge; [ This is Life Eternal
to know thee the Only True God, etc.] By the Heart then in Scripture we must
understand the Mind, not that which Philosophers call simply Theoretick, but
rather the Practick Understanding, which the Will cannot but follow. Came.
praelect. de Eccles. p. 214.
The same Author on Matthew. 18.7. has it thus; 'Faith cannot be separated from
Love, and yet Faith is in the Understanding; the Understanding therefore draws
with it, and necessarily leads the Will, otherwise there would be no
Inconsistency between a man's being a sound Believer, and a most vicious
person. To this it may be objected, That Faith, at least as to some part of it,
is in the Will. It Is not our business at this time to dispute concerning the
Subject of Faith, and yet, without being guilty of any impertinence, we may
assert, that Faith as to some part of it, is necessarily in the Understanding.
Now what is that part of Faith? they will tell you. it is Knowledge. But that part
of Faith, which does necessarily work Love. Whatever is in the Understanding,
most certainly is Knowledge; not every Knowledge, but that Knowledge, by which
thou do fix it in thy Soul, that the thing is thine, and cannot be separated
from Love. Nor can it be granted, that any one simple Habit should be in diverse
Subjects. They are Distinct Habits of the Understanding and Will; so that the
Will and Understanding are distinguished from each other. In a word, who can
deny that the (...) credere, to believe, is an Act of the Mind? Certainly
Belief has Truth for its Object; so that he who believes not, is said to make
God a Liar, etc.

Amyrald, in the Theses Salmurienses, speaking of the Subject, in which the
Habit of Faith inheres, affirms it to be the Understanding Faculty. Subjectum
cui Habitus Fidei innascitur atque inhaeret, facultatem eam esse quae in hemine
Intellectus appellatur, debet esse extra controversiam apud omnes, qui saltem
rem istam considerant non omnino oscitanter, etc. These. Salmur. de Fide par.
pri. 15. etc.
This (says he) should be embraced by all, innascitur atque but controverted
by none, except by such as have not closely studied this Point. To have Faith
imports nothing else than to Believe; to believe is to be persuaded of the
Truth of a thing, and therefore must belong to the Understanding. For Truth is
the Object thereof, and Persuasion is no otherwise than by admitting or
receiving into the Mind those Reasons, and Arguments, by which a thing
demonstrates it self to be True. Nor can any other thing be gathered from the
Holy Scriptures. If we consult those expressions used to represent Faith unto
us, whether they be Proper, or Metaphorical, they all direct us to conclude
Faith to belong to the Mind. To begin with what words are proper; The Object of
Faith is said to be Truth; the Faculty the Heart, or Mind ( Heart in Scripture,
and amongst other good Authors, denotes the Understanding.) The Effect arising
from Faith is Knowledge, Wisdom, etc. The State of them, who attain unto this
is such, that they, who are in it are said to be Intelligent, and Knowing; and
they who are in Unbelief are Fools, and Unwise. The Metaphors which import the
same Notion of Faith, are numberless. This, and much more has Amyrald, with
whom many great Divines agree.

Spanhemius, in his Exercitations about Universal Grace, provoking his
Adversary to the National Synod of Dort, Synodus profitetur, Sacras Scripturas
testari, Deum novas Qualitates Fidei, Obedientiae, acsensus amo ris sui
Cordibus noshis infundere. Hoc^ er^ consistere non potest, si Fidei Subjectum
sit tantum intellectus, ut docet vir doctus in These. suis de Fide. Span.
Exercit. Great. Univers. p 1675, 1676.
endeavors to press him with that Synods declaring, 'That from the Holy
Scriptures, it is clear, God infuses into our Hearts the New Qualities of Faith,
Obedience, and the Sense of his Love, which cannot (says Spanhem) consist with
Amyrald's making the Understanding the only Seat of Faith.

To this the Learned Dalley, in his Apology for the two National Synods, namely
Abenson, and Chaventon in France, returns this Answer; It Is true, Quod ait
Synodus and Fidem, Obedientiam, and sensum Amoris Dei Cordibus nostris infundi,
verum esse fatentur FRATRES Fides enim Menti, quae Cor est, sensus item Menti,
(sentire enim Mentis est, non voluntatis;) Obedienna partim Menti, partim
Voluntati, quae and ipsa Cor est* convenit. Cor vero an Intellectu distinctum
sedem esse istorum omnium Spiritus donorum, accusat^^s dictatum est; non est
Synodi Decretum. Dall. Apol. p. 658.
the Synod declares, that Faith, Obedience, and the sense of God's Love are
infused into our hearts. For Faith belongs to the Understanding, and so does a
sense of Love (to perceive a thing, being the part of the Understanding; not of
the Will;) Obedience is partly in the Mind, and partly in the Will. which is
also the Heart. But that the Heart, as distinct from the Mind, is the Seat of
the Gifts of the Spirit is the Dictate of the Accuser, not a Decree of the
Synod.

However, though they made Faith to lie only in the Understanding, yet held it to
be such a Practical Assent unto Gospel Truths as effectually engaged the Will
most intensely to Love Christ; and this Love to be such as influenced them to
receive the Lord Jesus on his own Terms, and keep his Commands; asserting also,
Faith and Love though distinct Graces to be Inseparable, and Saving Faith to be
Prolifick of Good Works; so that where these were absent, there the Faith was
not saving; so carefully did they Fence against Antinomianism.

Besides, by this Notion of Saving Faith, they kept themselves at a great
distance from the Arminian, and Socinian Dogmata about Justification, as will
appear plainly on a fairer and just proposal of their Sentiments in these
Points.

Crellius, considering Faith, as conjunct with its Effects, such as Hope, Love,
and Obedience, asserts it to be Justifying as thus conjoined, and so makes Good
Works to have the same Interest in our Justification, that Faith has.

That Faith (says he) by which we are Justified, or which on our part is the
nearest and only Cause of our Justification, is a Firm Hope in the Divine
Promises, placed in God through Christ, begetting Obedience to the Commands;
the Fiducia, or Firm Hope taken properly, may be the Genus of Justifying Faith;
but Obedience to Christ's Commands, flowing from this Firm Hope, may be the
Form; or, as St. James has it, is the Life, the Soul of Faith. This Faith,
thus defined, is that, which is required as necessary to Salvation under the
New Testament. Crel. Ethic. Christ. lib. 1. c. 5.


As Crellius, in his Christian Ethics gives this account of Faith; in like
manner he does the same, Romans 3.22. Gal. 2.16. Est vero Commentarius hic,
vivente adbuc Joanne Crellio -- Colle^a into desideratissimo a me consectus and
el^cubratus, ita ut in eruendis Epistolae istius sinsibus omnis mibi cum
Crellio sociata fucrit opera, idque ita ut ei primas hic parts merito defer
debtam; Praesat. ad Lector. Slichtin. in Heb. c. 11. v. 1.
on the Romans, and Galatians, and concurs with Slichtingius in his Commentary
on the Hebrews, in composing which he had a great hand, as Slichtingius, in his
Preface does ingeniously confess, where it is thus: Faith, if properly, and
strictly taken, differs from Obedience; and our coming unto God: For, Faith
must be in him, who seeks God, before he does it. Faith more largely by a
Synechdodochical Metonymy, comprehends within it its Effects, namely, all Works
of Piety and Righteousness.

Slichtingius, John 5.24. Fides in Christum trahit secum observationem
mandatorum ejus, quae nisi sequatur, vanam, and irritam esse sidem oportet.
on John, thus; Faith in Christ carries with it an observation of his Commands,
and without it all Faith is vain, yea dead. -- In this Faith therefore an
observation of Christ's Commandments is included. Wolzogenius, Fides duas habet
parts Primarias; una est Fiducia in Deum per Christum, inque promissiones ejus
collocata; altera Obedientia, ac observantia Preceptorum ^jus. Wolzog.
Instruct. ad util. Lect. Lib. N. T. cap. 6.
Faith has two Principal parts; the one is a Trust in God through Christ, and
in his Promises; the other is Obedience to his Commandments. Smalcius in his
Refutation of Frantzius is more express. Smal^. Refut. These. de Cause. peccat.
p. 450.
Even as the Soul is the Essential Form of Man; so are Works and Christian
Piety the Essence, and Form of Faith. Trust in God through Christ may be
Ratione distinguished from true Piety, and Obedience; but yet there is no Real
difference between them. Socinus himself thus; Fidei siquidem nomine ex qua
Justificemur, intelligit Paulus Fiduciam ejusmodi in Deo, per Christum
collocatam, ex qua necessario Obedientia Praeceptorum Christi nas^atur; quae
etiam Obedientia sit tanquam forma and substantia is it. us Fidei. Socin Lect.
Sacr. in Bibl. Polon.
That Faith by which we are Justified, according to the Apostle Paul, is a
Trust in God through Christ, from whence Obedience to his Commandments does
necessarily flow; for it is as the form and substance of this Faith.

Thus the Socinians, distinguishing between Faith, as taken properly, or
strictly; and figuratively, as largely, make the first to be only a Fiducia;
the second, which they affirm to be Justifying, is comprehensive of Hope* Love,
and Works, which (say they) are the Essential form of a Living Justifying
Faith, whereby they introduce Justification by Works; Not the Merit of our
Works: This they strenuously oppose. So Wolzogenius, who, speaking of the Merit
of our Good Works, assures us, That if we look closely into this matter,
nothing can appear to be more certain and true than that we cannot by our Good
Works Merit any thing of God. For, he is our Creator, and as such, has a right
to all we can do without the proposal of any Compensation or Reward -- Besides,
it is a Dictate of Right Reason, that the Fruit belongs to him that sows,
Welzog. in Luc. c. 17. c. 7.
and surely it is God that works in us to will, and to do of his own good
pleasure. These and some other considerations he offers against the Merit of
our Good Works. Crel. in Ephesians. c. 3 v. 1.11. Socin. Frag. de Justific.
The same is done by Crellius. Socinus is vehement in his opposition against
all Merit, which must necessarily be done by them, who ascribe so much to Free
Grace, as to deny both the Satisfaction of Christ's Death, and Merit of his
Righteousness.

Et ^t nostram ^^^^^de ^e s^^a^, ^e^t^^^^^ ^^^atz. and (...) omnes, (...)
nui^^^ ^mnino dari Meritum quemadmodum nec ipsa ^ox MERITI in t^to sacro Codice
usquam reperitur, mequicquameiaequipol ens; and quod ad Christum attinet, non
ob aliam causam dicitur Phil. 2. eum idio Exaltatum esse, quod usque ad mo^tem
obediens suerit, quam quod sine isla obedientia exaltatus non fuerit. Merit^m
autem in to nullum f^isse, hinc apparet quod Apostolus ibidem mox addit; and
donavit, ((...)) ei nomen quod (est) supra omne Nomen. Nihil autem me^ito
proprie accepto cum Donatione Commine est. Smalc. contra Fran^z. Disp. 3. p. 88.
That Frantzius, and all others, (says Smalcius) may know our sense in this
matter, we declare against all Merit whatever; for, neither the word [Merit] or
any thing signifying what is equivalent thereunto, can be found in Scripture;
and what was said of Christ touching his Exaltation for his being obedient to
the Death of the Cross, imports no more than that if he had not been obedient,
he would not have been Exalted. But that he did not Merit, is manifest from the
following words [He gave him ((...)) a name above every name] for Merit, and
Free Gist are incompatible with each other.

Id^^ nec usquam in sacris Lite^is Meriti, aut Mereudi ^oces m^^is de Christo
quam de nobis, rispectu Dei, usu^pantur; ut long praestat cum Scriptura loqui,
and Christi Obedientiae potius, ac Morti salutem nostram tribuere quam Meritis,
per illud enim GRATIA Dei non tantum non obscuratur, sed etiam loge magis
illushatur; sat per Meritum proprie dictum imminuitur, and tollitur. Slicir. in
Phil. c. ^. v. 9.
Slichtingius, on the Philippians says, That the word Merit. as it is not in
all the Sacred Writings attributed to Man's Works, with respect to God; so
neither is it unto Chrit's. Whence it is much better, with the Holy Scriptures
to ascribe Salvation to Christ's Death and Obedience, rather than unto his
Merits; for to do so, does not obscure, but illustrate the Grace of God;
whereas Merit taken properly does Eclipse, yea Destroy Free Grace.

These passages may suffice to show how much the Socinians are against the
Merit of Good Works; and, yet hold our Works to be an Essential of that Faith,
which they say is a cause of our Justification.

Faith, as it apprehends Christ's Righteousness for Justification, they
explode; and, by making it an Act of the Will, they take within the compass of
its Formal Nature, Hope, Love, and Obedience, and to bring in Good Works
amongst the Causes of our Justification.

The Nature, and Efficacy of True Faith, says Slichtingius) lies in this,
that it begets Love to God: Who can believe he shall obtain Eternal Life, if he
loves his Neighbor that will not love him? But because of some difficulties,
it may so happen that a Man may be more discouraged with the present Labor,
than moved by future Advantages. Love is therefore required with Faith, as a
Condition annexed to the Divine Promise, that, by the fulfilling it, we may
attain Salvation; but it is no wonder, that they who define Faith by our
apprehending and applying Christ's Merit, do exclude Love, Slicht. in 1 Cor.
13. v. 13. and in Heb. 11.6.
and every other Good Work from the Causes of our Salvation.

To speak accurately, Faith is not the Instrumental Cause of our Justification,
and yet it is an Efficient, not a Principal, but the Causa sine qua non of it,
whence it is, that we are said to be Justified by Faith. But this Faith, under
the New Testament, is not, as Frantzius dreams, an Application of Christ's
Merit, but a Trust in God through Christ, whose nature is, in hope of the Eternal
Life promised by Jesus Christ, to Obey him. Disp. 4. p. 103. Socin. Synop. 2.
Justisic.
So Smalcius against Erantzius. As we must take heed, lest we, (as many at this
time) do make Holiness of Life the Effect of our Justification in the fight of
God: So we must look to it, that we believe not this Holiness to be our
Justification: Or, that it is an Efficient, or Impulsive Cause, but only a
Causa sine qua non. Our Good Works, that is, the Obedience we render unto
Christ, though they are not the Efficient, Socin. This. de Justific.
or Meritorious Cause, yet are they a Causa sine qua non of our Justification
before God and of our Eternal Salvation. So far Socinus.

But though they make Justification by Faith to be the same with that by Good
Works; yet that they may reconcile this their Doctrine with what has been
delivered by the Apostle Paul, who denies Justification by Works; they find it
necessary to assert, That we are in this Gospel-day under two Laws; the one
called the Law of Obedience, or the Rule of Duty; the other the Law of Reward
or Punishment.

LEGES, quae ad quodvis been constitutum Regimen requiruntur, sunt diplicis
generis. Primo, sunt LEGES, quibus praescribuntur subditis OFFICIA quomodo se
quisque in suis actionibus gerere debeat; seu quid cuique ^aciendum vel.
VVolzogen^us is full in delivering the Socinian sense on this Point. In every
well constituted Government (says he) there are Laws of two sorts: The first
are such as show the Subject's Duty, what he must do; and, what he must not.
Omittendum sit. Quae LEGES ad distinctionem caetirarum PRAECEPTA and INTERDICTA
vocantur. Deind sunt LEGES, quibus propo nuntur sidis, ac morigeris sub. ditis
PRAEMIA, pro ipsorun Obedientia ac malisivis merit, pae^ae. Haec duo LEGUN
genera reperiuntur etiam i^ Regno Christi. Wolzog. In struct, ad Lect. lib.
N.T.c.^
These Laws, to distinguish them from the other, are called Praecepts, and
Prohibitions. Then there are Laws, by which Rewards are proposed to good
Subjects for the Encouragement of their Obedience, and Punishments threatened
against the Disobedient. Both these sorts of Laws, or Rules are in the Kingdom
of Christ.

Answerable to these two Laws, or Rules of Duty and the Promise, there is a
twofold Obedience. By the Rule of the Precept the highest and most absolutely
Perfect Obedience is enjoined. By the Law of the Promise, or Rule of the
Reward, Faith, and Repentance, with a certain purpose of Amendment is what
entitles to the Reward. Duplex dat Obedienti Pr^eceptis Divinis pr^standa, and
ita duple. Perfectionis consiratio: A^ra est, utmo nunqu^ quicquam co^^^itta
adversus Praecepta Dei; altera est, at in nullo ullius Peccati habitu haer, --
Islam priorem, etc. Smalc. contr. Frantz. Disp. 12. p. 427.
There is (says Salm^cius) a twofold Obedience, and a double consideration of
Perfection: The first is, that we never transgress, or deviate from God's
Commands: The other is, that no one Habit of Sin remain in us The first sort of
Obedience we do not think necessary to Salvation, it being sufficient, if there
be always a Tendency toward it: The other is necessary to Salvation, and its
observance possible.

That God in distributing Rewards observes another Rule than that of the
Praecept, even that of the Promise, which contains a Grant of the Reward to him
who is upright in heart, VVolzogenius does, in the plainest Terms affirm.
Christ (says he) is our King, but so that (as all other Kings ought to be) he
is at the same time our Father, and Faithful Pastor: His Promises are limited
by certain Conditions, and yet these Conditions are not over Rigidly insisted
on, in those cases where somewhat of Ignorance or other Infirmity intervenes.
The Promise of Eternal Life Requires an Observation of his Commands; but he,
knowing our Frailties, will not impute to us our daily sins, if so be there
remains in us an Upright Heart, and True Repentance, Walzog. Instr. ad util.
Lect. lib. N.T. c. 6.
and a certain Purpose of Amendment.

By this Distinction they endeavor to Reconcile Paul, and James. Though Paul
(says Socinus) affirms, [That we are justified by Faith, and not by the Works
of the Law;] and James, [That we are not justified by Faith alone, but by
Works,] yet on an explication of the words [Faith] and [Works] the Agreement
between them will be made manifest. For Paul does mean by [Faith] such a Trust
in God through Christ, as necessarily begets Obedience to his Commandments, an
Obedience that is as the Form, and Substance of Faith; and by [Works] he
understands a Perfect Obserservance of the Divine Law, and all its Praecepts:
By which* because of the weakness of our Flesh, none can be justified. James by
[Faith] means such an Assent as is imperfect, and without Good Works; and by
[Works] not the most perfect, but that Obedience only which is necessarily
required of us, that we may appear Just before him. And accordingly Paul
declares, that we are not justified by those Works, which are in all respects
conform to the Law; but by a Faith informed by Obedience. James, we are not
justified by a Faith void of Good Works, but by Works, which, though they are
not most perfect, yet are such as may be justly denominated Obedience, or Good
Works.

To this Effect Socinus does often express himself, Lect. Sacr. Fragment. de
Justif.
which compared with what I have taken out of VVolzogenius, and Smalcius, is,
as if it had been said, That we must distinguish between the Law of Pracepts,
or the Rule of Duty; and the Law of Rewards, or Rule of the Promise. That by
the Law, as it is the Rule of Duty, Perfection in the strictest sense, as
exclusive of the least Dissonancy from the Command, is required. But by the Law
of the Rewaerd, or Rule of the Promise, that Obedience which is with a sincere
and upright heart answering the Rule of the Promise is accepted. Besides, there
is a double consideration of Faith, and of Good Works. There is a Faith
perfected with Love and Obedience, and a Faith Inchoate, a bare Assent without
Love and Obedience. There are Works, answering the Rule of Duty in every
respect conform to the Commands; and there are Works, which, though Imperfect,
may justly be denominated Good, to which, by the Rule of the Promise, the
Reward belongs.

Faith Perfected; or, which has Love and Obedience for its Formal Reason by
which alone, says St. Paul, we are justified, in opposition to Works, is the
same (say these Socinians) with what St. James means by Works; so that the
Works Paul excludes from having an Interest in our Justification are such, as
are conform to the Rule of Duty, Vid. Crel. in Romans 8.32. Gal. 2.16. 1 Cor.
1.30.
and absolutely perfect. The Faith St. James affirms to be insufficient for our
Justification, is an Imperfect Faith without Works; and the Works, by which
(St. James says) we are justified, is Faith informed with such Works as are
conformed to the Rule of the Promise.

This in short is the Socinian Scheme; viz. Faith is an Act of the Will;
having, for its Essential Form, Hope, Love, and Obedience; which, though
imperfect, as not fully conform to the Rule of Duty, and therefore no way
Meritorious; yet as Answering the Law of the Reward, or Rule of the Promise is
perfect, and is a Cause, not Instrumental; but sine qua non, of our
Justification.

By this Notion they frame of Justifying Faith, they make it one Moral Habit,
comprizing within its own nature every Good Work, and when they assert
Justification to be only by Faith, they in doing so, raise Good Works to the
dignity of being a Causa sine qua non, of Justification. By the word [Faith]
they understand Trust, Hope, Love, and Obedience, and consequently to be
Justified by Faith, is to be Justified by our Trust, Hope, Love, and Obedience,
or Good Works.

The Arminians are of the same mind with the Socinians; for in their Apology,
they freely declare, Et sant, si quis ^a, quae a Socino dicuntur in bac
materia, sine gratia sine odio expendat, is velit nolit, confiteri tandem
cogetur, eum in substantia Rei cum Reformatis consentire, manente hoc solum
Descrimine causam semper (...) exeipe. Exam. Censur. cap. 10. page 114.
That whoever will impartially exaamine the Socinian Notion in this matter,
cannot but confess, that Socinus, as to the substance of this Doctrine
(excepting that one particular about the External Procuring Cause of our
Justification) holds the same with the Reformed.

But how boldly soever the Arminian assert an Agreement between Socinus, and
the Reformed; their Assertion can import no more than a Free Acknowledgment,
that there is a Harmony between themselves, and the Socinians. For the
Reformed, who place Faith in the Will, as well as in the Understanding, and
make it to be a Work, do by no means allow of its Justifying us, as a Work, but
exclude all Works from being either an Instrumental Cause or a Causa sine qua
non; or any other cause whatsoever of our Justification. And they that confine
Faith to the Understanding hold, that Faith is not a Work, and therefore cannot
justify, as such; whereby they effectually destroy Justification by Works, and
set themselves at the greatest distance from the Arminian, and Socinian Errors.

Excellent Camero has delivered the sense of them, who make the Understanding,
the only Subject of Faith, with much clearness, assuring us, That we must abide
by this, that Faith is not a Work. The Papists (says he) think they press us
with this Argument; viz. seeing Faith is a Work, the asserting that we are
Justified by Faith, can import nothing less than that we are Justified by some
Work. There are others, who profess to abhor nothing more than this Popish
Doctrine, who confess, That Faith is a Work, but then add, that it does not
Justify as a Work. But the Scriptures do always distinguish Faith from Works,
yea oppose Faith to Works in the matter of our Justification. And the Papists
themselves, when they say we are Justified partly by Faith, and partly by
Works, unless they will be guilty of a very gross absurdity, must distinguish
the one from the other. Faith therefore is not a Work: that it is called the
Work of God, Joh. 6.29. is only by way of Allusion, as Paul, Romans 3.27. calls
Faith a Law. The Jews continually glorying in their Works, in the Law, in their
Prerogatives, as they were the Children of Abraham, Christ in answer unto them,
having attributed Justification to Faith, uses their own words, who expecting
to be Justified by Works; Christ does as it were thus speak unto them: Will ye
have Life by your Works? then work this Work, Believe in the Son of God.
However, there is this difference between Faith, and Works: Faith gives nothing
to God; it only receives: Works are an Eucharistical Sacrifice, which we offer
unto God. Faith is the Instrument, it is as the Hand of the Soul by which we
receive saving Benefits from God.

Laying this Foundation, we go on, and affirm. That Justification is by Faith,
not by Works. 1. The Apostle, when he does professedly dispute of
Justification, he never opposes the Works of Holiness, or Sanctification unto
Works of the Law; which undoubtedly he would have done, if he had thought that
any thing in our Justification must be attributed to Works. His Adversaries
making it their business to expose him, as one, who, by by his Doctrine, lets
loose the Reins to all manner of Licensciousness, if he had thought that
Justification had been by any Works, whatsoever, could easily have answered
them by saying, He denied not Justification by Works, but earnestly contended
for its being by the Works of Sanctification. But that he never did for
healways opposed Faith to Good Works.

2. All our Salvation consists in the Free-Pardon of Sin, which God in the
Gospel does offer unto men, not singly, but so as thereby to invite them to
Repentance: If there had been no place for the Remission of Sin, a Sinner could
never entertain a thought about Repentance; and in this respect would be in the
same case with the Devils, who Repent not, because without the least hope of
Pardon. God, therefore to take away all Despair from men, offers them the
Forgiveness of Sin, that is to say, in his Son Jesus Christ. For no Remission
without a Sacrifice, and no Expiatory Attoning Sacrifice, besides that of
Christ. Now what Faculty of the Soul is that by which the Remission of Sin is
Perceived? None surely but Faith. It Is Faith which Believes God, who makes
the Promise. Hope is that, which expests the thing Promised: But Charity,
beholding the Goodness of him who Promises, in the Excellency of the Promise
Loves him. Whrefore seeing it is Faith only, which acquiesces in the Free
Promise of God through Jesus Christ; and apprehends the Forgiveness of Sin;
Justification is by the Holy Ghost ascribed only anto Faith. However by the way
it must be observed, That no one does certainly and seriously believe the
Promise made unto him, but he immediately Repents of his Sin. For on his
believing all occasion of Despair is taken out of the way, and such is the
Excellency, Beauty, and Glory of the Promise, as to take off the Heart from the
Love of the World; whence it may be truly said, that we are Justified by Faith
alone, and that we are Sanctified by Faith alone, for it is Faith that purifyeth
the Heart, Act. 13.9.

3. The reason why God forgives the Sins of the Penitent is this, namely
Because satisfaction is made to Gods Justice by Jesus Christ, who has purchased
this Grace for us: But the satisfaction of Christ cannot be apprehended by us
any other way but by Faith: Justification therefore must be ascribed only unto
Faith. So far Camero.

There are other Arguments, which he urges to this very purpose. But from what
he has here delivered, It Is plain, that Faith, not being an Act of the Will,
is not a Work; but is distinguished from it, and opposed unto it, and that
therefore when it is said, we are Justified by Faith; it cannot be that we are
Justified by a work. That Christ's satisfaction has purchased Pardon; which can
be apprehended by us no otherwise than by Faith; that Faith is the Instrument,
or as the hand of the Soul by which we receive forgiveness. That tho from this
Faith, Hope, Love, and Obedience immediately slow, and are inseparable; yet
they are no cause at all of our Justification; which is enough to make it
manifest that one, who is far from Antinomianism, may deny Faiths being an Act
of the Will, and confine it wholly to the Understanding. For Faith, Hope, and
Love, may be distinct Graces, though whilst in this Life inseparable: and so
long as Hope, Love, and Gospel Obodience are held to be inseparable from Faith
there is, there can be no danger in placing Faith only in the Understanding.
But many Advantages against the Papist, Arminian, and Socinian, to the
Exaltation of the Glory of Free Grace are hereby obtained.

CHAP. VII.
A Summary of the Principal Antinomian Errors, compared with the opposite
Truths. The present Controversy not with the Described Antinomians. The
Agreement between the Contending Brethren in Substantials suggested. The
Conclusion.

THese Doctrines I have thought meet to vindicate from the unrighteous charge
of Antinomianism; because, by a giving them up for Antinomian, not only many
who abhor it are accused for being Abettors of it; but some important Truths,
which strike at the very Root of this Error are represented to be Antinomian.

It has been the care of the Papist, Arminian, and Socinian, to insinuate into
the minds of Persons, less studied in these Controversies, as if the Orthodox
Protestant had, in opposition unto them run into the Antinomian Extreme; and
have inserted in the Catalogue of Antinomian Errors several Gospel Truths,
particularly the ensuing Assertions.

1. That Jesus Christ is a Second Adam, a Root Person, and Public
Representative, with whom the Covenant of Grace is made. 2. That the Guilt, as
well as Punishment of Sin was laid on Christ. 3. That the Covenant of Grace is
not Conditional in that sense the Papists hold it. 4. That Faith is a certain,
and a full Persuasion, wrought in the heart of a man. through the Holy Ghost,
whereby he is Assured of the Mercy of God promised in Christ, that his Sins are
forgiven him. 5. That Justifying Faith is not an Act of the Will, but of the
Understanding only. Though the Papists for some special Reasons oppose not this
Notion; yet the Arminians and Socinians do, to the end they may bring in Works
among the Causes of our Justification.
These Assertions are of such a Nature, as do really cut the very sinews of
Popery, and Socinianism; as I have already in part cleared, and hope more fully
to evince in my Second Part: But by those, who deviate from the Truth; all but
the last have been heretofore, and now the last is, by men more Orthodox, made
the Source of Antinomianism; the Spring, and Fountain, from whence the
following Conclusions do naturally, and necessarily flow. Thus they infer from
the

First, That Christ must be our Delegate, or Substitute, who Believed,
Repented, and Obeyed, to exempt the Elect from doing either, as necessary to
their Pardon, and Salvation. Second, That Christ so took our Person, and
Condition on him, as to have the Filth, and Pollution of our Sins laid on him.
Third, That the Promise of Pardon, and Salvation is made to Sinners as Sinners.
Fourth, That the Pardon of Sin was before Faith, even whilst we are in the
Height of Iniquity, and Enemies against God, and Despisers of Jesus Christ.
Fifth, That We may have Saving Faith, though our Wills remain onchanged, and
obstinately set against God.
These are the Antinomian Errors said to flow from the abovementioned
Assertions, which, if once granted, we shall be necessitated to acknowledge,
that there will be no Use at all of the Law, nor of Faith, Repentante,
Confession of Sin, etc. but we may live, as we list, and yet be saved.

But we have made it plainly to appear, that these Points are so far from being
Antinomian, that they do carry with them a Confutation of that Error. That the
Reader may the more clearly see the Difference there is between the one, and
the other; I will be very particular in showing the opposition.

Assertion I.
That Jesus Christ is a Second Adam, a Root-Person, and Public Representative,
with whom the Covenant of Grace is made.

From this Assertion it necessarily follows, that Christ must have a Spiritual
Seed, and be the Representative of that Seed, so far as Adam would have been of
his, if he had perfectly obeyed. And it is certain, that if Adam had rendered
the Required Obedience, his Posterity would have been, not only made Righteous,
and derive a Holy Nature from him, but be also obliged to Personal Holiness. In
like manner, so is it with the Posterity of the Secoud Adam.

The utmost then that can be fairly inferred from Christ's being a Second Adam,
etc. is, That he has a Spiritual Offspring; That they be Justified by his
Righteousness; derive a New Nature from him, and be obliged to a Personal
Obedience.

The Opposition.
Antinomian. Truth. 1. Christ is our Delegate or Substitute. 1. Christ is a
Second Adam, but not our Delegate or Substitute.

As the First Adam was the Head, and Public Representative of his Posterity;
but not their Substitute, or Delegate; so Christ, though a Public
Repeesentative, yet not our Substitute, as D. O. does excellently well show,
when he says, That Christ and Believers are neither One Natural Person, nor a
Legal, or Political Person, nor any such Person, as the Laws, Customs, or
Vsages of men do know, or allow of: They are One Mystical Person, whereof,
although there may be some Imperfect Resemblances found in Natural, or
Political Unions, yet the Union from whence that Denomination is taken between
Him, and Us, is of that Nature, and arises from such Reasons, and Causes, as no
Personal Union among Men (or the Union of many Persons) has any concernment
in. Dr. O. of Justific. p. 250.


2. Christ being our Substitute, or Delegate, Believed, and Repented for us, so
as to exempt us from the necessity of doing it. 2. Christ did not Repent for
us; nor exempt us from the necessity of doing it our selves.

It Is true, that Christ, our Surety, who Satisfied, and Merited, to exempt us
from the necessity of doing either our selves, did undertake to enable the
Elect to Believe, Repent, and Personally Obey the Holy Commandments; but never
undertook to exempt them from the necessity of Believing, and Repenting.

Assertion II.
That the Guilt, as well as Punishment of Sin was laid on Christ.

We have made it clearly to appear, that though the Guilt, and Punishment of
Sin was laid on Christ; yet the Sin it self, in its formal Nature, the Macula,
or Filth of Sin, was not. Guilt (as I have shown) is a Relation, which has a
Formal Sin for its Foundation. The Foundation of Guilt is Sin, formally
considered, the (...), the Macula, the Filth; and Guilt, the Reatus Culpae,
does immediately Result from the Sin, that is a transgression of the Praecept.
It is not then the Sin it self, the (...), the Macula, the Filth, that was laid
on Christ, but the the Guilt which resulted from it; the Macula, the Filth
remained in us; the Guilt, that immediately resulted from it as it respected
the Sanction of the Law, was laid on Christ, but this being somewhat distinct
from the Moral Filth, Christ remained Pure, and Spotless, notwithstanding 'twas
transferred over to him.

The Opposition.
Antinomian. Truth. 3. Sin, and Guilt are the same. 3. Sin, and Guilt, are Not
the same. 4. Not only the Punishment, and Guilt, but the Sin it self, the Filth
of Sin was laid on Christ. 4. The Punishment, and Guilt of Sin was laid on
Christ; but not the Sin it self, its Macula, or Filth.

In this particular the Difference is manifest. And it is plain, that though the
Antinomian blaspheme the Son of God by making him Inherently a Sinner; yet they
who are against the transferring the Filth of Sin on Christ, are far from it;
for, whilst They are opposing the Papist, and Socinian, they do most
effectually Fence against Antinomianism.

Assertion III.
That the Covenant of Grace is not Conditional, in that sense the Papists hold
it to be so.

The sense in which the Papists are for the Conditionality of Faith and Good
Works, has been already stated; and the Difference between the First
Reformers, and Modern Protestant Divines, cleared. All Popish Conditions, that
is to say, All Such Conditions in us, as give Right to the Reward, are excluded
from having any Interest in our Justification: And yet Faith is made so
necessary to our Justification, that without it we cannot be Justified; that
our Justification is suspended during its absence, and that Faith is an
Instrumental Cause of Justification. That the Promise of Pardon and Eternal
Life is not made to Sinners, as Sinners; but it is made to them that have
Faith, and are in Covenant with God; and only unto such.

The Opposition.
Antinomian. Truth. 5. That the Covenant of Grace is without All Conditions, in
every sense. 5: The Covenant of Grace is not without Conditions, in every
sense; for, Faith is the Condition of Pardon. 6. That the Promise of Pardon is
to Sinners, as Sinners. 6. The Promise of Pardon is not to Sinners, as Sinners;
it is only to them that have Faith, and are in Covenant.

Thus, whilst the Popish Doctrine of Merit is opposed, there is wrested out of
the hands of Arminians, and Socinians, that, by which they endeavor to destroy
Particular Election, Christ's meriting, and the Spirit's giving the first
Grace, together with the glorious Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, and a
sufficient Provision is laid in against the Antinomian Doctrine of Universal
Redemption.

Assertion IV.
That Faith is a Certain, and Full Persuasion, wrought in the heart of Man
through the Holy Ghost, whereby he is Assured of the Mercy of God* promised in
Christ, that his Sins are forgiven him.

By such as have not thoroughly enough searched into this Controversy, the
First Reformers, for holding this Assertion, have been charged with
Antinomianism: But, we have shown, 'twas unjustly. For, though of late years, our
Divines, who have indeed rather described, than defined Faith, and so, for the
help of Doubting Souls, have put them on Enquiries after the constant
Concomitants, and inseparable Effects of Saving Faith, to the end they might be
helped to well-grounded Evidences of their Interest in Christ; yet the First
Reformers in the ensuing Instances about Saving Faith differed very much from
the Antinomians.

Opposition.
Antinomians. First Reformers. 7. Faith lies in a confident Persuasion, that
my Sins were forgiven before I did believe. 7. Faith, though it lies in a
Persuasion of the Forgiveness of Sins; yet not that Sin was Pardoned before
Faith, but in the Instant of Believing. 8. This Faith admits of no Doubtings.
8. Faith admits of Fears and Doubtings. 9. A Person may have this Faith, and
apply the Promise of Pardon, as well whilst under the Power of Sin, as after.
9. No Man whilst under the Power of Sin, can apply the Promise of Pardon, as
well as after.

Assertion V.
That Justifying Faith is not an Act of the Will, but of the Understanding only.

That Faith is only an Act of the Understanding, has not been embraced by
Protestants universally; the chief Defenders of it being Camero, Amyrald, and
Dally. However, to do the New Methodists Justice, and that I might set forth
this Controversy in its proper Light, and show how they hereby secure
themselves from the Popish, Arminian, and Socinian Notions about Justification,
and how far they are from the Unjust Charge of Antinomianism, I have added the
foregoing Chapter.

The Opposition.
Antinomians. The New Methodists. 10. True Faith may be, where no change of the
Will is. 10. Though Faith be not an Act of the Will; yet is it not where the Will
remains unchanged.

Here then we may see not only the Difference there is between the
abovementioned Assertions, and Antinomianism; but have set before us such a
Scheme of the Antinomian Errors, as makes the Law of no use at all.

But let us consider what manner of Persons would be brought within the
Antinomian Verge, if these Assertions were Antinomian. Really the Reverend
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and all that drew up the Savoy Confession,
with the whole Body of United Ministers, must come in for Receiving the First
Assertion; the Lutherans, and Calvinists for holding the Second; the First
Reformers generally, and many Learned Protestant Divines at this time,
particularly Dr. Witsius, Divinity Professor at Vtricht, (who, with the
greatest Respect is earnestly desired to communicate his Thoughts freely on
this occasion) for Defending the Third; All the First Reformers for the Fourth;
and the New-Methodists for Propugning the Fifth; and none but the Papist,
Arminian, and Socinian would be able to escape the Slander. And yet according
to the best of my Judgment, the chief reason, why some worthy Brethren, have
been Reflected on as Antinomians, has been their Zeal for the first Four
Assertions. For they do not make Christ our Delegate, or Substitute, who
Believed and Repented for us, to the end he might exempt us from the necessity
of doing either our selves. Nor do they make the Filth and Guilt of Sin the
same, and lay them on Christ, making him thereby Filthy. Nor do they say, that
the Covenant of Grace is in every respect without Conditions; or that the
Promise of Pardon is to Sinners, as Sinners; or, that Faith lies in a
Persuasion, that Sin was Pardoned before we Believe; or, that Faith is
Exclusive of the Least Fears, or Doubtings; or, that an Elect Person can apply
the Promise of Pardon to it self as well before Regeneration, as after; nor do
they make the Law useless, but do hold, That in reference unto the work of
Regeneration it self, positively considered, we may observe, that ordinarily
there are certain Praevious, and Praeparatory works, Sunt quaedam effecta
interna ad Conversionem PRAEVIA, quae virtute verbi, spiritusque in nondum
Regeneratorum cordibus excitantur, qualia sunt NOTITIA VOLUNTATIS DIVINAE,
SENSUS PECCATI, TIMOR POENAE; COSITATIO de LIBERATIONE spes aliqua veniae.
Synod. Dord. Suffrag. Theol. Brit. and Art. 4. These. 2.
or workings in and upon the Souls of Men, that are Antecedent, and Dispositive
unto it: But, yet Regeneration does not consist in them, nor can it be educed
out of them. This is for the Substance of it, the Position of the Divines of
the Church of England, at the Synod of Dort -- I speak in this Position of them
only that are Adult -- And the Dispositions I intend, are only materially so;
not such as contain Grace of the same Nature as is Regeneration it self. A
Material Disposition is that, which Disposes, and some way makes a subject
fit for the Reception of that, which shall be communicated added, or infused
into it as its Form. So Wood by dryness, and a due composure is made fit and
ready to admit of Firing. A Formal Disposition is where one degree of the same
kind disposes the subject unto further degrees of it. The former we allow, not
the latter. So far Dr. Owen in his Discourse concerning the Holy Spirit. Lib.
3. c. 3. p. 191, 192.
And for thus much are the Accused Brethren, and on no more do the other
Brethren, who have been charged with favoring Arminianism insist; so that in
all these things, so far as I understand them, they mean the same thing, and
are in the Substance Agreed.

My next work is to enter on the consideration of the Arminian, and Socinian
Notions: But this Part having swollen so big, and to give a just account of these
Errors, and show what is not Arminianism, nor Socinianism, will make the
Discourse too large. I am content, that this Part go forth by it self, which
shall be followed with the other, as soon as God gives opportunity to finish it.

FINIS.

