THE HARMONY Between the Old and Present Non-Conformists PRINCIPLES, In
Relation to the TERMS of Conformity, With Respect both to the CLERGY, and the
PEOPLE.

Wherein A short History of the Original of the English LITURGY, and some
Reasons why several truly Conscientious Christians cannot join with the Church
in it.

Humbly Presented to Public Consideration in order to the obtaining some
necessary Relaxation and Indulgence.

To which are added some Letters that passed between the Lord Cecil, and
Archbishop Whitgift.

The Fault is on both sides, and on neither side. For the Godly wise on both
sides bear with each other, and concenter in the main. But then there be
selfish, peevish Spirits, on both sides some, and these make the Quarrel.

Greenham's Answer to the Lord Cecil's Question, Who is the Faulty Causer of
the Division in the Church? LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Joseph
Collier on London Bridge, 1682.

To the Right Reverend Edward Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross in Ireland.
MY LORD,
ON a perusal of your late Treatise, Entitled, The Protestant Peace Maker, I
find your Lordship so very much disposed to pursue Charity, Peace and Union,
the only necessary mean left us for the preservation of the Reformed Protestant
Religion, that though I am a perfect stranger to you, I cannot choose but make,
and hope that you will Heartily receive this present Dedication.

There is now (as your Lordship expresses it p. 29.) an argument for Unity,
which must be heard, and is uncontrollable; We must Unite or be destroyed. At
all times Christian duty obliges us thereto: now necessity or self-preservation
too, or more parties may balance one, when any single other cannot. [Thus it is
evident we must Unite.] The strength of the Protestant Cause, both here, at
home, and throughout Christendom lies in the Union of Protestants, and the
glory, purity and power of Christianity in this world, stand or falls with
Protestantism. But the only question is upon what Terms must the Church of
England come over to the Dissenters, or the Dissenters go over to the Church.

The right stating the true Terms of Union is a work of extraordinary
difficulty, a work that requires the heads and hearts of the greatest, the most
judicious and Holy men on earth to contribute all they can toward it.
Government in the Church must be secured, tender Consciences relieved; Where
there is no government, all things will run into confusion, where there is no
relief for tender Consciences, there can be no union. The government of a
National Church must be National, and such as is most exactly suited to the
civil constitution of the Natiou, The former must not interferr with the later.
But of this, though your Lordship speaks nothing, yet may your Lordship see
something (God permitting it) in good time that some Dissenters have to offer
toward the healing our breaches, and that also in a way consistent with an
establishment of such a National Church government, as agrees with the ancient
constitution of this Kingdom: That which your Lordship's wisdom has insisted
on, is a point of moment and importance, namely, the Liturgy and Ceremonies,
concerning which you propose mutual concessions and approaches, as the only
probable uniting expedient. Now if compliance be likelyest to do the business,
(you say, let us relax a little on both hands in the fear of God, and fall upon
it; Let us Heartily consult what good Conscience, what prudence will bear
toward an accommodation. (To this you add Page 118. 119.) I do not conceive
the alteration of an expression, or perhaps here and there of an whole Prayer
or two, by Law, or the dispensing (still by Law) with some ceremony in Law, for
the sake of some unsatisfied, but otherwise regular Christians (who are not
supposed of the Cathedral Body) I say, I do not conceive such concession or
relaxation as this, would break the harmony and beauty of our worship, or
disturb the Union or Peace of our Church. I will therefore freely publish my
thoughts to be, that whither we Consider the Nature of the thing it self, or
with regard to the Apostle's Rule. Romans 15. 1, 2. Not to please our selves, but
every one of us to please his Neighbor for his good to Edification. In either
regard I say, there are some Collects, and perhaps Rubricks too, which with all
Duty and Submission I humbly conceive may be altered for the better. And
farther that in some Seasons, and in some private places. -- If the Obligation
to a Ceremony or two were taken off, the benefit which would hence redound to
the Church would be very Considerable. -- And I seem to my self herein to
follow the sense and guidance of our Church, for even at present the Injunction
of the Ceremonies does not appear to me to extend it self to all places and
seasons. There are also diverse other points, which when once the design of a
fair Accommodation shall be on foot, will be fit to be mentioned, and indeed
will both of Course offer themselves, and be I judge, as easily granted; such
as the Liberty of exchanging Apocriphal Lessons for Canonical ones, any
Amendment of such Defects, as can be proved, in the Calendar, The Use of the
most Correct Translation of the Psalms. A better Metrical Version also, and
perhaps some like matters, which we may account small, some Diffenters do not.


My Lord,
May the expedient you propose be attended unto, the desired Union would soon
be obtained, for thereby all those Arguments mentioned in the ensuing Treatise,
which press hard on the Consciences of some Dissenters, concerning the present
Terms of Communion, would be answered, their Consciences relieved, and they be
of the same external Communion with the Church of England. I do therefore
humbly presume to beseech your Lordship to do your utmost for the furthering
this peaceable, and uniting Design, for certainly you have hit on what, if
closely followed, will reconcile us, and as your Lordship will express it, this
is the only probable expedient, for it is an undoubted Truth, That there are
among the Dissenters a considerable Number, who are under the most powerful,
and plain Convictions of Conscience about the Unlawfulness of the present
Liturgy as Ordered by the Canon, and Rubric to be used, and of the Ceremonies
that they cannot but by sinning against God to the wounding of their own
Consciences, conform.

That the World may be assured of this much, and see how necessary some
Relaxations are in Order unto Union. I have shown what are the Sentiments of
some of the most Judicious and more moderate Dissenters, why it is yet they
conform not to the Terms of Lay-Communion imposed by the Church, and why it is
they erect separate Congregations. Some are so fully Convinced of the
unlawfulness of the present Liturgy, and Ceremonies, that they refuse to
Conform, because they think their Conformity to be sinful, but other do not so
much insist on the sinfulness, as on the Inexpediency of their Conformity. They
cannot Conform without Scandal. By Scandal they mean (as your Lordship does)
with the Scripture generally) The drawing, or encouraging others to do what
they are not in Conscience convinced they may do.


My Lord,
There is a real Disposition, yea, longing Desires among the Non-Conformists
toward a Protestant Union, and it rejoices their very Souls to find some such
as your Lordship among the dignified Ciergie, and do bless God for you. There
are some such also in England, who, though they Conform, do it not blindfold, nor
upon Corrupt Inducements. We believe there are many of you, who can in the fear
of God, profess you have again, and again considered the Ecclesiastical Laws,
and according to your Duty, as you believe, you have been, and are obedient,
not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, and that you are Sound
Protestants, and as great an Eyesore to the Papist, as any among the
Dissenters. However we are as Confident, That there are others, who are
pretendedly at least great zealots for Conformity, and yet Aimrather at an
Union between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome, who consequently
hate a Protestant Dissenter much more than they do a Papist, not being ashamed
to profess They would rather be Papists, than Presbyterians.

There are many such, who delight not only to misrepresent the Dissenter, as
your Lordship will perceive by the Reverend Mr. Baxter's reply to your
Postscript, but moreover, to Unchurch all the Foreign Reformed Churches, who
have not an Episcopal Ordination, Thus Mr. Conold in his Notion of Schism
Dedicated to Anthony Lord Bishop of Norwich, p. 14. asserts, That he who is out
of this Line of Apostolic Succession, and exercises any Ministerial Office
without the Commission of Episcopal Ordination is but a Lay-Imposter, and a
Schismatic from the Catholic Church, and (p. 43.) speaking of Foreign
Protestant Churches, adds, But if any of them have a Ministry which have no
other Orders than their own Usurpation, or popular Election, I know not how to
Acquit them from being Shismaticks from the Catholic Church. But yet though he
is so severe in Censuring the Foreign Protestant Churches as Schismatics from
the Catholic Church, he is as Merciful to Foreign Papists, for in his Epistle
to the Reader. As for those of your Religion [vid. the Popish] who live under
the Laws of the Romish Dominions, I have a great Charity for them (says he) for
they can plead Submission to their own Superiors, and I am apt to believe, that
plea may be very considerable, when they come to appear before the Prince of
Peace and the God of Order.

There having been some such in the Church of England ever since the first
Reformation, they have impeded all Essays for a Protestant Union, and have
done their utmost rather to Accommodate the Differences between Us and Rome,
whereby Instead of Relaxations and Abatements toward Dissenters. The Church of
England has made the Terms of Communion the more difficult and uneasy unto us,
to the hightning and increasing the Divisions, and at this very day will be at
the same work, wherein, unless timely prevented, they may succeed. We beseech
your Lordship therefore to animate your Brethren, who are hearty to the
Protestant Interest to Consider with just regards the tender Consciences of
Dissenting Protestants, and to appear in making a brisk Opposition to those,
who under pretense of making the Church of England the more Grand, and August
designs her Ruin by bringing her into her Ancient Slavery to the Church of
Rome.

It Is to be wished a Bill Comprehensive of all Sound Protestants might pass in
Order to the uniting us, But if that cannot be, a Bill lesser Comprehensive^
with an Indulgence will very much contribute to the Churches peace, and the
strengthening the Protestant Interest. To which end, That the Advice your
Lordship gives p. 62. to the end, may be regarded by all, is the Prayer of him
who highly values your Lordships great Learning, your Christian Temper, and
Moderation, and who is

Your Humble Servant.
April. 1. 1682.

The Errata.
PAge 7. l. 11. dele who. p. 9. l. 2. After then add, my work is. l. 18. dele
For. l. 35. for they r. the Dissenters, p. 19. l. 22. for if r. of. p. 20. l.
23. After then add the Bishops of. p. 21. l. 32. for Families r. Faculties. p.
23. l. 7. after Objection add has offered: p. 26. l. ult. r. of. p. 28. l. 10.
dele of p. 32. l. 18. r. it has. p. 33. l. 10. d. and. l. 28. r. Proctors, p.
34. l. 11. r. Scultingius. p. 35. l. 15. r. Intelligencers. p. 40. l. 1. r.
pages. p. 41. l. ult. add That is several Popish Vestments. p. 42. l. 9. after
affairs add than in Civil. p. 44. l. 6. after drunkenness add does. p. 48. l.
5. r. Superstitious. p. 55. l. 13. r. Prince. p. 59. l. 19. r. Parity. p. 60.
l. 10. r. to. l. ult. r. 2. p 71. l. 27. r. Rites. l. 38. after that add are.
l. ult. r. why. p. 72. l. ult. r. Wild.

To the READER.
THE design of the ensuing Treatise is only to show, how necessary it is, that
the Church of England make the Terms of Communion with her somewhat more easy.
For it is certain, that whatever some suggest concerning the fancy, humor and
obstinacy of Dissenters; He who is the searcher of hearts does know, that they
are Conscientious in their Nonconformity, Could they with a good Conscience
conform, they would, but seeing they cannot, (as appears by what is insisted on
in this Treatise) what must they do? They must not sin and offend God to please
men.

It Is not altogether improbable but that a Conformist in his perusal of the
arguments in the following discourse, may be supplied with an answer
satisfactory to himself, and many others, notwithstanding which, the Dissenters
may still feel more conviction in those arguments for their Nonconformity,
than in any reply made to 'em, and therefore cannot Conscientiously conform.

Hitherto the Dissenters have been reproached as a people, who cause divisions
in the Church about Trifles, who though they will not now Conform, if there were a
Bill of Comprehension on no easier Terms than a complying with the use of the
Liturgy, they would generally do it: I have therefore upon a seririous and
deliberate weighing all things, thought it meet at this season (when a late
book of a singular brother calls aloud for it,) to give an impartial account of
the Dissenters sentiments, which are more general concerning Conformity, having
done it impartially, rather indeed like an Historian than a Logician.

The great thing I abide by, and judge my self obliged to defend is. 1. That
there are arguments powerful enough in the judgments of some, to fasten plain
convictious on 'em, concerning the unlawfulness or inexpediency of the use of
the present Ordinary Lord's days Service; Though I may not be convinced by
them, yet others may. 2. That so long as any Dissenters are thus fully
convinced of the unlawfulness or inexpediency of the Liturgy, they must not act
contrary to the plain conviction of their Conscience and Conform; If then there
be any peace in the Church, it must be either by a familiar, sweet and plain
discovery of their mistake, or by a relaxing somewhat the rigor of the Terms of
Communion. The Forms by many years experience we find impossible, and therefore
as the Bishop of Cork and Ross expresses it, the only probable expedient for
Union left us is the later.

In the following History I must say, that I have confined my self to urge
those arguments of the Old Non-conformists, which are against those parts of
the Liturgy now in being, and I have done it without passion or partiality. My
great care has been to propose with indifference their judgment, to the end
the Reader, considering it with the same equal mind as it is written, may be the
better enabled to pass a Candid Censure on the whole.

I have not been curious in the choice of words, for my design is only the
information of the vulgar, to whose capacity I have in the most familiar manner
I could, adjusted the following discourse: That the God of Heaven will enable
us all to follow peace with all men, and Holiness (for we must not so far
pursue peace, as to do any unholy thing in order thereunto) ought to be our
daily Prayer to the God of Heaven.

April 3. 82. Farewell.
An Account of the Non-Conformists Principles, concerning the Terms both of the
Clergy, and Lay-Conformity.
SINCE the 24th of August 1662, there have been many a Nonconformist, even
among the Ministers, and People of England, who, though they have different
apprehensions concerning the Terms of Conformity, do yet all agree in their not
submitting unto all that is required by the Act of Uniformity. There are some
among the Ministers, who can Conscientiously comply withal that is enjoined
the people, and there are others, that cannot.

That the Reader may with the greater clearness understand, wherein the
principal grounds of Nonconformity consist, I will with the greatest
impartiality attempt the giving a particular account of the Principles of
those, who are now most commonly known by the name of Dissenters. Not that I
design to insist on all those principles, they profess to embrace, as they are
sound Christians, and good Protestants, but only to show, what their Judgment
is, as they are Dissenters from the Church of England.

1. There being a great difference between the Terms of Conformity imposed on
the Ministers, and those enjoined the People, there are some among the
Nonconforming Ministry, who can submit unto the impositions laid on the
people, but not unto what is exacted from the Ministers. They can hear, yea
read the ordinary Lord's days Service, and join in the Communion of the Church,
but yet cannot Assent, and Consent to every thing contained in the 39 Articles,
Book of Common Prayer, and Homilies already extant, and such as shall hereafter
be set forth, because they are fully convinced, that there are several things
contained in those Books, which are not agreeable unto the Word of God, and
because, they cannot divine what may be inserted in the Book of Homilies,
hereafter to be published, and are loath to subscribe to they know not what.
These have so great an advantage against the Conformists, that Dr. Stilling
fleet, when he first entered on the controversies about the Terms of the peoples
Communion with the Church, waved that of the Ministers Conformity. As these are
Non-conformists, so in their writings they triumph over the Conformists; But
then as they do ordinarily separate from the Communion of the Church, and erect
orderly Congregations for the Administrations of all Ordinances, they have not
that advantage which other Nonconformists have; For say the Conformists unto
'em, seeing you look on the terms of Lay-Communion to be lawful, and to show
so much, you do occasionally hold Communion with us, your Communion ought to be
fixed and ordinary, and that because the consideration of the Curches peace,
and the authority of our Governors in the enjoining what is confessedly
lawful, should oblige your Consciences.

There are several things replied. First, The Ministers, being consecrated unto
God in that Holy Function of the Ministry, dare not look back, they commit
Sacrilege should they withdraw themselves from the Ministry, for woe unto them
if they preach not. Secondly, The great necessity there is of their preaching,
in order to the reforming the people; Moreover, they add, that they do not
separate from the Church, they do but preach as Lecturers, or Curates unto the
Parish Ministers.

In this controversy, I Will not engage my self, for my business is principally
designed to give a right state of the controversy, and, so far as I can, to
offer somewhat in the Non-conformists defense, which as to this particular,
shall be only to clear them from that reproach which is cast on them, about
their going to Church, to Divine Service, and the Communion, and yet do not
conform as Ministers. The answer is easy, viz. There is much more than these
things required of them; Viz. Subscriptions as enjoined by the Act of
Uniformity, besides the abjuring the Covenant, to the which several, who have
nothing to offer against the ordinary Lord's days Service, and the other Terms
of Lay-Communion, cannot yield their Consciences.

2. There are other Nonconforming Ministers, who cannot conscientiously
conform either unto the Terms imposed on the Minister or People. Of these there
are two sorts.

(1.) Some, who look on the particular forms of Prayer, imposed on all to be
Lawful, but not Expedient. (2.) Others who consider this particular form of
Prayer to be Unlawful.
1. Of the first opinion are several Presbyterians, if not some Congregational
Divines. For the clearer understanding their Sentiments, we must consider.

1. That there is a difference between the lawfulness of set forms of Prayer in
Thesi, and in Hypothesi; A form of Prayer in general may be lawful, but this,
or the other set form in particular, sinful. In the Popish Mass Book there are
several forms of Prayer, which are by sound Protestants esteemed sinful, not
because they are forms, so much as because they are such forms. There are very
few, besides some Independents and Anabaptists, who judge all forms of Prayer,
because they are forms, to be Unlawful.

2. There is also a difference between the lawfulness of a form, and its
expediency. A Stinted Liturgy may in some cases be both lawful and expedient,
and in other, though in it felf lawful, yet highly inexpedient. For ought I
can say to the contrary, a set form of preaching is as lawful as a set form of
Prayer; and it is manifest, that there was a time in the beginning of Edward the
6ths. Reign, that the making Sermons for the Ministers, was as convenient as
the making Prayers for them, such was the ignorance, peevishness and
contentiousness of those in Holy Orders; That a stinted form was as neeessary
to be used in preaching as 'twas in praying, for which reason as an English
Liturgy was drawn up for the Ministers help in prayer, a Book of Homilies was
prepared to be read instead of preaching, unto both which, at first, all such
as had not a License were equally obliged. But though a stinted form of
preaching be in it self lawful, does it therefore follow that it is always
expedient? The like may be said of a form of prayer.

3. That about things lawful, that is, about such things as are in their own
nature indifferent, enquiry must be made after their expediency or inexpediency
pro hic, and nunc. For many things which are in Thesi lawful, are yet in
Hypothesi, because of their inexpediency sinful. To eat flesh is in it self
lawful, but to eat flesh offered unto Idols when another acquaints thee with
it, is inexpedient, and therefore sinful. There are many things that are
lawful, which because they edify not, but offend, and grieve such for whom
Christ dyed are inexpedient, yea as so circumstantiated, are unlawful, and
cannot without sins be complied with.

The Apostle Paul in his Epistles to the Romans and Corinthians does somewhat
amply treat of this point, where he says, that though all things are lawful,
yet all things are not expedient, that is, as the Apostle himself explains it,
all things edify not; All things, (i. e.) all indifferent things are lawful,
but not at all times, in every circumstance for God's glory, and therefore not
expedient. In the exercise of our liberty about things indifferent, if we will
follow the Apostle Paul, we must take heed that we do nothing that affords
grief, or proves a stumbling block to those for whom Christ dyed, but must
endeavor that all things be to the Glory of God, and the edification of Souls.
This is evident from Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 10.

If then the Ordinary Lord's days Service be in it self lawful and
indifferent, yet if it is use be a grief and a stumbling block to those for whom
Christ dyed, no way conducive to God's glory, nor the peoples edification, its
use is so very inexpedient as to become unlawful, yea sinful, unto such as
know so much, the which inexpediency remains, notwithstanding any Humane Law to
the contrary. For when the case is as here stated, the word of God shows it to
be inexpedient, and therefore cannot be altered by any law of man.

That the Lord's days Service, though in it self lawful, is in its use
inexpedient. Some may argue thus, namely, It becomes all good Christians to
mind the Peace and Edification of those Churches, where they live, and unto
this we ought to have a special regard in the exercise of our liberty about
things indifferent. There is a manifest division among Protestants in this
Kingdom, the which has proved very pernicious unto the Protestant Religion,
and if increased, cannot but be much more mischievous, and therefore all men
must take heed, that in the use of their liberty they do not what necessarily
tends to the multiplying divisions. If we cannot Unite the Conformist and
Nonconformist, we must do all, that lawfully we can, to fix an Union between
Conformist and Conformist, yea, and between Nonconformist and Nonconformist;
This every judicious and sober Christian will I presume grant, from which
concession, it is thus argued, even from the supposition of the lawfulness of
the Lord's day, Service against the expediency of its use pro hic, and nunc.

If a Non conformist's using this service dothnot contribute any thing toward
an Union with the Conformist, but tends to the dividing the Nonconformist,
though the service be in it self lawful, yet its use is not expedient.

But a Non-conformists using this Service does not contribute any thing toward
an Union with the Conformist, [As Mr. Read's experience does evince, for says
he in his case, Though we yield as far as we can in things lawful, there is no
Union, no Peace nor Agreement to be had with such men,] but tends to the
dividing of the Non-conformists, as is most manifest to any that will but
deliberately consider the general practice of the Dissenting Brethren.
Therefore the use of the Lord's days Service pro hic and nunc highly
inexpedient, and not to be done.

The multiplying divisions among good Protestants cannot be for God's glory,
nor for the edification of the people, but has been, and still is a stumbling
block unto some, and great grief unto others for whom Christ dyed, and
therefore a man should rather suffer, than use it. It Is quaeryed by some,
whether or no the generality of Non-conformists do esteem the use of the
ordinary Lord's days Service expedient? In answer unto which, I may safely
assert, that the generality of the Non-Conformists do at least consider the
Conforming unto the Lord's days Service so very inexpedient, that they cannot
Conscientiously comply with it; This is manifest from their avowed Principles
and Practices.

1. Their Principle is, that in matters of Religion, whatever is in it self
lawful and pro hic, and nunc expedient, is their Duty; The expediency of a
lawful thing makes it Duty. It has therefore been the Conscientious endeavor
of Non-conformists to find out the expediency of those things which are
lawful, (i. e.) whether the use thereof is for God's glory, and the
edification of the people, and they judge themselves bound in Conscience to do
whatever lawfully they may, to the end God may be glorified, and the
edification of immortal souls advanced.

2. The Practice of the Non-conformists has been by this Rule, as they dare
not do what is to God's dishonor, so they are afraid to omit what will be for
God's glory, and for edification. Their being turned out of their places to the
impoverishing the families of some, the great prejudice of all, does evince
they cannot venture on the doing what is to God's dishonor. Their grievous
sufferings on the account of their public meetings do as manifestly
demonstrate, that they are afraid to omit what is for God's glory, and the
edification of the people.

To thief considerations add, that if these Conscientious Non-conformists had
been convinced, that the use of the ordinary Lord's days Service had been both
lawful and expedient, that is, had been for Gods glory, and the people's good,
would they have lived so many a year in the neglect and omission of so
excellent a duty? What, do they make conscience of one duty, but no conscience
of another? Surely, I cannot believe it.

For this reason I think my self obliged to conclude, that the true reason why
the generality of the Nonconforming Ministers, who do not use this Service, is
because they think it inexpedient, they believe it is not for Gods glory, nor
for edification, they fear that should they use it, they should dishonor God,
and be a scandal and grief to many for whom Christ dyed. But,

II. There are others, who consider the particular forms of worship, appointed
in the Liturgy for the ordinary Lords days service, to be unlawful, of this
opinion are some Presbyterians, the Congregational generally, and the
Anabaptist. Here I Will give the sense of the moderater sort of those, who look
on the present Liturgy, as what cannot by them be used without sin; The which
I Will do without an engaging my self so far in their defense, as to espouse
their quarrel.

As for my part, I think moderation becomes all Christians, especially English
Protestants, in a day wherein they are in danger of being destroyed by the
common enemy, the Papist. This is not a time to fall out with one another, and
quarrel about lesser things, for now the great and weighty matters of our
Religion are in hazard, there must be an exercise of Christian charity toward
each other. Let every man give that liberty to the conscience of another, which
he expects should be given his own, for while the World endures, there will be
as different apprehensions about lesser matters, as there are different
complections among men, and therefore there must be mutual forbearance, or
there will be no peace among us.

Methinks it looks ill, when men assume to themselves an unaccountable
infallibility, the which is attended with a proportionable severity, in
imposing their own sentiments on others. This is not only common among the
Papists, but also to be observed too much among all sorts of Protestants,
whether Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independent or Anabaptist, and is, I verily
believe, one great reason of those violent Dissentions that are among us, every
one thinks, that such as dissent from them, do so without any solid reasons,
and therefore not to be tolerated. Thus some of the Conforming Clergy esteem
the Non-conformists dissent from them, to be both unreasonable and intolerable,
and some Dissenters, it may be, are even with the Episcopal in those censures
they pass on them, and among the Non-conformists, some, who only desire that
the subscriptions and abjurings of Covenants be removed, are willing enough
that the Liturgy be established with but a few amendments, the which may be
done by a Comprehensive Bill, that has nothing of Indulgence in it.

But really how weak soever the greatest part of the Non-conformists are, it is
too manifest, that they think that there are other Blocks which lie in their
way to Conformity, than subscriptions and abjurings, whose Consciences should
be regarded, and who stand as much in need of an Indulgence, as others do of a
Comprehension. If the Bill of comprehension should be comprehensive enough to
take me in, I think my self obliged to do my utmost that such Conscientious
persons, who through weakness cannot do as much as my self, be at least
indulged.

Conscience is a tender thing, and is really the immediate directer of our
actions, against the plain convictions of which we must not go. No Authority is
sufficient to oblige any man to act against the plain convictions of
conscience; For which reason, seeing the Dissenters are fully convinced in
Conscience, that they cannot lawfully conform to the present Terms of
Lay-Communion, there must be either some alteration of the Terms, or some must
suffer for Conscience sake, whence then to show the necessity of altering some
things, even for a comprehension, and the indulging in other things for the
ease of tender Consciences. I Will give the Reader an Historical Account of some
of their reasonings against the Terms of Lay-Communion, the which I will
produce only to this end, namely to show, that the reasons are such as may lay
convictions on the Consciences of good and honest; if not learned men. Though
men of great learning may be able to answer them, yet if they be such as are
unanswerable in the judgmenr of the Dissenters, it is sufficient for the purpose
for which I produce them. Those arguments may be strong in the judgment of
some, which are not so in the opinion of others. My province then is only to
propose, not to defend the arguments that are cogent in moving some Dissenters
to conclude, that as Laymen, they cannot conform unto the imposed Terms of
the Church of England.

For to the complete Communion of Laymen, there is required a conformity, not
only to the ordinary Lord's days Service, but moreover unto their Modes of
Administering the Sacraments. But that unto this they cannot conform, I will
essay particularly to evince, by showing more generally, why they cannot conform
to the Terms imposed on the people, and then more particularly why they cannot
submit unto the Rubric about baptizing their children, nor Communicate with
them in the Lord's Supper, and in fine give several reasons, why others cannot
with a safe Conscience attend on the Reading of the ordinary Lord's days
Service.

1. Why some cannot Conscientiously comply with the Terms of Communion,
imposed by the Church on the people.

1. More generally; Because there are so many things which the Church of
England acknowledges to be in their own nature indifferent, that are made so
necessary apart of Religion, as to be Terms of Communion with them. They take
the Word of God contained in the writings of the Old and New Testament to be
the only Rule of the whole, and of every part of their Religion, whence what is
enjoined them, as so necessary a part of Religion, as to be made a Term of
Communion, they cannot conform thereunto, unless it be agreeable to the Word of
God. A Term of Christian Communion is a very necessary part of Christ's
Religion, the non-embracing which deprives a person of the benefit and
advantage of the Sacraments, and therefore they must be no other, than what our
Lord Christ has in his Word made so. If any man, or society of men assume unto
themselves a power concerning matters of Religion, which Christ never gave
them, they think they cannot be faithful unto Christ, if they subject
themselves unto them in their exercise of such an irregularly assumed power.
Christ Jesus is the Sole Lord of his Church, and Lawgiver in it, and therefore
the alone Author of the whole of Christian Religion, for which reason, they
cannot receive any such additions as are made merely by men, as parts, much
less as necessary parts of Christian Religion, they know that there are some
who say, the Imposition may be sinful, when a compliance therewith is a duty;
But this in matters of Religion, especially in the present case they do not
understand, because when lawful Authority commands any thing sinfully, the
great reason why it is sinful is, because it is in other manner than according
to the Word of God, but if the command be not according to God's Word, how can
their obedience be so? All obedience is to a command, and such is the connection
between the command and the obedience, that we must consider the obedience to
be as is the command; If the command be out of the Lord, and sinful, the
obedience thereunto cannot be in the Lord, and a duty. If the command be not
for the Lord, but against him, the obedience cannot be for the Lord. But that
our obedience must be in, and for the Lord, is acknowledged by the Church of
England.

But there are many things in their own nature, according to the confession of
the Church os England indifferent, which yet are made so necessary a part of
Christian Religion as to be enjoined as Terms of Christian Communion. Whoever
conscientiously refuses to be present at their public Prayers, or to kneel at
the Sacrament, is, by the 27th. Canon, deprived of the Sacrament, yea, and
though the Minister, who shall wittingly administer the same to notorious
offenders, and perjured villains incurres not for such a default, the pain of
Suspension; Yet no Minister when he celebrateth the Communion, shall wittingly
Administer the same to any but to such as kneel, under pain of Suspension, nor
under the like pain to any that refuse to be present at Public Prayers,
according to the Orders of the Church of England. Thus not only a form os
Prayer, but this particular form of Prayer, in which form there are many
things, with which these Dissenters cannot comply, are made so necessary a part
of Religion, that if they conform not unto them, they are denied the Lord's
Supper, and what Minister soever admits such unto the communion is liable unto
a suspension, a greater punishment than is threatened against those Ministers,
who admit such as commit the horrible sin of perjury. Moreover though they are
convinced in conscience they sin if they kneel, yet they cannot be admitted
unto the Lord's Supper unless they kneel,

Let us put the best sense on these things, and it is this; As the notorious
offender and perjured villain cannot be admitted to the Sacrament, because he
complyes not with God's Terms, the Holiest man on earth cannot be admitted,
unless he complies with Man's Terms. But what is this less than setting up
man's posts with Gods, or a setting as high (if not a higher) value on the
precepts of men, as on the commands of God? But seeing our Lord Christ has
purchased a liberty for them, whereby they may be admitted to the Sacrament on
easier Terms than Man will permit, they must abide by this liberty in doing
which they do, but discharge their duty in asserting the Lord Jesus Christ to
be the Sole Author of the whole of Christian Religion, and of all the Terms of
Christian Communion. But,

2. To be more particular in showing why they cannot join with the Church in
the Sacraments; In doing which I Will contract my self in giving you no other
than what I find in the Altar of Damascus.

(1.) Of Baptism.

I Will only offer a very little that is insisted on in my Author, and therefore
will pass by that passage in the Second Prayer before Baptism, [where the
Remission of sins is defired by Spiritual Regeneration; As if the pardon of sin
consisted rather in the Sanctification of the soul, than the dissolving the
obligation to punishment:] and consider the Interrogatories which are these,
Do thou forsake the Devil, and all his works. etc. Do thou believe, etc.
Will thou be Baptized in this Faith? The Child has not Understanding, nor
Faith, nor desire of Baptism; And how be it the child had Faith, can the
Godfather tell absolutely, and in particular, that this Child whom he
presents, does Believe, desire Baptism, or forsake the Devil? It is a foolish
thing, and great mockery of God's service, to demand that of Infants, which was
at the first demanded of such as were come to years of discretion, and were
converted from Gentilism. The children of Faithful Parents are within the
Covenant of Grace, whereupon it is that they are made partakers of the Seal of
the Covenant; The Covenant being made with the Parents in their Faith, and not
the Faith of the child, the Parents should give confession of their own Faith,
and not of the Faith of the child, which is not: because their own Faith is the
condition of the Covenant upon their part, whereupon God promises to be their
God, and the God of their Seed. Whereupon also it follows, that the Father of
the child should present the child, and give confession, and not another,
because the Covenant is made with him, and his Seed, and the child is his Seed,
not the Seed of another, whom we call Godfather; The Natural Father is the
proper Godfather. Others may be Witnesses of Baptism, but that the Father
should, or can resign this duty to another, I deny. -- After that the child is
dipped, [or sprinkled] and Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, the Priest makes a Cross upon the child's Forehead; Saying, We receive
this child into the Congregation of Christ's Flock, and do sign with the sign
of the Cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the
faith of Christ Crucified, and Manfully to fight under his Banner against Sin,
the World, and the Devil, and to continue Christ's Faithful Soldier and
Servant unto his Life's end. He says not we have received, but we do receive,
as if the child were not received by Baptism, but by Grossing, or as if the
child were again received by Crossing, which was before received by Baptism.
This signing with the cross is no decent gesture, it is rather like a jugglers
gesture, than a gesture of decency and comeliness; It must then be used as a
Symbolical and Significant Rite. But we have no such sign set down in the Word
of God, as to make two Cross Lines in the Air with our fingers, to represent
the cross of a Tree, or to signify unto us, that we should not be ashamed of
the Cross of Christ. etc. Thou shall make unto thy self no Image, that is any
Representation forged in thy own brain to be set up in the Worship of God.
Admit once the Aerial Cross in Baptism, ye cannot refuse to set up the material
Cross, and the Rood in the Kirck, nor the Wooden or Stone Crosses in the
Highway; For all may signify the same thing, that the Cross on the forehead;
And by this reason every one may wear a Silver Cross upon his forehead also.
Further, not only other significant crosses material may be brought in upon
this ground, but also the rest of the beggarly ceremonies of Baptism, to
deface, and deform the purity, plainness and simplicity of Christ's
institution. As to put salt into the mouth of the child, to anoint with Oil the
breast and shoulders, and the top of the head with Holy Crism, and to put a
burning Taper into his hands, etc. for these Toys had their own glorious
signification, as well as the Cross. Lastly, What does it signify, but that
which is already signified in baptism. The same valor and courage, and
constant profession, and fighting under Christ's banner, is a part of that
Grace which is sealed by baptism. But besides that it is a significant toy, it
is also esteemed effective, for they say, that the infant by it is dedicated to
the service of him that dyed on the cross. Who did sanctify this sign for such
an use? Are men able to do it? It was made also a consecrator of Water, Bread
and Wine, and all other Holy things in time of Popery, for the which corruption
we ought to abhor it. Again we Sign this child in token, that he shall
continue Christ's faithful Soldier to his Lives end; These words [shall
continue to his lives end,] compared with the like in the Epistle of the 22
Sunday after Trinity [God shall continue the work in you to the end] show unto
us, that we use the cross for a pledge to give assurance to the child to
continue in grace to the end, which if it be so, then it serves to work faith,
and is used effectually, says Parker. Hooker says, that there cannot be a
more forceable means to avoid that which may deservedly procure shame. If it be
in some sort a means to secure from confusion Everlasting, then it is in some
sort effective of Grace. In a word, suppose there were no sinful use of it for
the present, the horrible abuse of it in times bypast, and the danger and
peril of these same abuses are sufficient to remove it out of this Holy
Sacrament, where it is set up in such honorable State, beside the Lord's own
Altar.

(2.) Of the Lord's Supper.

I Will not mention all is said of this, I Will only apply my self to what is said
of Kneeling, which gesture, though not according to Christ's example, nor the
nature of the Ordinance, is imposed as a necessary condition of our Right in
the Lord's Supper; whatever right Faith and Repentance may give unto this
Ordinance, no jus in re, no right in it is acknowledged to any among us, but
such as Kneel, whereby Kneeling is made by the Church of England a necessary
Term, and yet looked on but as indifferent, as if a man had been invested with
a power of making a thing in it self indifferent, to become a necessary part of
Christ's Religion; But to give you what I find in the Altar of Damascus; Where
it is said. That without any farther, he and they [viz. Minister and People]
Communicate Kneeling after the Popish manner, that is, with a gesture of
Adoration, when they are beholding the signs, taking, eating, drinking, and
inwardly in their minds should be meditating on the signification, and the
fruit, and benefit which they reap by Christ Crucified, and consequently cannot
without distraction of mind from this employment of the Soul, and Meditation,
pray a set, and continued prayer to God, or cannot meditate and be employed in
the present action without distraction of mind from the prayer, and therefore
either they pray irreverently, which they will not grant, or do Communicate
this Gesture of Adoration to the other employments of the Soul, and of the
outward senses and members of the body, about the objects presented, which they
must grant, and so nill they, will they, they must be forced to confess, that
they commit idolatry. Kneeling is no decent gesture for a Table, for commodity,
they say, makes decency, but this gesture is confessed not to be commodious,
as sitting is; It is then enjoined for another reason. to wit for Reverence,
but to kneel for Reverence and Religious respects is ever Adoration in the
highest degree. To kneel for reverence, that is, to adore, is not enjoined here
for prayer, neither may prayer lawfully be enjoined in time of another action,
and part of God's worship to be performed by the same person. And suppose it
were enjoined for the short prayer uttered by their priest, yet are not the
outward senses, and inward faculties employed principally on that prayer, but
upon another action, principally and directly intended in the institution,
whereas the other is only super-added by man. Let them frame their Canons and
Acts as they please, and suppose, that they kneel for reverence of the
Sacrament, common sense may teach us, that it is done for that respect, either
totally or principally; but let it be in the least part, yet that least part is
idolatry. Beside the idolatry of this gesture, it cannot stand with the right
manner of celebration, and rites of the institution. For when they kneel for
adoration they cannot carry the cup from hand to hand, nor divide the elements
among themselves, as Christ has commanded. In many places the people are
raised from their kneeling to come about the Table there to receive kneeling,
and then are directed to their places again, says the Author of the Survey.
The priest gives the Bread and the Wine, to every one severally, out of his
own hands. When the cup is to be carried from one to another, the communicant
is too profane (in their opinion) to reach it, the Priests Holy hand must take
it from one, and give it to the other: but Christ willed his Disciples to
divide it among themselves, and it was carried from hand to hand indeed, after
the manner of the last paschal cup. When Christ therefore gave the Bread and
the Wine, he said in the plural number, take ye, eat ye, etc. The English
priest speaks in the singular number, when he gives the elements, he
annexeth not Christ's words containing a comfortable promise, and uttered in an
Enunciative form, but other words invented by man, and in form of a prayer,
converting one part of God's worship into another, or else confounding them.

By this it is manifest that many Ministers may conscientioufly refuse to
conform to the Terms imposed on the people. They can no more satisfy their
consciences in complying with the Terms of Lay-Communion, than others can with
those of the Ministers Conformity.

Moreover.

II. As they cannot hold Communion with the Church in the Holy Sacraments, and
consequently not comply with what is required of the people in order thereunto,
so neither can they with a safe Conscience join in the ordinary Lord's days
Service. They cannot conscientiously approve of many things in that service,
unto which they must give their approbation if they conform thereunto.

Whoever conforms does thereby show his approbation of what he conforms unto.
To what a man conforms, to that he manifests his good liking, why is it that
some cannot conform unto the By-Offices, but because they do not approve of
them, and why do any conform to the ordinary Lord's days Service, but because
they approve of it, which is as much as if it had been said, Conformity is an
Overt Act of Approbation, it is in practice an Approving the thing.

But some scrupulous Dissenters cannot conform unto the ordinary Lord's days
Service without conforming to several things to which they refuse the giving
their approbation. By the ordinary Lord's days Service they understand, all
that Office that is according to the Liturgy, and Canon of the Church,
appointed to be read Ordinarily on the Lord's day, or to speak in the Common
Prayer Dialect, that Service that is appointed to be read ordinarily on
Sundays, against the use of which they do more generally argue thus.

I. If they must conform to the ordinary Lord's days Service, it must be to
all according to the Rubric and Canon, or only to some part. But,

If the latter it will not satisfy the Church, for by refusing to be present
at any part thereof, they are to be denied the Lord's Supper, and if when
called to show their reason of such their refusal, they speak any thing against
either the Service it self, or any Ceremonies, or Rites in use, they are by an
Ipso facto Excommunication Excommunicated according to the 4th. and 6th.
Canons, whereby to some it seems apparent, that unless their Conformity be full
and complete they are as liable to the displeasure and censure of the Church,
as if they had not at all conformed. The Minister must read all required, and
the people must join with him in it, or be exposed to the severe lash of
Ecclesiastical Fulminations; but this many a Dissenter cannot do, neither does
every Conformable Minister in this respect actually conform to the Canon.

It Is true every Minister according to the import of the second Article, unto
which he that subscribes is obliged to use the form in the said book prescribed
in Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and no other; The which was
expressly enjoined all Ministers, primo Eliz. Where it is said, That all and
singular Ministers -- in any Parish Church, or other place within the Realm of
England -- shall be bounden to say and use -- all their Common and Open Prayer
in such order and form as is mentioned in the said Book, and none other, or
otherwise, that is, says Dr. Heylin, neither before nor after Sermon, no other
prayer, unless the bidding of prayer with the alone use of the Lord's Prayer,
is allowed by the Canon.

That this is the sense of the Church of England, how contrary soever the
practice of her Sons generally is, will appear with conviction to such as
soberly consider, that the weightyest arguments which are produced to prove the
usefulness of a public Liturgy, are fetched from such Topics, as necessarily
infer the unlawfulness of a public praying ex tempore, or by a form of a
private Ministers Composing. One great Argument is given us by Mr. Hutton, in
the words of the Counsel of Melevis, which is, that a public Liturgy
approved of either by a Council or Synod, must be used least any thing
peradventure be otherwise framed contrary unto Faith, either by ignorance, or
for want of study, or due meditation, or as others add, least those Ministers
who pray ex tempore, or use a set form of their own composing, should be
Immethodical in their Prayers, using Tautologies, or having in 'em Nonsense,
and several uncomely slips; beside it is added, that we must use a public
Liturgy, that the prayers of the several Congregations within this Realm, may
be sent up unto God in the same words, etc. All which is against the use of all
free Prayer, or Prayers Composed by the Minister himself, for which reason many
are of an opinion, that the Liturgy was designed to be instead of all other
prayer, the which seems to be the meaning of the 14th. Canon, where it is
expressed, that there must be an using the Liturgy without either diminishing in
regard of Preaching, or any other respect, or adding any thing either in the
matter, or form thereof.

But that many among the Dissenters cannot satisfy themselves in abiding by a
form of prayer, thus erected to the public disuse of the gift of prayer is
very certain, see Dr. Collins on this Subject. Though there are some
circumstances wherein a form of prayer is lawful, namely, when the person
whose duty it is to pray in public has not a gift, in that case to use a form
is much better than not to pray at all, which is enough to show that the using
a form of prayer is not in it self unlawful, seeing if it had been so, it
could never be a duty; However to set up a form in opposition to the public
use, if spiritual or free prayer is in the opinion of some, not only a practice
unknown to the Church for several hundred years, but moreover contrary to the
present dispensation of the Spirit.

1. They assert that the imposing a public Liturgy thus, is a practice that
was unknown to the Church for several hundred years. The Reverend and Judicious
Mr. Baxter in his Search for the English Schismatic, asserts; That no One
Liturgy was imposed on any National Church, or any Patriarchal for many hundred
years after the Apostles days (yea and after Constantine,) but every Bishop or
Pastor was the chooser of his words and practice, and as others, a public
Liturgy was not Universally imposed until Antichrist did arise, by the power
of whose might Gregory's Liturgy in contempt of that of Ambrose was imposed on
the Churches, which Liturgy was not received from the Apostles, nor in many
years after, but some part had its rise from Pope Sixtus the First, another
from Celestin, etc. as Platina in the lives of Sixtus, Celestin, and Gregory
does assert. Furthermore Bellarmine himself does acknowledge, that the Bishops
of particular Churches ever had allowed 'em a power of making Offices for their
own Churches, which point of Bellarmine is confirmed by uncontrollable
evidences in this our own Country, where until the time of the Reformation,
there was great diversity in saying and singing in Churches, some following
Salisbury use, and some Hereford, some the use of Bangor, and some that of
York, and others the use of Lincoln; All which were suppressed by Edward the
6th. in order to the carrying on a farther Reformation, in the Room of which
Offices, one only was set up as what did most effectually answer the great
design of our worthy Reformers, which was the promoting a thorough Reformation
with as much speed as the badness of those times would bear it.

2. As it is thus evident that there was no public form of prayer imposed on
any particular Church the first 300 years, nor Universally till Antichrists
appearing in the World, and that even then particular Churches enjoyed the
liberty of forming Offices for their own particular Churches, in like manner
the erecting any one public form, in opposition to the public use of the
Gift of Prayer is so contrary to the Gospel dispensation, which is the
dispensation of the Spirit, that the Divines of the Church of England cannot
but by their practice discover their dislike of such impositions. They do not
therefore adhere so firmly unto these forms, but that before Sermon, they use
some of their own Composing, which is a sufficient demonstration, that praying
extempore, or the public use of a prayer Composed by a Minister in private,
is neither unlawful nor inexpedient, and that the Arguments produced from the
absurdities of such a practice, to prove the usefulness of a public Liturgy
are not cogent enough to command their assent, the which cannot but countenance
and justify the Dissent of the Non-Conformists, as they refuse to conform unto
the Liturgy as it is enjoined, as the only form of prayer to be used in public.

II. But to be more particular, there are many among the Dissenters who are
furnished with such Arguments, as the Reader may find in the Abridgment of that
book, which the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese delivered to the King, Anno 1605.
as also in a part of the Register, and among the reasons for Refusal of
Subscription, exhibited to Cotton Bishop of Exeter by the Devonshire, and
Cornish Ministry, and in several other discourses, as in Bayly's Parallel of
the Liturgy, with the Mass Book, Ames his fresh suit against Ceremonies, etc.
The which have fixed such strong convictions on the Consciences of some
Dissenters concerning the unlawfulness of the present Liturgy, that they cannot
safely join with any in the use of it. Though some, who have not received such
powerful impressions from the weight of those Arguments, can read the Common
Prayer, and join with such as do, to the end they may save themselves from the
severity of Penal Laws, yet other Dissenters will rather submit themselves to
the greatest extremities, than venture to dishonor God by doing what they are
convinced is a sin.

That the Reader may be moved to entertain some charitable thoughts concerning
such persons, and that the common objection that is laid in against their
Nonconformity, which is Humor and Fancy, and a Peevish Obstinacy, may be
fully answered. I Will give an Historical Account of some of those Arguments
which do so fully convince some Dissenters, that they cannot without laying an
unnatural violence on their Families, conform.

Argument I.
I. They are persuaded that according to the Rubric, the same honor is put on
the Apocryphal Books, which is due alone to the Sacred Scriptures. For they are
appointed to be read as a part of the Old Testament, without any note of
difference from the Canonical.

In a discourse before the Common Prayer concerning the Service of the Church,
it is asserted that nothing is ordained to be read, but the very Pure word of
God, the Holy Scriptures, or that which is agreeable to the same, beside this
after the order, how the Psalter is to be read, it is said in the Title, how the
rest of Holy Scripture is to be read, under which Title several orders are to
be found. Namely, 1. The Old Testament is appointed for the first Lessons at
Morning and Evening Prayer, so as the most part thereof will be read every year
once, and in the 3d. order it is said that to know what Lessons shall be read
every day, look for the day of the Month in the Calendar following, and there
ye shall find the Chapters that shall be read for the Lessons both at Morning
and Evening Prayer, and in the Rubric after the Psalms are read it is ordered,
that then shall be read distinctly with an audible voice, the First Lesson
taken out of the Old Testament, as it is appointed in the Calendar, whereby
it is evident that what is appointed in the Calendar to be read, for the First
Lesson, is considered as a part of the Old Testament, the Holy Scripture, the
pure word of God; But the Apocryphal books are in the Calendar appointed to be
read for First Lesson for almost Two Months together, even from the latter end
of September until November 24th, beside the Holy days, on which these books
are appointed to be read. To which add that this is done to the constant
neglect of reading a great part of the Sacred Scriptures, namely the two books
of Chronicles. Solomon's Song, and a great part of the Revelations.

That it is the appointment of the Church to read the Apocryphal books as a part
of the Holy Scriptures, is farther confirmed by Archbishop Bancroft, in the
conference held at Hampton Court, where (as the abridgment has it,) he taxed
Jerome for calling these books Apocrypha, and said he was the first that gave
them that name, and called his objections against them, the old Cavills of the
Jews; And the Bishops of Winchester affirmed at the same time, that they must
needs be held, Canonici ad informandos mores. Canonical for the information of
manners. To these I Will add, what Mr. Hutton in his answer unto the reasons of
the Ministers of Devon and Cornwall to this very objection. They, are says he,
called Holy Scriptures in a signification at large, because the subject they
entreat of, is God, his Love, Power, our Sanctification and Obedience to him.
And they may be held Canonical, wholesome Doctrines being thence deduced, though
not simply of themselves, yet wherein they agree with the Canon, as also
because they may serve as they always heretofore have done, for a rule to
direct and order our Conversation aright.

In this answer, though he seems without the approbation of the Rubric, to
make a difference between the Sacred Scriptures, and the Apocrypha books, yet
at length falls in with the Bishop of Winchester asserting, that they are a
Canon or Rule to direct our Conversation aright.

But in opposition hereunto, it is generally by sound Protestants asserted. 1.
That the Apocryphal books are not a part of the Holy Scriptures, the pure word
of God. 2. That there are several things appointed to be read, which are not
agreeable to the word of God, nor can be defended by any sound Protestant.

To make this point the more clear, I Will give the Reader an account of what is
replied to the distinction of the Bishop of Winchester about the Canon of
Faith, and Manners, and then offer what arguments have been urged against this
practice of the Church.

In the second part of the defense of the reasons of the Devonshire and Cornish
Ministers, it is thus replied to the aforesaid distinction. But that we may
farther see how heartless and unsound this distinction of Canonical for
manners, but not for Faith is, let us observe how they here make a distinction
of faith and manners where none is, for all Doctrines of God's word are (in
this respect) Doctrines of faith, whether they concern matters of believing, or
of other Conversation of life, wherefore the Apostle has coupled them together
in that place to Timothy, saying, all Scripture given by inspiration of God,
etc. showing us thereby, that upon one, and the same divine Revelation, our
knowledge and practice both must be grounded. And I would entreat these men
that give us this distinction, to tell us whether it be not a point of faith,
That we must worship one God, and him after his own manner, reverencing his
Name, and keeping his Sabbaths, etc. And whether it be not a point of faith,
That we must honor our Parents and Superiors, that we must not Kill, commit
Adultery, Steal, Slander, Covet; And whether our Consciences be not bound in
these things by the Divine Testimony, as well as in any point of our
understanding? surely (unless our Divinity fails) all the word of God is the
object of Faith, that as well which directs to manners, as that which
reveals mysteries unto us. There is (I confess) a distinction between Faith
and Manners, when we come to sort and sever the things contained in the Word,
into the kinds of duties imposed, but when we consider them in the Rule and
Principle of the word it self, from which the Conscience is certainly informed
and bound, there is no difference, but they are all of faith alike: even as the
same sap, which in the branches distinct unto leaves and blossoms, was in the
Root but one; whence it follows that nothing can be properly Canonical unto
manners, but the same was first Canonical unto faith: for we therefore stand
undoubtedly persuaded that thus we ought to do, because we first believe that
God himself would have us to do so, and has revealed it to us as his will.

By this it seems evident that the distinction between Canon of faith and of
manners as used by the Bishops, is idle and impertinent, and that therefore
notwithstanding all has been said by Mr. Hutton, it remains as an undoubted
truth, that the Service Book does consider the Apocripha as Canonical, as a
part of the Holy Scriptures, the pure Word of God, which is no more than what
may be inferred from their confounding the Apocriphal with the Canonical books,
as may be seen in their great Bible Authorized to be read, where dividing the
books of the Old Testament into Legal, Historical, Sapiential and Prophetical;
In the Historical they place 19 books, amongst which they reckon the third and
fourth books of Esdras, the books of Tobith and Judith, the two books of
Maccabees, and the rest of the Chapters of Esther, making the book of Esther to
consist of 16 Chapters, and then to be part of that book. In the Sapiential
they place 5 books, whereof they reckon the books of Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus
for two, calling the book of Wisdom the Wisdom of Solomon. In the Prophetical
they place 18 books, of which they reckon Baruch the Prophet, and Susanna, Bell
and the Dragon, making the same all one with Daniel, consisting of 14 Chapters;
What can be more clear than this, says the Defender of the Reasons? etc. Where
to (says the same Author) if we add the book of Homilies, how it diverse times
calls these Apocriphal Books Holy Scriptures, in the same sense wherein the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are so called, saying in the alleging
Tobith and Ecclesiasticus, the Holy Ghost speaks so in the Scriptures,
thereby giving the same Authority and Title with Zechary, Luke 1. and the
Author to the Hebrews Chapter 3. 7. give to the Holy Prophets, in their writing of
places out of the Old Testament.

Thus it is evident; That according to the Service Book, and the Sentiments of
some great Bishops, the great Bible and Book of Homilies, the Apocripha is
considered as a part of the Holy Scriptures. The which truth abides in its
strength, notwithstanding what is argued from the Book of Articles, where it is
sufficiently manifest, that the Apocripha are no part of the Holy Scriptures,
for this does but discover the contradiction there is between the book of
Articles and the Service book, etc. whereby the Non-Conformists are but
supplied with an unanswerable argument against subscription, which I Will give in
the words of the Devonshire Ministers: viz. That to subscribe to the Service
Book is contrary to our Subscription to the Book of Articles, the 6 Article
whereof under the name of Holy Scriptures, understanding only the Canonical
Books of the Old and New Testament, there mentioned, whereof the Apocrypha
Books are none, and therefore they conclude they cannot safely subscribe,
because they shall subscribe to two books, one contrary to another.

This being so clear, namely, that the Apochripha Books, are appointed to be
read as a part of the Holy Scriptures, and as the Canon and Rule of manners,
I Will proceed to show what has been objected against it; Not that I Will trouble
the Reader with all, but only with two or three particulars.

1. Hereby their error, who account these Books Canonical Scripture is
confirmed; This was (says the Lincoln Abridgment) the only reason, that moved
the third Council of Carthage to decree, that they should be held Canonical,
because they had received from the Fathers, that they were to be read in the
Church. And Bellarmine makes this one of his best reasons to prove that the
authority of these books is Divine and Canonical, because they are now, and
have been of old, read by the Church in the public Assemblies; so do the
Papists in that Book they have lately Published, called the Three Conversions
of England; And Gregory Martin reasons thus; "Their own Service book (says
he) appoints these books of Toby and Ecclesiasticus to be read for Holy
Scriptures, as the other. Do they read in their Churches Apocryphal and
Superstitious Books for Holy Scriptures? so clear it is that the very Papists
are confirmed in their error by this practice of the Church.

2. The reading these books, though but as the Canon and Rule manners tends so
very much to the corrupting the manners of men in some things, that the
Dissenters can in no way approve of it.

In the defense of the Devonshire and Cornish Ministers reasons, it is thus
argued. If the Apocriphal Books be Canonical as teaching manners, then
whatsoever point of manners those books do commend unto us, either by Precept
or allowed Example, we not only may but must observe it for Conscience sake, as
a divine Rule or Canon.

It Is true hereby a late Order, which was that the wicked Dissenters, if poor
receive not Alms, will be defended, for it is but according to the command in
Ecclesiasticus 12. 5. where it is expressly said; Give not to the Ungodly, hold
back thy bread, and give it not unto him: least he over-master thee thereby.
But how agreeable this Precept is unto the pure word of God, or the light of
nature, let a common capacity judge, but though this practice is enjoined to
the defense of that but now mentioned order, yet there are other allowed, and
highly approved practices, which are most odious in the apprehension of the
Dissenter, and are really abhorred by all but bloody Papists. For Judiths
tricking up her self on purpose to tempt and ensnare the heart of Holofernes to
uncleanness, her compassing an Irreligious Governor by fraud, by lies, by
oaths and protestations in the name of God, to the end she might the more
assuredly murder him, is not only an allowed, but a practice highly approved of
by the book of Judith, that is appointed to be read in October.

The children of Israel, though now returned from the Babylonian Captivity, yet
to the very time Holofernes was murdered by Judith, they remained under the
Government of the Emperor. The Emperor though an Idolater, yet their Lawful
Governor, whose Government they should not have shaked off by frauds, by lies,
equivocations, and other sinful practices, which yet Judith did to the gaining
the greatest applause and commendation; The which is read in the Church as the
Rule of manners, whereas in truth, it is meet only for the countenancing the
unjustifiable treasons of the Papists, to which purpose it has been improved by
Saunders de schismate, who inciting the English Ladies, professing the Popish
Religion to murder Queen Elizabeth, and all her Favorers, calling her
Holofernes, the Heretical Prince, did prove from this example of Judith, that
they might do it, without any the least stain or blot to their Religion.

This is urged in the defense of the reason of the Devonshire and Cornish
Ministers, from whence I would query, whether a person fully convinced of that,
if the book of Judith must be read as the Rule of manners, this allowed
practice of Judith must be in the like case imitated, ought not rather to
abandon the reading or hearing of these books, then presume to enter on the
practices of murdering by lies, deceits. etc. I verily believe, that the
Non-Conformists rather than that they would imitate Judith in these things,
would rather be exposed to the worst of miseries, whereby they would more
effectually demonstrate to the World the Loyalty of their Principles, than by
their Conformity.

There are several other things that must be practiced; if the Apocriphal Books
be embraced as the Rule of manners, unto which the Dissenters cannot conform.
But designing to be short, I will at this time wave the considering them, and
proceed to show the sense, some of the Old Church of England Protestants had of
these books, as I find it in the Abridgment.

3. The Old Church of the Jews, (says Dr. Whitaker) never vouchsafed the
Apocriphal Books so much honor as to read 'em publicly, which also the
Learned hold to be a good president for us to follow -- The Council of Hippo
(says Bishop Jewel) speaking of the Canonical Scriptures, decreed that
besides them nothing might be read in the Church. The Council held at Laodicea
decreed, on the Sabbath we may not read any books, that be without the Canon,
but only the Canonical books of the Old and New Testament. To the like effect
Chrysostom speaks, (says the same Jewel,) and as Bishop Jewel, so Bishop
Horn, and Bishop Pilkinton asserts, the French Church by the constitutions of
Jews and Charles, were against the reading of the Apocrypha. Whoever will
diligently compare what Protestant writers offer against Apocryphal books, with
the books themselves will find so many idle stories and fables, so many errors
and ill presidents in it, that they cannot but conclude with Dr. Sutcliff. That
it is impudence in the Papists, that they match Apocryphal books and Legends,
with the Scriptures, or at least read them in the Churches, together with the
Scriptures.

From the whole has been said on this particular, I infer that it is but
charity to conclude that some Dissenters may receive such strong convictions
concerning the unlawfulness of conforming to this part of the Liturgy, that
their Nonconformity may be more justly esteemed the product of Conscience,
than the Offspring of obstinacy, and an unreasonable Humor.

Argument II.
II. Some Dissenters cannot Conscientiously approve of the Translation of the
Psalms, which is read at the ordinary Lord's days service, because it is not
only imperfect, but moreover in some places senseless and absurd, and in other
places false, directly contradicting our last Translation of the Psalms in the
Bible.

The Translation now used is the same set forth in the times of ignorance, when
the light of the truth did but begin to dawn in Henry the 8th. days, and is

1. Imperfect, because among many other omissions, all the Titles, though a
part of the original and very useful, are left out.

2. Senseless and absurd, for Psalm. 58. 9. where our Translation has it thus,
viz. before your pots can feel the Thorns, he shall take them away with a
Whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath. In the Service Book Translation
it is, or ever your pots be made hot with Thorns, so let indignation vex them,
as a thing that is raw. So Psalm. 72. 6. He shall come down like rain upon the
mowen grass. This in the common prayer is Translated thus, he shall come down
like the rain into a fleece of Wool. This our Old Protestant divines looked
upon as a corruption in the Papists, not to be approved, but can it be less so
when done by the sons of the Church of England, Fulk, Withers, Bulkley,
Whitaker, and others have blamed the Rhemists Translation, because it is in many
places senseless and absurd, for which reason seeing the Translation of the
Psalms in the Service Book, is as senseless in some things, as that of the
Rhemists is in other, it is as much to be blamed, and as little to be approved.

But this is not all, for this Translation in Henry the 8th, is not only
imperfect, absurd and senseless, but moreover in some places contrary to the
original, not only in the opinion of Dissenters, but also in the judgment of
those who were the Authors of the best Translation that ever was in English.

1. The Psalter has it in Psalm. 17. 4. Thus, because of men's works that are
done against the words of thy lips: I have kept me from the ways of the
destroyer, but more agreeably to the Original, our Translation is thus,
concerning the works of men, by the words of thy lips I have kept me from the
paths of the destroyer, whereby it is apparent, that not men's works that are
done against the words of God's lips kept David right, but concerning men's
works, David was kept from the paths of the destroyer, by the words of God's
lips.

2. In Psalm. 18. 26. The Psalter says, that with the froward, thou shall learn
frowardness, but according to the Hebrew, it is as our last translation in the
Bible has it, with the froward thou shall show thy self froward.

3. In the Psalter Psalm. 68. 6. it is thus, he is the God that makes men to be
of one mind in an house, whereas according to the Hebrew, it is God sets the
solitary in Families.

4. In the Psalter, Psalm. 107. 40. Though he suffer them to be evil entreated
through Tyrants, but according to the Hebrew in our Bibles; He pours contempt
upon Princes. But,

5. In Psalm. 105. 28. The Psalter says, And they were not obedient unto his
word, but the Hebrew, And they rebelled not against his word, or were not
disobedient to his word. And in Psalm. 106. 30. The Psalter has it; Then stood
up Phineas and Prayed, and so the Plague ceased; But our Bibles, then stood up
Phinehas and executed judgment, and the Plague ceased, which is not only most
agreeable to the Hebrew in this place, but moreover to the History in number
25. 7, 8.

Such as conform to the ordinary Lord's days Service, must not only show their
approbation to the many idle Stories in the Apocryphal books, and give 'em that
countenance that alone pertains to the pure word of God; but besides must lay
aside the Translation that is most exactly agreeable to the Original, and use
one that is not only imperfect, absurd and senseless, but in some things so
contrary to the Original. But some Dissenters think that their Conformity in
this respect cannot but prove pernicious to the Christian Religion, as it casts
a reproach not only on the last and best translation, but even on the Original
it self; They know how jealous God is about his word, unto which no additions,
diminutions or alterations can be made, but to the provoking the most high, and
the wounding their Consciences, and therefore are afraid to conform.

Argument III.
III. The third Argument does more immediately concern the very Service it
self, unto which the Dissenters refuse to Conform, because of that similitude,
likeness and agreement there is between it and the forms of Prayer, which the
Papists use.

That the Reader may be the more fully acquainted with the true State of this
controversy, about the agreeableness there is between the English, and Roman
Service Books, and what it is the Dissenters aim at by their insisting so very
much on it, I must show.

1. What they say concerning the agreableness that is supposed to be between
these Service Books.

2. How this came to pass; What occasioned our adhering so closely to the
Popish Service Book even when we forsook their Communion.

3. The Reasonings of some Dissenters from that agreeableness is supposed to be
between these two books against the English Service.

First, What they say concerning the agreableness that is supposed to be
between these two Service books.

The Dissenters do out of King Edward's Letter unto the Devonshire and Cornish
Rebels give this following account of it, namely. As for the Service in the
English Tongue thus manifest reasons for it, and yet perchance it seems to
you a new Service, and indeed is none other but the old; the self same words in
English, which were in Latin. The difference is, that you our Subjects should
understand in English, that which before was spoke in Latin. If the Service of
the Church was good in Latin, it remains good in English, for nothing is
altered, but to speak with knowledge, that which was spoke with ignorance.
Furthermore these Dissenters add, as I find in their Anatomy of the Service
Book. That every piece and parcel of the Liturgy, word for word is out of these
Popish pieces, namely the Breviary out of which the Common Prayers are taken,
the Ritual, or book of Rites, out of which the Administration of the
Sacraments, Burial, Matrimony, visitation of the sick are taken. The Mass Book,
out of which the consecration of the Lord's Supper, Collects, Epistles and
Gospels, are taken: As for the book of ordination of Archbishops, Bishops and
Ministers, that is out of the Roman Pontifical.

These things being so, whoever pleads for the English Service book, does so
far defend the Romish Mass Book, not that it is a defense of the whole Romish
Service, for in the Anatomy of the Service Book it is acknowledged, that every
thing in the Mass Book is not in our Liturgy, though all that is in our Liturgy
is word for word in the Mass Book. But so far as our Liturgy is defended, so
far that part of the Romish Service is defended, for which reason, the greatest
Champions, who among our Church men have most zealously written in defense of
the Liturgy, and have been considered by the Church of Rome as men; who have
done great Service to the Roman Religion. Thus Whitgift and Hooker, have had
their applauses from the Romanists

It Is not unworthy observation to find Archbishop Whitgift reproaching
Cartwright, and the Dissenters as a people eminently serviceable to the Papist,
and Dean Stilling fleet to give the utmost countenance he could thereunto,
whereas the truth is, that that on which Whitgift grounds his censure, will not
bear it, and though none of Dean Stilling fleet's adversaries have taken any
notice of it, that I can find, yet Whitgift himself is the man, who has had
from the Jesuits great thanks for what he has written against Dissenters, in
defense of the English Service and Discipline.

That Whitgifts Censure concerning the Dissentes subserviency to Popish
designs is groundless, being rather the product of his indiscreet passions,
than of sound arguings, is evident, in that the great reason given to show that
the Dissenters are the Papists promoters, is because they assert that the
Papists ought not to be compelled to receive the Supper of the Lord, so long as
they continue in their Popery, that is, they ought not to act contrary to their
Conscience, nor dissemble with Almighty God, by professing themselves to be
Protestants, even when they are really, and in heart Papists; whether this be
to gratify the Papist let the impartial Reader judge.

But that Whitgift has gratified the Papist in his writings against Dissenters;
I Will evince by producing what the learned Parker in his Ecclesiastical policy,
lib. 1. chap. 33. insists on, in answer to this objection of Whitgift,
Bancroft, and others, where he shows how William Reignolds the Jesuit asserts,
that John Whitgift in his discourse against Cartwright, has defended the
Catholic Cause, and accordingly the said Reignolds in the preface against
Whitaker, makes great use of Whitgift, and in the book it self, he sends Mr.
Whitaker unto Dr. Whitgift, for a supply of reasons for the confirming their
notion about putting of our caps, and making courtesy at the hearing the Name
of Jesus. Scultinyns and Stapleton give the same Character both of the writings
of Whitgift and Bancroft against the Puritanes, even as Gretzer the Jesuit
triumphs in Saravias and Sutcliff's defense of the Episcopal Authority in
Civils.

And as Whitgift, even so Hooker, for the service done the Church of Rome, by
what they have writ in defense of the worship and discipline of the Church of
England, has had the praises of the Romanists. This Mr. Walton in the life of
Hooker has observed, which is no more than what Dr. King, Bishop of Chichester
was acquainted with, as he himself expresses in a letter to honest Isaac. I am
glad you mention (says the Bishop) how much value Robert Stapleton, Pope
Clement the 8th, and other eminent men of the Romish persuasion have put upon
this book, having been told the same in my youth by persons of worth, that have
traveled Italy. And what does this discover less than that such is the
agreement between the Service and Discipline of the Church of England, and that
of Rome, that whoever pleads for the one, defends the other.

Furthermore in the Anatomy of the Service Book, we are furnished with an
Historical Account of the Papists approving our Liturgy. There be, says the
Author thereof, abundance of instances for the Papists approving our Liturgy,
witness Mortons Appeal, Pope Pius the 4th, and Gregory the 13th. offered to
Queen Elizabeth to confirm the English Liturgy; Witness Dr. Abbot then Prelate
of Canterbury, and Mr. Cambden in the life of Queen Elizabeth, who says the
common fame went for truth, that the Pope promised to confirm out of his own
authority the English Liturgy, provided her Majesty should rank her self with
the Roman Church: To thief I adjoyn Dr. Boys, who was a bitter expositor of
the English Liturgy, as Heiga by the Doctors of Dowayes appointment was of the
Mass, after he has whetted his teeth upon the Schismatics in his Epistle to
Bancroft, he produces the letter of Pope Pius, for the approbation of the
Service Book, and notes also the Testimony of approbation from Bristow, in his
motives, Queen Elizabeth being interdicted by the Popes Bull. Secretary
Walsingham wrought so, that he procured two Intelligences to be sent from the
Pope, as it were in secret into England, to whom the Secretary appointed a
State Intelligencer to be their Guide, who showed them London, and Canterbury
service in all the pomp of it, which the popish Intelligencers viewing and
considering well, with much admiration they wondered, that their Lord the Pope
was so ill advised, or at least ill informed as to interdict a Prince, whose
Service and Ceremonies so Symobiliz'd with his own, and therefore returning to
Rome they possessed the Pope, that they saw no Service, Ceremonies or Orders in
England, but they might very well serve in Rome, whereupon the Bull was
recalled, to this also Doctor Carrier, consid. p. 45. a dangerous seducing
Jesuit gives ample evidences; The Common Prayer book, (says he) and the
Catechism contained in it, held no point of Doctrine expressly contrary to
Antiquity, that is, as he explaineth himself contrary to the Romish Service,
etc. Much more might be spoke to this purpose, but I wave it, judging that what
has been already offered is sufficient to evince, that there is, at least in
the judgment of many, a very great agreableness between the two service books.

2. What is it that occasioned the Church of Englands adhering to so great a
part of the Romish Service Book, even when she forsook the Communion of that
Church?

Whoever considers the State of the Church in Edward the sixth his time, will
find that Cranmer and others discovered a propension to drive on the
Reformation much farther than they did, but were hindered by the iniquity of the
times. Thus Bullinger, as I find it in a difcourse of the troubles of
Franckford, reports to Mr. Williams, Whittingham, Gilby and others, that
Cranmer Bishop of Canterbury had drawn up a book of Prayers an hundred times
more perfect than this we now have, but the same could not take place, for that
Cranmer was matched with a wicked Clergy and Convocation with other enemies.

There were also reasons of a like nature that might hinder the furtherance of
the reformation in Queen Elizabeth's days, for even then the ignorance of the
vulgar accompanied with a proportionable hatred to true Religion was very
great; Whence it is that Cambden assures us, that the change of Religion was not
suddenly made, but by little and little, by degrees, for the Roman Religion
continued in the same State it was first, a full Month, and more after the
death of Queen Mary. The 27th of December it was tolerated to have the Epistles
and Gospels, the Ten Commandments, the Symbol, the Litany, and the Lords
Prayer in the vulgar Tongue. The 22 of March the Parliament being Assembled,
the order of Edward the sixth was re-established, and by act of the same, the
whole use of Lord's Supper, granted under both kinds. The 24th. of June by the
Authority of that which concerned the Uniformity of Public Prayers, and
Administration of the Sacraments. The Sacrifice of the Mass was abolished, and
the Liturgy in the English Tongue more and more Established. In the Month of
July, the Oath of Allegiance was proposed to the Bishops, and other persons,
and in August, Images were thrown out of the Temples and Churches, and broken,
and burned.

Furthermore, as the illness of the times did impeed a sudden Reformation, in
like manner the moderate temper, and favorable disposition the Queen had to
some part of Popery, was such as hindered a full Reformation; whereupon it was
not so far carried on by this Queen, as 'twas sometime before by her Brother
Edward the sixth.

That Queen Elizabeth had a natural propension to favor some part of Popery,
is not only manifest from her (I hope) Conscientious conforming so far in Queen
Mary's days, as to hear Divine Service according to the rule in the Romish
Church, and her often going to confession, and afterward when she came to the
Throne, her choosing to be Crowned by a Popish Bishop, according to the order
of the Roman Pontifical, which had so much in it of the Ceremonies and
Superstitions of the Church of Rome, that it is thought very probable, the
Protestant Bishops would not act in it, but with great alterations, and that
therefore she desired 'em not to be engaged in it. But beside this, Dr. Burnet
gives us the same Character I have suggested, for says he in his History of
the Reformation, Queen Elizabeth receiving some impressions in her Fathers
Reign in favor, of such Old Rites as he had still retained, and in her own
Nature loving State, and some Magnificence in Religion, as well as in every
thing else, she thought, that in her Brother's Reign they had stripped it too
much of External Ornaments, and had made their Doctrine too narrow in some
points, therefore she intended to have some things explained in more general
Terms, that so all parties might be comprehended by them. She inclined to keep
up Images in Churches, and to have the manner of Christ's presence in the
Sacrament left in some general words, that those who believed the Corporal
presence might not be driven away from the Church by too nice an explanation of
it. So far Dr. Burnet.

In pursuance of these resolves, the Queen attempts the accommodating matters
of Religion so unto the Romish Clergy, as to take 'em into the Communion of the
Church of England, the which end, as Dr. Heylin affirms, she so effectually
compassed, that for several years the Papists continued in the Communion of the
Church, and when they did forsake it, it was not because they approved not of
our Liturgy, but upon political considerations, and because the Council of
Trent had commanded it, and Pope Pius the 5th. had Excommunicated the Queen,
and discharged her Subjects from their Allegiance, and made the going or not
going to Church a sign distinctive, to difference a Roman Catholic from an
English Protestant.

I Will give you the words of Dr. Heylin, they are in his History of Queen
Elizabeth. There past another Act for recommending and imposing the book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, according to such
alteration and corrections as were made therein by those who were appointed to
revise it, as before is said. In the pursuance of which service, there was
great care taken for expunging all such passages in it, as might give any
scandal or offense to the Popish party, or be urged by them in excuse for their
not coming to Church, and joining with the rest of the Congregation in God's
public worship. In the Litany first made and published by King Henry the
Eight, and afterward continued in the two Liturgies of King Edward the sixth,
there was a Prayer to be delivered from the Tyranny, and all the detestable
enormities of the Bishops of Rome, which was thought fit to be expunged, as
giving matter of scandal, and disaffection to all that party, or that otherwise
wished well to that Religion. In the First Liturgy of King Edward, the
Sacrament of the Lord's Body was delivered with this benediction, that is to
say, the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for the preservation of
thy Body and Soul, to Life Everlasting; The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ,
etc. which being thought by Calvin and his Disciples to give some countenance
to the gross and carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which passes by
the name of Transubstantiation in the School of Rome, was altered into this
form, into the second Liturgy, that is to say, take and eat this in remembrance
that Christ dyed for thee, and feed on him, in thy heart by faith with
Thanksgiving; Take and drink this. etc. But the Revisers of the book joined
both forms together, least under color of rejecting a carnal, they might be
thought also to deny such a real presence as was defended in the writings of
the ancient fathers. Upon which ground they expunged also a whole Rubric at
the end of the Communion Service, by which it was declared, that kneeling at
the participation of the Sacrament, was required for no other reason, than for
the signification of the humble and grateful acknowledging of the benefits of
Christ given therein unto the worthy Receiver. And to avoid that profanation
and disorder which otherwise might have ensued, and not for giving any
adoration to the Sacramental Bread and Wine, there bodily received, or in
regard of any real and essential presence of Christ's Body and Blood. And to
come up closer to the Church of Rome, it was ordered by the Queens injunctions
that the Sacramental Bread (which the book required only to be made of the
finest Flower) should be made round, in fashion of the wafers used in the time
of Queen Mary. She also ordered that the Lord's Table should be placed where
the Altar stood, that the accustomed reverence should be made at the name of
Jesus, Music retained in the Church, and all the old festivals observed, with
their several Eves; By which complyances, and the expunging of the passages
before remembered, the book was made so passable amongst the Papists, that for
ten years they generally repaired to their Parish Churches, without doubt or
scruple, as is affirmed not only by Sir Edward Cook in his Speech against
Garnet, and his charge given at the Assizes held at Norwich, but also by the
Queen her self, in a Letter to Sir Francis Walsingham, then being her Resident,
or Leiger Ambassador in the Court of France, the same confessed by Sanders also
in his book de Schismate.

To this Heylin within a few years following adds. And now we may behold the
face of the Church of England, as it was first settled and established under
Queen Elizabeth. The Government of the Church by Archbishops and Bishops; --
The Liturgy conform to the primitive patterns, and all the Rites and Ceremonies
therein prescribed, accommodated to the honor of God, and encreafe of piety.
The Festivals preserved in their former Dignity, observed with all their
distinct Offices peculiar to them, and celebrated with a Religious Concourse of
all sorts of people, the weekly Fasts, the Holy time of Lent, the Embring
weeks, together with the Fast of the Rogation, severely kept by a forbearance
of all kind of flesh, not now by virtue of the Statute, as in the time of King
Edward, but as appointed by the Church in her public Calendar, before the
book of Common Prayer, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper celebrated in most
reverend manner, the Holy Table seated in the place of the Altar, the people
making their due reverence at their first entrance into the Church, kneeling at
the Communion, the confession and the public prayers, standing up at the
Creed, the Gospels and the Gloria Patri, and using the accustomed reverence at
the name of Jesus; Music retained in all such Churches in which provision had
been made for the maintenance of it, or where the people could be trained up at
least to plain Song; All which particulars were either Established by the
Laws, or commanded by the Queens injunctions, or otherwise retained by virtue
of some ancient usages, not by Law prohibited. Nor is it much to be admired
that such a general Conformity to those ancient usages was constantly observed
in all Cathedrals, and the most part of the Parish Churches, considering how
well they were presidented by the Court it self, in which the Liturgy was
Officiated every day, both morning and evening, not only in the public
Chapel, but the private Closet, celebrated in the Chapel with Organs, and
other Musical Instrments, and the most excellent voices of men and children,
that could be got in all the Kingdom. The Gentlemen and Children in their
Surplices, and the Priests in Copes as often as they attended the Divine Service
at the Holy Altar. The Altar furnished with rich Plate, two fair Gilt
Candlesticks with Tapers in them, and a Massy Crucifix of Silver in the midst
thereof, which last remained there for some years, till it was broke in pieces
by Pach, the fool (no wiser man daring to undertake such a desperate Service)
at the solicitation of Sir Francis Knolles, the Queens near Kinsman by the
Caries, and one who openly appeared in favor of the Schism at Franckford. The
ancient ceremonies accustomably observed by the Knights of the Garter, in their
Adoration toward the Altar, abolished by King Edward the 6th, and revived by
Queen Mary, were by this Queen retained as formerly in her Fathers time -- for
which she received both thanks and honor from her very enemies, [i. e. the
Papists] as appears by Harding's Epistle Dedicatory before his answer to the
Apology, etc. So far Heylin.

Thus from what the sons of the Church, Cambden, Burnet and Heylin have
affirmed, it is apparent that Queen Elizabeth had a natural propension to favor
the Papists, and that this was discovered by her making the Terms of Communion
much more easy to the Papists than in King Edward's time, whereby they became
the more difficult and arduous to the Protestant Dissenter. I Will only add one
observation of the Jesuit Reignold against Whitaker, whereby the Reader may
perceive, not only that the Papists take notice how the practice of the Church
of England contradicts their Rubric, but also that in the Rubric concerning
Apparel, which is now to be found in the Communion Book, even the beginning
before morning prayer, it is ordered; That the Minister at the time of
Communion, and at all other times in his Ministration, shall use such Ornaments
in the Church, as were in use by Authority of Parliament, in the second year of
the Reign of King Edward the 6th.

But Queen Elizabeth was not the only cause of driving back the Reformation,
but the Clergy themselves had an hand in it, which was sufficiently discovered,
when they perceived that her Majesty's Council began to entertain more
favorable thoughts of Protestant Dissenters, who continued their cries for a
further Reformation.

Cambden assures us, that about the year 1583, The Queen (who held it for a
maxim that she ought not to be more remiss in Ecclesiastical Affairs,)
advancing Whitgift from the Sea of Worcester, to that of Canterbury, above all
commanded him to re-establish the Discipline of the Church of England, that as
then lay dismembered by the connivency of Prelates, the obstinacy of Innovators,
and by the power of some great ones, whilst some Ministers -- using to their
own fantasy new Rites of Services in their private Houses, utterly condemning
the Liturgy, and the appointed manner of Administering the Sacrament, as being
in many things contrary to the Scriptures, and therefore many refused to go to
Church. -- To abolish which things, and to reduce 'em in Unity, Whitgift
propounded Three Articles to the Ministers, by them to be subscribed. But (adds
Cambden) it is incredible what controversies and disputations arose upon this --
What troubles and injuries Whitgift suffered of certain noble men. So far
Cambden.

But whoever might be so happy as to be thoroughly acquainted with a just,
impartial and particular History of those times would suddenly see, that the
true cause of all Whitgifts troubles was his intemperate persecuting Godly and
Conscientious men, who rather like a Spanish Inquisitor proposed a multitude of
Articles to ensnare, than as a good Pastor to reduce his erring Brethren to the
truth; For even when he was most violent in letting out his rage on the
Conscientious Dissenter, even then the wicked, the ungodly and profane Priests
knew not what it was to be prosecuted for their debaucheries. Neither can it be
truly said that the Earl of Leicester was the only great person, that resented
the ill proceedings of this Bishop, but even the Lord Treasurer Cecill, and her
Majesty's Council.

It Is sad to consider with what severity Whitgift treated the Couscientious
Dissenter, and with what mildness the drunkard, glutton, etc. The which was so
palpable, that some zealous Conformists, since that time have judged it
necessary to essay the putting some color on it, as Isaac Walton in the life
of Hooker, most Satyrically represents the Nonconformist to be much more vile
than the drunkard or glutton, even when he could not impeach 'em as being
guilty of any such enormities. But that somewhat might be said to expose the
Dissenter, and defend the Bishops, an encroachment is made on the divine
prerogative and vain man, who cannot but with much difficulty look into his own
heart, pretends to see into the secrets of the Dissenter, where he finds so
many Spiritual wickednesses that lie hid to lodge, that he must be warm in
discovering his abhorrence to such Villainies, judging not according to the
outward appearance, but like unto the all-knowing God, according to the heart.
I Will give you Mr. Walton's own words, who speaking of the Nonconformists,
says. Of this party there were many that were possessed with an high degree of
Spiritual wickedness; I mean with an innate restless radical pride and malice,
I mean not those lesser sins, that are more visible, and more properly Carnal,
and sins against a man's self, as gluttony and drunkenness, and the like, (from
which good Lord deliver us) but sins of an higher nature, because more unlike
to the nature of God, which is Love and Mercy, and Peace, and more like the
Devil, (who is not a glutton, nor can be drunk, and yet is a Devil:) those
wickednesses of malice and revenge, and opposition, and a complacence in making
and beholding confusions. -- Men whom Pride and Self-conceit had made to
overvalue their own Wisdom, and become pertinacious, and to hold foolish and
unmannerly disputes against those men, which they ought to reverence, and those
Laws which they ought to obey. As if disputing freely with the Bishop, and not
giving him the desired respects by rendering obedience to his commands, even
when they could not without sinning against God, had been the Overt Act of that
Pride, Malice, etc. which makes men more vile than Gluttony and Drunkenness.

But it is no part of my present province to comment on this notion, but only
from it to infer, that as the dignified Clergy did consider the Nonconformity
of the Dissenter to be a sin most odious, much more high and great, than that
of gluttony, even so it is easy to conclude, that what is affirmed in History
concerning the Bishops treating the drunkard with more candor than the
Conscientious Dissenter, is very true; For which no stronger reason can be
assigned, than that the debauchees wickedness, not being so great an impediment
to the accommodating the difference between the Church of England, and of Rome,
as the Nonconformity of the Dissenter, the wickedness of the former might be
tolerated, even when the Dissent of the latter would not be born.

That this is so, namely, that the Archbishops and Bishops in the respects
they showed the ignorant, and scandalous among the Ministry, and the letting
out their wrath on the intractible Dissenter as they termed it, was a plain
evincement, that they thereby aimed at the gratifying the Papist, will appear
with conviction to such as will be so just to themselves, as to weigh
impartially the import of those Letters, are added to the end of this Treatise,
where he will not only see into the reason, why the Episcopal would by all
means hide 'em from the Light, but moreover perceive the matter of fact, I have
suggested to be very true.

That these Letters are nor spurious, nor feigned, but copies from an
Anthentick Original is well known to some zealous Sons of the Church, who it
may be will be surpised to see that appear in face of the World, which does so
plainly discover what they desire might be concealed.

In these Letters, it is apparent, that when the prosecution was most brisk
against Protestant Dissenters, several among the dignified Clergy were very
covetous, and scandalous in their Conversations. (Numb. 1.) Even those who
antecedently to their preferment, were well affected, when they came to the
Cathedral Churches did so strangely degenerate, that the Lord Treasurer Cecil
(Numb. 2.) did fear the places did alter the men; whence it is that her
Majesty's Council in their Letter to the Bishop of London and Canterbury,
(Numb. 3.) did observe from the many complaints brought unto them, that the
worst of men met with no trouble, when Conscientious and Learned Ministers were
greatly molested for their Nonconformity.

But that which does most fully discover the temper, and design of Whitgift, as
one who acted rather like a Spanish Inquisitor, than a good Protestant,
imposing Articles that were of an ensnaring tendency, is what I find in the
Letters of the Lord Cecil unto the Archbishop, with Arch bishops reply. Numb.
4. 5, 6. The which is more generally suggested in Cambden, who mentions the
dissatisfaction of several noble men, with the Bishops proceedings, but more
expressly by a moderate writer in Queen Elizabeth's, who (in his plea of the
innocent) does in the name of the Non-Conformists speak thus of the Lords of
the Council -- And this is not all, that binds us to their honors: for in
our private troubles about the Ceremonies and Subscription, we the poor and
faithful Ministers of Christ, whenever we have opened our cause, and humbled
our selves unto them, we have found great justice and equity, and diverse times
great relief and ease from our troubles; No doubt they seeing our innocence,
that of mere Conscience without any the least inclination to disloyalty to our
Sovereign, we did forbear to do those things, they have tendered our cause, and
lovingly effected, that we might not be too much over-burdened. Moreover
concerning the Bishops they say; What could we do less, or better, than to
repair to the Reverend Bishops for Counsel and Comfort, which for the space of
ten years, (or the most part thereof,) they did in some good measure afford
unto us, till as I take it by the relation of some in the same broils, the
Papists had cunningly wrested our good Fathers from us, that they could, and
would do no further for us. Then yet complaining of our case, and opening our
doubts unto them, we did as the Law affords, that the cause should be brought
before the Ordinary, in all doubts about ceremonies of the Church Established
by Law: and finding not our selves resolved by our ordinaries, alas what could
we do less, than quietly to suffer our selves (with great grief bewailing our
flocks) to be suspended, imprisoned and deprived. And this has been the cause
of all them, which have not used the Ceremonies so fully as some other of their
Brethren.

By this it is evident, that as Queen Elizabeth's Education, natural temper,
Interest of State, and I verily believe, Conscience of Duty unto God inclined
her to such an establishment in the Ecclesiastical Constitution, as might be
most grateful unto the Papist, even so some of the Clergy (who by Heylin are
called Melancthonians of whom Whitgift and Bancroft were principal in their
times,) did their utmost by insisting so very much on the Ceremonies,
Subscription, etc. to the same end the Queens Majesty did, whereby to the great
grief of many Sound Protestants, the Service of our Church was made to resemble
as much as possible, that of the Church of Rome. But,

3. I Will now consider the reasonings of some Protestant Dissenters from this
similitude, likeness and agreement there is between these two service books
against the ordinary use of the English Liturgy.

Whoever will make a due enquiry into the History of the Reformation, will find
that in Edward the 6th, his days, Hooper Lord Bishop elect for Gloucester,
scrupled the Episcopal Vestments, because they had been invented chiefly for
celebrating the Mass with much pomp, and had been consecrated for that effect.
In Queen Mary's time the exiled Protestants at Frankford, such as Knox, and
those of his persuasion, refused to Minister the Communion by the book of
England, for that there were some things in it placed only by warrant of man's
Authority, or no ground of God's word for the same, and had also a long time
very Superstitiously in the Mass been wickedly abused. See discourse of the
troubles at Franckford. Moreover in Queen Elizabeth's, and King James's days,
several manifested their dislike of our Liturgy for this very reason, because
'twas so like unto the Romish Service. I Will give some particular instances with
those reasons that were by 'em urged against a compliance with a Service Book,
so like that of the Papists.

In a part of the Register you have the sense of Mr. Edward Deering, who says
that; The similitude that this book has, with the form of Prayer which the
Papists used; I think declineth from the equity of these Laws, Deuteronomy. 7. 25.
Deuteronomy. 12. 30. Deuteronomy. 18. 9. which things our fathers so much regarded in the
Primitive Church, that their books are full of great complaints, against all
similitude to be had with the Gentiles. Yea the second Council of Bracca made
a decree, that no Christian should have either Bay Leaves, or Green Boughs in
their houses, because the Gentiles so accustomed; And at this day all Reformed
Churches in France, Polonia, Helvetia, Scotland, and other places have changed
that form of Prayer, which prudence of all ages, if we shall condemn, the
rebuke of the Apostle, I think will touch us. 1 Cor. 14. 36. Came the word of
God out from you, or came it else to you only? Secondarily, we have the
Psalms, Venite, Benedictus, Magnificat, nunc dimittis, usual in our Ministry,
of which we can give no good reason. Nor I see no cause why we should more
leave out the Ave Maria. And because of parting the Scriptures again into the
Epistles and Gospels (which was not heard of before the days of Popery,) I
dare not avow that this is that reverent handling of the Scripture, and the
right dividing of the word of truth, which St. Paul requires 2 Timothy 2. 15.

But the Abridgment is much more full on this Subject, showing what are the
many Scriptural Arguments against all complyances with the Superstitions, the
which is farther confirmed, not only from the Fathers, the Transmarine
Protetestant Divines, but also by our own Old Protestant Doctors of the Church
of England. Take it as in the Abridgment, where it is asserted, that it is
contrary to the word of God, to use such ceremonies in the worship of God, as
man has devised, if they be notoriously known to have been of old, and still to
be abused unto Idolatry or Superstition, by the Papists, especially if the same
be now of no necessary use in the Church; Where note, that the Ceremonial part
of the English Service that is like unto that of the Romish, is what has been
abused by the Papists to Idolatry or Superstition, but yet are not so necessary
to Divine Worship, but that the worship may be complete, decent and orderly
without em but to their reasons, this may appear say they.

1. By the Second Commandment which forbids all provocation unto spiritual
fornication, as the 7th. does unto that which is Carnal.

2. By the Commandment and direction God has given us in his word to separate
our selves from Idolaters, and be as unlike to them as may be, especially in
their Religious Observations and Ceremonies, to abolish not only all Idols, but
also all the Ceremonies and Instruments of Idolatry, and that so as we may best
show our utmost detestation to them, and root out the very memory of them, to
cast away even such things as had a good Original, and use (if they be not
still necessary, or commanded of God) when once they are known to have been
defiled by Idolatry, or abused unto it.

3. By the equity and reasons of these Commandments which we find set down in
Holy Scripture, viz. 1. The detestation which the Lord our God (being a jealous
God) bears unto Idolatry, and all the Instruments and Tokens thereof, as unto
Spiritual Whoredom. 2. That we cannot be said sincerely to have repented of the
Idolatry or Superstition, whereby we or our Forefathers have provoked the
Lord, unless we be ashamed of, and cast away with detestation all the
Instruments and Monuments of it. 3. That we shall be in danger to be corrupted
in the Substance of Religion, and purity of Doctrine, and even to fall back
again unto idolatry, if we conform our selves to Idolaters in their Ceremonies,
and retain the Monuments of their Superstition, yea if we show not all
detestation unto them. 4. That our holding of Conformity with Idolaters in
their Ceremonies (wherein they repose the greatest part of their Religion,)
will be a special mean to harden them in their Superstition. 5. That seeing the
Pope is reveiled to be that great Antichrist, and his Idolatry troubles the
Church, at this day more than any other, and our people converse more with
Papists than with any other Idolaters, there is more danger in the retaining of
the Ceremonies and Relics of Popery, than of any other Idolatry whatsoever.

4. By the judgment of the Godly Learned of all Churches and Ages, who have
constantly taught and given Testimony to this Truth, that Christians are bound
to cast off the Ceremonies and Religious Customs of Pagans, Jews, Idolaters
and Heretics, and carefully to shun all Conformity with them therein.

In the Council of Nice it was decreed, that Christians might not keep the
Feast of Easter at that time, nor in that manner as the Jews did: Let us (say
they) in nothing agree with that most detestable rout of the Jews.

And in another Council, that none should fast on the Lord's day, because the
Manichees had taken up that day to fast on, which also Augustine alleges and
approves of in another That such Altars as were set up in the Country, and
Highways, in memory of the Martyrs, should be abolished, although they were
pretended to be set by Revelations or Visions, and that solemn request should
be made to the Emperor, that all Relics and Monuments of Idolatry might be
utterly destroyed. And this decree we find cited by Dr. Fulk.

In another Council it was decreed, that none of the Clergy should forbear or
make scruple to eat Flesh, that they might show themselves to differ from the
Priscillianists. In another, that Christians should not deck their houses with
Bay leaves, and Green Boughs, because the Pagans did use so to do. That they
should not rest from their labors those days that the Pagans did, and that
they should not keep the first day of every Month as they did. In another, that
Christians should not celebrate Feasts on the Birth days of Martyrs, because
that was the manner of the Heathen. Tertullian is large and vehement in this
point, as (says he) we may give nothing to the service of an Idol; So may we
borrow nothing from the service of an Idol; If it be against Religion to sit at
Table in an Idols Temple, what is it to be seen in the habit of an Idol. Again,
no habit or apparel is esteemed Lawful amongst us, that has been dedicated or
appointed to so unlawful an Act. Thou that art a Christian must hate those
things, the Authors and Inventors whereof, thou can not choose but hate. In
another place he affirms, that Christians might not wash their hands, nor lay
aside their Cloakes before Prayer, nor sit upon their Beds after Prayer,
because the Heathen used so to do. Melchiades Bishop of Rome decreed, that no
Christians should fast on the Lord's day, or on the Friday, because it was a
known custom of the Pagans to fast on those days. Ambrose taught Monica, the
Mother of Augustine, as Augustine himself reports it, which is also alleged
by Bishop Jewel, to leave bringing of Wine and Cakes to the Church, as she was
wont to do, because she might not Lawfully give such a show of Conformity with
the Gentiles. Augustine himself also prescribing a direction how to winn the
Pagans, has these words, if you ask how the Pagans may be won, how they may be
enlightened, how they may be called to Salvation? leave all their Solemnities,
forsake their Toys. Gregory (as we find him cited by Bishop Jewel) alleges
and approves of a decree of the Council of Toledo, which forbade the Ceremony
of thrice dipping in Baptism, because it was the custom of certain Heretics.
Leo advises all Christians to shun the viperous conference of Heretics, and
that in nothing they would be like unto them, who in name only are Christians.
The judgment of the Church of Scotland, appears in a Letter, written from a
general Assembly held at Edenborough 1566. unto the Bishops of England. In
which (besides many other sentences to this purpose,) thus they write; If
Surplice, Corner Cap and Tippet, have been badges of Idolaters in the very Act
of Idolatry, what have the Preachers of Christian Liberty, and the open
Rebukers of Superstition to do with the dregs of the Romish Beast. And more
plainly in the confession of their Faith, whereunto his right excellent
Majesty, with others of the chief states of that Kingdom, did solemnly swear
and subscribe, where we find these words. [We detest all the Ceremonies and
false Doctrine of the Roman Antichrist, added to the ministration of the true
Sacraments; We detest all his vain Allegories, Rites, Signs and Traditions
brought into the Church without the Word of God.] -- Thus have such as have
been chief Pillars in our own Church, judged of the Monuments of Idolatry, and
all Conformity with Papists in their Ceremonies. Mr. Rogers (that Holy Martyr)
would not consent to a Canon that was to be made in King Edward's days for the
Clergies Uniformity, in Cap, Tippet, and the rest of the Apparel, unless it
might be decreed that the Papists for a difference between them and others,
might be constrained to wear upon their sleeves a Challice with an Host upon
it.

Our late Queens injunctions require, that all Monuments of Idolatry and
Superstition be so utterly extinguished and destroyed, that there may remain no
memory of them either in our Churches or Houses. And the Book of Canons made
Anno Dom. 1571. That no man wear the gray Amice, or any other garment defiled
with the like Superstition.

Bishop Jewel in one place approves the judgment of Tertullian, and the
Fathers of that Age: who forbade Christians to wear Garlands of Bay, not for
that (says he) the thing was ill of it self, but for that they would not seem
to follow Idolaters. It had some appearance of evil. And in another place,
speaking of sundry of the Popish Ceremonies, you have (says he, speaking to
the Papists,) so misused these things, or rather so defiled and bewrayed them
with your Superstitions, that we can no longer continue them without breach of
Conscience.

Bishop Pilkinton misliked, that in our Liturgy we are so like the Papists; In
Marriage (says he) and many other things besides, we are but too like unto
them; That is our fault generally, that we differ not more from them, in all
our Ministry.

Bishop Westphaling (in his Treatise of Reformation) alleges to this
purpose, and allows this sentence of Augustine, whosoever (be he Jew or
Gentile,) that shall observe the Ceremonies of the Jews, not only he that does
it unfeignedly, but even he that does it to any other intent, tumbleth himself
into the Bottomless pit of the Devil.

Bishop Bilson (defending the Reformed Churches against a slander of the
Papists,) reports thus of them, as approving and allowing them in it; The
Reformed Churches (says he) are so far from admitting the full dose of your
Heresies, that by no means they can digest one dram of your Ceremonies.

Dr. Humfrey speaking of Constantines zeal in forbidding all Conformity with
the Jews, affirms; That all men ought to imitate him therein, and refuse to
conform themselves to the enemies of God in any of their Ceremonies. And in
another place he professes plainly both his desire and hope of the utter
abolishing of the Ceremonies, and of all the Monuments of Popish Superstition
that yet remain in our Church.

Dr. Fulk in one place says; If any man mislike our form of Service, as not
differing sufficiently from yours, he shows his greater zeal in detestation
of your Idolatry and Blasphemy. And in another; We abhor (says he) whatsoever
has but a show of Popery. In another place he gives this for a reason, why our
Ministers use to stand at the North-side of the Table at the Communion, that we
might show our selves thereby unlike to the Papists,

Dr. Andrews now Dean of Westminster has this Speech in his Catechism, if it
be true that is in Jude 23. that we must hate the very Garment that the flesh
had spotted, surely, because the Idol is as unclean and abominable, no less
abominable must that Garment be, that it has spotted.

Dr. Sutcliffe makes this one of his principal Arguments against the Papists;
that they have derived most of their Ceremonies and Customs from the Jews and
Pagans. See also a most plain and pregnant Testimony of Mr. Greenham for this
our first Argument in the last Edition of his Works. But above all others that
ever were read, Marbury is most peremptory and bitter in this point. And as all
these Divines agree with us in this our first Argument against the Ceremonies,
so do they and others also, in the reasons we have brought out of the
Scriptures to confirm it by. For they hold.

1. That those Laws, that we have alleged out of the Old Testament against
the Monuments of Idolatry, do bind us as much as they did the Jews, and from
them they conclude as we have done, that all Relics of Popish and Heathenish
Superstition, are to be banished out of the Church of of Christ; Of this
judgment are Calvin, Martyr, Grineus, Wolphius, Vrsinus, Macabeus, Zanchius,
Simterus, Zepperus, our own Book of Homilies; Dr. Fulk and others.

2. That Ezekiah, Josiah, and the rest of the Godly Kings of Judah, which
showed most zeal in abolishing those things which had been abused to Idolatry,
did no more than they were bound by the Law of God to do, and that from their
example the Argument holds strong against the Monuments of Idolatry now,
because all Christians are bound to imitate their zeal therein. Of this
judgment was Augustine, Calvin, Martyr, Wolphius, Lavater, Zanchius, Zadeel,
Bishop Jewel, Bishop Bilson, Dr. Fulk, Dr. Rainold, Dr. Andrews, Mr. Perkins,
and others.

3. That the retaining of the Popish Ceremonies will certainly be a means to
endanger the doctrine that we profess, and to bring the people back again to
Popery. This was the judgment of the divines of Saxony, and of them of
Hamburgh, of Luther, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Bucer, Martyr, Wolphius,
Chemnitius, Pezelius, Zanchius, Dr. Andrews, Mr. Greenham, and others.

4. That the retaining of the Ceremonies of Idolaters will cause them to insult
over our Religion, as if it could not stand without help from them, and so
harden them in their liking of their own Idolatry. This reason has been used
against Conformity with the Jews, by Constantine the Emperor, and by all the
fathers in the first Council of Nice, and against Conformity with the Papists,
by Brentius, Musculus, Bishop Jewel and others.

Fourthly, we are confirmed in this our persuasion that it is unlawful to
retain the ceremonies of the Papists, by experience of the great hurt they have
done, and do daily in the Church. For we find.

That some of the learned of our English Papists (namely Martial, Bristow,
and he that penned that Petition for the Papists, which Dr. Sutcliffe and Mr.
Powel have answered,) have by this Argument justified their Church and
Religion, that we have borrowed our ceremonies from them, yea some of them (as
Harding, Martial, and he that wrote the Apologetical Epistle for our English
Papists,) have professed, that this was to them an evident Argument, that Queen
Elizabeth did in her conscience like well of their Religion, because she liked
and maintained their ceremonies, and the superstitious multitude, do usually
defend the blessing of themselves with crossing their Breasts and Foreheads, by
our Crossing our children in Baptism. So far the Abridgment.

To which I Will not make many an addition, because I think that the reasonings
of those Reverend Divines, those great Doctors and Bishops of the Church of
England are so weighty and important, that an impartial Reader cannot but
conclude: that though the influence this Argument may have on some be
inconsiderable, yet it may be strong and very cogent in the judgment of others,
in order to the obliging 'em to refuse to join with the Church in the use of
the English Service: especially at such a time as this, wherein we are under
the fearful apprehensions of Popery.

If ever a Popish Successor should enter the English Throne, we may easily
suppose, he will do his utmost for the re-introduction of his own Religion
amongst us, the which now cannot be done with more ease and speed, than the
first establishing the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom has been. For, as
the generality of the people were for Popery then, they are now as much against
it, and therefore as the first Reformers suited the progress of the Reformation
to the temper of the vulgar, so must the Papist now, and as King Edward argued
for the English Liturgy, from its agreableness with the Romish; So now the
Papists will argue on behalf of the Romish Service, from its agreableness with
our English, and say, if 'twere good under an Heretical Under, why shall it be
less so under a Catholic King, then (they may say) you have with the
approbation of his Holiness the Pope, what formerly you had by the good liking
of the Heretic only.

It Is not improbable that at first the Pope will be content, we shall use the
same Liturgy we now have, with very little alterations, and to gain England
under his Tyranny, will consent to what Pope Pius would have done in Queen
Elizabeth's days, and a late Pope in Laud's time: and then by little and little
add unto the Liturgy, sometime a few Prayers, and again for the greater
Solemnity, Decency and Order in the Administration of Baptism, may add to the
sign of the Cross, that of Salt and Spittle, and Lights, etc.

Seeing then this may be so, there are many among the Dissenters, who are
afraid to comply with the use of the English Liturgy, least by their practice
they give an unanswerable advantage to their implacable enemy the Papist. They
are aware of the design, they are sensible how the Romanists have been
practicing on the Church of England, and what use they will make of their not
driving on the Reformation much farther, and therefore now, in this day do
think, they shall highly provoke the Lord to jealousy, should they give
countenance to the Service Book, which may be so easily improved to the
advancing the superstition of the Roman Catholic.

But if after all it be said by any, that these things are Light-points, and
not so much to be insisted on, no other answer shall be given, but that of the
Reverend Mr. Dering in his reply to an objection of a like nature, as it is in a
part of the Register. If I seem curious, or stand upon light points, (beside
that in the worship of God there is nothing light,) so the Conscience of man is
exceeding tender, that it will neither be troubled nor touched in the least
tittle, contrary to the persuasion of truth The weight of sin is not in
substance of matter, but in the Majesty of God, that is offended, and be the
thing never so little, yet the breach of his Commandment deserves death. This
faith we have learned of him, that is the wisdom of the father, and our only
Prophet, that is, whoever shall break one of these least Commandments, these
words which are shall break one of the least, have every one a greater weight
than may be contemned of any man.

Argument IV.
There is in this Service Book a strange disorder and confusion unworthy the
grandeur and Majesty of that God, unto whom we make our approach in Prayer. God
is a great King, his Name is dreadful even among the Heathen, he is great and
greatly to be feared and reverenced even in the Assembly of his Saints. God is
in Heaven, we on the Earth, and therefore as our words must be few, even so
must they be uttered in the gravest, and most serious manner. God is a jealous
God, and it is dangerous to trifle with him, when we come to worship him; Yea
God is a God of Order, and not of Confusion, and therefore our Addresses should
be in the most Solemn Order.

This all will grant, but the question is, whether there be any such disorder
in the Common Prayer Book; For this has been formerly objected against the
extempore and free Prayer of Dissenters, who are said to enter rashly into
God's presence, and pray after the most disorderly manner conceivable, how then
comes this to be urged (may some say) against that set form of Prayer, which
has been with the greatest deliberation of the Fathers of the Church Composed.
I reply,

That the Reader may the more distinctly Comprehend what I have to offer on
this Fourth head of Argument, I must beseech him to consider. 1. That I am not
defending such as will inconsiderately Rush into the presence of Almighty God,
and profane instead of honoring the name of God in Prayer. I durst not plead
for such an Irreverent or uncomely practice. Neither 2. Do I design to offer
any thing against those, who will seriously meditate on what they have to do,
when they make their approaches unto the Throne of Grace. Premeditation on the
matter to be prayed for, on the Method of the Address, yea, and on the choice
of Expressions, is so far from a Sin in my Judgment, that I verily believe it
to be a duty. Neither, 3. Do I Object against the prudent and necessary Use of
some set form of Prayer in public, for many may be endowed with the Grace of
Gods Spirit, who abound not with its Gifts, and it is not enough that a man has
the Grace of Gods Spirit to enable him to be the Mouth of Others to God in
Prayer, it is the Gift, that in this Case is requisite, the which some may not
have who yet must pray in public, or public Worship must be totally omitted,
in which Case the using a Form of Prayer is not only lawful, but highly
expedient.

These things premised, the Reader may easily perceive who it is, for whom I do
not Apologize, as well as that I am not arguing against the Divine Service
Book, as it Contains a Form of Prayers, nor as it a form imposed, which yet I
approve not of, but as it is such a form so disorderly, and Confused a Form.

This is insisted on in the Altar of Damascus, and in the Lincoln Abridgment.
In the Altar it is thus expressed.

Then again their Prayers are shred into so many small pieces, They pray in Two
or Three Lines, and then after having read, some other things come, and pray as
much more, and so to the Twentieth or Thirtieth time, with pauses between.
Prayers should be continued together, not cut off, and interrupted, or cut in
small pieces. They do with their Prayers, as they do with their Gospels and
Epistles which they rent from their Contexts, which would serve for memory and
greater Edification. So sar he. To whom I add, That if a Dissenting Minister in
Pulpit before his Sermon, when he addresses himself to God in Prayer, should
utter Three or Four Sentences in Prayer, and then go off to another thing, to
the reading Two or Three Verses in the Bible, and then to his Prayer, and then
to Reading, would not the generality of the Church say, this Dissenting
Minister, by Confounding Reading and Prayer, offers up his Requests after a
most disorderly manner. But to the Abridgment.

In the Abridgment it is urged, That by this Book sundry things, that bring
great Disorder and Confusion unto the Worship of God are appointed As that the
People should say after the Minister whole Sentences of Prayer and Scripture,
yea the Minister one part of the Prayer, and the people another, and in sundry
parts of the Letany, the people make the Prayer, and the Minister only directs
them what to pray for.

The Minister at some time must pray, and the People give the reason of the
Prayer; for Instance. The Minister Prays saying, Give peace in our days O
Lord, and the people make their Answer, Because there is no other that fights
for us, but only thou O God, as if Almighty God alone had not been able to
defend them in the time of War, whence they Pray unto God for the sending
Peace. But cannot that God, who sends Peace by putting an end unto Wars,
preserve and protect in the day of Trouble. If he can, to what purpose is this
Argument urged. Again an alteration is made in the State of this Affair. The
Minister gives instruction, or rather as a beginner of the Prayer, mentions the
Matter or Thing to be prayed for, and the people must proceed to the making it
a formal Prayer, whence it is, that whereas the Minister in the public Assembly
should be the Mouth of the people unto God, The Minister being silent, the
people altogether with a loud voice, a distracting Murmur are their own Mouth.
Thus, From Fornication, and all other deadly Sin, (as if some sins were not
Mortal, but Venial) and from all the Deceits of the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, so far the Minister proceeds, and then make a stop, from whom the people
take it adding Good Lord deliver us. Again, O Lamb of God, that takes away the
sins of the World, says the Minister with the greatest seeming fervor and
affection, but yet in the midst of the sentence, his warm affection is ended,
and the people proceed to say, Grant us thy peace O Lord. Again they must be as
they were in Statu Quo, and the Minister prays, O Lord let thy Mercy be showed
on us, to which Petition the people either add, their sense, or Limitation, or
Reason of the Prayer, as we put our Trust in thee.

Beside at some one meeting of the Assembly, the Paternoster, or Lords Prayer
is to be repeated Six or Eight several times, and the Gloria Patri Twelve,
beside the many Kyrie Eleesons and Christ Eleesons, Lord have mercy on us,
Christ have mercy upon us, the Responces, the Versicles, etc. Alas how
ridiculous would this be interpreted by the generality of those who are now
Sons of the Church, should the Dissenters have used such a practice!

This Argument receives strength from what I find insisted on by by some of His
Majesty's Commissioners in the Account of all the proceedings of the
Commissioners of both persuasions, where it is thus Argued, Vid. As we find that
the Minister is the Mouth of the people to God in public (which Scripture, and
the necessity of Order do require,) So we are loath to Countenance the people's
Invading of that Sacred Office, so far as they seem to us to do, By reading
half the Psalms and Hymns. 2. By saying half the Prayers as the Minister does
the other half, -- 4. By being the only Petitioners in the far greatest part of
all the Letany by their [Good Lord deliver us] and [We beseech thee to hear us
good Lord.] While the Minister only recites the Matter of the Prayer, and
makes none of the request at all; we fear least by purity of reason, the
people will claim the work of preaching and other parts of the Ministerial
Office. 3. And we mentioned, that which all our Ears are witnesses of, that
until half the Psalms and Hymns, etc. are said by such of the people as can say
them, the Murmur of their Voices in most Congregations is so unintellgible and
Confused, as must hinder the Edification of all the rest; for, who is edified
by that which he cannot understand. This you will find page 29, but in page 60, we
have account of the Rule, and Order of Prayer, with a full Demonstration, That
the Common Prayer is not agreeable unto any just Rule, or Order.

There are (say they) Two Rules of Prayer; One is the Nature of the things
Compared (in Matter and Order) with Nature and Necessity; The Other is the
Revealed Will of God in his word, in General the Holy Scripture, more
Especially the Lords Prayer: The Liturgy (for the greatest part of the Prayers
for daily Use) is Confused by whichsoever you measure it. You seem much to
honor the Lords Prayer by your frequent Use of it (or part of it) we beseech
you dishonor it not practically, by denying it by Matter and Order, to be the
only Ordinary and Perfect Rule; We know about particular Administrations, where
it is but certain select Requests, that we are to put up, suited to the
partcular Subject and Occasion, we cannot follow the whole Method of the Lords
Prayer, which contains the heads of all the parts, where we are not to take
in all the parts; we cannot take them in that Order. But that none of all your
Prayers should be formed to that perfect Rule; that your Letany, which is your
Comprehensive Prayer, and that the Body of your daily Prayers, (broken into
several Collects) should not (as set together) have any considerable respect
unto that Order, nor yet to the Order, which reason and the Nature of the thing
requires (which is observed in all things else) and yet that you should so
Admire this, and be so tenacious of that which is conceived Prayer, you would
call by worse names than Confusion, this shows us the power of prejudice.

By this the Reader may perceive how much the Non-Conformists are for a decent
Order, and Comely Method in Prayers, but the Conformist against it, and how
much the Nonconformist are for the right use of the Lords Prayer, even when
the Conformist are not at least practically for it. Whence we may see how
unreasonable it is to make such a Noise and Clamor, as if the Dissenters
rejected the Lords Prayer, or were against its use, whereas in truth the
Dissenters are much more for the Right use of the Lords Prayer, than the
Conformists are.

Whoever will understand the true State of this Controversy, must consider
what the great design of the Disciples in Asking, and of Christ in granting
their Request about Prayer was, the which he can no sooner with just
deliberation, and impartially do, but will be satisfied, that the thing the
Disciples desired was to be Taught how to Fray, Lord Teach us as John taught
his Disciples How to Pray, and they desire to be taught, not that they
prescribe unto Jesus Christ a Method in which he should teach 'em, for that
became not Disciples, even Scholars, who are to Learn, but not to teach. This
being the desire of the Disciples to be taught to pray, not to have a form of
Words to be Verbally and Syllabically rehearsed, or repeated, but Rules or
Presidents for the directing 'em, how to pray. The answering of their Request
was the Design of Christ in giving 'em the Lords Prayer, which was principally
intended for the Direction of the Disciples, who were as Matthew expresses it,
Obliged by that Command when ye Pray, say, Our Father, so say after that
manner, when you pray, or whenever you pray. The Command is perpetual, Obliging
at all times of prayer so far, as the particular Occasions of Prayer will
admit, every Prayer we make must be according to this Command of Christ.

But will any say, That the meaning is, when ever you pray, repeat the very
words, and Syllables of the Lords Prayer; Let not one Prayer be made without
the Repetition of this Prayer. If so, then, whereas now the Lords Prayer is
repeated in the Church six or eight times some Mornings, it should be so Twenty
or Thirty, even at the end of every Collect, or other short Prayer. This none
will assert, which is enough to show, that none do understand the words of
Luke, [when you pray say] to be in this sense, namely, when ever you pray,
repeat these words and Syllables, for none do it, none of the Church of
England, nor among the Papists. The true sense then of those words in Luke is
more fully given us in Matthew, when you pray say after this manner, that is,
The Lords Prayer is given as a Form, a Rule, a Directory of our Prayers, A Rule
to be prayed by, which Rule is transgressed by such, who when they pray, will
cut their Prayers into many shreds and pieces. The Lord Christ's Prayer was but
One continued Prayer, all its parts most admirably connected, he did not say,
Our Father, and teach his Disciples to add, Which art in Heaven.

This is enough to evince that the Common Prayer Book is not according to the
Rule of Christ, and that although according to the Rubric a part of the Lords
Prayer is so frequently rehearsed in one Morning, as if the rehearsing several
Pater nosters was ex opere Operato sufficient to procure the pardon of Sin; yet
the Dissenters, who do pray unto him, unto whom they are directed by the Lords
Prayer, for such things, as are more generally contained in it, keeping as near
as they can to the same Method, do not only keep more close to the command of
Christ in Luke, but moreover set an higher value on the Lords Prayer than these
Conformists, who, by keeping to the Rubric, at most do make it but the end of
some of their Prayers.

But to return from this necessary Digression, to what is farther insisted on
by the aforesaid. Commissioners, p. 62. It Is said, But if we may (according to
the Common Prayer Book) begin and end, and seem to withdraw again, and make a
Prayer of every Petition or two, and begin every such Petition with God's name,
and Christ's merits, as making up half the Form, or near; Nothing is an
affected empty tossing of God's name in Prayer, if this be not, we are
persuaded, if you should hear a man in a known ex tempore Prayer do thus, it
would seem strange and harsh even to your selves.

This being so, there are some among the Dissenters, who considering how
jealous God is in matters of his worship, how pure, and how holy, are afraid to
draw near to God in this disorderly and confused manner, when they have the
opportunity of addressing themselves to the Throne of Grace, in a way more
agreeable to his Holy and most Blessed Will; When they have a Male in their
Flock, they are afraid to offer a corrupt thing, least they thereby expose
themselves to that curse in Mal. 1. 14. If they should make their approaches in
this disorderly manner unto God, will he not say, offer it now unto thy
Governors, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person?

Argument V.
In the Abridgment, an Argument against the Ceremonies, to which those who join
with the Church of England must show their approbation is fetched from the
mystical significancy of 'em thus; All humane Ceremonies (say they) being
appropriated to God's Service, if they be ordained to teach any Spiritual Duty
by their mystical signification, are unlawful.

That this Argument may appear in its fuller strength, 'twill be requisite to
consider the nature of Religious Worship, as well as a Religious Ceremony, and
to make some enquiry after the power, man has given him to appropriate Humane
Ceremonies to God's worship.

1. whoever will consult the Learned of most persuasions, will find 'em to
agree in the general about the nature of external worship, and a Ceremony of
Religion. Dr. Covel, a great asserter of the English Ceremonies in his modest
and reasonable examination etc. Chap. 6. has very handsomely given the sense of
the Church of England, in Bellarmine's words* as near as an English Translation
can well be to a Latin Original. Whoever will but compare Bellarmine's 29th.
Chapter de effectu Sacramentorum, with what Dr. Covel has in his 6 chap. will
find the agreement to be almost verbatim; Ceremonia (says Bellarmine) est
actus externus Religionis, qui non aliunde habet laudem, nisi quia fit ad Dei
honorem; that is, as Covel, without making any mention of his Master
Bellarmine, Translates it, ceremonies are all such things as are the external
Act of Religion, which have their commendation and allowance from no other
cause, but only that in God's worship, they are virtuous furtherances of his
honor. Thus Covel, who borrows his explications, as well as arguments from
Bellarmine, in order to the making the stronger defense of English Ceremonies,
is so bold as to take the whole substance thereof from him, without any
considerable variation, whereby we may find that the Church of England agrees
so far with the Church of Rome in this matter, as to make a Ceremony of
Religion to be. 1. An external Act expressive of inward worship. Actus externus
interno respondens, qui est quaelibet externa actio, quae non aliunde est bona,
nisi quia fit ad Deum colendum; That is, as Covel Translates it, the External
Act answering the internal, which is no otherwise good or commendable than that
it virtuously serves to the inward worship of God, it is an outward sign
representing the inward frame of the Spirit, as it is after God. 2. It Is also a
virtuous furtherance of inward Religion, which is to the honor of God; It is
apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God, by
some notable and special signification, whereby he might be edified. Ceremonies
of Religion are means whereby the dull mind is stirred up to the remembrance of
duty, and whereby the Soul is edified (i. e.) strengthened and confirmed in
grace; Then is a man edified when his graces are suscitated, stirred up,
strengthened, increased or confirmed.

This description of a Religious Ceremony is not only what Bellarmine and Covel
out of him give us, but also the same, to which a late Author in his verdict
upon the Dissenters Plea, gives his approbation. Page 57. That such mystical
Ceremonies, or Symbolical representations are not sinful, (says he), I am
fully convinced, because they are good for the use of edifying; For whatsoever
is apt to inform me, and put me in mind of my duty, and to excite me to perform
it; That is certainly for my edification, because to inform, to admonish, and
excite is to edify, and that some mystical Ceremonies are of this nature, is
too notorious to be denied. So far the Answer to Melius Inquirendum.

The same is asserted in the Discourse that is prefixed unto the Common Prayer,
concerning the Service of the Church, where it is expressed, That the Ceremonies
are by some notable signification, designed to stir up the dull minds of Men to
the Remembrance of their Duty. Their use is for the exciting to Duty as well as
for instruction.

This is that they say concerning the Nature of a Ceremony, whereby it seems
to some very evident, That there is a great Difference between a Religious
Ceremony, and a necessary Circumstance of Religion. The former is a part of
External Worship, the latter but an Appendix. Some Circumstances, such as time,
and place, etc. are necessary unto, though no parts of Worship, but an humane
Ceremony, though not necessary unto, yet is made a part of Worship. We cannot
worship God but in some time, and in some place, but can do so without any of
these humane significant Ceremonies, which yet are made a part of external
Worship, which is but the expressing and setting forth of the Internal by
outward signs, by which as by certain outward bodily Shadows and Colors the
Spiritual and Inward Worship of God is made visible, and sensible to others, as
the Learned Bradshaw expresses it.

Much more might be said by way of Explication, but this is enough to evince,
that a Religious Ceremony is significant of those inward motions of the heart
that are directed unto God, and consequently a part of External Worship; and
more than a Circumstance. That the Ceremonies in Controversy are of the same
Nature with some of those in use among the Papists, Jew, and Heathen; for which
reason, who ever can justly appropriate the English Ceremonies to Gods Worship,
may, for the same reason appropriate those of the Papist, Jew, or Pagan, and,
that there is too much of the Nature of a Sacrament assigned unto 'em, in that
they are not only significant, but moreover adapted for the stirring up the
dull mind unto an edifying Remembrance of duty.

This said, of Religious Worship and Ceremonies. The next enquiry is concerning
what power man has given him to appropriate humane Ceremonies unto Gods
Worship. By humane Ceremonies the Dissenters (If I mistake 'em not) understand
such Ceremonies as are neither Natural, nor of Divine Institution, but of Man's
Invention only, By appropriating 'em to Gods Worship, they mean an Ordaining,
or an using them after a solemn and Religious manner for Spiritual uses, and
ends, not for Civil or Temporal, but as outward Notes and Testimonies of those
things that make us Spiritual. The ordaining or Using 'em as significant of
inward Grace, and for the suscitating and stiring up those graces thereby
signified. The which is supposed to be done even when the Worship may be
complete and exactly agreeable to the word of God without them.

This appropriating humane Ceremonies to Gods Worship is not only an
Unaccountable adding unto Gods Worship, but a making that a part of Christ's
Religion, which God never made to be so, which is as unlawful in Protestants,
as it is in the Papist. The Papists may as lawfully appropriate to Religion a
Shaven Crown, a Monks habit, Spittle in Baptism, Holy Water, and all the Missal
Rites (as Bradshaw has it) as a Protestant Magistrate can make a Surplice, a
Cope, a Cross in Baptism, Imposition of hands in Confirmation, Ring in Marriage
to be Ornaments of Religion and Holy Ceremonies, yea, as Bradshaw. Those that
may bring in, without special Warrant from God, Piping [vid. of the Organ,
etc.] into his Service, might as well bring in Dancing also; those that have
Authority to join to the Sacrament of Baptism, the Sign of the Cross have
Authority also (no doubt) to join to the Sacrament of the Supper, Flesh, Broth,
Butter, or Cheese, and worse matters than those, if they will [seeing they are
equally capable of significancy, and apt for the stirring up our dull minds to
the Remembrance of many a necessary duty] Yea, those that have power to make
peculiar forms of Religion and Worship, have power to make and invent a
Religion of their own.

There are two things, on which the Church men do seem to insist very much.

1. If the Ceremonies imposed be in their own Nature indifferent. And 2. Such
as do teach good Doctrine, they may be lawfully imposed. To this the Old
Non-Conformists answered.
I. That all things that are in themselves matter indifferent, are not lawful
to be done in Divine Service, though the Magistrate should Command them, the
which they judge will be very clear to such as will but consider what things
are indeed indifferent, or go under the Name and Title of indifferent things,
that the Magistrate cannot lawfully command, nor the people lawfully observe
'em if Commanded. e. g. Eating and Drinking, the avoiding the Superfluities of
Nature, Spinning and Carding, Killing of Oxen and Sheep, which of themselves
have in them neither virtue, nor vice, and are therefore indifferent Actions;
and yet I think (says Bradshaw) none except professed Atheists, but will hold
it a foul Sin to do some of these Actions in any Assembly, much more in the
solemn Worship of God, though the Magistrate should Command the same even upon
pain of Death. But if it be further considered, That Carding and Diceing,
Masking and Dancing, For men to put on Women's Apparel, and Women Men's,
Drinking to Healths, Ribaldry, Stage Plays are things indifferent to be done
upon the Lord's own day, [at least it was esteemed so when the Book for Plays
was to be read] may a Minister of the Gospel upon the Magistrates Command do
any of these in Divine Worship?

By this we may see, That there is not so much Innocence in the mere
Indifferency of an Action, that it should on that Account be meet enough to be
appropriated to Gods Worship. Neither,

2. Can the significancy of a Ceremony, or its aptness to edify and stir up
grace, be reason enough to appropriate a Ceremony to Gods Service, unless the
playing a Game at Cards may be lawfully introduced into the solemn Worship of
God. For says a late Author, a Son of the Church of England in his Answer to
Melius Inquirendum, page 57. The other day as I remember, I saw a Pack of
Cards, which according to this Account may very well be called a Pack of
Sacraments, [that is as a Sacrament is Considered to be a Outward and visible
sign of an inward and Spiritual Grace] for each Card had the Matter of a
Sacrament, that is, an Outward, and Visible sign of some Inward, and Spiritual
Grace in the Martyr [Sir Edmund. Godfrey] (whose barbarous Murder they were
designed to represent;) and sure the ingenious Contrivers of those Cards
intended some effect from them, to excite, to stir up, to increase Grace and
Devotion by the sight of them, Viz. an utter abhorrence of Treason, and all
Popish Principles, which lead to it, and must this poor pack of Cards be
condemned to the Flames for the Ingenuity of the Author? So far our Author. Who
should have said and may not this pack of Cards, so like unto other humane
significant Ceremonies, or Sacramentals, be appropriated unto the solemn
Worship of God, May not the Minister and People in the midst of solemn Worship
apply themselves to those Cards, seeing they in their play turning 'em
frequently over, may be excited to an utter abhorrence of Treason, and whether
any sober Divine of the Church of England would so far approve of the
appropriating this indifferent but significant Ceremony, namely this pack of
Cards to their solemn Religious Worship, is not difficult to determine. To
return to what Mr. Bradshaw adds, who speaking of the above mentioned
Ceremonies, says, There is none of these but may have applied unto them, by
the Wit of Man, a Mystical and Religious Sense, even the filthiest Actions,
and things that are, may teach good Doctrine. The Holy Ghost resembles the
Soul polluted with Sin to a Menstruous Cloth, A man fallen again into Sin to a
Sow wallowing in the Mire: Might therefore a filthy Sow, and such unclean
Clothes be brought into the Church, to be visible Shadows, and representations
of such things? Pray, what may not by this means be brought into Gods Worship,
and yet by this reason he defended to be a good Ceremony, if the Magistrates
and Bishops should decree the same. -- A Minister clothed with such Apparel as
those that Act the Devils part in a play may teach this, That by Nature we are
Limbs of Satan and Firebrarnds of Hell: Bear-baiting may teach us how Christ
was baited before the Tribunals of the Pharisees, or the Combat between the
Flesh, and the Spirit. But shall these be therefore appropriated to God's
Worship?

Thus, no good Argument may be fetched either from the indifferency, or
significancy of Ceremonies for their lawfulness in God's worship, though
commanded by the Magistrate. For notwithstanding the utmost can be said from
either of these Topics, there will not (as Dissenters think) be enough to
balance what is offered against the lawfulness of the Ceremonies, or of a
compliance with 'em in God's Worship; On the which I have the rather insisted,
because the hot Sons of the Church, by adheering over zealously to significant
Ceremonies which are considered, because of their being in their own nature
indifferent, as very harmless, do but open the way to the letting in an
overrunning flood of Popish Ceremonies, against which the Zealots for
Ceremonies have nothing to offer, because the Ceremonies they impose, are in
their own nature indifferent and very significant, instructive of good
Doctrine, stirring up the peoples dull minds to their duty, and enjoined by
public Authority, but of this more in the reasons against the appropriating
humane significant Ceremonies to the worship of God; The which I Will give the
Reader out of the Abridgment, the Authors of which assert them to be unlawful,
because;

1. The Second Commandment forbids us to make to our selves the likeness of any
thing whatsoever, for Religious use. And so is this Commandment understood by
Bucer, Virell, Dr. Fulk, and others.

2. Christ is the only Teacher of his Church, and appointer of all means,
whereby we should be taught, and admonished of any Holy Duty, and whatsoever he
has thought good to teach his Church, and the means whereby he has perfectly
set down in the Holy Scriptures, so that to acknowledge any other means of
teaching, and Admonishing us of our duty, than such as he has appointed, is to
receive another Teacher into the Church besides him, and to confess some
imperfection in those Means he has ordained to teach us by. Our Savior by
this Argument (amongst others) Condemns the Jewish purifyings and and
Justifies himself and his Disciples in refusing that Ceremony, because (being
the precept of men) it was taught and used as a Doctrine by way of
signification to teach what inward purity should be in them, and how they ought
to be cleansed from the pollutions of the Heathen. And so we find this place
interpreted by Chrysostom (whose Judgment also is alleged and approved by Dr.
Whitaker) the Church of Wittemberge Calvin, Virell, Zeipperus, Dr. Fulke, Dr.
Reinolds and others. This Reason we find alleged by such Divines as have been
of chief credit in the Church of Christ, namely. Mr. Calvin, Chemnitius,
Lavater. Dr. Fulke, and others. So to them that say Images may stand in
Churches as helps to stir up Devotion, and to put Men in remembrance of good
things; It is answered (by Peter Martyr, Gualier, Lavater, Vrsinus, Polanus,
and others) that the Lord himself has appointed means enough to do that; and
that no means may be used to that end, but such as he has Ordained. So the
Churches of France and Flanders in their Observations upon the harmony of
Confessions gives this Reason against all Mystical Ceremonies, that they are
parts of the Holy Doctrine, and Dr. Andrews alleges this for the first Root
of all Superstition and Idolatry, that men thought they would never have
admonitions and helps enough to stir them up to Worship God, yet God (says
he) had given four means, viz. The Word written, the Word Preached, the
Sacraments, and the great Book of the Creatures.

3. This gives unto Ceremonies a chief part of the Nature of Sacraments, when
they are appointed to teach or Admonish us by their Signification. This is
affirmed and given as a reason against Significant Ceremonies, by Augustine,
the Churches of France and Flanders, in their Observations upon the harmony of
Confessions, Calvin, Martyr, Beza, Sadcel, Danaeus, Zepperus, Polanus, Bishop
Jewel, Dr. Humfry, and others.

4. In the time of the Law, (when God saw it good to teach his Church by
significant Ceremonies) none might be brought into, or received in the Worship
of God, but such only as the Lord himself did institute. This reason is used
against the Popish Ceremonies by ^alvin, Junius, Lubbertus, and others.

5. It is much less lawful for man to bring significant Ceremonies into Gods
Worship now, than it was Under the Law. For God has abrogated his own, not
only those that were appointed to prefigure Christ, but such also as served by
their signification to teach moral Duties, so as now (without great Sin) none
of them can be continued in the Church, no not for signification. Of this
Judgment were the Fathers in the Council of Nice and Austin, Martyr, Bullinger,
Lavater, Hospinian, Piscator, Cooper, Bishop Westphaling, and others.

And if those Ceremonies that God himself ordained to teach his Church by their
signification may not now be used, much less may those which man has devised.
This Reason our Divines hold to be strong against Popish Ceremonies, namely
Calvin, Bullinger, Hospinian, Arcularius, Virell, Dr. Bilson, Dr. Rainolds, Dr.
Willet, and others. Yea, this is one main Difference which God has put between
the State of that Church under the Law, and this under the Gospel, that he
thought good to teach that by other mystical Ceremonies, besides the ordinary
Sacraments, and not this. And of this Judgment is Calvin, Bullenger,
Chemnitius, Danaeus, Hospinian, Arucularius, our book of Homilies, Dr. Humfrey,
Dr. Rainolds, Dr. Willet, and others. All which Divines do teach that to bring
insignificant Ceremonies into the Church of Christ is plain Judaism. Besides
this, it is a special part of that Christian Liberty which Christ has purchased
for us by his death, and that which all Christians are bound to stand for: that
the Service we are to do unto God now, is not mystical, Ceremonial, and Carnal
(as it was then) but plain and spiritual. And of this Judgment were the Divines
within the Territories of Hamborough) in an Epistle they wrote to Melancthon)
and Virel, Piscator, Dr. Rainolds, and others.

6. This will open a Gap to Images, Oil, Lights, and Spittle, Cream, and all
other Popish Ceremonies, especially if they shall be judged as fit to Teach and
Admonish by their signification, as these which we retain. And indeed this is a
chief Reason whereby both Papists and Lutherans justify the Use of Images; and
whereby Bellarmine commends all other their Ceremonies, that they are fit to
teach and put men in remembrance of good things. The Popish Custom of the
Priests sprinkling men with Holy Water, and using with all these words,
Remember thy Baptism, (as their manner was in some Countries can with no reason
be held for Unlawful, if such significant Ceremonies as ours are to be
defended. With such Respects and Relations, Remembrances and Apprehensions
(says Dr. Fulke) all Idolatry and false Worship may be defended.

7. We are further confirmed in this our Argument by the Judgment of the Godly
Learned, who, (besides the Testimony they have given to every several proof we
have brought for it) do also speak directly with us in this General. That no
Mystical and significant Ceremony devised by Man, and appropriated to Gods
Service may be retained in the Church of Christ. Of this judgment is the Church
of Wittenberg, the Churches of France, and the Low Countries, in their
Observations upon the Harmony of Confessions, Mr. Calvin, Mr. Beza, Mr.
Perkins, and others. Yea, Dr. Whitgift himself professes, that he did not like
that any prescript Apparel should be used in Gods Service for Signification.
And no good reason can be given why the Church may not as well enjoin a
prescript Apparel for signification, as any other Ceremony.

To all which I Will add one Argumentative Consideration which the Church of
England does afford us, which is given in their Discourse of Ceremonies before
the Common Prayer Book, as a reason why they did put away any of those many
Ceremonies, with which the Church was burdened, which reason is distinct from
that of their Multitudes, and it is taken from their significancy, and the
likeness they had with those in use among the Jews, on which account they were
not suited to the Gospel Dispensation. After mention is made of the great
excess and Multitude of Ceremonies in the days of Popery, they add, And
besides this, Christ's Gospel is not a Ceremonial Law (as much of Moses Law
was) but it is a Religion to serve God not in Bondage of the Figure, [i. e.
significant Ceremony] or Shadow, but in the Freedom of the Spirit. As if it had
been said a great part of Gospel Liberty consists in being freed from those
significant Ceremonies, which are not now of Gods appointment, These words do
seem to suggest that one reason of the abolishing the significant Ceremonies of
the Papists was because they being significant, were so like unto the Jewish
Service, and so different from the Gospel State, and such as have been so much
abused to Superstition, that 'twas not easy to retain the Ceremony, and
abandon the Superstition.

This being the Sense of the Church of England, seeing the Ceremonies retained
are of the same significant, or Jewish Nature, with those abolished, that have
been as much abused to Superstition, as others, and have no other Foundation
than Man's Wit and Will for their support, why were not these, that are left,
rejected for the same reason, those still retained by the Papists have been. If
you will argue from the significancy, the likeness that is between Popish
Ceremonies, and the Jewish; and therefore reject 'em, seeing the English are of
the same kind, is not the Argument as strong against them. Is not a Surplice as
like the Jewish Garment, as some of the Popish Rights are to the Jewish
Ceremonies; why then shall the one be abolished, because of that likeness, and
the other kept, or, if their being abused to superstition, and the Difficulty
of separating the Superstitious abuse from the useing 'em be sufficient to
abolish the Rites of Salt, and Spittle, Lights, etc. why not as sufficient for
the abolishing the Surplice, the Sign of the Cross in Baptism. Kneeling at the
Lords Supper, Bowing at the name of Jesus: Have not all these been as much
abused to Superstition, and still are as any of the rest, especially
considering what Divisions they have made in the Church, why not then
abolished? Or if it be a sin to conform to the Popish Rites, How a Duty to
Conform to these that of the same kind with 'em? Or, if these without Sin may
be appropriated to Gods Worship by Protestants, which may not the Papists,
where they have Authority by their Impositions, impose 'em on the people as in
France, etc. and appropriate 'em to God's Worship?

Methinks Mr. Greenham expresses himself very full on this particular in his
Answer unto the Bishops of Ely, as it is in the Register. If your Wisdom think
(says he) that I deceive my self in my Supposition, for that in Lutheranism
more and worse abuses be maintained, I answer, (that Consubstantiation
excepted) they be all ejusdem generis of the like kind. [This he speaks of the
Ceremonies of the Lutherans, who keep up Images, comparing 'em with our
Ceremonies] seeing they are not retained ad Cultum Dei, to the Worship of God,
but as they say, Ad Aedificationem, Decorum, et Ordinem Ecclesiae to
Edification, etc. and differ only from us secundum Majus, and Minus, as great
things and less, Therefore as more and worse Ceremonies are less to be
tolerated, so no more are the fewer, or lesser evils to be allowed, and as you
and other good men have great Consciences in the Multitude of Ceremonies I
beseech you to think, that I, and others may have some Consciences in the fewer
sort, when they be of the like nature with others.

Seeing what has been said does sufficiently prove the unlawfulness of the
Ceremonies in the judgment of many a Dissenter, they are afraid to Comply with
(or join with any in) the use of those Ceremonies. They are fully convinced,
they should sin if they did, the which they durst not do, least they provoke
God to jealousy.

There are in the VVritings of the Old Non-Conformists such a multitude of
weighty Arguments against the Lawfulness of the Ceremonies, etc. that a giving
the Reader all would take up a very large Volume, but it is not my business to
insist on all that may be offered, I Will therefore close with this one Argument.

Argument VI.
Notwithstanding the great Cry that has been made about the Antiquity of the
English Service, and the reasonableness of conforming unto it, for that reason,
some Dissenters refuse to join in the use of it, because such a practice is not
agreeable to the best Antiquity.

They think that the Apostles were best acquainted with the Mind and Wit of
Jesus Christ, and that the Primitive Christians in the First, Second and Third
Centuries kept more exactly to the Rule of Christ than those, who lived in the
Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, or Seventh, etc. whence the Antiquity the Dissenter
pleads for is that which is most Ancient, and most pure, unto which pattern
such as will aim at a thorough Reformation, must attempt the reducing all
things in matters of Religion.

It Is generally agreed by all Protestants, that in the Apostolical and most
Primitive Days of the Gospel all things were most exactly conformed to the
Will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that the nearer any keep to his Rule, the
better. A Deviating from the Primitive practice has been but the beginning of
all those many corruptions that have infested the Church of Christ.

Seeing this is a truth acknowledged by most, let us enquire after the
Antiquity of such Liturgies as this in use among us, and after the time when
Liturgies were first imposed, and from whom and when the present English
Liturgy had its rise.

1. From what has been already suggested, it is manifest That there were no
stinted Liturgies imposed on any Pastors of particular Churches, the First Four
Hundred years after Christ. The which may be be further confirmed out of what
Dr. Burnet in the Second part of the History of the Reformation does
acknowledge, who, speaking of Liturgies, does say, That they were not made the
Subject of any public Consultation till St. Austins time; when in their
Dealings with Heretics, they found they took advantages from some of the
Prayers, that were in some Churches. Upon this, he tells us, it was ordered,
that there should be no Prayers used in the Church, but upon common Advice.
After that the Liturgy came to be more carefully confidered. Formerly the
Worship of God was a pure, and simple thing, and so it continued till
Superstition had so infected the Church, that those Forms were thought too
naked, unless they were put under more Artificial Rules, and dressed up with
much Ceremony, etc. So far Dr. Burnet.

About this time, which was in the Fourth Century St. Ambrose composed his
Service Book, which was the first that gained any confiderable Reputation in
the World. The Spurious Liturgies that are ascribed unto the Apostles are
such, as have enough in 'em to convince the Reader, that they were not so
ancient as is pretended. After this time the Pastors, or Bishops of Churches
were very busy in composing Prayers, in making Additions to what was done by
such as went before 'em. But no Liturgy as yet imposed on any Churches, Every
Pastor, though he communicated the prayers he had composed for his own use unto
others (The which he did only for the satisfaction of his Brethren that they
might be assured, there was nothing of Error in 'em) yet none imposed. It Is
very probable that St. Ambrose's Liturgy in Diverse places finding Acceptance
was much in use: But it is most certain, that until Pope Adrian the first, who
lived in the Eighth Century there was no general Imposition of any Liturgy.

In Petries Church History it is storyed. That about the later end of the Eighth
Century, there was a great contention for receiving the Mass of Pope Gregory
into the Churches, first by Authority of Pope Adrian, and then of Charles the
Great; some Churches had one Directory, and some another, who would not change,
When the Pope saw so great Opposition (and it may be understood, that it was
not small, when the Pope was put to such a shift) he said he would refer it to
the Will of God, whither he would by any visible sign approve the Mass of
Gregory, or Ambrose: so these two Books were laid together upon the Altar in
St. Peter's Church, and he called upon God which of the Two he approved. The
Doors were shut all Night, and the next Morning, when they were returned into
the Church, the Book of Ambrose was found lying as it was laid down, and the
other was all torn and dispersed through the Church. The Pope makes the
Comment (if we will belive Jacob de Voragine in Vita Gregorij) That the Mass of
Ambrose should be untouched, and the Mass of Gregory should be used through the
World, and so he did Authorize and Command that it should be used in all
Churches, and Chapels. But many did expound that sign the contrary way, and
would not receive it, till Charles did command all Bishops and Priests to use
it through his Dominions, he caused the Mass of Ambrose to be burned and threw
many Priests into Prison, who refused to accept the new Mass [or Pope Gregory's
Liturgy] The Church of Millaine would not change. Walifred Strabo (who lived
about the year 900) testifies in his Book de Exordijs rerum cap. 25. That in
his time the Roman Mass was not universally in all Churches, but almost (says
he) in all the Churches of the Latins, and no Benedictine Monks did read it,
etc. Thus Adrian the Pope, and Charles the Emperor were the first hot Zealots
for Gregory's Liturgy, who were much more fond of it, than Gregory himself was,
for Gregory did as much detest the Universal Imposition, as he did zealously
reject the Title of an Universal Bishop, whence he was not fond of imposing it
on us in England.

It Is very certain that the Christian Religion did many an hundred years
flourish in this Kingdom before 'twas troubled with a Romish Liturgy, which
came not hither till about the year 600, and then rejected by the British
Christians, who severely suffered for their refusing to comply with the
prelatick Impositions of that proud Monk Austine, who, stirring up the King of
Kent to fight against the Christians, thereby to bring 'em, if possible, to a
compliance with his Ceremonies, was the cause of the Destruction of above a
Thousand Godly Monks, besides the many others who were cruelly slain at that
time. The which Austin most wretchedly did, though he never received any such
advice from Gregory.

An account of Pope Gregory's Moderation we have in Dr: Burnet, who gives us
also a short History of the Rise and Progress of Ceremonies thus. Gregory the
Great was the first, that took much care to make the Church Music very
regular, and he did also put the Liturgies in another Method, than had been
formerly used. Yet he had no such fondness of his own Composures. But left it
to Austine the Monk, whom he sent over into England, when he consulted him in
it, either to use the Roman, or the French Rituals, or any other, as he should
find they were most likely to edify the people. [But] After this there were
great variations; for as any Prelate came to be Canonized, or held in high
esteem by the people; some private Collects, or particular Forms, that he had
used, were practiced in his, or perhaps as his Fame, spread in the Neighboring
Diocese.

Thus the Liturgy as it is first rise was in Austine's time, or thereabout,
which was occasioned by the Errors that then did infest the Churches, at which
time the Ministers would vent their Errors in their very Prayers, even so by
degrees it received remarkable Additions, some part brought in at one time, and
some at another. So says Dr. Burnet. In every Age there were notable Additions
made, and all Writers almost in the Eighth and Ninth Centuries employed their
Fancies to find out Mystical Significations, for every Rite, that was then
used; and so as a new Rite was added, it was no hard matter to add some Mystery
to it. This had made the Office swell out of measure, and there was a great
variety of them, Missals, Breviaries, Rituals, Pontificals, Portoises, Pies,
Graduals, Antiphorals, Psalteries, Hours, and a great many more.

Out of these was the English Service taken, which as it had no higher Rise
than that of Gregorie's or at most Ambrose's Liturgy, in like manner it was a
Composition of time, the Remaining parts having different Fathers, some hundred
years younger than the Apostles.

This I Will evince particularly out of Bellarmine, who (as his Interest prompted
him) made diligent search after the Antiquity of the several parts of the
Romish Service Book.

1. The Versicle, Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost
was as Alcuinus thought Composed by St. Hierome at the request of Pope Damasus,
But as Walfrid Strabo, 'twas composed by the Nycene Council sometime before
Hierome, it may be to show their Detestation to the Arrian Heresy, which was
some hundred years after Christ.

2. The Kyrie Eleison (i. e.) Lord have mercy on us, is foolishly supposed to
be used ever since the Apostles days, because it is found in St. James's feigned
Liturgy, but Bellarmine cannot say that 'twas used in the Roman Liturgy Two
Hundred years before Gregory the Great who lived about the year 600.

3. Dominus Vobiscum, or the Lord be with you, An ancient Salutation, used by
Believers in the Old Testament times, about which Petrus Damianus wrote a Book
with this Title, Dominus vobiscum. Though this was an ancient Salutation in use
among old Believers, when they met one another, yet we have no evidence, that
'twas brought into the Liturgy as a part of solemn and set Worship until the
first Council at Bracca, Can. 21. enjoined it the Bishops and Priests.

4. The Collects, which were the short Prayers of several Popes and others
Cannoniz'd for Saints, were brought into the Liturgy by Pope Gregory almost 600
years after Christ.

5. The Te Deum Laudamus, or that Hymn which begins thus. We praise thee O God,
though it be not found in the Sacred Scriptures, yet 'twas (says Bellarmine)
given the Church by Inspiration at the Baptism of St. Austine, at which time
St. Ambrose and St. Austine did extempore, and alternately to the Astonishment
of the people sing this Hymn, as Dacius Episcopus Mediolanensis reports.

6. After the Lessons, the Responses, which are so called, says Rabanus,
because one who begins is answered by the rest, were first invented by the
Italian Churches, was not within several hundred years after Christ.

By these Intimations concerning the Antiquity of some parts of the English
Service it is evident, That as all stinted Liturgies compared with the most
primitive practices are new, so our Liturgy, which was taken out of Gregory's,
A Liturgy not so ancient, as that of Ambrose, and which in process of time was
strangely altered is much more new, unto which the Dissenters cannot firmly
adhere, if they will as they think they ought, make the most Primitive Practice
the pattern and Rule of theirs.

What need any other Impositions on the Ministers of the Gospel, or on the
people now, than were on 'em the first 300 years? And why shall we be wiser
than our first Forefathers? Is it not a duty to have a just respect to
Antiquity? Why not then to that Antiquity that comes nearest unto the Apostles
days? Whatever some may think, there are many among the Dissenters, who are
fully persuaded that until all things in Religion be reduced to the ancient
Constitution established by the Lord Christ, and his Apostles, adhered unto by
those who for some hundred years followed 'em, the Church of God will never
flourish.

This is the Rule they must walk by, etc. or Sin against God, to avoid which
Sin, they refuse to join with the Church of England in her Liturgy, that is so
beside the practice of the Primitive Christians.

Let these few of the many Arguments, which the Dissenters have offered against
the lawfulness of the English Liturgy satisfy the Reader, On this I have the
more fully insisted to the end those Sober Conformists, who it may be have not
considered the Reasons why the Dissenters cannot conform to the English
Liturgy may see thas it is not Honnour, nor Fancy, but Conscience, that is the
ground of their Nonconformity.

I Am very Confident, that a great part of the Dissenters (I speak not of all
because I know 'em not) would with all their Hearts Conform to all is required
of 'em by the Church of England, could they do it with a safe Conscience, and
surely, such among the Conformists, who will consider these Reasonings of the
Dissenters, and who do not measure the Consciences of other Men by the Light
and Latitude of their own, cannot but conclude, that there are some
Nonconformists who cannot with a safe conscience conform, but should they do
it, 'twould be against the plain convictions of consciences.

As it is not humor nor fancy that occasions their Dissent from the Church, so
it is more than mere scruple of conscience. These Dissenters are under strong
convictions of Conscience, that they sin, if they conform; This is certainly
the case of many, who are as fully persuaded, that the Conformists do err, as
the Conformist can be that they do so.

This being their case, the question is, whether notwithstanding these plain
convictions of Conscience, they must conform, and act contrary to their
convictions? Whether they may safely sin against God, to the end they may
render the Obedience required by man? It has been heretofore asserted by all
sorts of Christians, whether Protestant or Papist. 1. That God must be obeyed
rather than man; And, 2. That no authority is sufficient to oblige any to act
contrary to the plain convictions of Conscience. Yea Medina himself does
assert, that a man must rather obey an erroneous Conscience, than the command
of any Prelate, that is contradictory thereunto.

Supposing these Dissenters do err, yet they must not act contrary unto an
erroneous Conscience, the whole that can be justly desired is, that they use
all regular means to depose and shake off the error of Conscience, which must
be done by a sincere seeking God for more light, that they may come to the
knowledge of the truth, and by a diligent and impartial enquiry into the true
State of the controversy; Moreover, there must be if possible, a consulting
the writings of the Learned on both sides, or a conversing with 'em, with a
readyness to weigh all things with deliberation, and a resolution to embrace
the truth, where ever it is found; But if after all their old convictions are
rather strengthened than otherwise, they must beware they act not contrary to
their Conscience. They must not resign up their reason, their Conscience, nor
their Religion unto the pleasure of the greatest Potentate on Earth. This I
take to be the Doctrine of all sound Protestants of the Church of England, yea
I can, when there shall be an occasion, prove it to be so by a Collection of
the several Arguments of the Learned Drs. of the Church, which they have urged
for the confirmation of this truth, in the opposition they make to the blind
obedience of the Papist. Whence I infer.

That these Dissenters in refusing to join with the Church of England in the
Liturgy, do but discharge their duty unto God. Their not joining with the
Church is not the sin of Schism; Schism is asserted by Protestants to be a
causless separation, whence if there be a good cause why they separate, it is
not causeless, and can there be a better cause than the avoiding sin? They
separate, because they should sin if they did not separate.

But though this be enough to clear the Dissenter, who is fully convinced of
the unlawfulness of those Terms of Communion that are imposed on the people,
yet it is not enough to justify the separation of those, who do not only think
it lawful, but expedient to join with the Church of England in their Prayers
and Ceremonies, etc. who if they will separate from the Church of England, and
justify their separation, they must argue from other Topics, for certainly
the peace of the Church, and the authority of the Magistrate, cannot but engage
a people to do what is both lawful and expedient.

These therefore (I think) deny, that they separate from the Communion of the
Church. Although they worship God in Meetings, locally distant from the Parish
Church, yet their Meetings are but as Chapels of Ease, and the Preachers but
as Curates to the Parish Churches.

That the Episcopal Party may effectually demonstrate a Religious Assembly
locally distant from the Parish Church to be Schismatical, they must prove.

1. That the people of this Assembly were once actually Members of the Parish
Churches. 2. That these people do ordinarily separate themselves from the
external Communion of their Parish Churches. 3. That their separation is
causless.
First, They must prove, that the people of this Assembly, that is locally
distant from the Parish Church, were once Members of the Parish Church, that
they were under an obligation of holding external Communion with their Parishes.

1. All External Communion must be in Parish Assemblys, or single
Congregational Churches; For a Diocesan, Provincial or National Assembly of all
the Members of those Societies for External Communion, is, on the account of
the multitude of the people, impossible, it is impossible they should meet in
one and the same Assembly, and hold Communion with each other in Prayers, in
the Word, and in the Sacrament; Their External Communion in Prayers, etc. must
be in lesser Assemblies, or not at all.

2. Those who are under any Obligations of holding external Communion with
this, or the other Parish must be Members of this or the other Parish Church.
Such as are not Members of this or the other Parish Church, cannot be said to
separate from it, though they meet in places locally distant, because they not
being Members of the Parish Church, are not under any Obligation of holding
external Communion with that Parish, A Man (says Dr. Stilling fleet) is not
said to separate from every Church, where he forbears or ceases to have
Communion, but only from that Church with which he is obliged to hold
Communion, and yet withdraws from it, This sufficiently evinces, That unless
the Conformists can prove that the Dissenters were obliged to hold Communion,
as Members of the Parish Churches, they cannot prove a Separation. To separate
from a Church does suppose, that person to have been once of that Church.

But the Quaerie is, how the Conformists will prove all the Dissenters to be
Members of some particular Parish Church? Will they say that they were all made
Members of some particular Parish Church by their Baptism? That cannot be,
because by Baptism we are only made Members of the Catholic Church. Does our
being born English Men, and our Inhabiting in such a Parish make us Members of
the Parish Church? No, for there are no Grounds in Scripture for this, Our Lord
Jesus Christ, nor his Apostles did not leave any Intimations concerning such a
Rule, neither can any precept, but what is fetch from God's word, fasten any
such Obligation on the Conscience, that whoever lives within such a precinct
must be a Member of such a Church, How then must it be? The Answer of our Lord
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, and the Primitive Christians for the first 300
years, and of most Protestants, is full for this, which is, That it must be by
the peoples consent. For as the people are invested with a Right to chose their
own Pastor and the Church with which they would hold Communion. Even so they
cannot be Members nor under any Obligation of holding Ordinary Communion with
this, or the other particular Church without their own consent. Consent is as
absolutely necessary to the constituting a particular Parish Church, as a
National, which consent may be discovered not only Expressly, but also
implicitly, which is when a people do ordinarily join with some particular
Church in all Ordinances, as many Parishioners, who, by their Ordinary holding
Communion with the Parish Church in all Ordinances, do practically, and
interpretatively (though not expressly) discover their consent to be of that
Church, whereby (I think) they are under an Obligation to constant Communion
with that Parish Church so long as they find it lawful: Though these may
Occasionally hold Communion elsewhere, yet their ordinary, and constant
Communion must be with their Parish Church. For which reason, if they do
ordinarily forbear, or cease to have Communion with their Parish Church, it may
be justly said, that they do separate from it.

But there are many an Inhabitant in most Parishes, who, as they were not made
Members of the Parish Church by Baptism, nor can be by mere Cohabitation, even
so they never were by their own Consent, either expressly, or interpretatively.
They never held Communion with the Church of England in all Ordinances, were
never confirmed by the Bishops, nor ever did participate of the Lord's Supper,
and therefore I think it cannot be truly said, That they Separate. How can they
cease that Communion which they never had? For which reason to prove these
Schismatical Separatists, who never separated from the Church, seems an
Impossibility. Surely their exercise of that Right, and Power, with which they
are invested as Christians in chosing their own Pastor, cannot be an Act
Schismatical.

By this it is manifest, That those who never expressly nor implicitly consenting
to hold communion with any Parish Church in all Ordinances were never actually
obliged to hold Communion with such particular Parishes, and consequently their
forbearing such Communion or their Assembling in places distant from the Parish
Church cannot be a Separation, and if not a Separation, it cannot be a Schism.

Thus the Reader may easily perceive how necessary it is, that the Conformists
prove, that those Dissenters, who now meet in Assemblies locally distant from
the Parish Churches, were once Members and under an Obligation of holding
external Communion with the Parish Churches, if they will prove 'em
Separatists, Furthermore they must prove.

2. That this people do ordinarily Separate themselves from the external
Communion of their Parish Church. For seeing the Sin of Schism consists in
causeless Separation, there must be a Separation, or there can be no causeless
Separation, (that is) there can be no Schism, but how the Conformist can prove
a Separation any otherwise than by insisting on the people's, not holding
Communion in the same manner, or same place with the Church, is difficult to
suppose. And if they take either of their ways without the Addition of some
other Consideration, they must either make many of their own Meetings Separate,
which are in places locally distant from the Parish Church, where their Modes
of Administration are different, or clear many Dissenters from the Reproach of
Separation, what do they think of such Meetings in which the Common Prayer is
read, are they Separate and Schismatical? But after they have proved both
these, they cannot prove all Dissenters Schismatical, unless they can also
evince.

3. That the Separation is Causeless and Sinful, But how they can prove that
those who, if they separate, do so on no other Account, than that they may
forsake Sin is a point worthy of Consideration.

If there be any sinful Imposition made the term of Communion, it is sufficient
to justify the Separation of those, who withdraw themselves from the external
Communion of that Church. If a Church that is sound in the Doctrine of
Religion, though it detests an Idolatrous Worship, yet if it make the least Sin
the Term of Communion, whereby the people cannnot have Communion with that
Church but by a deliberate committing that Sin, Separation from the Communion
of this Church is justifiable. For whatever some may suggest, we must not
commit the least Sin that good may come thereof.

To insist then so much on the Peace and Unity of the Church, as if it were a
Good for the Obtaining which we might venture on a little Sin, is a Notion of a
very dangerous Tendency, giving too great Countenance to a Doctrine of the
Papists, whereby they justify all their Villainies. A Little evil (say they)
may be done for the Obtaining a great Good, for instance. The Salvation of the
many Souls in Three Kingdoms is a great, a very great Good, the Killing One,
Two, or Three Heretics in order thereunto, at most is but a little evil which
may be done for so great a good. Moreover this justifies all their Officious
Lying and Equivocating, they tell a Lie that some great good may come thereof.
But this is so contrary to the pure Nature of a Holy God, and his Holy, Good,
and Just Command, that whoever will indulge himself in a practical embraceing
such a Notion, does but prepare the greater Damnation for his own Soul.

God is a great God, and the least Sin being an Offense to his Dread Majesty,
cannot knowingly with deliberation and allowance be committed, but the person
that does it, exposes himself to Divine Indignation; who ever breaks the
least of these my Commands, says Christ. Matthew. 5. 19. is in danger of loosing
Heaven, for, though a man keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he
is guilty of all. James 2. 10. We must not speak nor act wickedly for God, he
is not glorified by Man's lie, and therefore Woe unto them that will do evil that
good may come thereof. Romans 3. 8. If the least sin be made the Term of
Communion, no Consideration of Peace and Unity, or of Obedience to the
Magistrate can excuse those from guilt, that will venture on that sin. Whence
it is evident,

That all those who by the Reasons insisted on in this Treatise are fully
convinced, That somewhat sinful is imposed as a Term of Communion with the
Church of England, they do but discharge their Duty, and keep a good Conscience
in separating, and yet by separation do not accuse the Church, as if she had
been no true Church, or as if Salvation could not by others be had in it. A
Church that is sound in the Faith, that it is a true Church in a Theological
Sense, being liable to Error, may, even while Sound in the great things of
Religion, impose some Error, as a Term of Communion, from which those, who are
convinced of the Sin, must separate. A sound Church in the great things, may
err in lesser matters, and may Impose Assent and Consent unto that Error, as a
Term of Communion, with the which these Dissenters durst not comply, but seeing
they cannot have Communion on easier Terms, must separate.

There is a great Difference between the Errors or Corruptions of a Church
which are made Terms of Communion, and those which are not. It Is not to be
questioned, but that a man may join with a Church that is less pure than
another, even with a Church that has several Spots in it (or he must join with
none) and may be under an Obligation of continuing with that Church, although
he may go elsewhere and be better edifyed, otherwise there being variety of
Gifts, those who are more eminent than the rest among the Ministry, must have
most of the people round, when other honest, though not so able; Preachers have
few, or none. However if they make the least Spot, or Impurity a Term of
Communion, he dares not comply. As long as he may may continue Communion
without being made a partaker of the impurities, (as in many instances he may)
he must not separate, but when they impose their corruptions as Terms of
Communion, so that he cannot have Communion but by complying with the
corruption, he must not sin for the sake of Communion, nor on any other
consideration whatsoever.

But seeing they cannot hold Communion with the Parish-Churches; The next great
quaerie is, what they must do, whether live without some Ordinances all the
days of their Life, or Assemble themselves together for Communion in all
Ordinances, in such a way as they are fully convinced is agreeable to the Sacred
Scriptures.

That they must not constantly neglect any Ordinance of God, nor the public
attendance on his worship, somewhere is so clearly revealed in the word of God,
that whoever is not so far in love with Quakerism, as to neglect the Testimony
of God's written Word, cannot but acknowledge it; That the Lord Jesus who has
instituted a Ministry, and made it the peculiar work of some men in special to
preach the Word, not only for conversion of sinners, but for the edisication of
the converted, for the help and benefit of whom there is instituted not the
Ordinance of Baptism alone, but that of the Lord's Supper, which is designed
for the strength and increase of Grace in Christians, I say this Lord Jesus,
who has so graciously instituted a Ministry and Ordinances, has made it the
duty of Christians to assemble themselves together, to the end they may be made
partakers of the Blessings of his Institutions and Ordinances; And such is the
Relation between Minister and People, that is, between a Gospel Minister, and
an orderly Christian Assembly, that the one cannot be without the other,
neither can the one ordinarily perform some Relational Duties, but in an
Assembly with the other, and therefore must assemble themselves together, it is
their duty.

I cannot at present enlarge on this head, and therefore as to this I can only
add, that the sense of all Protestants generally is, that all Christians ought
to assemble themselves together for public worship; Viz. for Prayer, the Word
and Sacraments, and that it is the duty of a Pastor to take heed to himself, and
the Flock over which he is made over-seer, and that it is the peoples duty to
attend Ordinarily on the Ministry of their own Pastor.

The great difference between the Church of England and Dissenters, is not so
much about the peoples duty of assembling themselves together for public
worship, as about the place where, and the Minister with whom. The Church of
England says, it must be in the Parish Church with the Minister of the Parish,
but the Dissenter asserts, that every Christian is invested with a right to
choose his own Pastor, and that therefore he must go where he finds the worship
to be in a way most agreeable to God's Holy word, but when he is once fixed, he
is under those Obligations of Duty unto his Pastor, that the Church of England
do say, a Parishioner is unto the Minister of the Parish. But seeing on these
things I cannot now enlarge, I will conclude with an humble and affectionate
request to all good Christians, whether Episcopal or Dissenter.

I beseech you to consider, that conscience is a tender thing, its wounds
unsupportable, frequently accompanied with such horror as is very like unto the
pains and torments of the damned; No man therefore must act contrary to the
plain convictions thereof. What man soever does, what he is convinced in
Conscience is a sin, does greatly dishonor and provoke Almighty God. All care
must be taken to obtain the knowledge of the truth, and gain a freedom from
error, but there must not be an acting against the plain convictions of
conscience, though erroneous.

On this I insist as a sound part of the Protestant Doctrine, strenuously
defended against the many feeble assaults of the Papist, by several worthies of
the Church of England; And really this is a Rule all good Christians must walk
by, in doing which, seeing there are almost as many different persuasions of
conscience about some lesser things, as there are considering minds, there
will be as many different practices where there are different Sentiments about
matters of practice, there the practice will be different, for which reason,
the strong must take heed that they despise not the weak, and the weak look to
it that they judge not the strong; For whether we conform, or conform not, if
we do what we do conscientiously to the Lord, we shall be accepted of him.

I verily believe that many do think themselves bound in conscience to conform,
the which they would not do to gain a world, if they did think it a sin, and
it is as true, that many among the Dissenters are as conscientiously
Non-conformists, and would really have conformed, did they not think that so
conforming they should sin against God. Both these must be tenderly regarded by
such as will walk by the Christian Rule; A Non-conformists censuring a
conformist as one that acts against his conscience is unchristian, and a
Conformist's censuring all Dissenters as Hypocrites, looking on their
conscience to be but fancy, their Religion to be faction, is no less
unchristian than the former. But to be more particular, my humble desire is,

1. That those who are of the Communion of the Church of England, would
continue it so long as they can with a safe conscience. Let not every little
dissatisfaction with some men drive you off from those ways you have nothing,
beside the miscarriage of some men of that profession, to object against, it is
true, your duty is to mind the glory of God in the edification of your own
Soul, and if your Parish Minister be one whose incapacity for the Ministerial
work is such, as not to answer the end of the Ministry, you must look out for a
better, and be where you may have more than the shadow of a Minister, even one
who is competently qualified for the works; But do this in a way as little
offensive to the Church of England, as your conscience will permit. Why will
you separate from that Communion, where you may be without sin, especially
seeing by doing so you do what you cannot justify? But if you cannot continue
your Communion without complying with sin, you must rather withdraw than sin.

2. That such as are not actually of any Communion, (i. e.) neither joined with
the Church of England, nor with the Dissenter, of which fort there are many,
especially among the younger people, would remember that they have, as
Christians, a right to choose their own Pastor, in the exercise of which right,
it is their duty to have a special regard to the Glory of God, the good of their
own Soul, and the peace of the Church, and therefore if you may have all these
ends answered by joining your selves to the Church of England, and you can with
a safe Conscience do it, you do well in joining with that Church, but if you
cannot with a safe Conscience join with the Church of England, but can with the
Non-conformists, you must apply your selves to those of the Non-conformists who
do in your judgments keep most exactly to the rule of the Gospel. You must
regard God's Glory as your ultimate end, the Salvation of your Soul as an end
subordinate, and God's word as your Rule, by which in pursuance of these great
ends, you must walk. Study therefore seriously the Rule, and be sure you do not
knowingly and with deliberation deviate there from.

3. My third request is to such as are joined with the Non-Conformists, that
you Censure not those who continue their Communion with the Church of England,
Are you Conscientious in your way, So ought you to esteem them to be in their
way? Would not you have them consider you as Hypocrites, or fanciful
Humourists, neither do you judge them to be such, what, though those Reasons I
have Collected out of the Writings of the Old Nonconformists, may fasten
powerful Convictions on your Conscience, yet they may not be of any such weight
in the esteem of others. Though I have produced them to the end the Conformist
may be moved to look on you as conscientious persons, yet do you not abuse it,
as if all Conformists were as much Convinced by 'em as you your selves are, and
therefore must be esteemed to act contrary to their Consciences in conforming.
Take heed of such censuring.

Finally my humble desire is, That such as are of the conforming Clergy would
consider, that the above mentioned Arguments may be (as indeed with many they
are) of great Force, and that although the Conformist may be able easily to
answer 'em; Yet Thousands among the Dissenters can not shake off the
Convictions they receive from such Arguments. Oh then be not too severe in your
censure! But consider that these Dissenters cannot conform but by wounding
their Consciences, be therefore very tender how you impose on 'em, but do your
utmost both for a Comprehension, and Indulgence of those sound Protestants, who
walk conscientiously.

FINIS.
The LETTERS.
BY an impartial perusal of these following Letters, the Reader may easily
perceive the difference there was between some great States men in Queen
Elizabeth's time, and some of the Clergy, and that when the Clergy were for a
severe persecuting Protestant Dissenters, the Council, and in special the Lord
Burleigh, that wonder of his age (though a Son of the Church of England)
endeavored the relief of the Non-conformists.

These Letters were first taken from Archbishop Whitgift's own Copy, as may
appear from the Title prefixed to the Letter, thus, My Lord Treasurer's Letter
unto me, and my answer to the Lord Treasurer. There are some great persons
among the Clergy, who have seen 'em in Manuscript.

Numb. 1.
THere is a Letter written to the Bishop for the execution of her Majesty's
Proclamation for the Uniformity set forth in the book, and other injunctions,
penned (as is supposed) by Sir Thomas Smith; The which I Will not fully
transcribe. There is one clause only that is for my purpose, which is
concerning the meetings of the Clergy, which were first ordained to keep all
Churches in the Diocese, in an Uniform and Godly Order, which now is commonly
said (the more is the pity) to be only used of you [i. e. the Bishop and his
Clergy,] and your Officers to get money, or for some other purposes; This
passage shows the corruption of the Clergy.

Numb. 2.
A Letter written by the Lord Treasurer Cecil to Archbishop Whitgift, in
answer to one received from the Archbishop.
MAY it please your Grace; I perceive that the Bishop of Rochester through your
persuasion is contented to be removed to Chichester, whereof I am glad, whereby
the Dean of Westminster may be placed, as your Grace may think fit, and I do
desire her Majesty will new place all the Bishops in the void room, whereof I
am very mindful and desirous for the benefit of the Church, wishing that the
Church may take that good thereby, that it has need of, for surely your Grace
must pardon me, I rather wish it, than look, or much hope for it; I see such
Worldlyness in many that were otherwise affected before they came to Cathedral
Churches, that I fear the places alter the men, but herein I condemn not all:
but few there be that do better, being Bishops (in the void rooms whereof I am
very mindful,) than being Preachers they did; I am bold thus to utter my mind
of Bishops to an Arch bishop, but I clear my self, I mean nothing in any
conceit to your Grace, for though of late I have varied in my poor opinion, in
that by your order, poor simple men have rather been sought for by inquisition
to be found Offenders, than upon their facts condemned, yet surely I do not for
all this differ from your Grace in Amity and Love, but I do reverence your
Learning and Integrity, and wish that the Spirit of gentleness may win, rather
than severity; But therefore enough of the misbehaviour of Browning, toward
the Master of Trinity College; I am sorry to hear as I do, esteeming him meeter
for Bethlehem than for that College. The Queen's Majesty asked me, what I
thought of Travers to be the Minister of the Temple, whereunto I answered, that
at the request of Dr. Alney in his sickness, and of a number of honest
Gentlemen of the Temple, I had yielded my Allowance of him to that place, so as
he will show himself Conformable to the order of the Church, whereunto I was
informed, that he would so be; But her Majesty told me that your Grace did not
so allow of him, which I said might be for something supposed to be written by
him, Tituled, de Disciplina Ecclesiastica, whereupon her Majesty commanded me
to write to your Grace, to know your opinion, which I pray your Grace to
signify unto her, as God shall move ye, surely it were great pity, that any
impediment should be occasion to the contrary, for he is well learned, very
honest, and well loved, and allowed of the generality of that house. Mr. Bond
told me, that your Grace liked well of him, and so do I also, as of one well
learned, and honest, but (as I told him) if he came not to the place with some
applause of the Company, he shall be weary thereof, and I commended him to her
Majesty, if Travers should not, but her Majesty thinks him not fit for that
place, because of his infirmity. Thus I end, wishing your Grace Assistance of
God's Spirit to govern your charge unblameably

Your Graces to command William Burleigh.
From the Court at Oatlands, Sept. 17. 1584.
Numb. 3.
A part of a Letter sent unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of
London, from her Majesty's Council about September 20. 1584.
AFter our hearty commendations to both your Lordships, although we have heard
of late times sundry complaints out of diverse countries of this Realm, of some
proceedings against a great number of Ecclesiastical Persons, some Parsons of
Churches, some Vicars, some Curates, but all Preachers, whereby some were
deprived of their livings, some suspended from their Ministry, and preaching,
yet we have forborne to enter into any particular examination of such
complaints, thinking, that howsoever inferior Officers, as Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, and such like, whose Offices are of more value and
profit by such kind of proceedings, might in such sort proceed against the
Ministers of the Church, yet your Lordship the Archbishop of that Province of
Canterbury, have beside your general authority, some particular interest in the
present jurisdiction of sundry Bishoprics vacant, and you also the Bishop of
London, both for your own authority in your Diocese, and as head Commissioner
Ecclesiastical would have a Pastoral regard over the particular Officers, to
stay, and temperate them in their hasty proceedings against the Ministers, and
especially against such as do carnestly profess, and instruct the people
against the dangerous Sects of. Papistry; but yet of late, hearing of the
lamentable estate of the Church in the County of Essex, that is, of a great
number of zealous and learned Preachers, they are suspended from their cures,
the vacancy of the place for the most part without any Ministry or Preaching,
Prayers and Sacraments, and in some places of certain appointed to those void
rooms, being persons neither of learning, nor of good names, and in other
places of that County, a great number of persons occupying the cures, being
notoriously unfit, most for lack of learning, many charged or chargable with
great and enormions faults, as drunkenness, filthiness of Life, Gamesters at
Cards, hunting of Alehouses, and such like, against whom we hear not of any
proceedings, but that they are quietly suffered to the slander of the Church,
to the offense of good people, yea to the famishing of them for lack of good
teaching, and thereby dangerous to the subverting of many weaklins from their
duties to God, and the Queens Majesty, by secret Jesuits, and counterfeit
Papists, and having thus in a general sort heard out of many parts of the like
of this lamentable Estate of the Church, yet to the intent, we should not be
deceived in the generality of the reports we sought to be informed, etc.

Numb. 4.
A Letter from the Lord Treasurer to the Archbishop. July 5. 1584.
IT may please your Grace, I am sorry to trouble you so often as I do, but I am
more troubled my self, not only with many private Petitions of sundry
Ministers, recommended for persons of credit, for peaceable persons in their
Ministry, and yet by complaints to your Grace, and other your Colleagues in
commission, greatly troubled, but also I am daily now charged by Counselors
and public persons to neglect my duty in not staying these your Graces
proceedings, so vehement, and so general against Ministers and Preachers, as
the Papists thereby are greatly encouraged, all evil disposed persons and
subjects animated, and thereby the Queen's Majesty's safety endangered; with
these kinds of Arguments I am daily assailed, against which I answer, that I
think your Grace does nothing, but being duly examined, tends to the
maintenance of the Religion now Established, and to avoid Schism in the Church,
I also have for example showed your papers sent to me, how fully the Church is
furnished with Preachers, and how small a number there are that do contend for
their singularity, but these occasions do not satisfy all persons, neither do
I seek to satisfy all persons, but with Reason and Truth. But now my good
Lord, by chance I have come to the sight of an Instrument of 24 Articles of
great length and curiosity, formed in a Romish Style, to examine all manner of
Ministers in this time without distinction of persons, which Articles are
Entitled apud Lambeth, May 1584 to be executed ex officio mero, etc. and upon
this occasion I have seen them. I did recommend unto your Graces favor two
Ministers Curates of Cambridge-shire to be favorably heard, and your Grace
wrote to me, that they were contentious, seditious, and persons vagrant, to
maintain this controversy, wherewith I charged them sharply, and they both
denied these charges, and required to be tried, and so to receive punishment, I
answered, that your Grace would so charge them, and then I should see
afterward, what they should deserve, and advised them to resort to your Grace,
comforting them that they should find favorable proceedings, and so I hoped
upon my former commendations the rather. What may be said to them I know not,
nor whether they have been so faulty as your Grace have been informed, neither
do I mean to treat for to favor such men, for pardon, I may speak upon their
amendment; but now they coming to me, I asked how your Grace proceeded with
them, they say, they are commanded to be examined by the Register of London,
and I asked them whereof, they said of a great number of Articles, but they
could have no copies of them, I answered, that they might answer to the truth,
they said, that they were so many in number, and so diverse, that they were
afraid to answer to them, for fear of captious interpretation, upon this I sent
for the Register, who brought me the Articles, which I have read, and find so
curiously penned, so full of branches and circumstances, and I think, the
Inquisitors of Spain use not so many questions to comprehend, and to trap their
preyes. I know your Canonists, can defend these with all their particles, but
surely under your Graces correction, this Juridical and Canonical sifting of
poor Ministers is not to edify and reform, and in charity I think they ought
not to answer to all these nice points, except they were very notorious
Offenders in Papistry or Heresy. Now good my Lord, bear with my scribbling, I
write with the Testimony of a good Conscience; I desire the peace of the
Church, I desire concord and unity in the exercise of our Religion, I fear no
sensual wilful recusant, but I conclude that according to my simple judgment,
this kind of proceeding is too much savouring the Romish Inquisition, and is
rather a device to seek for Ossenders, than to reform any; This was not that
charitable instruction that I thought was intended. If these poor Ministers
should in some few points have any scrupulous conceptions meet to be removed,
this is not a charitable way to send them to answer to your common Register
upon so many Articles at one instant, without commodity of instruction by your
Register, whose office is only to receive their answers, by which the parties
are first subject to condemnation, before they be taught their errors; It may
be that I say that Canonists may maintain this proceeding by Rules of their
Laws, but though omnia lice^t, omnia non expediunt. I pray your Grace bear
this (one, perchance a fault) that I have willed them not to answer these
Articles, except their Consciences may suffer them. And yet I have sharply
admonished them, that if they be disturbers in their Churches, they must be
corrected, and yet upon your Graces answer to me, ne suitor ultra erepidam,
neither will I put falcem in alterius messem. My paper teaches me to make an
end.

Postscript.
Your Grace must pardon my hasty scribbling, for I have done this raptim, and
without correction.


Your Graces at command William Burleigh.

Numb. 5.
The Treasurer's reply to an answer of the Archbishop's unto the former
Letter. July 17. 1584.
I Have received your Graces loving Letter, answering Speeches (as I think)
delivered by your Chaplain Dr. Cossins, and I perceive you are sharply moved to
blame me, and clear your self, I know I have many faults, but I hope I have not
given such cause of offense, as your Letter expresses, I deny nothing that
your Grace thinks meet to proceed in with these whom you call factious, and
therefore there is no controversy betwixt you and me expressed in your Letter.
The controversy is passed in your Grace's Letter in silence, and so I do rest
satisfied, your Grace promised me to deal (I say,) only with such as violate
order, and to charge them therewith, which I allow well thereof; But your Grace
not charging men with such faults, seeks by examination to urge them to
accuse themselves, and then I think you will punish them. I think your Graces
proceedings is, (I will not say rigorous nor captious) but I think it is scarce
charitable. I have no leisure to write more, and therefore I will end, for
writing will but increase offense, and I mean not to offend your Grace. I am
content that your Grace, and my Lord of London where I hear Brown is, use him
as your Wisdoms shall think meet. If I had known his faults, I might be blamed
for writeing for him, but when by examination only it is to sift him with 24
Articles I have cause to pity the poor man.

Your Graces as Friendly as any, William Burleigh.

Numb. 6.
The Archbishop's Answer to the Lord Treasurer.
MY singular good Lord; God knows how desirous I have been from time to time
to satisfy your Lordship in all things, and to have my doings approved to you,
for which cause, since my coming to this place, I have done nothing of
importance without your advice, I have risen early, and sat up late, to write
unto you such objections and answers as on either side were used, I have not
done the like to any man, and shall I now say that I have lost my labor, or
shall my just dealing with two of the most disordered Ministers in a whole
Diocese (the obstinacy and contempt of whom, especially of one of them your
self would not bear in any subjected to your Authority) cause you so to think
and speak of my doings, yea and of my self, no man living should have made me
believe it. Solomon says, an old friend is better than a new, and I trust your
Lordship will not so lightly cast off your old friend, for any of those new
fangled factious Sectaries, whose fruits are to make divisions, wheresoever
they come, and to separate old and assured friends. Your Lordship seems to
charge me with breach of promise, touching my manner of proceeding, whereof I
am no way guilty, but I have altered my first course of depriving them for not
subscribing, only justifiable by law and common practice, both in the time of
King Edward, and from the beginning of her Majesty's Reign. Your Lordship also
objecteth that I took this course for the better maintenance of my book, etc.
mine enemies said so indeed, but I trust my friends have a better opinion in
me; Why should I seek for any confirmation of my book after years, or what
should I get thereby more than already? And yet if subscription may confirm it;
it is confirmed long ago, by the subscription of all the Clergy almost in
England before my time, even of Branie also who seems now to be so wilful.
Mine enemies and tongues of this slanderous and uncharitable Sect report, that
I am revolted, become a Papist, and I know not what; But it proceeds from
their lewdness, not from any desert of mine, and I disdain to answer to such
notorious untruths, which the best of them dare not avouch to my face. Your
Lordship seems further to burden me with wilfulness, I am sure, that you are
not so persuaded of me, I will appeal to your own Conscience, there is
difference between wilfulness and constancy, I have taken upon me the defense
of the Religion, and Rights of this Church of England, to appease the Sects of
Schisms therein, to reduce all the Ministers thereof to Uniformity and due
obedience, herein I intend to be constant, and not to waver with every wind,
the which also my place, my person, my duty, the law, her Majesty, and the
goodness of the cause does require of me, and wherein your Lordship and others
all things considered, ought in duty to assist and countenance me. It is
strange that a man in my place dealing with so good warranties as I do, should
be so encountered, and for not yielding should be accounted wilful, but I must
be contented, vincit, qui patitur, and if my friends herein forsake me, I trust
God will not, neithe law, her Majesty, who has laid the charge on me, and are
able to protect me; But of all other things it most greiveth me, that your
Lordship should say, that the two Ministers fare the worse because your
Lordship sent them; Has your Lordship ever had any cause so to think of me, it
is needless for me to protest my heart and affections toward you above all
other men, the world knows it, and I am assured that your Lordship nothing
doubeth thereof, I have rather cause to complain to your Lordship of your self,
that upon so small occasion, and in the behalf of two such, you will so hardly
conceive of me, yea and as it were countenance persons, so meanly qualified in
so evil a cause against me your Lordship's so long tried friend, and their
ordinary, that has not so been in times past, now it should least of all be, I
may not suffer the notorious contempt of any of them, especially unless I will
become Aesop's block, well, because I would be loath to omit any thing whereby
your Lordship might be satisfied, I have sent unto you certain reasons to
justify the manner of my proceeding which I marvel should be so much misliked
in this cause, having been so long practiced in the like, yea in the same, and
never before this time found fault with, truly my Lord, I must proceed this
way, or not at all, the reasons I have set down in this paper, and I heartily
pray your Lordship not to be carried away either from the cause, or from my
self upon unjust surmises or clamours, least you be some occasion of that
confusion, which hereafter you would be sorry for: For mine own part, I desire
no farther defense in these occasions of your Lordship, nor any other than
justice and law will yield unto me. In my private affairs I know I stand in
need of friends, especially of your Lordship, of whom I have made always an
assured account, but in these public actions I see no cause why I should seek
for friends, seeing they to whom the care of the common weal is committed,
ought out of duty therein to join with me, to conclude, I am your Lordships
assured, neither will I ever be persuaded, but that you bear an hearty good
will toward me.

So far Whitgift. If Dr. Burnet would undertake the carrying on the History of
Ecclesiastical Affairs all the time Q. Eliz. lived, and in order thereunto,
might he be so happy as to obtain a sight of all those great things were then
on the stage, the world would see how little they are owing unto Heylin for his
History, and also understand how unjustly the Old Protestants called Puritanes,
have been represented as factious. etc.

FINIS.

