A SERMON Preached before the KING At WHITE HALL, On December. 1. M.DC.LXVII.
Being the First Sunday in ADVENT.

By William Lloyd D. D. one of His MAJESTY'S Chaplains in Ordinary.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes, for Henry Brom at the Starr in Little-Brittain,
Anno Dom. 1668.

S. JOHN vi. 14. Then those Men, when they saw the Miracle which Jesus did,
said, Of a truth this is that Prophet that should come into the world.
THE Text is the Conclusion of a Story that reaches from the beginning of the
Chapter to this Verse.

The persons concerned in it were of the Jewish Nation: a Nation anciently
famous and flourishing; but at that time, under the yoke of a Roman Conquest:
from which they yet hoped for deliverance, by a Prophet, whom they looked for
about that time to come into the World.

In this Critical time, comes our Lord Jesus to show himself; poor and
conteptible to see to, but withal so mighty in word and deed, that many
believed him to be that Prophet; the Rulers knew not what to think of him, and
the People flockt after him in multitudes, which way soever he went.

In this Chapter He went over the Sea of Galilee (so they call it, though in
truth it is but a Lake) the People, about 5000 of them, went about the Lake to
meet him. The place where they found him was Desert, they were far from any
house or home, what Provisions they brought with them were spent, and they
seemed to be in no small distress; which He mercifully Considered, and
miraculously Relieved. Out of that small pittance which one (...), Verse. 9.
Lad had brought with him, He furnished a sufficient meal for 5000 persons, and
caused twelve Baskets to be filled with those Fragments they had left.

This they all saw, and were amazed at the thing, and magnified the Person,
whom they could Judge to be no other than what himself professed that He was,
namely, that He was That Prophet that should come into the World.

Which Judgment of theirs, how Reasonable it was on their part, and what the
Use of it should be to us, are the things I am now to consider.

The Reason of their Judgment stands briefly thus: They looked for a Prophet to
come about that time; and that he should make himself known to 'em by Miracles:
They had heard a great Fame of Christ, and now they saw him do a great Miracle;
Therefore they concluded that He must be that Prophet.

First, That the Jews did look for one to come into the World, one that should
be Born of their Nation; a great Prophet, a Messiah, one Anointed of God, for
the Revealing of his Will, and for the Redemption of his People; this is
acknowledged on all hands. It was a chief Article of the Jewish Faith, the very
Hope and Expectation of Israel: For, to them were committed the Oracles of God;
in which they had Promises and Prophecies of him, almost from the beginning of
the World, to the end of their Scriptures. The time would fail me, if I should
go about to reckon them. But methinks a short reckoning may serve, when I
consider, that Moses to these Jews was instar omnium: He was the Man in whom
they did trust, and he Prophesied of such a Messiah to come, Deuteronomy. xviii. 15,
and 18. verse. It Is a remarkable Text, and therefore I quote you both the place
and the words. Verse 15. Moses speaks to the People of Israel, in his own
words, The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of
thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye hearken: and then to
assure them, that he said not this of himself, he repeats the words that God
spoke to him upon Mount Sinai to this purpose, verse 18. I will raise them up a
Prophet from among their Brethren like unto thee. Now, that Christ was one of
their Brethren, the Jews cannot but acknowledge: and that Christ was like unto
Moses, we Christians are able to show them. But to spare us that trouble, they
say, this Text was not meant of the Messiah. Of whom then? why, of such
Prophets as God would raise up from time to time in his Church. But there were
many such Prophets, and the Text speaks expressly but of one: whom therefore
Aben Ezra In their Comments on the place.
will have to be Joshua the successor of Moses. Abraham Seba In their Comments
on the place.
says, it is intended of the Prophet Jeremy But neither This, nor That, nor
any other Prophet, can fill up the Character of this person; of whom God says,
he shall be (...) like unto thee: Moses says (...) he shall be like unto me.
For never was there any Prophet (...) like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. xxxiv. 10. nor
ever will be, says Maimonides, except the Messiah, who, says he In Teshuba
Cap. 9.
, shall be a great Prophet, and like to our Master Moses.

It may seem strange, that our Modern Jews, who so passionately dote on the
hopes of a Messia, should be so loath to hear of him in this Prophecy. But
there is no strangeness in it, to him that considers the Witchcraft of
Contradiction. They think themselves bound to find another sense of the words,
because the Apostles of Christ have quoted them in this sense. St. Peter, Act.
iii. 22. St Steven, Act. vii. 37. both of them, in express terms, applying this
Prophecy to Christ. Not to say that others also do it in general words;
namely, Philip, Joh. i. 45. St. Paul in the xxvi. and xxviii. Chap. of the
Acts. Nay, our Savior himself, Ioh. v. 45. telling the Jews, that Moses wrote
concerning him. All which Quotations in the New Testament, as they do prejudice
the Modern Jews, against the true understanding of this Prophecy; so they
plainly prove, that it was thus understood by their Forefathers: For else it
had been a vain thing for the Apostles to go about to prove Christ to be the
Messiah, out of such a Text as those Jews understood in a different sense:
Especially when there were so many other Texts of Scripture, which the Jews do
acknowledge to be meant of the Messiah, that could have been as easily alleged
by them, and as aptly applied to Christ, as this Prophecy which is now in
Question.

For the proof of what I say, I shall produce two or three such Texts; and my
choice shall be of those, that not only foretold that a Messiah was to come,
but also marked out the time when he was to be expected: Genesis xlix. 10. is
Jacobs Prophecy, that The Scepter shall not depart from Juda, till Shilo come;
that is, there shall never cease to be Kings and Princes of the house of Juda,
till the Messiah come: So both the Targums render it; and so does Onkelos,
whose Paraphrase is of greatest authority among the Jews, and who himself lived
about 40 years before Christ's Incarnation. Another Prophecy there was, but
along time after this; it was foretold when the second Temple was building,
that The desire of the Nations, in Haggai; The Lord whom they sought, in
Malachi; should come, and that suddenly, to that Temple. The texts are Haggai
ii. 7. and Mal. iii. 1. Both which places are clearly meant of the Messiah, and
the latter of them is so interpreted by Aben Ezra In their Comments on the
places.
and David Kimchi In their Comments on the places.
, two of the learnedest Blasphemers of Christ in the Jewish Nation.

I shall offer but one Testimony more, and it is from that Prophet, whom I
think no man, without invincible obstinacy, can read and consider, and not be a
Christian; so unquestionable he is for his Authority, so evident in his
Predictions, so punctual in the Circumstances of them: I mean the Prophet
Daniel; who bewailing the desolation of Jerusalem, and the 70 years Captivity
of his Nation, was told by an Angel they should soon be restored, and Jerusalem
be rebuilt. But farther, that after 7 times 70, that is, after 490 years, from
the going forth of the Commandment for the rebuilding of Jerusalem, they
should be a Nation no more; That within the last 70 of these years, the Messiah
should come, the holy One should be Anointed; Dan. ix. 24. and that he should
be cut off, but not for himself, Verse 26. and then, that a Prince should come,
and destroy the holy City and the Sanctuary, as there it follows in the end of
the Chapter.

How Easy a thing was it for any considering man in Christ's days, to Reckon
within a small matter of those 490 years? I say, within a small matter; because
there might be some doubt where to fix the Beginning of that reckoning: whether
it should begin at the First Commandment, for the rebuilding of Jerusalem; or,
at the Last, which was about 50 years after. Which possibly was the cause, why
R. Nechonia ben Hakkana, who lived about 50 years before Christ's Incarnation,
said, as Grotius De veritate Christ. Relig. l. 5.. 14.
tells us, (for I know not his Author) we are now within 50 years of the
Messiah; and R. Iose, who lived about 50 years after Christ's death, said,
according to R. Jacob in Caphtor, we are now past the time of the Messia.

Certain it is, that the 100 years between these, was a time of great
expectation, of some extra ordinary Person to come into the World: which
Expectation began in Judea, and from thence it spread even all the World over.
Among the Gentiles there were strange Intimations of an Universal King that was
then to be born; as may appear from Cicero L. 1. Epist. 1. and l. 2. de
Divinatione.
, and Virgil Eclog 4.
, from Suetonius De Vespasiano, c. 4.
, and Tacitus Hist. l. 4.
, in their several Writings. Among the Jews it was a Question in every man's
mouth, where is he that should be born? so the Pharisees to John Baptist, Art
thou he? and so the Baptist to our Savior, Art thou he that should come? so
the People among themselves, Is not this that Prophet? They were at it upon
every Occasion, and dearly they paid for it at last. For they put the Nations
about them all into a ferment with these Discourses, and then into a rage with
their Commotions, which could never be laid but with the Destruction of their
Temple and Government; according to those Prophesies, which being read to them
in their Synagogues every Sabbath day, as St. Paul Act. xiii. 27.
says, they fulfilled, because they understood not.

And as for those obstinate wretches, whom God suffered to outlive that
Destruction, when the terror of it was a little over, and they begin to
recollect themselves, and to consider what hope they had left of the Promise;
the Scepter being now departed from Judah, there being no Temple left, and the
490 years long since expired; what a Confusion they were in, it is not possible
to express, nor easy to imagine, without reading of their Talmud, where In
Sanhedrin, c. Chelek.
in the 4th part, 4th. Book, 11th. Chap. you may find them casting up among
themselves, what hopes they had left of their Messiah. One reflects upon that
Prophecy of the School of Elias, that the World should last 6000 years; 2000
years before the Law (...)
, and 2000 under the Law, and 2000 under the Messiah: which makes well for us,
because Christ came much about the year 4000; but made ill for them, because
that year was then past and gone. Another makes mention of two old Prophesies,
that the Messiah should come after 85 Jubilees, that is, about the year 4200;
but those Prophesies gave them no comfort, that year also being past and gone.
A third said, all our prefixed times are at an end; a fourth, that the Messiah
was come already and lived somewhere incognito; a fifth, wished the bones of him
broken that should keep any more reckoning of time. A strange and a certain
accomplishment of that most ancient Prophecy Deuter. xxviii. 28, 29.
concerning the state of the Jews after their rejection of the Messiah; that
God would sinite them with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart;
that they should grope at noonday, as the blind gropes in darkness; a Prophecy
that ought not to be lightly past by, but I must not go beyond my line.

I have showed, that our Prophet was foretold, and that a time was set for his
coming, and that in Christ's days that time was come. Now what could the Jews
desire more but some Token to know him by? And such a Token was this (...) in
my Text. It signifies properly a Sign, though we translate it a Miracle; which
obliges me to show what a Miracle is, and how fitly it was ordein'd to be the
Sign of the great Prophet.

A Miracle, according to the derivation of the word, is such a work as is apt
to raise Wonder and Admiration in us. And admiration proceeds from the
ignorance of causes. Therefore Fools wonder at many things, because they know
the causes of few things: Wise men admire at those things which proceed from
occult causes in nature, though the things are very usual and ordinary: All men
admire at those things which are unusual and extraordinary; which if they also
exceed the whole power of nature, so far as any man is able to judge of it,
then they are properly and strictly called Miracles.

In every work, by the laws of Nature, there must be an Active cause naturally
able and ready to work; and there must be a Passive matter fitly disposed for
it: without both which, nothing can be done.

If any thing be done without either of these, then it is said to be
Supernatural. 1st. On the Passive part, when either there is no matter at all,
as in the Creation of the world out of nothing; or, when there is such a matter
as has no fitness for such a use, as it was in the Creation, and will be at the
Resurrection, of living man out of the dust of the Earth. 2ly. In respect of
the Agent, when the work is above the reach of any natural cause, above the
power of any Creature that we can know of, as the staying of the Sun in
Ioshuah's days; or when no second cause is employed in it, or such a cause as
has no disposition for it, no activity but what is Supernaturally given it; in
all such cases a work is said to be Miraculous.

This kind of work God is pleased to make use of, as the Seal of his Commission
to any Person, as the Attestation of his hand to any Doctrine: so that if any
Person or Doctrine be Blameless in other respects, and only Questionable for
its Authority; it sufficiently clears its Authority to be from God, that he
sends it, or suffers it to come to us, with the Testimony of Miracles.

Thus Moses, being sent from God to the people of Israel, was appointed to take
two or three Witnesses along with him; namely, two or three Signs, to assure
that captious people, that he was truly a Prophet sent from God. First he turns
his Rod into a Serpent, and then that Serpent into a Rod again; he makes his
hand in an instant become leprous, and immediately restores it again; he takes
up water out of the River, and poures it out perfect blood upon the ground.

Thus also, that Prophet like unto Moses, Deuteronomy xviii. 15. was promised to come
with signs like him, Verse 21, 22. To the same effect are many other Texts of
the old Testament. But I think that one is enough, if I can show that the Jews
did believe it, that they depended upon it, and were ready on all occasions to
exact this proof of a Messiah. It is not unlike, that the Devil himself (who is
certainly a great Textuary) had some thought of this, when he tempted our
Savior to command the stones to become bread. But as for the Jews, it was
unquestionably their way; which St. Paul observes, 1 Cor. i. 21. the Jews
require a sign; tell them of their Prophet, and presently they call for a Sign.
How often were they upon these terms with our Savior? He could be no Messiah
for them, unless he would show 'em a Sign. Though some of them before hand were
resolved not to be convinced with it, yet none of 'em were to be satisfied
without it; nay not without many signs, as he tells them, Joh. i. 5. Joh. iv.
49.
Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe. And it is observable of
Barcozba, that famous Impostor, who set up for a Messiah their own way,
pretending to make 'em a great flourishing People, which so won him their
hearts, that for a while they generally adhered to him; yet at last distrusting
him for want of success, they put him to death only for want of a sign. Which
though Maimonides In Hilcheth Melachim, c. 11.
denies, as also he does this Doctrine, for fear of being pressed with the
undeniable Miracles of our Savior; yet the Talmud affirms both these, as to
that of Barcozba Ibid. in Sanhedrin.
, IV. 4. 11. And as to this Doctrine In Berachoth c. Meemathe korin.
I. 1. 1. as also the Midrash Coheleth, c. 1. teaching, that all past Miracles
shall be as nothing in comparison of the Miracles of the Messiah. Which being
the ancient Tradition of the Jews, founded in the promises of God, derived to
them in the prophesies of Scripture, which Scriptures were read to them every
Sabbath day; it is no wonder that the Jews did set their hearts on this way of
trial.

It remains to show, how Christ did answer their Expectation. Who as he was a
Prophet above all other Prophets, so his Miracles were far above all other
Miracles. Never any one did Miracles like him, even his Enemies being Judges;
no nor all that ever were before him according to their own computation. For
whereas all the Prophets before him, in three or four thousand years, did but
74 Miracles, besides Moses who did 76 if their reckoning v. Menasseh ben
Israel's Conciliator, Part. 1. Q. 11. in Deuteronomy.
were true; Our Savior alone in three or four years time at most, did more
than it was possible to keep account of; insomuch that as St. John says Joh.
xxi. 25.
in a proverbial expression, if they were all to be reckoned together, the
whole world could not contain the Books that should be written.

Whatsoever any man else did of this kind, whether Prophet or Apostle, he did
it by a borrowed and limited Power; which he could neither communicate to
others, nor exercise it himself, but by Gods especial appointment: but for
Christ, who had the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him; he did what he
pleased, and when he pleased, by himself, or by others, being determined by
nothing but by his own Goodness and Wisdom.

What part of the Creation, does not afford us an instance of his Power? who
had the blessed Angels at his call, and the damned Spirits subject to his will;
who commanded the seas and the winds and they obeyed him; who guided the Fishes
in the deep, which way he pleased; but especially for men, that were his
peculiar charge, he provided against all their necessities and wants, their
infirmities and miseries. He fed them by Miracle, he healed them by Miracle, of
sundry diseases which were otherwise incurable: of inveterate Dropsies and
Leprosies, of a Palsy of 38 years, of Blindness from ones birth; what could
one do more, but to raise men from the dead? and thus he did diverse,
particularly Lazarus who had lain four days buried in the grave.

And these things he effected, as well absent as present, in an instant as by
sensible degrees; by the applying of his hand, by the touch of his garment, by
the word of his mouth, by the motion of his will; to show that any means would
serve, that no means were necessary, that all times and places were alike, to
the Sovereign virtue that he employed in the working of his Miracles.

Which works being so evident testimonies of a Divine Authority, and being
designed for so universal a Benefit, it was necessary that they should be as
evidently and universally known. And this our Savior seems to have considered
in all his Miracles. If any of them were done Privately, which were but few in
comparison, he commanded them not to be spoken of, that there might be no
suspicion of Imposture. But for the generality of his works, he did them Openly
and publicly; before multitudes, or in throngs; at Feasts, or in Synagogues,
or in the streets, and in the open Sun; many of them in the Temple, and that at
Passover times, in the face of his watchful Enemies, and before a whole Nation
of witnesses.

This Miracle in my Text, was done in a Desert, but it was in the presence of
5000 persons; whom the Fame of Christ's works had drawn thither to observe him,
and therefore they could not well be surprised in the manner of it: nor could
they be deceived in the Action it self; for they saw, and felt, and tasted the
effects of it. He fully satisfied their hunger; and so far their hopes, that
they determined to look for no other Messiah; being assured that this was He,
This of a Truth is that Prophet that should come into the world.

I have done with the reason of their Judgment: and should next proceed to the
Use of it; but that I am sensible of an Objection in the way, which some have
started at this distance of time, to question the Judgment of that age, and to
promote the Infidelity of this. I am sorry there should be any cause to mention
it; that instead of carrying on the Building of God, and helping forward the
duty of Christian life, we must be put to answer those Atheists that stand
pecking at the Foundation. But we must be content, since God is pleased to
suffer it. It is a vicious World that we live in, and always so much Vice, so
much Unbelief. Perhaps too, we are not far from that time, of which Christ
says, when the Son of Man comes, Luk xviii. 8.
shall he find Faith upon the Earth? If so, we are not like to prevail much
against the Atheists. Howsoever we are bound to do our endeavor, and not to
leave their Arguments unanswered, though in effect we only leave their Persons
the more unexcusable.

Their Objection is, that these Evangelists being Christ's followers, might
boldly assert things for the honor of their Master and his Cause, which for
ought we know have been as stiffly denied by the Opposite parties. I propound
this Objection in behalf of a sort of men whose Invention is commonly better
then their Reading.

For whosoever is any whit skilled in Antiquity, must needs know, that the
Ground of this Objection is false; Jews, Heathens, Mahometans, as many as write
of this matter, do all confess, that our Savior did work Miracles. For the
Mahometans, v. Rycaut of the Ottoman Empire, l. 2. c. 2, 3.
they are but of yesterday, and know nothing: only this they say in general,
for the brutish proof of their sensual Religion; that as Christ came with
Miracles, so Mahomet came with the Sword. As for Jews and Heathens, who in
Christ's time, and after it, abounded with Writers and Learned men; there is no
reason to imagine, but if they had had any Color for it, they would as
fiercely have denied Christ's Miracles with their Pens, as they persecuted his
Followers with Fire and Sword. But seeing it was in vain to Deny those things,
which so many thousands knew to be true; and the memory of which, was
continually revived, by those fresh Miracles which the Primitive Christians
wrought in Christ's name: therefore either they chose to take no notice of them
at all in their Writings; or if they mentioned Christ's Miracles, they ascribed
them to Magic or Diabolical Causes. And what can one ask more of an Enemy, as
to matter of Fact; then that he should either speak out and confess it, or show
by his silence that he knows not how to deny it? No Jew can with reason deny
Christ's Miracles; since they are confessed by his own Talmud in diverse places,
specially In Aboda Zara.
in the 4th. Part, the 9th Book. Nor no Heathen could in Tertullian's or Justin
Martyr's days; unless those Learned men were monstrous silly and impudent, who
durst Justin M. in Apol. 2. Tertull. in Apol. c. 21. v. Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
tell their Emperors, they might find proofs of them in Pilat's Records which
were then at Rome. They were such irrefragable Proofs, that neither Jew nor
Heathen had any thing to say to them, but this, that they were done by Magic;
which may be said of any thing, and signifies just nothing: or, that they were
done by Evil Spirits, which will not serve the turn of our Atheist, who is as
unwilling to believe that there is a Devil, as that there is a God.

But (besides these Quotations, which it were easy to multiply, if it were so
proper for this place;) besides these, we have the greatest Assurance that in
reason can be wished for, of the truth of these Miracles. For what assurance can
be had at such a distance, concerning things done 1600 years ago? The best
that can be expected* is a History written by some credible Persons that lived
in those times. And such a History this is, or there is no such in the World.
For that it was written by them whose Names it bears, no Adversary ever
questioned, and all Christians have acknowledged, that have written from Age to
Age ever since. Nor is it questioned, that the things here written are the same
that were taught by the twelve Apostles: which Apostles our Savior took along
with him to be the constant Witnesses of all his actions; and they profess to
have been present with him at most of the things that are here Written. Men so
far from being suspected of any Deceit, that their Simplicity and Ignorance
has been their only Accusation. And that so many, such men, should conspire
together, to fain incredible things, and to impose them upon the faith of
Mankind: Why they should do this, without any Temptation of Honor, or Wealth,
or Preferment; nay with certain Assurance of persecution, and misery, and cruel
death, which their Master foretold them, and they looked for no other, and they
were not mistaken in this: How they durst Adventure such stories with such
Circumstances, of time, places, and persons, which they knew certainly would be
sifted, and might easily have been disproved, if they had not been true; all
this were as prodigiously strange in Them, as it would be now in Us, if we
should not believe them.

But say, it were possible that they might be deceived themselves in Christ's
Miracles, yet sure ^hey could not be so in his Resurrection; and think
whosoever believes his Resurrection, is much to blame if he doubts of any of
his Miracles. This being that Sign of the Prophet Io^as; which Christ said Mat.
xii. 39.
he would reserve to the ^ast place, to confound them that would not be
Convinced, and were therefore not worthy of any Other sign.

But what say they of his Resurrection? ^ews and Heathens say in the General,
that he was put to death. These Apostles tells us all ^he Particulars of it;
and say farther, that after ^hree days he Rose again from the dead. That ^e
showed himself Alive to them; First to one ^r two at a time, then to all the
twelve together, then to 500 of his followers at once, most of whom were alive
when these things were written: but especially to those twelve Apostles, he
showed himself by many Infallible proofs; being Seen of them, and Conversing
with them, for forty days; at the end whereof, being together with him upon
Mount Olivet, after much discourse they Beheld him taken up in a bright cloud,
which carried him out of their sight.

Now is it reasonable to imagine, that all these men, all this while, had no
use of their Reason, or had not so much as Common sense about them? For if that
Relation was false, then one of these things must be true: that either they
were besides their Senses when they believed this; or, they were out of their
Wits, when they affirmed it, and laid down their lives for the witnessing of
that which they did not believe. And what then shall we say to that world of
Christians, that Rendered themselves up to the belief of these men that had so
little Reason to believe themselves? It Is Prodigious to Think what I am about
to say: and yet think it one must, o^ he can be no Atheist; he must assent to
all this which I am about to say. That a poor Young man, of the Meanest birth
and breeding, of a most hateful Nation, and hated himself by that Nation, for
taking upon him to be a Prophet sent 'em from God, for which he was laid hold
of, and put to a bitter and most shameful Death. That after his death, a few
Fishermen and others, as Mean as himself in all Circumstances, should still
Proclaim that he was that Prophet: and confirm it with a Story of his
Resurrection, and with loud boasts of Miracles wrought by him and his
Followers, all which were utterly False; Promising all them that would believe
in him, nothing in this world but Affliction and cruel Death, which their own
Sufferings proved to be True: That such men, with no other Charms, should work
such a Faith, in all the Wisest part of Mankind; and that with so lasting an
Impression as Time has not been able to deface, no, nor Vice neither, which is
the thing that makes Them desire to deface it. That so Impregnable a Faith
should be bottomed on so foul an Imposture, (Pardon me great God that I lend
breath to their Blasphemies) it is a thing so prodigiously Incredible, that it
could never enter into any man's head, unless he were for his Lust's sake as
great a Monster of Credulity, as I have showed him, in other respects, to be a
very Monster of Unbelief.

I fear this Discourse may have been larger then the Occasion; nay I hope it
rather in this place; and would to God that it were wholly Superfluous, that
there were no more Unbelievers in This world, then there will be in the Other;
and then I am sure there would be Few enough.

But I have now done with Them, and am to speak to your selves; to You that
believe the holy Scriptures, and desire to make a profitable Use of 'em. And
the Use of this Scripture is, to observe what these men in my Text, did
according to Reason, and (allowing for the difference of Circumstances) to do
the same Thing our selves. Namely, if we have any Prophet yet to come, and the
promise of Miracles to know him by; then it is our Duty, when we see those
Miracles, to acknowledge that Prophet: but if we have no such Prophet to
expect, and no more Miracles to look for; then it behooves us to make much of
those Miracles, and that Prophet that we have already, and to look for No
other. This appears to be the natural consequence of my Text.

It has been proved, that Christ is that Prophet, of whom God has foretold us
from the beginning of the World: and this Prophet has told us, Mat. xxviii. 20.
Behold, I am with you to the end of the World.

But have we any other to look for? any other Prophet to come? any farther
Miracles to know him by? It should seem that we have: For Christ says words to
that purpose; and he says it not lightly, but he lays great weight upon it,
Behold, says he Mat. xxiv. 24, 25. Which Text is thus applied by the Fathers,
Chrysostom, Austin, etc.
I tell you of this before. There shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets,
and shall show great Signs and Wonders; insomuch that (if it were possible)
they shall deceive the very Elect. Particularly, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 9. That Son of
perdition; whose coming shall be after the working of Satan, with all power,
and Signs, and lying wonders. So likewise, 1 Timothy iv. 1. The Spirit speaks
expressly, that thus it shall be in the Latter times. All which things are
confirmed by other places of Scripture: and are applied by St. John to the
second Beast; that has horns like a Lamb, but speaks like a Dragon: Whose
Miracles are set forth, Rev. xiii. 13. and xvi. 14. and xix. 20. etc.

That the first Beast which St. John there describes with seven Heads, was the
Heathen, and Imperial Rome, I think all Interpreters do agree. Whether the
second Beast be the Papal Rome, it is not our business now to enquire, let them
see to it that are her Worshippers and Followers. But it is our business to
know whom to beware of; and Christ has warned us of some body that shall
pretend to Miracles, and we know of none, but the Papal Rome, that does pretend
to them. She makes it one of her Marks, and vaunts that she is to be known by
her Miracles.

But what then? did not Christ promise Miracles to his Church? and ought not
His Promise to be made good? It is most true, that he did promise, and that he
has performed, we have sufficient proofs of it, both in Scripture, and in the
Records of the Primitive Church. For it was necessary that our great Prophet
should be made known to us; as well in his Doctrine, as in his Person; that the
Christian Faith should be planted and settled by Miracles. But when this
Doctrine was written and published, and where this Faith was planted and
generally received; Then there was no such necessity; v. Ambros. in 1 Cor. xii.
in fine.
Then it was enough to say, thus it is written; which Writings were as
obligatory to all them that had received this Doctrine, as if they had been
preached to them severally by persons risen from the dead. Of which those
Fathers were so thoroughly satisfied that lived in those times, when most part
of the world was already converted; that they plainly professed, that now the
time of Miracles was at an end. They are few and rare now, if any, says
Chrysostom in Hom. 4. on Mat. There are more feigned ones amongst false
Christians, then true ones amongst the true; says the Author of the Imperfect
work, Hom. 49. It Is enough for Christians, that the old Miracles are read to
them, says St. Austin De Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 8, 9, 10.
; and for Heathens, that Miracles are yet done by us, though not so Frequently,
nor so Manifestly, as in former times.

Little did these good men think, that within some Ages after they were dead,
and in those places where there were no Heathens to convert, there should arise
a sect of Christians more abounding with Miracles in some one age, than were
ever seen in all ages of the world before: and the Reason is plain, for those
Fathers never dreamt of those new Doctrines and designs that would have need to
be ushered in and supported with new Miracles; nor of the wickedness of those
men that holp the Devil to invent them; nor of the gross ignorance of an
after-age, that fitted the people to receive 'em. All which things, had they
not conspired together, it had been Impossible for such monstrous Absurdities
to be imposed upon the Faith of so great a part of Mankind.

How could those strange Fictions of Purgatory have ever obtained; if men had
not been fooled into the belief of them, with pretended Visions, and
Revelations, and Apparions? Who could ever have been so Sottish, as to adore
the works of the Pencil, and the Chizzle; unless the dumb things themselves had
been made to move, and sweat, and talk, and weep for it? What Believer of the
true God would ever have stoopt to the Invocation of his fellow creatures? nay
to invocate them more then God, (for God is not so often prayed to, as the
Virgin Mary) but that these blessed Creatures themselves, as well as their
deluded worshippers, have been abused intolerably by the forgers of Miracles? I
shall instance but in one Doctrine more; I might do it in many, for there is
hardly any one of their upstart Doctrines, which has not been taught or
promoted this way; but this is the transcendent foppery of all, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. A Miracle it self they call it, in their Manual, which
teaches them to say thus at the Elevation; Oh Miracle! Oh the Goodness etc.
This is done by no Iugling, but in the open sight of all the lookers on. And
what do the Lookers on Discern? Do they see any visible change of the Elements?
no, not the least shadow of alteration: But what is it that they believe? a
Miracle? Nay, more than a Miracle, flat Impossibility and Contradiction. A
subject to be without accidents, and accidents without any subject. They
believe the same body to be at the same time in so many several places, and
whole in every place; in Heaven, upon Earth, both here, and at Rome, and in
both the Indies. Oh monstrous belief! had not this need to be supported with
Miracles? It was propagated by them, and Bellarmine de Sacram. Eucharistiae, l.
3. c. 8.
proves it by them, because some have seen the Host to bleed, others have seen
a Child in the place of it; and he tells us, that St. Anthony of Padua's horse
forsook his Oats to go and worship it.

I am sensible that these things are very ridiculous, and therefore I am
ashamed to mention any more of them. And yet, I hope, you will excuse us, if we
mention in our Sermons such things as have been the chief Arguments of theirs;
and such Arguments as their great Masters of Controversy despair not, that
some may possibly be fools enough to believe them. But if I should proceed into
their Legends and Lives; if I should spread before you the filth of those lewd
Romances; I should seem to have too little regard to this Place, and to this
Presence. They are stuffed with such absurd Tales, such idle and extravagant
Prodigies: as if the Devil had invented them in a wanton humor; being not
content to have affronted the true Miracles of God, and to have had his Will
upon the Doctrine of Christ; but he must insult also, and sport himself with
the Ignorance and Superstition of Men.

I cannot think of these things without some wonder at those men, who, knowing
that these things are written in their own Books, and that some of us are able
to Read them, can yet be so impudent as to revile and scoff at the
Reformation. That happy Recovery of Christian Religion! without which, their
old Tales would have been Gospel still; and the Cheat would have proceeded
farther still, and it is hard to imagine what a Monster, by this time,
Christianity would have grown. I know some of them say, that they themselves
are the better for it, which yet may be a very great Question. For though the
Crafts-men among them are grown more wary of late days, in showing of their
Tricks, and the Writers of them bring their Matters more within compass than
their Predecessors did: yet they can never wipe off the shame of their Old
doings, while they read Lessons in their Churches collected out of those
Legends; and while they Retain those Doctrines, (nay they make them part of
their Creed,) that owe, some their Being, and all their Reputation, to those
gross and palpable Impostures. For us, we have great cause to bless God for the
Reformation; which, like Christianity when it first appeared in the world, has
chased away these Demons and their Oracles from among us. I do not hear they
work any Miracles among us of late days; unless this be a Miracle, which I
think is no Wonder, that some persons, for some causes, are won over to so
corrupt a Religion. For our parts, we pretend to no new Miracles, nor have any
Occasion, while we content our selves with the old Doctrines, While we hold to
the Prophet that God has sent us, we may rest in those Miracles that He wrought
for us. God grant we may be wrought by 'em into a due Faith and Obedience.

First, we owe a duty of Faith to the Doctrines of our Prophet; to all that
have been taught by him and his Apostles, and are left written for us in the
Holy Scriptures. In which Scriptures, though there be many things hard to be
understood, which ignorant and unstable Souls wrest to their own Damnation: yet
all those things are Plainly delivered, which are Necessary for us to know.
Which were therefore collected by the Apostles into the Creed; and owned by the
Fathers under the name of the Apostolical Tradition: the Profession of which
was necessary for every man, at his Baptism, to make him a Christian; and was
sufficient for any man, that was Baptized, to be known by as a Member of the
Catholic Church.

This is the Tradition, not of one or two, but of all Ages: This is the Faith,
not of this or that, but of all Churches: as far as Christianity goes, it is
the same Faith and Tradition still. This has the seal of God to it, in all the
Miracles of Christ, and of his Apostles, and of the Primitive Christians.
Whosoever Adds to it, or Varies from it, (especially if he pretend to Miracles,
of which the Scripture has forewarned us,) we are bound to defy both Him and
his Doctrines. If we hold our selves close to this Faith, and if This should
happen to deceive us; what have we to say? but with St. Victor, Oh Lord, it is
thou that have deceived us; Thou have given such plain Demonstrations, such
visible Testimonies, of thy Almighty hand to it; that if This should be false,
we know not what can be true. For there is no possible way of certainty of
things removed from bodily sense, no way to make any thing surer to our belief;
then that is, by which we are made sure of this, that this Faith, this
Christian Doctrine, was taught by that Prophet that was sent from God.

Lastly, we owe the duty of Obedience to his Precepts, to those Rules of life
which he has given us in the name of God. Rules that, like their Author, are
full of Justice and Goodness; then which nothing can be more fitly contrived,
to make us live happily here in This world, and to prepare us for a Better life
in the world to come. Nor do they provide only for the Private, but also for
the Public. They both Direct and Secure every man in his own proper Station.
So that he were neither a Friend to Himself, nor a Lover of humane Society,
that should not heartily submit to these Laws; though he were led to it by no
other consideration, but that of their own Goodness and Utility.

But withal when we consider, from what hand they come; and by whom, and in
what manner they were sent: how can we acquit our selves, in the breach of
these Laws, of the highest Ingratitude and Rebellion against Almighty God? That
good God, that has been pleased to require nothing of us, but such things as of
themselves are truly best for us; and yet, as if that were not enough to oblige
us, has recommended 'em by such a Prophet, and confirmed them to us by
undeniable Testimonies. Unless we Obey these Laws, what can we expect from Him?
what Ought we to think of our selves? If the Jews, out of a misunderstanding of
God's Counsel, did oppose and reject it; If that whole Generation of men were
overwhelmed with such Calamities, as no other Nation ever felt, no other Age
ever knew; If their whole Posterity were sent wandering about the World, to make
us fear that great God that has sent these Examples to our doors: How shall We
ever hope to escape, if we neglect so great a Salvation as is now offered to
us? What Examples may God make of us in This World? What Judgments must we look
for in the Other? What Penalties, what measure of Wrath, can be too much for
such ungrateful Wretches, such Rebels against the Supreme Majesty of God?

I beseech you pardon me this great Vehemence, if any degree of Vehemence can
need pardon, in the pressing of things that so infinitely concern you. That
these things do so, we shall be more sensible hereafter. It is but a little
while; and He that is now our Prophet, shall come to be our Judge, and shall
call us to a strict Account before him. Then will the Observation of his Laws
be a Comfort and a Joy: Then will the Neglect of them cause Horror and
Desperation. 'Twill be a restless Grief to reflect, how easily we were won to
Neglect them; how easily we might have Observed them. We have yet the
Opportunity before us. Good God give us Hearts to Consider it: Now in this time
of Advent, so to remember the First coming of thy Son, when He came to be our
Prophet; that we may be prepared, and ready for his Second coming, when He
shall come to be our Judge. To whom, etc.

THE END.

