A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN
Late Lord Bishop of Chester.

At the Guildhall Chapel, LONDON, On Thursday the 12th of December, 1672.

By William Lloyd, D. D.

Dean of Bangor, and one of His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON: Printed for Charles Brom. School.

HEB. XIII. 7. Remember them which have the Rule over you, who have spoken to
you the Word of God, whose Faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation.
IN handling this Text of holy Scripture, that we may mingle nothing of Human
Affections, that our Passions may give no Interruption to you in hearing, or to
me in speaking; I should desire to suppress them quite, if it were possible.
And possible it is, where they are slightly raised, as upon common and ordinary
occasions: But where they are grounded and strong, where they dare argue, and
seem to have Reason on their side, as there is too much in sight for ours;
there, I think, it is in vain to endeavor it: The only way in this case, is to
give them some kind of Vent, to discharge them in part, and to govern what
remains of the Affections.

You will, I hope, the rather bear with my Infirmity, that I cannot contain
from deploring the Loss, the irreparable Loss that we suffer, I think all
suffer, in the Death of this Eminent Person. He was the Man in whom his Friends
had experience of much good, and had hopes of much more; not so much for his
greatness or power, as abstracting from these, for what they found in himself,
which was a great and manifold Blessing to all that lived within his
conversation. He was a Father, a Counselor, a Comforter, a Helper, a sure
Friend: He was all they could wish in every Relation, and by the course of
Nature, might have been for many years. But for our sins, (though for his
unspeakable advantage) the great and wise God was not pleased to continue that
Blessing; He took him out of this World, when for ought we could judge, there
was most need of such men to live in it; and when we had much reason by expect
more good than ever by his living in it.

Oh the Unsearchable ways and Counsels of God! Oh the Blindness of Human hopes
and expectations! While we please our selves with the good we have in hand,
while we reach out for more, as if there would never be an end, within a few
days all withers, all vanishes to This: We have nothing left, but what it
grieves us to see; We have nothing remains, but what we are willing to be rid
of, a poor shell of earth, that we make haste to bury out of our sight.

Yes; of wise and good men, which is their Privilege above others, there
remains after Death, a Memory, an Example which they leave behind them, as a
sacred Depositum for us to keep and use until we see them again. Are these
things Nothing in our sight? They are above all price in the sight of God; who,
that they may be so to us, both tells us the worth, and recommends them to
our esteem, and requires the fruit of them in many places of Scripture. But in
none with more Application our present Occasion, than in my Text. I shall
sufficiently Justify my choice of it, if I can but make it be understood: I
shall show the full Import of it, in those duties which it contains: I shall
endeavor to stir you up to practice them with respect to this present Occasion.

First, For the understanding of my Text, we are to look for no help from what
goes next before it, or after it: For the whole business of it is contained
within it self. It lies in the heap among other directions, which without any
certain connection between them, were given by the Writer of this Epistle to the
Hebrews, that is, to those Jews who were converted to be Christians.

For the time when it was written, we are certain of this, that it was while
Timothy lived; for he is mentioned as living in the 24th Verse of this Chapter.
And he being there said to have suffered Imprisonment for the Gospel, this
brings us a little nearer to the knowledge of the time. For then it must be
after both St. Paul's Epistles to Timothy. In the last of those Epistles, which
was some years after the other, St. Paul speaks much of his own Imprisonment
for the Gospel: He warns Timothy often, that he must suffer for the Gospel: He
instructs him what to do when God shall call him to suffer. Not a word of any
thing that he had suffered already: Nay, he counsels him as a young man that
had never been tried. He invites him to Rome, which was the great place of
trial; in which place, as it appears in the close of this Chapter, Timothy did
suffer that Imprisonment for the Gospel, from which he was delivered, when this
Epistle was written. It appears, that after the Epistle to Timothy, how long
after we know not, he did go to Rome, as Paul willed him. How long he staid
there we know not, e're he did suffer Imprisonment. How long he was in Prison,
we know not, e're he was set at liberty. Only we know, it was a considerable
time, we have reason to think it might be some years; it might be many years
that this Epistle was written after the second Epistle to Timothy.

And if so, then it was written, not only as Theodoret says, long after the
death of James the Brother of John: But account it how you will, this Epistle
was written, after the death of James the Brother of our Lord. Which James
being the first Bishop of Jerusalem, and the other James an Apostle, that is, a
Bishop at large, and both these being put to death at Jerusalem; Not to search
into Church History for those others of their Order, who died before this time
in other places; nor to guess how many others were dead, that are not recorded
in Church History: If we think of no more but these two eminent servants of
Christ, we cannot be to seek of the understanding of this Text, nor of the
application to our particular purpose. I say not, but it may have a more
general extent. There is a memory due, not only to the Apostles of Christ, and
to the Bishops their Successors; but to all other good Ministers of Christ, yea
to all other exemplary Christians. But if the Apostle had meant this only of
Bishops, I cannot guess that he would have it expressed otherwise, than he has
done in my Text.

To prove this, I must have recourse to the Original, and not wholly depend
upon our English Translation. For that he meant this of Bishops, it appears not
sufficiently, and of them being dead, not at all, in our Translation. And yet
from the Original, I see see no reason to doubt, that our Apostle in this Text,
meant no other but Bishops, and those departed this life.

For the Order of Bishops, it is described by those act of Ruling and Teaching,
in the words of our Translation; but it is much more expressly by the word (...)
in the Original. For the meaning of which word, to whom should we resort, but
either to the Greeks, in whose Language; or to the Jews, for whose immediate
use this was written? Among the Greeks (...) is a general word, it signifies
Rulers Ecclesiastical or Civil. In this Verse they take it for Ecclesiastical
Rulers: So Chrysostom on my Text; and Oecumenious, (...), the Apostle speaks of
Bishops in this Verse. If the Jews would say so too, what could we have more?
They do say it, as much as we have reason to expect. In their Traditional
Language they call one of our Bishops (...), which in effect is the word in my
Text. So then we have the consent both of Greeks and of Hebrews, that is, of
them who had most reason to know the meaning of the word, that Bishops are
meant by the word (...) in my Text.

That the Apostle here speaks not of Living, but of Dead Bishops: Of them that
Had the Rule before that time, though it is rendered, that Have, in our
Translation; it appears by other words in my Text. Remember them, says the
Apostle: What, those that are present? They are not the objects of Memory, but
of Sense. Remember (...), the good Bishops you have had: (...), them that have
spoken to you, that have spoken their last, and shall speak no more in this
world: (...), considering, looking back, or looking up to (...), the end of
their conversation. (...) signifies the whole course of this life, (...) is the
end or period of it. Look back, says the Apostle, to your Bishops deceased,
consider their end, or Exit, or going out of this world.

To confirm this, if any doubt, I shall desire him to compare this Verse with
the 17th of this Chapter. In both Verses the Apostle speaks of the (...), that
is, of Bishops, as I have interpreted and proved. In the 17th he shows our duty
to the living, Obey them, says the Apostle, and Submit your selves, for they
watch for your souls. In this Verse he shows our duty to Bishops deceased;
Remember them, and follow their Faith, considering the end of their
conversation.

I think no more needs to be said, to show the scope of my Text, and how
applicable it is to our present Occasion. It being clear that the Apostle
speaks here of Bishops, and of them being departed this life.

I now proceed to the duties required at our hands; (...) and (...), Remember
and Imitate.

First, Remember. It Is a natural desire that men have, to be remembered when
they are dead. We do not find it is so in any other creature: They desire to
live as long as they can; but for ought we can judge by any Indication, they
have no regard to what shall come after. The reason is plain, for their Being
determines with their life. But for man, among many other tokens of
Immortality, he has by secret Instinct, a Natural desire to be thought of, and
spoken of in aftertimes. We see this, not only in them that are inflamed with
the hope of a Future life; but even in those, that, for ought appears to us,
know or think little of any more but the Present.

What else made the Egyptian Kings lay out their wealth on Pyramids, and the
like stupendous Buildings? What moved the old Greeks and the Romans, with so
much care and expense to leave Statues and other Monuments, with Inscriptions
of their names? What meant those in the unlettered Nations, by the much harder
shifts they have made to convey any thing of themselves to Posterity? I need
not seek for instances of this in remote Times and Countries, when we see it is
so frequent in our Age, and perhaps no where more than in the City; for men of
design, that think long beforehand, above all other things, to provide for this
kind of Immortality. Some venture their lives, others wear out themselves, they
do and suffer any thing to get Estates: Not for themselves, that might be
happier without them; nor so much for their known Heirs, whom they load with
Entails, as for men whom they know not, but only hope they will be in
aftertimes. For their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for
ever, and their dewlling place to all generations: they call their lands by
their own names. This their way is their folly, and those that see it are such
fools to take after them, says David, Psalm 49.11.

But if this design take, it must be in spite of God, who has declared it
shall not do. He will thwart wicked men. They that provide not for the true
Immortality, shall lose their design in this shadow of it. Either their name
shall be forgotten; God has threatened he will cut it off, he will blot it out,
their memory shall perish with them: Or if it survive, it shall be to their
shame, their name shall rot, Prove. 10.7. What they build for fame, shall be
like Absolom's Pillar, which remains to this day; but the passers by throw
stones at it, in detestation of his Memory: Such is gererally, though not
always, the curse of God that pursues wicked men.

Whereas contrariwise, it is the Promise of God to the Just, that they shall
always be had in remembrance, Psalm. 112.6. And that their memory shall be
blessed as far as known, Prove. 10.7. Promises which, as all other of Temporal
things, arr to be understood with reservation to the Divine Economy, to that
wisdom of God which orders all things in the Government of the world. It
becomes not the Majesty of him that governs all things, to break his course,
and to work Miracles upon every particular occasion. It Is enough that he
generally provideth that the same thing may be done otherwise, and declares it
to those by whom it ought to be done. If they do it not, if there be a failure
in them; his Promises is not void, his word is not broken, since it was given
with that condition: Which being not performed by them that were to have done
it, he can make reparation to those that suffer by it; yea, he has done it
already in this, that he has given them that which this typifies. And what if
they fall short of the shadow, when they have the substance, in a better and
true Immortality?

The mean while we see what is required on our parts. As the servants of God,
out of that store which he has given us, We are to pay what he has promised
good men. It Is that which all naturally desire, but wicked men shall not
attain; only to the just, God has promised that we shall remember them, and he
commands that we should do it, especially for good Bishops departed this life.

Our remembrance of them does not differ in kind, but in degree, from what we
owe to the memory of others. It Is a Duty we are to pay them above others, in
our Thoughts, in our Affections, in our Words, and in our Actions and Lives.

First, In our Thoughts; it is not a simple remembrance that God requires; for
that being an act of the sensitive soul, as I conceive, does not directly fall
under precept. For it is not in our power to remember or forget, either what or
when we please. But it is in our power to do those acts which conduce to the
exciting, or to the helping of our memory. This is that which God requires at
our hands, that we should endeavor to turn our minds toward such objects, and
contemplate in them the gifts and graces of God: That as often as we think of
them we should acknowledge that good which was in them, and which we have
received by their means: That we should pay them that honorable esteem which
we owe to our spiritual Parents and Benefactors.

If we think upon them heartily in this manner, it will work something upon our
Affections. We cannot but be sensible of the want of such men, and therefore
grieved for our loss, when they are taken from us; as the Asian Bishops were at
those words of St. Paul, when he said, they should see his face no more. Though
God intended it for their gain, whom he takes to himself, and he takes them in
that time, which suits best with their Circumstances: Yet even then, we have
cause to grieve for our selves, and for the presence and use of such men. How
much more, when for ought we know, they are taken away for our sins? When for
ought we know, it was because the age was not worthy of them? For ought we
know, it is in order to some Judgment of God, which will come the sooner when
they are gone, when we have filled up the measure of our iniquities?

When Elijah was taken away in a very evil age, Elisha cried out, O my Father,
my Father, the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel! What will become of Israel now
thou art gone? We dare not think so highly of any one man. We have no such
cause to despond of our Nation. When it is bad, we are to do our parts to make
it better, to pray that God would send more Laborers into his Harvest, that he
would double his gifts and blessings on those that are left.

And for those we have lost, we must resign them to God; both acknowledging his
bounty in giving them to us, and submitting to his Will, in taking them to
himself. So St. Bernard on the death of his Brother Gerard, Lord, says he, thou
have given, and thou have taken away; though we grieve that thou have taken
away, yet we cannot forget that thou did give him. Yea, we owe not only
submission to God, but thankfulness too for their sakes who are delivered by
this means from so great and such manifold evils, as continually hover about us
in this life. From sickness and pain, from labor and danger, from sorrow, and
fear, and care, and what not? Being delivered from Sin which is the Cause, and
from that Flesh which is the Center of all this.

They are past all evils else, that have overcome Death: They leave sorrow to
us, who call our selves the living: Their life, the only true life, is
immutable Joy, eternal Rest, Peace, and Felicity.

Which if we seriously believe, if we desire to be with them, we cannot sorrow
for our loss, without joy for their gain, and thanksgiving on their behalf, to
that good God, who has given them the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

But thus much we owe upon the death of every true Christian, though of never so
mean a rank and condition. We are to be thankful to God for his mercies, and to
profess it, as we are taught in the Offices of our Church: which have the same
words of burial for the meanest of our Communion, as for those that are highest
in their Graces and Gifts.

But there is a remembrance in Words that is due to these, and not to the
other; namely, the due praise of those their excellent Graces and Gifts; which
though they have not of themselves, but through the bounty and liberality of
God, who is therefore to be chiefly respected and glorified in all the praise
that we give to his creatures: Yet since he is pleased to do them this honor
above others, and to make choice of them whom he so dignifies; we are bound to
allow it them; we are to follow God's choice, to give them praise whom he has
so qualified for it. Only with this care, that we do it truly, not to flatter
the dead; and profitably, for the example and imitation of the living.

We have so much reason to do this, that they who had only reason to guide
them, the Gentiles, upon the death of any eminent persons, had Orations made
publicly in their praise. The Jews, without any particular Law for it, had
honor done to the Memory of Worthy persons at their Funerals, 2 Chronicles. 32.
ult. The Rites of it are partly described, 2 Chronicles. 16.14. They laid their dead
in a bed full of the richest perfumes, which also were publicly burnt at the
Interment. To which I conceive the Preacher alludes, Eccles. 7.1. where he
says, A good name is better than precious ointment, and the day of ones death
than the day of ones birth.

When one comes into the World, none knows how he may prove; if he do well in
it, he goes out with this public testimony. After which the Jews never
mentioned such Persons without a blessing on their memory.

But above all others, the Primitive Christians were very observant this way.
They saw it was the Will of their Lord and Master, That the good work which was
done upon him by Mary, should be kept in perpetual memory, and is therefore
recorded in the Gospel. They saw how the works of Dorcas were shown at her
death; the Coats and Garments which she made for the poor. They saw what need
there was of great Incentives in those days, when Christianity was a most
dangerous Profession. It is of no small force to make men love a Religion, when
they see it infuses excellent Principles, that it excites so suitable
Practices, that it is proof against suffering and death. And the experience of
that power it has in some, provokes and animates others to the same.

Upon these and the like considerations, and perhaps with allusion to that
Text, where St. John is said to have seen the souls of the Martyrs under the
Altar; They had their Memorias Martyrum, their places of Worship where they
placed the Altars over the bodies of their Martyrs. What, with any intention to
worship the Martyrs? It was so suggested by the Adversaries, and as vehemently
denied by the Christians of those times. By those of Smyrna, in the undoubted
acts of Polycarpus: We cannot (say they) worship any other than Christ; We love
the Martyrs as being followers of Christ; We celebrate the days of their
passions with Joy; We do it both in remembrance of those Champions of God, and
to train up and prepare others for the like conflicts.

Besides this, which was peculiar to the Martyrs, the had a lower degree of
remembrance, for Bishops and Confessors, and all other eminent persons departed
this life: Whom they not only praised in Orations at their Funerals, but writ
their names in their Diptychs, or two-leav'd Records, which contain in one page
all the names of the Living; in the other, the Dead that were of note in the
Church.

All these were recited in the Communion-Service. Where, as the Living for
themselves; so for the Dead, came their Friends, and gave Oblations and Alms.
Which, before they were distributed among the poor, were first offered up to
God in a prayer, like that which we use for the Church Militant here on Earth.
These Doles were their only Sacrifices for the dead: Only Alms to the poor,
with which sacrifices God is well-pleased. And their prayers were not for any
deliverance from pains; unless the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and the Apostles,
and Virgin Mother of Christ, were in the same pains too, and needs the same
Deliverance: For they were all mentioned alike, and together, as it is to be
seen in the ancientest Liturgies.

Among all these Innocent Offices, and Rites of the Primitive Christians, was
there any thing of prayer for Souls in Purgatory? Was there any thing of prayer
to Saints departed this life? Was there any foundations for those Superstitious
Observances, of adoring their Relics, of Prostration to their Images, of
Pilgrimage to their Shrines, of making Vows, of saying Masses, of Offering to
them, and the like? The Papists say there was, they plead the practice of the
Church for it, they wrest places of Scripture to their purpose. Nay, the
Rhemists and others, allege this very Text, without which I should not have
mentioned them at this time.

But as the Learnedest men among themselves have been so just not to charge
this upon my Text, and some of them confess they have no ground for these
things in any one Text of Canonical Scripture: So they would do us but right to
acknowledge, That none of these things were practiced for some hundreds of
years after Christianity came into the world.

In those Primitive times all their Offices for the Dead, were, either to give
Testimony of that Faith in which they died, and that death had not dissolved,
their Communion with the Living: Or they were to bless God for their holy Life,
and happy death: Or to pray to him, not for their deliverance from Purgatory,
of which there was no Faith in those times; but for the Increase of that Good
which they believed them to be possessed of already, or for the Attainment of
that farther good which they thought they were sure of, namely, for their
speedy and happy Resurrection, for their perfect discharge at the day of
Judgment, for the Consummation of their bliss with their own in the Kingdom of
Glory.

Not to say how the Fathers differ among themselves in these particulars; or
how many of these particulars are omitted in the Roman Church as well as ours;
it is enough that here is nothing makes for them, but much against those their
Errors and Corruptions. All that is agreed on all hands, or that we find in the
Practice of the first Ages, being sufficiently contained in those Offices of
our Church; in the Prayer for the Church-Militant, in the Collect on all
All Saints day, and in the Office for the Burial of the Dead; where we pray,
That it would please God of his gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish the
number of his Elect, and to hasten his Kingdom, that we, with all those that
are departed in the true faith of his holy Name, may have our perfect
consummation and bliss, both in body and soul, in his everlasting glory.

Lastly, Remembrance in Action is the other duty enjoined in my Text, (...),
Imitate their Faith, that is, their Christian profession and practice, their
whole Life and Conversation, according to their own belief of that word which
they have spoken.

The Reason of this duty is plain: For it is our business in this world to
recover the Image of God in which he created us: to be like him here in
Righteousness and Holiness, that we may be like him hereafter in Glory and
Happiness.

To this End, God has given us those Lineaments of himself, which are written
sufficiently in our Nature, but more fully and distinctly in Scripture. In
which Scripture, he so often and so vehemently requires us, Be ye Holy, as I am
Holy; be ye Just, as I am Just; be ye Merciful, as I am Merciful; be ye Pure,
as I am Pure; be ye Perfect, as your heavenly Father is Perfect.

This good Word of God, which was given by the Prophets and Apostles, is still
inculcated on us by them that speak to us the Word of God. Which Office being
primarily of Bishops, as appears in my Text, They are first and above all
others to conform themselves to it, to show others how possible and how
practicable it is.

Our Apostle supposed this in those Primitive Bishops in my Text. God requires
it of all that succeed them in the Church. So of Timothy, though he were young
in Age, yet being in that Place, Be thou an Example to believers in word, in
conversation, in spirit, in faith, in truth, 1 Timothy 4.12. and in the last
Verse, Take heed to thy Self, and to thy Doctrine: Do this constantly and
continually, and so thou shall save both thy self and them that hear thee.

Whether they do this or no, they are our Teachers and Rulers; therefore in the
17th Verse of this Chapter, while they live, we must obey their Word, and
submit to their Government. When they are dead, both for what they are, and
were, we may do well to say no ill of them; and since we can say no good, even
forget them, and leave them to God.

But if they are such as they ought, which the Apostle supposes in my Text, if
they live as men that believe themselves what they say: It Is our duty not only
to submit and obey them while they live; but also to Remember them when they
are dead: Remember them in our thoughts, with that honor they deserve: In our
Affections, with a due sense of our loss, and their gain: Remember them in
words, with the just praise of their actions and lives: In our prayers to God,
with due thankfulness for their graces and gifts in this life, and for the
glory they receive after death: Lastly, Remember to follow them in that holy
way, which leads to so happy an end: In our Apostle's words, follow their
Faith, considering the event, the blessed end of their good conversation.

What my Text says in general of Bishops deceased, it is most easy to apply. I
know it has been done all this while, by them that knew the virtuous and great
Mind that lately dwelt in this Body. They know the truth of all I shall say,
and much more that might be said in his just Commendation. But the little I can
bring within the time I have left, being said from many years experience, will
at least stir up those that knew him not, to enquire; and if they find these
things true, they know their duty of Remembrance and Imitation.

I shall not be minute, in drawing all I say under these heads: For I speak to
them that can distinguish, and sort things, as they belong to the one, or to
the other.

To begin with the Natural endowments of his Mind; I cannot think of him
without just refection upon that Paradox, of the Equality of Souls. He was
surely a great Instance to the contrary, having that largeness of Soul in every
respect, which was much above the rate of ordinary men. He had an Understanding
that extended to all parts of useful Learning and Knowledge; a Will always
disposed to Great, and Public, and Generous things. He had a natural aversion
from all idle speculations, and from the eager pursuit of small and frivolous
designs. In great matters he judged so well, that he was not usually surprised
with events. He pursued his intentions with such equalness of mind, that he was
never carried beyond the calmness of his Natural Temper, except through his
Zeal for Public Good, or where his Friend was concerned.

What he was in his Studied, I have reason to know, that have often been tired
with studying with him. He was indefatigable, and would have worn himself out,
if he had not been relieved with multiplicity of business. However, he impaired
by it, a Body which seemed to have been built for a long Age, and contracted
those Infirmities that hastened his Death.

The effect of his Studies, in his Preaching and Writings, are sufficiently
known, and would have been much more, if God had given him time.

As for his Preaching, it was sometimes famous near this place, though he
sought rather the profit, than the praise of his hearers. He spoke solid truth,
with as little show of Art as was possible. He expressed all things in their true
and natural colors; with that aptness and plainness of Speech, that grave
natural way of Elocution, that showed he had no design upon his hearers. His
plainness was best for the instruction of the simple; and for the better sort,
who were in truth an Intelligent Auditory, it was enough that they might see he
had no mind to deceive them. He applied himself rather to their Understanding
than Affections. He saw so much of the beauty of Goodness himself, that he
thought the bare showing of it was enough to make all wise men, as it did him,
to be in love with it.

In his Writings he was judicious and plain, like one that valued not the
circumstances so much as the substance. And he showed it on whatsoever Argument
he undertook; sometimes beating out new untravell'd ways, sometimes repairing
those that had been beaten already: No Subject he handled, but I dare say is
the better for him; and will be the easier for them that come after him.

If in these he went sometimes beside his Profession, it was in following the
Design of it, to make men wiser and better, which I think is the business of
Universal Knowledge. And this he promoted with much zeal and sincerity, in hope
of the great Benefit that may accrue to Mankind.

It was his aim, as in all things, so especially in that which, I conceive, is
much more censured than understood; I mean, in the design of the Royal Society.
He joined himself to it with no other end, but to promote Modern knowledge,
without any contempt or lessening of those great men in former times. With due
honor to whom, he thought it lawful for others to do that which, we have no
reason to doubt, they themselves would have done if they were living.

I would not seem to excuse that which deserves commendation and
encouragement; or to commend other things for want of Subject in him. Therefore
leaving this Theme in better hands, I proceed next to speak of his Virtues and
Graces; and these the rather, as being both to be remembered and followed.

And in speaking of these, where shall I begin? Nay, When shall I end, if I say
all that may be spoken? I think it not worth while to speak of those that are
Vulgar, though he had them also in no common degree: Nor would I seem to make
any Virtue a Propriety. But there are those which are not common to many, and
were generally acknowledged to be in him; though they appeared not so to some
other men, as they did to those that intimately knew him.

His Prudence was great, I think it seldom failed in any thing to which he
applied himself. And yet he wanted that part, which some hold to be essential;
he so wanted Dissimulation, that he had rather too much openness of heart. It
was Sincerity indeed that was Natural to him; he so abhorred a Lie, that he was
not at all for show; he could not put on any thing that looked like it. And
presuming the same of other men, through excess of Benignity, he would be
sometimes deceived, in believing they were what they seemed to be, and what he
knew they ought to have been.

His greatness of Mind was known to all that knew any thing of him. He neither
eagerly sought any Dignity, nor declined any Capapacity of doing good. He
looked down upon Wealth, as much as others admire it. He knew the use of an
Estate, but did not covet it. What he yearly received of the Church, he
bestowed in its Service. As for his Temporal Estate, being secured against
Want, he sought no farther, he set up his Rest; I have heard him say often, I
will be no Richer; and I think he was as good as his word.

As for Revenge, how could it enter into the Breast of him that hated nothing
but that which makes us hateful to God? I say not but he had a sense of
Personal Injuries; and especially of those that reflected upon his Name, when
they proceeded from those that had good Names of their own. What others said,
he despised; but by those he would often wish he had been better understood:
That he was not, he bore as his Misfortune; he would not requite them with the
like, but mentioned them with all due Respect, and was always ready to oblige
them, and to do them good.

Yet it was not so desirable (I say not to be his Enemy, for He did not account
them so, but) to be at those terms with him, as to be his Acquaintance or
Friend. They that were never so little familiar with him, could not but find as
well Benefit as Delight in his Conversation. His Discourse was commonly of
useful things; it never caused trouble or weariness of the Hearer. Yet he would
venture to displease one for his good; and indeed he was the man that ever I
knew, for that most needful and least practiced point of Friendship. He would
not spare to give seasonable Reproof, and wholesome Advice, when he saw
occasion. I never knew any that would do it so freely, and that knew how to
manage that freedom of speech so inoffensively.

It was his way of Friendship, not so much to oblige men, as to do them good.
He did this not slightly and superficially, but like one that made it his
business. He durst do for his Friend any thing that was honest, and no more. He
would undertake nothing but what well became him, and then he was unwearied
till he had effected it.

As he concerned himself for his Friend in all other respects, so especially in
that which went nearest to him of all earthly concernments. He would not suffer
any Blot to be thrown or to lie upon his Friend's Good Name or his Memory. And
that Office I am obliged to requite, in giving some account of that which has
been spoken by some to his disadvantage.

I shall neglect, for he did so, any frivolous Reports; but that which seems to
have any weight in it, as far as I have observed, is, That he had not that Zeal
for the Church, that they would seem to have that object this. He seemed to
look upon the Dissenters with too much Favor to their Persons and Ways.

As to the Persons: No doubt that Goodness of Nature, that true Christian
Principle, which made him willing to think well of all men, and to do good, or
at least no hurt to any, might and ought to extend it self to them among
others. But besides, he was inclined to it by his Education under his
Grandfather Mr. Dod, a truly Pious and Learned Man; who yet was a Dissenter
himself in some things.

Not that he had any delight in contradiction, or could find in his heart to
disturb the Peace of the Church for those matters. He was so far from it, that
as I have frequently heard from this his Grandchild and others, when some
thought their Dissents ground enough for a War, he declared himself against it,
and confirmed others in their Allegiance: He professed to the last a just
hatred of that horrid Rebellion. Now his Relation to this Man, and Conversation
with those of his Principles, might incline him to hope the like of others of
that Way. And when he found them farther off from the Unity of the Church, he
might possibly overdo, through the Vehemence of his desire to bring them off of
their Prejudices, and to reduce them to the Unity of the Church, in which his
Grandfather lived and died: Why might he not hope the same of other Dissenters?

As for himself, he was so far from Approving their ways, that in the worst of
times, when one here present bewailed to him the Calamities of the Church, and
declared his Obedience even then to the Laws of it: He encouraged him in it, he
desired his Friendship, and protected both him and many others, by an Interest
that he had gained, and made use of chiefly for such purposes.

How he demeaned himself then, is known in both Universities; where he governed
with Praise, and left a very grateful Remembrance behind him. How in the next
Times since, I cannot speak in a better Place. And when I have named this City,
and the two Universities, I think he could not be placed in a better Light in
this Nation. There were enough that could judge, and he did not use to disguise
himself; I appeal to you that conversed with him in those days, What Zeal he
has expressed for the Faith, and for the Unity of the Church: How he stood up
in defense of the Order and Government: How he has asserted the Liturgy, and
the Rites of it: He conformed himself to every thing that was commanded. Beyond
which, for any man to be vehement in little and unnecessary things, whether for
or against them, he could not but dislike; and as his free manner was, he has
often been heard to call it Fanaticalness. How this might be represented I know
not, or how his design of Comprehension might be understood.

Sure I am, that since he came into the Government of the Church, to which he
was called in his Absence, he so well became the Order, that it out-did the
expectation of all that did not very well know him. He filled his Place with a
Goodness answerable to the rest of his Life; and with a Prudence above it,
considering the two Extremes, which were nowhere so much as in his Diocese.
Though he was as before, very tender to those that differed from him; yet he
was, as before, exactly conformable himself, and brought others to Conformity,
some Eminent men in his Diocese. He endeavored to bring in all that came
within his reach, and might have had great success, if God had pleased to
continue him.

But having given full proof of his intentions and desires, it pleased God to
reserve the fruit for other hands, from which we have great cause to expect
much good to the Church.

He was in perfect Health in all other respects; when a known Infirmity, from
an unknown cause, that had been easier to cure, than it was to discover, stole
upon him, and soon became incurable.

He was for many days in a prospect of Death, which he saw as it approached,
and felt it come on by degrees. Some days before he died, he found within
himself, as he often said, a Sentence of Death. In all this time, first of
Pain, then of dreadful Apprehensions, at last in the presence of Death, Who
ever saw him dismayed? Who ever found him surprised? Or heard a word from him,
unbecoming a wise man, and a true Christian? It was my infelicity to be so
engaged, that I could not duly attend him; and so deceived with vain hopes,
that I believed him not dying, till he was dead. But at the times I was with
him, I saw great cause to admire his Faith toward God, his Zeal for his
Church, his Constancy of Mind, his Contempt of the World, and his Cheerful
hopes of Eternity. I have heard much more upon these heads, from those that
were with him. Some of you may have heard other things from other men. It has
been the way of our Adversaries to entitle themselves to dying men, even those,
whose whole life was a Testimony against them. Thus, after the Death of our
Famous Jewel, the Papists were pleased to say, he dyed of their Religion.
Militiere has ventured to insinuate the same, of our late King, of blessed and
glorious Memory. Men's Tongues and Pens are their own, but least they should
abuse them and you, and the Memory of this worthy Prelate, as they have abused
others, (though nothing needs to be said to such groundless Calumnies) I
declare, and that upon most certain grounds, That he died in the Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Communion of the Church of England, as it is by
Law established.

He died only too soon for the Church, and so his Friends: But for himself he
had lived long enough. He has lived long enough that dies well. For whatsoever
he wants of that which we call Time, it is added, though it adds nothing to
Eternity.

As for us that are now to try how we can bear the want of those many blessings
we enjoyed in him, What shall we say? We must submit to the Will of God. Our
Comfort is, that we shall follow, and come together again in due time. Till
when, Farewell, pious and virtuous Soul, Farewell, great and excellent Man,
Farewell, worthy Prelate and faithful Friend! We have thy Memory and Example,
Thou have our Praises and out Tears. While thy Memory lives in our Breasts, may
thy Example be fruitful in our lives: That our Meeting again may be in Joy
unspeakable, when God shall have wiped away all Tears from our Eyes.

FINIS.

