May 25th 1692.

Let this be Printed, Nottingham.

THE PRETENSES OF THE French Invasion EXAMINED. FOR THE INFORMATION OF THE
PEOPLE of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for R. Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1692.

A Catalogue of some Books lately Printed and Reprinted for Robert Clavel, at
the Peacock in S. Paul's Churchyard.
THE State of the Protestants of Ireland under the late King James's
Government, in which their Carriage toward him is justified, and the absolute
Necessity of their Endeavoring to be freed from his Government, and of
submitting to their present Majesty's is demonstrated. Writ by Bishop King.
Licensed by the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham. The Third Edition,
with Additions.

The Frauds of the Romish Monks and Priests set forth in Eight Letters, lately
Written by a Gentleman in his Journey into Italy. The Third Edition, very
fairly printed.

Observations on a Journey to Naples, wherein the Frauds of Romish Monks and
Priests are farther discovered: By the Author of the former Book.

Forms of Private Devotions for every Day in the Week by a Method agreeable to
the Liturgy; with Occasional Prayers, and an Office for the Holy Communion, and
for the time of Sickness.

L. Annaei Flori Rerum Romanarum Epitome, interpretatione, and Notis
illustravit Anna Tanaquilli Fabri Filia, Jessu Christianismi Regis in usum
Serenissime Delphini. In a large 8vo. curiously Printed.

LEVSDEN's Greek Testament. The Fifth Edition.

A Defense of Pluralities, or holding two Benefices with Cure of Souls, as it
is now practiced in the Church of England.

THE PRETENSES OF THE French Invasion EXAMINED: For the Information of the
People of England.
THat the Sword has thus long been kept from destroying among us, is a
Blessing which we cannot sufficiently understand, unless we consider the woeful
Desolation it has made in all Neighboring Nations: Nor are they at all
sensible how much they owe to God, and their Majesty's for keeping us in Peace,
who give the least Encouragement to this intended Descent, which must turn our
Land into an Aceldama, and will make such woeful Havoc of our Lives and
Fortunes, while one party fights for Safety and the other for Revenge, that no
Age can parallel the horrid Consequences of such a Civil War as this will
prove. And if Papists only (blinded by Zeal for their Religion, and blown up
with hopes of absolute Empire) encouraged this bloody design, it would be no
Wonder, and could have no Success, considering the general Aversion of the
People to them, and the fresh Instances of their Insolence and Cruelty.

But alas! It appears that many who call themselves Protestants, are engaged in
this fatal Conspiracy against their Religion and their Native-Country; which is
so prodigious and amazing, that a Man would wonder who has bewitched these
foolish Galatians to push on their own and the Churches Ruin: And every one
must be inquisitive into the specious pretenses by which these Men are induced
to become their own Executioners.

Now the pretended Motives are these:
1. Repairing the Injury done to the late King. 2. Delivering us from the
Oppressions we suffer under the present King. 3. Settling the Government upon
its old Basis. 4. Securing the Protestant Religion for all future Ages.
Now it becomes every true English Protestant to examine these Pretenses very
well, before he venture on a thing of so evil Appearance and dangerous
Consequence, as is the joining with these Invaders.

First, It is pretended, the late King was unjustly deprived of his Birthright
by his Subjects, who by Nature and Oaths were bound to defend him in the
Possession of it: And now that he comes to demand his own, all that ever were
his Subjects must either assist, or at least not oppose him.

But let it be considered, that all the late Kings Sufferings were owing to,
and caused by the Counsels of his Popish-Priests, and the Bigots of that
Persuasion: Protestants were not the Aggressors, he might have kept his
Possession to this day undisturbed, if he had not made such open and bold
Attempts upon our Laws, our Religion and Properties; so that he was the first
and only Cause of his own Sufferings; and why should Millions be involved in
Blood and Ruin, who are perfectly Innocent of doing this Injury? No free Nation
did ever bear more or greater Injuries, or endure such Violences so long, or so
patiently as we did: And when some Stop was to be put to the final Ruin of our
Liberties and Religion, it was done at first by Petitions and Complaints; and
when they were despised, none but defensive Arms were taken up by some few, and
by a Foreign Prince, only to cover their Heads while the Grievances were fairly
redressed; not to take away his Rights, but to secure our own: Nor did the
Prince of Orange, or these Gentlemen, divest or deprive him of his Throne, but
owned his Right by offering a Treaty, during the continuance of which he
disbanded his Army, dissolved his Government, and as much as in him lay
attempted to desert the Throne, and seek Aids from an Enemies Country; which
might secure him against redressing any Grievances, and enable him to be
revenged upon the injured Complainers: We did not make the Throne vacant, but
the late Archbishop and other Peers at Guildhall, believed he had left it void,
or else they would not without his Consent, have seized on the Administration
of the Government, secured his Chancellor, taken possession of the Tower, and
offered the Exercise of the Supream-Power to the Prince of Orange. He left us
in Anarchy, and we provided for our selves in the best manner such a Juncture
would allow: I will not enquire now, whether these Subjects who are so Zealous
for his Return, were not bound to do more than they did to keep him in his
Throne while he had it; their Conscience then permitted them to look on and let
him sink, while his Security had been far more easily compassed: But they who
have now these unseasonable Pangs of their old Loyalty, must consider, that a
Man may leave his Right when he pleases, but may not take it again at his
pleasure, especially not by Force, and this most especially as to Sovereign
Power: Some Body must govern, when he would not; the next undoubted Heir in an
Hereditary Monarchy must; and whoever does govern in Chief in this Nation must
be King, by our Constitution, and must have Power sufficient to protect himself
and the Nation, against all their Enemies, and that cannot be without Swearing
new Allegiance. Now when a King and Queen are declared, submitted to, and owned
by Oaths, and all other Methods required in such Case: The King is not at
liberty to give up his own Power, and the Protection of us, nor are the People
free to join with him that deserted them, or to venture their Necks or their
Countries Ruin, to restore him: I dare say that the French King will not grant,
that the Citizens of those Cities who were Subjects to Spain or the Emperor,
and bound by Oath to those Princes (but have now submitted to him, and sworn
new Allegiance) are obliged to venture their Lives and Fortunes, by virtue of
their old Oaths to restore those Cities to their former Masters; doubtless he
would solve their Scruples with a Halter if he found they attempted it. Besides
the Injuries (as they are called) done to the late King by his own Acts, if
they were capable of Reparation, must not be repaired with the injuring, yea
ruining many thousand innocent Persons, who must unavoidably lose their Lives,
and be undone in their Estates by his returning by Force: The present King and
his Army, are bound by Oaths, Duty and Interest, to oppose him, so are all now
protected by him, and who have sworn Allegiance to him; and it is certain all
that are not perjured Hypocrites will do so: And then what Englishmans Bowels
must not Bleed, to consider what Murders, Burning, Plundering and Destruction
he brings upon his Native-Country, who encourages the Aggressors? If he have
any Kindness for us whom he calls his Subjects, he would rather sit quietly
under his single Injuries, than wish, or however attempt to be restored by
Blood, and an Universal Ruin: And if he have no Pity for us, why should we be
so concerned for him as to Sacrifice our Lives and Fortunes to his Revenge? He
went away while a Treaty was on Foot, and nothing but a Treaty can restore him
fairly, which he never yet offered: We did not force him to go away in
Disguise, and if he will force himself upon us again by French Dragoons, and
Irish Cutthroats, we may and must Oppose him; for our Allegiance is now
transferred to another. Finally, there is no Injury to any but himself, and
those who run into Voluntary Exile with him, by his being out of the
Possession; the Monarchy, the Law, the Church and Property are all in better
Estate than in his time, and all these with innumerable private Persons must be
irreparably injured by his Return in an Hostile manner. So that there can be no
reason to redress the sufferings he ows to his own Faults, by so many public
and private Injuries: If it be pleaded that he who was born to a Kingdom really
wants Subsistence, I reply, that if he would seek the Peace of Christendom, and
of his late Subjects, he might by a fair Treaty set on foot, not only restore
the Exiles, but have a sufficient and honorable Maintenance from this
Government; but while the War he makes upon it, puts us to so great Expense, he
cannot expect it, nor imagine we should give him a Supply to enable him to ruin
us.

The Second Pretense why we should assist toward his Restoration, is to
deliver our selves from the Oppression we suffer under the present King: And to
set off this with a better Gloss, the late Reign is magnified by the Jesuits
and their Tools, and this blackned: Freedom from Taxes then is made a rare
Instance of his Gentleness, and the present Impositions heightened with all the
Rhetoric imaginable, to represent this King as an Oppressor. The flourishing
of Trade then is extolled, the decay of it now odiously insinuated, and great
hopes are given of Golden Days, upon the Return of James the Just; he is to
make us all happy.

Now to answer this, there is no need to make a Satyr on that Reign, or a
Panegyric on this; that is so well remembered, and this so fully known, that
all unprejudiced People see on which side the Truth lies. But it is great Pity
they who have the Wit to invent or urge this Plea, have not a Memory to remind
them, that none complained more of the Danger of Law and Religion, of our Lives
and Fortunes in that Reign, than many who have this high Opinion of it now; the
Cruel Severities in the West, the High Commission, turning out of Office all
good Protestants, attempting to reverse all the Penal Laws, putting unqualified
Men into all Places of Trust, Profit and Power, excluding the Fellows of
Magdalen, and putting in Papists, with the Imprisonment and Trial of the
Bishops were thought Oppressions then; but now all these are buried in
Oblivion, and those Taxes which the late King and his Ally of France with their
Abettors alone make necessary to this Frugal Prince, these are our only
Grievance, and this Kings unpardonable Crime. The late King had one Tax, and
might, yea, would have had more for the glorious Design of enslaving his
Subjects, if he could have got a Parliament to his Purpose, which he vigorously
endeavored; and it was because he was sure he must satisfy his People in
their just Complaints, when ever he asked a Supply, that he durst not ask it of
a freely chosen Parliament; yet then we were in Peace with all Nations, and now
he has entangled us in a War with the worst Enemy in Europe. Assessments then
were not needed but to hasten our Ruin; now they are absolutely necessary to
our Safe^y, and made so by him and his complaining Friends. Yet still what
Grievances are these Taxes, in comparison of what is laid on the French Slaves,
into whose Condition we were intended to be brought? There is a vast difference
between losing our Property for ever, and paying some part of our Profits to
secure the rest, and our Inheritances to our Posterity as well as our Selves.
Besides, should we not leap out of the Drying Pan into the Fire, if to avoid
tolerable Payments, we should rashly bring a fatal War to our Doors, that must
last till more than one half of the Nation be destroyed, and the rest utterly
and almost irrecoverably impoverished? This I am sure is voluntarily to change
our Whips for Scorpions. We have paid as much formerly for assisting France to
ruin Europe, and maintain Vice at Home, as now serves to deliver Europe, and
secure our Native Country and Religion from utter Destruction: Nor are the Sums
considerable, (reckoning the Abatement of Chimney-Mony,) which we have paid to
this Government; no Country in Europe has paid so little in proportion to our
Wealth, these last Three Years of War: And if the late King return, England
must pay all the Sums borrowed of France to maintain him abroad, to keep
Ireland, and to discharge the Forces that come to thrust him on us, and must
stay to complete the happy Design of setting up Popery and Slavery, the natural
consequences of his Restoration; and it is well if Arrears of Chimney-Mony, and
other public Moneys be not called for to carry on so glorious a Work: So that
if England rebel against the present King to avoid the Burdens now upon them,
they expose themselves to Ten times greater Taxes for many Years, and it can
end in nothing but the utter Impoverishing of the whole Nation, especially the
Protestant part of it, who by their Poverty will become a more easy Prey. As
for Trade, the Decay of it began in the late King's time, and it is the War
which he and France have engaged us in, that still keeps it at a low Ebb; so
that for the late King's Friends to expose the present Government for this, is
like a Conjurers complaining of the Storms he raises. That ingenious History of
Bishop King's of the Estate of the Protestants in Ireland under King James,
makes it out, that the late King feared and hated the increase of Trade, which
made him use all means to hinder it; and all the World fees, that no Absolute
Monarch (as he affects to be,) likes that his Subjects should grow rich by
Trade. But our present King so soon as he can have Peace, will make it his
first Care to promote Trade here, as he did in the Country he came from; and
even in the difficult times he had, Trade has been a great part of his and his
Parliaments Care. Finally, if Men can remember the times that are so lately
past, when Law and Right was only the King's Pleasure, dictated by Mercenary
Judges, when no Party but the Papists flourished, when a general Consternation
had stopped all Business, they cannot hope to be happy by his Return, who caused
all these Miseries: And they must expect now he has more perfectly Learned the
French Methods (of making a King the greatest of Monarchs, by making his
Subjects the vilest of Slaves,) that he will practice it with greater Industry
and Application than ever, to put it eternally out of his Subjects Power, to
protect themselves again: For oppressing his People, which was but expedient
before, will now be thought absolutely necessary. So that nothing can be more
improbable, not to say impossible, than for England to be happy under him, that
attempted to make her Miserable without any provocation, and must return with
the same Principles and Designs, the same Counselors and Interests he had
before, and with all the addition that Revenge, Hatred and Fear can make to an
angry and implacable Mind: But it may be said, his Dear-bought Experience of
the ill success of these Methods, will make him rule more moderately, if he be
restored: To which I reply, Coelum, non Animum mutat. The forecited Book of
Bishop King's demonstrates, that after he had lost England and Scotland, and a
great part of Ireland, upon his Return thither from France, he was more
Arbitrary and hard to his Protestant Obedient Subjects, than ever he had been
before, even though it was against his visible Interest, and tended to disgust
all the Protestants who would have served him there. His declaring himself
Papist at first here, and all his Actions since show that he prefers his Will,
and an obstinate pursuing his own Methods, far above his true Interest; whence
it follows, that we vainly expect from one of his Temper, that either his past
Experience, or his future Interest should teach him Moderation, any longer than
till he has Power to oppress us: And if he should by a Thousand Promises or
Oaths engage to rule by Law, his frequent breach of both has given us no
reason to trust him; and the Religion he professes can so easily dispense with
both, that neither of them give us any security from that sort of Obligations.
The Interests of Popery and France require he should be Absolute, and his
Nature spurs him on to it, and nothing but Fear can for a Moment restrain him
from being so. What a shadow of a Dream then must this be of Protestant
Subjects, being happy under a bigoted Popish Prince of such a Temper?

Thirdly, Whereas it is said we have changed our old Hereditary Monarchy into
one merely Elective, and by degrees shall bring it to a Commonwealth; nor can
any thing prevent this, (which will be of Fatal consequence to the Church,) but
our restoring the late King: I answer, the Position is false, and the
Consequence a mere Sham; the Government of England always was, and ever must be
Monarchical; that Twelve Years when it was endeavored to make it otherwise,
convinced all Men, that all Projects to the contrary must come to nothing. As
for this Revolution, it is not likely a Parliament which made an Entail of the
Crown in a Lineal Succession, should be for setting up a Commonwealth, or
altering the Hereditary Monarchy. If it be alleged there was a great Breach as
to the Person of the Reigning King, it is replied, he himself made it, and they
did not make, but find the Throne void. And there have been greater Breaches
since the Conquest as to the true Lineal Succession, and laying aside, yea
deposing the Reigning King, and setting up his Son, or a Remoter Person, which
indeed was an Injury to the Kings so Deposed; but still the Monarchy was called
and continued to be Hereditary. In our case the King deserted us, yea, left us
without any Government; but we applied to his next certain Heir, with whom at
her Request, and for our Safety and hers, by general consent a Title was given
to her Husband and our Deliverer, but this only for Life, though he be much
nearer in Blood to the Right of Succession, than either Henry the Fourth, or
Henry the Seventh, successively made Kings of England. And the saving the
Succession to the Princess of Denmark and her Heirs, shows how far that
Parliament was from designing any such thing as a Commonwealth. We see Philip
of Spain, who had no Title to be King of England but by his Marriage with Queen
Mary, was made King at her Request and in her Right; but he had not merited so
much as our King, and therefore his Title was to cease at her Death. As for the
Prince of Wales, there are so clear Indications of his Birth being an
Imposture, and the Design of forming that Project is so known to be Revenge on
the Princesses for adhering to their Religion, and to get more time to force
Popery and Slavery upon us; yea his Health and Strength make it so unlikely he
should proceed from such crazy Parents, that till the Parties concerned prove
the Affirmative by better Witnesses and clearer Evidence, and the People of
England in Parliament own him for the Heir, we need not go about the
unreasonable Task of proving a Negative: Wherefore since the breach in the
Succession was the late King's own Act, and only concerns his Person and a
supposed unknown Heir, we are not to answer for that; and considering the hurry
his unexpected Desertion put all things in, and the absolute necessity of a
speedy Settlement, the Friends of the old English Monarchy have just cause to
rejoice it was made so near the old Foundation, with a small and only Temporary
Variation from it, which was also absolutely necessary in that Juncture of
Affairs: And it is evident that there are many of the best Quality and Interest
who hate the notion of a Commonwealth in England, and love Monarchy as well as
any of the late King's Abettors, who freely consented, and firmly adhere to
this Establishment. If it be objected that King William was bred up in a
Commonwealth, and inclines to that Form of Government; it is answered, He does
and may like it in Holland, but they must show some Instances that his Zeal for
a Commonwealth is as hot and as blind, as King James's for Popery, before they
can prove him so desperate a Foe to his own Interest, as to uncrown himself,
and make himself the People's Vassal, when he is and may be their Gracious
Lord. If it be urged, that it is a dangerous Precedent for future Kings, to
allow the People a Liberty to take away their Princes Right, and set up
another, on Pretense of Misgovernment: The Reply is, the late King was the
occasion of this Precedent, by first attempting to alter the whole frame of our
Laws, Government and Religion, and then Deserting us. And if it be an ill
Precedent for the safety of Princes, that the Advantage was taken, it was
however necessary to take it for the Safety of the People, for whose good
Heaven made Kings. Sure I am, there are as dreadful Consequences of Arbitrary
Tyranny, as there are of Rebellion, witness the Misery and Slavery of the poor
French at this Day; and it seems as necessary there should be some Precedents
to deter Princes from abusing their Power, as well as to restrain the People
from abusing their Liberty: For both Tyranny and Rebellion are great Sins, and
of most mischievous Consequence. Wherefore this unexpected Example may make our
Kings more Just and more apt to Rule by Law, but it can never hurt the Monarchy
it self, or countenance a Rebellion, while a King is in the Throne that will
stay to hear and redress his Peoples Grievances, which will never be denied by
the present, or any other good King.

The last Pretense is the most surprising of all, That there is no way to
preserve the Church of England, no nor the Protestant Religion, but by
restoring the late King, who its said in his Declaration promises this as
liberally as he did at his first Accession to the Throne.

If Mankind were not the oddest part of the Creation, one would wonder how it is
possible for Protestants to believe, that the Wolves design good to the Sheep:
When the late King was here, he involved himself in infinite Mischiefs, and did
the most odious things in the World to destroy the Protestant Religion, and
especially to ruin the Church of England; and has he given any Evidence of
changing his Temper, his Principles, his Zeal, or his Methods? He showed in
Ireland a greater spite to Protestants than ever; he has lived in France ever
since, where he has seen how much it tends to advance his dear absolute Power
to Dragoon all Men into the Kings Religion; his only Motives to draw in this
Frenchify'd Pope to lend him Money to invade us, is by convincing him, he lost
all by his Zeal to restore Popery, and by engaging he will use his Power (if he
can regain it) only to promote the Catholic Interest. His other Ally the
French-Persecutor, cannot be endeared by any better Interest, till the
Principal of the Sums Lent are repaid by poor England, than by Assurance that
he will make one Kingdom in the World as miserable by absolute Empire, and
forcing one Religion, as France now is; that his Barbarity, Cruelty and
Treachery may not be the infamous single Instance of such Proceedings; his
Promises to his Allies, his Zeal, his Principles, and his Nature, all engage
him to destroy the Protestant Religion. He attempted it when he was not half so
deeply obliged, and can we think he will not pursue it now? It Is next to Frenzy
to think the Pope and King of France furnish him with Money, Ships, Forces, etc.
only to secure the Protestant Religion and Church of England; he must be tied
in more than ordinary Bonds, to endeavor the Ruin of both, or no such Favors
had been shown by such a Pope, and such a Persecutor: It cannot be Ease to
Roman Catholics he desires; They are more at Ease under King William, than
under any Protestant King ever since the Reformation: It must therefore be the
suppressing all other Religions, and setting up that alone, must engage Rome,
France and Lucifer in his Restoration: As for his Promises to us in his
Declaration, alas he has already given greater and stronger to the Pope and
French King to the contrary; and though his Interest, and the Hopes that some
will be so mad to believe him, put him upon renewing these Promises to England,
yet his Consessor can soon resolve him which Promise is to be kept, whether
that pious Catholic Promise to the Holy Father, and the Hector of that Cause,
or that extorted one to Heretics: Besides, we should remember the Italian
Proverb, God forgive him who deceives me once, but God forgive me if one Man
deceives me twice. No Prince in the World ever promised with more Solemnity
than the late King to protect the Protestant Religion, or the Church of
England; yet nothing is more clear, than that he designed to gull us only, not
to oblige himself by this Protestation; and the first thing he did was to break
it as soon as he durst, and can we be so distracted to believe him again? He
declared in Ireland, that the Church of England stunk in his Nose, and that he
abhorred it. He cannot truly love either any person of that Persuasion, or any
other Protestant; he may flatter some of them to get into the Saddle, but when
they have mounted him he will ride over their Heads; his own Friends of the
Protestant Religion are very few, and his Revenge on the far greater number who
have opposed his Designs, will outweigh the Kindness of a few inconsiderable
Heretics who abetted his Interest, and who will be told, that it was not Sense
of Duty, but despair of obliging his Enemies that forced them into his Quarrel:
They had sufficient Experience after Monmouth's Rebellion (suppressed only by
the Church of England Men) how little any Acts of those he counts Heretics can
oblige him; his carriage in Ireland to the Loyal Protestants, writ this in
Capital Letters, and it must be supposed they have drunk deep of Lethe who can
forget all this: But I pray what is it the Church of England wants, or any
other Protestant? This King is as serious and sincere a Protestant, and as true
a Lover of that Interest, as King James is a professed Enemy to it; and why may
not he be more likely to preserve the Religion he professes, than the other to
maintain that Religion which he vilely deserted, and mortally hates? The
Churchmen say King William is too kind to Dissenters; but has he given them
any other or more Liberty than King James did? That King begun with Toleration,
and it was not for a new Prince in a troublous State of things to alter any
thing of that Nature: Besides, at the same time the Dissenters do think the
present King too kind to the established Church, not considering that it is the
National Religion which he found, and keeps in possession of all its Rights, as
his Duty and Oath oblige him, yet so as the Dissenters have Ease, and every
thing but Empire, which from a prudent King of England they can never expect,
being not only a less part of the Nation, but so divided among themselves, that
nothing can please all parties of them; and therefore freedom to Worship in
their several ways, is all the Favor they can be capable of in the best times;
and so they are most unreasonable to hope for more now: Besides, let it be
considered, that our King is not only the Head and Protector of the Protestants
of England, but of all the Reformed Churches in Europe: And the French King
(the main Wheel in this designed Restoration) is so mortal an Enemy to the
whole Reformation, that he desperately weakened himself, and banished 30000
Families of useful Subjects, only to root the whole Profession out of his own
Dominions: And now can any rationally pretend, this present King will destroy
the English Church, or the French-Persecutor, and his Client the late King of
England, uphold it? My dear Brethren and Countrymen, do not so infamously
abuse your selves to believe so incredible a Fiction, so manifest a Cheat:
Alas, all these good words are only to lull you asleep, till you, at the peril
of your Necks, get him Power enough to Extirpate you and your Religion also: I
doubt not but for a while he would maintain the established Church, and renew
his Indulgence, because he can get Footing no other way; but it is easy to
foresee how short-lived all these Sham-Favours will be: They spring from Fear,
and desire of Opportunity to be revenged; and so soon as ever the Fear ceases,
and that Opportunity comes, he will most certainly kick down the Ladder by
which he ascended, and pull off the Mask, appearing what he is in his Nature
and Principles, and not what his Necessities have made him seem to be; so that
if this Disguise be credited, the persons imposed on will and must pay for
their Credulity, with the woeful price of helping to destroy the most pure and
flourishing Church in the World: In assisting to re-instate him, and fighting
for him, they fight against their own Religion, which the Primitive Christians
for all their Heroic Loyalty would not do, and which no Man ought to do,
either for Interest or Revenge: For my part, I think true Religion so far above
all worldly Concerns, and the Preservation of it, so principal an advantage of
Government, that the Prince who will certainly Suppress that, must be more
intolerable than he that would take away my Liberty, Estate, or my Life; and it
must be a damnable Sin in me to assist him in it, or put him into a Capacity to
do it: No Oath or Allegiance can bind me to this; it may oblige me to suffer,
but not to act for such a design: Wherefore for Shame, let his Irish and
English Popish Subjects alone carry on this impious Design, who can only hope
for Advantage by his Restoration, and who are only bound in Conscience to help
him: Neuter we must stand at least, and that will suffice to show how
contemptible a party that is, which must be set up on the Nations Ruin, and how
impossible it is for him to cut down the Protestant Religion in England,
without borrowing a handle from the Tree he would fell: Take warning by what is
past, and what must be the inevitable Consequence of your deserting this King,
or assisting the late Prince, even the Ruin of this most famous Church of
England, and the endangering the whole Estate of Protestantism through all
Europe: In vain will you complain of this Consequence, when it is too late to
remedy it; your Guilt, Shame and Sorrow will then only remain, for having had a
hand in so deplorable a Mischief: For my part I have delivered my own Soul, and
given you fair warning; God of his infinite Mercy open your Eyes in time, and
grant you a right Judgment in this and in all things.

FINIS.

