LICENSED,

November. 27. 1691. Ia. Fraser.

Some Considerations OF THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE Lowering of Interest, AND
Raising the Value OF MONEY.

In a Letter to a Member of Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for Awnsham and John Churchill, at the Black-Swan in
Paternoster Row. 1692.

SIR,
THese Notions, concerning Coinage, having for the main, as you know, been put
into Writing above Twelve Months since; as those other concerning Interest, a
great deal above so many years: I put them now again into your hands, with a
Liberty (since you will have it so) to communicate them farther, as you please.
If, upon a Review, you continue your favorable Opinion of them, and nothing
less than Publishing will satisfy you, I must desire to remember, That you
must be answerable to the World for the Style; which is such as a Man writes
carelessly to his Friend, when he seeks Truth, not Ornament; and studies only to
be in the right, and to be understood. I have, since you saw them last year,
met with some new Objections in Print which I have endeavored to remove; and
particularly, I have taken into Consideration a Printed Sheet, entitled,
Remarks upon a Paper given in to the Lords, etc. Because one may naturally
suppose, That he that was so much a Patron of that Cause, would omit nothing
that could be said in favor of it. To this I must here add, That I am just now
told from Holland, That the States, finding themselves abused by coining a vast
quantity of their base [Schillings] Money, made of their own Ducatoons, and
other finer Silver, melted down; have put a stop to the Minting of any but fine
Silver Coin, till they should settle their Mint upon a new Foot.

I know the sincere Love and Concern you have for your Country, puts you
constantly upon casting about on all hands for any means to serve it; and will
not suffer you to overlook any thing you conceive may be of any the least use,
though from the meanest Capacities: You could not else have put me upon looking
out my old Papers concerning the reducing of Interest to 4 per Cent, which have
so long lain by forgotten. Upon this new Survey of them, I find not my Thoughts
now to differ from those I had near Twenty Years since: They have to me still
the Appearance of Truth; nor should I otherwise venture them so much as to your
sight. If my Notions are wrong, my Intention, I am sure, is right: And whatever
I have failed in, I shall at least let you see with what Obedience I am,

Sir, Your most humble Servant.
Nov. 7. 1691.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 2. read Natural; p. 9. l. 27. r. Masters; p. 12. l. 13. r. Natural
price; p. 26. l. 16. r. of 1000 l. l. ult. r. Clothing his; p. 48. l. 25. r.
Money being; p. 50. l. 19. r. to their; p. 52. l. 18. r. be 9/10; p. 64. l. 13.
r. a quality which; p. 80. l. 14. r. Natural; l. 16. r. Natural; p. 82. l. 27.
r. what has; p. 91. l. ult. r. cheaper; p. 94. l. 27. r. Landholder; p. 95. l.
6. r. all, as; ^. 20. r. the yearly; p. 121. l. 6. r. Mortgagee; p. 122. l. 23:
r. and pay; p. 123. l. 27. r. other Conjurers; p. 127. l. 11. r. Virgula; p.
129. l. 3. r. this present Year 1690. p. 137. l. ult. dele more than is the
Standard of our other Money; p. ^38. l. 11. r. these Species; p. 140. l. 18. r.
from, it is; p. 141. l. 8. r. Debts, and in; l. 9. r. Rents for ever; p. 147.
l. 18. r. Owner; p. 153. l. ult. r. it to a; p. 156. l. 29. r. raise the; p.
168. l. 10. r. Rate as readily as any other Coin; l. 28. r. place bringing; p.
169. l. 8. r. because they; p. 173. l. 7. r. by the Ounce; p. 174. l. 25. r^ise
elsewhere ^ p. 182. l. 2. ^. lighter than; p. 183. l. 12. r. own Coin; p. 186.
l. 23. ^. beforehand with those to whom Debts are owing.

SIR,
I Have so little Concern in paying or receiving of Interest, that were I in no
more Danger to be misled by Inability and Ignorance, than I am to be biassed by
Interest and Inclination, I might hope to give you a very perfect and clear
Account of the Consequences of a Law to reduce Interest to Four per Cent. But
since you are pleased to ask my Opinion, I shall endeavor fairly to state this
Matter of Use with the best of my Skill.

The first thing to be considered, is, Whether the Price of the Hire of Money
can be regulated by Law. And to that I think, generally speaking, one may say,
it is manifest it cannot. For since it is impossible to make a Law that shall
hinder a Man from giving away his Money or Estate to whom he pleases, it will
be impossible, by any Contrivance of Law, to hinder Men, skilled in the Power
they have over their own Goods, and the ways of Conveying them to others, to
purchase Money to be lent them at what Rate soever their Occasions shall make
it necessary for them to have it. For it is to be Remembered, That no Man
borrows Money, or pays Use, out of mere Pleasure; it is the want of Money drives
Men to that Trouble and Charge of Borrowing: And proportionably to this Want,
so will every one have it, whatever Price it cost him. Wherein the Skilful, I
say, will always so manage it, as to avoid the Prohibition of your Law, and
keep out of its Penalty, do what you can. What then will be the unavoidable
Consequences of such a Law?

1. It will make the Difficulty of Borrowing and Lending much greater; whereby
Trade (the Foundation of Riches) will be obstructed.

2. It will be a Prejudice to none but those who most need Assistance and Help,
I mean Widows and Orphans, and others uninstructed in the Arts and Managements
of more skilful Men; whose Estates lying in Money, they will be sure,
especially Orphans, to have no more Profit of their Money, than what In^^r^st
the Law barely allows.

3. It will mightily increase the Advantage of Bankers and ^e^^veners, and
other such expert Brokers; who skill^d in the Arts of putting out Money
according to the true and Nat^^nal Value, which the present State of Trade,
Money and Debts, shall always raise Interest to, they will infallibly get what
the true Value of Interest shall be, above the Legal. For Men finding the
Convenience of lodging their Money in Hands where they can be sure of it at
short Warning; the Ignorant and Lazy will be forwardest to put it into these
Men's hands who are known willingly to receive it, and where they can readily
have the whole, or a part, upon any sudden Occasion that may call for it.

4. I fear I may reckon it as one of the probable Consequences of such a Law,
That it is likely to cause great Perjury in the Nation; a Crime, than which
nothing is more carefully to be prevented by Lawmakers, not only by Penalties
that shall attend apparent and proved Perjury, but by avoiding and lessening,
as much as may be, the Temptations to it: For where those are strong, (as they
are where Men shall swear for their own Advantage) there the fear of Penalties
to follow will have little Restraint; especially if the Crime be hard to be
proved. All which I suppose will happen in this Case, where ways will be found
out to receive Money upon other Pretenses than for Use, to evade the Rule and
Rigor of the Law: And there will be secret Trusts and Collusions amongst Men,
that^ though they may be suspected, can never be proved without their own
Confession. I have heard very sober and observing Persons complain of the
Danger Men's Lives and Properties are in, by the frequency and fashionableness
of Perjury amongst us. Faith and Truth, especially in all Occasions of
attesting it upon the solemn Appeal to Heaven by an Oath, is the great ^ond of
Society: This it becomes the Wisdom of Magistrates carefully to support, and
render as sacred and ^wful in the minds of the People as they can. But if ever
Frequency of Oaths shall make them be looked on as Formalities of Law, or the
Custom of straining of Truth (which Men's Swearing in their own Cases is apt to
lead them to) has once dipped Men in Perjury, and the Guilt with the Temptation
has spread it self very wide, and made it almost fashionable in some Cases, it
will ^e impossible for the Society (these Bonds being dissolv^d) to subsist:
All must break in Pieces^ and run to Confusion. That Swearing in their own
Cases is apt, by degrees^ to lead Men into as little Regard of such Oaths, as
they have of their ordinary Talk, I think there is reason to suspect, from what
has been observed in something of that kind. Masters of Ships are a sort of Men
generally industrious and sober, and I suppose may be thought, for their Number
and Rank, to be equally honest to any other sort of Men; and yet, by the
Discourse I have had with Merchants in other Countries, I find, That they think
in those Parts, they take a great Liberty in their Custom-house Oaths, to that
degree, that I remember I was once told, in a trading Town beyond Sea, of a
Master of a Vessel, there esteemed a sober and fair Man, who yet could not hold
saying, God forbid that a Custom-house Oath should be a Sin. I say not this, to
make any Reflection upon a sort of Men that I think as incorrupt as any other;
and whom I am sure ought in England to be cherished and esteemed as the most
industrious and most beneficial of any of its Subjects. But I could not forbear
to give this here as an Instance how dangerous a Temptation it is, to bring Men
customarily to Swear, where they may have any Concernment of their own. And it
will always be worthy the Care and Consideration of Lawmakers, to keep up the
Opinion of an Oath high and sacred, as it ought to be in the minds of the
People; which can never be done, where frequency of Oaths, b^^^sed by Interest,
has established a Neglect of them; and Fashion (which it seldom fails to do) has
given Countenance to what Profit rewards.

But that Law cannot keep men from taking more Use than you set (the want of
Money being that alone which regulates its Price) will perhaps appear, if we
consider how hard it is to set a Price upon Wine or Silks, or other unnecessary
Commodities: But how impossible it is to set a Rate upon Victuals in a time of
Famine! For Money being an universal Commodity, and as necessary to Trade, as
Food is to Life, every body must have it at what Rate they can get it, and
unavoidably pay dear when it is scarce, and Debts, no less than Trade, have
made Borrowing in Fashion. The Bankers are a clear Instance of this: For some
Years since the Scarcity of Money having made it in England worth really more
than Six per Cent. most of those that had not the Skill to let it for more than
Six per Cent. and secure themselves from the Penalty of the Law, put it in the
Bankers hands, where it was ready at their Call, when they had an Opportunity
of greater Improvement, so that the Rate you set, profits not the Lenders, and
very few of the Borrowers, who are fain to pay the Price for Money, that
Commodity would bear, were it left free; and the Gain is only to the Banker.
And should you lessen the Use to Four per Cent. the Merchant, or Tradesman,
that borrows, would not have it one jot cheaper than he has now; but probably
these two ill effects would follow. First, That he would pay dearer; and
secondly, That there would be less Money left in the Country to drive the
Trade. For the Bankers paying at most but Four per Cent. and receiving from Six
to Ten per Cent. or more, at that low Rate could be content to have more Money
lie dead by them, than now when it is higher. By which means there would be
less Money stirring in Trade. and a greater Scarcity; which would raise it upon
the Borrower by this Monop^ly. And what a part of our Treasure their skill and
management, joined with others laziness or want of skill, is apt to draw into
their hands, is to be known by those vast Sums of Money they were found to owe
at the shutting up of the Exchequer. And though it be very true, yet it is
almost beyond Belief, That one private Goldsmith of London should have Credit,
upon his single Security, (being usually nothing but a Note under one of his
Servants Hands) for above (...) at once. The same Reasons I suppose will still
keep on the same Trade: And when you have taken it down by Law to that Rate, no
body will think of having more than Four per Cent. of the Banker, though those
who have need of Money, to employ it in Trade, will not then, any more than
now, get it under Five or Six, or as some pay, Seven or Eight. And if they had
then, when the Law permitted men to make more Profit of their Money, so large a
Proportion of the Cash of the Nation in their hands, who can think but that by
this Law it should be more driven into Lombard Street now? there being many now
who lend them at Four or Five per Cent. who will not lend to others at Six. It
would therefore perhaps bring down the Rate of Money to the Borrower, and
certainly distribute it better to the Advantage of Trade in the Country, if the
legal Use we^e kept pretty near to the natural; (by na^ur^l U^e, I mean that
Rate of Money which the present Scarcity of it makes it naturally at, upon an
equal Distribution of it) for then men being licensed by the Law to take near
the full natural Use, will not be forward to carry it to London, to put it into
the Bankers hands; but will lend it to their Neighbors in the Country, where
it is convenient for Trade it should be. But if you lessen the Rate of Use, the
Lender, whose Interest it is to keep up the Rate of Money, will rather lend it
to the Banker, at the legal Interest, than to the Tradesman or Gentleman, who
when the Law is broken, shall be sure to pay the full natural Interest, or
more; because of the engrossing by the Banker, as well as the Risque in
transgressing the Law: Whereas were the natural Use suppose Seven per Cent. and
the legal Six; first, the Owner would not venture the Penalty of the Law for
the gaining 1/^ part, that being the utmost his Money would yield. Nor would
the Banker venture to borrow, where his Gains would be but One per Cent. nor
the moneyed man lend him what he could make better Profit of legally at home.
All the Danger lies in this, That if your being behind hand has made the
Natural Use so high, that your Tradesman cannot live upon his Labor, but that
your rich Neighbors will so undersell you, that the Return you make will not
amount to pay the Use and afford a Livelihood, there is no way to recover from
this but by a general Frugality and Industry, or being Masters of the Trade of
some Commodity, which the World must have from you at your Rate, and cannot be
other where supplied.

Now I think the Natural Interest of Money is raised two ways: First, When the
Money of a Country is but little in proportition to the Debts of the
Inhabitants one amongst another; For suppose 10000 l. were sufficient to manage
the Trade of Bermudas, and that the Ten first Planters carried over 20000 l.
which they Lent to the several Tradesmen and Inhabitants of the Country, who
living above their Gains, had spent 10000 l. of this Money, and it were gone
out of the Island: It Is evident, that should all the Creditors at once call in
their Money, there would be a great scarcity of Money when that employed in
Trade must be taken out of the Tradesmens Hands to pay Debts; or else the
Debtors want Money and be exposed to their Creditors, (...) interest will be
high. But this sell(...)ing, that all, or the greatest (...) Creditors do at
once call for (...) unless it be in some great and (...) is less and seldomer
seit (...) unless where the Debts (...) own to a greater pro(...) causing more
(...) leade^s, will (...) high Secondly. That which con(...) raises the (...)
of Money, is, when (...) to the Trade of a Country; for in Trade every Body
calls for Money according as he wants it, and this disproportion is always
felt. For if Englishmen owed in all but One Million, and there were a Million
of Money in England, the Money would be well enough proportionable to the
Debts, yet if Two Millions were necessary to carry on the Trade, there would be
a Million wanting, and the price of Money would be raised as it is of any other
Commodity in a Market, where the Merchandise will not serve half the Customers,
and there are two Buyers for one Seller.

It Is in vain therefore to go about effectually to reduce the price of Interest
by a Law; and you may as rationally hope to set a fixed Rate upon the Hire of
Houses, or Ships, as of Money; He that wants a Vessel, rather than lose his
Market, will not stick to have it at the Market Rate, and find ways to do it,
with security to the Owner, though the Rate were limited by a Law; and he that
wants Money, rather than lose his Voyage, or his Trade, will pay the Natural
Interest for it, and submit to such ways of Conveyance as shall keep the Lender
out of the reach of the Law. So that your Act, at ^est, will serve only to
increase the Arts of Lending, but not at all lessen the Charge of the Borrower;
He it is likely shall with more trouble, and going farther about, pay also the
more for his Money, unless you intend to break in only upon Mortgages and
Contracts already made, and (which is not to be supposed) by a Law, post
factum, void Bargains lawfully made, and give to Richard what is Peter's Due,
for no other Reason but because one was Borrower and the other Lender.

But supposing the Law reached the intention of the Promoters of it; and that
this Act be so contrived, that it forced the National price of Money, and
hindered its being by any Body Lent at a higher Use than 4 l. per. Cent. which
is plain it cannot. Let us in the next place see what will be the Consequences
of it.

1. It will be a loss to Widows, Orphans, and all those who have their Estate
in Money, one third of their Estates, which will be a very hard case upon a
great number of People; and it is warily to be considered by the Wisdom of the
Nation, whether they will thus at one blow, fine and impoverish a great and
innocent part of the People, who having their Estat^^ in Money, have as much
Right to make a^ much of their Money, as it is worth, (for more they cannot) as
the Landlord ha^ to let his ^and for as much as it will yield, and to ^ine Men
one Third of their Estates without any Crime or Offense committed, seems very
hard. 2. As it will be a considerable Loss and Injury to them, so it will be no
Advantage at all to the Kingdom; for so Trade be not Cramped, and the
Exportation of our Native Commodities and Manufactures not hindered, it will be
no matter to the Kingdom, who amongst our selves Gets or Loses, only common
Charity teaches, those should be most taken care of by the Law, who are least
capable of taking care for themselves. 3. It will be a Gain to the Borrowing
Merchant; for if he Borrow at Four per Cent, and his Returns be Twelve per
Cent. he will have Eight per Cent. and the Lender Four, whereas now they divide
the profit equally at Six per Cent. But this neither Gets nor Loses the Kingdom
in your Trade, supposing the Merchant and Lender to be both Englishmen; only it
will as I have said, transfer a third part of the Monied Man's Estate, who has
nothing else to live on, into the Merchants Pocket, and that without any Merit
in the one, or Trangression in the other, and that to the prejudice of Trade:
Since it will discourage Lending at such a disproportion of Profit, to Risque,
as we shall see more by and by, when we come to consider of what consequence it
is to encourage Lending, that so none of the Money of the Nation may lie dead,
and thereby prejudice Trade. 4. It will hinder Trade, for there being a certain
proportion of Money necessary for driving such a proportion of Trade, so much
Money of this as lies still, lessens so much of the Trade: Now it cannot be
rationally expected, but that where the Venture is great, and the Gains small,
(as it is in Lending in England upon low Interest) many will choose rather to
hoard up their Money than venture it abroad on such Terms. This will be a loss
to the Kingdom, and such a loss as here in England ought chiefly to be looked
after; For we having no Mines, nor any other way of getting or keeping of
Riches amongst us but by Trade, so much of our Trade as is lost, so much of our
Riches must necessarily go with it; and the over-ballancing of Trade between us
and our Neighbors, must inevitably carry away our Money, and quickly leave us
Poor and exposed.
In a Country not furnish^d by Nature with Mines of Gold and Silver, (and those
too, as far as I can observe, are generally Poor enough, the Digging and
Resining of those Metals, taking up the Labor, and wasting the number of the
People; for which Reason, the wise Policy of the Chinese will not suffer those
Mines they have to be wrought) there are but two ways of growing Rich, ( i. e.
of bringing more Riches, and consequently more Plenty of all the conveniences
of Life, than what falls to the share of Neighboring Kingdoms and States) and
those two ways of growing Rich, are either Conquest or Commerce. By the first,
the Romans made themselves Masters of the Riches of the World, but I think that
in our present circumstances, no Body is vain enough to entertain a Thought of
our reaping the Profits of the World by our Swords, and making the Spoil and
Tribute of vanquished Nations, the fund for the supply of the Charges of the
Government, with an overplus for the wants, and equally craving Luxury, and
fashionable Vanity of the People. Commerce therefore is the only way left to
us, either for Riches or Subsistence, for this the advantages of our Situation,
as well as the Industry and Inc^ination of our People, bold and skil^ful at
Sea, do Naturally fit us; By this the Nation of England ha^ been hitherto
supported, and Trade left almost to it self, and assisted only by the Natural
Advantages abovementioned, brought us in Plenty and Riches, and always set
this Kingdom in a rank equal, if not superior to any of its Neighbors, and
would no doubt without any difficulty have continued it so, if the more
enlarged, and better understood Interest of Trade, since the Improvement of
Navigation had not raised us many Rivals; and the amazing Politics of some
late Reigns, let in other Competitors with us for the Sea, who will be sure to
seize to themselves whatever parts of Trade our Mismanagement, or want of
Money, shall let slip out of our Hands; and when it is once lost, 'twill be too
late to hope, by a mistim'd Care, easily to retrieve it again. For the Currents
of Trade, like those of Waters, make themselves Channels, out of which they are
afterward as hard to be diverted, as Rivers that have worn themselves deep
within their Banks. Trade then is necessary to the producing of Riches, and
Money necessary to the carrying on of Trade: This is principally to be looked
after and taken Care of; for if this be neglected, we shall in vain, by
Contrivances amongst our selves, and shu^tling the little Money we have from
one another hands, endeavor to prevent our Wants: Decay of Trade will quickly
waste all the Remainder; and then the Landed man, who thinks perhaps by the
fall of Interest to raise the Value of his Land, will find himself cruelly
mistaken, when the Money being gone, (as it will be if our Trade be not kept
up) he can get neither Farmer to rent, nor Purchaser to buy his Land.
Whatsoever therefore hinders the lending of Money, injures Trade: And so the
reducing of Money to Four per Cent. which will discourage men from lending,
will be a Loss to the Kingdom, in stopping so much of the Current of Money,
which turns the Wheels of Trade. But all this upon a Supposition that the
Lender and Borrower are both English men.

If the Lender be a Foreigner, by lessening Interest from Six to Four you get
to the Kingdom of the Interest we pay yearly to Foreigners; which let any one
if he please think considerable. But then upon lessening Interest to Four per
Cent. it is likely one of these things will happen. That either you fall the
Price of your Native Commodities; Or lessen your Trade; Or else prevent not the
high Use as you intended. For at the time of lessening your Interest, you want
Money, or you do not: If you do not, there is no need to prevent Borrowing at a
high rate of your Neighbors; for there can be no Money borrowed, but in order
to Trade; for what is not employed in Trade lies still, and no body borrows for
that. For borrowing of one to pay what we owe to another may be generally
accounted to be for Trade; it being very seldom People call in their Money to
let it lie still. And if you do want Money, Necessity will still make you
borrow of them, and at the Rates your Necessity, not your Laws, shall set: or
else, if there be fearcity of Money, it must hinder the Merchant's Buying and
Exportation, and the Artisan's Manufacture. Now the Kingdom gets or loses by
this (for no question the Merchant by low (...) gets all the while) only
propo^tionably (allowing the Consumption of foreign Commodities to be still the
some) as the paying of Use to Foreigners carries away more or less of our
Money, than want of Money and stopping our Trade keeps us from bringing in, by
hindering our Gains; which can be only estimated by those who know how much
Money we borrow of Foreigners, and at what Rate; and too, what Profit in Trade
we make of that Money: Though perhaps it will appear true upon Examination,
That our growing rich or poor depends not at all upon our borrowing upon (...)
or not; but only which is greater o^ less, our importation or Exportation of
consumable Commodities. For supposing two Millions of Money will drive the
Trade of England, and that we have Money enough of our own to do it; if we
consume o^ our own Product and Manufacture, and what we purchase by it of
foreign Commodities, one Million, but of the other Million consume nothing, but
make a Return of Ten per Cent. per An. we must then every year be 100000 l.
richer, and our Stock be so much encreast: But if we import more consumable
Commodities than we export, our Money must go out to pay for them, and we grow
poorer. Suppose therefore ill Husbandry has brought us to one Million Stock,
and we borrow the other Million (as we must, or lose half our Trade) at Six per
Cent. If we consume one moiety, and make still Ten per Cent. per An. Return of
the other Million, the Kingdom gets 40000 l. per An. though it pay 60000 l. per
An. Use. So that if the Merchant's Return be more than his Use, (which it is
certain it is, or else he will not trade) and all that is so traded for on
borrowed Money be but the ov^^ballance of our Exportation to our Importation,
the Kingdom gets by this Borrowing so much as whatsoever the Merchant's Gain is
above his Use. But if we borrow only for our own Expenses, we grow doubly poor,
by paying Money for the Commodity we consume, and Use for that Money; though
the Merchant gets all this while, by making Returns greater than his Use. And
therefore Borrowing of Foreigners in it self makes not the Kingdom rich or
poor; for it may do either; but spending more than our Fruits or Manufactures
will pay for, brings in Poverty, and Poverty Borrowing.

For Money, as necessary to Trade, may be doubly considered; first, as in his
hands that pays the Labourer and Landholder, (for here its motion terminates,
and through whose hands soever it passes between these, he is but a Broker) and
if this man want Money, (as for Example, the Clothier) the Manufacture is not
made; and so the Trade stops, and is lost. Or secondly, Money may be considered
as in the hands of the Consumer, under which Name I here reckon the Merchant
who buys the Commodity, when made, to export; and if he want Money, the value
of the Commodity, when made is lessened, and so the Kingdom loses in the Price.
If therefore Use he lessened^ and you cannot tie Foreigners to your Terms, then
the ill effects fall only upon your own Landholders and Artisans: If Foreigners
can be forced by your Law to Lend you Money only at your own Rate, or not Lend
at all, is it not more likely they will rather take it home, and think it safer
in their own Country at Four per C^nt than abroad; Nor can their overplus of
Money bring them to Lend to you, on your Terms; for when your Merchants want of
Money, shall have sunk the price of your Market, a Dutchman will find it more
gains to buy your Commodity himself, than Lend his Money at Four per Cent. to
an English Merchant to Trade with: Nor will the Act of Navigation hinder their
coming, by making them come empty, since even al-already there are those who
think, that many who go for English Merchants, are but Dutch Factors, and Trade
for others in their own Names: The Kingdom therefore will lose by it if it
makes Foreigners withdraw any of their Money, as well as if it hinders any of
your People from Lending theirs, where Trade has need of it.

In a Treatise writ on purpose for the bringing down of Interest, I find this
Argument of Foreigners calling away their Money to the prejudice of our Trade,
thus Answered, That the Money of Foreigners is not brought into the Land by
read, (...) Bullion, but by Goods or Bills of Exchange; and when it is paid
must be returned by Goods or Bills of Exchange, and there will not be the less
Money in the Land. I could not but wonder to see a Man, who undertook to write
of Money and Interest, talk so directly besides the matter in the business of
Trade; Foreigners Money, he says, is not brought into the Land by ready Coin or
Bullion, but by Goods, or Bills of Exchange. How then do we come by Pullion or
Money? For Gold grows not that I know in our Country, and Silver so little,
that One Hundred Thousandth part of the Silver we have now in England, was not
drawn out of any Mines in this Island. If he means that the Monied Man in
Holland, who puts out his Money at Interest here, did not send it over in
Pullion or Specie hither, that may be true or false; but either way helps not
that Authors purpose. For if he paid his Money to a Merchant his Neighbor, and
took his Pills for it here in England, he did the same thing as if he had sent
over that Money, since he does but make that Merchant (...) in England, the
Money which ^e has Due to him there, and otherwise would carry away: (...),
says our Author. (...); I must not be paid and exported in ready Money, so says
our Law indeed, but that is a Law to hedge in the Cookoe, and serves to no
purpose; For if we Export not Goods, for which our Merchants have Money due to
them in Holland, How can it be paid by Bills of Exchange? And for G^ods, 100 l.
worth of Goods can no where pay 200 l. in Money, this being that which I find
many Men deceive themselves with in Trade: It may be worth while to make it a
little plainer.

Let us suppose England Peopled as it is now, and its Woollen Manufacture in
the same State and Perfection that it is at present, and that we, having no
Money at all, trade with this our Woollen Manufacture for the value of 200000
l. yearly to Spain, where there actually is a Million in Money; Let us suppose
that we bring back from Spain, yearly in Oil, Wine, and Fruit, to the value of
100000 l. and continue to do this Ten years together; it is plain we have had
for our two Millions value in Woollen Manufacture carried thither, one Million
returned in Wine, Oil, and Fruit, but what is become of ^ other Million? Will
the Merchants be content to lose it? That you may be sure they would not, nor
have Traded on, if they had not every year Returns made answering their
Exportation. How then were the Returns made? In Money it is evident. For the
Spaniards having in such a Trade, no Debts, nor the possibility of any Debts in
England, cannot pay one Farthing of that other Million by Bills of Exchange;
And having no Commodities that we will take off above the value of 100000 l.
per Annum, they cannot pay us in Commodities. From whence it necessarily
follows, that the 100000 l. per Annum, wherein we overbalance them in Trade,
must be paid us in Money; and so at the Ten years end, their Million of Money,
(though their Law make it Death to Export it) will be all brought into Engl^nd,
as in truth, by this overbalance of Trade, the greatest part of our Money
has been brought into England out of Spain.

Let us suppose our selves now possessed of this Million of Money; and
Exporting yearly out of England, to the several parts of the World^ consumable
Commodities to the value of a Million, but Importing yearly in Commodities,
which we consume amongst us to the value of 1100000 l. If such a T^^de as this
be managed amongst us, and continue Ten y^^^s it is evident, that our Million
of Money will at the end of the Ten years be inevitably all gone from us to
them, by the same way that it came to us; that is, by their overbalance of
Trade. For we Importing every year 100000 l. worth of Commodities more than we
Export, and there being no Foreigners that will give us 100000 l. every year
for nothing, it is unavoidable, that 100000 l. of our Money must go out every
year to pay for that overplus, which our Commodities do not pay for; and it is
ridiculous to say, that Bills of Exchange shall pay our Debts abroad; that
cannot be till scrips of Paper can be made current Coin. The Eng^ish Merchant,
who has no Money owing him abroad, cannot expect to have his Bills paid there;
or if he has Credit enough with a Correspondent, to have his Bills answered;
this pays none of the Debt of England, but only changes the Creditor: And if
upon the general balance of Trade, English Merchants owe to Foreigners 100000
l. or 1000000, if Commodities do not, our Money must go out to pay, or else our
Credit be lost, and our Trade stop, and be lost too.

A Kingdom grows Rich or Poor just as a Farmer does, and no otherwise: Let us
suppose the whole Isle of Portland one Farm, and that the Owner, besides what
serves his Family, carries to Market to Weymouth and Dorchester, etc. Cattle,
Corn, Butter, Cheese, Wool, or Cloth, Lead and Tin, all Commodities produced
and wrought within his Farm of Portland, to the value of 1000 l. yearly; and
for this, brings home in Salt, Wine, Oil, Spice, Linen and Silks, to the value
of 900 l. and the remaining 100 l. in Money: It Is evident he grows every year
100 l. Richer, and so at the end of the ten years will have clearly got 1000 l.
If the Owner be a better Husband, and contenting himself with his Native
Commodities, buy less Wine, Spice and Silk, at Market, and so bring home 500 l.
in Money yearly, instead of 100 l. at the end of ten years he will have 5000 l.
by him, and be so much Richer. He Dies, and his Son succeeds, a fashionable
young Gentleman, that cannot Dine without Champane and Burgundy, nor Sleep but
in a Damask Bed; whose Wife must spread a long train of Brocard, and his
Children be always in the newest French cut and Stuff: He being come to the
Estate, keeps on a very busy Family; the Markets are weekly frequented, and
the Commodities of his Farm carried out, and Sold, as formerly, but the Returns
are made something different; the fashionable way of Eating, Drinking, and
Clothing (...) his Wife, Children and Family, requires more Sugar and Spice,
Wine and Fruit, Silk and Ribons, than in his Fathers time; so that instead of
900 l. per Annum, he now brings home of consumable Commodities, to the value of
1100 l. yearly. What comes of this? He lives in Splendour, it is true, but this
unavoidably carries away the Money his Father got, and he is every year 100 l.
Poorer. To his Expenses, beyond his Income, add Debauchery, Idleness, and
Quarrels, amongst his Servants, whereby his Manufactures are disturbed, and his
Business neglected, and a general Disorder and Confusion through his whole
Family and Farm; This will tumble him down the Hill the faller, and the Stock,
the Industry, Frugality, and good Order of his Father had laid up^ will be
quickly brought to an end, and he fast in Prison. A Farm and a Kingdom in this
respect di^^er no more than as greater and less. We may Trade, and be busy,
and grow Poor by it, unless we regulate our Expenses; If to this we are Idle,
Negligent, Di^honest, Malicious, and disturb the Sober and Industrious in their
Business, let it be upon what pretense it will, we shall Ruin the faster.

So that whatever this Author, or any one else may say, Money is brought into
England by nothing but spending here less of Foreign Commodities, than what we
carry to Market can pay for; Nor can Debts we owe to Foreigners be paid by
Bills of Exchange, till our Commodities Exported, and Sold beyond Sea, have
produced Money or Debts due there, to some of our Merchants; for nothing will
pay Debts but Money or Moneys worth, which three or four Lines writ in Paper
cannot be; for if they have an intrinsic value, and can serve instead of
Money, why do we not send them to Market instead of our Cloth, Lead and Tin?
and at an easier rate purchase the Commodities we want. All that a Bill of
Exchange can do, is to direct to whom Money due, or taken up upon Credit in a
Foreign Country, shall be paid; And if we trace it, what is due already, we
shall find, became so, for Commodities, or Money, carried from hence; and if it
be taken up upon Credit, it must ^et the Debt be shif^^d from one Creditor to
another as often as you will) at last be paid by Money or Goods, carried from
hence, or else the Merchant here must turn Bankrupt.

We have seen how Riches and Money are got, kept, or lost, in any Country; and
that is by consuming less of Foreign Commodities than what, by Commodities or
Labor is paid for. This is in the ordinary course of things: But where great
Armies and Alliances are to be maintained abroad by Supplies sent out of any
Country, there often, by a shorter and more sensible way, the Treasure is
diminished. But this, since the holy War, or at least since the Improvement of
Navigation and Trade, seldom happening to England, whose Princes have found the
enlarging their Power by Sea, and the securing our Navigation and Trade, more
the Interest of this Kingdom than Wars or Conquests on the Continent; Expenses
in Arms beyond Sea have had little Influence on our Riches or Poverty. The next
thing to be considered, is, how Money is necessary to Trade.

The Necessity of a certain Proportion of Money to trade, (I conceive) lies in
this, That Money in its Circulation driving the several Wheels of Trade, whilst
it keeps in that Channel (for some of it will unavoidably be dreined into
standing Pools) is all shared between the Landholder, whose Land a^^ords the
Materials; The Labourer, who works them; The Broker, ( i. e.) Merchant and Shop
keeper, who distributes them to those that want them: And the Consumer, who
spends them. Now Money is necessary to all these sorts of Men, as serving both
for Counters and for Pledges, and so carrying with it even Reckoning and
Security that he that receives it shall have the same Value for it again, of
other things that he wants, whenever he pleases. The one of these it does by
its Stamp and Denomination; the other by its intrinsic Value, which is nothing
else but its Durableness, Scarcity, and not being apt to be counterfeited.
Which intrinsic Value, though it be not natural, but is only in the Opinion of
men consenting to it, yet being universal, has generally, but not always, (for
we see that in a Siege or Man of War Silver may not be of equal Value to
Gunpowder, and in a Famine Gold not be worth its Weight in Bran) the same
effect as if it were natural

The Necessity therefore of a Proportion of Money to Trade, depends on Money,
not as Counters for the Reckoning may be kept or transferred by Writing, but on
Money as a Pledge. For since the Bill, Bond, or other Note of Debt, I receive
from one man, will not be accepted as Security by another, he not knowing that
the Bill or Bond is true or legal, or that the man bound to me is honest or
responsible; and so is not valuable enough to become a current Pledge, nor can
by public Authority be well made so, as in the Case of Assigning of Bills;
because a Law cannot give to Bills that intrinsic Value, which the universal
Consent of mankind has annexed to Silver and Gold. And hence Foreigners can
never be brought to take your Bills or Writings for any part of Payment, though
perhaps they might pass as valuable Considerations among your own People, did
not this very much hinder it, viz. That they are liable to unavoidable Doubt,
Dispute and Counterfeiting, and require other Proofs to assure us they are true
and good Security, than our eyes or a Touchstone. And at best this Course, if
practicable, will not hinder us from being poor; but may be suspected to help
to make us so, by keeping us from feeling our Poverty, which in Distress will
be sure to find us with greater disadvantage. Though it be certain it is better
than letting any part of our Trade fall for want of current Pledges; and better
too than borrowing Money of our Neighbors upon Use, if this way of Assigning
Bills can be made so easy, safe and universal at home, as to hinder it.

To return to the business in hand, and show the necessity of a Proportion of
Money to Trade: Every man therefore must have at least so much Money, or so
timely Recruits, as may in hand, or in a short distance of time, satisfy the
man who supplies him with the Necessaries of Life, or of his Trade. For no body
has any longer these necessary Supplies than he has Money or Credit, which is
nothing else but an Assurance of Money in some short time. So that it is
requisite to Trade there should be so much Money as to keep up the Landholders,
Laborers and Brokers Credit; and therefore ready Money must be constantly
exchanged for Wares and Labor, or follow within a short time after.

This shows the necessity of some Proportion of Money to Trade; but what
Proportion that is, is hard to determine, because it depends not barely on the
quantity of Money, but the quickness of its Circulation; which since it cannot
be easily traced, for the very same Shilling may at one time pay 20 men in 20
days, at another, rest in the same hands 100 days together; to make some
probable guess, we are to consider how much Money it is necessary to suppose
must rest constantly in each man's hands, as requisite to the carrying on of
Trade.

First therefore the Laborers, living generally but from hand to mouth, and
indeed, considered as Laborers in order to Trade, may well enough carry on
their part, if they have but Money enough to buy Victuals, Clothes, and Tools;
all which may very well be provided, without any great Sum of Money lying still
in their hands. The Laborers therefore being usually paid once a Week, (if the
times of Payment be seldomer, there must be more Money for the carrying on this
part of Trade) we may suppose there is constantly amongst them, one with
another, or those who are to pay them, always one Weeks Wages in ready Money.
For it cannot be thought that all or most of the Laborers pay away all their
Wages constantly as soon as they receive it, and live upon Trust till next Pay
day. This the Farmer and Tradesman could not well bear, were it every
Labourer's Case, and every one to be trusted; and therefore they must of
necessity keep some Money in their hands to go to Market for Victuals, and to
other Tradesmen, as poor as themselves, for Tools; and lay up Money too to buy
Clothes, or pay for those they bought upon Credit: Which Money thus necessarily
resting in their hands, we cannot imagine to be one with another much less than
a Weeks Wages, that must be in their Pockets, or ready in the Farmer's hands.
For he who employs a Labourer at 1 s. per Day, and pays him on Saturday Nights,
cannot be supposed constantly to receive that 6 s. just the same Saturday; it
must ordinarily be in his hand^ one time with another, if not a whole Week, yet
several Days before. This was the ordinary Course, whilst we had Money running
in the several Channels o^ Commerce: But that now very much failing, and the
Farmer not having Money to pay the Labourer, supplies him with Corn, which in
this great Plenty the Labourer will have at his own Rate, or else not take it
off his hands for Wages And as for the Workmen who are employed in our
Manufacture, especially the Woollen one, these the Clothier not having ready
Money to pay, furnishes with the Necessaries of Life, and so truck Commodities
for Work, which, such as they are, good or bad, the Workman must take at his
Master's Rate, or sit still and starve, whilst by this means this new sort of
Ing^oners or ^oresta^lers, having the feeding and supplying this numerous Body
of Workmen out of their Warehouses, (for they have now Magazines of all sorts
of Wares) set the Price upon the poor Landholder. So that the Markets now being
destroyed, and the Farmer not finding Vent there for his Butter, Cheese, Bacon
and Corn, etc. for which he was wont to bring home ready Money, must sell it to
these Ingrossers, on their own Terms of Time and Rate, and allow it to their
own Day-Labourers under the true Market-price; which what kind of Influence it
is like to have upon Land, and how this way Rents are like to be paid at
Quarter-day, is easy to apprehend; and it is no wonder to hear every day of
Farmers breaking and running away; for if they cannot receive Money for their
Goods at Market, 'twill be impossible for them to pay their Landlord's Rent:
And if any one doubt whether this be so, I desire him to enquire how many
Farmers in the West are broke and gone since Michaelmas last. Want of Money
being to this degree, works both ways upon the Landholder. For first, the
engrossing Forestaller lets not the Money come to Market; but supplying the
Workman, who is employed by him in Manufacture, with Necessaries, imposes his
Price and Forbearance on the Farmer, who cannot sell to the others. And the
Labourer, who is employed by the Landholder in Husbandry, imposes also his Rate
on him for the Commodities he takes. For there being a want of Day-Labourers in
the Country, they must be humoured, or else they will neither work for you, nor
take your Commodities for their Labor.

Secondly, as for the Landholder, since his Tenants cannot coin their Rent just
at Quarter-day, but must gather it up by degrees, and lodge it with them till
Payday, or borrow it of those who have it lying by them, or do gather it up by
degrees, which is the same thing, and must be necessarily so much Money for
some time lying still; for all that is paid in great Sums must somewhere be
gathered up by the Retail Incomes of a Trade, or else lie still too in great
Sums, which is the same stop of Money, or a greater. Add to this, That to pay
the Creditor that lent him his Rent, he must gather up Money by degrees, as the
Sale of his Commodities shall bring it in, and so makes a greater stop and
greater want of Money, since the borrowed Money that paid the Landholder the
25th of March, must be supposed to lie still some time in the Creditor's hand,
before he lent it the Tenant; and the Money that pays the Creditor three Months
after must lie still some time in the Tenant's. Nor does the Landlord pay away
his Rent usually as soon as he receives it, but by degrees, as his Occasions
call for it; we cannot but suppose that between the Landlord and Tenant there
must necessarily be at least of the yearly Revenue of the Land constantly in
their hands. Indeed considering that most part of the Rents of England being
paid at our Lady Day and Michaelmas, and that the same Money which pays me my
Rent from my Tenant the 25th of March, or thereabouts, cannot pay my next
Neighbor his Rent from his Tenant at the same time, much less one more remote
in another Country; it might seem requisite to suppose half the yearly Revenue
of the Land to be necessarily employed in paying of Rent. For to say that some
Tenants break and pay not their Rent at all, and others pay not till two,
three, four, five, six, etc. Months after Quarter-day, and so the Rent is not
all paid at one time, is no more than to say, That there is Money wanting to
the Trade: For if the Tenant fail the Landlord, he must fail his Creditor, and
he his, and so on, till somebody break, and so Trade decay for want of Money.
But since a considerable part of the Land of England is in the Owners hands,
who neither pay nor receive great Sums for it at a certain day; and because
too, (which is the chief Reason) we are not to consider here how much Money is
in any one man's, or any one sort of men's hands at any one time; for that at
other t^mes may be distributed into other hands, and serve other parts of
Trade; but how much Money is necessary to be in each man's hands all the Year
round, taking one time with another, ( i. e.) having 200 l. in his hand one
month, is to be reckon^d as 100 l. in his hand three months, and so
proportionably) I think we may well suppose of the yearly Revenue to be
constantly in the Landlords or Tenants hands; where^ by the by, we may observe,
That it were better for Trade, and consequent^y for every body, (^or more Money
wo^^d be stirring, and less would do the business) if Rents were paid by (...)
In^^rvals than six months. For su^^^sing I let a Farm at 52 l. per An. i^ my
Rent be paid half yearly, there is re^^^^ed 26 l. to be employed in the Payment
of it in ^ne entire Sum. (if it ^e paid well, and if it be not paid well, (...)
^^nt of so (...) Money to be spared to that purpose, there is so much want of
Money, and Trade is still endamag'd by it) a great part whereof must
necessarily lie still before it come out of my Tenants Chest to my Hands: If it
be paid once a Quarter 13 l. alone will do it, and less Money is laid up for
it, and stopped a less while in its course; But should it be paid every Week,
one single 20 s. will pay the Rent of 52 l. per Annum, whence would follow this
double benefit; First, that a great deal less Money would serve for the Trade
of a Country; And Secondly, That less of the Money would lie still, the
contrary whereof must needs happen where growing Debts are to be paid at larger
distances, and in greater Sums.

Thirdly, As for the Brokers, since they too must lay up the Money coming in by
Retail, either to go to Market, and buy Wares, or to pay at the day appointed,
which is often Six Months; for those Wares they have already, we cannot suppose
them to have less by them, one with another, than One Twentieth part of their
yearly Returns, whether the Money be their own, or they be Indebted so much or
more it matters not, if it be nece^sary they should have constantly by them,
comparing one time with another, at least One Twentieth part of their yearly
Return: Indeed in some great Towns, where the Bankers are ready at hand to buy
Bills, or any other way to lend Money, for short time at great Interest, there
perhaps the Merchant is not forced to keep so much Money by him, as in other
places, where they have not such a Supply.

But if you consider, what Money to do this must necessarily be constantly
lodged in the Bankers Hands; to which, if you add, what part of the Money of a
Country Scholars of all sorts, Women, Gamesters, and great Men's menial
Servants, and all such that do not contribute at all to Trade, either as
Landholders, Laborers, or Brokers, will unavoidably have constantly in their
Hands, it cannot well be thought, that less than One Fiftieth part of the
Laborers Wages, One Fourth part of the Landholders yearly Revenue, and One
Twentieth part of the Brokers yearly Returns in ready Money, will be enough to
drive the Trade of any Country. At least to put it beyond Exception low enough;
it cannot be imagined that less than one moiety of this, i. e. less than One
Hunderd part of the Laborers yearly Wages, One Eighth part of the Landholders
yearly Revenue, and One Fortieth part of the Brokers yearly Returns, in ready
Money, can be enough to move the several Wheels of Trade, and keep up Commeree
in that Life and Thriving posture it should be; And how much the ready Cash of
any Country is short of this proportion, so much must the Trade be impaired and
hindered for want of Money; But however these measures may be mistaken, this is
evident, that the multiplying of Brokers hinders the Trade of any Country by
making the Circulation, the Money goes larger, and in that Circuit more stops,
so that the Returns must necessarily be flower and ^cantier, to the prejudice
of Trade: Besides that, they Eat up too great a share of the Gains of Trade, by
that means Starving the Labourer, and impoverishing the Landholder, whose
Interest is chiefly to be taken care of, it being a settled unmovable
Concernment in the Commonwealth; And therefore it would be convenient to
hinder, as much as is possible, any one from Selling any of our Native
Commodities but he that makes it; Shopkeepers in this being worse than
Gamesters; for they do not only keep so much of the Money of a Country
constantly in their Hands, but also make the public pay them for their keeping
of it; though Gaming too, upon the account of Trade, (as well as other Reasons)
may well deserve to be restrained, since Gamesters, in order to their Play,
keep great Sums of Money by them, which there lies Dead; for though Gamesters
Money shift Masters oftener than any, and is tumbled up and down with every cast
of a Die, yet as to the public lies perfectly still, and no more of it comes
into Trade than they spend in Lating or Wearing.

Here too we may observe, how much Manufacture deserves to be encouraged, since
that part of Trade, though the most considerable, is driven with the least
Money, especially if the Workmanship be more worth than the Materials; For to
the Trade that is driven by Labor and Handicrafts Men, One two and fiftieth
part of the yearly Money paid them will be sufficient; but to a Trade of
Commodities of our bare Native growth, much greater proportion of Money is
required.

Perhaps it will be wondered, why having given some estimate (how wide I know
not) of the Money necessary in the Hands of the Landholder, Labourer, and
Br^ker, to carry on Trade, I have said nothing of the Consumer, whom I had
mentioned before; But to this I Answer, there are so few Consumers, who are not
either Laborers, Brokers, or Landholders: (For those who immediately depend on
the Landholder, as his Children and Servants, come in under that Title, being
maintained by the Rent of his Land, and so of the rest) that they make a very
inconsiderable part in the account.

By what has been said, we may see what Injury the Lowering of Interest is like
to do us by hindering Trade, when it shall either make the Foreigner call home
his money, or your own People backward to lend, the Reward not being judged
proportionable to the risque.

There is another seeming consequence, of the reducing of Money to a low Price,
which at first sight has such an appearance of truth in it, that I have known
it impose upon very able men, and I guess has no small Influence at this time
in the promoting this alteration and that is, that the lowering of Interest
will raise the value of all other Things in proportion. For Money being the
C^unter-ballance to all other Things purchasable by it and lying, at it were,
in the opposite Scale of Commerce, it looks like a natural Consequence, that as
much as you take off from the value of money (...) much you add to the price of
other Things which are exchanged for it; the raising of the price of any thing
being no more but the addition to its value in respect of money, or, which is
all one, lessening the value of money. For Example: Should the value of Gold be
brought down to that of Silver, 100 Guineas would purchase little more Corn,
Wool, or Land, than 100 Shillings, and so the Value of Money being brought
lower, say they, the price of other Things will rise; and the falling of
Interest from 6 to 4 per Cent. is taking away so much of the price of money and
so consequently the lessening its value.

The mistake of this plausible way of Reasoning will be easily discovered, when
we consider that the measure of the value of Money, in proportion to any thing
purchasable by it, is the quantity of the ready Money we have in Comparison
with the quantity of that thing and its Vent; (which vent depends upon its
Necessity or Usefulness, as convenience of Life or Opinion, guided by Fancy or
Fashion, shall determine) or which amounts to the same thing, the price of any
Commodity rises or falls by the proportion of the number of Buyers and Sellers^
whereby the vent comes to be increased or decreased, as a greater part of the
Money we have is designed to be laid out by several People, at the same time,
rather in one thing than another, as we see in the change of Fashions; This
rule holds Universally in all Things that are to be Bought and Sold, bateing
now and then an extravagant Fancy of some particular Person, which never
amounts to so considerable a part of Trade as to make any thing in the account
worthy to be thought an Exception to this Rule.

I shall begin first with the Necessaries or Conveniences of Life, and the
Consumable Commodities subservient thereunto; and show, That the Value of Money
in respect of those depends only on the Plenty or Scarcity of Money in
proportion to the Plenty and Scarcity of those things, and not on what Interest
shall be by Necessity, Law or Contract at that time laid on the borrowing of
Money: and then afterward I shall show that the same holds in Land.

There is nothing more confirmed by daily Experience, than that Men give any
Portion of Money for whatsoever is absolutely necessary, rather than go without
it: And in such things, the Scarcity of them alone makes their Prices. As for
example: Let us suppose 1/^ Ounce of Silver, or half a Crown now in England, is
worth a Bushel of Wheat; but should there be next year a great scarcity of
Wheat in England, and a proportionab^e want of all other Food, five Ounces of
Siver would perhaps in Exchange purchase but one Bushel of Wheat, so that Money
would be then 9/10 less worth in respect o^ Food, though at the same value it
was before, in respect of other Things that kept their former proportion in
their Quantity and Consumption. By the like proportions of Increase and
Decrease, does the value of Things more or less convenient rise and fall in
respect of Money, only with this difference, that things absolutely necessary
for Life must be had at any Rate; but Things convenient will be had only as
they stand in preference with other Conveniences; and therefore in any one of
these Commodities, the value rises only as its quantity is less, and vent
greater, which depends upon its being p^eferr'd to other Things in its
Consumption; For supposing that at the same time that there is a g^^at scarcity
of Wh^^t, and other Grain, there were a considerable quantity of O^^s, Men no
question would give far more for Wheat than Oats, as being the healthier,
pleasanter, and more convenient Food; but since Oats would serve to supply that
absolute necessity of sustaining Life, Men would not rob themselves of all
other Conveniences of Life, by paying all their Money for Wheat, when Oats
that are cheaper, though with some inconvenience, would supply that Defect. It
may then so happen at the same time, that half an Ounce of Silver, that the
year before would buy one Bushel of Wheat, will this year buy but 1/10 of a
Bushel: Half an ounce of Silver, that the year before would have bought three
Bushels of Oats, will this year still buy one Bushel; and at the same time half
an Ounce of Silver, that would the year before have bought 15 pounds of Lead,
will still buy the same quantity. So that at the same time Silver, in respect
of Wheat, is 9/10 less worth than it was, in respect of Oats less worth, and in
respect of Lead, as much worth as before.

The fall therefore or rise of Interest, making neither more or less Land,
Money, or any sort of Commodity in England, than there was before; immediately
by its change alters not at all the Value of Money, in reference to
Commodities; because the measure of that is only the Quantity and Vent which
are not immediately changed by the Change of Interest, but only as the Change
of Interest in Trade conduces to the bringing in or carrying out Money or
Commodity, and so in time varying their Proportion here in England from what it
was before, which is not in this place to be considered.

This is perfectly the Value of Money in respect of Consumable Commodities: But
the better to understand it in its full latitude, in respect both of consumable
Commodities, and Land too, we must consider, First, That the Value of Land
consists in this, That by its constant production of saleable Commodities it
brings in a certain yearly Income. Secondly, the Value of Commodities consists
in this, That as portable and useful things, they, by their Exchange or
Consumption, supply the Necessaries or Conveniences of Life. Thirdly, In M^r^y
there is a double Value, answering to both of these first, as it is capable by
its Interest to yield us such an yearly Income; and in this it has the Nature
of Land, the Income of one being called Ren^, of the other, Use; only with this
difference, That the Land in its Soil being different, as some fertile, some
barren, and the Products of it very various, both in their Sorts, and Value
too, according as their Quantity and Vent, varies; but Money^ constantly the
same, and by its Interest giving the same sort of Product through the whole
Country, is capable of having a sixed yearly Rate set upon it by the
Magistrate; but ^and is not. But though in the Uniformity of its legal Worth,
100 l. of lawful Money being all through England equal in its current Value to
any other 100 l. of lawful Money, (because by virtue of the Law it will every
where pass for as much Ware or Debt, as any other hundred pounds) is capable to
have its yearly Hire valued better than Land: yet in respect of the varying
need, and necessity of Money, (which changes with the increase or decay of
Money or Trade in a Country) it is as little capable to have its yearly Hire
fixed by Law, as Land it self. For were all the Land in Rumney-Marsh, Acre for
Acre, equally good, that is, did constantly produce the same quantity of
equally good Hay or Grass, one as another, the Rent of it, under that
Consideration of every Acre being of an equal Worth, would be capable of being
regulated by Law; and one might as well Enact, That no Acre of Land in
Rumney-Marsh shall be let for above 40 s. per An. as that no 100 l. shall be
let for above 4 l. per An. But no body can think it fit (since by reason of the
equal Value of that Land it can) that therefore the Rent of the Land in
Rumney-Marsh should be Regulated by Law. For supposing all the Land in
Rumney-Marsh, or in England, were all of so equal a Worth, that any one Acre,
compared at the same time to any one other, were equally good in respect of its
Product, yet the same Acre, compared with it self in different times, would not
in respect of Rent be of equal Value; And therefore it would have been an
unreasonable thing, if in the time of Henry ^ the Rent of Land in Rumney-Marsh
had been settled by a Law, according to the judged Value of it at that time,
and the same Law, limiting the Rent perhaps to 5 s. per Acre, have continued
still. The Absurdity and Impracticableness of this every one sees at the first
Proposal, and readily concludes within himself, That things must be left to
find their own Price^ and it is impossible in this their constan^ mutability
for human Foresight to se^ Rules and Bounds to the constantly-varying
Proportion and Use, which will alway^ regulate their Value.

They who consider things beyond their Names, will find, That Money, as well as
all other Commodities, is liable to the same Changes and Inequalities: Nay in
this respect of the Variety of its Value brought in by time in the Succession
of Affairs, the Rate of Money is less capable of being regulated by a Law in
any Country than the Rent of Land; because of the quick Changes that happen in
Trade this too must be added, That Money may be brought in or carried out of
the Kingdom, which Land cannot; and so that be truly worth 6 or 8 per Cent.
this year, which would yield but 4 the last.

2. Money has a Value, as it is capable by Exchange to procure us the
Necessaries or Conveniences of Life; and in this it has the Nature of a
Commodity, only with this difference, That it serves us commonly by its
Exchange, never almost by its Consumption; but has not at all a more standing
settled Value in Exchange with any other thing, than any other Commodity has,
but a more known one, and better sixed by Name, Number and Weight, to enable us
to reckon what the Proportion of Scarcity and Vent of one Commodity is to
another. For supposing, as before, that half an Ounce of Silver would last year
exchange for one Bushel of Wheat, or for 15 l. weight of Lead; if this year
Wheat be 10 times scarcer, and Lead in the same quantity to its Vent as it was,
is it not evident that half an Ounce of Silver will still exchange for 15 l. of
Lead, though it will exchange but for One Tenth of a Bushel of Wheat; and he
that has use of Lead will as soon take 15 l. weight of Lead, as ^ Ounce of
Silver, for One Tenth of a Bushel of Wheat, and no more; so that if you say
that Money now is 9/10 less worth than it was the former year, you must say so
of Lead too, and all other things that keep the same Proportion to Money they
were in before; only this Variation is first observed in Money, because it is
the measure by which People reckon. For calling that half Ounce of Silver Half
a Crown, they are understood better when they say, Half a Crown, or two
Shilling^ and six pence, will now but 1/10 of a Bushel of Wheat, but do not
say, that 15 l. of Lead will now but 1/10 of a Bushe^ of Wheat, because it is
not generally used to this sort of Reckoning; nor do the^ say Lead is less
worth than it was, though in respect of Wheat Lead be (...) worse than it was,
as well as Silver; only by the Tale of Shillings we are better enabled to judge
of it.

This I suppose is the true Value of M^^ney when it passes from one to another
in buying and selling; where it runs the same Changes of higher and lower, as
an^ other Commodity does; for one equ^^ quantity whereof you shall receive more
or less of another Commodity at on^ time than you do at another in exchange For
a Farmer that carries a Bushel ^ Wheat to Market, and a Labourer th^^ carries
Half a Crown, shall find that the Money of one, as well as Corn of the other,
shall at some times purchase him more or less Leather or Salt, according as
they are in greater Plenty and Scarcity one to another. So that in Exchange of
coined Silver for any other Commodity, which is buying and selling, the same
measure governs the Proportion you receive, as if you exchanged Lead or Wheat,
or any other Commodity, which is nothing else but their Quantity in Proportion
to their vent. If then change of Use makes not your Silver more in Sp^ci^, or
your Wheat or other Commodities less, it will not have any Influence at all to
make it exchange for less of Wheat, or any other Commodity, than it will have
on lead, to make it exchange for less Wheat, or any other Commodity.

Money therefore in buying and selling being perfectly in the same Condition
with other Commodities, and subject to all the same Laws of Value, let us next
see how it comes to be of the same Nature with Land, by yielding a certain
yearly Income, which we call Use or Interest. For Land produces naturally
something new and profitable, and of Value to Mankind; but Money is a barren
thing, and produces nothing, but by Compact transfers that Profit that was the
Reward of one man's Labor into another man's Pocket. That which occasions
this, is the unequal Distribution of Money; which Inequality has the same
effect too upon Land that it has upon Money. For my having more Money in my
hand than I can, or am disposed to use in buying and selling, makes me able to
lend; and another's want of so much Money as he could employ in Trade, makes
him willing to borrow. But why then, and for what Consideration does he pay
Use? For the same Reason, and upon as good Consideration, as the Tenant pays
Rent for your Land. For as the unequal Distribution of Land, (you having more
than you can or will manure, and another less) brings you a Tenant for your
Land; and the same unequal Distribution of Money, (I having more than I can or
will employ, and another less) brings me a Tenant for my Money: So my Money is
apt in Trade, by the Industry of the Borrower, to produce more than 6 per Cent.
to the Borrower, as well a^ your Land, by the Labor of the Tenant, is apt to
produce more Fruits than his Rent comes to; and therefore deserves to be paid
for, as well as Land, by an yearly Rent. For though the Usurer's Money would
bring in no yearly profit, if he did not lend it, (suppo^ing he employ it not
himself) and so his Six per Cent. may seem to be the Fruit of another Man's
Labor, yet he shares not near so much of the profit of another Man's Labor,
as he that lets Land to a Tenant; for without the Tenants Industry (supposing
as before, the owner would not manage it himself) his Land would yield him
little or no Profit; so that the Rent he receives is a greater Portion of the
Fruit of his Tenants Labor than the Use is at 6 per Cent, for generally he
that Borrows 1000 l. at Six per Cent. and so pays 60 l. per A^num Use, gets
more above his Use in one year, by his Industry, than he that Rents a Farm of
60 l. per Annum gets in two above his Rent, though his Labor be harder.

It being evident therefore that he that has skill in Traffic, but has not
Money enough to Exercise it, has not only reason to Borrow Money to drive his
Trade, and get a livelihood, but as much Reason to pay Use for that Money, as
he that not having Land of his own, yet has Skill in Husbandry, has not only
reason to Rent Land, but to pay Money for the Use of it; It follows, that
Borrowing Money upon Use is not only by the necessity of Affairs, and the
Constitution of humane Society^ unavoidable to some Men, but that also to
receive Profit for the Loan of Money, is as equitable and lawful, as receiving
Rent for Land, and more tolerable to the Borrower, notwithstanding the Opinion
of some over-scrupulous Men.

This being so, one would expect, that the rate of Interest should be the
Measure of the value of Land in number of years Purchase, for which the Fee is
Sold; For 100 l. per Annum being equal to 100 l. per Annum, and so to
perpetuity.

and 100 l. per Annum being the Product^ of 1000 l. when Interest is at 10 per
Cent. of 1250 l. when Interest is at 8 per Cent. of 1666 l. or thereabouts,
when Interest is at 6 per Cent. of 2000 l. when Money is at 5 per Cent. of 2500
l. when Money is at 4 per Cent.
One would conclude, I say, that Land should Sell in proportion to Use,
according to these following Rates, viz.

When Money is at 10 per Cent. for 10 years purchase. When Money is at 8 per
Cent. for 12 1/^ years purchase. When Money is at 6 per Cent. for 16 ^/^ years
purchase. When Money is at 5 per Cent. for 20 years purchase. When Money is at
4 per Cent. for 25 years purchase.
But Experience tells us, that neither in Queen Elizabeth, nor King James the
First Reigns, when Interest was at Ten per Cent. was Land Sold for Ten; or when
it was at Eighth per Cent, for 12 years purchase, or any thing near the low
rate that high Use required (if it were true, that the rate of Interest
governed the price of Land) any more than Land, now yields 25 years purchase,
because a great part of the Monied Men will now let their Money upon good
Security at Four per Cent. Thus we see in fact how little this Rule has held at
home; and he that will look into Holland, will find that the Purchase of Land
was not raised there when their Interest fell. This is certain, and past doubt,
that the legal Interest can never regulate the price of Land, since it is
plain, that the price of Land has never changed with it in the several Changes
have been made in the rate of Interest by Law, nor now that the rate of
Interest is by Law the same through all England, is the price of Land every
where the same, it being in some parts constantly sold for 4 or 5 years
Purchase more than in others. Whether you or I can tell the Reason of this, it
matters not to the Question in hand, but it being really so, this is plain
Demonstration against those who pretend to advance and regulate the price of
Land by a Law, concerning the Interest of Money.

But yet I will give you some of my Guesses, why the price of Land is not
regulated (as at first sight it seems it should be) by the Interest of Money.
Why it is not regulated by the legal Use is manifest, because the rate of Money
does not follow the Standard of the Law, but the price of the Market; and Men
not observing the legal and forced, but the Natural and Current Interest of
Money, regulate their Affairs by that; But why the rate of Land does not follow
the Current Interest of Money requires a farther Consideration.

All Things that are Bought and Sold, raise and fall their price in proportion,
as there are more Buyers or Sellers: Where are a great many Sellers to a few
Buyers, there use what Art you will, the thing to be Sold will be cheap; on the
other side, turn the Tables, and raise up a great many Buyers for a few
Sellers, and the same thing will immediately grow dear; this Rule holds in Land
as well as all other Commodities, and is the Reason, why in England at the same
time, that Land in some places is at seventeen or eighteen years purchase, it
is about others, where there are pro^itable Manu^actures at two or three and
twenty years Purchase; because there (Men thriving and getting Money by their
Industry, and willing to leave their Estates to their Children in Land, as the
surest, and most lasting Provision, and not so liable to Casualties as Money in
untrading or unskillful Hands) there are many Buyers ready always to Purchase,
but few Sellers, for the Land thereabout being already possessed by that sort
of Industrious and Thriving Men, they have neither need, nor will, to sell: In
such places of Manufacture, the Riches o^ the one not arising from the
squandring and waste of another, (as it does in other places where Men live
lazily upon the product of the Land) the Industry of the People bringing in
increase of Wealth from remote Parts, makes plenty of Money there without the
impoverishing of their Neighbors. And when the thriving Tradesman has got more
than he can well employ in Trade, his next Thoughts are to look out for a
Purchase, but it must be a Purchase in the Neighborhood, where the Estate may
be under his Eye, and within convenient distance, that the Care and Pleasure of
his Farm may not take him off from the Engagements of his Calling, nor remove
his Children too far from him, or the Trade he breeds them up in; And this
seems to me the Reason, why in places wherein thriving Manufactures have
erected themselves, Land has been observed to Sell quicker, and for more years
Purchase than in others, as about Hallifax in the North, Taunton and Exeter in
the West.

This is that then which makes Land as well as other Things dear; plenty of
Buyers, and but few Sellers; and so by the Rule of Contraries, plenty of
Sellers and few Buyers makes Land cheap.

He that will justly estimate the value of any thing, must consider its
quantity, in proportion to its vent, for this alone regulates the Price; for
the value of any thing, compared with its self, or with a standing Measure, is
greater, as its quantity is less in proportion to its vent; but in comparing
it, or exchanging it with any other thing, the quantity and vent too of that
must be allowed for in the computation of their Value. But because the desire
of Money is constantly, almost every where the same, its vent varies very
little; but as its greater scarcity enhanses its price, and increases the
scramble, there being nothing else that does easily supply the want of it The
le^sening its quantity, therefore, always increase^ its Price, and makes an
equal portion of it exchange for a greater of any other thing. Thus it comes to
pass, that there is no manner of settled proportion between the value of an
Ounce of Silver, and any other Commodity; for either varying its quantity in
that Country, or the Commodity changing its quantity in proportion to its vent,
their respective values change, i. e. less of one will barter for more of the
other; though in the ordinary way of speaking, it is only said, that the price
of the Commodity, not of the Money is changed. For example, half an Ounce of
Silver in England, will exchange sometimes for a Bushel of Wheat, sometimes
for, sometimes but, etc. and this it does equally, whether by Use it be apt to
bring in to the Owner 6/100 of its own Weight per annum, or nothing at all; it
being only the change of the quantity of Wheat to its Vent, supposing we have
still the same Sum of Money in the Kingdom; or else the change of the quantity
of our Money in the Kingdom, supposing the quantity of Wheat, in respect to its
vent be the same too, that makes the change in the price of Wheat; for if you
alter the quantity or vent on either side, you presently alter the Price, but
no other way in the World.

For it is not the Being, Adding, Increasing or Diminishing of any good quality
in any Commodity that makes its Price greater or less, but only as it makes its
quantity or vent greater or less, in proportion one to another. This will
easily appear by Two or Three Instances.

1. The Being of any good and useful quality in any thing, neither increases
its Price, nor indeed makes it have any Price at all, but only as it lessens
its quantity or increases its vent, each of these in proportion to one another.
What more useful or necessary things are there to the Being or Well-being of
Men, than Air and Water, and yet these have generally no Price at all, nor
yield any Money, because their quantity is immensly greater than their vent in
most places of the World; but, as soon as ever Water (for Air still offers its
self every where, without restraint or enclosure, and therefore is no where of
any Price) comes any where to be reduced into any proportion to its
consumption, it begins presently to have a Price, and is sometimes sold dearer
than Wine; and hence it is, that the best and most useful things are commonly
the cheapest, because, though their Consumption be great, yet the bounty of
Providence has made their production large and suitable to it. 2. Nor does the
Adding an excellency to any Commodity, raise its Price, unless it increase its
Consumption. For suppose there should be taught a way (which should be
published to the knowledge of every one) to make a Medicine of Wheat alone,
that should infallibly Cure the Stone, it is certain the discovery of this
quality in that Grain, would give it an excellency very considerable; and yet
this would not increase the Price of it one Farthing in Twenty Bushels, because
its quantity or vent would not hereby, to any sensible degree, be altered. 3.
Neither does the Increasing of any good quality, in any sort of things make it
yield more; for though Teasels be much better this Year than they were last,
they are not one jot dearer, unless they be fewer too, or the consumption of
them greater. 4. Nor does the Lessening the good qualities of any sort of
Commodity lessen its Price; which is evident in Hops, that are usually dearest
those Years they are worst. But if it happen to be a Species of Commodity,
whose defects may be supplied by some other, the making of it worse does lessen
its Price, because it hinders its Vent; for if Rye should any Year prove
generally smutty or grown, no question it would yield less Money than
otherwise, because the deficiency of that might be, in some measure, made up by
Wheat and other Grain; but if it be a sort of Commodity whose use no other
known thing can supply, it is not its being better or worse, but its quantity
and vent is that alone which regulates and determines its value.
To apply this now to Money as capable of different Rates of Interest,
considering Money in its proper use, as a Commodity passing in exchange from
one to another, all that is done by Interest is but adding to Money by
agreement or public Authority, which Naturally it has not, viz. a faculty of
increasing every year Six per Cent; now if public Authority sink Use to Four
per Cent. it is certain it diminishes this good quality in Money 1/^ but yet
this making the Money of England not one Farthing more than it was, it alters
not the Measures upon which all changeable Commodities increase or sink their
price, and so makes not Money Exchange for less of any Commodity than it would
without this alteration of its Interest; but rather if lessening Use to Four
per Cent. does at all alter the quantity of Money and makes it less; it makes
Money as it has the Nature of a Commodity dearer, i. e. a less quantity of
Money will Exchange for a greater quantity of another Commodity than it would
before. This perhaps will appear a little plainer by these following
particulars.

1. That the Intrinsic Natural worth of any Thing, consists in this, that it
is apt to be serviceable to the Necessities or Conveniences of human Life, and
it is Naturally more worth, as the Necessity or Convenience it supplies is
greater; but yet, 2. That there is no such Intrinsic Natural settled value in
any Thing, as to make any assigned quantity of it, constantly worth any
assigned quantity of another. 3. The value of any assigned quantities of two or
more Commodities, are pro hic and nunc, equal, when they will Exchange one for
another; As supposing one Bushel of Wheat, two Bushels of Barley, 30 l. of
Lead, and one Ounce of Silver, will now in the Market be taken one for another,
they are then of equal worth, and our Coin being that which Englishmen reckon
by; An Englishman would say, that now one Bushel of Wheat, two Bushels of
Barley, 30 l. of Lead, one Ounce of Silver, were equally worth Five Shillings.
4. The altering of this value, two things in respect of one another, or any one
standing common Measure, is not the altering of any Intrinsic value or quality
in the Commodity, (for musty and smutty Corn will Sell dearer at one time than
the clean and sweet at another) but the alteration of some proportion, the
Commodity bears to something else. 5. This proportion in all Commodities,
whereof Money is one, is the proportion of their quantity to the Vent, which
Vent is nothing else but the passing of Commodities from one owner to another
in Exchange, and is then called quicker, when a greater quantity of any species
of Commodity is taken off from the Owners of it in an equal space of time. 6.
This Vent is regulated, i. e. made quicker or slower, as greater or less
quantities of any Saleable Commodity are removed out of the way, and course of
Trade; separated from public Commerce; and no longer lie within the reach of
Exchange. For though any Commodity should shift Hands never so fast, and be
Exchanged from one Man to another; yet if they were not thereby exempted from
Trade and Sale, and did not cease to be any longer Traffic, this would not at
all make, or quicken their Vent; but this seldom or never happening, makes very
little or no alteration: And thus the Vent is altered three ways; 1. By
Consumption, when the Commodity in its Use is destroyed, as Meat, Drink, and
Cloths, etc. all that is so consumed is quite gone out of the Trade of the
World. 2. Exportation; and all that is so carried away, is gone out of the
Trade of England, and concerns Englishmen no more in the price of their
Commodities among themselves, than if it were out of the World. 3. Buying and
laying up for a Man's private Use. For what is by any of these ways shut out of
the Market, and no longer moveable by the Hand of Commerce, makes no longer any
part of Merchantable Ware, and so in respect of Trade, and the quantity of any
Commodity, is not more considerable than if it were not in being. All these
three terminating at last in Consumption of all Commodities, (excepting only
Jewels and Plate, and some few others which wear out but insensibly) may
properly enough pass under that Name. Engrossing too has some influence on the
present Vent, but this enclosing some considerable part of any Commodity (for
if the Engrossing be of all the Commodity, and it be of general Use, the price
is at the will of the Ingrosser) out of the free common of Trade only for some
time, and afterward returning again to Sale, makes not usually so sensible and
general an alteration in the Vent as the others do, but yet influences the
price, and the Vent more according as it extends its self to a larger portion
of the Commodity, and Hoards it up longer. 7. Most other portable Commodities
(excepting Jewels, Plate, etc.) decaying quickly in their Use, but Money being
less consumed or increased, i. e. by slower Degrees removed from, or brought
into the free Commerce of any Country, than the greatest part of other
Merchandise; and so the proportion between its quantity and Vent, altering
slower than in most other Commodities, it is commonly looked on as a standing
measure to judge of the value of all Things, especially being adapted to it by
its Weight and Denomination in Coinage. 8. Money, whilst the same quantity of
it is passing up and down the Kingdom in Trade, is really a standing measure of
the falling and rising value of other Things in Reference to one another: and
the alteration of price is truly in them only. But if you increase or lessen
the quantity of Money current in Traffic in any place, then the alteration of
value is in the Money; and if at the same time Wheat keep its proportion of
Vent to quantity, Money to speak truly alters its worth, and Wheat does not,
though it Sell for a greater or less price than it did before; for Money being
looked upon as the standing measure of other Commodities, Men consider and
speak of it still as if it were a standing measure, though when it has varied
its quantity, it is plain it is not. 9. But the value or price of all
Commodities, amongst which Money passing in Trade is truly one, consisting in
proportion, you alter this, as you do all other proportions, whether you
increase one or lessen the other. In all other Commodities, the Owners when
they design them for Traffic, endeavor as much as they can to have them
vented and gone, i. e. removed out of the reach of Commerce and Exchange, by
Consumption, Exportation, or laying up, which Vent is sometimes slower, and
sometimes quicker, But Money never lying upon Peoples Hands, or wanting Vent,
(for any one may part with it in Exchange when he pleases;) the endeavor of
the Public, and almost every Body, is to keep it from Venting or Consuming, i.
e. Exportation or Hoarding up, which is its proper Consumption. The Vent of
Money therefore being always sufficient, or more than enough, its quantity
alone is enough to regulate and determine its value, without considering any
Proportion between its quantity and vent, as in other Commodities. 10.
Therefore lessening of Use, not bringing one Penny of Money more into the Trade
or Exchange of any Country, but rather drawing it away from Trade, and so
making it less, does not at all sink its Value, and make it buy less of any
Commodity, but rather more. 11. That which raises the natural Interest of
Money, is the same that raises the Rent of Land, ( i. e.) its aptness to bring
in yearly to him that manages it, a greater Overplus of Income above his Rent,
as a Reward to his Labor. That which causes this in Land is the greater
quantity of its Product, in Proportion to the same Vent of that particular
Fruit, or the same quantity of Product, in proportion to a greater Vent of that
single Commodity; but that which causes increase of Profit to the Borrower of
Money, is the less quantity of Money, in proportion to Trade, or to the Vent of
all Commodities, taken together, and vice versa. 12. The natural Value of
Money, as it is apt to yield such an yearly Income by Interest, depends on the
whole quantity of the then passing Money of the Kingdom, in proportion to the
whole Trade of the Kingdom, ( i. e.) the general Vent of all the Commodities.
But the natural Value of Money, in exchanging for any one Commodity, is the
quantity of the Trading Money of the Kingdom, designed for that Commodity, in
proportion to that single Commodity and its Vent. For though any single man's
Necessity and Want, either of Money, or any species of Commodity, being known,
may make him pay dearer for Money, or that Commodity; yet this is but a
particular Case, that does not at the same time alter this constant and general
Rule. 13. That supposing Wheat a standing Measure, that is, That there is
constantly the same quantity of it in proportion to its Vent, we shall find
Money to run the same Variety of Changes in its Value, as all other Commodities
do. Now that Wheat in England does come nearest to a standing Measure, is
evident, by comparing Wheat with other Commodities, Money, and the yearly
Income of Land in Hen. 7. time and now. For supposing 1 Hen. 7. N. let 100
Acres of Land to A. for 6 d. per An. per Acre, Rack-rent^ and to B. another 100
Acres of Land, o^ the same Soil and yearly worth with the former, for a Bushel
of Wheat per Acre^ Rack-rent, (a Bushel of Wheat about that time being probably
sold for about 6 d. it was then an equal Rent. If therefore these Leases were
for years yet to come it is certain that he that paid 6 d. per Acre. would pay
now 50 s. per An. and he that paid a Bushel of Wheat per Acre, would pay about
25 l. per An. which would be ne^r about the yearly Value of the Land^ were it
to be let now. The reason where of is this, That there being ten times a^ much
Silver now in the World, (the Discovery of the W^st-Indi^s having made the
Plenty) as there was then, it is 9/1^ less worth now than it was at that time;
that is, it will exchange for 9/1^ less of any Commodity now, which bears the
same Proportion to its Vent as it did 200 years since; which, of all other
Commodities^ Wheat is likeliest to do. For in England, and this part of the
World, Wheat being the constant and most general Food, not altering with the
Fashion, not growing by chance; but as the Farmers sow more or less of it,
which they endeavor to proportion, as near as can be guessed, to the
Consumption, abstracting the Overplus of the precedent year in their Provision
for the next; and vice versa, it must needs fall out that it keeps the nearest
Proportion to its Consumption, (which is more studied and designed in this than
other Commodities) of any thing, if you take it for 7 or 20 years together;
though perhaps the Plenty or Scarcity of one year, caused by the Accidents of
the Season, may very much vary it from the immediately precedent, or the
following. Wheat therefore, in this part of the World, (and that Grain which is
the constant general Food of any other Country) is the fittest Measure to judge
of the altered Value of things in any long tract of Time: And therefore Wheat
here, Rice in Turkey, etc. is the fittest thing to reserve a Rent in, which is
designed to be constantly the same for all future Ages. But Money is the best
Measure of the altered Value of things in a few years; because its Vent is the
same, and its quantity alters slowly. But Wheat, or any other Grain, cannot
serve instead of Money^ because of its Bulkiness and too quick Change of its
quantity: For had I a Bond, to pay me 100 Bushels of Wheat next year, it might
be Loss or Gain to me; too great an Inequality and Uncertainty to be ventured
in Trade, besides the different Goodness of several Parcels of Wheat in the
same year. 14. That supposing any Island separate from the Commerce of the rest
of Mankind, if Gold and Silver, or whatever else, (so it be lasting) be their
Money, if they have but a certain quantity of it, and can get no more, that
will be a steady standing Measure of the Value of all other things. 15. That if
in any Country they use for Money any lasting Material, whereof there is not
any more to be got, and so cannot be increased, or being of no other use, the
rest of the World does not value it, and so it is not like to be diminished;
this also would be a steady standing Measure of the Value of other Commodities.
16. That in a Country where they had such a standing Measure, any quantity of
that Money (if it were but so much that every body might have some) would serve
to drive any proportion of Trade, whether more or less, there being Counters
enough to reckon by, and the Value of the Pledges being still sufficient, as
constantly increasing with the Plenty of the Commodity. But these three last,
being built on Suppositions that are not like to be found in the Practice of
Mankind, since Navigation and Commerce have brought all parts acquainted with
one another, and introduced the use of Gold and Silver Money into all Trading
parts of the World; they serve rather to give us some light into the nature of
Money, than to teach here a new Measure of Traffic, though it be certain, That
that part of the World, which bred most of our Gold and Silver, used least of
it in exchange, and used it not for Money. 17. That therefore in any Country
that has Commerce with the rest of the World, it is almost impossible now to
be without the use of Silver Coin, and having Money of that, and Accounts kept
in such Money, it is impossible to have any standing, unalterable measure of
the value of things; for whilst the Mines supply to Mankind more than wastes
and consumes in its use, the quantity of it will daily grow greater in respect
of other Commodities, and its value less. 18. That in a Country that has open
Commerce with the rest of the World, and uses Money made of the same Materials
with their Neighbors, any quantity of that Money will not serve to drive any
quantity of Trade, but that there must be a certain proportion between Money
and Trade: The reason whereof is this, because to keep your Trade going without
loss, your Commodities amongst you, must keep an equal, or, at least, near the
Price of the same Species of Commodities in the Neighbor Countries, which they
cannot do, if your Money be far less than in other Countries; for then, either
your Commodities must be sold very cheap, or a great part of your Trade must
stand still; there not being Money enough in the Country to pay for them (in
their shifting of hands) at that high price which the Plenty, and consequently
low Value of Money makes them at in another Country; for the value of Money in
general is the quantity of all the Money in the World, in proportion to all the
Trade; but the value of Money in any one Country, is the present quantity of
the Current Money in that Country, in proportion to the present Trade:
Supposing then, that we had now in England but half as much Money as we had
Seven years ago, and yet had still as much yearly Product of Commodities, as
many hands to Work them, and as many Brokers to disperse them as before, and
that the rest of the World we Trade with, had as much Money as they had before
(for it is likely they should have more by our Moiety shared amongst them) it is
certain, that either half our Rents should not be paid, half our Commodities
not vented, and half our Laborers not employed, and so half the Trade be
clearly lost, or else that every one of these must receive but half the Money
for their Commodities and Labor they did before, and but half so much as our
Neighbors do receive for the same Labor, and same natural Product at the same
time, which, though it will make no scarcity of our Native Commodities amongst
us, yet it will have these ill consequences. 1. It will make our Native
Commodities vent very cheap. 2. It will make all Foreign Commodities very dear,
both which will keep us Poor: For the Merchant making Silver and Gold his
measure, and considering what the Foreign Commodity costs him ( i. e. how many
Ounces of Silver) in the Country where Money is more Plenty, i. e. Cheaper, and
considering too how many Ounces of Silver it will yield him in another Country,
will not part with it here, but for the same quantity of Silver, or as much as
that Silver will buy here of our Commodity, which will be a great deal more
than in another place; so that in all our exchange of Native for Foreign
Commodities, we pay double the Value that any other Country does, where Money
is in greater plenty: This indeed will make a dearness, and, in time, a
scarcity of Foreign Commodities; which is not the worst inconveniency that it
brings upon us, supposing them not absolutely necessary: but 3. It endangers
the drawing away our People, both Handicrafts, Mariners, and Soldiers, who are
apt to go where their Pay is best; which will always be where there is greatest
plenty of Money, and, in time of War, must needs bring great distress.
19. Upon this measure too it is, That the variation of exchange of Money,
between several Countries, does somewhat depend; for it is certain, that one
Ounce of Silver is always of equal value to another Ounce of Silver considered
in its Intrinsic worth, or in reference to the universal Trade of the World;
but it is not of the same value at the same time, in several parts of the World,
but is of most worth in that Country where there is the least Money, in
proportion to its Trade; and therefore Men may afford to give 20 Ounces of
Silver in one place, to receive 18 or 19 Ounces of Silver in another: But this
is not all to this then, (to find out the alteration of the exchange) the
overbalance of the Trade must be taken into consideration; and these two
together regulate the exchange in all the Commerce of the World, and, in both
the increase of the exchange ( i. e. receiving a greater quantity of Silver
(for that is the measure, let the Coin or the denomination be what it will) in
one Country for a less quantity of Silver paid in another Country) depends upon
one and the same thing, viz. the greater Plenty of Money in one Country than in
the other, only with this difference, that where the overbalance of Trade
raises the exchange above the Par, there it is the plenty of Money which
private Merchants have in one Country, which they desire to remove into
another: But where the Riches of the Country raises the exchange above the Par,
there it is the plenty of the Money in the whole Country. In one, the Merchant
has more Money (or Debts, which is all one) in a Foreign Country than his Trade
there will employ, and so is willing to allow upon exchange to him abroad, that
shall pay him ready Money at home, 1, 2, 3, etc. per Cent. more or less,
proportionably as his or his Countrymens plenty of ready Money abroad, the
danger of leaving it there, or the difficulty of bringing it home in Specie,
and his present need of Money at home is greater or lesi.
In the other, the whole Country has more Money than can well be employed in
the Trade thereof, or at least, the proportion of the Money to the Trade is
greater than in the Neighboring Country, where the exchange is below the Par.

For, supposing the balance of Trade to be equal between England and Holland,
but that there be in Holland a greater plenty of Money than in England, (which
will appear by the lowness of the National Use in Holland, and the height of
the National Use in England; and also by the dearness of Food and Labor in
general in Holland, and the cheapness of it in England.) If N. has 10000 l. in
Holland, which the greater advantage he could make of it in England, either by
Use or Purchase, tempts him to transfer into England, it is probable he will
give as much to a Merchant in Holland to pay him 10000 l. in England, as the
ensurance of that time between Holland and England is worth; which, if it be in
a Country where the Exportation of Bullion is Prohibited, he must pay the more,
because his Venture, if he carry it in Specie, will be greater; and, upon this
ground, perhaps the Prohibiting the Exportation of Money out of England, under
Penalties, may be of some use, by making the rate of the exchange greater upon
those Countries who Import upon us more than they Export in Commodities, and so
retain some part of the Money which their overbalance of Trade would carry
away from us, though, after all, if we are over-ballanc'd in Trade it must go.

But, since the Holland Merchant cannot receive N -- 's 10000 l. in Money in
Holland, and pay him 10000 l. in England, unless his overbalance of Trade
make Englishmen indebted to him 10000 l. in Money, which he is not like to
take in Commodity. I think the overbalance of Trade is that which chiefly
raises the exchange in any Country, and that plenty of Money in any Country
does it only for so much of the Money as is transferred either to be let out to
Use, or to be spent there; and though lending to Foreigners, upon Use, does not
at all alter the balance of Trade between those Countries, yet it does alter
the exchange between those Countries for so much as is lent upon Use, by not
calling away the Money that should follow the overbalance of Trade, but
letting it rest there, as if it were accounted for; all one as if the balance
of Trade were for so much altered: But this being not much in comparison of the
gener^^ Traffic between two Nations, or at lea^^ varying slower, the Merchant
too regulating the exchange, and not the Usurer I suppose it is the present
balance of Trade, on which the exchange immedi^ately and chiefly depends,
unless some accident shall make a great deal of Money be remitted at the same
time, from one place to another, which will for the timeraise the exchange all
one as an ove^-ballance of Trade; and indeed, when examined is generally very
little different from it^

To be able to estimate the Par with the rise and fall of the exchange, it is
necessary to know the intrinsic value, i^ how much Silver is in the Coins of
the two Countries, by which you reckon and charge the Bill of Exchange.

Sir, If I have been led a little too f^^ from one thing to another, in the
considerat^^on of Money, I beg your Pardon, h^ pu^^^ that these Particulars
will afford some lig^^ to our present subject.

To return to the Price of Land, by which has been abovesaid, it is evident
That the Years purchase of Land do not increase with the fall of Interest, and
the abating that good quality in Money of yielding yearly Six p^r Cen^. to
Four, does not presently so sink its Value, in respect of Land, that 1/^ part
more is required in exchange: that is, That falling of Interest from Six to
Four, will not raise Land from Twenty to Thirty years purchase. The raising and
falling of the Price of Land, as of other things, depends much on the quantity
of Land, set to Sale, compared with the quantity of Money designed for that
Traffic, or which amounts to the same thing, upon the number of Buyers and
Sellers, for where there are many Sellers and few Purchasers, though Interest
be lessened, Land will be cheap, as I have already showed. At least, this is
certain, That making a Law to reduce Interest, will not raise the Price of
Lands: It will only, by driving it more into the Bankers hands, leave the
Country barer of Money, whereby, if the Price of Land about London, should be
accidently raised, that of remoter Countries would thereby have fewer
Purchasers, and at lower Rates.

This being so, that the low rate of Land depends much on the great number of
Sellers in proportion to Purchasers, the next thing to be inquired into, is,
What makes plenty of Sellers? and to that the Answer is obvious, general ill
Husbandry; and the consequence of it Debts. If a neglect of Government and
Religion, ill Examples, and depraved Education, have introduced Debauchery; and
Art or Chance has made it fashionable for Men to live beyond their Estates,
Debts will increase and multiply, and draw with them a necessity on Men, first
of Incumbring, and then Selling their Estates; This is generally the cause why
Men part with their Land: And I think there is scarce one of an hundred that
thinks of Selling his Patrimony till Mortgages have pretty well Eat into the
Freehold; and the weight of growing Debts force a Man, whether he will or no,
out of his Possessions. When almost is there ever a clear and unincumbred
Estate set to Sale? It Is seldom a thriving Man turns his Land into Money to
make the greater advantage. The Examples of it are so rare, that they are
scarce of any Consideration in the number of Sellers.

This I think may be the Reason, why in Queen Elizabeth's days (when Sobriety,
Frugality, and Industry, brought in dai^y Increase, to the growing Wealth of
the Kingdom) ^and kept up its price, and Sold for more years Purchase than
corresponded to the Interest of Money, then busily imploy^d in a thriving
Trade, which made the natural Interest much higher than it is now, as well as
the Parliament then set it higher by Law.

On the contrary side, what makes scarcity of Purchasers; 1. The same Reason,
Ill Husbandry; When the Tradesman lives up to the height of his Income, and the
vanity of Expenses either drains the Merchants Coffers, or keeps them from
overflowing, he seldom thinks of Purchasing: Buying of Land is the result of a
full and satiated Gain, and Men in Trade seldom think of laying out their Money
upon Land, till their profit has brought them in more than their Trade can well
employ, and their idle Bags cumbring their counting Houses, put them upon
emptying them on a purchase. 2. Another Thing that makes a scarcity of Buyers
of Land, are doubtful and ill Titles, where these are frequent and fatal, one
can no more expect, that Men who have Money, should be forward to Purchase,
than Ships richly laden to venture themselves amongst Roc^s and Quicksands.
It Is no wonder such Seas should not be much frequented where the Examples, and
remains of daily Wrecks, show the ^olly and hazard of the venture, in the
number of those who have Miscarried. 3. A general decay of Trade discourages
Men from Purchasing^ for this threatens an Universal Poverty, which is sure to
fall first and heaviest upon Land. The Merchant who furnishes the improvident
Landholder, will not fail to have Money for his Wares with Gain, whether the
Kingdom get by his Trade or no, and he will keep his Money rather employed in
Trade, which brings him in profit, (for the Merchant may get by a Trade that
makes the Kingdom poor) than lay it out in Land, whose Rents he sees sinking,
and foresees by the course of Trade, is likely to continue on to do so. When a
Nation is running to decay and ruin, the Merchant and Monied Man, do what you
can, will be sure to starve last: Observe it where you will, the decays that
come upon, and bring to Ruin any Country, do constantly first fall upon the
Land; and though the Country Gentleman, (who u^ually securely relies upon so
much a year as was given in at his Marriage Settlement, and thinks his Land an
unmovable Fund for such an Income) be not very forward to think so; yet this
neverthe^ess is an undoubted truth, that he is more concerned in Trade and
ou^ht to take a greater care that it be w^ll managed and preserved than even
the Merchant himself; for he will certainly find^ that when a decay of Trade
has carried away one part of our Money out of the Kingdom, and the other is
kept in the Merchant and Tradesmans Hands, that no Laws he can make, nor any
little Arts of Shifting Property amongst our selves, will bring it back to him
again: But his Rents will fall, and his Income every day lessen, till general
Industry, and Frugality, joined to a well ordered Trade, shall restore to the
Kingdom the Riches and Wealth it had formerly.

This by the way, if well considered, might let us see, that Taxes, however
contrived, and out of whose Hand soever immediately taken, do in a Country,
where their great Fund is in Land, for the most part terminate upon Land.
Whatsoever the People is chiefly maintain^d by, that the Government supports it
self on: Nay, perhaps it will be found, that those Taxes which seem least to
affect Land, will most surely of all other, ^a^ the Rents; which is an evil the
hardest to be recovered, for Rents once f^^len are not e^sily raised again. A
Tax laid upon Land seems hard to the Landholder, because it is so much Money
going visibly out of his Pocket; and (...) ease to himself, the Landholder i^
^^^^ys fo^ward to lay it upon Commodities: but (...) through^y consid^^ it, and
(...) the Effects, he will find he Buys this seeming Ease at a very dear rate,
and though he pays not this Tax immediately out of his own Purse, yet there
will be more wanting there at the end of the year than that comes to, with the
lessening of his Rents, which is a settled and lasting evil, that will stick
upon him beyond the present Payment.

To make this clear, let us suppose in the present State of Affairs in England,
that the Rents of England are Twelve Millions, and that the Charge and
Necessities of the Government requires a supply of Three Millions from the
Parliament, which is laid on Land; Here is one fourth part of his yearly Income
goes immediately out of the Landlords and Landholders Pocket: This is a Burden
very apt to be felt, he readily perceives what goes thus out of his Estate, who
actually pays the Money out of his Pocket, or finds it deducted out of his Rent
at Quarter-day for Taxes; but though this be a Quarter of his yearly Income,
and out of an Estate of Four Hundred pounds a year, the public Tax now openly
takes away One hundred; Yet this influences not at all the yearly Rent of the
Land, which the Rack-renter or under Tenant pays; it being the same thing to
him, whether he pays all his Rent to the King or his Landlord, or or or none at
all to the King; the Case is all one to him what hand receives his Rent, when
due; so Trade flourishes, and his Commodities go off well, he will be able to
pay his Rent on. This lessens not any more the Value of his Farm, than an high
or a low chief Rent does, paid out of it to the Lord of the Fee; and the
Tenant's Bargain and Profit is the same, whether the Land be charged or not
charged with an Annuity payable to another Man. We see this in College Leases,
where though the College Tenant pays for it to the College some years five
times as much as he does others, upon the varying Rate of Corn, yet the Under
Tenant feels not this Alteration in the least, nor finds a Reason to have his
Rent abated, because a greater part of it is diverted from his Landlord. All
this is but changing the hand that receives the Rent, without any influence at
all upon the yearly Value of the Estate; which will not be let for one Penny
more or less to the Renter, however, or amongst whomsoever, the Rent he pays,
be divided. From hence it is evident, That Taxes laid on Land do not in the
least make Rents fall.

But suppose, to shift off the Burden from the Land, some Country Gentlemen
should think fit to raise these three Millions upon Commodities, to let the
Land go free. First, it is to be considered, That since the public Wants
require three Millions, (for that we supposed for Argument sake; let it be
three Millions, or one Million, that is all one;) and so much must go into the
King's Coffers; or else the Necessities of the Government will not be supplied;
That for raising these three Millions on Commodities, and bringing so much into
the Exch^quer, there must go a great deal more than three Millions out of the
Subjects Pockets: For a Tax of that nature cannot be levied by Officers, to
watch every little Rivulet of Trade, without a great Change, especially at
first trial. But supposing no more Charge in raising it, than of a Land Tax,
and that there are only ^ Millions to be paid, it is evident that to do this out
of Commodities, they must to the Co^^umer b^ raised in their Price; so that
every t^^^g, to him that uses it, must be d^^^er. ^et us see now who at long
run (...) pay this and where it will light. It Is p^ain, the Merchant and
Broker, neither will nor c^n; for if he pays 1/^ more for Commodities than he
did, he will sell them at a Price proportionably raised. The poor Labourer and
Handicraftsman cannot; for he just lives from hand to mouth already, and all
his Food, Clothing and Utensils, costing more than they did before; either his
Wages must rise with the Price of things, to make him live, or else, not being
able to maintain himself and Family by his Labor, he comes to the Parish; and
then the Land bears the Burden a heavier way. If the Labourer's Wages be
raised in proportion to the increased Rates of things, the Farmer, who pays
more for Wages, as well as all other things, whilst he sells his Corn and
Wool, either at the same rate, or lower, at the Market, (since the Tax laid
upon it makes People less forward to buy) must either have his Rent abated, or
else break and run away in his Landlord's Debt; and so the yearly Value of the
Land is brought down, and who then pays the Tax at the years end, but the
Landlord; when the Tenant, not able to raise his Rent by his Commodities,
either runs away in his Landlords Debt, or cannot be continued in the Farm
without abatement of Rent? For when the yearly charge in his Farm is greater by
the increase of the Laborers Wages, and yet his product Sells ^ea^er by reason
of the Tax laid on his Commodities; How will the Farmer be able to make up his
Rent at Quarter Day? For this may be worth our Notice, that any Tax laid on
Foreign Commodities in England, raises its price, and makes the Importer get
more for his Commodity; But on the contrary, a Tax laid on your Native Product,
and home made Commodities, lessens their price, and makes them yield less to
the first Seller.

The Reason whereof is plain. For the Merchant Importing no Commodity but what
the necessity, or fashionable Wantonness of your People gives him Vent for,
will not only proportion his Gain, to the Cost and Risque he has been at before
Landing, but will expect profit of his Money paid here, for any Tax laid on it;
and take advantage from thence to raise his price above what his Tax comes to;
and if he cannot do that, he will Trade no more in that Commodity. For it being
not the Product of his Farm, he is not tied to bring it to Market, if he finds
its price not answer his Expectation there, but turns himself to other Wares,
which he finds your Markets take off better. A Merchant will never continue to
Trade in Wares, which the change of Fashion, or humor amongst your People,
have made less vendible, though he may be sometimes caught by a sudden
alteration. But that seldom happens in the course of Trade, so as to influence
the great bulk of it: For things of Necessity must still be had, and things of
Fashion will be had as long as Men have Money or Credit, whatever rates they
cost, and the rather because they are dear; For it being Vanity not Use that
makes the Expensive Fashions of your people, the Emulation is, who shall have
the finest, that is the dearest things, not the most convenient or useful. How
many things do we value and buy, because they come at dear rates from Iapan and
China, which if they were our own Manufacture or Product, to be had common and
for a little Money, would be contemned and neglected? Have not several of our
own Commodities offered to sale at reasonable Rates been despised, and the very
same eagerly bought and bragged of when sold for French at a double Price? You
must not think therefore that the raising their Price will lessen the vent of
fashionable Foreign Commodities amongst you, as long as Men have any way to
purchase them, but rather increase it. French Wine is become a Modi^h Drink
amongst us, and a man is ashamed to Entertain his Friend, or almost to Dine
himself without it. The Price is in the Memory of Man raised from 6 d. to 2 s.
and does this hinder the drinking of it? No, the quite contrary, a Man's way of
Living is commended, because he will give any rate for it; and a Man will give
any rate rather than pass for a poor Wretch, or Penurious Curmudgeon that is
not able or knows not how to live well nor use his Friends civilly. Fashion is
for the most part nothing but the Ostentation of Riches, and therefore the high
price of what serves to that, rather increases than lessens its vent: The
contest and glory is in the Expense, not the Usefulness of it, and People are
then thought and said to live well, when they can make a show of rare and
foreign things, and such as their Neighbors cannot go to the Price of.

Thus we see how Foreign Commodities fall not in their price by Taxes laid on
them, because the Merchant is not necessitated to bring to your Market any but
Fashionable Commodities, and those go off the better for their high rate: But
on the contrary your Land (...) being forced to bring his Commodities to
Market, such as his Land and Industry affords them, common and known things,
must sell them there at such price as he can get. This the buyer knows; and
these homebred Commodities being seldom the Favorites of your People, or any
farther acceptable than as great convenience recommends them to the Vulgar or
Downright necessity to all, As soon as a Tax is laid on them, every one makes
as sparing a use of them as he can, that he may save his Money for other
necessary or creditable Expenses, whereby the price they yield the first seller
is mightily abated, and so the yearly value of the Land which produces them
lessened too.

If therefore the laying of Taxes upon Commodities does, as it is evident,
affect the Land that is out at Rack-rent, it is plain it does equally affect
all the other Land in England too, and the Gent^ will, but the worst way,
increase their own Charges; that is by lessening their Yearly Value of their
Estates, if they hope to ease their Land by charging Commodities. It is in vain
in a Country whose great Fund is Land^ to hope to lay the public charge of the
Government on any thing else, there at last it will terminate. The Merchant (do
what you can) will not bear it: the Labourer cannot, and therefore the
Landholder must; and whether he were best do it, by laying it directly where it
will at last settle, or by letting it come to him by the sinking of his Rents,
which when they are once fallen every one knows are not easily raised again,
let him consider.

Holland is brought as an instance of laying the Charge of the public upon
Trade, and it is possible (excepting some few small Free Towns) the only place
in the World that could be brought to favor this way. But yet when examined
will be found to show the quite contrary, and be a clear proof, that lay the
Taxes how you will, Land every where in proportion bears the greater share of
the burden. The public Charge of the Government, is, it is said in the United
Provinces, laid on Trade, I grant it is, the greatest part of it; But is the
Land Excused or Eased by it? By no means, but on the contrary so loaded, that
in many places, in others, in others 1/^ of the Yearly value does not come in
to the owners Pocket: and if I have not been misinformed, the Land in some
places will not pay the Taxes; so that we may say, that the Charge of the
Government came not upon Commodities till the Land could not bear it. The
burden unavoidably settles upon the Land first, and when it has pressed it so
that it can yield no more, Trade must be brought in aid to help to support the
Government rather than let all sink: but the first stress is always upon Land,
and as far as that will reach it is unavoidably carried, lay your Taxes how you
will. It Is known what a share of the public charges of the Government is
supported by the Trade of Amsterdam alone, as I remember the 36/100; but are
the Lands of Guelderland eased by it? Let any one see in that Country of Land
more than Trade, what they make clear of their Revenues, and whether the
Country Genttlemen there grow rich on their Land, whilst the Merchant having
the Taxes laid on his Commerce is impoverished? On the contrary Guelderland is
so low and out of Cash, that Amsterdam has been fain for many years to lay down
the Taxes for them, which is, in effect, to pay the Taxes of Guelderland too.

Struggle and contrive as you will, lay your Taxes as you please, the Merchants
and Traders will shift it off from their own gain, bear the least part of it,
and grow poor last. In Holland it self, where Trade is so loaded, who, I pray,
grows richest the Land-holder or the Trader? Which of them is pinched, and
wants Money most? A Country may thrive, the Country Gentleman grow rich, and
his Rents increase (for so it has been here) whilst the Land is Taxed. But I
challenge any one to show me a Country wherein there is any considerable
public charge raised, where the Land does not most sensibly feel it, and in
proportion bear much the greater part of it.

We must not therefore impute the fal^ling of the Rents, or price of Land to
high Interest: Nor if i^l Husbandry has wasted our Riches hope by such kind of
Laws to raise them to their former value, I humbly conceive we shall in vain
endeavor it by the fall of Interest. The number of Buyers must be increased
and Sellers lessened, which must be done by other ways than regulating of
Interest, or else the Landed man will neither find Chapmen for his Land, nor
for the Corn that grow on it at the rate he desires.

But could an Act of Parliament, bring down Interest to 4 per Cent. and the
lowering of that immediately raise the Purchasers Fine from 20 to 25 Years
purchase; yet it may be doubted, whethe^ this be sit to be made into a Law,
because it would be of no advantage to the King^dom. For what profit would it
b^ to the Nation to make a Law, that (...) who sells Land should instead of 4
have 5 hundred pounds of the Purcharser. Thi^ indeed a little alters the
distribution of the Money we have amongst us Englishma^ here at home, but
neither helps to continue what we have, nor brings in more from abroad; which
being the only concernment of the Kingdom, in reference to its Wealth, is apt
to be supposed by us without doors to be the only care of a Parliament: For it
matters not so it be here amongst us, whether it be in Thomas or Richards
hands, provided it be so ordered, that whoever has it may be encouraged to let
it go into the current of Trade, for the improvement of the general stock and
wealth of the Nation.

As this Increase of the Fine in the purchase of Land is not an advantage to
the Kingdom, so neither is it to the Landholder, who is the person that bearing
the greatest part of the burdens of the Kingdom, ought, I think, to have the
greatest care taken of him, and enjoy as many Privileges and as much Wealth, as
the ^avour of the Law can (with regard to the Publick-weal) confer upon him.
But pray consider, to raise the Years purchase in buying of Land gives the
advantage not to the Landholder, but to him that ceases to be so. He that has
no longer the Land has the more Money, and he who has the Land is the poorer.
The true advantage of the Landholder is, that his ^orn, Flesh, and Wool, sell
better, and yield a greater price; this indeed is a profit that benefits the
owner of the Land and goes along with it; it is this alone raises the Rent and
makes the Possessor richer; and this can only be done by increasing our Wealth,
and drawing more Money into England, which the falling of Interest, and thereby
(if it could effect it) raising the purchase of Land is so far from doing, that
it does visibly and directly one way hinder our increase of Wealth, that is, by
hindering Foreigners to come here and buy Land, and settle amongst us. Whereby
we have this double loss; First we lose their Persons, increase of people being
the increase both of strength and riches: Secondly we lose so much Money. For
though whatever an Englishman gives to another for Land, though raised to 40
Years purchase, be not one farthing advantage to the Kingdom, yet whatever a
Foreigner, who purchases Land here, gives for it, is so much every farthing
clear gain to the Nation, for the Money comes clear in, without carrying out
any thing for it^ and is all one as if it dropped down from the Clouds.

But farther, if consideration be to be had only of Sellers of Land, the
lowering of Interest to 4 per Cent will not be in their Favor, unless, by it,
you can raise Land to Thirty years Purchase, which is not at all likely; and I
think no Body by falling of Interest to Four per Cent, hopes to get Chapmen for
their Land at that Rate; and whatsoever they have less, if Law can regulate
Interest, they lose of their value of Land, Money being thus abased. So that
the Landedman will scarce find his account neither, by this Law when it comes
to trial. And at last I imagine this will be the result of all such Attempts,
that Experience will show, that the price of Things will not be regulated by
Laws, though the endeavors after it will be sure to prejudice and
inconvenience Trade, and put your Affairs out of Order.

If this be thus, that Interest cannot be regulated by Law, or that if it
could, yet the reducing of it to Four per Cent. would do more harm than good;
What then should there (will you say) be no Law at all to regulate Interest? I
say not so, for, 1. It is necessary that there should be a stated Rate of
Interest, that in Debts and Forbearances, where Contract has not settled it
between the Parties, the Law might give a Rule, and Courts of Judicature might
know what Damages to allow: This may, and therefore should, be Regulated. 2.
That in the present current of running Cash, which now takes its course almost
all to London, and is Engrossed by a very few hands in Comparison, young Men,
and those in want, might not too easily be exposed to Extortion and Oppression;
and the dextrous and combining Money Jobbers not have too great and unbounded a
Power, to Prey upon their Ignorance or Necessity, there would not be much
danger of this, if Money were more equally distributed into the several
quarters of England, and into a greater number of Hands according to the
Exigences of Trade.


If Money were to be hired, as Land is, or to be had as Corn, or Wool, from
the Owner himself, and known good security be given for it, it might then
probably be had at the Market (which is the true) Rate, and would be a constant
gauge of your Trade and Wealth; But when a kind of Monopoly, by consent, has
put this general Commodity into a few hands, it may need Regulation, though
what the stated Rate of Interest should be in the constant change of Affairs,
and ^lux of Money, is hard to determine. Possibly it may be allowed as a
reasonable Proposal that it should be within such Bounds (...) quite Let up the
Merchants and Tradesmans profit, and discourage their Industry; nor on the
other hand so low, as should hinder Men from Risquing their Money in other Men's
Hands, and so rather choose to keep it out of Trade, than venture it upon so
small profit. When it is too high, it so hinders the Merchants gain, that he
will not Borrow; when too low, it so hinders the Monied Man's profit, that he
will not Lend; and both these ways it is a hindrance to Trade.

But this being perhaps too general and loose a Rule, let me add, that if one
would consider Money and Land alone, in relation one to another, perhaps it is
now at Six per Cent. in as good a proportion as is possible, Six per Cent.
being a little higher than Land at Twenty years Purchase, which is the Rate
pretty near that Land has generally carried in England, it never being much
over nor under. For supposing 100 l. in Money, and Land of 5 l. per Annum, be
of equal value, which is Land at Twenty years purchase: It Is necessary for the
making their value truly equal, that they should produce an equal Income, which
the 100 l. at 5 l. per Cent. Interest is not likely to do. 1. Because of the
many, and sometimes long intervals of Barrenness, which happen to Money more
than Land. Money at Use, when returned into the Hands of the Owner, usually
lies dead there, till he gets a new Tenant for it, and can put it out again;
and all this time it produces nothing. But this happens not to Land, the
growing product whereof turns to account to the owner, even when it is in his
Hands, or is allowed for by the Tenant, antecedently to his entering upon the
Farm. For though a Man who Borrows Money at Midsummer, never begins to pay his
Interest from our Lady Day, or one moment backwards, yet he who Rents a Farm at
Midsummer, may have as much reason to begin his Rent from our Lady Day, as if
he had then entered upon it.

Besides the dead intervals of ceasing Profit, which happen to Money more than
Land, there is another Reason why the Profit and Income of Money let out,
should be a little higher than that of Land; and that is, because Money out at
Interest ^^^s a greater Risque than Land does; The ^o^^ower may break and run
away with the Money, and then not only the (...) due, but all the future
Profit, with the Principal, is lost forever; But in Land a Man can lose but the
Rent due, for which usually too the Stock upon the Land is sufficient security;
and if a Tenant run away in Arrear of some Rent, the Land remains, that cannot
be carried away or lost. Should a Man Purchase good Land in Middlesex of 5 l.
per Annum, at Twenty years Purchase, and other Land in Rumney-Marsh, or
elsewhere of the same yearly value, but so situated, that it were in danger to
be swallowed of the Sea, and be utterly lost, it would not be unreasonable he
should expect to have it under twenty years Purchase; suppose 16. This is to
bring it to just the case of Land at twenty years Purchase, and Money at Six
per Cent. where the uncertainty of securing ones Money may well be allowed that
advantage of greater Profit; and therefore perhaps the legal Interest now in
England at Six per Cent, is as reasonable and convenient a Rate as can well be
set by a standing Rule, especially if we consider that the Law requires not a
Man to pay Six per Cent, but ties up the Lender from taking more; so that if
ever it falls of it self, the Monied man is sure to find it, and his Interest
will be brought down to it.

High Interest is thought by some a Prejudice to Trade; but if we will look
back, we shall find that England never throve so well, nor was there ever
brought into England so great an increase of Wealth since, as in Queen
Elizabeth's and King James I. and King Charles I. time. when Money was at 10
and 8 per Cent.. I will not say high Interest was the Cause of it; for I rather
think that our thriving Trade was the Cause of high Interest, every one craving
Money to employ in a profitable Commerce. But this I think I may reasonably
infer from it, That lowering of Interest is not a sure way to improve either
our Trade or Wealth.

To this I hear some say, That the Dutch, Skilful in all Arts of promoting
Trade, to out do us in this as well as all other Advancements of it, have
observed this Rule, That when we fell Interest in England from 10 to 8. they
presently sunk Interest in Holland to 4 per Cent. and again, when we lowered it
to 6, they fell it to 3 per Cent. thereby to keep the Advantage which the
lowness of Interest gives to Trade. From whence these men readily conclude,
That the falling of Interest will a^^ance Trade in England. To which I answer,
1. That this looks like an Argument, rather made for the present Occasion, to
mislead those who are cred^lous enough to swallow it, than arising from (...)
Reason and matter of Fact. For if lowering Interest were so advantageous to
Trade, why did the Dutch so constantly take their measures only by us, and not
as well by some other of their Neighbors, with whom they have as great or
greater Commerce than with us? This is enough at first sight to make one
suspect this to be Dust only raised to throw in Peoples eyes, and a Suggestion
made to serve a Purpose. For, 2. It will not be found true, That when we abated
Interest here in England to 8. the Dutch sunk it in Holland to 4 per Cent. by
Law; or that there was any Law made in Holland to limit the Rate of Interest to
3 per Cent. when we reduced it in England to 6. It is true, John De Wit, when
he managed the Affairs of Holland, setting himself to lessen the public Debt,
and having actually paid some, and getting Money in a readiness to pay others,
sent notice to all the Creditors, That those who would not take 4 per Cent.
should come and receive their Money. The Creditors finding him in earnest, and
knowing not how otherwise to employ their Money, accepted his Terms, and
changed their Obligations into 4 per Cent. whereas before they were at 5. and
so (the great Loans of the Country being to the State) it might be said in this
sense, That the Rate of Interest was reduced lower at that time; but that it
was done by a Law, forbidding to take higher Interest that 4 per Cent. that I
deny, and require any one to show. Indeed upon good Security one might lately
have borrowed Money in Holland at 3, and 3 per Cent. but not by virtue of any
Law, but the natural Rate of Interest. And I appeal to the men learned in the
Law of Holland, whether last year (and I doubt not but it is so still) a man
might not lawfully lend his Money for what Interest he could get; and whether
in the Courts he should not recover the Interest he contracted for, if it were
10 per Cent. So that if Money be to be borrowed by honest and responsible Men,
at 3, or 3 per Cent. it is not by the force of Statutes and Edicts, but the
natural Course of things, which will always bring Interest upon good Security
low, where there is a great deal of Money to be lent, and little good Security
in proportion to be had. Holland is a Country where the Land makes a very
little part of the Stock of the Country. Trade is their great Fund; and their
Estates lie generally in Money; so that all who are not Traders, generally
speaking, are Lenders: Of which there are so many whose Income depends upon
Interest, that if the States were not mightily in Debt, but paid every one
their Principal, instead of the 4 per Cent. Use, which they give, there would
be so much more Money than could be used, or would be ventured in Trade, that
Money there would be at 2 per Cent. or under, unless they found a way to put it
out in foreign Countries.


Interest, I grant these Men, is low in Holland; but not as an effect of Law,
nor the politic Contrivance of the Government, to promote Trade; but as the
Consequence of great Plenty of ready Money, when their Interest first fell, I
say when it first fell: For being once brought low, and the Public having
borrowed a great part of private Men's Money, and continuing in Debt, it must
continue so, though the Plenty of Money, which first brought Interest low, were
very much decayed, and a great part of their Wealth were really gone. For the
Debt of the State affording to the Creditors a constant yearly Income, that is
looked on as a safe Revenue, and accounted as valuable as if it were in Land;
(and accordingly they buy it one of another; and whether there be any Money in
the public Coffers or no, he who has 10000 l. owing him from the States may
sell it every day in the week, and have ready Money for it) this Credit is so
great an advantage to private Men, who know not else what to do with their
Stocks, that were the States now in a condition to begin to pay their Debts,
the Creditors, rather than take their Money out to lie dead by them, would let
it stay in at lower Interest, as they did some years since, when they were
called on to come and receive their Money. This is the state of Interest in
Holland; Their plenty of Money, and paying their public Debts, some time
since lowered their Interest, but it was not by Law, nor in consequence of our
reducing it here by Law to 6 per Cent. For I deny that there is any Law there
yet, to forbid lending of Money for above 3, or 6, or 10 per Cent. What ever
some here suggest, every one there may hire out his money as freely as he does
any thing else, for what rate he can get; and the Bargain being made, the Law
will enforce the Borrower to pay it.

I grant low Interest, where all men consent to it is an advantage to Trade, if
Merchants will regulate their Gains accordingly, and men be persuaded to lend
to them; but can it be expected, when the Public gives 7, 8, or 10 per Cent.
that private men, whose Security is certainly no better, shall have it for 4?
And can there be any thing stranger, than that the same Men who look on, and
therefore allow high use as an encouragement to lending to the Chequer, should
think low Use should bring Money into Trade? The States of Holland some few
years since, paid but 4 l. per Cent. for the Money they owed; if you propose
them for an example, and Interest be to be regulated by a Law, try whether you
can do so here, and bring Men to lend it to the Public at that rate, this
would be a benefit to the Kingdom, and abate a great part of our public
Charge: If you cannot, confess, that it is not the Law in Holland has brought
the Interest there so low, but something else, and that which will make the
States, or any body else pay dearer now, if either their Credit be less, or
Money there scarcer.

An infallible sign of your decay of Wealth, is the falling of Rent^, and the
raising of them would be worth the Nations Care; for in that, and not in the
falling of Interest lies the true advantage of the Landed Man, and with him of
the Public. It may be therefore not besides our present business, to enquire
into the cause of the falling of Rents in England.

1. Either the Land is grown barrenner, and so the Product is less, and
consequently the Money to be received for that Product is less; for it is
evident that he whose Land was wont to produce 100 Bushels of Wheat communibus
annis, if by long Tillage and bad Husbandry it will now produce but 50 Bushels,
the Rent will be abated half. But this cannot be supposed general.

2. Or the Rent of that Land is lessened. 1. Because the use of the Commodity
ceases: as the Rents must fall in Virginia, were taking of Tobacco forbid in
England. 2. Or because something else supplies the room of that Product: as the
rate of Copis-lands will fall upon the discovery of Coal mines. 3. Or, because
the Markets are supplied with the same Commodity, cheaper from another place.
As the breeding Countries of England must needs fall their Rents, by the
importation of Irish Cattle. 4. Or, because a Tax laid on your Native
Commodities, makes what the Farmer sells, cheaper, and Labor, and what he buys
dearer.

3. Or, the Money in the Country is less. For the exigencies and uses of Money
not lessening with its quantity, and it being in the same proportion to be
employed and distributed still in all the parts of its circulation, so much as
its quantity is lesse^'d, so much must the share of every one that has a right
to this Money be the less; whether he be Landholder, for his Goods; or
Labourer, for his Hire; or Merchant, for his Brokage. Though the Landholder
usually finds it first. Because Money failing, and falling short, people have
not so much Money as formerly to lay out, and so less Money is brought to
Market, by which the price of things must necessarily fall. The Labourer feels
it next. For when the Landholder's Rent falls, he must either bate the
Labourer's Wages, or not employ, or not pay him; which either way makes him
feel the want of Money. The Merchant feels it last. For though he sell less,
and at a lower rate, he buys also our Native Commodities, which he Exports, at
a lower rate too; and will be sure to leave our Native Commodities unbought,
upon the hands of the Farmer, or Manufacturer, rather than Export them to a
Market, which will not afford him Returns with profit.

If one Third of the Money employed (...) Trade were locked up, or gone out of
England, must not the Land-holders necessarily receive less for their Goods,
and consequently their Rents fall; A less quantity of Money by being to be
distributed amongst an equal number of Receivers? Indeed, People not perceiving
the Money to be gone, are apt to be jealous one of another^ and each suspecting
another inequality of Gain to rob him of his share, every one will be
employing his skill and power the best he can to retrieve it again, and to
bring Money into his Pocket in the same plenty as formerly^ But this is but
scrambling amongst (...) selves, and helps no more against (...) want, than the
pulling off a short Cover let will, amongst Children that lie toge^ther,
preserve them all from the Col^^ Some will starve, unless the Father of the
^amily provide better, and enlarge (...) scanty Garments. This pulling and
con^^^ is usually between the Landed Man ar^ the Merchant. For the Labourer's
share, b^^ing seldom more than a bare subsistenc^ never allows that body of Men
time (...) opportunity to raise their Thoughts abo^^ that, or (...) with the
Richer (...) theirs^ (as one common Interest,) unle^^ when some common and
great Distre^^ uniting them in one universal Ferme^ makes them forget Respect,
and emb^^dens them to carve to their Wants (...) armed force: And then
sometimes the break in upon the Rich, and sweep ^ like a deluge. But this
rarely happens (...) in the mal-administration of neglected mis-manag'd
Government.

The usual struggle and contest, as I said before, in the decays of Wealth and
Riches, is between the Landed Man and the Merchant, with whom I may here join
the Moneyed Man. The Landed Man finds himself aggrieved, by the falling of his
Rents, and the streightning of his Fortune; and thinking the Merchant (whom he
sees flourish and thrive) eats up his Profit, and builds up a Fortune upon his
Ruins; he therefore endeavors, by Laws, to keep up the value of Lands, which
he suspects lessened by the others excess of Profit: But all in vain. The cause
is mistaken, and the remedy too. It Is not the Merchants nor Mon^y'd Man's Gains
that makes Land fall; but the loss of the Kingdom, in our decay of Trade, which
the Land always first feels. If the Landed Gentleman will have, and by his
example, make it fashionable to have more Claret, Spi^^, Silk, and other
Foreign consumable Wares, than our. Exportation of Commodities does exchange
for; Money must unavoidably follow to balance the Account, and pay the Debt.
And therefore I fear that another Proposal, I hear talked of, to hinder the
Exportation of M^ney and Bullion, will show more our need of care to keep our
Money from going from us, than a way and method how to preserve it here.

It Is death in Spain to export Money: And yet they, who furnish all the World
with Gold and Silver, have least of it amongst themselves. Trade fetches it
away from that lazy and indigent People, notwithstanding all their artificial
and forced contrivances to keep it there. It follows Trade against the rigor
of their Laws; and their want of Foreign Commodities makes it openly be carried
out at Noonday. Nature has bestowed Mines on several parts of the World: But
their Riches are only for the industrious and frugal. Whomever else they visit,
it is with the diligent and sober only they stay. And if the Virtue, and
provident way of living of our Ancestors (content with our native conveniences
of Life, without the costly itch after the Materials of Pride and Luxury from
abroad) were brought in fashion and countenance again amongst us; this alone
would do more to keep increase our Wealth, and enrich our Land, than all our
Paper helps about Interest, Money, Bulli^n, etc. which, however eagerly we may
catch at, will not, I fear, without better Husbandry, keep us from sinking,
whatever contrivances we may have recourse to. It Is with a Kingdom, as with a
Family. Spending less than our own Commodities will pay for, is the sure and
only way for the Nation to grow Rich. And when that begins once seriously to be
considered, and our faces and steps are in earnest turned that way, we may hope
to have our Rents rise, and the public Stock thrive again. Till then, we in
vain, I fear, endeavor with noise, and weapons of Law, to drive the Wolf from
our own to one another doors. The breed ought to be extirpated out of the
Island. For Want, brought in by ill management, and nursed up by expensive
Vanity, will make the Nation Poor, and spare no body.

If Three Millions were necessary for the carrying on the Trade of England,
whereof One Million were for the Land-holder, to maintain him; another were for
the payment of the Labourer and Handicraftsman; and the Third were the share of
the Brokers, coming to them for their care and pains in distributing; If One
Million of this Money were gone out of the Kingdom, must not there be part less
to be shared amongst them for the product of their Land, their Labor and their
Distribution? I do not say they will feel it at the same time. But the
Landholder having nothing but what the Product of his Land will yield; and the
Buyer, according to the Plenty or Scarcity of Money he has, always setting the
Price upon what is offered to Sale; The Land-holder must be content to take the
Market-Rate for what he brings thither, which always following the scarcity or
plenty of Money, if any part of our Money be gone, he is sure first to find it
in the price of his Commodities. For the Broker and Merchant, though he Sell
cheaper, yet he Buys cheaper too; and he will be sure to get by his Returns, or
let alone a Commodity which will not produce him Gains; and whatsoever is so
let alone, and left upon hands, always turns to the Land-holders loss.

Supposing that of our Woollen Manufacture, Foreign Markets took off one half,
and the other half were consumed amongst our selves; if a sensible part, (as of
our Money) were gone, and so Men had equally less than they had (for, it is
certain, it must be tantamount; and what I 'scape of less, another must make
up) it would follow, That they would have less to lay out in Clothes, as well
as other things, and so would either wear them longer, or pay less for them. If
a Clothier finds a want of Vent, he must either Sell cheaper or not at all: If
he Sells cheaper, he must also pay less, both for Wool and Labor: And if the
Labourer has less Wages, he must also pay less for Corn, Butter, Cheese,
Flesh, or else forbear some of these quite. In all which cases, the Price of
Wool, Corn, Flesh, and the other Products of Land are brought down, and the
Land bears the greatest part of the loss. For wherever the Consumption or
Vent of any Commodity is stopped, there the Stop continues on till it comes to
the Land-holder. And wherever the Price of any Commodity begins to fall, how
many hands soever there be between that and the Land-holder, they all take
reprisals one upon another, till at last it comes to the Land-holder; and there
the abatement of Price, of any of his Commodities, lessens his Income, and is a
clear loss. The Owner of Land, which produces the Commodity, and the last
Buyer, who consumes it, are the two extremes in Commerce. And though the
falling of any sort of Commodity in the Land-holder's hand, does not prove so
to the last consumer, the Arts of intervening Brokers and Ingrossers keeping up
the Price to their own advantage; yet whenever want of Money, or want of desire
in the consumer, make the Price low, that immediately reaches the first
producer; no body between having any Interest to keep it up.

Now, as to the two first causes of falling of Rents, falling of Interest has
no Influence at all. In the latter, ^it has a great part: Because it makes the
Money of England less, by making both Englishmen and Foreigners withdraw or
withhold their Money. For that which is not let loose into Trade, is all one
whilst hoarded up, as if it were not in Being.

I have heard it brought for a reason, why Interest should be reduced to Four
per Cent; That thereby the Landholder, who bears the burden of the Public
Charge, may ^e, in some degr^e, eased by falling of Interest.

This Argument will be put right, if you (...) it will case the Forrower, and
say the less on the Lender; but it concern not the Land in general, unless you
will suppose all Land-holders in Debt. (...) we may yet think that Men in
^^gland, who have Land, have Money too; and that Landed Men, as well a^ others,
by their Providence and good Husbandry, accommodating their Expenses to their
Income, keep themselves from going backwards in the World.

That which is urged, as most deserving consideration and remedy in the case,
is, That it is hard and unreasonable, that one, who has Mortgaged half his
Land, should yet pay Taxes for the whole, whilst the Mortgage goes away with
the clear profit of an high Interest. To this I answer, 1. That if any Man has
run himself in Debt, for the Service of his Country, it is fit the Public
should reimburse him, and set him free. This is a care that becomes the Public
Justice; That Men, if they receive no Rewards, should, at least, be kept from
Suffering, in having Served their Country. But I do not remember the Polity of
any Nation, who altered their Constitution, in favor of those whose
mismanagement had brought them behind-hand; possibly, as thinking the Public
little beholding to those who had misimploy'd the Stock of their Country, in
the excess of their private Expenses, and, by their Example, spread a fashion
that carries ruin with it: Men's paying Taxes of Mortgaged Lands, is a
punishment for ill-husbandry, which ought to be discouraged; but it concerns
very little the Frugal and the Thrifty. 2. Another thing to be said in reply to
this, is, That it is with Gentlemen in the Country, as with Tradesmen in the
City. If they will own Titles to greater Estates than really they have, it is
their own faults, and there is no way left to help them from paying for them.
The Remedy is in their own hands, to discharge themselves when they please. And
when they have once Sold their Land, and paid their Debts, they will no longer
pay Taxes for what they own, without being really theirs. There is another way
also, whereby they may be relieved, as well as a great many other
inconveniences remedied; and that is by a Registry: For if Mortgages were
Registered, I and Taxes might reach them, and order the Lender to pay his
proportion.


I have met with Patrons of Four per Cent, who (amongst many other fine things
they tell us of) affirm, That if Interest were reduced to Four per Cent, then
some Men would, borrowing Money at this low Rate, pay their Debts; Others would
borrow more than they now do, and improve their Land; Others would borrow more,
and employ it in Trade and Manufacture. Gilded words indeed, were there any
thing substantial in them! These Men talk as if they meant to show us, not only
the Wisdom but Riches of Solomon, and make Gold and Silver as common as the
Stones in the Street; but at last, I fear, 'twill be but Wit without Money;
and, I wish it amount to that. It Is without question, That could the
Countryman and the Tradesman take up Money cheaper than now they do, every
Man would be forward to Borrow, and desire that he might have other Men's Money
to employ to his advantage; and therefore, I confess, those who contend for
Four per Cent, have found out a way to set Men's Months a watering for Money at
that Rate, and to increase the number of the Borrowers in England; if any body
can imagine it would be an advantage to increase them. But to answer all their
fine Projects, I have but this one short question to ask them: Will Four per
Cent increase the number of the Lenders? If it will not, as any Man at the very
first hearing, will shrewdly suspect it will not, then all the Plenty of Money
these Conjurers bestow upon us for Improvement of Land, Paying of Debts, and
Advancement of Trade, is but like the Gold and Silver which Old Women believe
others Conjurers, bestow sometimes by whole Lapfuls, on poor credulous Girls,
which, when they bring to the light, is found to be nothing but withered
Leaves, and the possessors of it are still as much in want of Money as ever.
Indeed I grant it would be well for England, and I wish it were so, that the
plenty of Money were so great amongst us, that every Man could borrow as much
as he could use in Trade, for Four per Cent; nay, that Men could borrow as much
as they could employ for Six per Cent. But even at that Rate, the Borrowers
already are far more than the Lenders. Why else does the Merchant upon
occasion, pay Six per Cent, and often above that rate for Brokage? And why does
the Country Gentleman of 1000 l. per Annum find it so difficult, with all the
security he can bring to take up 1000 l? All which proceeds from the scarcity
of Money, and bad Security; two Causes which will not be less powerful to
hinder Borrowing, after the lowering of (...); and I do not see how any one can
imagine how reducing Use to Four per Cent, should abate their force; or how
lessening the Reward of the Lender, without diminishing his Risque, should make
him more forward and ready to Lend. So that these M^n, whilst they talk, that
at Four (...) M^n would take up, and ^mploy more Money to the public
advantage, do but (...) to multip^y the number of Borrowers among us, of which
it is certain we have too many already. Whilst they thus set Men a longing for
the Golden days of Four per Cent, methinks they use the poor indigent Debtor,
and needy Tradesman, as I have seen prattling Jack-Daws do sometimes their
young, who kawing and fluttering about the Nest, set all their young ones a
gaping, but having nothing in their empty Mouths but Noise and Air, leave them
as hungry as before. It Is true these Men have found out by a cunning project,
how by the restraint of Law to make the price of Money cheaper, and then they
tell John a Nokes, that he shall have 10000 l. of it to employ in Merchandise,
or Clothing; and John a Styles shall have 20000 l. more to pay his Debts; and
so distribute this Money as freely as Dego did his Legacies, which they are to
have even where they can get it. But till these Men can instruct the forward
Borrowers where they shall be furnished, they have perhaps done something to
increase Men's desire, but not made Money one jot easier to come by. And till
they do that, all this sweet gingling of Money in their Discourses, goes just
to the Tune of, If all the World were Oatmeal. Methinks these Undertakers,
whilst they have put Men in hopes of Borrowing more plentifully at easier
Rates, for the supply of their Wants and Trades, had done better to have
bethought themselves of a way, how Men need not Borrow upon Use at all; for
this would be much more advantageous, and altogether as Feisible. For I am
sure, it is as easy to contrive in a Country that wants Money in proportion to
its Trade, how every Man shall be supplied with as much Money as he needs, ( i.
e. can employ in Improvement of Land, paying his Debts, and return of Trade)
for nothing, as for Four per Cent; As it is as easy to distribute Twenty pair
of Shoes amongst Thirty men, if they pay nothing for them at all, as if they
paid 4 s. a pair. Ten of them (notwithstanding the Statute rate should be
reduced from 6 s. to 4 s. a pair) will be necessitated to sit still Barefoot,
as much as if they were to pay nothing for Shoes at all. Either we have
already more Money than the Owners will Lend, or we have not. If part of the
Money, which is now in England, will not be Lent at the rate Interest is at
present at, will Men be more ready to Lend, and Borrowers be furnished for all
those brave Purposes more plentifully, when Money is brought to Four per Cent?
If People do already lend all the money they have, above their own occasions,
whence are those who will borrow more at 4 per Cent, to be supplied? Or is
there such plenty of Money, and scarcity of Borrowers, that there needs the
reducing of Interest to 4 per Cent, to bring Men to take it? All the imaginable
ways of increasing Money in any Country, are these two: Either to dig it in
Mines of our own, or get it from our Neighbors. That 4 per Cent, is not of the
nature of the De^sing-rod, or Virgila Divina, able to discover Mines of Gold
and Silver, I believe will easily be granted me. The way of getting from
Foreigners, is either by force, borrowing, or Trade. And whatever otherways
besides these men may fancy or propose, for increasing of Money, (except they
intend to set up for the Philosophers Stone) would be much the same with a
destracted man's device, that I knew, who, in the beginning of his distemper
first discovered himself to be out of his Wits, by getting together, and
boiling a great number of Groats, with a design, as he said, to make them plim,
and grow thicker. That 4 per Cent, will raise Armies, Discipline Soldiers, and
make Men valiant, and fitter to conquer Countries, and enrich themselves with
the spoils, I think was never pretended. And that it will not bring in more of
our neighbors Money upon Loan, than we have at present among us, is so visible
in it self, that it will not need any proof; the contenders for 4 per Cent
looking upon it as an undeniable Truth, and making use of it as an Argument to
show the advantage it will be to the Nation, by lessening the Use paid to
Foreigners, who upon falling of Use will take home their Money. And for the
last way of increasing our Money, by promoting of Trade, how much lowering of
Interest is the way to that, I have, I suppose, showed you already.

Having lately met with a little Tract Entitled A Letter to a Friend
concerning Usury, Printed in the year 1690; which gives in short, the Arguments
of some Treatises Printed many years since, for the lowering of Interest; It
may not be amiss, briefly to consider them.
1. A High Interest decays Trade. The advantage from Interest is greater than
the Profit from Trade, which makes the rich Merchants give over, and put out
their Stock to Interest, and the lesser Merchants Break.

Answ. This was Printed in 1621, when Interest was at 10 per Cent. And whether
England had ever a more flourishing Trade than at that time, must be left to
the judgment of those who have considered the growing Strength and Riches of
this Kingdom in Q. E. and King I. the 1st Reigns: Not that I impute it to high
Interest, but to other Causes I have mention^d, wherein Usury had nothing to
do. But if this be thought an Argument, now in 1690, when the legal Interest is
6 per Cent; I desire those who think fit to make use of it, to name those rich
Merchants who have given over and put out their Stocks to Interest.

2. Interest being at 10 per Cent, and in Holland at 6; our neighbor Merchants
undersell us.

Answ. The legal Interest being here now at 6 per Cent, and in Holland not
limited by Law; our neighbor Merchants undersell us, because they live more
frugally, and are content with less profit.

3. Interest being lower in Holland than in England, their Contributions to
War, works of Piety, and all Charges of the State, are cheaper to them than to
us.

Answ. This needs a little Explication. Contributions greater or less, I
understand: but Contributions cheaper or dear^r, I confess I do not. If they
manage their Wars and Charges cheaper than we, the blame is not to be laid on
high or low Interest.

4. Interest being so high, prevents the building of Shipping, which is the
strength and safety of our Island, m^st Merchant Ships being built in Holland.

Answ. Though this Argument be now gone, such Ships being prohibited by a Law,
I will help the Author to one as good. The Du^ch buy our Rape-seed, make it
into Oil, bring it back to us, and sell it with advantage. This may be as well
said to be from high Interest here, and low there. But the Truth is, the
Industry and Frugality of that People, makes them content to work cheaper, and
sell at less profit than their Neighbors, and so get the Trade from them.

5. The high R^te of Usury makes Land sell so cheap, being not worth more than
14 or 15 years Purcha^^; whereas in Holland, where Interest is at 6, it is
worth above 25. So that a low Interest raises the Price of Land. Where Money is
dear Land is cheap.

Ans. This Argument plainly confesses, That there is something else regulates
the Price of Land, besides the Rate of Interest; else when Money was at 10 per
Cent here, Land should have been at 10 years Purchase; whereas he confesses it
then to have been at 14 or 15. One may suppose, to favor his Hypothesis, he
was not forward to speak the most of it. And Interest, as he says, being at 6
per Cent in Holland. Land there should have sold by that Rule for 16 ^/^ years
Purchase, whereas he says it was worth about 25. And Mr. Manly says, ( p. 33.)
That (...) in France being at 7 per Cent, Noble (...) 4 and 35 years Purchase,
and (...) Land for 25. So that the true (...) from hence is not what our (...)
That it is not the legal (...) something else, that governs the (...) of Land. I
grant his Position, That (...). But it must be so by the natural, not legal
Interest. For where Money will be lent on good Security at 4 or 5 per Cent,
it is a Demonstration that there is more than will be ventured on ordinary
Credit in Trade. And when this Plenty becomes general, it is a sign there is
more Money than can be employed in Trade; which cannot but put many upon
seeking Purchases, to lay it out in Land, and so raise the Price of Land, by
making more Buyers than Sellers.

6. It Is not probable Lenders will call in their Money, when they cannot make
greater Interest any where. Besides, their Security upon L^nd will be better.

Answ. Some unskilful and timorous men will call in their Money; others put it
into the Banker's hands. But the Bankers and Skilful will keep it up, and not
lend it, but at the natural Use, as we have shown. But how Securities will
be^ne e^d^d by lowering of Interest, is I confess beyond my Comprehension.

Of Raising our Coin.
BEing now upon the Consideration of Interest and Money, give me leave to say
one Word more on this occasion, which may not be wholly unseasonable at this
time. I hear a Talk up and down of raising our Money, as a means to retain our
Wealth, and keep our Money from being carried away. I wish those that use the
Phrase of raising our Money, had some clear Notion annexed to it; and that then
they would examine, Whether, that being true, it would at all serve to those
Ends, for which it is proposed.

The raising of M^n^y then signifies one of these two things; either raising
the Value of our Money, or raising the Denomination of our Coin.

The raising of the Value of Money, or any thing else, is nothing but the
making a less quantity of it exchange for any other thing, than would have been
taken for it before. v. g. If 5 s. will exchange for, or (as we call it) buy a
Bushel of Wheat; if you can make 4 s. buy another Bushel of the same Wheat, it
is plain the Value of your Money is raised, in respect of Wheat,. But thus
nothing can raise or fall the value of your Money, but the proportion of its
Plenty or Scarcity, in proportion to the Plenty, Scarcity, or Vent of any other
Commodity, with which you compare it, or for which you would exchange it. And
thus Silver, which makes the In^^ntick Value of Money, compared with it self,
under any Stamp or Denomination of the same or different Countries, cannot be
raised. For an Ounce of Silver, whether in P^ne^, G^o^^^^ or Cr^wn Pieces,
Stivers or Du^^t^^ns, or in Bullion, is and always eternally will be of equal
Value to any other Ounce of Si^ver, under what Stamp or Denomination soever;
unless it can be shown that any Stamp can add any new and better (...) parc^l
of Silver, which (...) of Silver (...).

(...) therefore (...) of equal Value to Silver, (...) Coin, com(...) with
(...) less, or equal, (...) or equal Silve^ (...) And (...) can by no (...)
your Money. (...) of the World, (...) being a^oy^d, (...) so much Silver
alloy'd, or mixed with baser Metals: Because, besides the Weight of the Silver,
those who have need of fine ( i. e. unmixed Silver; as Gilders, Wyre-drawers,
etc.) must according to their need, besides an equal Weight of Silver mixed
with other Metals, give an Overplus to reward the Refiner's Skill and Pains.
And in this Case, fine Silver and alloy'd or mixed Silver are considered as two
distinct Commodities. But no Money being coined of pure fine Silver, this
concerns not the Value of Money at all; wherein an equal quantity of Silver is
always the same Value with an equal quantity of Silver, let the Stamp or
Denomination be what it will.

All then that can be done in this great mystery of Raising Money, is only to
alter (...), and call that a Crown now, which before by the Law was but a part
of a Crown. For Example: Supposing, according to the Standard of our Law, 5 ^.
or a Crown, were to weigh an Ounce, (as it does now, wanting 18 Grains)
whereof, ^ were Copper, and 11/12 Silver, (for there abouts it is) it is plain
here it is the quantity of Silver gives the Value to it. For let another Piece
be coined of the same Weight, wherein half the Silver is taken out, and Copper
or other Alloy put into the place, every one knows it will be worth but half as
much. For the Value of the Alloy is so inconsiderable as not to be reckoned.
This Crown now must be raised^ and from henceforth our Crown Pieces coined 1/20
lighter than an Ounce; which is nothing but changing the Denomination, calling
that a Crown now, which yesterday was but a part, viz. 19/20 of a Crown;
whereby you have only raised 19 parts to the Denomination formerly given to 20.
For I think no body can be so senseless, as to imagine that 19 Grains or Ounces
of Silver can be raised to the Value of 20; or that 19 Gr. or Ounces of Silver
shall at the same time exchange for or buy as much Corn, Oil, or Wine, as 20;
which is to raise it to the Value of 20. For if 19 Ounces of Silver can be
worth 20 Ounces of Silver, or pay for as much of any other Commodity, then 18,
1^, or ^ Ounce may do the same. For if the abating 1/20 of the quantity of
Silver of any Coin, does not lessen its Value, the abating 1^/20 of the
quantity of the Silver of any Coin, will not abate its Value. And so a single
Threepence, or a single Penny, being called a Crown, will buy as much Spice,
or Silk, or any other Commodity, as a Crown-Piece, which contains 20 or 60
times as much Silver; which is an Absurdity so great, That I think no body will
want Eyes to see, and Sense to disown.

Now, this raising your Money, or giving a less quantity of Silver the Stamp
and Denomination of a greater, may be done two ways.

1. By raising one Species of your Money. 2. By raising all your Silver Coin at
once, proportionably; which is the thing I supposed, now proposed.
1. The raising of one Species of your Coin, beyond its intrinsic Value, is
done by Coining any one Species, (which in account bears such a proportion to
the other Species of your Coin) with less Silver in it than is required by that
value it bears in your Money.

For Example, A Crown with us goes for 60 Pence, a Shilling for 12 Pence, a
T^ster for 6 Pence, and a Groat for 4 Pence: And accordingly, the proportion of
Silver in each of them, ought to be as 60. 12. 6. and 4. Now, if in the Mint
there should be Coined Groats, or Testers, that being of the same Alloy with
our other Money, had but 2/^ of the Weight that those Species are Coined at
now; or else, being of the same Weight, were alloy'd with of Copper (...)
(...); and should thus, by Law, be made Current; (the rest of your Silver Money
being kept to the present Standard in Weight and Fineness) it is plain those
Species would be raised part; that passing for 6 d which had but the Silver of
4 d in it; and would be all one as if a Groat should by Law be made current for
6 d; and every 6 d in payment pass for 9 d. This is truly raising the Species:
But is no more in effect, than if the Mine should Coin clipped Money. And has,
besides the Cheat that is put, by such base or light Money, on every particular
Man that receives it, that he wants of that real value which the Public ought
to secure him, in the Money it obliges him to receive as Lawful and Current; It
has^ I say, this great and unavoidable inconvenience to the Public, That,
besides the opportunities it gives to Domestic Coin^^^ to Cheat you with
lawful Money, it p^^^ it into the hands of Foreigners to (...) away your Money
without any Commodities for it^ For if they find that Two-Penny we^ght of
Silver, marked with a certain impression, shall ^^re in E^gland be Equivalent
to 3 d weight marked with anoth^r impression; they will not fail to (...)
Pieces of that Fashion; and so importing that base and low Coin, will, here in
England, receive 3 d for 2 d, and quickly carry away your Silver in exchange
for Copper, or barely the charge of Coynage.

This is unavoidable in all Countries where any one Species of their Money is
disproportionate in its intrinsic Value, ( i. e. in its due proportion of
Silver to the rest of the Money of that Country) which the King of France could
not avoid, with all his watchfulness. For though, by Edict, he made his 4 S^ls
Pieces, whereof 15 were to pass for ^ French Crown, though 20 of them had not
so much Silver in them, as was in a French Crown Piece) pass in the Inland
parts of his Kingdom, 15 for a Crown, in all Payments; yet he durst not make
them Current in his Seaport Towns, for fear that should give an opportunity to
their Importation. But yet this Caution served not the turn. They were still
Imported; and, by this means, a great loss and damage brought upon his Country.
So that he was forced to cry them down, and sink them to near their intrinsic
Value; whereby a great many particular Men, who had quantities of that Species
in their hands, lost a great part of their Estates; and every one that had any,
lost proportionably by it.

If we had Groats or Six-Pences Current by Law, amongst us, that wanted of the
Silver they now have by the Standard, to make them of equal Value to our other
Species of Money; who can imagine that our Neighbors would not presently pour
in quantity of such Money upon us, to the great loss and prejudice of the
Kingdom? The quantity of Silver that is in each Piece or Species of Coin, being
that which makes its real and intrinsic Value, the due proportions of Silver
ought to be kept in each Species, according to the respective Rate set on each
of them by Law. And when this is ever varied from, it is but a Trick to serve
some present occasion; but is alway^ with loss to the Country where the Trick
is played.

2. The other way of raising Many is by raising all your Silver Coin at once;
the proportion of a Crown, a Shilling, and a Penny, in reference to one
another, being still kept, ( viz. That a Shilling shall weigh 1/^ of a Crown
Piece, and a Penny weigh 1/12 of a Shilling, in Standard Silver) but out of
every one of these, you abate 1/20 of the Silver they were wont to have in them.

If all the Species of Money, be, as it is called, raised by making each of them
to have 1/2^ less of Silver in them than formerly; and so your whole Money be
lighter than it was: These following will be some of the consequences of it.

1. It will rob all Creditors and Landlords of 1/20 (or 5 per Cent) of their
Debts, in their (...) Rents, for ever; and all other Rents, as far as their
former Contracts reach, of 5 per Cent of their yearly Income; and this without
any advantage to the Debtor or Farmer: For he receiving no more pounds Sterling
for his Land or Commodities, in this new lighter Coin, than he should have done
of your old and weightier Money, gets nothing by it. If you say yes, he will
receive more Crown, Half-Crown, and Shilling Pieces, for what he now Sells for
new Money, than he should have done if the Money of the old Standard had
continued; you confess your Money is not raised in Value, but in Denomination;
since what your new Pieces want in Weight, must now be made up in their number.
But which way ever this falls, it is certain, the Public (which most Men think,
ought to be the only reason of changing a settled Law, and disturbing the
common current course of things) receives not the least Profit by it; nay, as
we shall see by and by, it will be a great Charge and Loss to the Kingdom. But
this, at first sight, is visible; That in all Payments to be received upon
precedent Contracts, if your Money be in effect raised, the Receiver will lose
5 per Cent. For Money having been Lent, and Leases and other Bargains made,
when Money was of the same Weight and Fineness that it is now, upon Confidence
that under the same names of Pounds, Sh^l. and Pence, they should receive the
same value, ( i. e. the same quantity of Silver) By giving the denomination now
to less quantities of Silver by 1/20, you take from them 5 per Cent of their
due.

When men go to Market to buy any other Commodities with their new, but lighter
Money, they will find 20 s. of their new Money will buy no more of any
Commodity than 19 would before. For it not being the denomination but the
quantity of Silver, that gives the value to any Coin, 19 Grains or parts of
Silver, however denominated or marked^ will no more be worth, or pass for, or
buy so much of any other Commodity as 20 Grains of Silver will, than 19 s. will
pass for 20 s. If any one thinks a Shilling or a Crown in name has its value
from the denomination, and not from the quantity of Silver in it, let it be
tried; and hereafter let a Penny be called a Shilling or a Shilling be called a
Crown. I believe no body would be content to receive his Debts or Rents in such
Money; which though the Law should raise thus, yet he foresees he should lose
11/12 by the one, and by the other of the value he received; and would find his
new Shilling, which had no more Silver in it than 1/12 of what a Shilling had
before, would buy him of Corn, Cloth, or Wine but 1/12 of what an old Shilling
would. This is as plainly so in the raising, as you call it, your Crowns to 5
s. and 3 d. or (which is the same thing) making your Crown 1/2^ lighter in
Silver; the only difference being that in one the loss is so great, (it being
11/12) every body sees and abhors it at first proposal; but in the other (it
being but 1/20, and covered with the deceitful name of raising our Money)
People do not so readily observed it. If it be good to raise the Crown-piece
this way 1/20 this Week, I suppose it will be as good and profitable to raise
it as much again the next Week. For there is no reason why it will not be as
good to raise it again another 1/20 the next Week, and so on; wherein, if you
proceed but 10 Weeks successively, you will by New-Years-Day next have every
Half-Crown raised to a Crown, to the loss of of peoples Debts and Rents, and
the King's Revenue, besides the Confusion of all your affairs: And if you
please to go on in this beneficial way of raising your Money, you may by the
same Art bring a Penny-weight of Silver to be a Crown.

Silver, i. e. the quantity of pure Silver separable from the Alloy, makes the
real value of Money. If it does not, coin Copper with the same stamp and
denomination, and see whether it will be of the same value. I suspect your
Stamp will make it of no more worth than the Copper-money of Ireland is, which
is its weight in Copper and no more. That money lost so much to Ireland as it
passed for above the rate of Copper. But yet I think no body suffered so much
by it as he by whose Authority it was made current.

If Silver give the value, you will say what need is there then of the charge
of Coinage. May not men Exchange Silver by weight, for other things; make their
bargains, and keep their Accounts in Silver by weight? This might be done, but
it has these inconveniences.

1. The weighing of Silver to every one we had occasion to pay it to, would be
very troublesome, for every one must carry about Scales in his Pocket.

2. Scales would not do the business. For, in the next place, every one cannot
distinguish between fine and mixed Silver: So that though he received the full
weight, he was not sure he received the full weight of Silver; since there
might be a mixture of some of the baser Metalls, which he was not able to
discern. Those who have had the care and government of Politic Societies,
introduced Coinage as a remedy to those two inconveniences. The Stamp was a
Warranty of the public, that under ^^ch a denomination they should receive a
piece of such a weight and such a ^iness; (...) is, they should receive so much
Silver. And this is the reason why the counter^iting the Stamp is made the
highest Crime, and has the weight of Treason said upon it; because the Stamp
(...) of the intrins^ck value. The Royal Authority gives the (...) the Law
^^lows and confirms the denomination, and both together give as it were the
pub^^^k faith, as a secu^ity that (...) of Money (...) for (...), be of such a
(...) have (...) them so much Silver. For (...) Si^ver and not Names that pay
Deb^^ and pur^^ase Commodities. If therefore I have contracted for twenty
Crowns, and the Law then has required that each of those Crowns should have an
Ounce of Silver; it is certain my bargain is not made good, I am defrauded (and
whether the public faith be not broken with me, I leave to be considered) if,
paying me 20 Crowns, the Law allows them to be such as have but 19/2^ of the
Silver they ought to have, and really had in them, when I made my Contract.

2. It diminishes all the Kings Revenue 5 per Cent. For though the same number
of Pounds, Shillings, and Pence are paid into the Exchequer as were wont, yet
these names being given to Coin that have each of them 1/20 less of Silver in
them; and that being not a secret concealed from Strangers, no more than from
his own Subjects, they will sell the King no more Pitch, ^arr, or Hemp, for 20
Shillings, after the raising your Money, than they would before for 19: or to
speak in the ordinary phrase, they will raise their Commodities 5 per Cent, as
you have raised your Money 5 per Cent: And it is well if they stop there. For
usually in such changes, an outcry being made of your lessening your Coin,
those who you have to deal with you, taking the advantage of the allarm to
secure themselves from any loss by your new Trick, raise their price even
beyond the Par of your lessening your Coin.

I hear of two Inconveniences complained of, which it is proposed by this
project to Remedy.

The one is, The melting down of our Coin; the other, The carrying away of our
Bullion. These are both Inconveniences I fear we lie under, but neither of
them will be in the least removed or prevented by the proposed alteration of
our Money.

1. It is past doubt, that our Money is melted down; The Reason whereof is
evidently the cheapness of Coinage For a Tax on Coin, paying the Coinage, the
particular Owners pay nothing for it. So that 100 Ounces of Silver Coined,
comes to the Owner at the same Rate, as 100 Ounces of the Standard Silver in
Bullion. For delivering into the Mint his Silver in Bars, he has the same
quantity of Silver delivered out to him again in Coin, without any Charges to
him. Whereby if at any time he has occasion for Bullion, it is the same thing to
melt down our mi^'d Money as to buy Bullion from abroad, or take it in Exchange
for other Commodities. Thus our Mint to the only advantage of our Officers, but
at the public cost, La^^urs in Vain, as will be found. But yet this makes you
not have one jot less Money in England, than you would have otherwise; but only
makes you Coin that which otherwise would not have been Coined, nor perhaps
been brought hither; and being not brought hither by an overbalance of your
Exportation, cannot stay when it is here. It is not any sort of Coinage, does
or can keep your Money here. That wholly and only depends upon the Balance of
your Trade. And had all the Money in King Charles the II. and King James the
II. time, been Minted according to this new proposal, this raised Money would
have been gone as well as the other, and the remainder been no more, nor no
less than it is now; though I doubt not but the Mint would have Coined as much
of it as it has of our present mil^'d Money. The short is this; An
overbalance of Trade with Spain brings you in Bullion; cheap Coinage, when it
is here, carries it into the Mint, and Money is made of it; but if your
Exportation will not Balance your Importation in the other parts of your
Trade, away must your Silver go again, whether Monied or not Monied. For where
Goods do not, Silver must pay for the Commodities you spend.

That this is so will appear by the Books of the Mint, where may be seen how
much milled Money has been Coined in the two last Reigns. And in a Paper I have
now in my Hands, (supposed written by a Man not wholly ignorant in the Mint)
it is confessed, That whereas 1/^ of the Current Payments were some time since
of mil^'d Money, there is not now 1/^^ Gone then it is. But let not any one
mistake and think it gone, because in our present Coinage, an Ounce wanting ^8
Grains is denominated a Crown^ Or that (as is now proposed) an (...) about 40
Grains, being (...) denominated a (...) it, or will (if our Money be (...) for
the future fix it here. Coin what quantity of Silver you please, in one piece
bigger or less, and give it the Denomination of a Crown; when your Money is to
go to pay your Foreign Debts, (or else it will not go out at all) your heavy
Money, ( i. e. that which is weight according to its Denomination, by the
Standard of the Mint) will be that which will be melted down, or carried away
in Coin by the Exporter, whether the pieces of each Species be by the Law
greater or less. For whilst Coinage is whol^y paid for by a Tax, whatever your
size of Money be, he that has need of Bullion to send beyond Sea, or of Silver
to make Plate, need but take milled Money, and melt it down and he has it as
cheap as if it were in pieces of Eight, or other Silver coming from abroad; the
Stamp, which so well secures the weight and fineness of the milled Money,
costing nothing at all.

To this perhaps will be said, that if this be the effect of milled Money, that
it is so apt to be melted down, it were better to return to the old way of
Coining by the Hammer; To which I Answer by no means. For, 1. That way of
Coinage less secures you from having a great part of your Money melted down.
For in that way there being a greater inequality in the weight of the pieces,
some being too heavy and some too light, those who know how to make their
advantage of it, cull out the heavy pieces, melt them down, and make a benefit
of the over-weight. 2. Coinage by the Hammer exposes you much more to the
danger of false Coin. Because the Tools are easily made and concealed, and the
work carried on with fewer Hands, and less noise than a Mill; whereby false
Coiners are less liable to discovery. 3. The pieces not being so round, even,
and fairly Stamped, nor marked on the Edges are exposed to Clipping, which
milled Money is not.


Mill'd-money is therefore certainly best for the Public. But whatever be the
cause of melting down our Mill'd-money, I do not see how raising our Money (as
they call it) will at all hinder its being melted down. For if our Crown-pieces
should be Coined 1/20 lighter; Why should that hinder them from being melted
down more than now. The intrinsique value of the Silver is not altered, as we
have shown already: therefore that temptation to melt them down remains the
same as before. But they are lighter by 1/20. That cannot hinder them from
being melted down. For Half Crowns are lighter by half, and yet that preserves
them not. But they are of less weight, under the same denomination, and
therefore they will not be melted down. That is true, if any of these present
Crowns that are 1/^0 heavier, are current for Crowns at the same time. For then
they will no more melt down the new light Crowns, than they will the old
clipped ones, which are more worth in Coin, and Tale, than in weight and
Bullion. But it cannot be supposed that Men will part with their old and
heavier Money, at the same rate that the lighter new Coin goes at; and pay away
their old Crowns for 5 s. in Tale, when at the Mint they will yield them 5 s. 3
d. And then if an old Milled Crown goes for 5 s. 3 d. and a new Milled Crown
(being so much lighter) go for a Crown, What I pray will be the odds of melting
down the one or the other? The one has 1/20 less Silver in it, and goes for
1/20 less, and so being weight, they are melted down upon equal terms. If it be
a convenience to melt one, it will, be as much a convenience to melt the other;
just as it is the same convenience, to melt Mi^l'd Half Crowns as Milled
Crowns; the one having with half the quantity of Silver, half the value. When
the Money is all brought to the new rate, i. e. to be ^/20 lighter, and
Commodities raised as they will proportionably; What shall hinder the melting
down of your Money then more than now, I would fain know? If it be coined then
as it is now G^^tis, a Crown piece, (let it be of what weight soever) will be
as it is now, just worth its own weight in Bullion, of the same fineness For
the Coinage, which is the manufactury about it, and makes all the difference,
^^^^ing nothing; what can make the difference of value? And therefore, whoever
wants Bullion, will as cheaply melt down these new Crowns, as buy Bullion with
them. The raising of your Money cannot then (the Act for free Coinage standing)
hinder its being meltted down.

Nor, in the next place, much less can it, as is pretended, hinder the
exportation of our Bullion. Any denomination or stamp we shall give to Silver
here, will neither give Silver a higher value in England, nor make it less
prized abroad. So much Silver will always be worth (as we have already showed)
so much Silver given in exchange one for another. Nor will it, when in your
Mint a less quantity of it is raised to a higher denomination (as when 19/20 of
an Ounce has now the denomination of a Crown, which formerly belonged only to
the whole 20) be one jot raised, in respect of any other Commodity.

You have raised the denomination of your stamped Silver 1/20, or which is all
one 5 per Cent. And Men will presently raise their Commodities 5 per Cent. So
that if yesterday 20 Crowns would exchange for 20 Bushels of Wheat, or 20 yards
of a certain sort of Cloth, if you will to day coin current Crowns 1/20
lighter, and make them the Standard, you will find 20 Crowns will exchange for
but 19 Bushels of Wheat, or 19 yards of that Cloth, which will be just as much
Silver for a Bushel, as yesterday. So that Silver being of no more real value,
by your changing your denomination, and giving it a less quantity; this will no
more bring in, or keep your Bullion here, than if you had done nothing. If this
were otherwise, you would be beholden (as some People foolishly imagine) to the
Clippers for keeping in your Money. For if keeping the old denomination to a
less quantity of Silver, be raising your Money (as in effect it is all that is
or can be done in it by this project of making your Coin lighter) the Clippers
have sufficiently done that; and if their Trade go on a little while longer, at
the rate it has of late, and your Mi^l'd-money be melted down and carried away,
and no more coined; your Money will, without the charge of new Coinage, be, by
that sort of Artificers, raised above 5 per Cent, when all your current Money
shall be Clipped, and made above 1/^0 lighter than the Standard, preserving
still its former denomination.

It will possibly be here objected to me, That we see 100 l. of clipped Money,
above 5 per Cent lighter than the Standard, will buy as much Corn, Cloth, or
Wine, as 100 l. in milled Mon^y, which is 1/20 heavier; whereby it is evident
that my Rule fails, That it is not the quantity of Silver that gives the Value
to Money, but its Stamp and Denomination. To which I answer, That Men make
their Estimate and Contracts according to the Standard, upon Supposition they
shall receive good and lawful Money; which is that of full Weight; and so in
effect they do, whilst they receive the current Money of the Country. For
since 100 l. of clipped Money will pay a Debt of 100 l. as well as the weightiest
milled Money, and a new Crown out of the Mint will pay for no more Flesh,
Fruit, or Cloth, than Five clipped Shillings; it is evident that they are
equivalent as to the Purchase of any thing here at home, whilst no body
scruples to take Five clipped Shillings in exchange for a weighty milled Crown.
But this will be quite otherwise as soon as you change your Coin, and^ to raise
it, as you call it) make your Money 1/^0 lighter in the Mint; for then no body
will any more give an old Crown of the former Standard for one of the new, than
he will now give you 5 s. and 3 d. for a Crown; for so much then his old Crown
will yield him at the Mint.

Clipped and unclipt Money will always buy an equal quantity of any thing else,
as long as they will without scrup^e change one for another. And this makes
that the foreign Merchant, that comes to fell his Goods to you, always counts
upon the Value of your Money by the Silver that is in it, and estimates the
quantity of Silver by the Standard of your Mint; though perhaps by reason of
clipped Money, any sum that is ordinarily received is much lighter than the
Standard, and so has less Silver in it than what is in a like Sum new coined in
the Mint. But whilst clipped and weighty will equally change one for another, it
is all one to him whether he receive his Money in clipped Money or no, so it be
but current. For if he buy other Commodities here with his Money, whatever Sum
he contracts for, clipped as well as weighty Money equally pays for it. If he
would carry away the Price of his Commodity in ready Cash, it is easily changed
into weighty Money; and then he has not only the Sum in tale that he contracted
for, but the quantity of Silver he expected for his Commodities, according to
the Standard of our Mint. If the quantity of your clipped Money be once grown so
great, that the foreign Merchant cannot (if he has a mind to it) easily get
Weighty Money for it, but having sold his Merchandise, and received Clipped
Money, finds a difficulty to procure what is weight for it; he will, in selling
his Goods, either contract to be paid in w^ighty Money, or else raise^ the
Price of his Commodities, according to the diminished quantities of Silver in
your Current Coin.

In Holland, ( Ducatoons being the best Money of the Country, as well as the
largest Coin) Men, in Payments, received and paid those indifferently, with the
other Money of the Country, till of late the coining of other Species of Money,
of baser Alloy, and in greater quantities, having made the Ducatoons, either by
melting down, or Exportation, scarcer than formerly, it became difficult to
change the baser Money into Ducatoons; and since that no body will pay a Debt
in Ducatoons, unless he be allowed per Cent, more than they were Coined for.

To understand this, we must take notice, That Guilders is the denomination
that in Holland they usually compute by, and make their Contracts in. A
Ducatoon formerly passed at three Guilders, and three Stuyvers, or 63 Stuyvers.
There were then (some Years since) began to be Coined another Piece, which was
called a Three Guilders Piece, and was ordered to pass for Three Guilders, or
Sixty Stuyvers. But 21 Three Guilders Pieces, which were to pass for 63
Guilders, not having so much Silver in them as 20 Ducatoons, which passed for
the same Sum of 63 Guilders, the Ducatoon^ were either melted down in their
Mints, for the making of these (...), or yet baser Money, with Profit; or were
carried away by Foreign Merchants; who when they carried back the Product of
their Sale in Money, would be sure to receive their Payment of the number of
Guilders they contracted for in Ducatoons, or change the Money they received
into Ducatoons; whereby they carried home more Silver than if they had taken
they Payment in Three Guilder Pi^ces, or any other Species. Thus Ducatoons
became scarce. So that now he that will be paid in Ducatoons must allow per
Cent, for them. And therefore the Merchants, when they Sell any thing now,
either make their Bargain to be paid in Ducatoons, or if they contract for
Guilders in general, (which will be sure to be paid them in the baser Money of
the Country) they raise the Price of their Commodities accordingly.

By this example in a Neighbor Country, we may see how our new milled Money
goes away. When Foreign Trade Imports more than our Commodities will pay for;
it is certain, we must contract Debts beyond Sea, and those must be paid with
Money, when either we cannot furnish, or they will not take our Goods to
discharge them To have Money beyond Sea to pay our Debts, when our Commodities
do not raise it, there is no other way but to send it thither. And since a
weighty Crown costs no more here than a light one; and our Coin beyond Sea, is
valued no otherwise than according to the quantity of Silver it has in it;
Whether we send it in Specie, or whether we melt it down here, to send it in
Bullion (which is the safest way, as being not Prohibited) the weightiest is
sure to go. But when so great a quantity of your Money is Clipped, or so great a
part of your weighty Money is carried away, that the Foreign Merchant, or his
Factor here, cannot have his Price paid in weighty Money, or such as will
easily be changed into it, then every one will see, ( when Men will no longer
take Five Clipped Shillings for a Milled or weighty Crown) that it is the
quantity of Silver that buys Commodities and pays Debts, and not the Stamp and
Denomination which is put upon it. And then too it will be seen what a Robbery
is committed on the Public, by Clipping. Every Grain diminished from the just
weight of our Money, is so much loss to the Nation; which will, one time or
other, be sensibly felt; and which, if it be not taken care of, and speedily
stopped, will, in that enormous course it is now in, quickly, I fear, break out
into open ill effects; and, at one blow, deprive us of a great part, (perhaps,
near) of our Money. For that will be really the case, when the increase of
Clipped Money makes it hard to get weighty, and Men begin to put a difference of
value between that which is weighty, and light Money, and will not Sell their
Commodities but for Money that is Weight, and will accordingly make their
Bargains.

Let the Country Gentleman, when it comes to that pass, consider what the decay
of his Estate will be, when receiving his Rent in the Tale of Clipped Shillings^
according to his Bargain, he cannot get them to pass at Market for more than
their Weight. And he that Sells him Salt or Silk, will Bargain for 5 s. such a
quantity, if he pays him in fair weighty Coin, but in Clipped Money he will not
take under 5 s. 3 d. Here you see you have your Money without this new trick of
Coinage, raised 5 per Cent. but whether to any advantage of the Kingdom I leave
every one to judge.

Hitherto we have only considered the r^isi^g of Silver C^in, and that has been
only by Coining it with les^ Silver in it, under the same Denomination. There
is another way yet of raising Money, which has something more of reality,
though as little good as the former in it: which now, that we are upon the
Chapter of Raising of Money, it may not be amiss to mention; And that is, when
either of the two richer Metals, (which Money is usually made of) is by Law
raised above its natural value, in respect of the other. Gold and Silver, have,
in almost all Ages and parts of the World (where Money was used) generally been
thought the fittest Materials to make it of. But there being a great
disproportion in the Plenty of these Metals in the World, one has always been
valued much higher than the other; so that one Ounce of Gold has exchanged for
several Ounces of Silver: As at present, our Guinea passing for 21 s. 6 d. in
Silver, Gold is now about 15 times more worth than Silver; there being about 15
times more Silver in 21 s. 6 d. than there is Gold in a Guinea. This being now
the Market Rate of Gold to Silver; if by an established Law the Rate of
Guinea's should be set higher, (as to 22 s. and 6 d.) they would be raised
indeed, but to the loss of the Kingdom. For by this Law Gold being raised, 5
per Cent above its natural true value, Foreigners would find it worth while to
send their Gold hither, and so fetch away your Silver at 5 per Cent profit, and
so much loss to you. For when so much Gold as would purchase but 100 Ounces of
Silver any where else, will in England purchase the Merchant 105 Ounces, what
shall hinder him from bringing his Gold to so good a Market; And (either
Selling it at the Mint, where it will yield so much, or having it Coined into
Guinea's) either go with them to Market, with that advantage of 5 per Cent in
the very sort of his Money, or change them into Silver, and carry that away
with him?

On the other side, if by a Law you would raise your Silver Money and make 4
Crowns or 20 s. in Silver, equal to a Guinea, at which rate I suppose it was
first Coined; so that by your Law a Guinea should pass but for 20 s. the same
inconvenience would follow. For then strangers would bring in Silver, and carry
away your Gold, which was to be had here at a lower rate than any where else.

If you say, that this inconvenience is not to be feared; for that as soon as
people found that Gold began to grow scarce, or that it was more worth than the
Law set upon it, they would not then part with it at the Statute-rate; as we
see the broad pieces that were Coined in K. James I. time for 20 s. no body
will now part with under 23 s. or more, according to the Market value; This I
grant is true; and it does plainly confess the foolishness of making a Law
which cannot produce the effect it is made for; as indeed it will not, when you
would raise the price of Silver in respect of Gold, above its natural Market
value: For then, as we see in our Gold, the price of it will raise its self.
But on the other side, if you should by a Law set the value of Gold above its
(...) then people would be bound to receive it at that high rate, and so part
with their Silver at an under value. But supposing that having a mind to raise
your Silver in re^pect of (...) (for when you would raise the value of Money,
fancy what you will it is but in respect of something you (...) it for, and is
only (...) make a less quantity of the (...) Money is made of change (...)
quantity of that thing (...) to) you make a Law (...) of that? If your Law
(...) that as much as you (...) Gold (for they are (...) things pu^ in (...)
the one (...) clear loss to the Kingdom as you raise Silver and debase Gold by
your Law, below their natural value. If you raise Gold in proportion to Silver
the same effect follows.

The effect and ill consequence indeed is not so easily observed in the one as
in the other: Because your accounts being kept, and your reckonings all made in
Pounds, Shillings, and Pence, which are denominations of Silver Coins or
numbers of them; if Gold be made current at a rate above the free and Market
value of those two Metals, every one will easily perceive the inconvenience.
But there being a Law for it, you cannot refuse the Gold in payment for so
much. And all the Money or bullion People will carry beyond Sea from you will
be in Silver, and the Money or bullion brought in, will be in Gold And the same
just will happen when your Silver is raised and Gold debased in respect of one
another, beyond their true and natural proportion: ( Natural proportion or
value I call that respective rate they find any where without the prescription
of Law) For then Silver will be that which is brought in, and Gold will be
carried out; and that still with loss to the Kingdom, answerable to the
overvalue, set by the Law. Only as soon as the mischief is felt, people will
(do what you can) raise their Gold to its natural value. For your accounts and
bargains being made in the denomination of Silver-money; if, when Gold is
raised above its proportion, by the Law, you cannot refuse it in payment, (as
if the Law should make a Guinea current at 22 s. and 6 d. you are bound to take
it at that rate in payment; but if the Law should make Guineas current at 20 s.
he that has them is not bound to pay them away at that rate, but may keep them
if he pleases, or get more for them if he can: yet from such a Law, one of
these 3 things follow. Either 1st, the Law forces them to go at 20 s. and then
being found passing at that rate, Foreigners make their advantage of it; Or 2
ly, People keep them up and will not part with them at the legal rate,
understanding them really to be worth more, and then all your Gold lies dead,
and is of no more use to Trade than if it were all gone out of the Kingdom; Or
3 ly, it passes for more than the Law allows, and then your Law signifies
nothing, and had been better let alone. Which way ever it succeeds it proves
either prejudicial or ineffectual. If the design of your Law take place, the
Kingdom loses by it; if the inconvenience be felt and avoided, your Law is
eluded.

Mo^ny is measure of Commerce, and of the rate of every thing, and therefore
ought to be kept (as all other measures) as steady and unvariable as may be.
But this cannot be^ if your Money be made of two Me^^l^, whose proportion, and
consequently whose price, constantly varies in respect of one another. Silver,
for many Reasons is the (...) of all Metals to be this measure, and therefore
generally made use of for Money. But then it is very unfit and inconvenient,
that Gold, or any other Met^l should be made current legal Money^ at a standing
settled Rate. This i^ to do by Law, what justly cannot be done; set a Rate upon
the varying value of Things; and is^ a^ I have showed, as far (...) it (...), a
constant damage and prej^dice to the Country where it is prac^ised. Suppose
Fifteen to One be now the exact p^r between G^ld and Si^ver; (...) make it
lasting, and establish it so tha^ next year, or twenty years (...) just value
of Gold to Silver^ and that one Ounce of Gold shall be (...) Ounces of Silver,
neither more nor les^? ^Tis possible, the (...) Trade sweeping away great (...)
of Gold, may make it scarcer in (...). Pe^haps the Guinea Trade, and Mines of
Peru, affording it in a greater abundance, may make it more plentiful; and so
its value in respect of Silver, come on the one side to be as sixteen, or on
the other as fourteen to one. And can any Law you shall make alter this
proportion here, when it is so every where else round about you? If your Law
set it at fifteen, when it is at the free Market Rate, in the Neighboring
Countries, as sixteen to one; Will they not send hither their Silver to fetch
away your Gold at 1/16 loss to you? Or if you will keep its Rate to Silver, as
fifteen to one, when in Holland, France, and Spain, its Market value is but
fourteen; Will they not send hither their Gold^ and fetch away your Silver at
1/1^ loss to you? This is unavoidable, if you will make Money of both Gold and
Silver at the same time, and set Rates upon them by Law in respect of one
another.

What then? (Will you be ready to say) would you have Gold kept out of Engl^nd?
Or being here, would you have it useless to Trade, and must there be no Money
made of it? I answer, Quite the contrary. It Is sit the Kingdom should make use
of the Treasure it has. It Is necessary your Gold should be Coined, and have the
Kings Stamp upon it to secure Men in receiving it, that there is so much Gold
in each piece. But it is not necessary that it should have a fixed value set on
it by public Authority. It Is not convenient that it should in its varying
proportion have a settled price. Let Gold, as other Commodities, find its own
Rate. And when, by the Kings Image and Inscription, it carries with it a
public Assurance of its weight and fineness; the Gold Money so Coined will
never fail to pass at the known Market Rates; as readily as any other Twenty
(...), though designed at first for 20 l, go now as current for 21 l. 10 s. as
any other Money, and sometimes for more, as the Rate varies. The value or price
of any thing being only the respective estimate it bears to some other, which
it comes in Competition with, can only be known by the quantity of the one
which will exchange for a certain quantity of the other. There being no two
Things in Nature, whose proportion and use does not vary, it is impossible to
set a standing regular price between them. The growing plenty or scarcity of
either in the Market; (whereby I mean the ordinary places, where they are to be
had in Tra^fick) the real Use, or changing fashion of the place bringing either
of them more into demand than formerly; presently varies the respective value
of any two Things. You will as fruitlesly endeavor to keep two different
Things steadily at the same price one with another, as to keep two Things in an
Aequilibrium, where their varying weights depend on different Causes. Put a
piece of Sponge in one Scale, and an exact counterpoise of Silver in the other,
you will be mightily mistaken if you imagine, that because that they are to day
equal they shall always remain so. The weight of the Sponge varying with every
change of moisture in the Air, the Silver in the opposite Scale will sometimes
Rise and sometimes Fall. This is just the state of Silver and Gold in regard of
their mutual value. Their proportion, or use, may, nay constantly does vary,
and with it their price. For being estimated one in Reference to the other,
they are as it were put in opposite Scales, and as the one rises the other
falls, and so on the contrary.

Farthings made of a baser Metal, may on this account too deserve your
Consideration. For whatsoever Coin you make current, above the Intrinsic
value, will always be damage to the public, whoever get by it. But of this I
shall not at present enter into a more particular Enquiry. Only this I will
confidently affirm, That it is the Interest of every Country, that all the
current. Money of it should be of one and the same Metal; That the several
Species should be all of the same Alloy, and none of a baser mixture: And that
the Standard once thus settled, should be Inviolably and Immutably kept to
perpetuity. For whenever that is altered upon what pretense soever, the public
will lose by it.

Since then it will neither bring us in more Money, Bullion, nor Trade; nor
keep that we have here; nor hinder our weighty Money of what Denomination
soever from being melted; to what purpose should the Kingdom be at the charge
of Coining all our Money anew? For I do not suppose any Body can propose, that
we should have two sorts of Money at the same time, one heavier, and the other
lighter, as it comes from the Mint. That is very absurd to imagine. So that if
all your old Money must be Coined over again, it will indeed be some advantage,
and that a very considerable one, to the Officers of the Mint. For they being
allowed 3 s. 6 d. for the Coinage of every Pound Troy, which is very near 5 per
Cent; If our Money be Six Millions, and must be Coined all over again, it will
cost the Nation to the Mint 330000 l. If the c^ipt Money must escape, because it
is already as light as your new Standard; do you not own that this design of
new Coinage is just of the Nature of C^ipping?

This business of Money and Coinage is by some Men, and amongst them some very
Ingenious Persons, thought a great Mystery, and very hard to be understood. Not
that truly in it self it is so: but because interessed People that treat of it,
wrap up the Secret they make advantage of in mystical, obscure, and
unintelligible ways of Talking; Which Men, from a preconceiv'd opinion of the
difficulty of the subject, taking for Sense, in a matter not easy to be
penetrated but by the Men of Art, let pass for Current without Examination.
Whereas, would they look into those Discourses, enquire what meaning their
Words have, they would find, for the most part, either their Positions to be
false; their Deductions to be wrong; or (which often happens) their words to
have no distinct meaning at all. Where none of these be; there, their plain,
true^ honest Sense, would prove very easy and intelligible, if expressed in
ordinary and direct Language.

That this is so, I shall show, by examining a Printed Sheet on this Subject,
Entitled, Remarks on a Paper given in to the Lords, etc.

Remarks. It Is certain, That what place soever will give most for Silver by
weight, it will thither be carried and Sold: And if of the Money which now
passes in England, there can be 5 s. 5 d. the Ounce, given for Standard Silver
at the Mint; when but 5 s. 4 d. of the very same Money can be given elsewhere
for it; it will be certainly brought to the Mint; and when Coined, cannot be
Sold, (having one Penny overvalue set upon it by the Ounce) for the same that
other Plate may be bought for, so will be left unmelted; at least, 'twill be
the Interest of any Exporters, to buy Plate to send out, before Money; whereas
now it is his Interest to buy Money to send out before Plate.

Answ. The Author would do well to make it intelligible, how, of the Money that
now passes in England, at the Mint can be given 5 s. 5 d. the Ounce for
Standard Silver, when but 5 s. 4 d. of the same Money can be given elsewhere
for it. Next, How it has one Penny overvalue set upon it by the Ounce; So
that, When Coined it cannot be Sold. This, to an ordinary Reader, looks very
Mysterious; and, I fear, is so; as either signifying nothing at all, or nothing
that will hold. For, 1. I ask who is it at the Mint, that can give 5 s. 5 d.
per Ounce, for Standard Silver, when no body else can give above 5 s. 4 d? Is
it the King, or is it the Master Worker, or any of the Officers? For to give 5
s. 5 d. for what will yield but 5 s. 4 d. to any body else, is to give 1/^5
part more than it is worth. For so much every thing is worth, as it will yield.
And I do not see how this can turn to account to the King, or be born by any
body else. 2. I ask, How a Penny overvalue can be set upon it by the O^ne^; so
that it cannot be sold? This is so Mysterious, that I think it near impossible.
For an equal quantity of Standard Silver will always be just worth an equal
quantity of Standard Silver. And it is utterly impossible to make 64 parts of
Standard Silver equal to, or worth 65 parts of the same Standard Silver; which
is meant by setting a Penny overvalue upon it by the Ounce, if that has any
meaning at all. Indeed, by the Workmanship of it, 64 Ounces of Standard Silver
may be made not only worth 65 Ounces, but 70 or 80. But the Coinage, which is
all the Workmanship here, being paid for by a Tax, I do not see how that can be
reckoned at all: Or if it be, it must raise every 5 s and 4 d Coined, to above
5 s. 5 d. If I carry 64 Ounces of Standard Silver in Bullion to the Mint, to be
Coined; shall I not have just 64 Ounces back again for it in Coin? And if so,
Can these 64 Ounces of Coined Standard Silver, be possibly made worth 65 Ounces
of the same Standard Silver uncoin'd; when they cost me no more, and I can, for
barely going to the Mint, have 64 Ounces of Standard Silver in Bullion turned
into Coin? Cheapness of Coinage in England, where it costs nothing, will,
indeed, make Money be sooner brought to the Mint, than any where else; because
there I have the convenience of having it made into Money for nothing. But this
will no more keep it in England, than if it were perfect Bullion. Nor will it
hinder it from being melted down; because it cost no more in Coin than in
Bullion: and this equally, whether your Pieces, of the same denomination, be
lighter, heavier, or just as they were before. This being explained, 'twill be
easy to see, whether the other things, said in the same Paragraph, be true or
false; and particularly, whether 'twill be the Interest of every Exporter, to
buy Plate to send out before Money.


Remark. It Is only barely asserted, That (...) Silver be raised at the Mint,
that 'twill ^^ise elsewhere above it; but can never be known till it be tried.

Answ. The Author tells us in the last Paragraph, That Si^v^r that is worth but
5 s. 2 d. per Ounce at the (...) is w^^th 5 s. 4 d. elsewhere. This how true or
what inconvenience it (...) not here examine. But be the Inconvenience of it
what it will, this raising the Money he proposes as a Remedy: And to those who
say, upon raising our Money Silver will rise too, he makes this Answer, That it
can never be known, whether it will or no, till it be tried. To which I reply,
That it may be known as certainly, without Trial, as it can, That two Pieces of
Silver that weighed equally yesterday, will weigh equally again to morrow in
the same Scales.

There is Silver, (says our Author) whereof an Ounce (i. e. 480 Grains) will
change for 5 s. 4 d. ( i. e. 496 Grains) of our Standard Silver coined. To
morrow you coin your Money lighter; so that then 5 s. 4 d. will have but 472
Grains of coined Standard Silver in it. Can it not then be known, without
Trial, whether that Ounce of Silver, which to day will change for 496 Grains of
Standard Silver coined, will change to morrow but for 472 Grains of the same
Standard Silver coined? Or can any one imagine that 480 Grains of the same
Silver, which to day are worth 496 Grains of our coined Silver, will to morrow
be worth but 472 Grains of the same Silver, a little differently coined? He
that can have a Doubt about this till it be tried, may as well demand a Trial
to be made, to prove, That the same thing is aequiponderent, or aequivalent to
it self. For I think it is as clear, That 472 Grains of Silver are
aequiponderent to 496 Grains of Silver, as that an Ounce of Silver, that is to
day worth 496 Grains of Standard Silver, should to morrow be worth but 472 Gr.
of the same Standard Silver; all Circumstances remaining the same, but the
different Weight of the Pieces stamped: which is that our Author asserts, when
he says, That it is only barely asserted, etc. What has been said to this, may
serve also for an Answer to the next Parapraph. Only I desire it may be taken
notice of, That the Author seems to insinuate that Silver goes not in England,
as in Foreign Parts, by Weight; which is a very dangerous as well as false
Position; and which, if allowed, may let into our Mint what Corruption and
Debasing of our Money one pleases.

Remark. That our Trade has heretofore furnished us with an Overplus, brought
home in Gold and Silver, is true: But that we bring home from any place more
Goods than we now Export to it, I do not conceive to be so. And more Goods
might be sent to those parts; but by reason of the great Value of Silver in
this part of the World, more Money is to be got by Exporting Silver, than by
any other thing that can be sent; and that is the reason of it. And for its
being melted down, and sent out, because it is so heavy, is not by their Paper
denied.

Answ. That we bring home from any place more Goods than we now Export, (the
Author tells us) he does not conceive.

Would he had told us a Reason for his Conceit. But since the Money of any
Country is not presently to be changed, upon any private Man's groundless
Conceit, I suppose this Argument will not be of much weight with many Men. I
make bold to call it a groundless Conceit; For if the Author please to remember
the great Sums of Money are carried every year to the East Indies, for which we
bring home consumable Commodities; (though I must own that it pays us again
with advantage.) Or if he will examine how much only two Commodities, wholly
consumed here, cost us yearly in Money, (I mean Canary Wine and Currants) more
than we pay for with Goods Exported to the Canaries and Zant; besides the
Overbalance of Trade upon us in several other places; he will have little
reason to say, he does not conceive we bring home from any place more Goods
than we ^ow Export to it.

As to what he says concerning the melting down and Exporting our Money,
because it is heavy; if by heavy, he means, because our Crown-Pieces (and the
rest of our sp^cies of Money in proportion) are 23 or 24 Grains heavier than he
would have them coined. This, whoever grants it, I deny; upon grounds which I
suppose, when examined, will be found clear and evident.

Indeed when your Debts beyond Sea, to answer the Overbalance of foreign
Importations, call for your Money; it is certain the heavy Money, that is that
which has the Standard Weight, will be melted down and carried away; because
Foreigners value not your Stamp, but your Silver.

He would do well to tell us what he means by the great value of Silver in this
part of the World. For he speaks of it as a Cause that draws away our Money
more now than formerly; or else it might as well have been omitted as mentioned
in this place: And if he mean, by this part of the World, England; it is scarce
Sense to say. That the great Value of Silver in England should draw Silver out
of England. If he means the Neighboring Countries to England, he should have
said it, and not doubtfully this part of the World. But let him^ by this part
of the World, mean what he will, I dare say every one will agree, That Silver
is not more valued in this, than any other part of the World; nor in this Age,
more than in our Grandfathers Days.

I am sorry if it be true, what he tells us, That more Money is to be got by
Exportation of Silver, than by any other thing that can be sent. This is an
Evidence, that we bring home more Goods than we Export: For till that happens,
and has brought us in Debt beyond Sea, Silver will not be Exported; but the
Overplus of Peoples Gain, being generally laid up in Silver, it will be brought
home in Silver; and so our People will value it as much as any other, in this
part of the World.

The Truth of the Case in short is this. Whenever we, by a losing Trade,
contract Debts with our Neighbors; they will put a great Value on our Silver,
and more Money will be got by transporting Silver than any thing can be sent:
Which comes about thus. Suppose that, by an Overbalance of their Trade
(whether by a Sale of Pepper, Spices, and other East India Commodities, it
matters not) we have received great quantities of Goods, within these two or
three Months, from H^lland, and sent but little thither; so that the Accounts
balanced between the Inhabitants of England and the United Provinces, we of
England were a Million in their Debt; what would follow from hence? This: That
these Dutch Creditors, desiring to have what is due to them, give Order to
their Factors and Correspondents here, to return it them. For enquiring, as we
do, what are the effects of an overbalance of Trade, we must not suppose they
invest their Debts in Commodities, and return their Effects that way. A Million
then being to be returned from England to Holland in Money, every one seeks
Bills of Exchange: But Englishmen not having Debts in Holland to answer this
Million, or any the least part of it, Bills are not to be got. This presently
makes the Exchange very high; upon which the Bankers, etc. who have the command
of great quantities of Money and Bullion, send that away to Holland in Specie,
and so take Money here to pay it again there upon their Bills at such a rate of
Exchange as gives them five, ten, fifteen, etc. per Cent. profit; and thus
sometimes a 5 s. piece of our milled Money may truly be said to be worth 5 s.
3 d. 4 d. 6 d. 9 d. in Holland. And if this be the great value of Silver in
this part of the World, I easily grant it him. But this great value is to be
remedied, not by the alteration of our Mint, but by the Regulation and Balance
of our Trade. For be your Coin what it will, our Neighbors, if they
overbalance us in Trade, will not only have a great value for our Silver, but
get it too; and there will be more to be got by Exporting Silver to them, than
by any other Thing can be sent.

Remarks. The alteration of the Coins in Spain and Portugal are no way at all
like this. For there they altered in Denomination near half, to deceive those
they paid, with paying those to whom they owed one Ounce of Silver, but half an
Ounce for it. But in the alteration here designed, to whoever an Ounce of
Silver was owing, an Ounce will be paid in this Money; it being here only
designed, that an Ounce of Money should equal an Ounce of Silver in value, at
home, as well as abroad, which now it does not.

Answer. In this Paragraph the Author Confesses the alteration of the Coin in
Spain and Portugal was a cheat; but the alteration here designed, he says, is
not: But the Reason he gives for it is admirable; viz. Because they there
altered in Denomination near half, and here the Denomination is altered but 5
per Cent; for so in Truth it is, whatever be designed. As if 50 per Cent were a
Cheat, but 5 per Cent were not; because perhaps less perceiveable. For the two
Things that are pretended to be done here by this new Coinage, I fear will both
fail, viz. 1. That to whom (...) an Ounce of Silver is owing, an Ounce (...)
Silver shall be paid in this Money. For when an Ounce of Silver is Coined, as
is proposed, into 5 s. 5 d. (which is to make our Money 5 per Cent. higher than
it is now) I that am to receive an 100 l. per Annum, Fee Farm Rent; shall I in
this new Money receive 105 l. or barely 100 l.? The first I think will not be
said. For if by Law you have made it 100 l. it is certain the Tenant will pay me
no more. If you do not mean that 400 Crowns, or 2000 Shillings of your new Coin
shall be an 100 l. but there must be 5 per Cent, in tale, added to every 100,
you are at the charge of new Coinage to no other purpose but to breed
Confusion. If I must receive 100 l, by tale, of this new Money for my Fee Farm
Rent, it is demonstration that I lose five Ounces per Cent of the Silver was due
to me. This a little lower he Confesses in these Words, That where a Man has a
Rent-SEC, that can never be more, this may somewhat affect it, but so very
little, that it will scarce ever at all be perceived. This very little is 5 per
Cent. And if a Man be cheated of that, so he perceives it not, it goes for
nothing. But this loss will not affect only such Rents as can never be more,
but all Payments whatsoever that are contracted for before this alteration of
our Money.

2. If it be true, what he affirms, That an Ounce of Money does equal an Ounce
of Silver in value abroad, but not at home; then this part of the Undertaking
will also fail. For I deny that the Stamp on our Money does any more debase it
here at home than abroad, or make the Silver in our Money not equal in value to
the same weight of Silver every where. The Author would have done well to have
made it out, and not left so great a Paradox only to the credit of a single
Assertion.

Remarks. And for what is said in this Bill to prevent Exportation, relates
only to the keeping in our Coin, and Bullion, and leaves all Foreign to be
Exported still.

Answer. What the Author means by our own and Foreign Bullion, will need some
Explication.

Remarks. There is now no such thing as Payments made in weighty and milled
Money.

Answer. I believe there are very few in Town, who do not very often receive a
milled Crown for 5 s. and a milled half Crown for 2 s. 6 d. But he means I
suppose in great and entire Sums of milled Money. But I ask, if all the clipped
Money were called in, whether then all the Payments would not be in weighty
Money; and that not being called in, whether if it be lighter than your new
milled Money, the new milled Money will not be melted down as much as the old;
which I think the Author there confesses, or else I understand him not.

Remark. Nor will this any way interrupt Trade; for Trade will find its own
course; the Denomination of Money in any Country no way concerning that.

Answ. The Denomination to a certain Weight of Money, in all Countries,
concerns Trade; and the alteration of that necessarily brings disturbance to it.

Remark. For if so be it occasions the Coining more Money,

Answ. He talks as if it would be the occasion of Coining more Money. Out of
what? Out of Money already Coined, or out of Bullion? For I would be glad to
know where it is.

Remarks. It may be some gain to those that will venture to melt down the Coin,
but very small loss (if any) to those that shall be paid in the New: It Is not
to be denied, but that where any Man has a Rent-SEC, that can never be more,
this may somewhat affect it; but so very little, 'twill scarce ever at all be
perceived.

Ans. As much as it will be gain to melt down their Coin, so much loss will it
^e to those who are paid in the new: (...) 5 per Cent^ which, I suppose, is
more than the Author would be willing to lose, unless he get by it another way.

Rem. And if the alteration designed should have the effect of making our
Native Commodities any way dearer,

Ans. Here the Author confesses, that proportionably as your Money is raised,
the Price of other things will be raised too. But to make amends, he says,

Rem. It does at the same time make the Land which produces them, of more than
so much more in value.

Ans. This more than so much more in value, is more than our Author, or any
body else for him, will ever be able to make out.

The Price of things will always be estimated by the quantity of Silver is
given in exchange for them. And if you make your Money less in Weight, it must
be made up in Tale. This is all this great Mystery of raising Money, and
raising Land. For Example, The Manor of Blackacre would yesterday have yielded
100000 Crowns, which, let us suppose, numero re^und^, to be Ounces a piece of
Standard Silver. To day your new Coin comes in play, which is 5 per Cent
lighter. There Is your Money raised. The Land now at Sale yields 105000 Crowns,
which is just the same 100000 Ounces of Standard Silver. There Is the Land
raised. And is not this an admirable Invention, for which the Public ought to
be at Charges for new Coinage, and all your Commerce put in disorder? And then
to recommend this Invention, you are told, as a great Secret, That, Had not
Money, from time to time, been raised in its Denomination, Lands had not so
risen too: which is to say, Had not your Money been made lighter, fewer Pieces
of it would have bought as much Land as a greater number does now.

Rem. The loss of Payments therespoken of, will, in no sort, be so great as if
the Parties to whom these Debts are owing, were now bound to receive them in
the Money now passes, and then to melt the same down; so at this they will have
no cause to complain.

Ans. A very good Argument! The Clippers have robbed the Public of a good part
of their Money (which Men will, some time or other, find in the Payments they
receive) and it is desired the Mint may have a liberty to be beforehand in it.
They are told they will have no reason to Complain at it, who suffer this loss;
because it is not so great as the other. The damage is already done to the
Public, by Clipping. Where at last it will light, I cannot tell. But Men who
receive Clipped Money, not being forced to melt it down, do not yet receive any
loss by it. When Clipped Money will no longer change for weighty, than those who
have Clipped Money in their hands, will find the loss of it.

Rem. 'Twill make the Customs better paid, because there will be more Money.

Ans. That there will be more Money in Tale, it is possible: That there will be
more Money in Weight and Worth, the Author ought to show. And then, whatever
becomes of the Customs, (which I do not hear are unpaid now) the King will lose
in the Excise above 30000 l. per annum. For in all Taxes where so many Pounds,
Shillings, or Pence are determined by the Law to be paid, there the King will
lose 5 per Cent. The Author here, as in other places, gives a good reason for
it. For, His Majesty being to pay away this Money by Tale, as he received it,
it will be to him no loss at all.

As if my receiving my Rents in full Tale, but in Money of undervalue 5 per
Cent, were not so much loss to me, because I was to pay it away again by Tale.
Try it at 50 per Cent. The odds only is, That one being greater than the other,
would make more noise. But our Author's great refuge in this is, That it will
not be perceived.

Remark. If all Foreign Commodities were to be Purchased with this new Species
of Money sent out; we agree, That with 100 l. of it there could not be so much
Silver or other Commodities bought, as with 100 l. in Crown Pieces as now
Coined; because they would be heavier; And all Coin in any Kingdom, but where
it is Coined, only goes by Weight; and for the same weight of Silver, the same
every where still will be bought; and so there will, with the same quantity of
Goods. And if those Goods should cost 5 per Cent more here in England than
heretofore, an^ yield but the same Money (we mean by the Ounce abroad) the same
Money brought ho^^ and Coined, will yield the Importer 5 per Cent more at the
Mint than it heretofore could do, and so no damage to the Trader at all.

Answ. Here Truth forces from the Author a confession of Two things, which
demonstrate the vanity and usele^nes^ of the Project. 1. That upon this c^ange
of your Coin, Foreign Goods will be raised. 2. Your own Goods will (...) more 5
per Cent. So that Goods of all kind^ being thereupon raised; wherein con^^^ the
raising of your Money, when an (...) of Standard Silver, however (...) ^tamped,
or denominated, will buy (...) more Commodities than it did before? This
confession also shows the Falsehood of that dangerous supposition, That Money,
in the Kingdom where it is Coined, goes not by Weight, i. e. is not valued by
its Weight.

Rem. It Is true, The Owners of Silver will find a good Market for it, and no
others will be damaged; but, on the contrary, the making Plenty of Money will
be an advantage to all.

Answ. I grant it true, That if your Money were really raised, 5 per Cent, the
Owners of Silver would get so much by it, by bringing it to the Mint to be
Coined. But since, as is confessed, Commodities will (upon this raising your
Money) be raised to 5 per Cent, this alteration will be an advantage to no body
but the Officers of the Mint.

Rem. When Standard Silver was last raised at the Mint, ( which it was, from 5
s to 5 s and 2 d the Ounce, in the 43 d of Eliz.) and, for above Forty Years
after, Silver uncoin'd was not worth above 4 s 10 d the Ounce, which occasioned
much Coining; and of Money, none in those days was Exported: Whereas Silver now
is worth but the very same 5 s and 2 d the Ounce still at the Mint, and is
worth 5 s 4 d elsewhere. So that if this Bill now with the Lords does not
happen to pass, there can never any Silver be ever more Coined at the Mint; and
all the Milled Money will in a very little time more be destroyed.

Answ. The reason of so much Money Coined in Queen Elizabeth's Time, and
afterward, was not the lessening your Crown Pieces from 480 to 462 gr. and so
proportionably all the rest of your Money, (which is that the Author calls,
raising Standard Silver from 5 s to 5 s 2 d the Ounce) but from the
overbalance of your Trade, bringing then in plenty of Bullion, and keeping it
here.

How Standard Silver (for if the Author speaks of other Silver, it is a
fallacy) should be worth its own Weight in Standard Silver at the Mint, ( i. e.
5 s 2 d the Ounce) and be worth more than its own Weight in Standard Silver, (
i. e. 5 s 4 d the Ounce) in Lombard Street, is a Paradox that no body, I think,
will be able to comprehend, till it be better Explained. It is time to give off
Coining, if the value of Standard Silver be lessened by it; as really it is, if
an Ounce of coined Standard Silver will not exchange for an Ounce of uncoin'd
Standard Silver, but an Ounce of coined Standard Silver will not exchange for
an Ounce of uncoin'd Standard Silver, unless you add 15 or 16 grains overplus
to it: Which is what the Author would have taken upon his word, when he says,
Silver is worth Five Shillings Four Pence elsewhere.

Five Shillings Four Pence of Money Coined at the Mint, the Author must allow
to be at least 495 grains. An Ounce is but 480 grains. How then an Ounce of
uncoin'd Standard Silver can be worth Five shillings Four pence, ( i. e. How
480 grains of uncoin'd Standard Silver can be worth 495 grains of the same
Standard Silver, Coined into Money) is unintelligible; unless the Coinage of
our Mint lessens the Value of Standard Silver.

SIR,
COIN and Interest are Two things of so great moment to the Public, and of so
great concernment in Trade, that they ought, very accurately to be examined
into, and very nicely weighed, upon any Proposal of an alteration to be made in
them. I pretend not to have Treated of them here as they deserve. That must be
the work of an abler Hand. I have said something on th^se Subjects, because you
required it. And, I hope, the readiness of my Obedience will excuse, to You,
the Faults I have committed, and assure You that I am,

SIR, Your most humble servant
.
FINIS.

