IMPRIMATUR,

Mar. 9. 1693/4. Ra. Barker.

Reason and Religion: IN SOME Useful Reflections On the Most Eminent HYPOTHESES
CONCERNING The First PRINCIPLES, and NATURE of THINGS.

WITH ADVICE suitable to the Subject, and Seasonable for these Times.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleet Street. 1694.

THE PREFACE.
IT IS bad, when Discourses to prove the Fundamentals of Religion are very
seasonable, worse when they are necessary, but worst of all, when no
Demonstrations or Endeavors can affect Men with a Sense of Piety. Which of
these Characters our Age deserves, is left to the Judgment of the most
Experienced: In the mean time, our continuing Essays to assign the Reasons of
our Faith, ought to be thankfully acknowledged by all, as an Argument of our
Hope and Charity.

The Design of the following Papers, is, after our Regards to the Preservation
of Truth, to set upon the Irreligious in their own Fortresses, and turn to a
good Use those Philosophical Reasons or Conjectures, which they have perverted:
to what degrees of Humility this Method may reduce them, can only be foreseen
by the Searcher of Hearts; the Good it has done already, may be a propitious
Omen to our future Expectations: and this we may reasonably suppose, that if it
makes not every attentive Reader, how prejudiced soever, more distrustful of
his wicked Principles, it must make him more desperate and self-condemned.

Let no wicked Men pretend any Arguments hereafter used, are above their Reach
and Capacity: The Method is neither confused, nor the Expression ambiguous; and
their taking no care to understand them, must be looked upon as a Token of
great folly: for such it must be, to entertain Prejudices against God, without
knowing the utmost that can be said for our Respects to him; or referred to
Diabolical Instinct, drawing them off from THE TRUE ORACLES OF REASON, to
listen to Impostures. Such Brutish Infidels deserve not the Treatments of
Humanity: When the Head infects the Heart, the Disease will bear Argumentative
Prescriptions; but when the Corruptions of the Heart infect the Head, some
sharper course must be taken with them.

May GOD of his Mercy so guide us all to, and in our Endeavors after a true
Reformation, that undissembled Holiness may adorn his Church, and the Blessings
of his Love be a lasting Protection to it.

Reason and Religion.
ALL our Discourses of GOD, and Enquiries about his Holy Nature, ought to be
attended with Caution and Respect, least we derogate from the Excellencies of
the best Being, have our Minds overcast with the most dangerous Errors, and
wander out of the way of our principal Interest. We are placed, by the Divine
Ordination, in a part of the World, wherein we have a moderate competency of
Light and Knowledge: and our distance from the Fountain of Glory is not so
great, but the Irradiations we have from it may enliven our Hopes, and guide
our Endeavors in aiming and aspiring to it. If we are faithful unto our own
Faculties, and employ our Time and our Judgment in gathering into the Mind the
scattered Rays and Principles of Heavenly Light, their united power will frame
us into a Divine Temper, and sublimate our Nature for nearer Accesses unto God:
but if we bend entirely unto the Earth, and suck our Notions and Nourishment
from the same place, our Minds must labor under the Dominion of corrupt and
cloudy Principles, which will carry us further from God, and make even this
Earth too happy an Habitation for us.

The first and principal of all Sacred Truths, to be considered, is, the
Existence of God: and though no Principles or Hypothesis lead altogether to the
denial of God; yet we have reason to fear, that the strange and irreligious
Practices of Men do spring from some naughty and irreligious Persuasions; and
that their Thoughts of God (if they have any) have but little root.

It may not be amiss therefore, to be helpful to any Men who will give
themselves the liberty of thinking, that they may make the best even of bad
Principles, and be able from any Hypothesis to infer the Necessity of the
Divine Nature.

There are Three Opinions which may occur to us in the Contemplations of
Nature: Either, First, That this World was framed and fashioned into this
admirable State, by an Eternal Mind and Wisdom. Or, Secondly, That it had a
Beginning from the fortuitous Motions and Combinations of blind and ungnided
Matter. Or, Thirdly, That it has been from Eternity, in the same State that we
have at present. Some Reflections on the two last, which are the usual
Retirements of Infidelity, may not improperly follow a general Confirmation of
the Truth in the first Hypothesis.

In the building up, and forming of a Religious Life, it is fit we should lay a
good Foundation; arguing first from the Principles of Truth, and then from the
Principles of Men.

1. Our first Essay shall be therefore to prove the Existence of an Eternal
Mind and Wisdom: by whose Power the Universe was produced, and on whose
Guidance its Order does depend. And this may be performed, by demonstrating the
Existance of some Eternal Being, and by discovering the Properties thereof.

1. That something is Eternal, is as certain, as that any thing exists at
present: and none can doubt of it, but on the same ground that he shall doubt,
whether in every Triangle, if one Angle be right, the other two shall be acute:
i. e. for want of a little thinking, and rightly attending to the force and
signification of Terms: For, either every thing is Eternal, or something, or
nothing. If you modestly allow something to be Eternal, you are certainly in
the right. If you say every thing is Eternal, you decline something from it:
but if you say nothing is Eternal, you get into the Angle of Error, at farthest
distance from the right, and wound your Reason with the most pungent Absurdity.

Whatsoever is not Eternal, must have a beginning: whatsoever has a beginning,
must have it either from itself, from something else, or nothing. That any
thing should give beginning to itself, is very absurd: for that which gives
beginning being a precedent Cause, a thing must be, and not be, at the same
time; must be before it had a beginning, must be the Cause and the Effect, must
give beginning to that which had a beginning before, etc. That a thing may have
its beginning from something else, is true; but then that which gives a
beginning, must either have its own beginning from itself, (if it have any) and
then the former Absurdities will recur: or from something else, and that from
another, and so in infinitum, that is, from Eternity. And to say, that any
thing can have its beginning from nothing, is either to reconcile
Contradictions, to make something and nothing, cause and no cause, positive and
negative the same; or to speak a great Truth, for that which has its beginning
from nothing, has no beginning, and must be Eternal.

Now before we ascend to the Properties of an Eternal Being, we may do well to
stop awhile in the Contemplation of Eternity itself: for our intent being
declared, of evincing the Existence of an Incomprehensible Being, we must not
lose our advantage of any Truth in itself most certain, yet to us
incomprehensible. Those therefore who imagine they sufficiently disprove
Religion, by reducing its Maintainers to a Mystery, will see little reason for
their Triumph, when they find in any case, that nothing is more certain than
that which is most mysterious. Take the Instance before us: We cannot be more
ascertained of our own Existance, than of something's existing from Eternity:
but when we apply our finite Thoughts, to an infinite Duration, how do we lose
our selves in this vast Ocean? How do our proud Pretenses unto Comprehension
fail. Had Methusalem, instead of 900, lived 900000 Years, and spent his Time in
no other Employment but the Multiplication of Numbers, which in the short
running of a Pen, 79543285012759021899723109235 72813709280639275458367689542
83159473890928446732197836290 75389259306518973259076825, etc. amount to an
unconceivable Sum, and an astonishing Duration, especially if you measure by
the Great Year, he had been no nearer expressing the proper extent of Eternity,
than if he had said nothing. And what a strange, prodigious, wonderful,
suprarational, mysterious, incredible, incomprehensible Thing is this! How does
this baffle the vain Essays of Men, to measure Eternity by mutable Motion and
Succession! How may this convince us, that the readiest way of fixing in the
Mind an undeceiving Idea of Eternity, is not by running over Millions and
Millions of Ages, but to abide at the first Point, the most comprehensive Power
and Point of Unity; and restraining the Mind from irregular rambling, to keep
it stable and permanent, as Eternity itself is, in an indivisible Duration. If
you say this likewise is very mysterious, (as the Truth and Certainty of it we
reserve to be debated in another Paragraph, so) we reply, That either you must
allow something mysterious, or deny the Existance of all Things, and Truth of
all Propositions. The Universal Creed of Mankind establishes and imposes Truths
incomprehensible. We have no need then (as you see) to be ashamed of laying the
Foundations of Piety, in a Doctrine mysterious and incomprehensible: something
or other must be so, because Eternal, and what that is will best be discovered,
when

II. The Properties and necessary Attributes of the Eternal Being come to be
examined, and they will be evinced to be especially Four, Cogitation,
Immensity, Immutability and Perfection.

1. That Cogitation with the Fruits of it, Knowledge, Wisdom, Justice, and
Goodness, must have existed somewhere or other from Eternity, will appear from
the Difference between external and internal Qualities.

External Qualities, as whiteness, smoothness, ponderosity, and the like may
result from the agreeableness and actings of one sensible thing upon another:
and a wise Being knowing what will arise from the various Modifications of
Matter, may produce some external Qualities, Appearances, or Colors, which
never were in the World before: Now that which may be produced a new, and is
not a derivation from another of the same kind, need not be Eternal. But mental
and internal Qualities are of another kind; when they are produced, they are
produced by something like themselves: thought cannot be produced, as whiteness
and the like are, by the mixtures, motions, and contemperings of mere Matter;
but through the several Gradations of Time, and Series of Productions, you may
trace the same Quality both in the Effect and Cause, till at last you must
acknowledge it Eternal.

To render this Argumentation more perspicuous and firm, revolve in your Mind
how unlikely it is, that Thought should not be Eternal: how impossible it is,
if not Eternal, that it should ever be at all: and that there is not one
Instance assignable in Nature, of the Production of Thought, but from a
Thinking Principle.

That Thought, the most excellent Quality in the Universe, should be but of
yesterday's starting up: that all the World should lie for Eternal Ages in
confused Horror and Darkness, under the Dominion of hideous Disorder, in an
apprehension so unlikely and dismal, that nothing but the Shades of the most
wretched Ignorance and Prejudice against God can support its Credibility. But
if the natural Traduction of the most Glorious Light from Eternal Obscurity, of
the most exquisite Knowledge from Eternal stupidity and dullness, with the
commensurateness of the vilest State, to the most excellent Duration, be not
Absurdities sufficient to startle our Pretenders unto Sense: if they think it
enough for them to ground their Arguments, with the Value and Weal of their
Souls, on bare Possibilities, and expect Impossibilities, or Arguments ab
impossibili, that it should be otherwise from us, we will indulge their Humor:
and when they can once prove it possible for Thought to be otherwise than Self
origenated, we will venture to be skeptical as well as they. In the mean time
we observe in all Emanations, Issues, and Effects a congruity in Kind and
Temper to the Spring, Causality, and Parentage from whence they come. The whole
World is a circulation of like from like. The Vegetable Nature propagates
itself by Vegetative Seeds and Principles. The Sensitive Life is formed,
animated, and organized by homogeneous Powers: the business of equivocal
Generations being now justly exploded. And must not those Men deserve very
meanly of Humane Nature, who would derive our original from any thing below
ourselves, as though Thought need not come from a Thinking, nor Rational
Faculties from a Rational Source, but might easily be attracted from the solar
impregnation of a little Slime and Dung, which is not able to produce a Worm or
an Insect? We might resent the Reproach they bring upon our Nature, by making
themselves worse than Beasts: but because they knew themselves best, and may be
bold in Self-censures, they must not use the same freedom with all Mankind.

It remains then, that Thought is a Derivation either to Man from Man, or from
a superior Mind, and is therefore eternal.

There is no Remedy then against the Belief of an Eternal Mind. The difficulty
which some Men's Hearts may suggest, is, where, to what Object, or Being, or
rank of Beings to apply and fix this unavoidable Belief. We might proceed to
the other Properties of an Eternal Being, for the determination of this, were
it not fit to pursue this Property of Cogitation, as far as it will lead us to
the knowledge of God.

1. Some may vainly seek for this Eternal Cogitation in the Successions of
Humane Nature; and indeed, if all Mankind were acted by the same Soul, and all
the various appearances and workings among us were no other than the various
operations of this universal Soul, according to the different Capacities and
Aptitude of Matter it co-operates with, it would be something to that purpose,
though not to theirs. But to believe, as we must, that Men have so many
individual distinct Souls, and yet to expect an Eternity of Thought among them,
must be grounded on these two Suppositions: That it is possible the Successions
of Men should be eternal. And, That they actually are so. Which in the sequel
of this Discourse will appear incredible.

2. If Eternity of Thought must necessarily be acknowledged in some Being or
Beings, Mankind, in the lowest supposition, cannot have the only Title and
Claim unto it. To monopolize Cogitation and Reason to our selves is the
greatest arrogance in Nature. It Is certain, that not only the Earth, but all
included in the circumference of its motion about the Sun, bear no sensible
proportion to the rest of the World: And shall we vain Wretches, who creep upon
this point, called in our high Conceits the Terrestrial Globe, fancy that all
the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are lodged among us? Why might not the
poor Inhabitants of a Molehill enter their Pretensions to universal
Thoughtfulness, and defy all Policy, all Care or Providence besides their own?
And yet hundreds of them are blown away by the Breath of our Mouths, put by all
their plodding and politics, and perish in the surprising desolation of their
Country, if we turn but our Foot against them. And does not a Molehill bear as
considerable a proportion to the Earth, as the Earth to the Universe? And must
not we be esteemed as inconsiderable, when compared with the larger Capacities
and Extent of Thought in superior Beings, as inferior Beings are when
compared to us? The most irreligious Hypothesis must admit and confirm this.
And those Persons certainly have little concern for their Souls, who will
venture their Happiness on this Presumption, That there are no cogitative
intelligent Beings in the Universe besides Mankind.

3. And if Men cannot be so silly as to imagine, when they contemplate the
glorious Habitations above us, that there is not some Being or Beings endowed
with more excellent degrees of Thought and Wisdom than themselves are; the
force of the same Reason which extorts this Confession from them will lead them
unto God. For let a Man seriously consider with himself in this manner; There
certainly is some more wise and excellent Being than my Senses can discover, or
than sensual Men are aware of; and the Ground of his so believing will be
plainly this. He finds himself in a pitiful and mean condition, compared with
the glorious appearances of the Universe. He perceives he is not the cause of
all the wonderful Works, nor the Contriver of all the regular Motions, nor the
Continuer of all the harmonious and beautiful Operations which the visible
Creation presents us with. And were a Man supposed to have the Wisdom of an
Angel, the same Considerations will naturally recur to him. An Angel has
neither Thought nor Wisdom proportionable to the Magnitude and Glories of the
World, capable of framing the order of its Parts, and fit for managing the
Affairs of the Whole; and must therefore in humility look out, as we do, for a
Being superior and more skilful than himself: and whatsoever that Being is,
which could frame, manage, and order this vast Fabric of the World, in it our
Expectations of the most comprehensive Thought and Wisdom must terminate at
last, and this is GOD.

This Proof of an Eternal Intelligence having a largeness of Thought, and by
consequence all other Excellencies, infinitely surpassing ours, might suffice
any reasonable Enquirer into our Belief of God: but because it may be expected
from us to consider the abovementioned Attributes or Properties of an Eternal
Being, we shall from them bring some concurring Evidence and Strength unto our
holy Cause.

II. Immensity is the next Attribute of an Eternal Being. For, since it is
acknowledged on all sides, that there is something immense or without Bounds,
it is impossible that that should grow immense by time, which was not so from
Eternity. Nay, the same Reasons which prove an immense Being now, are of an
eternal Validity. As, whatsoever is bounded is bounded by something else; and
whatsoever that is which bounds the Extremities, or fixes the Limits, of all
things bounded, must of itself have no Bounds at all. Thus that which proves an
immense Being at present proves the same from Eternity.

And here we might digress in the contemplation of another mysterious Truth,
did not the usefulness of this Truth call more immediately for our Regards and
Improvement.

Our chief difficulty to be resolved here, is, what is this Immense Being: and
there are no other conceivable Opinions for it, than that it must be either
such a gross Substance as we call Matter, or such a fine and pure Substance as
we call Spirit, or an empty Space: either Matter, Spirit, or Space, or
altogether must be Immense.

1. That an empty space should be Immense, can by no means be allowed: though the
Atomical Hypothesis would suppose it. Space and Time are but Modes of
Existence; the one commensurate to the Motion of Substances, the other to their
Magnitude. Our best Divines and Philosophers agree in this, That where there is
no Body, there is no Space. At least this is evident, that an empty Space is
but another Name for nothing. And when you say an emty Space is Immense, you
say, nothing is Immense: which is an absurd predicating something of nothing,
or a contradiction to the precedent proof.

2. That Matter, or this material World, should be immense, is extraordinary
astonishing, if not impossible. An indefinite extension we can admit: For which
of us shall nominate the Bounds of the Divine Operations? But an infinite
Extension, the divisibility of a material Being will exclude: For whatsoever is
divisible into parts, is bounded in all its parts; and whatever is bounded in
all its parts, must needs be bounded in the whole, or have ends without end:
which looks very like a Contradiction. Besides,

If a Line be drawn from this Point ascending, and may in the progress of
material parts be continued in infinitum, and the same Line drawn descending
through the Center of the Earth to our Antipodes, or (if you will) in
infinitum; on the other side, from hence will follow: 1. That the ascending
Line shall have as many parts as the ascending and descending put together. 2.
That of two Lines, one shall have 10000 parts more than another, and yet they
shall be both equal; equal both as to the length and number of parts. 3. That
if you add 10000 parts to your ascending Line, it has never the more; and if
you substract 10000 it has never less. 4. That if you substract any
conceivable number from the ascending Line, it shall have as many parts, not
only as it had, but as the substraction, and ascending, and descending put
together, and even as the Superficies and solid Content. And what is this, but
to make the part as big as the whole, the Line equal to the Superficies, to
confound our clearest Notions of Distance and Magnitude; and an hundred such
Absurdities may be recounted, which if you are disposed to Skepticism, may make
you very doubtful how you attribute Immensity unto Matter.

3. And if we must attribute Immensity to some Substance, but not to such a
gross one as is divisible into parts, then we must attribute it to some
Substance of a purer kind: that has no parts, and is absolutely indivisible.
Having removed the two former Opinions, we thereby establish the third.

The Substance to which we attribute Immensity, we commonly call Spirit: but
because words are assumed by the Consent and Approbation of Men, we will have
no quarrel about that: being willing to allow you, and every Son of Adam, the
Authority and Privilege, of calling Things by what Names you please: but when
we appropriate the word Spirit to the signification of the Divine Nature, we
mean no other than an immense Substance, distinct from this visible, divisible,
and material World.

If you say, you can have no conception of this immense Spirit, and can much
easier conceive this World to be immense, it is answered, 1. That with the same
facility that you conceive the Earth to be circumscribed, you may conceive the
Limits of the Universe. The small Globe on which we live, giving us the Idea of
one prodigiously greater. 2. That, whatever you may say or fancy, you cannot
conceive material Immensity at all: for you cannot conceive any material
Magnitude to which something may not be added; and that Magnitude to which
Thought can always add something, must necessarily be conceived with its Bounds
and Limits. 3. If this World be immense, not only we, but the wisest and most
excellent Beings in the Universe, (except an immense Spirit, which we are
contending for) cannot possibly conceive what it is, or tell what to make of
it. For a finite Spirit, though coeternal with the World, might spend Millions
and Millions of Ages, in traveling through the infinite Apartments and
Habitations therein, and come never the nearer his Journey's-end; nor be able
to inform himself what manner of Thing the World, in all its parts, is. Nay,
two finite Spirits might travel Millions of Ages with exceeding velocity each
toward other, and that in the same right Line, and never meet. Why will you say
then, it is so easy to conceive this World immense, when on the supposal of its
Immensity, none, but an infinite Spirit, either by his own peregrination, or
experience, or information from others, can possibly know or conceive what it
is. 4. The conception of an Infinite or Immense Spirit, is not clogged with any
of these Difficulties: for, conceiving this World, as having its Fences and
Bounds put to it, by an Almighty Power, and shaped into the most perfect, that
is a Sphaerical Figure; whatsoever we conceive beyond that, that is, beyond all
Bounds, must needs be Immense. And there our Minds must presently fix, without
any rambling or indefinite Excursions: the Majesty of God swallowing up all our
Thoughts at once, and allowing us no material flees, no divisible progressions
to go on further by. God give a Blessing to these Thoughts; which proving an
eternal and immense Substance, and excluding this visible and material World
from any Claim thereto, leads us to the acknowledgment of his spiritually
immense and undivided Essence.


III. Immutability is another Attribute of an Eternal Being, which we shall
endeavor in this Paragraph to explain and prove.

By Immutability we mean, not only exemption from change in Mind, Manners, and
Conduct, as we have it in ordinary Affairs, but such a stable, unaltering
continuance as is not liable to the Causes or Symptoms of Change; that is,
Motion or Succession. Many are the Disputes hereupon; Whether Eternity be a
thing fixed and immutable, or transient and successive. The Prejudices of this
irreligious Age, affect the Minds even of the Religious, and make them shy of
asserting that with any confidence, which others have the Impudence to laugh
at. Who is there that is not almost willing to confess Aeternitas est
interminabilis vitae tota simul and perfecta possessio. De Consolat. l. 5.
Boethius's Definition of Eternity, a pious Whim, a well-meaning Extravagance;
and yield Eternity to be a duration of infinite Successions. In opposition to
which we need not be afraid to state these Assertions.

All Successions are finite. Nothing which has any Changes, Motions, or
Successions, can be eternal. Eternity must be something stable, simple,
indivisible and immutable.

And here we might be contented to show you, that this Immutability of the
Eternal Being, and therefore of Eternity itself, will follow from the former
Paragraph: for, a spiritually, immense, or indivisible Being, must have an
indivisible Duration. Where there is no succession of Parts, for the measuring
of Magnitude, there can be no Variations or Motions to measure Duration by; but
because it is best, when each particular Paragraph has strength of itself,
without needing to have recourse to what went before, especially in Arguments
of this moment, therefore consider further.

1. That no Numbers, Successions, or Periods of Time can be an adequate measure
of Eternity, or bring us any thing nearer to a notion of it. Which certainly
those People do not rightly weigh, who wonder that we have not a larger date of
time from the Sacred Writings than 5000 or 6000 years. They think surely the
World is of a much older standing than so, though they will not be positive for
its Eternity. But when they revolve in their Minds, that the further they go on
in the numeration of Years or Ages, they come never the nearer to Eternity;
that a Minute bears as considerable a proportion to Eternity as Ten thousand
millions of Ages; their Wonder will be over, and they will perceive it is the
same thing, whether they consider the World as many millions of Years old, or
in the very moment of its Creation.

That Duration then, which cannot be made either longer or shorter, by any
additions or substractions, which cannot be measured by any periodical
Revolutions, can have no Parts. Like is measured by like: Our partible Times
and Seasons are measured by partible and successive Motions: and our Thoughts
applying the one to the other, can add or substract as we see good. Add 366
diurnal courses of the Sun to a Thousand Years, and it makes the whole duration
a Year longer. But the Eternal Being is the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever: not older to day than a Thousand years ago; nor will be older a Thousand
years hence: for that which by descending grows older and older, by ascending
will prove younger and younger. But no duration can be older or longer than
Eternity: nor younger, or of a fresher date, if it be eternal. Which shows,
That Eternity is another kind of a Duration from our Times, and the Eternal
being different from every thing that is changeable and various; and having no
parts or periods applicable to it, give us leave to say, possesses the same
never-ending Life with equal perfection and stability, through all Ages.

2. Many are the Absurdities which follow from the supposal of infinite
Successions; for the right apprehending which take these two Admonitions along
with you. First, That of Successions or Numbers infinite, one is not greater or
less than another: For wherein soever one Number or Succession is greater or
exceeded by another, therein you suppose one of them to be finite. Secondly,
That what is positively true in one Age, the circumstances continuing always
alike, must be true to Eternity. Their Use follows. Have there then, say you,
been infinite Successions, and the Generations of Men and Beasts, the
Viciffitudes of Night and Day, of Summer and Winter, Times and Seasons, from
Eternity; then eying the first Admonition, from hence will follow, that there
have been as many Heads as Hands, as many Hands as Fingers, as many Fingers as
Joints, as many Men as Men and Beasts put together, as many Beasts as Beasts
and Men put together, as many Birds as Feathers, as many Birds as Men, Beasts,
Birds, Hairs, Feathers put together; as many Ages as Years, as many Years as
Months, Weeks, Days, Hours, Minutes, etc.

If you are disposed to draw back, and care not to let down these monstrous
Consequences, you must likewise relinquish the Principle, from whence they so
evidently flow: For if there have not been as many Heads as Hairs, etc. then
the Generations of Men must be finite; and reckonink Men by the Poll, as much
as the number of Men is surpassed by Hands, Hairs, etc. so much at least they
fall short of Infinity: But if you have Courage to defend these Consequences,
and will run all hazards on this supposition, that there have been as many
Heads as Hands or Hairs; then we must direct the second Admonition against you
thus. If in this Age, or the compass of a Thousand Years, there are more Hairs
than Heads, more Years than Minutes, etc. then ascend or descend as far as you
can, or as far as it is possible there should be these Successions, and their
number must be constantly unequal. And since your Infinity equals all things,
in these successive Generations or Seasons there can be no progression to it.

We might produce you great store of like Absurdities, if your Stomach would
bearthem. But those abovementioned will try the Strength of your digestive
faculty, and it may be hoped the operation they will have may prove rather
medicinal than noxious, and carry off with themselves this Fancy of Infinite
Successions, with other gross Humors, which while they lurk in the Mind,
distemper its Constitution.

3. The force of the former Arguments, for the immutability of the Eternal
Being, will more clearly appear, by a good refutation of the chief Objection to
it. It must be expected, that Irreligious Men will have something to say,
though it be little to the purpose. And that they may not complain of wanting a
fair hearing, the utmost that the Wit of Man can invent, shall now be
considered. They may say, There have been Infinite Successions past, as well as
there will be in the times and duration to come: and as we believe the Sun, and
Moon, and Men may endure for ever, so whatever we may object against their
existing from Eternity, will be as strong against our Belief of their existing
to Eternity.

Many Answers, were we pinched with this Objection, might be made to it; but
how formidable soever it may look, there are especially two, which may be
freely given by us, and may be satisfactory to you.

I. Men, it is true, and other things may endure for ever, but not in the way
of Succession and Generation.

As we believe a first Man, so we believe a last; and, when the times appointed
by the Almighty shall be fulfilled, a stop shall be put unto the Generations of
Men. There shall be no further progress in the propagation of their kind. We
wait for the accomplishment of God's Elect: and the Promise of such a state,
when it shall be no longer with Men as it is here on Earth: when there shall be
no marrying nor giving in Marriage, the destinctions of Youth and Old Age, of
Great and Small, of Generation and Corruption, being done away.

The like may be said of the Sun and Moon: For though they be faithful Witnesses
in Heaven, and serve for the distinctions of Times and Seasons, Days and Years,
yet we also wait for their dissolution; the final conflagration will put a
period to their Motions, close up their Successions, level all their Changes,
and the Revolutions of their time will be swallowed up in Eternity: and the
same that we say of the Periods allotted to the Sun, may be applied to the rest
of the Stars, either alternately, or altogether, as it shall please God to
order it.

So far we labor under no great Difficulties: what we have objected to your
Infinite Successions does not affect us. For, as we believe a beginning of the
Generations of Men, of Night and Day, of Summer and Winter, so we believe an
end of them. But we may Answer,

II. There is a great difference between Eternity and Perpetuity: or between
that Duration which is comprehensive of all Time, and that which is only
comprehensive of the Time to come. That Duration which has no beginning must
be Infinite: but that Duration which has a beginning must be Finite, take what
measure you will of it. There can be no Infinite Number, and therefore no
Successions, which we contend for, and which we measure by Number, can be
Infinite, though they endure for ever. Eternity a part post (as they call it)
has for ever an End, because it has a Beginning: but absolute Eternity having
no Beginning, has no End. It will be very convenient to make this as plain as
may be; because it may seem strange, and is really, if true, of considerable
importance.

Begin any Succession with the number One, and go on adding (as it may be) as
fast as the Succession happens: and because numbers may be continually added,
if the Succession shall last for ever, it shall for ever be Finite. Your
Succession having a Beginning, you can for ever measure it by a Number: and
coming back when you will, you can for ever come to an End. Suppose this the
first year of the Sun's enlightening the Earth: and this annual course was to
remain for ever: and the Reader of this Book appointed, by the King of Heaven,
as an Everlasting Register of Times and Seasons: he may easily be sensible that
he has no very difficult Employment; one day at most in Ten thousand Years
would be sufficient for it. His Marks and Numbers may be as comprehensive as he
pleases: he can always add his Numbers as the Ages go of, and for ever prove
them Finite, (as every Number in Reason must be, and) even visibly, by having
recourse unto his first point. You therefore do greatly err, if you fancy as
much may be said for clearing Absurdities from Successions eternally past, as
from Successions in the after-Eternity. Because though you think Ascending and
Descending from a Point given may be the same, yet it is not. Ascending from a
Point given in Successions which have no beginning, you come to no end in the
Ascent, and have only a supposed one to ascend from, (Eternity being still
Current) and therefore have no end at all: But in descending in the
after-Eternity you have a real Beginning to descend from, and come back to; and
therefore wherever you stop, you have two Ends, and your Succession is for
ever numerable and finite.

More may be said for clearing this Objection, but this doubtless is
sufficient: for if Successions of Night and Day, or even of Thought, the utmost
that can be made of it shall last for ever, they shall be for ever finite, as
we say, because these Successions shall for ever have a beginning, and may be
numbered: they may be perpetual, but not properly eternal. Or, we may justly
question, whether any Successions shall last for ever or no: and if there be
occasion we can positively deny it.

Could any other Objection to the Immutability of the Eternal Being, be
imagined worth answering, it should have its place here. But, the main Fortress
being broken, other little Refuges of Infidelity will fall of course. And if,
as it has been proved, the common Successions and Changes of the World cannot
have been from Eternity, then that which is eternal must be a Being, as
Eternity itself is, without parts, division, or mutability. Would you be helped
to some notion of this, shut your Eyes to, and draw off your Mind from all
corporeal Changes and Successions, and think of an eternally-current Unity, and
you are not very far from it.

III. Perfection is the last Attribute of an Eternal Being, which we are to
speak of. And, as on the one side he looks with very little Judgment on this
visible World, who passing through the several ranks and gradations of Beings in
it, is not inclined to the belief of one most perfect; so on the other, the
most perfect Duration must have a compleatness of all Excellencies; and it is
not to be imagined, that an Eternal Being should acquire Perfections in Time
which it had not from Eternity.

Better and better includes worse and worse, and these Differences succeeding
in an Eternal Being, suppose a liableness to all possible Alterations: which is
the linking of things incompatible, Perfection and Imperfection, Eternity and
Alteration together.

To fix this Attribute of Perfection in the general Compages of the Universe,
is very absurd; as if that could be truly perfect, taken altogether, which has
many Imperfections in its several parts: as sin and wickedness, deviation from
what is right and good, grievous corruptions and continual changes: and if
these visible Imperfections put together, can never be constitutive of
Perfection, then we must lodge Perfection in some invisible Being, supreamly
excellent, having no Corruptions, no Changes; that is, no Imperfections in his
Nature.

Besides, Perfection is properly a Collection and Summing-up of the other
abovementioned Attributes; and resulting from their several particular Powers
or Branches, is best proved by them. If there be an eternally cogitative Being,
he must be eternally wise; and Wisdom being the Spring and General Root of
other blessed Qualities, he must be likewise just and good. If there be an
Immense Being, he must be Omnipotent: If a Being Immutable, he must possess
perfect Simplicity, Purity and Holiness; that is,

The Eternal Being must have a perfect Union of all Blessed Qualities in his
Nature; of Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, Power, and Holiness, and this is GOD.

Our Argumentation has hitherto proceeded on the irrefragable Principles of
Truth. Some Men may cavil at the whole, but can find no flaw in its connection,
no weakness in the parts; and it carries this advantage along with it, that if
it be false, nothing can be proved true; and if it be true, all contrary
Opinions or Pretenses must be necessarily false: whereby it may seem
superfluous to consider any other Hypothesis, being assured of the Truth of
this; as it would indeed, were it not for the Anticipations crept into Men's
Minds, from which they are not so effectually driven by any sudden violence,
unless supernatural, as gradually weaned from. And what follows, is an
Indulgence of their Humor; not constrained by any necessity, but conceded for
the present hardness of their Hearts. It may please God to open their Eyes for
discerning his heavenly Truth, when they are a little suffered to go on in
their own ways: like the Prodigal Son, they may deem it most expedient to
return to their Father's House, when after various Perplexities they find their
own extravagant Inventions conspiring to bring them to it. It Is a present
Unhappiness to be involved in Error; but it is no great matter where we begin to
get out of it, or what Dangers and Byways we travel through, if we recover the
right at last, and come in Season and Safety unto our Journeysend.

II. Having in the former part cleared the first Hypothesis, and set the
Principles of Truth in a competent Light, we shall now undertake to render the
Patrons of Infidelity self-condemned, and destroy their Presumption, even by
their own Principles.

I. Let us begin with that fancy unaccountably invented for freeing Mankind
from the Fear of God, by supposing this World derived its Original from the
fortuitous Motions of eternal and unguided Matter. By what fortuitous Rovings
of the Mind, the Defenders of this Opinion first hit upon it, is almost as
unconceivable as the Opinion itself; and its ever entering into the Heart of
Man, is the best Argument that can be made for it. Nothing may seem advanced
above the Power of Chance; and one would imagine, innumerable Thoughts might
have an eternal Rendezvous in the Soul, and never combine or jump into such a
Principle. To instance in the Absurdities following from it, would be labor in
vain: And if any in this Age are so void of Reason as to be taken with that
which has not so much as the Appearance of it, there is no direct way of
arguing with such People: And it shows the deplorable Depravation of some Men's
Natures, who rather than believe in God, will believe any thing. Should any
have this Fancy running in their head, That all the Churches in the Nation grew
out of the Earth, like Mushromes in one night; or that As several believed Sir
Francis Drake's Ships in 1588 did arise from Chips thrown into the Water.
all the Ships in an Harbor did arise from the Froth and Ebullitions of the
Sea, it would not be agreeable to the Profession of a Philosopher to undertake
their Cure. We may pity or smile at the Foolishness of the Fancy, but cannot
help it. But as Persons not endowed with the firmest Judgment are best dealt
with by complying with their Humor, by supposing as they do, That a blind
impotent Wretch, for instance, is the most powerful Prince living, thereby to
draw them off from an extravagant and harmful pursuance of their Fancies; so if
any ones Reason have come by such an unhappy chance, that nothing can make him
believe otherwise than that blind Matter and Motion are the only powerful
forming Principles of Things, the only Kindness he is capable of; that he may
not pursue this Persuasion to his utter Perdition, is, for a while to suppose
as he does, and to try if by any other means he may be kept within some Bounds
of Respect unto a superior Being. And,

1. When they think of this Opinion, they may do well to think of the Authors
of it; who, as far as we can learn, unanimously professed their Belief of a
Divine Nature.

What Moschus the Tyrian, who is supposed to live before the Trojan War, Strabo
Geogr. l. 16.
and to maintain the Atomical Hypothesis, thought of God, we have no Account
of. Strabo does but just mention him; and that with great Uncertainty. Nor have
we any Probabilities to persuade us, either from the Time or Place in which he
lived, that his Head was repleat with such a Scheme of Opinions as the
following Dealers in Atoms had; at least, we cannot think him worse than
Plutarch de Plac. Phil. l. 1. c. 13. Hier. in Aur. Car. p. 253. Cic. de Not.
Deor. l. 1. The Testimony of Theophilus against Empedocles, we cannot allow,
which you have ad Autolycum l. 3. for he says as bad of the Stoics l. 2. and
may be balanced, in behalf of Empedocles, by Athenagoras, Lactantius, and other
Christians.
Empedocles, Diog. Laert. in vita Plut. de Pla. Phil. l. 1. c. 5. Cic. de Not.
Deor. l. 1.
Democritus, and Laert. in vita.
Epicurur, who are all of them very free in their Discourses of a Divine Nature.

Lucretius Omnis enim per se divum natura necesse est immortali aevo summa cum
pace fruatur. l. 1. and alibi.
might speak for them all, did not Epicurus himself give us this Profession of
his Faith in God: That God is a Blessed and Immortal Being; Laert. in vita.
and that he is not impious who denies the Gods of the Multitude, but he who
applies the Notions of the Multitude unto God. Many indeed who have jumped in
with the Hypothesis of Epicurus, have led Lives unworthy of his Pattern, Laert.
in vita, and Seneca Osten.
and spoke more slightingly of Matters which we ought to revere, than he did.
But, must it not be very incongruous to follow such Leaders in their Dance in
the Dark, through the Eternal Windings and Revolutions of Matter and Motion,
and yet leave them when they come out of this Maze, and speak something like
themselves of an Immortal Being.

2. Nor do the Words only, but the very Principles of these Men, who have spoke
so much of Atoms, Matter, and Motion, lead unto the Belief of God. It Is true,
it has been objected to them, that they do, after some sort, deny Cic. de Not.
Deor. l. 2.
the Existence of God, that is, by Consequence; or, that they owned and
professed it only as they joined in Religious Rites, Plutarch against the
pleasant Life of Epicurus.
for fear of the Multitude. But you will not think the Objection sufficient to
prove them such great Hypocrites, when you consider their Zeal to prove the
Existence of some Declinando faciunt primordia motus principium quoddam quod
fati foedera rumpat. Lucret. l. 2. Cic. de Fato.
certain Principle, which is able to break the Fetters and Power of Fate; and
that Epicurus Diog. Laert. in Epicuro.
himself says, It Is much better to believe all the Fabulous Relations of the
Heathen Deities, than to suppose our selves under the Servitude and Dominion of
natural Fatality.

It Is, indeed, a Difficulty in that Hypothesis not easily to be digested, That
such rational Creatures as we take our selves to be, should be under the
Tyranny of circumambient Matter: That we who sometimes have proud Thoughts of
our selves, and look with Disdain on Things below us, should be little better
than Logs of Wood floating on impelling Waters, and hurried down the Stream of
Eternity by Causes which have neither Sense nor Reason in them. Some may please
themselves with Talk at this rate: Supposing God to be nothing, Man little
different from the Brutes, and Brutes little better than so many senseless
Machines, that is, so many Tools made up of Matter, put together by chance, and
guided by necessary Impulses, they know not how. And then, for so might even a
generous Epicurean say, before I would have such a Cheat put upon me by
Universal Nature, before I would be affronted with the seeming Concessions of
Choice and Reason, and Dominion over my self, without the real Possession, Were
I to choose what Flesh I would wear, Rochester's Satyr against Man.

I had rather be a Monkey or a Bear,
Or any Thing but that proud Animal
Which boasts it self in being Rational.
It would not vex one half so much to be an inanimate Lump, kicked up and down
the Streets by a Being better than ones self, as to lie at the Mercy of a
pitiful and ignoble Crowd, not only to be trampled upon and tossed here and
there, but be forced to Speak, Debate, Think, and Believe, as every Upstart in
Nature, every Turn of blind and tumultuous Matter shall make its Insults upon
us. The Soul of Epicurus abhorred so mean a Thought, and would admit of any
Absurdity, rather than not introduce a self-commanding Principle, which might
break the Chain of Fate, and maintain the Freedom and Dignity of an Intelligent
Being, against the Necessitation of outward Causes. Be it so then, most
excellent Epicurus, we will not take the Advantage of this Concession to justle
thee and thy Atoms against each other, by showing how impossible it is that a
voluntary rational Agent should be produced by the Motions of irrational
unintelligent Matter, or that the Pretense of a declining Atom will not Cicero
de fato.
defend us from the Danger of fatal Necessity. Let us follow the Supposition as
far as it will lead us. It Is necessary, it seems, that there should be a
Principle of Free Will, which checks and overrules the otherwise fatal
Progression of outward Causes. Is it so only here upon the Earth, or also in
those Diog. Laert. in Vita Epicuri, and Lucret. l. 2. and alibi.
innumerable Worlds and Habitations which we will grant are not believed in
vain. If so, as certainly there is as much Reason for the one as the other,
then here is a Ground for believing innumerable intelligent Beings, which all
over the Universe are the Lords paramount, and endowed with a Divine
Prerogative of controuling the blind Efforts, and guiding the irregular
Tendency of irrational Agents. What these Intelligences should be, and why they
may not have Power and Wisdom as far different from us as the glorious
Apartments of Heaven differ from this Earth of ours; or why they may not
concern themselves about us, by their Perfections supplying what is defective
in us, and helping entirely to redeem us from the Dominion of Necessity, or,
why this Principle may not carry us to an universal Intelligence, whose supreme
Will and Power may break and overruled the universal Power of Fate, is not so
easily answered. Which may induce us to believe, that what Diog. Laert. in
vita. Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 1.
Epicurus spoke and writ of Sanctity and Piety to the Gods, and of an excelling
and transcendent Nature, was not merely Verbal, but an agreeable Consequence of
his other Opinions: and that the Saying of Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 1.
Cotta might be true enough, That he never saw any one more afraid than he was
of what he said there was no Reason to fear, that is, Death and the Gods. But
to leave Epicurus, who might now and then have his melancholic Fits, and talk
a little too highly and incoherently of God and Man.

3. Let us advance one Step nearer unto his Disciples; who make as bold with
his Hypothesis, to take in or leave out according as the Fit works with them,
as Cic. de fn. l. 1.
he did with his Master Democritus.

You shall not be tied to any One's Opinion of God, nor be bound to maintain
Free Will in Man, nor to answer a great many troublesome Questions, How
senseless disorderly Matter could possibly jump into Thought and Order. Apply
your Mind to the Motions and supposed Results of Matter, and follow the
Guidance of it, through its visible Train and Consequences, how fatal soever
the Event may prove. Mind only what you say, and compare it with what you see,
and with Faithfulness expect the Issue.

I. Something, which you cannot believe is any other than Matter in Motion,
has produced such intelligent thinking Beings as we call Men. Let us come from
whence you will, here we are; governing, using, and recreating ourselves with
inferior Creatures; debating the Nature of Truth and Falsehood, Good and Evil,
and managing our Affairs with much Wisdom and Precaution.

II. We lift up our Eyes to Heaven, and there we observe the Sun and the Stars,
Bodies of a wonderful Magnitude, moving in an indeterminable Space, in an
invariable Order, and at a vast Distance from us. Has our Atoms provided so
rarely for us, as to frame such a glorious Canopy Lucret. l. 5. Cic. de Not.
Deor. l. 1.
merely for our Benefit, for such mortal Machines, such Tools of Necessity to
look upon? Is all Nonsense, and nothing but vain glistering beyond this Earth
of ours? Or, if we might have a complete View of the Glories represented to us
in so narrow a compass, Fate are necesse est esse alios alibi congressus materi
ai qualis hic est. Lucr. l. 2.
might we not expect to meet with our Match, and find Beings which have Sense,
and Thought, and Reason as well as we?

III. And if it be a Piece of Folly and Presumption in Man to think himself the
only Wise, it is not much less, to think himself the Wisest Being in the
Universe. The Barbarous Americans, before their Commerce and Acquaintance with
the European World, might with much greater Reason suppose themselves the most
Polite and Knowing, the most Skilful in all Arts and Sciences of any People
upon Earth, because they had Knowledge and Skill bearing some Proportion to an
Earthly State; but the Wisest of us all are much short of what may be expected
and supposed in Heaven. Could you have so mean an Opinion of Nature as to stint
the Powers thereof to the Production of Beings no better than our selves; Could
you be so weak as to fancy the Intelligences in all, even infinitely distant
Apartments, are of the same Kind and Capacities, equally unhappy, equally
perplexed about the Origin, and Ministration, and End of Things, and as
ignorant of Us as we are of Them; That Nature should not make one Being that
could give a more certain Account of its Operations than we can, and enquire
why any one should believe otherwise, it may be answered, from the different
Contextures and Varieties of Matter. If, indeed, all the Habitations in the
Universe were of the same kind, it makes the Argument more probable, That all
the Inhabitants might be of the same kind too. But if there be great Variety in
the Coalition and Segregations of Matter; if the more fine, active, and
tenuious, be separated from the more gross, heavy, and unactive; if some Parts
of the Universe have sensibly and certainly more Heat and Vigor than others;
Why should we not believe as much Variety in the ruling Inhabitants that are
placed therein? It will not be needful at this time to give a Scheme of the
World, or to reflect on the Foolishness of Epicurus, Cic. de fin. l. 1. Lucr.
l. 5. Plut. d Plac. l. 2. c. 210.
who thought the Sun not above two Foot broad, or about the Bigness of a pretty
large Wheel, which needs only being laughed at. The innumerable Worlds supposed
by him will serve our Turn as well. We have here Heat and Cold, Light and
Darkness, and a Constitution tolerably suited for bearing these Changes: But
when we see one Star differing from another Star in Glory, we must suppose a
more glorious and beatifying Concourse (of Atoms if you please) in some Parts
than in others; where, a Light too splendid for mortal Eye to approach, and a
Heat too vigorous for Flesh and Blood to endure, adorns and refines both the
Place and the Products of it. The Blackness and Tawniness caused by too near
Approaches to the Sun, is little other than the Scum of a filthy and
overheated Nature. But those Beings whose Inheritance is in superabounding
Light, must have Natures pure and defecate, clarified from the Dregs and
Corruptions of an Earthly State, not so properly Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 1.
corpus, as quasi corpus, a Body, (if Origin. cont. Celsum, ib. 4.
we must call it a Body) Tinuis enim Natura Deum longeque remota^ sensibus ab
nostris. Lucret. lib. 5.
tenuious and spiritual, differing in proportion, as much from us, as Heaven
from Earth. Thus you are led at least unto the Heathen Deities, unto an
innumerable Company of Heavenly Intelligences, or (if we may begin to speak in
the Language of Christianity) to the Acknowledgment of Angels and Archangels.

IV. Nor is it reasonable for us to stop here, but on the same Foundation we
may raise our Belief of a Supreme Intelligence; in whom the several Powers and
Perfections in Nature do most eminently concenter. Those Principles from whence
we infer the Existence of Beings in all Ranks of Perfection higher and more
excellent than our selves, may, without much begging of the Question, be
supposed to prove the Existence of one Most High. And if our Materialists shall
require for this, some evident Symptoms and Indications in Nature; and shall
profess their Belief of Superior Intelligences, from the Appearance of more
blessed and glorious Habitations, but not of a Supreme Intelligence, because
the Existence of a most Blessed Place, which may be the Throne, Palace, or
Residence of the Supreme Being is not so visible unto them; it may be answered,
1. That they beg the Question as much as we. They suppose there is no Supreme
Intelligence, we suppose there is; and so far we are equal, nay considering the
Ranks of Beings, have the Advantage in Their own Hypothesis. 2. That the Unity
of the Godhead, though a certain Truth, is not absolutely necessary to the
Enforcement of Religion; for the most ignorant Heathen, whose Faith and Reason
could not carry them beyond a Multitude of Gods, were nevertheless very Devout
and Religious in their Way: So that whether there be one God or more, you
cannot but be under a Divine Influence to a Religious Life. 3. That our Belief
of a Supreme Being need not depend on the supereminency of any particular
Place. The Glory of the Highest may manifest itself all over the Universe, in
measures suitable to the Dignity of Place and Persons: And tho one Place may
not in itself be really more glorious than all the rest, yet it may be rendered
relatively so, by the Glory of his Presence. 4. They who deny the supereminency
of any particular Place, speak contrary to the common Appearances of Matter. Of
all Things within the compass of our View and Vortex, the Sun makes the most
astonishing and brightest Show: And if any Religious Person will say, that the
Supreme Being has set his Tabernacle in the Sun, the modern Epicureans, even
on their own Principles, can only oppose a pretty confident Assertion by a more
confident Denial. And if any shall bring the fixed Stars in as Competitors in
Splendor, each as the Center of a particular Vortex, and say, any of them may
put in for the Center of the Universe as well as the Sun, they prove nothing
for themselves; for as of the Planetary, so likewise of the Fixed, one Star may
differ from another Star in Glory: And if the Sun be not the most Glorious, we
only introduce some other in the room; for there is no imaginable Reason to
believe them exactly all alike. Or if any shall think, that though the Sun makes
so fine a show, the inward Glory thereof is not so considerable: Which they
would gather from the gross and fiery Eruptions from the Body of the Sun,
discovered by our late famous Glasses, that may arise from the Deceivableness
of the Sight; as the unsteadiness or halfshutting of the Eye, or the
interposing of any small Bodies, makes us think we see Streams of Fire from a
distant Light, when there are none. Or Secondly, the Collection of such strong
and powerful Rays as proceed from the Body of the Sun, may so affect the Nerves
with an extraordinary Vigor, that we cannot rightly judge of it, but think we
see nothing but Fire. Or, a Refraction from the Atmosphere of the Sun,
replenished with vivid and peircing Rays, may cause such a Confusion in our
Judgment, though within there may be a blessed Habitation of serene and pure
Light. 5. Let the Sun and Fixed Stars be what their Cause has made them. It Is
more than sufficient for us, That some Place in the Universe may be more
eminently glorious than all the rest, though we cannot point out what or where it
is. It Is not probable, that we can see the Thousandth part of the Stars; which
may be concealed from us not only by their Smallness, but their Distance. The
Universe is another kind of a Thing than we are capable of conceiving; and its
invisible Glories may as far exceed every Thing visible, as the Sun and Fixed
Stars do exceed the grosser Bodies which move about them. And as every Sphere
or Vortex retains its most lively and illuminating Particles at the Center,
while the more scummy, feculent, and heavy, boil off to the Circumference; so
the whole Universe may be considered as one vast Vortex, having in or near its
Center a Coacervation of all blessed Ingredients, for making a Light most pure,
a Hear most benign, and a Life most happy.


In a careful Observation of the Heavens, we may perceive the Glimmerings and
Coruscation of an extraordinary Glory, which hitherto none has been able to
give any tolerable Account of. But what has been said, agrees with the Opinion
of our Divines concerning the Coelum Empyraeum, a Seat and Residence of Divine
Glory, the most refulgent.

And have not we now humored our Materialists, in proving from their own
Principles, the Existence of a Superior or Supreme Intelligence.

V. We may advance, now, one Step farther, and break the very Heart of the
Epicurean Hypothesis. Their last Refuge for Irreligion is, to suppose that no
Superior Being meddles or concerns himself in Humane Affairs. And if the
Divine Beings (think they) do not concern themselves at all about us, why
should we concern our selves at all about them.

But before you make such an irregular Inference, you can never be too careful
to secure the Premises. For, Nec been promeritis capitur nec tangitur ira,
Lucret. l. 1. Natura videtur Libera continuo dominis privata superbis ipsa sua
per se sponte omnia Diis agere expers. Lucret. l. 2.
if you propagate and entertain so mean an Opinion of God, and prove mistaken,
you may forfeit his Love, and find it too hard a task to oppose his
Displeasure, when too late to atone it.

In the Name of God then, let us seriously debate this Point, and enquire into
the Reasons either of Denying or Asserting a Divine Providence: which will
terminate in these three Considerations; of the Power, of the Authority, of the
Will of God. If there be no Heavenly Being which both may, can, and will
intrest himself in Earthly Matters, then our Discourses of Providence are vain
and superstitious: But if something Divine has a Power, Right, and Mind to
Oversee and Govern us, our Obligations unto Providence are in Force still.

1. And what imaginable Reasons can we have to suppose, that the Divine Power
and Cognizance extend not to us. Can the winged Inhabitants of this lower Orb
mount out of our Sight, and approach the very Confines of invisible Regions,
and not exalt our Faith to the Acknowledgment of an Intercourse between Earth
and Heaven? Can short-sighted Mortals, with some small Assistance unto their
Visive Faculty, perceive the Inequalities of Hills and Valleys, Earth and Water
in the Body of the Moon, the Spots in the Sun, and in the Body of Jupiter, the
different Phases of Mercury and Venus, and even of Saturn so distant from us,
with the small Satellities unto the greater Planets; and shall not an Heavenly
Eye, with transcending Clearness and Accuracy, penetrate into the Phoenomena of
our Imperfect State? Can the Skill of a Physiognomist give notable Conjectures
of the inward Temper by the outward Lineaments and Features; Can the Astronomer
tell you the Conjunctions and Oppositions, the Motions, Magnitude, and Distance
of the Heavenly Bodies; Can an Experienced Physician see through the Color,
Qualities, and Agitations of the Body, into its latent Distempers; and the
Sagacity of a Chinoese, measure out the Life of Man by the Beating of his
Pulse? And shall we not allow the Divine Wisdom a more profound and perfect
Intuition into the secret Windings and Intricacies, the various Combination,
Tendency, Influence, and Events of Sublunary Transactions? We cannot prescribe
the Bounds even of Earthly Improvements: Every Age crowns the Diligence and
Meditations of Men with new Increases of Knowledge: And since we cannot
determine the utmost Exaltation of Humane Nature, or what Sacred Commerce with
the Spiritual World we may attain unto; Why should we rashly limit the
Faculties of better Things, or fancy that any Darkness or Distance, which are
but relative and comparative, should cover us from the View of a Superintending
Deity. We may positively assure ourselves, that the lowest in the Angelical
Rank is furnished with Abilities to pry into our Affairs, and to govern and
manage, as he himself pleases, the Persons of all Mankind.

2. Our next Enquiry is, concerning the Authority and Rightful Foundation of
Divine Government. The Holy and Blessed Beings above will not meddle with that
which they have nothing to do with: But if we will take Mr. Hobbes for our
Spiritual Guide, we shall soon remove all Scrupulosity in this Case. Power
confers Right; and he justly possesses a Domination over others who is most
strong. It Is true, if a Power be irresistible, we have no Reason to quarrel
with it, whether we have a Right or no: And the Accumulation of Abilities
necessary to command, seems an Indication in Nature where Obedience should be
paid. This Mr. Hobbes makes the Ground Leviathan, c. 31. and alibi.
even of Divine Government; and the Gomarus, Maccovius, Amyraldus, Camero, etc.
Followers of Mr. Calvin speak conformably to it: But because it may look
something strange to fix no better Ground for obeying God, than for obeying a
Tyrant or a Thief that proves too hard for us, you shall not be urged with any
ones Authority in this Point neither. Others fix the Basis of God's Government
in the Act of Creation, and limit the Exercise of his Power to the Measure of
his Benefits. Of which Number are the first Refiners Hierocles de Provid. and
Fato.
of Platonism, and the Arminii These. private. de Praedest. 27. Remonstrantes
Explic. cap. 9. ad Roman. etc. especially Curcellaeus de dominio dei in
Creaturas Innocents.
Armenians. And because it may be supposed you will catch at this Opinion, we
will try the Force of it, and see how well it will serve for your purpose. And,

If Benificence be the Basis of Government, are you sure that God has no Right
to interpose in our Affairs? Is it likely (upon your own Principles, which need
not always be particularly mentioned) that the Divine Nature is not more
ancient than the Humane? That its antecedent Excellencies should have no Hand
in our Formation? Or may not the Superior Beings, if they are disposed to
meddle in our Affairs, by their watching over us for Good, merit our Obedience
and Subjection? Are not several Inferior Creatures fed by our Kindness, and
preserved by our Providence, tho we did not create and form them? And do not
the Blessings descending from the Administrations of Earthly Government render
a Legislative rightful and reasonable, though they have no Creative Power? The
aforesaid Authors have pursued a good Notion a little too far; the Hierocles,
ut supra.
one of them saying, that if Matter be coeternal with God, his endeavoring to
make a Change therein, by drawing it into Form and Order, must be injurious:
the other, That See Curcellaeus.
could we suppose ourselves not to have received the Benefit of Creation from
God, but come into the World without any Obligation to his Power and Goodness
in forming us, we might admire the transcendent Excellencies of his Nature, but
could not justly be subjected unto his Government and Disposal. The Weakness of
which Assertions will appear by the two following Arguments. First, That it is
very fit, in the Order of Nature, that the Inferior should be subservient unto
the Superior: For what other Reason can You assign for the Dominion of Man
over inferior Creatures: They are coeval with us; and it is certain, we could
have no hand in the Formation of them. But as that natural Dependence and
Relation between Superior and Inferior justifies (not our Tyranny and
Cruelty, there can never be any Reason in Nature for that, but) our taming and
subduing them to necessary Uses, our bridling and governing them as is
expedient; much stronger is the Argument when applied to the Difference between
God and Man. Secondly, All Beings have a general Right and Charter to do good,
and to be the Ministers of Eternal Rectitude, in promoting Order, and
preventing Disorder in the Universe. It is lawful for us to cultivate the
Earth, and draw out of the Heart and Bowels of it, Fruits and Minerals, for
Ornament, Nourishment, and Preservation; to extirpate noxious Weeds, and
promote the Increase of useful Plants, beautiful Flowers and Objects of
Delight: May we without the Imputation of injurious Meddling, cherish mild,
quiet, and profitable Tempers, and deliver the weak and inoffensive from the
wild and untameable Birds and Beasts and Men of Prey which are too strong for
them? May we unblameably rescue the Good from the Jaws of the Wicked, and
celebrate the Atchievments of those ancient or modern Worthies who have made it
their Business to Causin of Constantine.
redeem Mankind from Oppression and to quell Monsters? May Earthly Magistrates
draw Malefactors before the Judgment Seat, and consign them to Punishment,
protect the Innocent, and reward the Well-deserving according to their
Discretion? And can Men have the Impudence to question God's Right to do Good,
to bring Order out of Disorder, to take care of and reward the Meek and Holy,
to restrain and punish the Subdolous or violent Workers of Iniquity? What is
this, but to exalt Mankind to the Dignity of Gods, and to depress the Divine
Prerogative below the Privileges of Men.

3. And if God both can and may, the Consequence is very natural, that he will
and does interpose in the Management of Humane Affairs. Right and Power, in the
Hands of a good Being will not lie dormant; but exert their Force to the
beneficial Employments for which they are adapted. Epicurus indeed Lucretias.
Plutarch, etc.
introduces the Gods so much taken up with their own Felicity, That they will
not trouble themselves (for, in his Opinion, there must be a great Trouble) in
minding any Thing else. And Plutarch. adversus Colotem, and de Repugnantiis
Stoicorum, and Arrian, Epictetus l. 1. c. 23. and alibi.
his Wise Men were to have their Lives formed according to this Pattern of
their Gods; enjoying their Ease and Privacy, and having nothing at all to do in
Civil Administrations; in pursuance of his Principles, no doubt, That Chance
might bear an Universal Sway, without the interposing of any Wise Mind to order
it, either in Heaven or Earth. Not to reflect on Epicurus, by showing the Need
his Deities had to look to themselves, and the quiet Governing of the World;
Must not doing Good be highly agreeable and pleasing unto a Good God? Must not
the Delight and Complacency in beholding the due Procedure and Harmony of
Things, preponderate the Trouble (if there should be some) in effecting it?
Does a Virtuous Prince confine himself to the Pleasures of his Palace, or
regret at his Hours of Watchfulness, Care, and Pains-taking, which secures the
Prosperity of his People? Does not even Curiosity sweeten our tedious
Inquisitions into Truth and Falsehood, Right and Wrong, and Sympathy with the
Virtuous in Distress, constrain us to take their part? And can we imagine the
Deity should indulge an everlasting Slothfulness, when there is so much Good to
be done, so much Evil to be redressed, so many deserving Objects of his
Compassion and Care, which call for his Assistance? Either we must condemn as
Foolish the Vigilance of good Governors, laugh at the compassionate Essays of
the Pious, and confound our Notions of Generosity, Benignity, and Things
praiseworthy; or we can never persuade our selves, That God is an idle
Spectator, and bears the Sword of Power and Authority in vain.

The last Pretext, of Trouble in the Conduct of Providence, hardly deserves an
Answer. Can a single Man of Diligence and Sagacity, with comfort supervise so
many Affairs, and an Earthly Potentate boast with how little Trouble the World
was governed, and cannot God, whose Knowledge and Power inconceivably surpasses
ours, who has Millions of Heavenly Agents and Nuncio's to attend his Pleasure,
and execute his Commands, dispatch the Affairs of his Government without any
Confusion or Perplexity? Or, if you fear that seeing and being conversant among
the Evils and Miseries of Mankind should really grieve and afflict a Mind of so
great Benignity, allowing the Divine Nature the commendable Wisdom of a Stoic,
that Difficulty you will easily surmount and cure.

4. What remains then, but that the Reasons of Irreligion falling, the
Hypothesis invented for its Support should fall too. Men's naughty Opinions
proceed not from an hardened Malignity against God, but either from
Doubtfulness, or Consciousness of their own Demerits; and it is no wonder, if
they strive by any Artifice to exclude that Providence from whence they expect
no Good: Like the Iniquiry of Men to their Brethren; first to offend and injure
them, then to weaken their Authority and Credit; and if they do not, or cannot
destroy them, yet to wish them dead. But since the Existence of God and his
Providence maintains its Credit, and lives in the Belief of the Wise and Holy;
since all you can say to the Prejudice of Religion profits you nothing, but
even your own Principles must either endear or enslave you to it; since, to
repeat it once more, the Epicurean Hypothesis, whatever it pretends at the
first Interview, will unavoidably keep you to Religion, you had as good leave
it, and be Religious upon the most excellent Principles.

And is it not much more becoming the Dignity of Man to pay his Obedience to an
eternal King, whose Wisdom and Power is infinite, than to harbor in his Mind
low Thoughts of the Deity which he must serve, and be governed by Chance only
at the Second-Hand? Does it not make Religion, and the Offices thereof, look
more venerable, and the Thoughts of the Divine Majesty more awful in the Soul,
when the Bent of our Devotion terminates in the prime Cause, and contemplates
Perfections not to be transcended? There the Soul, with Comfort and Credit, can
acquiesce, and fix its Adorations when it can go no further.

All that has been spoken, was intended not to improve, but gradually to wean
you from the Epicurean Hypothesis. Its Heart and Spirit may be, because the
Design of it is, well-nigh broken: And though it may not be convenient to rip
open its Bowels, and expose its Loathsomness, for fear of Defilement, yet one
Consideration more may be suggested; namely, What the Heavenly Intelligences,
according to this Atomical and Fortuitous Origination of Things, must think of
themselves. It Is hard for Brutes to be made mere Machines, and Plants the
Composition of Chance. Man looks a little higher, and will stoutly argue and
dispute against it. And if the Heavenly Intelligences can be conscious of so
mean an Original, they must needs be ashamed to own it.

To this shall be only added, That though it be impossible this absurd Hypothesis
should be true, yet even from it so clear an Account may be deduced both of
Divine Providence and Dispensations, of Angelical Beings and their
Ministrations, of the Fall of the Devil, of his Deceiving Man, and of the
Extent of his Power and Principality, that those Persons cannot but be Luke
19.22.
condemned out of their own Mouth, who dare to be Irreligious on this
Foundation.

II. Let us proceed to the second Retirement of Infidelity; That the World has
always been as it is; from Eternity subsisting in the same Frame and Order
which we have at present. And what principally offers it self to our
Consideration on this Subject, shall be introduced with

1. An Explication of the Hypothesis it self: For if we take it in the gross,
nothing is more evidently true, than it is evidently false.

How can we say the World has been from Eternity as it is at present; when
every Age, every Year, nay every Day, presents to our View such wonderful
Mutations. What Revolutions in Humane Affairs, what Changes in Government,
Religion, Laws, and Manners, what Improvements in Liberal and Mechanical Arts
and Sciences, do the Histories of all Nations exhibit to us? Or if you can see
no Argument in this, against the fixed Consistence of this Earthly Frame, take
notice of the Conflicts and Jarrs among the Elements themselves, and their
interchangeable replevying from each other; the Fire making its hostile
Eruptions upon the Earth, as often as it can gather sufficient Forces, and
either finds or makes a Vent; the Air cherishing noxious and pestilential
Vapors, which destroy all before them, blast the Fruits of the Earth, and
turns the Breath of Life into the Minister of Death. The Earth and the Water
have their Aristot. Meteor. l. 1. c. 14.
Quarrels about Dominion, and enlarge their Bounds by mutual Depredations.
Sometimes the Earth is too hard for the Waters, lifts up its Head above, and
places a Garrison in the midst of the swelling Floods. Diodor. Sic. l. 5. c.
13. Philo (...). Plin. Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 87.
Rhodes and Pliny. Philo ibid. and Aristot. apud Plin. lib. 4. cap. 12.
Delos, with many lesser Monuments mentioned by Not. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 85, 87,
89.
Pliny, show that the Earth can be sometimes brisk, and throwing off her
natural dullness, recover some Ground from her neighboring Foe. And again, the
Waters have been too many for the Earth, scorning to have their Forces
disjoined by the weak Fences of Nature, making their Way (if not Verstegan l.
1. c. 4. Cambden, etc.
between England and France, yet) between Plin. l. 2. c. 88. Strabo l. 1. Diod.
Sic. l. 4. c. 14.
Italy and Sicily, Cyprus and Syria, etc. taking no less than three Aristot. de
Mun. c. 4. Philo, Strabo, Pliny, etc.
famous Cities in Peloponnesus, and overrunning, in a Night and a Day, the
great Island Atlantis, if you will believe In Trinaeo, Critia, etc. See also
the later Histories of Peru and Mexico. Lipsius Physiol. Stoic. p. 247.
Plato. Nor have their swallowing some certain Cities or Countries bounded
their Ambition, which in the Times of Noah, Ogypes, and Deucalion, almost
obtained by prodigious Inundations, and threatened to establish an Universal
Empire. It Is true, we have now a tolerably quiet Temperament of Things; but
these wonderful Effects of contending Elements minister sufficient ground of
suspecting, that it has not been always upon the Earth as it is at present;
which is supposed and confessed Ocellus Lucanus de Universo cap. 3. Aristot. de
Mundo passim.
by the principal Patrons of this Hypothesis: of which we shall make our
Advantage afterward. But Master Aristotle perchance will obviate our Design by
one of his Distinctions, telling us, that these formidable Changes happen only
in the Aristot. de coelo lib. 3. cap. 6. de mundo, and de Generat. and Corrupt.
passim. Item, Ocellus Lucan c. 2.
Elementary or Sublunary World, but Aristot. de coelo lib. 1. cap. 10. lib.
2.3. passim. Plut. de Pla. lib. 1. cap. 3.
the Celestial Bodies, made up of his Fifth or Finest Element, are liable to no
Changes or Corruptions, but conserve an immutable and even Tenor through all
the Successions of Eternity. Had he himself been made up of this fine
incorruptible Element, his own Experience and Modesty might have convinced him
by this time of his great Mistake. The Moon and other Planetary Bodies are
found to be near of the same Nature and Constitution with the Earth. Carts.
princip. Philosophiae, Part. 3. Sect. 104. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2. c. 26.
Many Fixed Stars innumerated by the Ancients are now unknown; and many appear
a new which former Ages give no Account of; and that notable Star in
Cassiopeia, bigger and brighter than the rest of the Fixed Stars, first
observed November 1572, and disappearing March 1574, had a very fatal Influence
upon, and portended the Overthrow of this Hypothesis. Nay, those Blazing Stars,
which in all Ages shake their ominous Rods over admiring Mortals, forewarn us
by a right Calculation of their Altitude, not to depend on it. The Philosopher
indeed, agreeably to his Principles, Aristot. de Met. l. 1. c. 67. Plut. de
Plac. Phil. 3. c. 1, 2.
could not allow the Blazing Stars a place so high as the Orb of the Moon; the
Senselessness of which Fancy, contrary to many other Reasons, is evidently
demonstrated from the Insensibility of their Paralax. How much they are higher
than the Moon, we cannot certainly tell; but, in all Probability, they must
needs be advanced above the Sphere of Saturn. Hence follows, that when any one
says, the World has been from Eternity as it is at present their Words must be
a little qualified, and mean no more, than that the Substance or general
Compages of the World may have been Eternal; though the several Parts of it,
both in Heaven and Earth, or all alternately, have undergone very considerable
Changes and Alterations.

2. Let us next enquire into the Reasons which might tempt Men to this Opinion
of the World's Eternity: And they seem to be two. First, because they could
perceive no Changes, no Symptoms of the Generation or Corruption of the World:
And Secondly, because they could give no reasonable Account of the World's
Origin and Production.

(...), etc. Ocell. cap. and Aristot. de coelo, l. c. 10.
The first we find in Ocellus Lucanus, and Aristotle; and all their winding and
circular Disputes for the Impossibility of its Generation from the
Impossibility of its Corruption, and vice versa, terminate in this: Like the
Argument against the Dissolution of the World, mentioned by the Scoffers in 2
Pet. 3.4. ^t. Philo (...).
St. Peter. For since the Fathers fell asleep, all Things continue as they were
from the Beginning of the Creation. And to this we may return the same Answer,
That they who can see no Indications of a changeable Nature, must needs be
willingly ignorant; and for clearing their Eye sight, may be referred unto the
preceding Paragraph. And if seeing or not seeing can be an Argument on either
side, it can be only against them. For we do see, and are positively assured,
of very great Changes in the World; and if it had a Beginning newly formed,
Mankind might have sensible Convictions of it: But if the World be Eternal, it
requires a very large Faith to look back into its Certainty, and no Mortal
could ever have a sensible or ocular Demonstration of it.

The Second Reason we take from the conceited Humor of Aristotle; Aelian. var.
Hist. l. 3. c. 19.
who being too much given to contemn and deride others, Diog. Laert. in vita,
and Aristot. Phys. l. 1. c. 1.
and servilely following his own Reason to the assigning a Cause for the
smallest Matters, Cicer. in Lucullo. Philo (...). Aristot. de Coelo. Physic.
Audit. de Generat. and Corrup. passim.
laughed at all Accounts of the World's Original, and judged the Defenders of
it little better than mad. This hasty Shooting of his Bolt, proceeded from the
Excess of his Pride, or the Defectiveness of his own Reason. He could have no
satisfying Notion, when, or by what means, or in what manner the World was
made. And how should any thing be done without Aristotle's knowing it. We will
not enquire into his profound Skill in the whole Circle of Physics, his rare
Definitions of Substance, Form, Time, Motion, etc. his accurate Discovery of
Meteors (except Comets, which you heard something of lately) and the familiar
Acquaintance he had with the substantial Forms and occult Qualities of Nature.
We will only ask his Disciples, What they can think of the Generation of Man?
Can you tell how such Rational Beings as we are, attain our Maturity and
Perfection? What are the constituent Principles of our Nature? How the Body is
formed and organized? At what time the Soul is united to it? or how an
Immaterial can operate on a Material Being, and receive Impressions from it? Or
(for perchance you may be disposed to smile at the former Questions) How mere
Matter, and the rude Elements of Life, can expand themselves to the Production
and Exercise of those Noble Functions, of Sensation, Cogitation, Memory, etc.
Consider a while of it, and by that time you can return a satisfying Answer to
these Questions, we may give you as satisfying an Account of the Formation of
the World. But if this little World be a Province too difficult for your
Undertaking, What Humility do our Contemplations of the Universe require? And
how absurd must it be to assert the Eternity of the World upon those
Principles, which either prove that there are no Men in the World, or that they
are all Eternal. For instance, If it be impossible there should be any
Communion between a Material and an Immaterial Being, or that mere Matter
should think Reason, and remember, etc. as the Difficulties are inexplicable on
each side, then there are no Men in the World; and how big soever we may look,
we are no better than those Apparitions and Shades of the Night, which poor
ignorant People are so commonly frighted with. Or, if you are not pleased with
that, since we could have our Beginning neither from Matter nor Spirit, for
choose which you will it is an easy matter to puzzle you, then we must have been
and shall be for ever just as we are at present, and all the Histories and
Evidences of Life and Death are to be rejected as fabulous Fears, Fancies, and
Traditions. This is exactly your way of dealing with us. You ask us two or
three puzzling Questions about the Origin and Formation of the World; and
because we do not explain it entirely to your Satisfaction, therefore it must
be Eternal.

3. Our third Reflection shall fall on the Novelty of this Opinion, and its
arrogant breaking in upon the Prescriptions of Antiquity.

When Time had worn off the Reverence, with the uniform Attestations of
Tradition, the World's Original began to be debated by the weak Reason of Man.
And the wrangling Philosophers raising up Difficulties which they could not lay
again, like so many Evil Spirits let loose upon the Earth, they tempted Men
from the Acknowledgment of their Primitive Cause; and deceived them with the
Insinuations of becoming wise, nay, wiser than their Forefathers. Aristotle,
all over his Physical Discourses, musters up the Opinion of preceding
Philosophers; gives no Intimations of any that believed as he did; but disputes
against Melissus, Parmenides, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Leucippus, Democritus,
Anaxagoras, Timaeus, Plato, etc. pleasing himself, no doubt, in the Singularity
of his Notion, and sufficiently confuting the World's Genesis, by finding some
Flaw in the Solutions of it, or showing their Repugnancy to each other. A
little Tract of Ocellus, indeed, deprives Aristotle of the Glory which the
Philo (...).
first Inventer of so fine an Hypothesis might expect: some Copies of which
Tract Vide Nagarolae Annot. in Ocellum.
came, probably, to his hands; though as it happened, all did not. If this
Ocellus be the same whom Diogenes Laertius In vita Archytae.
mentions, (as we will not suborn the appearing Advantages both in Ocellus and
Diogenes to witness against it) the Opinion of the World's Eternity bears
something a more ancient Date than the Time of Aristotle. But, alas, What is
this to the whole Stream of unsuspected Antiquity? Consult the Archaeologies of
all Ages; and if you find the most ancient Monuments of Reason and Intelligence
taking the Tradition of the World's Original for granted, where can you expect
to find more competent Judges? All those in Caldaea, Assyria, Persia,
Phaenicia, Egypt, Greece, Italy, Palestine, etc. who lived nearest the
Beginning which Moses speaks of, do likewise speak of it as a Matter never
controverted: But when those Reverend Worthies were gone off the Stage, from
whose Repute for Learning and laborious Inquiries, and Capacity for knowing
most of the Ages most doubted of, Mankind might receive the best Information;
when Tradition, which in this Case is a better Rule than Reason, grew weaker
and weaker by passing through so many Hands, then that became a Controversy
which before was none, and some, who envied the Reputation, would not yield
unto the Authority of former Ages. Matter of Fact is not to be known by Reason,
but by Testimony: And since for much above 3000 Years after the Beginning which
we contend for, we have a Cloud of Witnesses, in distinct Ages and Countries,
which appear for us, and not one against us: This shows, That the nearer to
that Beginning, the clearer was the Certainty, the stronger the Belief of it:
And this Weight of Universal Consent ought much to overballance any Arguments
whatsoever, which some later Pretenders to Reason, in their private
Contemplations and Retirements shall suggest.

4. Our next Essay shall be, to make the best of this Hypothesis: And though the
Reasons for it be weak, and the Tradition against it strong, yet you must know,
its chief Defenders were not such an Ungodly Generation as would now pervert
and abuse it. You, therefore, whom the Supposal of this World's Eternity makes
unmindful of God, look unto the Rock from whence it was hewn, and hear what the
first of your Race profess concerning the Divine Nature.

Ocellus Lucanus. in Stobaeo. Eclog. Phys. l. 1. c. 16.
Life keeps our Earthly Tabernacles from falling in pieces, and the Cause of
this is the Soul: And Harmony conserves the World, and the Cause of this is
God.

The Sphere of the Moon is the Isthmus or Partition between a changeable Life
and Immortality. Ocellus de Universo, cap. 2.
The Regions above being the Possession of God and Divine Natures, and those
below of [mutable] Nature and Contention.

God gives to Men Generative Faculties, Idem, cap. 4
Organs, and Appetites; not for Pleasure, but the Preservation of their kind.
And a little after, They who altogether abstain from the Procreation of
Children, are injurious to the most honorable Bonds of Union: but from
irregular and reproachful Mixtures proceed a Generation of Wretches, vile and
abominable both to God and Man, to Families and Cities.

God and Nature do nothing in vain. Aristotle de Coelo, l. 1. c. 4.


All Men have a Notion or Conception of God, and allot unto the Divine Nature
the highest Place, whether they be Greeks or Barbarians, or whoever think of
God: Idem. l. 1. c. 3.
For it is manifest, an Everlasting Being ought to be fitted with an
Everlasting Habitation.

De coelo, l. 2. c. 12.
We may very well think, that by one first [Mover] these several [heavenly
Bodies, or their Motions] do subsist: For you may observe in all other kinds of
Life or Principles, the Supereminence is in a first over all the rest.

De Generat. and Corrup. l. 2. c. 10.
God gives Compleatness to the whole, and makes every particular Production
perfect.

We ought to think of God, as a Being most powerful for Strength, De Mundo
passim.
most perfect in Beauty, in Life immortal, in Excellencies transcendent. And
what the Master is in a Ship, Aut Aristoteles, aut Aristotelicus.
the Driver in a Chariot, the Leader in a Dance, the Law in a City, the General
in an Army, that is God in the World. Except, in as much as they, in their
respective Places, direct with Wearisomness, Toil and Care; but he without
Pain, without Labor, exempted from all Bodily Weaknesses whatsoever. For being
fixed on an immovable Throne, he moves all Things, and turns them about,
according to his Pleasure.

It would be endless to transcribe Religious Expressions from the Followers of
Aristotle. Let is suffice to tell you, That the latter See Marcilius Ficinus,
in Platonis Timaeum, c. 13. and Johannes Grammaticus.
Platonists embraced this Opinion of the World's Eternity; and made a great
deal to do to reconcile See Hierocles de Providencia, and Aenaeas Gazaeut.
Plato first to Aristotle, then to himself. So that you will make this
Hypothesis fight against God, you must sight against the Pillars and main
Upholders of it; whose devout Elevations of Soul expressed in their several
Ages, a Reverence for the Deity, and would have abhorred, as a degenerous
Brood, the Blasphemers of it.

5. All the Religious Principles, by natural Light formed in the Mind,
concerning God, are indifferently well consistent with the World's Eternity:
Which you cannot but be satisfied in, considering,

1. Many Christian Philosophers, believing the Beginning spoken of by Moses,
think it not impossible (if God had so pleased) for the World to have been made
before, even from Eternity. They dare not limit the Power of God, as not in
Efficacy, so not to Time: And if any one will say, an Eternal Cause may have an
Eternal Effect, they will not be positive in denying it. In which Number you
shall not be referred to some ancient Heretics, or to our late foolish
Pre-Adamites, but to the Debates among our Aquinas, Suarez, Vasquez, Greg.
Valentia, Baronias, etc.
most eminent Schoolmen and Metaphysicians.

II. The later Platonists and Aristotelians argued for the World's Eternity,
chiefly from the Consideration of God's Eternal Goodness: Which Argument of
theirs is most clearly expressed by Sallustius, and in the fewest Words. It Is
(...). Sallustius de Diis and Mundo, c. 7.
necessary (says he) the World existing through the Goodness of God, that as
God is always Good, the World should always Exist. They De Mundo sub nomine
Aristotelle. Metaphys. Maj. cap. 2. Metaphys. sub nomine Theophrati, cap. 1.
recognize God as the Cause, the Fountain, the Parent of the Universe, and
affirm it the Effect, Offspring, and Emanation from him. Only they suppose a
Being Eternally Good must be Eternally Communicative: Which Reason, by the way,
if it have any Force in it, makes not so much for the Eternal Generation of the
World, as of the WORD and Son of God.

III. It does no way derogate from the spiritual Nature or Providence of God;
but supposes an Eternal Conservation and Direction of all Things under the
Government of an Eternal Spirit. Diog. Laert. in Aristotele. Metaphys. maj. c.
7.
Aristotle, the most suspected Person, acknowledges this. And if Immaterial and
Incorporeal Being or Substance, be Iargon, Tobu and Bobu, it is none of our
Framing or Invention. The Fear indeed of some Religious, and the Hopes of some
Irreligious Men, may deserve our Notice: As if that which supposes God to act
by a Necessity of Nature, must render instituted Religion absurd, and to no
purpose, and vacate the Expectations of Reward or Dreads of Punishment. This
formidable Difficulty will soon vanish, when it appears how preposterously it
is made to work. For if God acts by a Necessity of Nature, that is, (...)
his own Nature, this ought to be matter of Joy and Comfort to the Good, and
Terror to the Wicked. For it can signify no more, than that God is necessarily
Holy, Wise, Good, and Just, and cannot act otherwise than according to the
Eternal Rules and Dictates of Holiness, Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice. What
Good may not the Righteous expect from this? What Reason have not the Wicked,
instead of triumphing, to tremble at it? And with Respect to God, Nec ob hoc
minus liber and poten^ est. Sen. ibid. N. Q. pr. 1.
it infringes not his Liberty, it illustrates his Perfection.

IV. Nor are the general Arguments for God's Existence endangered by this
Hypothesis; as you may see by the Enumeration of some Particulars.

1. We argue for God's Existence, from the Necessity of acknowledging a first
Principle of Motion. Thus, Every Thing moving has Motion either essential to
it, or by Communication from another: That every Thing moving has not Motion
essential to it, is proved by the Cessation of Motion in some Things, or their
Continuance in or Tendency unto Rest. And that a Body once quiescent would
continue so for ever, if it was not moved by something else, is agreeable both
to Phys. l. 8. c. 4.
Aristotle's Principles, and Princip. Philosoph. Part 2. Sect. 37.
Carts his first Law of Nature; and indeed unto Common Sense. And if every
Thing moving is moved by something else, it is necessary to stop somewhere, and,
without Aristot. Phys. l. 8. c. 5.
going on in infinitum, to terminate in a first Mover. And since the first
Mover must be Cap. 6.
immovable, and therefore Ibid. c. 10. It. Plato de Leg. l. 10. and Johannes
Gram. in Aristot. de Anima. Prooem.
indivisible, impassible and without Parts, it must likewise be immaterial; and
having an infinite Power of moving every thing else, it is what we believe of
God. Nothing can pretend to answer this Argument, but the Invention of a
perpetual Lamp or Motion; but all our Brains may be cracked, and we may hope,
by the Grace of God, to have the Truth of it confirmed to our Comfort, before
that Time comes. This, upon Review, will be found a very weighty Argument; very
rationally making all the Motions in the Universe proceed from, terminate in,
and directed by one Common Principle; which (like the Soul in the Body, the
Spring and End of all Humane Motions) is the (...), the general Superviser and
Governor of all Things.

2. The Existence of God is proved by the Series and Gradation of Causes, in
this manner.

Every Thing which we see has its Beginning and Production, must have its
Beginning and Production from something else. Nothing can give Beginning to it
self. Which is true, not only of those Things which we see produced, but of
every Thing else from whence they have their Production, until we come unto
some Cause which is not produced. Aristot. Metaphys. min. l. 1. c. 2.
An infinite Series of Causes is not to be admitted, unless you are resolved to
be Contradiction-proof; for then, of two Infinites, one Rank may have
infinitely more in number than the other: There may be every Day an Addition to
what was infinite before, etc.

It Is certain, That Link which has an End, must have a Beginning; That Train
or Succession which has a Last must have a First: And by these Steps we ascend
to the Supreme Independent Cause from whence all subordinate Causes do proceed,
and that is God.

3. The Existence of God is proved by the admirable Order and Beauty of the
World; its visible Glories declaring his invisible Power and Godhead. Eternal
Order can never be maintained upon the Principles of Chance, but supposes an
Eternal Orderer; by whose interposing Power and Wisdom, the Jarrings and
Discords in Nature are overruled, every Part fixed in its proper Place, and
guided most conducively to the Good and Harmony of the whole.

Take off your Eyes a little from this Earth of ours, and direct your
Contemplations toward Heaven; Look up to the Sun, the Moon, and the rest of
the Heavenly Hosts; Conjecture at their Magnitude, observe their Motion,
thankfully reflect on their benign Influences; Consider how glorious Objects
they all seem, what blessed Mansions some of them may prove to be. Have these
existed, say you, Millions of Ages longer than most of us imagine? The more
wonderful you make their Frame and Architecture, the greater Convictions (if
possible) you give of an incomprehensibly wise and powerful Governor; the
stronger Assurances against the Fear of a blind and fortuitous Causality.
Chance, possibly, may hit upon something excellent, but it does not last long.
Coordinate and independent Powers may associate for mutual Benefit and Defense,
but it is much if they hold together to Eternity. It Is only one predominant and
supreamly excelling Principle, which can preserve a just Temperament, an
eternal Tenor and Comeliness, a regular Union and Correspondence in all the
Parts of the Universe, and this is GOD.

Shall we now proceed to the other Arguments for God's Existence, from the
general Notion of God in the Mind, and the common Consent of Men to it, from
the Fabric of the Body, and the Nature and Operations of the Soul, from the
several Ranks of Beings, which may lead to one most excellent and perfect:
Rather peruse the learned Discourses already extant on those several Heads;
apply them to, and see their Consistence with this Hypothesis, and by them,
with the Intimations already given, you will soon perceive, that Men of
Irreligious and Ungodly Principles only cheat themselves, when they think to
hide themselves from God, under this Subterfuge of the World's Eternity.

6. One Remark more, before the Conclusion of this Part, may be recommended to
you: That even upon this Hypothesis, the Generations of Men, in all
Probability, must have a Beginning. And for this we will not repeat the
Impossibility of infinite Successions, but re-mind you of Matters of Fact.

There are two Ways (this Hypothesis standing good) whereby the Inhabitants of
the Earth may be all destroyed: Either by a general Destruction of our Vortex,
whereof the Sun is the Center; or, by some particular Predominancy of Fire or
Water.

I. A general Destruction of this Vortex may happen either by an Extinction of
the Sun, or by an unequal Dispersion of its Rays and Heat.

1. If at any time there happen an Extinction of the Sun, all the Inhabitants
in this Vortex (not removed by a supernatural Power) must needs perish, as
under the Poles, for want of Light and Heat. The several Instances of a
gathering Scum, over or near the Sun's Body, which, to us, have weakened or
drowned the Sun's Light, and reduced it almost to a total Obscuration, may be
foreboding Symptoms, and Comminations of such a Judgment. For a whole Year
together, after the Assassination of Julius Caesar, there was a Plin. Not.
Hist. lib. 2. cap. 30.
prodigious Failure of the Sun's Light; at other Times for several Months; and
in the Reign Phlegon. in Eusebius. Chron. sub Tiberio. Origin. Tract. on Matt. 35.
Tertul. Apol. c. 21.
of Tiberius the most wonderful of all, though it was but for several Hours; as
it were to blacken those Moments in the Records of Time wherein the Lord of
Glory suffered.

If you think these Frowns of offended Nature signify nothing; that these
Threatenings of the great and only Potentate, to hide the most sensible and
necessary Symbols of his Presence, have no Terror in them; or, to speak in the
Language of our Naturalists, that these scummy Spots can never increase into so
great a quantity, as wholly to crust over the Body of the Sun, and extinguish
the Light and Heat of it, let the disappearing of several Fixed Stars, Bodies
which might rival the Sun in Glory and Greatness, be a warning to you; and fear
lest by the Increase of Sin and Wickedness within our Sphere, the whole Mass to
which we belong, be made one cursed and confused Heap, tumbled out of its
Place, and become a Word of Reproach and a Gazing-stock to the whole Universe,
as See Car^^s his Account of Comets. Princip. Philosoph. Part 3. Sect. 115, etc.
Comets are.

2. If there be at any time a breaking and unequal Dispersion of the Suns Heat,
the irregular flying abroad of its fiery Particles, will consume every thing
within the compass of it, and Pet. 3.10.12.
fulfill the Prediction of the Day of the Lord, when the Heavens bring on fire
shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat. The
Tradition of this World's perishing by an Universal Conslagration, has
Testimonies to confirm it on all sides. S. Paul may be supposed to have had
some Skill in the Wisdom of the Heathens; but, that S. Jude, S. John, S. Peter,
or our Savior Christ Jesus, had the Perusal of Plato, Cicero, Ovid, Berosus,
Hermes Trismegistus, Democritus, Heraclitus, either of their Works, Fragments,
or Quotations from them, we have no Reason to persuade us: And yet they all
agree in this Point, as if they spoke by one common Inspiration. To sum up
Evidences, will be doing what has been sufficiently done already; but, for the
more compendious finding them, consult the Commentators on 2 Pet. 3.7. and
particularly Gr^tius, and on 2 These. 2.3. and particularly Zanchy: Or, if you
are prejudiced against any Thing that may come near the Sacred Oracles, you may
have Recourse to Physiol. Stoic. l. 2. Dissert. 22.
Lipsius. You shall only have one Passage of Consolat. ad Martiam, ad finem.
Seneca, whereby to guess at the rest. Fate with prodigious Fires shall burn
and consume all mortal Things; and when the time shall come wherein the World
drawing near to its Renovation shall expire, its several Parts shall dash one
against another, Stars shall rush upon Stars, and whatsoever now gives its
Light with Order and Beauty, shall with one general Conflagration be set on
fire.

II. There may be some particular Predominancy of Fire or Water, destructive to
all Animals upon the Earth, though the rest of our Vortex receive no Damage. And
in reporting the general Tradition of the Worlds perishing, you may observe
some Diversity among the Ancients: And besides the more universal Dissolution
which we learn from them, and which you may interpret of all within the Compass
of one or more Spheres; a particular Destruction, wherein only the Earth, with
its Parts and Appurtenances, shall be concerned, may be judged credible. Of
this we may interpret that Passage of Plato, in his Book De Regno, When all
Animals had fulfilled the Task and Generations appointed to them, God withdraws
his conserving Power, and retires from the Helm of Government. The Consequent
of which, for that Vicissitude, is the Ruin of all Earthly Creatures. And the
particular Manner of it is explained by the successive Dominations of Fire and
Water, as in the celebrated Exprobration of the Egyptian Plato in Timaeo. See
also Celsus apud Originem centra Celsum, l. 1. p. 16. Sen. Not. Quaest. l. 3.
c. 28.
to Solon; O Solon, Solon, you Grecians are always Children, nor have you
Knowledge, of any ancient Date, among you. Which happens by many and various
Destructions of Men, which have been, and will be, the greatest of which, by
the Force of Fire and Inundations of Water, the lesser, by several other
Chances and Calamities. As in the Circle of the Suns ordinary Course we have
our Summer and Winter, so in the great Circle of Time, which they call the Sea
Alex. ab Alexandro, and Censorinus.
great Year, an extraordinary Summer and Winter are supposed to take their
Turn; the one causing a general Conflagration, and the other a Deluge.

1. The Predominancy of Heat may proceed either from the altering of our
Position with Respect to the Sun or some nearer Approximation to it, as some
Moor's Mystery of Godliness.
suppose, or by the Carts Princip. Phi. Part 3. Sect. 2.
Eruption of the Central Fire, or by both together. The first may prepare the
way for the latter, by drying the Superficies of the Earth, making great Chinks
and Chasms in it, and opening a sufficient Passage for the subterraneous Fires,
to break out with all their Forces, to the Calcination of the whole. All
Histories give us prodigious Examples of excessively hot Seasons, wherein such
a Judgment might even naturally have been feared. We know what bituminous,
sulphurous, and combustible Matter the Bowels of the Earth are replenished
with, and what dangerous Eruptions they have made from their several Magazines,
particularly in Italy and Sicily, and lately to the Consumption of a Hundred
Thousand Persons; concerning which, we may use the Words of Not. Hist. l. 2. c.
116.
Pliny, That they threaten Desolation to the whole Earth: (...) l. 6. Ep. ^^.
which he had better have believed than have gone to see. From which Eruptions
of the Central Fire Princip. Philosoph. Part 3. Sect. 104.
Carts is not ashamed to solve the appearing of some Stars which never
appeared before. And if we can believe any Reality in his Supposition, by such
a Conspiracy of external and internal Fires, the Vicissitudes appointed by the
eternal Decrees of Heaven may be completed. To this particular Exustion of the
Earth, and the Powers thereof, many eminent Divines, both Ancient and Modern,
think fit to restrain the general Expressions in Scripture, concerning the Last
Day. (...)
Mr. M^de seems zealous for it, and in him you may find the best Collection of
Authorities, to clear him from the perilous Crime of Novelty. But our
Business, at present, is not to show what may be expected from Revelation, but
Reason. What is possible or probable being declared, we must leave to the
Choice of the Divine Wisdom what Methods are most expedient for Correcting the
Vices of Mankind.

2. The Predominancy of Water will require but a very brief Discussion; both
the Matter of Fact and Manner of an Universal Deluge, have of late been so
learnedly managed, that you cannot need any References to Authority in this
Case. You shall only be reminded of your Master Aristotle, Aristot. M^^eorol.
l. 1. c. 14.
who had not Assurance enough to confront Tradition in so plain a Matter; but
allowed, That as we have our successive Winters according to their Seasons, so
in some fatal Times and Periods we might have a great Winter, and such Excess
of Showers as might cause the Inundations reported by Antiquity.

It Is time now to show, unto what all this tends; and to satisfy you, That all
this Pains is not taken without some Prospect of Advantage: Which is no less
than this;

That according to the Principles of these very Men who Eternize the World,
it is highly probable, that Mankind have had a Beginning and a first of their
Race upon the Earth. For,

First, If in less than the Compass of Six Thousand Years, we have had one,
two, or three prodigious Deluges, How many such Calamities must the Earth have
groaned under, if it have Existed from Eternity? For referring former Deluges
to any Thing but an Eternal Cause, you suppose the Newness of the World, as
though it wanted some accidental Shakings to bring it unto a perfect
Settlement. And if in that great Deluge we have the most pregnant Proof of,
only Eight Persons were saved alive, then in the innumerable Deluges which the
Eternity of the Earth with its Inhabitants will suppose, sometimes 800 might be
saved, sometimes 80, sometimes 8, and sometimes none at all. For, though the
Eternal Causes may be regular in the general Production of a Deluge, they may
not in Reason be thought so regular and uniform in every small Circumstance.
And when the Condition of the Earth is brought to that deplorable State, that
only Eightscore or Eight can escape, the saving of these few cannot be referred
to the regular Operations of Nature, but either to Chance or Miracle. Miracle
you will not choose; and if only by Chance they escape once, in the Eternal
Rollings and Revolutions of second Causes, it is more than probable, that one
time or other they may chance to be all destroyed.

Secondly, And because the Predominancy of Fire and Water, according to your
way of reckoning, seem to be successive, and that another universal Deluge
cannot naturally be expected till after a Conflagration, that may come in for a
share in our present Meditations.

If any such opake and heavy Bodies as the Earth is may be burnt up, we will
not consider the means of their Renovation, but only the Possibility of such a
Judgment's Coming to our Turn. And the Eternity of the Earth being supposed,
there may have been as many Conflagrations as Deluges; and Fire being a much
more Tyrannous Element than Water, if ever the Earth was burnt up by the
Prevalency of Fire, (which if we can believe it Eternal, we may as well believe
has happened Millions of Times) we cannot imagine any possible Way or Means
(except miraculously) for one living Creature to escape.

The short of what we may infer from these two Particulars is, That either
Mankind have had only one Beginning, which we Christians do believe; or, that
they had an undeterminable Number of Beginnings, which you Heathens must
believe: And then the Question between us will be only this, From whence? by
what Forming Power they had their Beginning? And sure you will be ashamed to go
back to Epicurus, Diod. Sic. l. 1. Lucret l. 2.5.
and to the old ridiculous Fables of Mankind's creeping out of the Mudd and
Slime of the Earth, enlivened with the Suns Heat; having nothing to form and
organize them, but blind Matter and Motion. This is an Absurdity so great, that
the Opinion of Infinite Successions was invented on purpose to prevent it; your
Patrons wisely resolving, that of two Evils or Absurdities, the least was to be
chosen. Thus you are driven out of your Mudd and Matter to your Infinite
Successions, and from Infinite Successions into the Mudd again; not knowing
where to fix, unless the next Consideration will relieve you.

Thirdly, If there be such Mutations in the Heavenly Bodies, as the appearof
Comets, the fresh appearing or disappearing of Fixed Stars, are astonishing
Indications and Signs of, why should not you think that the like Mutations have
happened in our Sphere. In an Eternal Course of Ages, every thing that is
possible may be expected. Suppose, according to your Laws of Nature, the
Dissolution of one Sphere having a fixed Star for the Center, may happen in a
Thousand Years, which is a very moderate Supposal, in the infinite Circle of
Eternity, the same Fate might have taken its Round innumerable Times. All the
Hosts of Heaven, in their several Turns, might be broken and disbanded, and
recalled to their former Posts and Stations. And not to say how often it might
happen to our Vortex, we will take only once for granted: And the Sun, the
Moon, and all the Stars about us, having been in one confused Heap, without
Life or Order, you may as well believe the Beginning which Moses speaks of, as
any other. And though honest More Nevah. p. 2. c. 25.
Maimonides was very zealous against the World's Eternity, and thought he could
never muster up too many Arguments against it, as an Opinion which must
inevitably over-turn the Religion of Moses, and expose his Miracles as
Impostures; yet there seems not to be one Sentence or Word in the first Chapter
of Genesis, except the Critical Interpretation of the Word Bara, for Production
out of Nothing, which a necessary Explication of this Hypothesis may not accord
with. And all those eminent Doctors in the Church, Quum non tum primum, cum
visibilem istum mundum fecit Deus coeperit operari: s^d sicut, post
corruptionem hujus, erit alius mundus, and ita antequam hic esset, fuisse alios
credimus. Origin (...), l. 3. c. 5. Sicut scriptum est in Job, quando factae
sunt stellae, laudaverunt eum omnes angeli ejus: quasi antiquitores non solum
homine post creato, sed and omni creatura propter eum creat^. Origin. Tract. 9.
in Matt. and alibi. (...) (i. e. The Earth Created for Man) (...) Chrysos.
Orat. (...), c. 7. To these may be added about a dozen of the Ancient Fathers,
many of our Schoolmen, and Philo the Jew. See also Commentators on Job 38.7.
who have interpreted the six Days of Moses not strictly according to the
Letter, or believed the Existence of Ages, Persons, or Places, long before the
precise Account of Time given us by Moses; as they leave the absolute Beginning
of Things precarious and uncertain, so they render this Hypothesis (how
contrary to Reason soever it may be and is, yet) not so positively damnable
from Scripture.

And now, O vain Men! What Refuge will you flee unto? There are no other
possible Conceits for justifying your Infidelity. And since these will stand
you in no stead at present, think within your selves, How much less serviceable
they will be unto you at the Revelation of a more lightsome Day. Even in this
mortal and obscure State, the Approaches of Death give the Irreligious other
Eyes to see with. Danger dispels their Prejudices, and coming on the Brink of
Eternity, they begin to think of God, of separate Spirits, and other Regions,
when they cannot think of them with Comfort. Now they are apt to say, as the
Cardinals to the Religious Hermit, What if there be no God, no Future State?
But Diseases giving them notice of their Dissolution, the Answer of the good
Father will be running in their Minds, What if there be? And is it not much the
wisest and best Method, to live by those sacred Persuasions which probably you
will dye in, especially when the great Patrons of Infidelity can say nothing
against them. Nay, we have not so much as a Maybe left on our side, against the
Verity of Religion: For, it cannot be that the World should either be Eternal
or made by Chance. Or if one of those May-be's be granted, it cannot be that
either Hypothesis should be exclusive of a Divine Nature or Providence. And if
you are by these Considerations rendered (as you cannot but be) uneasy in
Irreligion, and know not which way to turn, read over the former Part again
with a pious Care and Attention, and it may prepare you for the following
Advice; which, as the precedent Discourse, is intended, not for the
reproaching, but reforming of your Judgment; not for the condemning of your
Persons, but the Safety of your Souls; not to abridge you of any present
Felicity, but to excite you to the Attainment of that which is Eternal.

III. So excellent a Subject ought not to be closed without some suitable
Advice: And though the Knowledge of God, as it is the Foundation of all Religion,
may have a general Reference to every Religious Duty; yet it will be fit to
choose out such particular Instances of Address, as the prevailing Vices and
Inadvertency of this Age seem most in need of.

1. The evident Connection of Reason and Religion may direct us to a right
Judgment of those Men who despise and undervalue Sacred Things: for hereby it
appears, they despise and undervalue that which they do not understand. Psalm.
14.
The Psalmist has given us an excellent Character of such Men, The fool has
said in his heart there is no God. They are corrupt and have done abominable
works, there is none that does good. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the
children of Men, to see if there were any that did understand and seek after
God: Which is as much as to say, That it is the Ignorance and want of
Understanding in Men, which makes them entertain any Scruples or Doubtfulness
of Heart concerning God. The Acknowledgment of God is also affirmed in Sacred
Scripture, to be the Beginning of all Wisdom, Ps. 111.10.
and the Instructions of Religion the best way to perfect it. Ps. 119.98.
And he who consents not to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.4.
is expressly said to be a Fool and know nothing. It Is therefore a great Error
in some, who set up for Men of extraordinary Parts and Wisdom, to speak Evil of
Religious Matters: That Singularity in Profaneness which they affect, and hope
by its Eminency will recommend them as Persons of a deep Reach, is of all
others the most disgraceful. It Is an Argument, That really they do not see so
far into the Intricacies of Truth as they would seem to do. Their Pretensions
are, 1 Timothy 6.20.
in the Apostle's Style, (...), the Oppositions of miscalled Science; and they
only declare, that there are a great many Things to be said for Religion which
they are not aware of. Should any Man go about to lessen the Eloquence of
Cicero, the Poetry of Virgil, the Morals of Seneca or Plutarch, he would only
betray his own Unskilfulness; and his Censures would only render himself
contemptible. The same we may say of the Censurers of Religion. Let them please
themselves with a Conceit of their own Wit: it is a Piece not only of Charity,
but Wisdom too, to impute their Profaneness to want of Judgment. Whatsoever
they may fancy, they are no better than Vulgar Mortals guided by some Sensual
or Popular Prejudices, and a superficial View of Things, through which they
cannot see into the Excellencies of Religion.

II. If Reason and Religion go hand in hand, then you may safely be advised not
to condemn or ridicule Religion, till you have carefully examined the Grounds
and Reasons on which it is built.

Can any be a fairer, or more reasonable Request than this? Religion is not a
Matter of so mean Importance, as to justify any trifling with it, or the
Author of it. If any think to throw off the Fear of God with a scornful Jest,
and look no further, it may (for ought they know) return again upon them with a
serious Horror; and then they will wish, that they had formerly thought more of
it. But if they will resolve to consider before they condemn, and try before
they defy it, they will then indeed act like Men, and will presently find
enough, if not absolutely to cure, yet at least to make them modest in their
Mistakes. It Is an insufferable piece of Arrogance, for Men to talk against
Religion, without enquiring into the Grounds on which its Reputation is
supported. It Is a malicious Ignorance which makes such Scoffers: and it is
enough to raise the Indignation of any serious Christian, to see his dearest
Interest trampled under-foot by those who never had any of its Notions in their
Head. And pray, Observe the Persons generally accustomed to vilify Sacred
Things; Are they Men to be depended on for their Seriousness? Do they seem to
be more fixed in their Thoughts? more given to Contemplation than other Men? Or
seem they not rather, Men of great Levity, and little Consideration? who mind
only a few sensual and silly Satisfactions, and so entirely devoting their
Thoughts that way, as though Reason was given them for no other end, but to
make them Beasts with some better Grace and Solemnity. The Apostle takes notice
of such Men in his Time, Romans 1.
who cared not to retain God in their Knowledge; 28.
and he describes them to be such as professed themselves to be wise, 22.
but were really foolish, Men of a vain Imagination, and darkened in their
foolish Heart. 21.
And it cannot be expected otherwise in this our Age. If Men give themselves up
to Lightness and Vanity, it is no wonder if the substantial and serious Matters
of our Belief do not relish well with them. If they are commonly engaged in the
Noise and Jollities of a licentious Life, this presently dislodges all
Fixedness of Thought as a dull melancholic Thing; and for their Ease from that
Grievance, instead of sober Reasoning, they employ their Mind in idle and empty
Talk; instead of a Soul, calm, sedate, and well-composed for looking into
Truth, they are hurried away with every ridiculous Humor and Frolic; and
instead of the Effects of a solid Judgment, nothing but Froth and Formality
comes from them. And yet these are the Men, who inspight of their own Genius
and Good Manners, must set up for the only Men of Sense and Judgment. They
think they can see further in the Hurries and Distractions of a vicious Mind,
than another in the most defecate and sober Temper: They think they can enlarge
their Knowledge further in an instant, with the help of a little merry Company
and a Bottle of Wine, than others can in many Years of Thoughtfulness, and most
careful Meditation. And though the few Brains and Notions of Truth they had, are
scattered in an airy and frolicksome Conversation, yet they fancy themselves as
well stocked with solid Arguments, as those who have made it their Business to
collect the Evidences of Truth all their Lives. The Extravagances of such kind
of Men, make them no very proper Managers of Humane Affairs. And why they
should not forfeit their Reputation in the Concerns of a Divine Wisdom, which
above all Things requires great Sobriety of Thought, can have a Reason given
for it only by those who are willing, since it cannot be disputed, that the
Cause of God should be laughed into Contempt.

Be entreated therefore, whoever reads this Book, to lay your Hands upon your
Heart, and if any find themselves conscious of an Inclination or Humor to
villifie Sacred Things, first to consider what you speak ill of, then upon what
Grounds you do it; and by thus advising with your selves, or others whom you
may think more exercised or fit to inform you in these Matters, you will find
that Godliness is a Matter of great weight, and supported by many considerable
Arguments which before you thought not of: And so, by the Blessing of God,
instead of Despising and Scoffing, you may be induced to give GOD that Honor
which is due unto him.

III. If Religion and the Cause of God be so evidently accountable for, to the
severest Reason, This may serve as a general Justification of all Zealous and
Well-meaning Christians.

God Almighty does variously distribute his Talents among the Sons of Men. To
some Men God is pleased to give a still and contemplative Temper; and them he
capacitates for to look into the hidden Things of his Law, and for returning a
satisfactory Account thereof to the rest of the World. To some God is pleased
to give a more warm and stirring Temper of Mind, a more vigorous and nimble
Spirit; and these may be zealous and active for God, though they do not always
give the best Reason and Demonstration for it. But however, by these
Diversities of Operation and Temper in the Creature, in carrying in the Cause
of God, the one supplies the Defectiveness of the other. It Is therefore no
sufficient Occasion of insulting, in any Irreligious Person, if they find the
Zeal of some plain and honest-hearted Christians to go beyond their Knowledge.
Every one is not cut out for a Disputer, especially in such Matters which they
could hardly ever have dreamed there should have been any Dispute about: And
though God gives them inward Convictions of the Truth of those Heavenly Doctrines
they are zealous for, yet they may not be prepared to encounter the Cavils and
Objections which an Artist in Profaneness may raise up. God provides other
Means and Instruments for that purpose; and they must not measure their
Conquest by the Insufficiency of less Contemplative Christians, but by the
Advantage they can gain over those (which will be but small) who have made it
their Business to dive into the bottom of their unreasonable Objections.

It Is customary with some Men, to furnish themselves with a few profane Cavils:
And if they can but puzzle the Parson, or some honest-hearted Christian,
Lucret. l. 1.
Illos exaequat victoria coele, they think the Day is their own, and that
Religion will never be able to lift up its Head more: Nay, sometimes when a
Minister discourses very affectionately concerning the Fear of God and our Duty
to him, concerning the Providence of God, and our Acknowledgment of it in many
eminent Occurrences of Humane Life; concerning the Promises of Heaven, and the
Terrors of Hell; such Men, who take themselves to be Men of no ordinary Parts
and Judgment, are ready to indulge Themselves and their Neighbor with a
scornful Smile. As if a Minister of the Gospel must be always laying the
Grounds of Divinity, without making any further Progress in opening to the
People the whole Counsel of God: As though none of his Auditory were deserving
of his Regards but a Company of Desperadoes, who, like that horrible Monster in
the Poet, Iuven. Sat. 4.
are by virtue of no Exhortations or Arguments to be reduced from Vice: As
though he must be shy or stirring up to Duty, of setting Life and Death,
Blessings and Cursings before his Charge, because a great many, who care
neither for him nor his Discourses, are not pleased with them. Rather than
Religion shall be thus reasoned out of Countenance, let them laugh on still.
It Is better they should despise and wander, than the Life of Piety in humbly
disposed Christians should be checked and perish. Let private Christians go on
in their way, without being perplexed at their Cavils; let godly Preachers
remind their Flock of the Judgments of God, without respecting their Faces, or
fearing their Disdain; and let all know, That as Religion in general, so its
particular Doctrines are capable of very rational Proof, though on this or that
Opportunity they have but little of it.

It would be well, if any thing which is spoken on this Subject, may as
effectually overawe the Rudeness as it does discover the Ignorance of
Irreligious Men; and make them more modest and suspicious of their own
Judgment. It Is better for them to live under a Sense of God and his Judgments
here, than feel the Effects of their wicked Folly and Confidence hereafter; and
they have reason to be thankful for the Kindness of those who will tell them
plainly and affectionately, of the Nature and Purposes of God, of his Promises
and Threatenings; since there are such Grounds for this Religious Zeal, as they,
with all their Knowledge, are not able to oppose.

IV. The Reasonableness of Religion justifies the Provision in all wise and
well-ordered States, for the suppressing of Profaneness and supporting Piety.
The Honor of Government can never be consistent with the Dishonor of God: And
how tolerable soever Differences in Religion may be, the Defiance of all
Religion is not to be endured. The most rigorous Inquisition, or Enforcements
to Uniformity, are preferable to that Indulgence, which permits the most
impudent Infidelity to thrive and spread under its Shelter. The Sword of
Authority is put into the Hands of Magistrates, for the Restraint of
Ungodliness, and was employed by a Prince after God's own Heart, for rooting
out all wicked Doers from the City of the Lord. Severity against Blasphemous
Wretches is no Breach of Moderation, but a piece of Justice to the Government,
of Charity to the Governed, and the Sufferers themselves can complain of no
hard Usage thereby.

1. If very severe Laws were made and executed against the Profaners of
Religion, What Obligation, either of Interest, Conscience, Generosity, or Good
Manners, are any under, to bring themselves in danger of the Penalty?

If they, like the Fool in the Psalmist, say in their Heart, That there is no
God, it is their Interest to conceal their Folly, and to wish none may be of
that Opinion besides themselves. For by this means they have a Tie over all
others, which others have not over them; and whether they are Masters or
Servants, Parents or Children, Husbands or Wives, or in whatsoever worldly
Commerce, Relations, or Business they are concerned, the Belief of a
superintending Deity will awe their Relatives to be faithful and affectionate,
and discharge a good Conscience to them: A Privilege! which it is very much for
their Advantage to preserve. Nor can Conscience engage them to make Proselites,
by openly professing their Infidelity. Both the Laws of God, and the Laws of
Man, the proper Rules of Conscience, dispose them to be silent: And if
Conscience especially, as they say, be no other than the Biass of Education, we
may hope none have so naughty an Education, as to think it their Duty, to
disturb the Religious Impressions of Education or Conscience in other People.
The most plausible Pretext is, that of Generosity, Regard to Truth, Humana ante
oculos foede cum vita faceret. In ^^rris oppressa gravi sub Religione, etc.
Lucret.
and the Welfare of Mankind. It grieves them to see the World so basely
enslaved to Religion, and Man's Life oppressed with Superstitious Fears or
Fancies, drawing them off from the Comforts they might enjoy, or embittering
their Enjoyment. But, alas! Unless we are persuaded of a Supreme Governor and
a Future State, the Life of Man hardly deserves our Notice: We are here to Day,
and gone to Morrow; and it signifies little what different Persuasions Men are
acted by, what different Scenes they have passed through, when Death in a very
little time will bring them to be all alike. If Men are now and then
melancholic, it is no great matter; Some critical Turn of Humors in the Body,
some favorable Frown of Nature, will give them their Quietus, and they will
sooner find a Cure by the loss of Life than Religion. Besides, most of the
Melancholy which Religious Men are infested with, is originally owing to the
Contagion of wicked Company: From thence terrifying Doubts and Occasions of
Disorder are suggested; from thence many unhappy Turns of Thought, which their
holy Souls abhor, but cannot so easily get clear of again: So that instead of
promoting the Ease and Welfare of Mankind, these wicked Renegadoes, in tempting
Men from God, prove only the Instruments of their Torment. But, setting aside
the Infirmities of Constitution, and some unfortunate Accidents, generally
speaking, Religious Men have much the better of it, much the more comfortable
and happy part even here on Earth: For which we may appeal to Experience, and
thereby acquaint these men of Honor and Generosity, that whether the Votaries
of Religion are in the right or no; their condition is very comfortable, and it
would be much more generous and good natured to let them go on in their own
way. And if any thing of good Manners may be expected from these men, one would
think they might make the Ostentations of their particular Improvements, give
way to public Constitution and Custom. If they are allowed to think themselves
wiser then all the World, it is not fit they should make a noise of it, and fly
in the face of the most Reverenced Establishments, merely for a vainglorious
humor. But if neither the Palaces of Princes, nor the Laws of a State, nor the
Solemnities of a City, nor the Consent of all grave and serious Men, nor the
Awe of a People fearing God, the great Supports to the Reputation of Religion,
can move them to any modest regards unto it; Can they wonder if their Impudence
receives a check, and brings some Trouble upon itself, by its presumptuous
troubling of Israel? The rebating of their rudeness they must thank themselves
for, and have no reason to complain, if their own perverseness punish them.

2. The interposal of Authority for the Punishment of these Evil doers, is a
great piece of Charity. The longer they are suffered to go on with Impurity,
the more will they be hardened in their Wickedness, and the further will their
Venom spread. If the execution of good Laws against them be for any time
deferred, they will think that Governors are like themselves: that they
secretly believe as they do, though they do not so openly aver it. Connivance at
their practice will argue consent to their Principle; and gives them more then
a liberty, even the allowance of the State, to be as irreligious as they
please. In the mean while the Souls of plain honest people are perplexed, if
not dangerously ensnared. The very Confidence of Infidels is enough to stagger
their Faith; for it will be presumed, they durst not with so high a hand fight
against God, unless they had well considered their strength, and on what
grounds they engaged. Every honest Christian has not a stock of Reason to
answer their Cavils: and where their Insinuations against God, do not entirely
bring over to the Devils side, yet have we instances of many, in whose sides
their deadly arrows have for a long time stuck, and even brought down their
heads in sorrow to the Grave.

Oh ye Kings and Princes! Let the sighing and sad Estate of many poor Souls
engage your Commiseration. Ye would be esteemed the Fathers of your Country,
the Defenders of the Faith, and the Refuge of the Distressed: Let all the World
then see, You have some regard to the Characters which you assume, and avenge
the Heritage of God of those Adversaries to their Internal and Eternal Peace,
which go up and down in all Companies seeking whom they may surprise, distract
and devour. Countenance not their reserved Impieties with your Favor, nor let
your Justice spare them when they are bold and barefaced: It Is better that
Thousands such Wretches should be cut off, than that their Tongues should be
suffered to go through the World, corrupting others, speaking wicked
Blasphemies, and talking at so abominable a rate against the Most High.

3. As Charity to others, so a just Regard to your selves, and the Stability of
the Government, may require this of you. Many excellent Arguments there are,
showing the Necessity of maintaining Religion for maintaining the State; which
the Adversaries of God are very sensible of, inveighing against Piety as the
Invention of Politicians. This only at present all Kings and Princes ought to
be put in mind of, That if they take no Care of Religion, in a little time,
neither the Religious nor Irreligious will care much for them.

1. The Irreligious are Men for this present World, prepared indifferently for
every new Stamp and Impression: Put them in the way of their Interest, and they
are in their own Element, let the Government be what it will. Every Prospect of
Danger holds them in Suspense; every Flood of Affairs which changes their
Fortunes for the better, changes their Affection. To exclaim against
Ingratitude and Baseness, are Words cast into the Air: From the Follies of
Impiety springs the Wisdom of the World: Their Portion is in this Life, and
they must make the best of it.

Princes are exposed to Dangers from abroad, and had need have some Trusty
Friends and Counselors at home: And a greater Advantage cannot a bordering
Enemy have against any Prince, than when his People are poisoned with
Infidelity. They are liable then to all Bribes and Corruption; and he that can
give the best Pension, shall have the best Party. They become by degrees
froward and high-gran'd; and if they have not their Revenge and Ambition, their
Covetousness or Lusts, gratified to the full; if they are not humored in every
thing, they begin to blow the Trumpet of Innovation, every Man to his Tents,
leaving their Prince to shift for himself, while they think of new Measures.
The Character of Princes is never Sacred to them, but when it comes ready
coined into their Pockets: Nor whatever they may pretend, would they prize the
Liberties or Properties of any People, if it were not to preserve their own. So
that nothing can secure their Fidelity, when once they are fallen from their
Allegiance unto God: If you flatter your self, that some Doctrines are so
ridiculous and absurd, that nothing can dispose them to further their
Establishment, yea, in their Opinion, as Priests of all Religions are alike, so
is likewise the Profession: and if they see things brought to a pinch, the
little Ties of Honor or Friendship will no longer hold them. Or, perchance,
the Fear of Servitude, or the Loss of their Estates, may keep them steady to
their Duty and the Service of their Prince: And, questionless, this, if any
thing, will make them hearty against a Foreign Power, and excite them to run
very great Adventures, rather than be ruined and tormented before their time.
But when the Calentures of a State come near unto a Crisis, they begin to cast
in their Minds, which is the strongest Side, and think it no small Artifice to
save themselves by the Sacrifice of their Country. All Estates and Polities are
alike to the Irreligious: Humor and Interest wind them variously about, and
Governors may portend how they shall be served, by the Respect which is paid
to God and his Service among their People.

2. The Religious deserve especial Consideration in the State, as Persons whose
Affection and Fealty may be depended on: They esteem Government as the
Ordinance, and Governors as the Ministers, of God: Liberty is never more
grateful to them, nor Life on Earth more expressive of the Heavenly, than under
the Protection of Pious Kings. They look upon their Authority with an
obsequious Love and Reverence, and prosecute their Commands with Heartiness and
Integrity. They fear no Diminution of their own Happiness from the increasing
Successes of their Royal Power; but believe the best of their Persons, hope the
best from their Conduct, and endure all Things for their Sake. If the Number of
such Persons at present be very few, the Religious Care of Governors, under
the Divine Blessing, may add to them. But, when the Reins of Coercion are
remitted unto blind Chance, and the Vermin of Corruption swarm abroad, and make
no small Buz in the Sunshine of Security, what a melancholic Scene of Thought
does this open to all well-disposed and serious Minds. Skepticism, in former
Times, has been adjudged to merit the Scrutiny and Severities of the State; and
all those flourishing Empires, the Records of whose Glory swell the Cheeks of
Fame, have ever agrandiz'd themselves under the Banners of Piety: Virtue
inspired their Soldiery with true Courage and Vigor, and Religion gave
Reputation to their Arms. The World affords never an Instance of Triumphant
Atheism: and if, through the Iniquity of the Times, and an extreme Abhorrence
of having Asses for Subjects, Irreligion be permitted to spread in the Camp and
Council, in the City and Country, how great soever the Prince himself may be,
the utmost such Toleration will prefer him to, is, in too large and literal a
Sense, to be a King of Devils. Oh, the Reproach that such a Brood must bring
upon a Church and Nation! and the Grief it must produce in all the Fearers of
God, to hear the Hopes, the Author, the Means of their Salvation, so frequently
blasphemed! If it go on much further, being delivered over, for the Correction
of our Sins, into the Hands of those Men whose Mercies are cruel, is the milder
Judgment of the two. When a Nation is once sunk into the Dregs of Impiety,
whatever Stirs or Commotions may fall out, whatever Changes in Government may
succeed, there is some Hopes of its arising into a better State, no Fear of its
growing worse. Calamity at least may reform their Manners, whom Prosperity had
corrupted; and they may be induced to acknowledge God in his Judgments, who
disdain his Mercy.

It Is highly behooveful therefore, for Governors, in securing Themselves to
secure a Reverence for Religion: Because, Irreligion will break the Bonds of
Love, Honor, and Fidelity, whereby Subjects are tied to their Authority; and a
general Profaneness grieving the Hearts of the Religious, makes them
indifferent unto the State that suffers it.

V. Since our Belief of God is so rationally grounded, from thence we may
learn, not only the Folly, Rashness and Rudeness, but also the Inexcusableness
of those Men, who live without the Sense of God in the World.

St. Paul affirms of the darkest Times of Heathenism, Acts 14.17.
that God did not leave himself without Witness; and that the Eternal Power and
Godhead was manifested to them by the Things that were made; Romans 1.19, 20.
and from thence concludes them to be without Excuse. How much more inexcusable
must such Men be in this our Age of Light, wherein the Advantages of the Gospel
does not only appear by the new Revelations made unto us, but by improving our
Rational Faculties, and enabling us to look more judiciously into the Frame and
Laws of Nature, than they could before. If all the Light, which now shines
among us, will not awaken the Drowsiness, remove the Wilfulness, work on the
Infidelity of some Men; if they will still please themselves with Fancy and
Vanity, with Shadows and Delusions, and prefer their own Darkness before this
Light, their Sin has all the heightning Aggravations it is capable of. And
what can they answer unto God, for such their unreasonable Opposition to his
Laws? for perverting the Excellencies of their own Mind, and abusing his Mercy,
and turning the noblest Accomplishments of Humane Nature against the Author of
them? What can they say, when God sets these Misdemeanors before their Eyes?
when, to their own Shame and Confusion, they come to a Sense of their former
Errors? when their Reason and Consciences (here drowned in Sottishness and
Sensual Joys) shall be awakened, and the Revelation of the Great Day, shall
discover to them and to all the World, the Falsity and incorrigible
Senselesness, the Incoherence and Weakness of those silly Arguments and Excuses
wherein they prided themselves against God? This Time will come we need not
doubt, but safely believe, O Heavenly Father, when the Tongues of thy Holy Ones
shall turn unto thy Praise, and the Mouth of all Wickedness shall be stopped.

Lastly, Since our Faith in God is not to be shaken by the strongest Reason,
this may be a Matter of great Joy and Comfort unto all Faithful Christians,
That God who made them and governs the World, will bear a continual Respect
unto them; will reward all their pious Cares and Fears; will supply all their
Weaknesses; will help them through all Temptations; will be with them in all
their Conflicts and Strivings against Sin. They may boast themselves to be the
only Wisemen; to build upon the wisest Expectations and Principles; to use the
best means for their Everlasting Comfort, and for securing the Favor of their
God, who is the best Friend. They may live in a joyful Persuasion of the
Goodness of their God, and of his Intentions to make them happy; and may think
within themselves, How when the Wicked shall not be able to stand in Judgment,
the Lord will own them for his People, and glorify their Faith, and receive
them to an Eternal Communion with Himself and his Son Jesus Christ, in whom
they trusted.

Be exhorted therefore and encouraged in the Apostle's Words, Heb. 10.35. etc.
Cast not away your confidence in God, which has great recompense of Reward:
For yet, a little while the Lord will come, and will not tarry: And if like
Just Men ye live by Faith, and continue Faithful unto Death, the Lord will
raise you up in Likeness to the Glory of his Son, and give you a Crown of Life.
If you believe in God, and make toward Heaven, the Place of his Abode, with
heavenly Hearts and Affections, you will find that you are not deceived in your
Faith; the God in whom you believe, Heb. 11.6.
being a Rewarder of all those who diligently seek him.

To whom be Glory and Obedience for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for William Rogers.
SErmons and Discourses, in 3 Volumes. Octav. The Rule of Faith; Or, An Answer
to the Treatise of Mr. I. Sergeant. Octav. Eleven Sermons, in Quart. Sermons
concerning the Divinity of our Blessed Savior, Octav. A Sermon Preached before
the Queen at White Hall, April 9th. 1693, concerning the Sacrifice and
Satisfaction of Christ, on Heb. 9.26. Quart. A Sermon concerning the Unity of
the Divine Nature and Trinity, on 1 Timothy 2.5. A Discourse against
Transubstantiation. Price 3 d. A Persuasive to Frequent Communion. Stich'd
Price 3 d. Bound Price 6 d. Six Sermons: 1. Stedfastness in Religion. 2. Family
Religion. 3, 4, 5, Education of Children. 6. The Advantages of an Early Piety,
Octav.
These all by his Grace John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

A Practical Discourse concerning Death. Oct. A Practical Discourse concerning
a Future Judgment. Oct. A Discourse concerning the Divine Providence. Quart.
These Three by Dr. Sherlock Dean of S. Paul's. Mr. Tyrril's brief Disquisition
of the Law of Nature according to the Principles and Methods laid down in the
Reverend Bishop Cumberland's Latin Treatise on that Subject. Octav.

