Seasonable Advice TO ALL Protestant People OF ENGLAND.

Heartily recommended by a Lover of his COUNTRY.

LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor. 1681.

Seasonable Advice TO ALL Protestant People OF ENGLAND. Heartily recommended by
a Lover of his COUNTRY.
I Think there be few men so unobserving as not to see, that many are much
inclined to stand upon their guards, and by Arms (if it appear unlikely to be
otherwise done) to secure themselves, and Religion, in such sort, as may seem
most for their own interest, and the advantages of Truth. Therefore it shall be
the business of these Papers, to enquire into the Causes and Reasons of such a
disposition, together with all Motives and Encouragements thereunto.

1. Then, Some conjecture, this is the most probable way we can go to work our
own interest in point of Safety, Trading and Religion.

To which I answer,

1. By way of concession, That some indeed plead a foreign War may sometimes be
needful, and therefore beneficial to a Nation, if successfully managed: because
it takes away many idle and Vagabond persons; many Cheats, Thieves and ill
Husband, who, like Caterpillars, only live on the fat of the earth, and as
drones, or Lurdains, feed on other men's labors. And also as it keeps up a
people in the courage, and discipline of War. For hereby a Nation is not only
eased of a burden both chargeable, and troublesome; but is also made the more
able to defend her self against any foreign Invader. And by the same means
other Countries may be made the seat of that War, which else in little time
might have been brought home to their own doors. For by this course, the many
and great Evils, that Armies generally cause in debauching of persons, in
illegitimate offsprings, in wasting of goods, and cattle, are all avoided: the
things that would have been consumed by persons thus employed, are saved; and
the increase of such evil inhabitants mightily stopped, which things soon
compensate the charges of an ordinary War.

But in a Civil War the case is wonderfully altered.

For then all debauches, and illegitimate increase, is amongst our selves: then
they be our own Shops and Houses, our own Barns, and Stables, that are
plundered: then every Trophy is an argument of our own calamity; and all spoils
evidence our own losses: and every slaughter is a mischief to the whole body,
from which so many members are cut off and perished. Which things necessarily
make a Nation more poor and weak, and consequently a more easy prey to some
foreign Assailant.

But certainly we, above all others, have cause to dread such a contest: by
reason we are made up of so many parties, who are all acted by different
Religions and interests; and amongst whom, on every side animosities are
mightily heightened by former occurrences. That if once we fall to pieces, it is
not well to be expected that any humane art, or any thing less than a Divine
Power, is able to compose, and set us together. Besides which, we have dangers
from without, viz. formidable forces, always ready, and watching opportunity
of raising their own trophies on our ruins. From all which things we may
justly fear, that as it has been the fate of the strongest Empires and
Kingdoms, to fall by their own hands, when others could not destroy them; that
the same destiny may attend our differences.

But in case this last evil, viz. of a foreign force, and total ruin, do not
happen; Yet look to the end of such a Contest, and perhaps we may find some
reason to suspect that the concomitant miseries of a War, that is, slaughters,
plunders, ruin of families, etc. may prove but the beginnings of sorrow. For,
in all probability such resisters will be either the Conquerors, or the
conquered. For since men's Spirits are now so heated, that a composure of
differences is so difficult, even while peace continues; when the Sword is once
drawn, it may possibly appear utterly impossible: as when the late King's
Concessions were voted satisfactory by some, no Concessions would satisfy
others. And let Victory incline either way, resisters must expect far greater
evils than what they now lie under. For,

1. If they be overcome, reason will not suffer us to hope escaping the wrath
of the Powers resisted. And so much the rather, because such will not be a
single offense, but a repetition of like things still fresh in memory, and
which Authority so easily passed over. And though circumstances are so much
different from what they were before, that it must needs go very hard on their
sides, who may thus seek to secure themselves from what they fear: yet because
men are much incapable of receiving impressions from Arguments of this nature,
by reason of their numbers (the very thing that emboldned the Jews to enter
into a War with the Roman Empire, whereby they ensured and hastened the total
ruin of their Place and Nation, that is, their Religion and Properties at
once) I shall therefore (since suppositions grant nothing) suppose them more
likely, than I judge they are, to be the Conquerors. And,

2. If so, they must look to be enslaved either by the Forces which made them
Victorious; and then, as the Romans once were, be governed by a standing Army,
which made Emperors, and ruled in all points according to their own pleasures;
which, if ever it so happen, will, like a Band of Robbers, make spoil and
plunder of all they like; and be sure will have good Commons, when they be
their own carvers:

Or else fall under the will and power of some cunning head, that shall feed
the Soldiery with the spoil of the people, that by them he may be empowered to
act his will upon the Nation. By which means the wealth and treasure of the
Land, shall be divided between tyrannical Usurpers, and the Forces that uphold
them.

If you think this unlikely, reflect a little upon late disasters, and you will
find, it was the misery of this Nation, that Religion and Property, all went to
wrack for the satiating an hungry and ungovernable Army. Of which, a late
Nonconformist in his Iter Boreale brings in the Nation thus sighing her
complaints, That I should sink with Justice ^ay accord,
Who let my Pilot be thrown over board.
Yet 'twas not I, ye Righteous Heavens know,
The Soldiers in me needs would have it so.
And a little after he speaks of them, as setting up a single Person, after the
Death of O. Cr. of whom thus, A Legion then he raised of armed Sprights,
Elves, Goblins, Fairies, Quakers, and New Lights:
And with these --
-- he Church and State possessed.
Who, though they filled all Countries, Towns, and Rooms,
(Yet, like the Fiend, that did frequent the Tombs)
Churches, and Church-ground, they haunted most,
No Chapel was at ease from some such Ghost.
The Priests, ordained to exorcise those Elves,
Were voted Devils, and cast out themselves.
Bible, or Alchoran, all is one to them,
Religion serves but for a stratagem.
The Holy Charms these Adders did not heed,
Churches themselves, did Sanctuary need.


Soon after they are dividing the University Lands among themselves, and in
fine, -- When we have done these, we'll not be quiet,
Lordships, and Landlords Rents shall be our diet.


For which reasons men sorely repented, that they were ever thought to petition
they might be put into a posture of defense: for by this means they became
utterly unable to defend their own Persons, Estates, or Religion.

And do the people really think they may become victorious, and that the Army,
by which they are made so, will not be proud and insulting? or that the
Commanders will not turn the Victory to their own advantage? Can they think men
are become so honest now, to what they were of late, when all the talk of
Reformation ended in the dividing Crown and Church lands, and great men's
estates amongst themselves? Can they expect better dealing than then, when the
liberty of the subject, so much talked of, miserably sunk into a perfect
bondage? Of which the same Nonconformist thus, Now broke in Egypt's plagues
all in a day,
And one yet worse than theirs; we must not pray
To be delivered! There scab'd folk were free
To scratch where it did itch: so might not we.
Our Magistracy was, like Moses Rod,
Turned to a Serpent by the angry God.
Poor Citizens, when Trading would not do,
Made Brick without Straw, and were beaten too.
Struck with the Botch of Taxes, and Excise,
Servants, our very dust, were turned to Lice.
It was but turning Soldiers, and they need
Not work at all, but on their Masters feed.
Strange Caterpillars eat our pleasant things,
And Frogs croak'd in the Chambers of our Kings.
Lightning, Hail, Fire and Thunder Egypt had,
And England Guns, Shot and Powder, that is as bad.


And I am sure that War began with as fair and plausible pleas, as any can
possible be in time to come: viz. only to take away the wicked from before the
King, that his Throne might be established; to bring the King to his
Parliament: and with solemn engagements to make him a great and glorious
Prince: To reform Religion, and to ascertain the liberty of the Subject. Our
concerns were in the hands of the Parliament, and the Army under the Command of
persons we thought we might trust. But we see whither a few running heads, and
the power of the Sword did carry things! Alas! even beside and beyond the
intentions of the ^^rst actors, who were themselves enslaved, as well as them,
they first exposed. And certainly we must expect that another War, alike
prosperous in the success of the Sword, if any such shall ever be, will prove
as unsuccessful in regard of the ends it first aimed at; so long as the like
Policies and Lusts remain in the World. Nothing is more easy than for men to
sit still, and frame fine Idea's and Chimera's of Government to themselves: but
nothing more difficult, than to constitute a Government according to them, when
the power is in the hands of other men.

Therefore all that the people are like to gain upon this supposal of becoming
victorious in such a way, is only this, viz. the putting their Persons,
Estates, Liberties and Religion, into the hands of fellow subjects, who, when
they come to Government, are ever more proud, greedy and tyrannical, than those
who are born in high places, and on whom the Government devolves by legal and
expected descents.

But in case this Storm pass over, we yet see another Cloud arising, that will
most certainly break down in Thunder, and Lightnings, and an horrible Tempest.
For though now all Parties embody, and jointly endeavor to shake off
Superstition, and every evil work; yet if they once shall be able to do this,
they immediately fall to pieces among themselves, every one endeavoring to
establish his own way. For it is not the ultimate end of any one Party merely
to ease himself of the burdens he now is under; this is but the means, and way
to his last intention, which is, every one to establish his own methods.
Therefore after all the contest and bustles, which we must certainly expect
among our selves, upon the supposition of success, which perhaps may prove
destructive to the whole, if any one get into the Chair, all the rest will
combine to pluck him out: and if they gain this point, and any one of the rest
crowds in, all the other, together with him pulled out, will again combine to
beat down that. By which means nothing but confusions, and endless
disturbances, are like to follow, till all become a ruin to one another.

These things de facto have been so: and that they will be so again, if ever
matters come to that state, is evident beyond all dispute, from the very
Opinions and Sentiments of all Parties now combining against the Church. For
the Presbyterian is for a Government by a Classis or Assembly of Divines,
instead of Bishops, and to have all persons and things kept strict and tight to
their methods. But the Independent is really for no Government at all, but
would have every one a Bishop, and Supreme in his own Parish: and is against
Episcopacy and Presbytery, not as such, but as they lay a restraint upon his
own actings. The Anabaptist differs from both. The Quaker would have no Law,
nor Rule, but the Spirit: And the Fifth-Monarchy-man will endure no Ruler, but
King Jesus. Therefore would every Party speak his own sentiments, they must
own, they will by no means sit contented in any way but their own. And that
their embodying, and joint cries for Liberty, are only to shake the present
yoke from their neck, that they may be in a capacity of struggling every one for
his own way: And that they would not thus combine, were they sure any one of
them to change the present establishment of Religion for any way but his own.
Therefore should the King be pleased to pass a Comprehensive Bill, or grant a
boundless Liberty to all Protestants, it would please none any farther, than as
it lays open the Church, takes off a present restraint from the people, and
gives every Party hopes at last to gain its own establishment: whence the
forementioned Confusions must necessarily follow, if men can ever get rid of
the present establishment.

But some may plead, All this mischief may be prevented by this, viz. That one
Party may become too strong for all the rest, and keep them from being able to
make such disturbances. To which I answer,

1. That if so, no man can divine which Party that may be. For the Presbyterian
was baited, and utterly beat out by other Parties. And I fear will be less able
to stand than before, by reason Independents are increased abundantly, and have
gained more from the Presbyterian than men imagine; our Mr. Crofton in his
Preface to his Saints Care of Church Communion, argues, that a great body of
Presbyterians are of late sunk into Independency. Or if otherwise, we have
little ground to expect he should preserve himself against the joint endeavors
of all others. And if we should ever fall under Independency, or a Liberty of
Conscience, can we think the change worth any little part of our pains we are,
or may be at? Can we think of being contented in that condition, which of late
years was the anguish of our souls? Can we make that our choice, which not long
since was our burden? Some men indeed are apt to reach after any thing but what
they have, and hope to gather Grapes of Thorns, and Figs of Thistles, till they
try, and prick their fingers.

2. Suppose the Presbyterian should be uppermost, this is no more than he had
before, but could not keep it. For truly they are for Government; they talked,
and preached, and wrote all they could against Liberty; they decryed the
forsaking their Church, as an unwarrantable Schism: and would severely have
bound up all to their own methods: for which cause the Independent spoke him
worse than the Pope. For Mr. Sterry in a Sermon at White Hall, Nov. 5. 1651.
tells us, that our deliverance from Popery is not so great a mercy, as our
deliverance from the black plots, and bloody powers of the Northern
Presbytery. For the same cause the Anabaptist disputed against, and the Quaker
disturbed him in the Pulpit, and every Party declared more against them, than
against the Church of England: and never rested, till they had worried and run
them down. And if it should be in the power of the Presbyterian to give Laws to
others; however as a means thereto, they may yield to Indulgence,
Comprehension, Liberty, or any thing; they will then lay a sufficient restraint
upon the tongues of all Sectaries, and stop the mouths of error and folly; else
they lose the end and fruit of all their care, pains, dangers, prayers, tears,
and whatsoever they have done for the service of truth and the Gospel. They
cannot suffer that woman Jezabel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach,
and to seduce -- which was the great sin of the Church of Thyatira, and for
which Christ said, he had a few things against her, Revel. 2.20. And if ever
they come to establish a Rule, and oblige all others to it, every Sectary will
cry persecution, and never cease, till they have undermined the Church and the
Truth, and thrown all again into utter confusions. Should any man flatter
himself into expectation of better fruit, if it ever come to trial, the issue
will confute, and fool him to his face. What a crop then must we expect from
the seed of Sedition and disturbance? What an harvest, when so many hands are
sowing Tares among the Wheat? Surely whatever men do hope, this will be the end
of all, that they that sow the wind, shall reap the whirlwind.

2. Another cause or reason of men's being disposed to a resistance of the
Powers, is this, that they think it is their bounden duty, as it seems to make
for the glory of God, and propagation of the Gospel of Christ.

This indeed has been the mistake and fall of many honest and well meaning
men, and my self formerly have much stumbled at it. But I took the course which
the ingenious Cartesius advises in order to the finding out any truth, which is
this, to strip our selves of all former Notions and Sentiments, or rather of
all Opinions and Persuasions formerly imbibed, and so, as far as is possible,
to bring our selves to doubt of every thing; and then without prejudice or
prepossession, to apply our selves to the consideration of the point we would
understand. In this way I came to be fully satisfied, that this point of
resisting lawful Governors, let them be what they will, is a grand and most
dangerous mistake, and has no foundation, or any the least color of
encouragement from the Gospel, or any Epistles, or part of the New Testament.
And as every man is bound upon his Salvation, to come to the light, and use the
best means he can to come to the knowledge of the truth: so I doubt not, but if
any man will lay aside his prejudices, and set himself to the impartial
consideration of these following heads, he will subscribe to this as an
undoubted truth, That a resistance of lawful Governors, let the reasons or
inducements be what they will, is no way our duty, nor by any means lawful. For,

1. There is no Precept of resistance in all the New Testament; I never heard
the man, that was so hardy, as to plead there is: and if any think there is
such a Text, let him find and produce it, that we may consider it. For Mat.
10.34. I came not to send peace, but a sword, speaks only an accidental
consequence; an evil proceeding, not from the nature of Religion, which
breathes nothing but on earth peace, and good will toward men: but only from
the wickedness of the world. And therefore shows us not what ought to be, but
what will be, viz. differences upon the account of Religion: as in V. 15. -- a
man at variance against his Father, and the daughter against her Mother. And
Luke 22.36. -- he that has no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one.
Only gave the Disciples an hint of the dangers and evils, that were now ready
to overtake them: and did not in the least authorize them to make the weapons
of their warfare carnal. This appears undeniably from our Saviors reproof of
Peter, who could best expound his own meaning, when he cut off Malchus's ear:
of which under the next head, which

2. Shows that we have no example of resistance in all the New Testament.

For when Peter, Matthew. 26.51. took the Sword, and cut off the ear of the High
Priests servant, Jesus heals the wound, and says V. 52. Put up thy sword --
for all they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. Where the Margin
points us to Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed.
Thereby asserting, that to kill any man, that comes from a lawful authority, to
apprehend even the Person of Christ, is murder. Therefore to kill any sent from
Authority, though (as they think) in defense of the Gospel, is murder too.
Unless they make Christ's Gospel more worthy of defense, than his person, which
certainly they will not do, that talk so much of Imputative righteousness, of
the personal excellencies of Christ; and the pretiousness of Christ. But if any
do so, yet still there is no example of resisting the Powers for defense of the
Gospel.

Therefore this instance is an instance only of Peter's weakness and error; and
gave an happy occasion to let the World understand, that no Plea from the
defense of Christ, the propagation of the Gospel, or the glory of God, can
justify a resistance, or excuse them from murder, who kill any that are in, or
come from Authority, in any manner, or to any end whatever. For if Peter's case
was not justifiable, I am sure none is.

Now some men reject Infant Baptism for no other reason but this, viz. that
there is expressed in the Gospel no precept or example of any one Infant
baptized. And certainly a precept or example is at least as necessary in this
case, as in the other. Therefore since there is none, by parity of reason a
resistance upon the same grounds ought to be rejected too. For the matter comes
to this point, viz. either Infants must be received to Baptism, though the
Gospel affords no precept nor example that way: or else such resistance must be
rejected, because the Gospel gives no precept nor example, this way. Else men
are humorsome, and do not square their opinions and judgments by Scripture;
but bend that sacred Rule to the obliquities of their own humors: or at least
use, or not use it, according as it may serve, or not serve their own
persuasions, or resolves.

3. The Gospel abounds in precepts of obedience to Governors simply as
Governors, and not as such, and therefore to all Governors, whether good or
bad. And whatever distinctions are made use of to restrain obedience only to
such, or to some Governors, are

1. Groundless and unwarrantable: for God says, Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers: and that there be no powers, but what are ordained of God.
What warrant then have any to gainsay the Spirit, and plead that some are not
ordained of God, and that some you ought not to be subject to? God says,
Whosoever resists shall receive to himself damnation: what reason then have any
to affirm that some resisters shall not receive damnation? We ought not to
bring restrictions, and limitations, unless truth, or the nature of the thing
so require: and if it does so in this case, where have you that truth? where is
it written? produce your warrant, that we may see and be instructed by it.

2. Such distinctions, or limitations are as serviceable to the Papist, as the
Protestant. For, because there is no Text, that says we may resist, much less
any that set forth for what causes or reasons men may do it, and that
consequently this Doctrine is gathered only from illogical inferences, sound of
words, and misapplication of Phrases, therefore there is no Text, that ever
was, or may be pleaded, for such resistance by one party, and for one reason,
but it may as well be so pleaded by any other party, and for any other reason.
For instance, why may not a Curse ye Meroz -- because they help not the Lord
against the mighty, be pleaded by a Papist, as well as any other: Since each
may, as indeed each do, speak themselves the people of God, and their cause the
cause of the Lord, and those they oppose the mighty, and then full cry Curse
all, that do not help them against 'em?

The very reason indeed of such distinctions and limitations, must be fetched
from humor, interest, or ambition, which make every party willing to be a Rebel
it self, but denies that freedom to any other.

4. All the behavior of Christ, and his Apostles, toward Governors, are but
fair lessons of obedience for us to learn and practice. Christ taught us to
give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, he paid Tribute and Customs
himself, he was obedient before the Consistory of the Jews, before an Heathen
Herod, and Pilate, and that even unto death. The Apostles taught obedience not
only by precept, but example too: Paul appealed to Caesar, whereby he owned
that power, though Heathen, and persecuting too: they were persecuted almost in
all places, scourged, imprisoned, and killed, and yet never meddled with Civil
Governors, or Government: never spoke evil of Authority, nor did any thing,
that tended to the working in men low and cheap thoughts of them. But
contrariwise, taught us to honor the King: and to be subject not only for
wrath, or fear, but even for Conscience sake.

Therefore all the arguments for resistance drawn from the Glory of God, and
propagation of the Gospel, are false, and unchristian. For,

1. Practices contrary to the commands of God, and example of Christ, and his
Apostles, cannot be for the glory of God. Nor can sins against the Gospel tend
to the propagation of the Gospel. But they that teach such things, are like
those in Romans 2.23. who make their boast of the Law, but through breaking the
Law, dishonor God.

2. Such things are against the very nature of Christian Religion, which is
peaceable, and quiet: therefore the Prophet Esa. 7.6, 7, 8, 9. tells us that
under the Gospel the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down
with the Kid: the Cow and the Bear shall feed -- and the Lion eat straw like an
Ox: they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain. By which is meant,
all the bestial qualities of men, whereby they devour, and destroy one another,
should be changed into meek and gentle tempers. Therefore those, that are not
thus transformed from evil to good, from rough and cruel, to kind and gentle,
are no true subjects of Christ Kingdom here, they are nominal, but no real
Christians. Therefore Lactantius observed that while all the precepts of
Philosophy had but little influence on the minds of men, wherever the Gospel
was really received by any, it made such visible alterations as of lustful it
made them chaste and continent; of covetous, kind, and liberal, etc. that they
were hardly known to be the same persons. This is to become indeed a new
Creature: and where men are not so, but remain quarrelsome, ungovernable, and
upon distaste, and cross Providence fly to the Pike and Musket, it is plain
that the Gospel of peace has not had its work and effect upon them.

And we find our Savior taught us rather to suffer wrong, than to right our
selves by much noise and disturbance: Matt. 5.39, 40, 41. Resist not evil: but
whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. If
any man sue thee at the Law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak
also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. And John
13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one
another. These were the ancient marks of Christianity, and not Drums, and
weapons of War: Christians then gave one another a kiss of charity, and not
reproofs on the point of the Sword. It was said by the Gentiles in the time of
Tertullian, See how the Christians love one another! Not, as in these days,
Behold how they slaughter and destroy! Therefore though our Savior's rules,
and precepts, are so admirably suited to the prophecies of the Gospel State,
yet the Jews seeing so much of division, enmity, evil speaking, censoriousness,
unruliness, oppositions, wars, and murders, among them that are called
Christians, are mightily prejudiced, and hardened in their unbelief, looking for
a Messiah, who shall bring into the World such times of peace and love, that
Swords shall be beaten into Plowshares, and Spears into pruning hooks. Nor will
considerate Christians believe, that the spirit of meekness, patience, faith,
etc. delights in Alarms of War Therefore though the Devil carries on many great
actions as an Angel of light, hiding sin under the gilt of religious pretenses,
as revenge under colors of Justice, cruelty under zeal, rebellion for
propagation of the Gospel, and ruining of Families and Countries for the Glory
of God: yet nothing is a greater dishonor to God, reproach to Christians, or
hindrance to the Gospel; nothing makes more Atheists, infidels, and loose
professors, than for the strictest pretenders, and mighty zealots, who would be
thought the only Christians, to act contrary to the very nature and design of
the Gospel, as this is one, To kill, instead of loving one another. To resist,
instead of submitting to the powers. To contemn and act in despite of, instead
of submitting to, every Ordinance of man. To make Songs, Libels, and invent all
manner of evil on, and against, instead of not speaking evil of our Rulers. It
was anciently observed that the glory of God was more advanced, the Gospel more
propagated, and the number of believers more increased by sufferings, than
Arms: whence that ancient, and common saying, The blood of the Martyrs is the
seed of the Church. It was three hundred years after Christ before the
Christians used any Arms, unless in the service of the Emperor, who was,
throughout those three Centuries, a Gentile, unless charity will allow a plea
for Philip. But all that while the Sword of the Lord was not in the hand of
Gideon, but in the mouths of his Prophets: and yet then the Church enlarged
herself, and gained upon the Gentile World in such wonderful measures, that
some persecutions were raised purposely to stop its farther progress, lest of a
sudden the whole World should become Christian. But when the Spaniards cut a
way for the Gospel into America with the sword, and seeking to conquer Soul and
body at once, taught them by the mouth both of their Priest, and the Cannon,
though they boast of the numbers baptized, yet I fear, scarce one became
Christian any farther than in name; since they presently flew off, and would
endure neither the persons that acted, nor the Religion that suffered, such
slaughters amongst them. The soft breathings, and whispers of the Spirit, are
soon drowned by the thundrings of Drums.

Later ages have experienced the same truth, for the patient sufferings of the
Protestants under Queen Mary, increased the number of Protestants; and God soon
removed the rod, and rewarded the Faith and patience of the Church with more
outward prosperity, and greater glory of the Gospel, than ever was in this
Nation before, or since. But when in the time of K. Charles the I. men made the
Pike and Musket the weapons of their warfare, instead of the Sword of the
Spirit, and the Shield of Faith; when they pleaded they had more wit than to
burn in Smithfield, calling the Martyrs Fools, as some have done Abraham,
because, when called of God, he left his own Country, not knowing whither he
went; the Protestant Religion immediately suffered her decays, and that
glorious body, which drew the eyes of all Christendom upon it, has ever since
been in the wane, till now it is almost lost in the Fogs and mist of opinion
and disputes. And the Protestant Church of England is become like another
Babel, wherein there be almost as many Tongues as men, who, instead of brick
and Lime to raise the work, bring axes and hammers to beat it down.

Which together with men's falling from one error to another, and dancing all
the rounds of opinion, and sinking at last into levelling principles; to own no
governor but King Jesus; that dominion is founded in grace, and that therefore
the Sts. shall rule the earth, and take to themselves the spoils of the wicked:
which are tenants destructive of all Government, both in Church and State: we
may judge a curse upon the new methods, that men have taken, whereby to secure
Religion amongst them.

The Pope was the first that ever preached this doctrine of non-allegiance of
Subjects, it was therefore from Rome that some Protestants took these measures:
and consequently this is more truly Popery, than a Cross in Baptism, and such
other things that have not like the other any intrinsic evil in them, and were
in the Church long before the Bishop of Rome claimed the title of Universal. We
may therefore say of such, while they damn the Papists for plots, and evil
intendments on Governors and Government, as St. Paul Romans 2.3. Think thou
this, O man, that judge those that do such things, and do the same, that
thou shall escape the judgment of God?

Search into all Religions in the World, and perhaps you shall find no other
but the Alchoran, that seeks its propagation by the Sword. For which very thing
as well as others, it has been condemned by all honest and judicious men. And
doubtless without being censorious, we may say it is self, and not the things
of God, that is sought in such ways.

Now if interest cannot persuade, nor the Gospel teach, I am sure our Laws
cannot allow such a resistance, which is the

3. Thing, some may think to justify such practices by. For our Laws make all
resistance a capital crime; without any limits, or exception; if it be not so,
let anyone produce but any one single Act, or any clause therein, that allows
such proceedings. And whereas some plead we ought to be governed in such and
such ways, that Kings are not absolute by the constitution of our Government,
these pleas do not reach the point. For in case Governors do not rule
according to Law, but beside or against them, Governors are accountable to God
only, but not to their Subjects, who are taught only to obey, or suffer. And I
presume that no man is so daring, and wicked in his argumentation, as to
undertake to make out, that in the first constitution Subjects have any power
of resistance upon any account whatsoever. And I doubt not but that the wisdom
and loyalty of Parliaments will evidence the same sentiments themselves

I would fain know, whether such reachings, and disputes of restless and
unbridled Nature, do not drive at the same thing, that our Savior charged as a
very heinous sin upon the Pharisees, Mark 7.13. that they made the commands of
God of none effect by their traditions. The word is (...), which properly
signifies to weaken or spoil of its authority, or obligatory power: which is
done by pleading any humane constitution, tradition, or custom, against the
Laws and Commands of God: by which means the matter is brought to this point,
Whom shall we obey, God or man? The thing is clear in the instance our Savior
gives. The Pharisees by their Corban, which was an Invention, and Doctrine of
subtle and covetous Hypocrites, absolved children from honoring their
indigent Parents with necessary supplies of food and sustenance: so such men by
such pleadings of our Laws, would acquit subjects from the great obligation of
honoring their Father (by which, even Presbyterian Writers, Mr. Dod in
particular, understand not only natural Parents, but Kings) with the natural
and indispensable duties of tribute, custom, fear and honor, Romans 13.7. We may
yet further observe, that the Jews had really such a Tradition, which our
Savior there overthrows: but we have no such Law, therefore these Pleas run
upon a false presumption, and have no foundation, and therefore are false in
themselves, and need not the authority of a Divine command to the contrary, to
put them to shame and silence.

I wish such men would consider that by such corrupt discourses, they utterly
destroy that argument, which themselves are ready enough to use, in order to
the persuading Princes to beat out Popery, and to establish the Protestant
Religion in their Dominions, drawn from their own safety among Protestants, and
dangers among Popish subjects; since resistance is favored, justified and
practiced by both. Where was the safety of King Charles the First among
Protestants? What is the difference between an Ax and Poison, or a Pistol? What
is the difference between the Popes absolving some Subjects from their
Allegiance, and your teaching, that no Allegiance or duty is owing to some
Princes? What difference between the Popes disposing of Crowns, and your
setting up an Usurper? Here is no room for any, unless a School distinction,
which is sometimes so nice, that the difference is not to be found. But you
will say, that Princes are secure enough among Protestants, when they rule
well: but I pray who must be Judge of that? Even your own selves: and then the
meaning is, they are safe, while they rule according to your own minds, but not
otherwise: and so much safety there is for them amongst the worst Papists in
the World. Therefore resisters utterly destroy this argument, and lose the
great advantage they might otherwise have made of it.

It is then neither our interest, nor duty, nor the privilege of our Laws, to
make resistance against Authority.

But there are doubtless diverse motives and considerations yet remaining, from
which the fondness of some men, and the subtilty of others, raise a fancied
necessity of such proceedings, else they think they are all undone, Horse and
Foot; Soul and body: for else say they, Popery will come in; for nothing is now
likely to keep it out, but the Sword.

To which I answer.

1. When the Heathen Emperors commanded the Christians to deliver up their
Bibles, and by confiscation of Goods, imprisonments, deaths, and all possible
artifices, and cruelties, endeavored to root the name of Christians out of the
World; might not they have said, nothing but standing on our guards can save
us? Yet in the time of Tertullian, they told the Emperor, that they had
Christians in his Armies, in every Town and City, that they wanted not Arms,
men nor courage, to defend themselves from persecuting hands, yet they dare do
no such thing, because their Lord and Master Christ Jesus had left them no
other weapons but prayers and tears. And what was the issue? God carried them
through all those fiery Trials, and increased them, as he did the Israelites of
old, under the very means used for their extirpation. It is God that rules over
all, and his providence extends to the meanest creatures, not a sparrow falls
to the ground without his will: be sure then that his Church shall not be left
to the will of his enemies, any further than serves the wise ends of his
providence. The Jews when few and weak, were preserved in the midst of a world
of enemies: the Christian Church upheld in the bosom of an Heathen Empire; who
patiently submitted to all severities, and waited milder providence, till he
pleased to bring them forth to the light, and show them his righteousness, Mic.
7.9. These all trusted in God, and were delivered. Why then should we be
faithless, as if the Lords arm were shortened, that he cannot help us? This in
Rev. 13.10. is called the Faith and Patience of the Saints, that they suffered,
and would not resist persecuting Governors. And indeed such resistance most
plainly evidences the want of Faith, and Patience both: for men first doubt God
will not deal well by them, and then resolve, right or wrong, to carve for
themselves. And for this reason God is more glorified, and Religion more
advanced in unjust sufferings, than in unjust resistance, because in such
sufferings men show their Faith, their Hope, their Patience, Fortitude, and
other graces, which evidence the excellency of the Christian Religion, by which
they wearied and overcame their fiercest persecutors: and moreover the wisdom,
goodness, and power of God is more clearly seen in their preservation and
deliverance, when men sit still and see the Salvation of God, than when they
seek by humane policy and strength to save themselves: for this speaks both
their weakness, and derives a reproach upon the Religion they profess, and also
disposes themselves and others, to attribute what safety they have, not so much
to God as to themselves.

2. The doing evil that good may come on it, never ends well. Where I pray, is
all the fruit and gain of the last Civil War? What is the Protestant Religion
the better, or Protestants the safer thereby? Nay what have not both suffered
since then, and (as we may undoubtedly affirm) for that very cause? For are not
the confusions of our Religion, and the danger of us all (both occasioned by
our present differences, and these differences occasioned by that resistance,
and the lawless liberty it took to it self) greater now than ever? God commonly
pays men in their own Coin. Thus upon the Babylonish captivity God told the
remains of the people, Jer. 42. that in case they would continue in their own
Land, he would build, and not pull them down, v. 10. But if they would go into
Egypt for fear of the Sword and Famine, which they afterward did do, then v.
16. The Sword which you feared, shall overtake you there in the Land of Egypt,
and the Famine whereof ye were afraid, shall follow close after you in Egypt,
and there shall ye dye. Divine Justice overtakes men in their own ways, and
snares them in the works of their own hands: making those very courses whereby
they would keep off judgments, to prove their ruin. I am sure the Jews found
it so, for John 11.48. they plead the necessity of crucifying our Savior in
order to the preservation of themselves, and their Religion. If we let him thus
alone, all men will believe on him, and the Romans will come and take away our
place and Nation: and for that very sin God brought the Romans upon them, who
indeed took away their Place and Nation too. And if these things are written
for our example upon whom the ends of the World are come, we cannot in any
reason think we may run into those great sins of Rebellion and murder, which
are a breach of so many Gospel precepts, and so contrary to the example of
Christ, and all his Apostles, out of a design to secure our Religion, but we
must expect a curse upon our proceedings. Did men but seriously consider, that
the last war which was pretended purposely to keep out Popery, proved so mighty
and sudden an inlet to it, that it had almost overtaken us, and the reasons of
men cannot think of any thing, which in those circumstances was like to have
kept it off, but his Majesty's restoration; they must needs see the finger of
God in that judgment: and own it exactly parallel with the two instances just
before us, unless in this only, that it did not proceed to an utter ruin. And
if men shall use the same methods, not only condemning things for Popery which
are not so, as the Church of England, and Churchmen, who have done an hundred
fold more to confute, and bar out Popery than all the parties in England
besides can pretend to; but shall actually oppose the Powers too, which were
the two instances of the madness and error of the late times, I shall expect
the sin shall breed and bring forth that judgment which they fear, and which
shall destroy the Actors of it. Truth needs not our lie, but abhors it: nor
will Religion be supported by the hand of sin, any more than the wrath of man
can work the righteousness of God.

2. Some are further confirmed in the persuasion that nothing but resistance
can save us, from hence, that they see but little execution of Laws upon
Papists.

I answer,

That it cannot be denied but that some Protestants have abundantly outdone the
Papists, even in those very things, for which the Papists are condemned. For
did the Papists design the murder of the King, and alteration of the Laws and
Religion established? and I pray, did not some Protestants actually do all this
in the memory of thousands amongst us, and that in the most open and daring
methods the world has ever heard? Yet I can find but ten executed for all
those Murders and Usurpations, and (which is the complement of all) for the
murder of the late King, beyond the example of all ages, and the banishment of
this. Look back to May 1679. when the Scots most barbarously butchered Dr.
Sharp, their Archbishop; and to the Rebellion, (which it seems uses to begin
with the Bishops) that broke out in the same month, and their standing a Battle
with the Kings Forces; of all whom, and for all which wickedness, which is
death by the Law, as well as any thing charged upon the Papists, I could never
understand that above two suffered. Whereas about twenty of the Papists have
suffered within two years, and three Months last past. Therefore we may with
more truth and reason affirm the procedure of the Laws more slow against
Protestant, than against Popish offenders. What reason then have some
Protestants to complain of the slow paces of Laws in judgment and execution,
when themselves are the greatest sharers in the mercy? And if from hence a
party should increase, and their sentiments advance the faster, the advantage
is more their own, than those men's whom they complain of. Nor have any among us
any cause from thence to conclude the inclination of the Powers, either this
way or that, but must impute it to clemency, and mercy, which has ever been
accounted an admirable qualification of persons in Authority; and ought to
oblige all honest, and ingenuous men, to a more free and hearty love, and
obedience.

And that the Lords in the Tower are not yet tried, is very unjustly made a
reflection on the King. For there is no man, that knows and considers things,
but must, if truth and honesty may speak, own that the cause is not in him. For
no Prince in the World would have left them more freely to justice, than the
King has done, especially to the Parliament that sat in October 1680. For that
part of the Speech, which relates to them, seems somewhat pressing in this
particular: when the Lord Stafford was tried, and Sentenced to death, he
quickly suffered; and that no more of them were tried at or about the same
time, was not in any thing that his Majesty hindered. Therefore, though I do not
blame that Parliament, who best knew the reasons of their own Actings, yet I
must in justice, and for the cause of truth, as well as the better satisfaction
of the people, argue against every evil surmise and imputation, that in this
affair is cast upon the King. Men are very ready to shoot their bolts, and make
every thing they fancy a miscarriage, to be the Kings evil, but when men are
told, and their reasons pressed upon these considerations, I cannot hear any
one so unjust to his own faculties, as to maintain the charge against his
Majesty. But indeed we that are subjects, should study to be quiet, and mind
our own business, and not meddle with persons and things above us.

Though I must needs confess that some reasons we have no more of settlement
yet, is rather from the cries and vogue of the people, than from the Policies of
the King: For when men will not hear of the Trial of the Lords in the Tower,
unless they first see the Bishops routed: When they desire not to see Popery
excluded, unless they may first see the Protestant Religion laid open by a
Liberty, a Toleration of all Sects, persons and things: When men would not the
King should have four pennyworth of Taxes, till he shall give away eight
pennyworth of Prerogatives: When they would not have Tangier, and the Trade of
the Nation secured, till the King leave himself and friends indefensible: When
they would not have the Papists beat down, unless they may be made capable of
setting up themselves: When every man must be a Church-Papist, or a
Field-Meeter, which is in plain English a bold Rebel; It is no wonder there be
rubs in the way, and a great distance between our selves, and that security and
settlement, we long since expected. And that the blame is still laid upon the
King, is but the old way to blacken his Majesty, whereby to make men, that have
more faith than reason, more honesty than wit or knowledge, to become his
enemies.

It was indeed the sad fate of the late King, that he was misrepresented by
some, and mis-understood by others of his Subjects, as a favourer of Popery:
but now all men, that will see and acknowledge the truth, place him in the rank
of true Protestants, and the best of Kings. And I doubt not, but the Ages to
come will acquit his present Majesty from any such imputation, since the
designs upon his Person from the Popish Party have been so many, and so
desperate: since he has so constantly declared for the Protestant Religion, as
it is established by Law: and since he has done so much for the security and
preservation of the same; and since he has condescended to offer any safe and
reasonable expedient for the security of the fame under a Popish Successor, in
case any such shall be. But it is the unhappiness of most men, that they see
persons the least, when nearest them; and understand them best at farther
removes. Which must be imputed partly to this, that few know the reasons of
other men's actings, especially while masked and clouded in a multiplicity of
affairs and things arising from different parties, principles and designs;
therefore, in such circumstances, if men judge always according to outward
appearance, they must needs sometimes judge amiss. For the wheels of Government
sometimes necessarily run in the deep, and by many oblique motions, windings,
and circumferences, come at last to the point they first aimed at. Therefore
when men always conclude, that their Governors design what their faces are at
any time set toward, they must unavoidably fall into error of judgment, and
trouble themselves with needless suspicions and fears. And sometimes the
mistake is founded on want of good information, due consideration, sound
judgment, and an over-easiness to be inclined by the unsteady measures of
fame, which represents persons and things, not according to their own natures,
but according to the rashness, ignorance, ill will, suspicions, and other
unreasonable humors of men. These indeed are the bitter fountains, from whence
our present, as well as late fears, jealousies and unsettlements do spring.

3. Many are affrighted into a dreadful expectation of some severe visitation
by Prodigies: and therefore think it very requisite to be upon their watch or
guard, that they may be ready to receive the shock, or rather to stave the evil
off.

Indeed there was one prodigious appearance in the face of Heaven in the latter
end of December, or beginning of January last. Things of which nature have
formerly been held to be Exhalations kindled in the air; and were believed to
be even operative causes of evil: as sometimes of Famines, the Earth being
beggered by such vast quantities of such matter drawn from it: sometimes of
Pestilence, the Air being poisoned by noxious matter arising from Fens, Bogs,
Ditches, Sinks, and other unwholesome places: and sometimes of War, men's minds
being inflamed by I know not what influence from thence, and so disposed to
quarrels and fighting. But these fancies have long since been hissed off from
the Stage. For now most men hold, they are no causes, but only signs and tokens
of some approaching evils. But these conceits have no foundation in Scripture:
for though our Savior foretold some notable appearances, that should precede
the destruction of Jerusalem, yet this does not reach our case: For,

1. That was a calamity, that admitted no parallel; it was a Type of the
destruction of the world, and was to carry with it some sensible evidences of
Divine displeasure, not only against that people, but their worship, which was
at first established by mighty Signs and Wonders.

2. As we are not to expect any like Visitation, so we have no warrant to
expect any like prodigies.

3. St. John in the Revelations threatening a ruin to so many Churches, never
mentioned any such Sign that should precede that ruin, nor do we elsewhere
read of any such thing observed to have preceded the same; nor does any Text in
the New Testament mention any thing of this nature, unless in those two cases,
viz. of Jerusalem, and the end of the world.

4. There were, doubtless, such appearances in the several Ages of the Jewish
Church, and are thought to be mentioned under the terms of pillars of fire and
smoke, yet we no where read, that they ever looked upon them as Signs of the
times, as some now take it. The Romans indeed, and other Nations had very
sacred regards to these things long before Christ, therefore they seem as much
of Gentile Original, as the May-poll, or any thing else, that is arraigned and
condemned by some amongst us.

And if Scripture cannot justify, I am sure Reason has no plea for any such
matter. For the only inducement to such a persuasion, is the common
observation, that they are usually forerunners of some very sore visitation or
revolution. To which we answer,

1. Sometimes they are owned to be tokens of good, as the birth of Princes, etc.

2. Many notable changes, and heavy judgments have been in the world, when men
have not been alarmed by any Prodigy.

3. Come when they will, something remarkable must be expected to follow,
because there is little in the world but instances of the frailty of nature,
and uncertainty of humane affairs.

4. They do not remain fixed, like the Sword over Jerusalem; nor do they hover
about one Country only, as the Armies in the Air about Judaea, but pass over
great part of the world. Therefore from these heads it undeniably follows, that
men cannot say whether the Prodigy portends

1. Good, or

2. Evil, or

3. Neither: that is, whether any thing, or nothing.

But suppose it bodes some evil, yet no man can tell, whether it be

1. To us, or

2. To the Dutch, German, French, Italian, or any other, to whom it has been
as visible, as here.

But suppose it portends some evil to us, yet none can guess what evil, whether

1. Any thing from a Popish hand, or

2. Whether it may not be an evil, that some men are disposed to run into, in
order to keeping out some other evil they may fear.

There is no certain conjecture then from things of this nature; but they have
been often abused to vanity, or wicked purposes: for while they take off men's
minds from the more steady rules of Scripture, and reason, which shewmen what
they must expect from the works that they have done; they have usually been
made an encouragement to men of all sides, parties, and causes: And have
oftentimes affrighted some, and encouraged others to those disturbances, and
other evils, they had not else been likely to have run into. Therefore it has
been the policy of wise men of old, observing that no good, and many times
great evils befell a Society from attendance to, and conjectures from such
appearances, to use all prudent means they could to take off men from such
Vanities. There is as much foundation in reason for Palm^stry, Augury, and such
other Ethnic customs, as for presages from monstrous births, and generations
on the Earth, or in the Heavens. And as the Egyptians, and at last the Romans,
with other Heathen people, were the great observers of such things; so it was
the Nations that lived without God in the world, who gave the first being to
these conceits; for which reason we may plead, as our Savior in another case,
after these things do the Gentiles seek: which would be argument enough against
it, were it an institution, or rite of the Church of England. But admit they
are some general Alarms to mankind, yet that we of this Nation should draw from
them certain conclusions of evil upon us, when they pass over so great a part
of the World, is an humor like that of the late times, which would have the
prophecies of Daniel and the Revelations to be accomplished in England only.

But other Prodigies so much talked of, and still believed by many, there is no
truth in them. For the Saddles said to rise out of the Earth, are now as
confidently said to come to nothing. And all the groanings of men, and shrieks
and cries of women and children, as if under some bitter torments, said by a
weekly Intelligence about 17. Months since, to have been heard at Edgehil in
Warwickshire, are notoriously false. What is become of the Army, and the
audible reports of Guns, said to have been seen and heard at Hatfield, some
time this winter? Where are the Armies reported to have been seen in the air in
Leicestershire? Where is the blazing Star, said to have been visible several
nights to people about Warwickshire, and elsewhere? I might give in a long
relation of Prodigies, that have had no being, but only the fears, fancies, and
mouths of the people. I find a whole heap of such stuff raked up together, in a
book printed An. Dom. 1662, or 61. wherein we are told of a Drum beating at
certain times in a well in Oundle in Northamptonshire, and of the waters turned
to blood at the time the said Drum was heard, which continued by fits such a
space, that people came many miles, and were frequent witnesses to those
things; but when my self some time after inquired of the truth of this
relation, I found the inhabitants of the place wholly strangers to any such
matters. And diverse other very monstrous relations, from which nothing can be
learned, but the vanity, falsehood, and religious frenzies of some great
zealots. By which wild extravagancies they would persuade men to believe that
even Heaven it self gives approbation to their cause, that the Stars fight in
their courses for them, that even Nature goes out of her common paths to make
way for them: that all the Elements, and whole Juries of the creatures, give in
their verdicts for them: whence it must needs be concluded that they are Chara
Dei Soboles -- the people of God, and the offspring of Heaven. Though I know no
greater evidences of an overgrown hypocrisy, and pride; yet it is strange how
wonderfully those devices take with the people: for whilst every party are of
so different interests and Religions, yet they all receive these things with
such religious regards, that they will undertake to spell out of them the fall
of Princes, the revolution of Government, and the advance every one of his own
party, though as inconsistent together, as the present establishment, and
themselves.

Now whilst it is made a very heavy charge upon the Church of Rome, that they
uphold their Religion by officious lies, and pious frauds: all parties amongst
us do the very same thing. For by these stratagems men gather, keep and
increase their parties; for poor well-meaning people seldom question the truth
of such pretended Prodigies, but receive them as signs from Heaven sent to
condemn what they dislike, and approve what themselves espouse, and as
assurances that in little time God will appear for them. Whereas would men
speak truth, all those spreading parties would soon shrivel to a little
substance.

And that we may not be overtaken with the error of the times, and the strong
delusions the Scripture mentions, we should be careful not to make Prodigies
the touchstone, whereby to try the truth of a Religion, the lawfulness of a
Government, or the goodness of a cause. Nor should we receive the reports of
any Prodigies, till we see sufficient confirmation, and good reason to do so.
By which means we shall exclude many of those fears, that otherwise may
terrify and discompose us. For as peoples attendance to such things is the
greatest evidence of unsettled minds, and reaching after some new thing; so it
is the ready course to hurry men into rash Counsels, and those precipitant
actions, they may afterward have all the reason in the world to repent. But we
should bottom our selves upon the best foundation, which is a good life, and a
clear conscience from all forbidden things and works of darkness, and then we
need not be much concerned what colors may be hung out from the battlements of
Heaven, but may compose ourselves into a faith and confidence that whatever
comes, it shall be well with us, and therefore not fear though the Earth be
removed, and the mountains cast into the sea.

4. Many men are mightily moved to such sentiments, viz. of the necessity of a
resistance, by evil reports raised on Governors. For while we should not
revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of the people, Exodus 22.28. it is become
the humor of the times to blast their names, and bespatter all their Actions
Were they never so vile, this can be no part of our Religion, but is the work
of him, who is an accuser of the brethren: and therefore is called the Devil,
from (...) to calumniate, or slander. But we may observe that all the Actions
of Governors are backwards and forwards turned to evil. For while any part of
the Army raised for Flanders were in Arms, they are said to be kept up to
secure our ruin: when they are all disbanded, the design must needs be to
leave us naked, and exposed to slaughters. This time was two year, there was no
Fleet out, the reason of which was said to be, that we might lie open to
Foreign Invasions: when the King would have set out a Fleet in April 1679. the
design must then be to impoverish the Nation. These two instances may mind the
Reader of many others of like nature, from which it is most palpably plain,
that a Spirit of jealousy in some men, and evil intendments in others, make
dangers where they cannot find them; and where there is no Bear nor Lion in the
way, will affright fools with their own shadows. But where men know no more
than what is told them; and easily receive whatever is offered, it is no wonder
that the ignis fatuus of pretended Prodigies, and the black representations of
Governors and Government, bring them to their wits end; and make them think
there is no safety left, when the greatest dangers may be of their own making.
It is from hence, that (as I have often observed) the same times have two
faces, the one blear-eyed and always weeping the other more fair and comely.
For go amongst the common people of the Town, hear their stories, and you will
think the world is at an end: for you shall see nothing but Signs in the Sun,
and in the Moon, and on earth Goblins and Furies, distress of Nations, men's
hearts failing them for fear, and for looking for the things that are coming on
the world; but discourse with men that are more wise and observing, who fetch
their knowledge from the things themselves, not from the reports and sentiments
of others, and we find a place still left for hope, and a comfortable enjoyment
of our selves: and what evil circumstances we are in, we there see not only the
evil it self, but the true Origin, or cause, and therefore can the better
compose and quiet our selves, than under the monstrous shapes and false
accounts that are given to men in the dark. Therefore men must of necessity
either better inform themselves, or not be over credulous in believing others;
else they shall never clear themselves from this evil, but shall always lie
harrassed under false fears, and be in danger of taking wrong methods for their
own safety.

Before we dismiss this Head, it will not be impertinent to observe, that
though men matter not what they say of Authority among men of their own
persuasion, yet some are so wary, that when they would impoyson others, and are
not willing their own tongues should paint the King in those ugly colors they
would represent him in, they have a cunning device of doing it by the tongues
of others, viz. by little stories, as one between the King and the Cobbler,
being this, That the heel of the King's Shoe coming off, he steps incognito to
a Cobbler to set it on, which done, the Cobbler is paid so well, that he sends
for Ale to make his Master drink: the King drinks the Duke of York's health,
which the Cobbler refuses for this reason, that he is a Papist: then his Majesty
drinks the King's health, which the Cobbler refuses too, for, says he, the King
is little better. Which in their canting, looks like a Meiosis, whereby more is
understood, than expressed. Now because themselves dare not say too openly that
the King is a Papist, therefore the Cobbler is made to do it, and that not as
from himself, but as speaking the common sentiments of the people: which is the
most wicked way of slandering in the world, because the voice of the people
makes a much deeper impression, than a single opinion. The story thus ended, it
is pretty to observe, that this Cobbler is made to follow the King where ever he
goes. At first this was done at Westminster, then Windsor, sometimes in the way
between both, and anon about Newmarket; and now at last at Woodstock. Nor are
the places more, than the times in which it has been said to be done: For I
heard it first about two years since, yet now it is told afresh, as if done
this March, when the Court was at Oxford. The story, it seems, is like the
Cuckoo, that comes once in the year, sings a while till she is hoarse, and the
story stale, then lies scab'd a while in a corner, and of a sudden comes
flush't abroad, sings brisk, and gains the peoples ear, as if it were some new
tale she tells.

These are the great disturbers of our peace, and the Thieves that rob us of
our our best Jewels, in a quiet and a settled mind. And whilst they talk of want
of Trade, themselves by such courses hinder it: it being the common way of men,
first to make an evil, and then charge it upon Authority; Kings and Judges
being made the Scape-goats, to bear the peoples sins.

As there would not be many Thieves, were there no Receivers: so the mouth of
wickedness would not be so open, were men's ears stopped against their evil
whispers. Therefore the best expedient both to compose our minds, and to check
this spreading leprosy, is to follow Solomon's advice, Prove. 24.21. My son,
fear thou the Lord, and the King: and meddle not with them that are given to
change.

In fine, men of hot heads, or desperate fortunes, or such as have fed on Crown
and Church Lands (the sin truly lying in those estates, not in the persons) may
reach this way. But the people under a resistance, are like to prove the
miserable hands, that shall only minister to the ambition and interest of
others. For what gains can you expect, but hard marches, hungry bellies, field
quarters, frequent alarms, bloody battles, wounds, and death?

Haec spolia nostra! If you come off with life, loss of limbs, scars, pains,
aches and poverty, are like to be all your trophies! For when the Parliament
Army broke up, the main Body being by Arms put out of a way to live, some
returned Shabs to their own Countries, others sought for death in foreign
Service, and some turning Robbers, took up their last Quarters at the Gallows.
Therefore though you may hear fine stories of Liberty and Reformation, which
are always the Pleas of Rebellion, 'twas so in the matter of Corah, 'twas so
lately with us, and so with Mahomet, who in the end only purchased a Kingdom by
his Soldiers blood; yet it is good for men to consult their own safety, and
not run out of Gods blessing into the warm Sun.

FINIS.

