A Second Letter TO A DISSENTER, Upon Occasion of His Majesty's Late Gracious
DECLARATION OF Indulgence.

LONDON: Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey. 1687.

A Second Letter to a Dissenter, etc.
WE are subject to nothing more than forgetfulness of Blessings, unthankfulness
for Mercies, or to abuse or misuse them. When Israel was delivered from
Egyptian Slavery, they sang Gods Praise, but soon forgot his great Goodness to
them; in their distress they cried unto God, but when he delivered them from
their Oppressors and Oppressions, they kicked against him; when beyond their
Faith or Hope they were freed from their Captive state in Babylon, most of them
contemned that Mercy, and chose to continue under Servitude, and only a few
embraced that Liberty. I hope none of you will be found to imitate them in that
ungrateful Obstinacy.

That the Obligations God by his late merciful Providence of the like kind has
laid upon you, and the sense thereof, and of the Blessing you have received by
his Majesty's most Gracious Declaration, may remain upon you, and that you may
consider what your Sufferings were, and what you are delivered from, this
seasonable Advice is given to you, by one of your own Number, that now is, and
for about forty years has been, a Member of a Congregational Church, and
purposes so to continue unto his death.

Your Deliverance was from the Jaws of Destruction; you are brought from
Slavery, to a state of Liberty; the Shackles of Conscience, and Bolts of your
Prisons, are knocked off, and you left free to Worship God in Truth, without
Fear; your Houses are no more rifled, nor your Goods plundered, seized, or
sold, nor your Persons, Wives, Children, Relations, and Friends, crowded into
nasty Goals, on the Perjuries and false Informations of the Dregs of the
People, such who by Debaucheries violated all Bonds of Conscience, and whose
Trade it was to spoil you; Men as compassionate as Ravenous Wolves, to whose
insatiate Avarice there were no bounds.

You were not suffered to plead your own Cause, (the Press being shut against
you) a favor Heathens always allowed; you were forced to bear all Injuries,
though innocent: If you complained, it increased your Punishment; if silent,
you were sullen; condemned, fined, and imprisoned, without being heard, or
knowing your Accusers, and that too many times for supposed Crimes you were not
guilty of; ruined, banished, and destroyed, because you were unwilling to be
damned for violating your Consciences; your worshipping of God as you judged
according to his own appointment, was accounted a greater Iniquity than
Adultery, Perjury, Atheism, or Blasphemy. These were easily expiated; but no
Atonement for Non- Conformity, or for not coming to Church; though in many
Parishes in and about London, the Churches would not hold one third part of the
Parishioners.

These Proceedings were accounted Legal, and your not conforming reckoned
Obstinacy, and such as deserved no pity; nothing would evince the contrary, or
that Conscience was concerned therein; loss of all the Comforts of this Life
would not do it, and further Evidence you could not give.

This was your State and Condition, as to your Sufferings and Persecutions,
from which your Deliverance was extraordinary and unexpected; whereby you are
at once engaged under many Obligations, which if you fail to answer, will lie
as a Brand of Infamy upon you.

1. You are therefore to bless and adore God, for this his great goodness and
deliverance, the effect only of his merciful bounty, to whom the praise is due,
and to be expressed in a godly, peaceable, meek, circumspect, humble, and
fruitful conversation, That will bring Glory, not only to his Name and Truth,
but also to your Profession, and establish in the Consciences of your
Oppressors a Conviction, That without any cause they unjustly persecuted you;
be not therefore wanting herein, least you provoke the Lord thereby again to
take this Blessing from you.

2. Thankfully to acknowledge the Kings Benignity and Compassion; his Grace was
free, and that too after many great provocations; nor were there wanting those
that so Misrepresented His Majesty, (which you too readily credited) as if he
had been another Nero, or Caligula, that nothing but Blood and Cruelty was in
his Nature and designed by him; and at the same time you were Represented as
his most Implacable and Irreconcilable Enemies, dressed up in Bears Skins to be
baited; and yet under these Circumstances, without Petition or Entreaty, of his
own Innate Goodness and Clemency, he both pardoned, and freed you from
Merciless Oppressors, and from those Cruel Laws, the Engines made use of to
debauch your Consciences, deprieve you of your Communion with God, and to make
your Lives bitter; a more seasonable mercy could not be given, and if you are
wanting in Thankfulness, Love, and Subjection to His Majesty, you will justly
be branded as the most ungrateful and perfidious.

3. It Is Incumbent on you also as men and Christians, to use your utmost
Endeavors by all Lawful Ways and Means to Extirpate all those Laws and Tests,
that deprieve you of this Freedom, or lay any Restraint on Conscience in
matters of Religion, you accounted it your duty (as Daniel did) to break these
Laws, when their keenest edge was turned against you, judging it better to obey
God then Men; and shall there now be the least hesitation in your minds, as to
the vacating of them? Can you desire again to be in bondage, even whilst your
Wounds are bleeding fresh, and your Backs soar with the Lashes you received
from them? Will not all men brand your folly, that when you have an opportunity
to be free, and nothing but your own remiss Inadvertancy can continue or renew
your bondage, you should be wanting to your selves herein? Who will then pity
you, if your Bonds are again repeated; and can you expect otherwise, so long as
these Laws and Tests are in force, for they have not lost their Sting, nor your
Persecutors their Malice, Prejudice, and Revenge; are they not the Children of
their Fathers, that formerly drove Thousands into the American Wilderness for
their Consciences? are your Sufferings the first persecution by these Laws?
what then means the many Petitions and Apologies against them, made by
Dissenters in each Kings Reign since they were first Enacted? Were there no
Ministers Silenced, nor persons Executed, Banished, or Imprisoned before your
days? and if so, by what Laws? and who were the Authors or Actors therein? And
will you suppose they will do so no more? and that too when those very men
whose pleasure was in your Ruin, do still rage like a Bear bereaved of her
Whelps, and curse you with bitter Execrations, because restrained from their
Cruelty, and deprieved of their Felicity, which with their debauchery, issued
in your destruction, whose wrath is so boiled into Envy, that they cannot
forbear their Threats, but set their Tongues on mischief, even to the most
undecent expressions of His Majesty himself, for his Fatherly Compassions to
you.

4. Consider that when His Majesty's Declaration of Indulgence could no longer
be prevented, but was published, how many Stratagems and Contrivances were
used, and endeavors to deprieve you of the blessing and mercy thereof; those
that first Addressed His Majesty with Thanks for his Grace and Clemency therein,
were (to deter others from the like) stigmatized as the unworthiest of Men,
Betrayers of the Liberties of the Nation; as if to accept Liberty on the Kings
Declaration, was to destroy all Law and Property at once, when yet nothing was
done therein but what all Ages have Recognized, as His Majesty's most undoubted
Right (which also in a little time will beyond contradiction be made most
apparent) as to his Power in Dispensing with all these Laws and Tests.

When these Endeavors failed, and many followed that good Example of
Addressing His Majesty with Thanks for His Declaration, and openly met in their
Congregations to Bless God for their Liberty, and Worshipped Him according to
their Consciences; Praying most heartily for all Blessings for his Majesty:
Then it was more than whispered, That there were Snakes in the Grass; their
Indulgence would be like the Morning-Dew; it was but a Scaffold to be taken
down so soon as the Building of Popery was Errected. The Provoked Church of
England would turn their Rods into Scorpions to all that accepted this Liberty,
of whom Lists were taken: that it was not their Disposition to Persecute, but
they were necessitated thereunto, to comply with the Government, and so could
not help it; that they would do so no more; that it was not safe to take away
the Penal Laws and Tests, for thereby the Papists would be let into Parliament,
and would make what Laws they pleased to ruin the Church of England, the
Bull-work of the Protestant Religion; that those Restraints and Penalties being
removed, a great part of the Nation would turn Roman Catholics, and could
serve in all Employments with Impunity; and Idoliters would be Tolerated, etc.

For propagating these Jealousies, specious and invective Reasons were drawn up
and dispersed; with a report, that Priests and Jesuits Preached in your
Meetings (without instancing where or when, or the Names of such Preachers);
supposing these endeavors might again be successful as they had been in
preventing the Dissenters Petitioning his Majesty for their Liberty; and in
King Charles the Il's time, to the Rejecting his Declaration of Indulgence;
which gave him such provocation, as that it became an occasion of his
withdrawing his Tenderness and Clemency to Dissenters, in that they were not
true and steady to their Interest, and not be trusted, but consented to be as a
Cats paw to gratify the humor and designs of those that sought their ruin.

5. All these suggestions, insinuations, and aspersion are manifestly
groundless and absurd; for if these Laws and Tests be taken away, What then can
abridge your Liberties? Men may (as you must expect they will) be angry but
they cannot hurt you: The Snake in the Grass, viz. A Spirit of Persecution, may
Hiss, but not Bite. The Building will endure and stand as firm as a Rock, and
the Protestant Religion not shaken; all (but such as delight in Mischief and
Oppression) will rejoice: See the Blessing and Benefit of Liberty of
Conscience! the Peace and Concord, the Increase of Trade, and Prosperity to the
whole Nation. That the Foundation of the Government it self will as soon be
taken, as your Liberty infringed; so that you need not fear the rage of any, or
their threats of Scorpions.

What danger can there be of Papists, or any other in Parliament, when all
Interests will be engaged against such as shall attempt to Invade this Liberty?
Besides, who shall Elect such great numbers of Papists, and where will they be
Chosen? If it be supposed that they may sit by undue Returns; that may also be
prevented by the very Act of Parliament that Repeals those Tests and Penal
Statutes, and such security provided for therein, as that it shall not be in
the power of any to infringe the Liberties of the Nation, or of any sort of
People therein; and that too by more justifiable and safer methods than those
Tests and Penal Statutes that have been the Burden and Oppression of the
Nation; shutting out of Parliament and all places of Trust, not only the
Papists, but also all others, which are not a few, that cannot conform to the
Ceremonies of the Church of England; and is it your Interest to be shut out of
all Trusts, and rendered useless (however otherwise quallified) or that all
Honors, Places, and Profits, should be distributed only amongst one sort of
men, many of whom have been your Oppressors, and are not a little provoked at
your Liberty, and such as please themselves with the hopes of Revenge?

The Allegation, that their Persecuting was to comply with the Government, and
that they could not help it, is manifestly absurd to all that knew his late
Majesty's Temper, who, did he brow-beat for his Clemency, was he passive, 'twas
to please the men of the Church of England; did he at any time give Directions
for it, 'twas at the pressing instance of their many-repeated irretating
Addresses, and false Representations made of the Dissenters. And his present
Majesty on his first access to his Government, proposed the Indulgence granted
by his Gracious Declaration, in which he was opposed by the men of that
Persuasion and Practice: However, they were not necessitated thereunto, but
acted therein freely, either out of Principle, or against Conscience; and in
neither Case are they again to be trusted: for the same men will re-act the
same thing on the like occasion, if those Laws and Tests continue in force.

6. That Liberty of Conscience should bring in Popery, is a Paradox not to be
understood by any thinking man. If Popery be the effect of preaching the
Gospel, let Popery come in: and if the Learning and Piety of the Church of
England, with their Dignities, Honors, Livings, and Fat of the Land, will not
preserve it, and maintain those Bulworks, without Tests and Penal Statutes, her
Canons of Cruelty and Destruction domineering over other men's Consciences, and
inslaving the Nation to their Pride and Avarice, let that Church fall, and no
more pretend to be such an Impregnable Fortress.

7. That the Papists should be so increased by taking away the Tests and
Penalties of the Law in matters of Religion, is not very probable, since hope
of Preferment, and the Princes Favor, does not now so prevail with many,
though men of that Persuasion serve in their Employments with Impunity; but if
it should have such effect, yet the Church of England are no Losers, since
thereby they are only freed of such as would never be serviceable to them nor
their Interest, and at best but deceitful Friends, a noxious humor in the
Body, fit to be purged out.

8. By tolerating Idolaters, I suppose is intended the Roman Catholics, who
now dwell amongst us, have by Law equal Right with others to Protection and
their Birthrights, bound by common Interest, as Englishmen, to desire, wish,
and endeavor the Welfare of the Nation: and after all this, must their Throats
be cut, or they banished, because of their different Sentiments in matters of
Religion? Will not such usage justify the Persecution of Protestants in other
Countries, since there is no more difference betwixt a Papist and a Protestant,
than there is betwixt a Protestant and a Papist? We cannot here practice and
justify it our selves, and yet condemn the same thing as wicked and cruel in
others; nor can any suppose any Popish Opinion worse than the Jews Execrations
and Blasphemies of our Savior, and yet there is no scruple of tolerating them:
They are at worst but Tares, and by Christ's directions such are to grow with
the Wheat, until the Harvest; besides, it is the Angels, not men, that must weed
them out.

9. Be true therefore to your own Interest; spare neither Root nor Branch of
those Tests nor Penal Statutes, they are and always have been Snares, in which
only conscientious men, such as scrupled Impositions and humane Inventions in
the Worship of God, have been catched; when Atheists, and men of debauched
Consciences, have not been bound by them. The Uniformity in Religion enforced
by them, has ruined many thousands. Let them do no more such Mischief, since
the Church of Christ needs no such Auxiliaries for its preservation; and Truth
is stronger than Error, without such Coertion: Therefore let not designing
Surmises and Insinuations of Dangers, where there are none, amuse your heads,
nor weaken your hands. Remember, that had Nehemiah been discouraged by the like
Threats and Surmises of Sambullat and Tobiah, he had never freed they Jews from
their Oppression, nor provided for their Safety, by finishing his building of
the Walks and City of Jerusalem.

There remains one Suggestion more, which is commonly pressed as unanswerable,
viz. That considering the King's Principles, it is folly to suppose he granted
his Indulgence to Dissenters out of kindness, 'twas only to make Tools of them;
nor can they trust his Word, since it is a Maxim amongst the Roman Catholics,
That Faith's not to be kept with Heretics; and such they account all
Protestants and Dissenters.

This will require a more distinct Answer than was given to any other
Suggestion; and therefore I shall be more particular therein.

Admitting this to be the Case, yet his Majesty's Indulgence is such a
Blessing, as calls for Thankfulness to God and to the King; for thereby you
have your present Liberty and Freedom from all the Slavery and Oppression
beforementioned: a Reprieve to a condemned man, present Ease from accute Pains
of Stone of Gout, are Mercies for which men are thankful to God, and the
Instrument by which they obtain such Favors and Blessings (and surely your
Liberty is not of less value.) Will a condemned man reject his Reprieve,
because it is not yet a full Pardon, or any one a present Relief, on supposition
that the Stone or Gout may 12 months after return upon him? This is the worst
that can be imagined of your Case, as to your present Liberty.

But suppose his Majesty granted this Indulgence out of Design, and not out of
Love to you, yet your Condition thereby is not worse than it was; you are sure,
by woeful experience, that your Persecutors hated you, and causelessly sought
your Ruin, the other can do no more; or is it less grievous to be ruined by
cruel merciless Protestant Persecutors, than it is by Papists? Nor is this
Suggestion made out of Kindness or Friendship, but of Hatred, Mischief, and
Design, viz. That since they can no longer turn the Edge of those Penal Laws
against you to your Ruin, they create Fears and Jealousies, to the end that
thereby you may become so Useless and Ungrateful, as to turn the King's Favor
into Displeasure; and if this can be done, they have gained their Point
effectually, with an opportunity, according to their Threats, to turn their
Rods into Scorpions.

Do not too easily credit this Suggestion; yet make a good and profitable use
of it, make the best construction, and take it as real, and carry it to his
Majesty: accordingly be not wanting in your Thankfulness, Love and dutiful
Subjection and Obedience to him, that so his Majesty may have a full
satisfaction that his Favors are not bestowed on an Ungrateful and Obstinate
People. And let this Suggestion become an Incitation to more Circumspection:
Hereby you will disappoint the Designs of your Enemies, and so prevail on his
Majesty, that if it could be supposed that he was not yet real to you, he would
become so; for he is not impenitrable, nor is he incapable of understanding his
own Interest: and if he finds you men useful and serviceable to a common
Interest, and fit to be trusted, you need not fear being made Tools of.

But since the Suggestion is made, if there is any Truth therein, it becomes
absolutely necessary, according to the Advice already given, to take your first
opportunity to root out those Penal Statutes and Tests; that so they may be no
more the Instruments of Destruction, either in the hand of the King, or any
other that desires your Ruin; until then, you are ruined by Law; and your
Persecutors justified therein: but when these Laws and Tests are abrogated,
they will be as cautious therein, as they are in the breach of any other Law,
as to Theft or Murder. So that your Security and Liberty is to be established
in, and by the vacating these Laws and Tests.

For that part of the Suggestion, That there is no Trust to be put in the King's
Word, since Faith is not to be kept with Heriticks: You have much more than His
Majesty's bare Word for your Liberty; Has he not by his Declaration removed
your Fears, and to his own satisfaction, thereby errect his Throne in your
Hearts? What else means his Gracious Acceptance of the many Addresses of Thanks
presented to Him, for his Gracious Declaration; and his Condescending,
Obliging, and Gracious Answers thereunto; his Dismissing out of his Service
(how useful soever) such as would not by any means be Reconciled thereunto; and
Trusting and Employing those that are for Establishing by Law, this Liberty;
and Encouraging all to concur with him therein; he desires and designs you
should not only have his Word, but a Magna Charta for security of Liberty of
Conscience, as well as you have for your Properties?

If his Majesty did not intend as real, and as high a security for your
Liberty, as he can give; he has acted most impolitickly: What need was there
then of publishing, in his Declaration, the Grounds and Reasons on which he
Granted his Indulgence? Which are so weighty, and such as will abide the
severest Test. Has he not thereby exposed Himself, his Honor, and Glory, to
the highest sensure and obliquie, both at home and in all Nations, if he
Violates his Word? has he not laid the greatest Obligations on Himself, to
assure the whole World that he will be true and steady thereunto? what need
else was there of publishing those Reasons, since a bare Indulgence without
them, might have served a Turn? or what reason is there for his frequent solemn
Promises to make it good? why else is it a pleasing and delightful subject to
him to be commonly talking and discoursing of, and of the benefits and
blessings that will accrue thereby to the Nation? These things, if not real,
are inconsistent with a Prudent Politic Prince, and below the common
sentiments of an ordinary man.

Before we can imagine his Majesty is not fully resolved to make good his
Declaration, we must suppose him to be a man that has no Zeal for, nor Sense
of his Religion, nor for the men of his own Persuasion: And this cannot be
supposed by any that knows him, and how constant he is at his Devotions, and
how he adventured three Kingdoms for his Religion, when Wind and Tide ran most
violently against him: Would he but have Dissembled his Religion, or quitted it
or his Party, he might have been the Darling of those Times; but he chose to
run the greatest risks and dangers, rather than not to appear what he was. And
shall we, after this, imagine he will have no regard to his Word, nor provide
for the safety of his Party, which else so soon as he Dies, must be exposed to
the uttermost Ruin, and to the Rage and Fury of these Laws and Tests.

We have also besides his Majesty's Word, the highest Security he can give for
our Liberties; we have not only the particulars before mentioned, but also
with his Word, we have his Interest, which will not Lie: So that if his Word
were of no force, yet he is bound by Interest to make it good. Does not his
Majesty know, that the Dissenters are not a sort of Treacherous Cowardly Men;
Where Is the instance that any of them ever betrayed their Trust, or refused any
Service they undertook, or were called unto, how perilous so ever? Are they
Droans that live by the sweat of other men's Brows; or rather, are they not
painful and industrious, addicted to Trade and Manufactories? Is not a great
part of the Trade of the Nation managed by them, whereby the Poor are employed,
His Majesty's Customs and Revenues increased? Nor are they an inconsiderable
number of his Majesty's Subjects; so that to part with them, he must part with
a great part of his Strength and Treasure, in which his Glory and Security
consists: which happily was no small Consideration with his Majesty, when he
published his Declaration. And this remains as an additional security unto his
Majesty's Word; and so much the rather, because he has Aspiring Neighbors who
will readily embrace all opportunities of increasing their numbers, especially
such as bring Wealth, Trade, and Manufactories with them: of which they were in
hopes, and so blew the Coals of our late Persecution, until his Majesty happily
extinguished them by his Healing Declaration, and thereby called home many that
on great encouragements were settling amongst them.

Though some of the Roman Catholics have asserted that Maxim, That Faith is
not to be kept with Heretics; yet God forbid there should not be a Man of
Truth found amongst them; or that the Opinion of some should be charged on all:
What Principle or Party of men, can then be Trusted? Are all the Church of
England cruel merciless Persecutors, because some of them are so (and that not
a few of them neither)? Are they all Socinians? And yet they are greatly Belyed
if there are not some such amongst them. Are they all Debauched, or guilty of
Adultery, Atheism, Blasphemy, and Murder? And yet there are such to be found
in that Church.

Besides, His Majesty is not only willing, but most desirous to put it beyond
his power to break the Word and Faith of his Declaration: What can he do (or is
not ready and willing to do) to give farther satisfaction herein? Let any man
rationally propound it, and let his Majesty refuse the same, before this, or
such like surmises be credited. Is he not willing and desirous that an equal
Liberty to all should grow up with, and be twisted in his Government? does he
not establish his Throne on that Basis? has he made any Limitations or
Restrictions therein, to exclude any for their Religious Sentiments? has he
ever solicited any man to change his Opinion and become Roman Catholic, to
increase his Party? who, or where is the instance of this kind? has he ever
Brow-beaten any man for his Opinion? And I am confident he will most readily
concur with his Parliament on the largest and comprehensivest Terms for
securing this Liberty: and then it will not be in His, nor any other Man's
power to break this Faith, any more than it is to subvert the Government it
self: Shall all men be trusted on their bare Word; and shall His Majesty's
solemn repeated Word and Promise (that ought to be accounted Sacred) be no
security, tho real instances, strong and most weighty obligations are conjoined
therewith. Where is that person of any Note or Figure in the World, that would
be so used for his kindness and benignity? The persons that make these, and
such like Suggestions, are unworthy of his Majesty's Goodness; nor are there
any but Ignorant, Wicked, and Malicious Men that will give them Entertainment.

You have other Work incumbent on you, viz. Since you have now full Liberty to
Worship God without any imposition on your Consciences, make Conscience to be
found in the constant Practice of his Worship; live not in the neglect thereof,
for that is a Contempt of the Mercy God has given you: Was the Truth and
Religious Worship, worth the adventuring all you had for? It Is not of less
Value because it now comes to you at a cheaper Rate: Do not turn Scepticks, nor
grow remiss in Religion; that is the way to loose the Blessing of your Mercies;
but whilst you have Seasons and Opportunities, make Conscience to improve them
diligently.

Hearken not to any Councels, nor give way to any Passions that tend to stir up
Quarrels, Contentions, or Divisions; this will deprive you of this Liberty, or
of its Blessing, to the gratifying of the Devil and your Adversaries; who for
carrying on such designs, will take on them new Shapes, and deal by you, as the
Samaritans did with the Jews; cover their designed Malice with a Cloak of
pretended Charity and Friendship; your strength is in Concord, and whilst you
mind a Common Interest, your Enemies cannot hurt you.

Let not an Imposing Spirit or Principle be found amongst you; for that is a
Persecution in its kind, as well as Mulcts, Prisons, and Blood, but bear with,
and forbear each other, notwithstanding differences in Judgments, or
Incitations to the contrary; this is the Spirit of Christ, and of his Gospel,
to which you ought to be Reconciled; for you profess to walk by Christ's Rule,
To do to others, as you would be done by; and not to censure and judge others
for differing sentiments; which will always be, until we come to the same
degree and measure of Knowledge; a State not to be expected on this side
Heaven: Till then let Charity (which is the Bond of your Perfection here) knit
you together in the pursuit of Holiness and Concord. Remembering always, That
the Bond of Conscience binds all other Men as well as yours binds you: And if
it were grievous to you to be oppressed herein by Enemies; can it be easy to
another to be in any respect so oppressed by you, that ought to be Friends? Will
you contradict your own professed Principles, to gratify your Enemies and your
Lusts; and grieve your Friends to the prejudice of your own Interests? When
happily the matters contended for, may be some obstruse Notions, not determinable
by the ablest and most learned. Consider that since Conscience (though
erroneous) binds both to Principles and Practice; and acting contrary
thereunto, is Sinful: its not possible that one Man's Conscience can be
affected or polluted simply by another Man's Principle or Practice; otherwise
to avoid Sin, we must sin against our own Consciences, or by our Dictates,
force other men's Consciences; or sin wilfully to avoid the supposed guilt of
another Man's: let therefore that noble Principle be maintained, and not in the
least infringed.

11. Consider that an Imposing Spirit, under which we lately groaned, is the
very Spawn and Spirit of Antichrist, the Sourse of all Impiety and Cruelty; to
which appertains the Iniquity and Guilt of all the Blood of the Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, and Millions of Christ's Servants; What Wars, Confusions,
and Disolations has this Spirit always made in the World? Robing it of its
Peace and Tranquillity, bringing glorious Churches into confusion, wasting and
impoverishing mighty Monarchs and Kingdoms; when, on the contrary, poor and
contemptible States, by cherishing this Principle of Liberty of Conscience,
have continued their Peace, and grown to greatness of Power and Wealth.

Shall we, that have woefully experienced the verity hereof, approve the
contrary, or in any measure contract this Guilt? Is that lawful, commendable,
or a Virtue in you, which is hateful, wicked, and abominable in others? Do not
justify your Adversaries in all their Cruelties and Inhumanities, by making
and imposing your Understanding and Practice as a Guide or Measure for other
men; for thereby every one becomes a Dictator, for what is lawful for one, is
lawful for every man. Do not therefore, on pretense of Conscience, multiply nor
streighten the Terms of Communion, nor make new Articles of Faith and
Communion; let those Christ has left in his Word suffice, lest out of blind
Zeal you turn, and keep out of the way, those that Christ would have gathered
and cherished.

12. Finally, do not study Revenge, for that appertains to God; let not your
Spirits boil up into Prejudice against those that have injured you; give no
opprobrious provoking Expressions, that is uncomly for Christians; remember your
Lord and Master reviled not again, but meekly and patiently endured the
Contradiction of Sinners; walk as you have him for your Example; pray for your
Persecutors, as Christ did; forgive your wrongs; walk holily to God, and
righteously to men; live up to your Profession: Hereby you will stop the mouth
of Envy, and possess the Blessing of this day of your Liberty, and God will
continue your Tranquillity.

Amen.
POSTSCRIPT.
It Is not my Province, to enquire into the Times, Occasions, or Reasons, on
which the Penal Laws and Tests were made, nor whether they are not (especially
the Tests) against Gods Word, the indispencible, immutable, and moral Law of
God, common Right, Justice, Equity, and Law of the Land (though this will be
enquired into, and published;) only this is most apparent, that by the Act by
which the Test is established, the Sacrament (the most sacred Gospel Ordinance
of Christ) is profanely made subservient to Carnal and Secular ends and
purposes, and designed to incapasitate his Majesty from having any Servant
about him (how useful or necessary soever) but such as either in reality or
hypocrisy conforms to the Ceremonies of the Church of England; or to reward
any other for any Service, though it should be the preservation of his Life,
Crown, or Kingdom; or to employ them in any Service, how fit or important
soever: whereby, in effect, he is rendered to be King only of some part of his
Subjects, and happily not of the greatest part of them neither; nor can he advise
in Council, for his own Preservation, or common Good and Safety of his Kingdom,
with any other sort of men, nor dispense the Justice of the Nation by any other
hands; whereby also it is in their power, at any time, without comptrole, to
impose what Terms and Inconveniences they please on the King and Kingdom, and
to make both his Majesty and all others truckle to them. On this consideration,
many are content to part with all the Penal Laws, but struggle for the Test, as
knowing that it capacitates them at any time to revive again those Laws, or to
make worse, if worse can be made, and to subject all men to what state and
condition they please: Therefore never account the Nation free, but subjected
to an Iron Yoke, and your selves to be lashed with Scorpions for your
Consciences, until these Tests and Penal Statutes are abrogated, and thereby
both his Majesty and every body else absolutely freed from them.

The END.

