THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE Most Pleasant and Delectable HISTORY OF AMADIS De GAUL,
Containing the first Part of the most strange, valiant, and worthy Acts of
ESPLANDIAN Son to Amadis De Gaul: As his strange sailing in the Great Serpent,
the Winning of his Sword, the Conquest of the Castle of The Defended Mountain:

His Wars with Armato King of Turkey, his Love to Leonorine Daughter to the
Emperor of Constantinople, with diverse Services done in her behalf.

The Besieging of Constantinople by the Turks and Pagans, with their Overthrow
by the Princes: His Marriage with Leonorine, his Investing in the Empire of
GREECE.

And lastly, His Enchantment with diverse other Princes in the Palace of
Apollidon devised by Vrganda.

London, Printed by T. J. for Andrew Kembe at St Margarets-Hill in Southwark,
and Charles Tyus at the Three Bibles on London Bridge. 1664.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT is not long since I printed the History of Palladine of England, in the
Advertisement whereof I promised the sudden publishing of this which is now
perfected, and I now intend to proceed in the performance of what I therein
further promised, which was, not only to proceed in the printing and
publishing of more Parts of this History, but also in publishing that so much
desired, and long-expected Piece, called, The Second Part of Don Bellianis of
Greece, which I now assure you is in the Press, and will be finished about a
month hence. And the Author of that has proceeded, not only in continuing
that History in a third Part, which I am confident will be very pleasant and
delightful, but also in translating more parts of this excellent History, which
shall all be published with all convenient expedition. And now, Gentle Reader,
hoping that the Bookseller and my self shall receive so good Encouragement in
these Pieces already published, that we shall not have occasion to repent our
selves of our pains, cost, and trouble, which is all intended for thy delight,

I remain thine in all friendship, T. J.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF AMADIS DE GAUL, Containing part of the valiant Acts of
Esplandian his Son, and others.
CHAP. I.
How Esplandian sleeping in the great Serpent, when he awaked, he found himself
to be at the foot of the Rock of the Enchauntress, and what happened unto him.

ESplandian that had fallen asleep in the Serpent by means of the melodious
noise of trumpets, that the six Gentlewomen sounded along the shore, after he
had received the order of Knighthood, as it has been declared unto you in the
end of our fourth book, when he awaked was much abashed that he saw not any of
the company that were there present when the Giant Balan dubbed him Knight, but
found himself alone between the wings of that monstrous beast, at the ^oot of a
rock unknown to him, which rock was so high, that he thought it impossible to
climb up, but he was persuaded that Urganda la Descogneve (whose works and
enterprises were most wonderful) had ordained it to be so, and thereupon he
comforted himself, going down into the body of the ship (where the day before
that great assembly had been) but he found no man; and seeking further, he went
into the chapel, where he espied Sergil his squire fast sleeping, and hard by
him two old men with rolls on their heads, apparelled like Turks: with that he
went to Sergil, and with his foot gave him such a thrust, that on a sudden he
started up, and speaking to his master (as though he had never seen him before)
asked him what he meant, whereat Esplandian began to laugh, and said unto him:
Good God, Sergil, have thou been in my company all thy life time, and know
me no better? and taking him by the hand, he drew him in such manner to him
that therewith he awaked, much ashamed to have committed such a fault: whereof
seeking to excuse himself, he said unto his master, By my faith sir, I was so
fast asleep when you called me, that I neither remembered you nor my self, and
I am now more a bashed then I was before to think how I fell into so sound a
sleep: That cannot I tell (answered Esplandian) although as much has happened
unto me. Then he told him that he had slept, and when he awaked he found
himself alone between the wings of the Serpent, without any of the company that
were with him when he received the order of Knighthood, and now (said he) we
are arrived at the foot of the highest rock that ever I saw, and withal it is
so hard and difficult to climb up, that I can find neither path nor way how to
do it, yet have I beheld it long, but (as I perce give) it is environed with
the Sea in such manner, that consider in the situation of the place, I
certainly believe it is the Rock of the Enchauntress, whereof in times past
thou have heard by Amadis my father. And as they were in this manner speaking,
Sergil heard the two old men snort (that as yet they had not once perceived)
and demanded of Esplandian if he knew them not: As God help me no (said
Esplandian for as far as I remember I never saw them before, but I judge that
Urganda has left them here to help us if we need. I pray you said Sergil let
us awake them: then he called them so loud that they rose up, Esplandian asking
them who brought them thither, but they made signs that they could not speak.
It was then about twelve of the clock, and Esplandian would willingly have
eaten if he had found meat, and said unto Sergil, Friend, never in all my life
had I so good an appetite to eat as I have now, but I doubt we shall find no
victuals in the ship, I pray the Sergil let us go see, for as I perceive, if we
trust unto these dumb men, we are like to fare but hardly: but the dumb men
perceived well what he meant: wherefore going out of the chapel they entered
into a chamber that joined to the hall, from whence they presently returned,
bringing with them such quantity of meat that Esplandian and Sergil were never
better satisfied in all their lives: having dyned and the tables uncovered,
they went into the place where Esplandian had slept, from whence he showed
Sergil the rock whereof he had told him before, saying: Assure thy self Sergil,
seeing the serpent stirs not from hence, it is a sign that I must go upon
this high rock to see if there be any adventures, and if I can bring them to an
end. I know not (answered Sergil) what you will do, but if you trust to the
counsel of our dumb men we shall stay long enough here before we have any words
of them. Let us land (said Esplandian) and with that he made signs to the old
men, that they should hoise out the boat, whereunto they willingly obeyed:
which done, the first that entered was Sergil, then Esplandian (armed in the
same armor he ware when the great Balan dubbed him knight) and rowing with
their oars they made toward the rock, at the foot whereof they descended out
of the boat, leaving the two dumb men alone in the serpent, and as they were
looking for a way to get up, they found the same path that Amadis and Gransador
had taken when they went up to see the strange adventures that the
Enchaunteress had left there, and they had not traveled long, but that Sergil
perceived his master to want a sword, (for of all other armor he was well
furnished when he received the order of Knighthood only of a sword) wherefore
he said unto him: Sir, I know not whither you mean to go, but if we pass
forward, and that upon the top of this rock, if you find any dangerous
adventure, you have nothing to defend your self withal, but if you will believe
me, you shall rather take an oar out of our boat, for oftentimes the stoutest
man is overcome, not for want of courage or stomach to resist, but for want of
weapons to defend himself, and with that he went back unto the boat, and
bringing one of the oars with him, gave it to his master, in which manner they
began to mount upon the Rock not without great pain, the way being so
difficul^, the air hot, and Esplandian heavily armed. Notwithstanding they
ceased not to travail day and night, till they arrived at the Hermitage, where
the image of brass stood with a serole of writing at his feet (as you have read
in the fourth book) which as then they could not discern by reason it was dark,
wherefore they determined to pass the night under the gate, not entering any
further, for it was extreme hot. Then Esplandian put off his Helmet, and laying
down his Shield, eat such meat as his Squire had brought with him: which done,
lying down upon the grass he stepped till the morning that he and Sergil entered
into the chapel, where they beheld the image and the writing, but neither of
them could read it because the letters were in Greek, which they understood
not. Then Esplandian determining to go further, said to Sergil, Friend, it is
best for you to stay here till I come again, for if this be the rock where my
father and Gransador (whether it were by fortune or willingly) did once arrive,
I remember I have heard them tell, that in Summer the air is so hot therein
that it breeds many venomous beasts, whereby thou might receive some harm,
being no better armed then thou art, but as for me thou know I am
predestined to those adventures that other men have failed to accomplish, which
puts me in hope either that I shall not live long, or I shall accomplish the
things that are foreshewed of me, and by that means shall conquer the sword and
the treasure, that for certain is said to be in an old palace within this Rock.
What, said Sergil, Do you think that although I should die a thousand deaths I
would refuse to go with you? No by my faith, for I know that without your
company life will be irksomer to me then a thousand deaths if a man could endure
so many. Friend, answered Esplandian, I believe it well, nevertheless if any
inconvenience should happen unto thee, besides the blame I might receive
thereby, thy deed would be more esteemed folly, then done of any courage: but
not to me that have both armor and shield to fight against the strongest enemy
that may be found, wherefore I pray thee once again do as I would have thee.
Wherewith Sergil perceiving no remedy, turned his head aside and began to weep.
In the mean time Esplandian laced on his Helmet, and hanging his Shield about
his neck with the oar on his shoulder, kept on the paths that at the last
brought him to the top of the rock, and being there he went toward the broken
Castle, where he perceived the other Image with the table that she held in her
left hand, the contents whereof he could no more understand then that of the
Hermitage, wherefore without longer staying ^e passed forward toward the
chamber where the treasure lay, being continually guarded by a most great and
horrible Serpent: and as he went nearer to it, he perceived the gates to be of
hard stone, where there was a sword so far thrust in, that nothing but the
handle could be seen, therewith he thought it to be the same whereof he had
heard, and being moved with great desire to have it, he determined (alth^ugh he
had but a staff to defend himself) to assail the beast, whatsoever happened
thereby. And to the same end with a ^^ld courage he set forwards, but the
serpent (that as the^ flept) awaked, and looking with a cruel countenance upon
Espland^an, began to hiss, and cast out fire at her mouth as if she would
devour him. Nevertheless Esplandian covered with his shield went near unto her,
and with his oar gave her such a blow between the ears, that with the force he
used, it had almost fallen out of his hands. Notwithstanding the beast made
toward him so furiously that she overthrew him on the ground and trod upon
his belly, whereat he was not a little abashed, but perceived what danger he
was in, suddenly started up, and by little and little g^t to the Gate wherein
the Sword stuck, which at the last he laid hold upon, and with both hands drew
it to him with such force that he pulled it cut: and with that the gates opened
with so fearful a noise, that presently the serpent fell down upon the ground,
and Esplandian was so astonished that he knew not what he did, but it was no
marvel, for that Sergil that stayed in the hermitage far from thence was in the
greatest fear that ever he had, and besides the sailors that as then sailed
along the c^ast, thought verily the rock would have fallen into the Sea, so
great was the noise at the opening of the gate. Mean time Esplandian lay in a
sw^un till midnight following that he opened his eyes, when he saw a great
brightness in the plate, perceiving the serpent dead and the enchanted Sword
lying by his side, which he took in his hand, and rising up entered into a
chamber, in the middle whereof he saw a Tomb shining brighter then fire, and
upon it a great lion of brass, holding in his right paw the scabberd of the
sword, from whence the great brightness issued, and in his left a roll of
letters written in Latin: The contents whereof do follow:

CHAP. II.
How Esplandian having read the Writing contained in the Roll that the Lion
held, took the shining Scabberd, and what speech he and Sergil had together.

THe fearful cries at the time of the great constraint, shall force thee (O
thou Knight that have conquered the Sword) to return again to conquer the great
Treasure whereby thy joy shall be restored in such sort, that the kindled
flames, by whose beams thou shall far off be wounded, shall be extinguished,
and content thy self with this glorious Conquest thou have made, for that
variable fortune has advanced thee before all others, and thou have obtained
the honor whereunto so many good Knights could never attain, notwithstanding
all their prowess.

Esplandian having read and again perused the Contents of the writing, for a
time stood musing thereon, and in the end perceived thereby, that although he
had brought the Adventure of the Sword unto an end, yet he should be
constrained to attend the time appointed (according to the Contents of the
Writing) nevertheless he knew not the meaning thereof, being as then at liberty
and free from all passions of love. Notwithstanding the cruel tyrant Love
afterward obtained so great a Conquest against him, that he made him fall in
love with her that he never had seen, nor never was in her company, as reading
further in this History you shall at large perceive. Then he laid hand upon the
scabberd, and put the Sword in it, thanking God devoutly for the grace he had
obtained. After that he went diverse times about the Tomb to see if he could
open it without breaking, but he perceived the crystal, from whence issued
part of the brightness to be covered with another plate colored like azure, so
wonderfully wrought, that it would scarce be judged whether it were marble,
metal, or any other stuff: whereupon he left off his enterprise, and returned
into the hall where the dead Serpent lay, but as then neither the Sword nor the
Scabberd yielded any such brightness as before they did, because it was day:
Then going out he went down again toward the Hermitage where he had left his
Squire, who being melancholy and amazed at the long absence of his master,
(fearing some danger happened unto him was gone out of the Hermitage to seek
him, and he had not traveled far, but he perceived him coming with the sword
by his side, whereat he made such joy, that being yet far from him, he cried
out and said; O my lord, blessed be God that has given you so good a beginning
whereat every man shall wonder. Friend (said Esplandian) he has yet done more
for me then thou would think, and with that he began from point to point to
show him the danger wherein he was, and being in that discourse, it waxed dark
even then when they arrived at the Hermitage: wherefore they determined not to
travel any further that night, but laid them down under the next trees they
came unto, still speaking of the strangeness of the place: whereat Sergil being
more abashed then before, could not refrain to say: As God help me Master, by
good reason you may be esteemed a better Knight then Amadis your father, that
came into this place, and saw the Image at the Hermitage, the writing that
stands upon the Arch of stone, the Serpent, the Sword that stuck in the gate
where you found it, and the shining Tomb, yet durst he never prove any of these
adventures: and he said true, for Amadis knew well by the Contents of the
Letters written in Greek, that those adventures were ordained for his Son
Esplandian, and therefore undertook them not, but all others, only Gransador
and Urganda knew it not till then: but although Sergil thought to please his
Master using such words in his commendation, yet Esplandian took it not so
well, saying: I pray thee Sergil never use such speeches, for if the prowess
and knightly adventures of my Father had been as well employed to the advancing
of the Christian faith as they were to win and obtain honor in this world, I
think his like would not be found, but having passed his youth in things so
vain and transitory, doubtless his glory is the less, not that I presume in any
thing to accuse him, and God forbid I should, yet is he known in so many places
to be so valiant a Knight, that whosoever he be can second him may well esteem
himself happy among the happyest, wherefore I pray thee let us talk of other
matters. Thus sometimes talking and other whiles sleeping, day began to appear,
when they rose up, taking their way toward the Seaside, descending down the
Rock, till they came where the two dumb men stayed for them, one within the
ship, the other in a little bark, wherein Esplandian entered, according to the
sign the dumb man had made, and Sergil went into the Serpent, and with that
they departed, and the bark sailed so swiftly, that in short space they left
the sight one of the other. But we will leave Sergil with his dumb man, making
extreme sorrow to see himself bereaved of his Masters presence, and will show
you of Esplandian that from this time forwards shall be called the B^ack
Knight, by reason of the arms he bare, who being in the little bark with his
conducter, sailed so long that they took landing near the Port where King
Lisuart lay prisoner.

CHAP. III.
How the bark wherein the black Knight and the dumb man sailed, arrived in the
borders of Turkey hard by the place called The defended Mountain, and of the
discourse that an hermit and the Knight had together.

TEn days and as many nights together the Black Knight and the dumb man sailed
on the Sea, not knowing in what parts they were, for if he had enquired of his
guide, it had been but labor lost: the eleventh day they discovered a great and
pleasand Island, where the Knight being wearied with the impetuosity of the
waves, desired his guide to put his bark on shore, but he regarding not his
words, thrust it near unto a high Rock, by nature cut in such manner, that it
seemed a wall purposely made for the defense thereof: and the country was so
full of woods and bushes, that it might be esteemed unhabitable. Then the dumb
man showed him a path that led him up to the Rock, and made him a sign to go
thither, wherewith he issued out of the Barque, armed at all points, and began
to mount up, the weather was then extreme hot, whereby the Knight was so chased
in his harness, that he was constrained to put off his Helmet and carry it in
his hand, till he perceived a little Hermitage among the bushes, and before it
stood a high cress, which pleased him well, not only for the hope he had to
find some one of whom he might enquire in what country he was, but because he
was assured that there dwelt a Christian, and with that he perceived a man
apparelled like an Hermit, so old and withered that his long white beard hung
down to his girdle, carrying in his hand a pitcher of water, that he had drawn
out of a fountain not far from thence, and was passing by when the Knight spoke
unto him, saying: Father, God save you, which when the good man heard, he was
in so great amase, that for fear his pitcher fell out of his hand and brake in
pieces. Nevertheless by little and little he came to himself again, and
perceiving him that spoke unto him, answered and said, My Son, it is now twenty
years past sithence I left the pleasures of this world, and forsook my native
soil to obtain the grace of God, and that which most abasheth me is, that since
the time whereof I speak I never found man that as yet saluted me in this
manner, and I think verily you are a stranger in these countries, or else your
speech and apparel disguiseth you much Father (said the Knight) true it is I am
a stranger, brought hither by such means, that I neither know the country where
I am, nor any man or woman inhabiting therein, for you are the first creature
that I met since I arrived here, of whom I might enquire, assuring you that
when I perceived this cross it rejoiced my heart, for it is the arms of the
Master that I serve. What? said the Hermit, do you then know the virtue
thereof? I, answered the Knight, that I do, being well assured that upon the
like cross our Redeemer (whereof I speak) suffered death and passion. Alas said
the holy man, you say true, praised be his holy name, that once before I die
has given me the grace to let me see a man of this side the Sea that beliveth
in him, assuring you sir Knight that you and I are only the two creatures in
this country that are christians, for all the rest are Pagans and Idolaters.
And as he would have proceeded further, his speech failed him, doubting yt he
to whom he spoke, was but a fantasy or shadow of a man, but at the last he
waxt bolder, and in manner of conjuration asked him if he were a mortal man or
not? Mortal (answered the Knight) that I am for certain, and withal a sinner,
which displeases me much, and if it abasheth you at this present to see me
here, I am my self no less abashed to see you: for without doubt the manner of
my arrival in this country has been such and so strange, that I can render you
no reason thereof, but if you know the country wherein we are, I beseech you
good Father, tell it me to put me out of doubt. Gladly, (said the Hermit) and
with that he took him by the hand, and led him to his Hermitage, and there
sitting down together upon a log of wood, the old man began to speak in this
manner, and said, Now sir Knight, tell me I pray you what country man you are.
Father (said he) Great Britain is the country where in my youth I was born and
bred, I know not if ever you were acquainted therewith: How long is it said the
Hermit, since you came from thence? It is fifteen days and more since I was
there said the Knight: Did you never know King Lisuart (said the Hermit) that
in my time reigned therein? Yes truly (said the Knight) for I have seen him
many times: how did he when you came from thence said the Hermit? That can I
not certainly show said the Knight, for he was lost and led away from thence,
but by whom or in what manner no man can tell, notwithstanding the great pain
and diligence diverse of his Knights have used to find him out. When the Hermit
heard that, he seemed very pensive, which the Knight perceiving, thought in his
mind that he could tell him some news, whereupon he began to behold him well in
the face to see if he changed color, with that the Hermit (that well perceived
the Knights meaning) said unto him. Truly Sir Knight, not without cause have I
enquired so much touching King Lisuart, but before I will show you my reason
why, you shall understand that I am of great Britain as well as you, where as
yet the greatest part of my kindred are living, whom I forsook at the same time
that a Giant Lord of this country married with a Lady who as then I served, and
with her passed the Sea, not only hoping to reap some reward of my former
service, but (as young men are moved) with a great desire to see strange
countries, but it fortuned, that my Mistress being forsaken of God, as soon as
she arrived in this country, left his holy law to receive the law of her
husband, wherefore considering with my self, that by reason as well of my
natural weakness, as by often frequenting the company of these country men I
might fall into some error, I determined to withdraw my self into this place,
wherein I have endured much pain and misery, to the great danger of my life, by
reason of the controversy between the law of Jesus Christ, which I hold, and
the law of the Pagans that seek daily to destroy it, that without the favor of
my mistress that would not suffer them to displease me, I had not lived so long
as I have done among them, but when it pleases God I will depart hence, and
return again into mine own country, now you have heard how I have hitherto
lived, I pray you sir Knight (said he) show me your adventures, and who has
brought you into this place from whence very hardly you will ever be able to
return again, but rather are in danger of most cruel death, or to endure the
most horrible imprisonment that ever was heard of, which would grief me much,
not only for the great beauty and young years that I perceive to be in you,
but for that you are my native countryman. Father answered the Knight, you have
done me great pleasure to show me the manner of your life and bringing up,
nevertheless before I satisfy your request, tell me (if it pleases you)
wherefore when you spoke of King Lisuart you seemed so sad, which made me
conjecture that you know something touching him. Son (said the Hermit) you
shall understand that a daughter of mine, servant to the Lady whereof I spoke,
not long since came hither to see me, and told me that her mistress returning
from great Britain, whither she went to deliver a brother of hers out of
prison, brought with her very secretly a Knight of great estimation as she
said, nevertheless I cannot assure you who it is: but as I have learned since,
they say the two Giants sons were much pleased therewith, which makes me
doubt, considering the news you have showed me touching King Luisart, that he
is most likely to be the man, for she is so well seen in the art of Nigromancy
and Magic, that oftentimes she procures mischief unto those that never
offended her. And in what country are we now (said the Knight?) You are between
the Marches of Turkey and Greece said the Hermit, for this mountain parts both
the countries, but it is so strong, not only by nature, but by art, that
neither of the two Princes of those countries, what force soever they brought
hither, could never win it. And now a Giant (son unto my Lady and mistress) and
one of the most strongest and puissant Knights in the East parts, (as many of
his neighbors, whose goods he has by force usurped, and that in despite of
the Emperor, or any other contradicting the same have proved) is Lord thereof.
Where dwells be (said the Knight?) Above upon the Rock (said the Hermit) in a
Castle which he has most strongly fortified, and is kept with all diligence
and care by a Giant one of his brethren, with others, of as good condition as
themselves, and which is more, it is not possible to come near ye Castle, but
by a little pathway whereon the Sea continually beats, at the end whereof
there is a pair of stairs cut out of ye Rock, whereby you mount up till you
come to an Iron-gate, where a villain, in whom the Lord of the Castle puts
his trust, watches continually, for there is no other entrance, but only the
great gate that is defended with strong Platforms and great Towers, in the
middle whereof there is a door so straight, that a man on horseback can hardly
enter therein, and that way most commonly those of the Castle do issue forth.
Before it be night, said the Knight, I mean to see what manner of place it is,
and if I can I will know who it is, that was so lately brought thither. God
keep you from thence (said the Hermit) for thereby you will either procure your
own death, or at the least perpetual imprisonment. Happen what may (said the
Knight) I will prove what fortune it shall please God to send me. That were but
ill done of you (said the Hermit) for that men are bound to employ their forces
only in things that stand for reason and possibility, thereby to reap a
benefit by their labors, otherwise they are to be esteemed desperate fools, and
not valiant and hardy Knights adventuring (without due respect) not only their
bodies, but their souls which are of greater price, and Christ himself has by
example plainly showed it unto us, for when the devil came and tempted him,
bidding him do certain things, which indeed (as he was Christ) were possible,
but as he was man were impossible to do, he answered him that he should not
tempt the Lord his God. So my good Son (said he) I would advise you to desist
from so unreasonable an enterprise. You may preach what you will to persuade me
to the contrary (said the Knight) but I must do that whereunto I am called,
which is to prove my self in those adventures that in man's judgment seem
impossible: otherwise those yt have foreshewed of me, should not only have
traveled in vain, but be esteemed liars and fools. If then these sayings be
true, what greater honor can I obtain then bringing most wonderful adventures
to an end, I may from henceforth thereby restrain the rage and fury of such men
as hurt, and do injury unto others, contrary to the Laws of God and man? And if
they be found liars, I had rather they should be reproved for their want of
knowledge, then I accused of any point of cowardice. And if the worst fall out,
I will employ my force against such accursed people, (members and ministers of
the devil) whom by the help of God I shall overcome: and I believe and am
certainly persuaded (that if I die in those adventures) he will receive my soul
into his heavenly joy. The Hermit marvelled much to hear the Black Knight speak
so wisely, and with so great a courage, nevertheless the great beauty and young
years he perceived him to have, moved him to so great compassion, yt the tears
ran down his eyes, and therewith he said, Ha good Knight, he in whom thou
trustest, preserve thee and send thee long life, and seeing thou art resolutely
determined to pass forward, I pray thee defer the time for this night, for it
is already so late, that although thou should have time enough to get unto
the gate before the Sun goes down, yet shall thou find it shut as it is
accustomed to be, whereupon the Knight kept the Hermit company till the next
day in the morning.

CHAP. IIII.
How the black Knight went up the Rock, where by force of Arms he slew three
Giants, and delivered King Luisart out of prison.

AT the Hermits request the Knight stayed and bare him company all night, who
entertained him in the best manner he could, where after they had supped, they
laid them down upon a little straw till day began to appear, when they rose
up, and the Knight having said his prayers in the Chapel, being Armed at all
points, took his leave of the Hermit, that brought him a great part of his way,
and had gone further but he feared the Giants. Wherefore committing him to God,
he took his leave and returned. Being gone, the Knight traveled so fast, that
having coasted along the Seashore, and passed the side of a great and thick
forest, be descended into the goodliest meddow that ever was seen, from whence
he perceived the Castle, situated upon the top of a high Rock, and making
toward it, he came to a long bridge, finding no other way unto it, at the end
whereof was a broad causie paved with stone, and the Sea beating continually
against the Towers, out of the windows he espied two Knights, one as he thought
was a Giant, the Ladies Son. Notwithstanding he stayed not, but took his way on
the left band, and mounting up the steps, came to a Marble-gate kept by a
Knight all armed, that before he came to him cried as loud as he could, saying,
Thou accursed wretch, the color of thy armor foresheweth not so much sorrow
and grief as here thou shall receive confusion. What devil was he that sent
thee hither being so young? Mean time the Knight by little and little got up
the Hill, making as if he heard him not, for he had work enough to look to
himself, the way was strait and uneasy to pass, and therefore he bare his
Helmet under his arm. But when he approached the Gate, and heard the other
continue in his bravery, he answered him and said, He that is afraid commonly
threatens a far off, as thou do me, but if thou destrest to know the cause
of my coming, open me the Gate, and thou shall see if I can satisfy thy
desire. With that the Porter came down, and (while the Knight put on his
Helmet) he opened the Gate, and looking out cried with a loud voice, come in
unhappy creature to the place where yet never any stranger had good
entertainment. Then the black knight went in, and entered into a vault, mean
time the gate was shut whereby the place seemed very dark, for there entered no
light but only by a little hole that came through the Rock, and as he passed
forward, the Porter that was behind, staying him, said unto him, Villain, leave
thy armor here, and I will bring thee where the Lords of the Castle shall
reward thee according to thy deserts. It were better (said the knight) without
so much trouble to bring me thither e'n as I am, and I will follow thee. But I
will not (said he) lest I lose too much by thee, for then my companion will
have thy Armor, which by right is mine, and with that he lifted up his hatchet,
thinking to cleave his head, whereat the black knight stepped back, and with his
Sword gave him such a blow, that he overthrew him on the ground, and stepping
upon him, thrust him into the body, and as he had done, there entered at the
Gate (that went out of the vault) a villain all armed, who thinking to speak to
the Porter, with a rude and churlish voice, said, Argantes, why stayest thou so
long to bring up that accursed wretch that even now entered at the Gate? Be
content a while (said the black Knight) I will be there soon enough both for
thee and those that sent thee, if the Gates be open. With that the villain
perceived himself to be deceived, for he espied Argantes dead upon the ground,
wherefore without longer staying he turned his back, and pulled the door after
him, left the knight shut into the vault, whereat he was abashed, fearing to be
famished for want of meat, but it fell out otherwise, for not long after he saw
the gate opened, whereat there entered a Giant arned all in green, who
perceiving the party dead, and the Knight that had slain him standing by him,
was in such a rage, that he said unto him, Thou cursed wretch, I am much
abashed how thou have thus entangled thy self within this place, from whence
while thou live thou shall never be able to escape, but when thou have
endured a long and most hard imprisonment, shall be constrained to end thy
miserable days with a thousand cruel torments that are prepared for thee. Art
thou at that point (said the Knight) I hope rather before we depart to make
thee bear this villain company, that at my entering spared not to threaten me as
thou do now. What (said the Giant?) I assure thee I loved this dead Knight
as well as I love my self, and now I find him in this manner slain before mine
eyes, yet art thou not afraid to boast thereof: By my head (said he) thou shall
dearly buy it. Behold I pray thee, answered the Knight, how thy unhappy fortune
follows thee at once, here before thy face thou see thy friend dead, and by
the same means thou shall likewise loose the soul out of thy body, which the
devil has waited for since thou first beganst to lead an evil life. That shall
soon be seen (said the Giant) and with that they encountered, and at their
meeting laid upon each other so fiercely, that with the noise they made, it
seemed ten Knights fighting together: and so long they continued the Combat,
that in the end the Giant waxed faint, which he perceiving, having lost the
greatest part of his Shield, and in a manner all his blood, he began to fly,
and the black Knight after him so fast, that before he could get out of the
vault with one blow that clave his Head to the teeth, he flew him in the place.
And as the Knight stepped forth, he met two Squires that came to see the
Combat, who perceiving the Knight with his Sword bloody in his hand, asked him
what was become of their guard. I have dealt with them (said he) as it has
pleased God to dispose? And how is that? (said they) To send them both (said
the Knight) an unhappy end of their wretched lives, that their souls might be
tormented in the everlasting pains of hell. With that they looked in and
perceived Argantes on the one side, and the Giant on the other as yet shaking
their legs with the pangs of death: whereat they had so great fear, that in
great haste they presently retired, cr^ing with a loud voice, Come forth my
Lords, come forth, for your Uncle and the Porter are both slain, wherewith at
the gate of the dungeon there appeared another Giant unarmed, very young and of
a huge stature, named Frerion, who perceiving the black Knight marching so
boldly toward him, held the door half shut, and with a loud voice spoke unto
him and said, By my Fathers soul thou must surely be some devil disguised in
humane shape, otherwise it had been impossible for thee to have slain two of
the best Knights in the world, and in despite of them to enter thus far within
the Castle, but of one thing am I well assured, that what pain or torment
soever I shall cause thee to endure, I cannot be revenged of the least wrong
and injury I have received at thy hands. Thou brutish and unreasonable beast
(said the Knight) thou art surely worse then he of whom thou speak, for that
he being already judged of God, has neither mean to repent his wickedness, nor
hope of salvation, but thou to whom it has pleased God to give sense and
reason to know both good and evil, do still persevere in thy wickedness,
making of vice a virtue, in such manner that by good right I may better term
thee a devil then those that are wearied and wax melancholy to have so long
attended for thy accursed soul, which I will shortly send them if thou come
forth into this court, or let me enter in. Then stay (said Frerion) and thou
shall see how I will teach thee to preach in other sort, and with that he shut
the door and went in to arm him, mean time the black Knight sat down upon a
marble stone, and he had not rested long, but the Giant came again, who
bringing a great Cimiter upon his shoulder, would have issued at the gate, when
the Knight spoke unto him, saying. Stay a little I pray thee before thou come
forth, and grant me one request which in right thou can not well deny me, for
although neither courtesy nor any part thereof did ever lodge within thy
breast, that habit of Knighthood wherewith thou art invested, ought more to
move thee to humanity then thy nature of it self affords. Ask what thou will
(said the Giant) and it may be thou shall be refused. Both thou and I (said the
Knight) are now on foot, I pray thee then let us fight in the other Court, that
those of thy Castle may behold the pastime: which he said to the end that if he
overcame his enemies as he doubted not thereof, they should not shut him out.
By my head (said the Giant) at the first I thought thou would have asked
mercy at my hands, which would not much avail thee: but seeing thy request is
no other, I am content to grant it, although a means to fly away were (much
more advantage unto thee which these high walls will not permit thee, if thou
be once enclosed within them: Thou speak said the black Knight) as thy
nature yields, and I as virtue binds me, for the rest let God work his
will. Come in then (said Frerion) and defend thy self from me if thou can.
With that the black Knight entered into a fair court paved with white Marble,
all galleried about and supported with Pillars of Porphire, in the midst
whereof stood the portal that entered into the house, where an old Lady
accompanied of diverse young gentlewomen stood looking forth, to whom the Giant
went, and kneeling on his knee, said unto her: Madam, I most humbly beseech
you, that neither for good nor evil which may happen unto me in fighting with
this Knight, not one of your house be so bold to help or favor me in any sort,
for I my self will put him to death with this my trenchant blade, and rising up
again holding his Shield before him with his Cimiterre in his hand, he marched
toward his enemy, who having God on his side (to whom he recommended himself)
stood ready to receive him. Then there began such a Combat between them, that
their blows seemed two Smiths forging upon their Anvils, seeming like fire that
the wind kindled in the air, and surely the black Knight had sped but hardly at
that time had it not been for the Armor Urganda gave him, that could not be cut
by any weapon, and for the good Sword he conquered in the Rock of the
Enchantress, wherewith he stroke not one blow, but he drew blood on the Giant
Frerion, who nevertheless did marvellously both defend himself and assayl his
enemy, but by evil fortune as he thought to strike the Knight on the right arm,
he started back, and stepping forwards again, gave the Giant such a blow upon
the Helmet that he cut away a great piece thereof, together with the buckle
that made it fast, but although the blow was mavelous great, and in a manner
incredible, yet was not the Giant any thing therewith abashed, but still showed
himself as fresh as if he had not fought all the day long: Nevertheless the
blood in such abundance issued out of his body, that the white pavement of the
Court was changed into red, and therewith he grew so weak, that it might easily
be judged he had the worst, whereby he still began to revile, seeking only to
defend himself from his enemies blows, whereat the old Lady that beheld them,
considering her Sons extremity, cried out and said, Alas my child, is it
possible I should see thee murdered before my face, and therewith in great
haste she ran thither, thinking to part them, but it was too late, for as she
began to go toward them, the Giant fell dead on the ground with two blows that
the black Knight gave him, one upon the head where he was unarmed, the other
right in the middle of his leg, wherewith he cut it from his body, whereat the
old Lady was so grieved that she swooned in the place, being by her Gentlewomen
carried from thence into her Chamber, where they laid her on a bed, cursing
him that was the cause thereof, nevertheless he followed them to the chamber
door, where the old woman (being revived) perceiving him to enter, began again
to lament and mourn, and shedding great abundance of tears, she said unto him:
Alas thou cruel knight, the only bereaver of all my joy and felicity, art thou
not satisfied yet? But will thou likewise have my life and my Sons both? Then I
pray thee with speed either execute thy will or else depart from hence, and
take what thou think good, permitting me to live the rest of my miserable
days in sorrow and care, with these poor women: but all her intent was to make
him enter into the chamber, which was so enchanted, that no man could pass the
threshold of the door, but presently he lost all his senses and fell down upon
the ground, as if he were dead, but little did the enchantment avail her
against the black knight, because the shining Sword had such a property in it,
that no enchantment whatsoever could hurt the bearer thereof. Therefore the
Knight hearing the sorrow the old Lady made, he went into the chamber, speaking
courteously unto her, and said, Madam me thinks you should take the offense I
have committed on your behalf, in much better part, considering such hazards
are common unto Knights, desiring to win honor, and therefore I pray you
applease your sorrow and show me the Knight you brought hither out of great
Britain. When the old Lady perceived him so far within the Chamber without let,
and that he desired to see the King, she being as it were out of her wits,
cried as loud as she could, and said, alas unhappy wretch that I am, what have
I done, for thinking to revenge another man's death, I have procured the
destruction of mine own children, and therewith she sighed in such manner as if
her heart would burst within her body, and lamenting the absence of her other
Son, said: Alas Matroco, where art thou now? What happy fortune has thus
separated thee from thy brother and me? Surely when thou hear of his death,
and at thy return shall find another Lord of this castle, I am in doubt thou will not have the patienre to put up so great an injury, but thinking to
revenge thy self I fear this devil will handle thee in the like sort he has
done the rest, for sure he is no mortal man, for if he were he had found more
resistance in this place then he has done. Then speaking unto the Knight she
asked him if he knew the man she held in prison, I truly (said he) it is King
Lisuart, whereof I am right sorry, being well assured that Kings elected of
God, (as he is) for the government of his people, ought not to be used in that
manner. Wherefore I would have you show me where be is, otherwise, I will do
worse then I have hitherto done. I know not (said she) who thou art, nor by
what means thou have so great power, but I am well assured and I would never
have thought that twenty such Knights (as once this day I did esteem thee)
could ever have attained to the atchieving of so great an enterprise, and much
less to have withstood my art as thou have done, so that considering thereof, I
suppose yt this thy power proceeds from him in whom in my young years I did
once believe, and since that have forsaken him, to follow the works of the
common enemy of all mankind, who according to his natural instinction, has
justly rewarded me to my desert: therefore it were but folly to deny thee any
thing, that art so surely defended by him to whom all things are obedient.
Follow me then (said she) and I will show thee the king, but as I think, it is
not he thou seek. And with that she rose up and went into a dark chamber,
the knight following her: then she opened an Iron-gate, and said unto him go
in, and there shall thou find the pris^ner. Lady (said the knight) if it were
to fight I would not fail to do your commandment, but if by subtilty I should
be shut in prison, you would laugh at me that I had no more wit but to put my
trust in you, wherefore go you in first, that whatsoever happens, you may
have your part, I see well (said the Lady) that my labor is in vain, and all my
art is nothing in respect of thee, therefore I am content to do thy will, but
we have no light to see. Care you not for that (said he) for I will provide you
light, and with that he pulled of the taffata that covered the scabberd of his
Sword, whereby there was so great a brightness in the place, as if the Sun had
shone therein. Then they descended into a Cave, where the Knight perceived King
Lisuart lie upon a couch of straw, with a great collar of Iron about his neck,
and fetters on his legs, whereby he endured no little pain, whereat he was so
grieved, that for sorrow the tears ran down his eyes, yet would he not disclose
himself unto him, neither once utter what he thought, but without making
himself known, said unto him Noble King, you have been overlong within this
filthy place, rise up I pray you and follow me. When the King heard him speak
in that manner, he made no other account but to end his days at that time,
wherewith he could not refrain to weep, and speaking unto the old Lady, asked
her if she knew him: For (said he) since I entered into this place, I never saw
any Knight nor any one that spoke unto me, but that little sustenance I had was
let down at a hole from the top of this dungeon. Then she answered him, and in
great despite said, Thou accursed King, if I had not known thee, I would never
have taken pains to fetch thee so far, from hence as I have done, cursed be the
time when first I took it upon me, for thou only art the cause of my great
sorrow, and the sole instrument of my bereaved joys. In faith Lady (said the
King) I know not what you mean, and am very sorry for your heaviness, for I
never sought but to do honor and pleasure unto all Ladies and Gentlewomen that
desired the same, and for them have I oftentimes enterprised many dangerous
adventures, to the great peril and hazard of my life, and if it has happened
otherwise unto you, it is altogether unknown to me and wholly against my will,
wherefore I beseech you be not offended with me, but tell me where I am, and in
whose power I now remain a prisoner in so great misery, for by my soul I know
it not, neither can I so much as conceive which way I came into this place;
only I remember that to second a Gentlewoman that a villain would have forced,
I entered into a tent, but what happened unto me after that I know not, but
that now I find my self lying on straw like a thief with Irons on my legs.
King (said she) the short time of thy continuance in this darkness has not
satisfied (as I well hoped it would) the great mischief I do wish thee, and
that for good cause, seeing that by thee only I have endured so much sorrow,
that if the heart and bowels were taken out of my body they would be found as
burning hot, as flaming fire, and especially for the new displeasure I have now
conceived to see thee so soon delivered out of my hands, being in good hope by
thy long imprisonment to satisfy my losses past: but yet I am deceived, for
that fortune has now made me pay the usury of my forepassed joys, having given
thee into my hands, from whence by the exquisite force of this devil incarnate
(thou ar^ now delivered) who having put to death the Guardians of this Castle
and slain mine own Son, has constrained me to bring him unto thee, which I
never thought he could have done, much less that ever I should have yielded
unto his request, knowing the wrath of a woman not to have any bridle, or means
of mittigation until her desired revenge, has wrought the effect: and so had
it happened unto thee without the force of this my enemy, but in despite both
of him and thee with mine own hands I will slay my self, if my accursed fortune
bereave me not the sooner of my wretched days: Cursed be both thou and thy
King, thou now have found (said she unto the Knight,) Now take him and do thy
pleasure with him. I pray you then Lady (said he) unlose his Irons, and help me
to lead him up, with that she took the keys out of her pocket, and opened the
locks of his chains, whereby the King rose up upon his feet, and embracing the
Knight, said unto him, What great good or pleasure sir Knight did I ever do
you, whereby you should purchase this liberty unto me? By my soul I swear, that
besides the honor you have obtained in this place, you have so much bound me
unto you, that during my life I shall never forget your courtesy, wherefore if
you love me let me know your name. Noble King (said the Knight) whosoever I am,
I account my self happy if in any sort I may be able to do you service, as for
the rest pardon me if it pleases you, and let us go out of this Cave, thanking
God, that oftentimes sends scourges unto those he loves, as in his heavenly
wisdom he thinks convenient, thereby to keep them in obedience unto him. The
King perceiving well by the Knights words that he desired not to be known, and
for the same cause kept his Helmit on his head, therefore he determined not to
move him any more, but with that they went all three out of the Cave, and came
into a goodly hall, when the Sun began to go down.

CHAP. V.
How that after King Luisart was delivered out of prison, Matroco (Frerions
elder brother) with his Ships, arrived at the foot of the Rock called The
Defended Rock, and of the Battle between the said Matroco and the black Knight.

KIng Luisart, the black Knight, and the Lady being entered into the hall, as
they looked out at the windows into the Sea, there entered a Gentlewoman, and
doing reverence unto the Lady, she said, Madam, your Son Matroco with his Ships
is even now arrived at the foot of the Kock, and with him great numbers of
other vessels, that he has taken upon the Seas, What is your pleasure to say
unto him? When the Lady heard her she waxed pale, and with tears in her eyes,
answered her and said, I would to God he were as far from hence as he is near:
for my heart gives me he will speed in the like manner that others have done
before him. And as she spoke, King Luisart and the Knight looked into the sea,
and perceiving the Giants Fleet surging on the shore out of wind and weather,
among the which they knew Elizabeth Libee his nephew, and diverse others that
were bound in Chains, making great sorrow, but none of Mattocos men durst set
foot on land, having already been advertised by some of the Castle, of the
great misfortune happened therein, and for the same cause stayed so long
without, till the Giant espied at the windows the Knight and the King looking
upon them, wherewith in a great rage he cried unto the black Knight whom he
perceived all armed, and said unto him: Thou accursed slave is it thou that so
cowardly has slain my uncle, my brother, and the porter of the Castle? When
the Knight heard him, he answered him and said, I have done my endeavor to make
thee know, that it belongs not to such as thou art either to imprison Kings,
or to molest and grieve so many men as continually thou do. By all my Gods
(said Matroco) fortune favoreth thee too much, when at my arrival I find thee
armed with the walls of this my Castle, for if I had thee here upon the shore,
I would soon send thee fishing into the Sea as I have done many other rash and
bold fools like thy self, that have enterprised without cause to enforce my
Castle, but if I continue here ten years together, I will never depart hence
till I have thee in my hands, then shall thou know how I use to handle such as
thou art. Stay a while (said the black Knight) there is much more difference
between saying and doing, then there is distance of place between thee and me.
Thy threatenings make me more assured, wherefore now I fear thee lesser then I
did before, and that thou may well know it to be so, take thy choice,
whether I shall come down to sight with thee, or thou come up to me. Then shall
thou plainly see to whom God will give the victory, either to thee that
trustest in thy own strength, or to me, that trust only in him. The greatest
oxen and the fattest bulls are oftentimes brought unto the slaughter as well as
lesser beasts. So thou great beast, I advise thee to remember thy former life
before worse happen unto thee, forsaking thy accursed faith which thou now
hold, and with might maintainest, otherwise be thou assured the wrath of God
will fall upon thee, as it has already done upon thy friends. That shall be
seen (said Matroco) and if thou have the courage to stay for me, I assure thee
thou will be glad to deny the villainous words thou now have uttered. Therefore
cause the gate to be opened, for seeing thou put me to my choice, I will
come up to thee, were it into the dungeon, from whence thou have delivered that
villain standing by thee, and therewith leaving his company behind him, being
all armed, he began to mount up the Rock, and went unto the Castle, but when he
came to the Iron-gate, (which he found open, because the watch had left it and
were gone) and saw Argantes lying dead, he was in a manner out of his wits, not
so much for the prowess he knew to be in him, as that he had from his youth
been nourished and bred up in the Castle by the Giant his Father. Nevertheless
he dissembled his grief, hoping to be revenged at his pleasure, and going
further, in an other place he found the Giant armed all in green, dead and
freshly bleeding, wherewith he was so moved, that he stayed and stood still,
and casting forth a great sigh, began to cry out and said, alas Arcalaus my
good Uncle, how near does the loss of thee go to my heart, wheresoever it had
happened, but especially being done within mine own Castle, wherein I thought
long time to live and make merry with thee: Alas is fortune so cruel unto thee,
that after so many travels and dangerous adventures, with infinite perils, that
in the flower of thy youth thou have sustained, thou must in thine old years
come and receive so cruel a death within my house, which I esteemed as an
assured hold and defense, not only for me, but for thee and the rest of our
kindred and friends? O immortal Gods, what vengeance can I take upon the
Traitor that has so much offended me, seeing that to cause him to die each day
a hundred times were nothing in respect of the mischief he has done unto me?
At the least if it were Amadis De Gaul, so much esteemed of all men or any of
his two brethren, or all they three together, my grief would be somewhat eased
by reason of the sorrows I would cause them to endure. But what? Now I am
constrained to fight against one alone, who by reason considering the travel he
has taken all this day, ought already to esteem himself overcome and
vanquished: What glory then can I obtain by winning victory against him? Truly
as much as if I sought against a simple woman, being (as by nature she is) both
weak and feeble, so he unworthy of my presence will be much prouder if I do but
make a countenance to fight with him? nevertheless what blot s^ever may happen
unto mine honor, of force he must die. In this manner did the Giant lament over
the body of Arcalaus his dead Uncle, not moving from thence, till at last he
perceived the black Knight that stood to hear him, wherewith being somewhat
ashamed he marched toward him, thinking without hinderance to enter into the
dungeon, but he found the black Knight at the gate that boldly thrust him back,
and said unto him, Thou brutish and unreasomable beast, think thou to enter
in by force? Whereat the Giant all abashed, stayed without and said, Thou
biddest me to come up, have I then done thee wrong to come at thy commandment?
No (said the Knight) but beholding thy countenance, it seems thou would
enter by authority, and therewith stepping aside, he said: Now come in, and do
what thou can. When the old woman (with whom King Luisart talked) perceived
them ready to fight, in great fear she ran out of the Hall, and fell down at
her Sons feet, crying out and said, Alas Matroco, I pray thee, and by the duty
a child owes unto the mother, I command thee not to enter into this Combat,
for thou know well that of all thy brethren, thou art only left alive,
wherewith my heart is so grieved, that had it not been for the love I bear
thee, thou had found me now at thy return in as pitiful estate as thou see
thy brother Frerion: neither is there any woman at this present living in the
world, that ought (with better reason) to wish for death then I. Alas what
fortune is this, that now again I must renew the sorrows, which both time and
long patience (as I thought) had buried in oblivion? Alas miserable woman that
I am, I only have forged the weapon that has given the wound, whereby at this
present I receive this damage, for upon ye day of my husbands decease,
thinking to revenge the grief that my soul sustained, I have to the contrary
advanced mine own shame and utter ruin, justly receiving the reward that
belongs unto such, as refusing the better part, think to remedy one mischief
by procuring a worse upon themselves. Madam (said the Giant) if at this present
you have received great loss by the death of some of your friends, nevertheless
you ought not to take it so offensively, seeing they have ended their days in
honorable Combat, as behooves all worthy Knights such as they were. And as for
me, think you that for fear of death I will refuse to do that whereunto by
Knighthood I am bound? No, no: likewise what reason or what excuse should move
me, being as I am both fresh and well disposed, to refuse the Combat alone
against one simple Knight? I deny not Madam, but confess that affection causes
you to use these words, and show the nature of a woman: but you must conceive
and think with your felf that I answer you as it becomes me, prefeirving mine
honor before your tears, wherefore I beseech you suffer me to take the small
vengeance I can upon the villain that has so much offended me. Matroco (said
the Knight) thou reckonest before thine host, I would not for all the gold in
the world, lose such an occasion offered as I now have, both for mine honor and
advantage. Believe me, that neither thy mothers tears, nor the duty thou owe
unto her (as being her child) can by any means prolong the end of thee or me,
if without dissimulation thou do not by oath promise and assure me to live in
as good sort from this time forwards as in times past thou have lived wickedly.
Wherefore it were better for thee to make me know by effect the Prowess thou
vauntest thy self to have, and for me to let thee see the courtesy, which it
may be thou shall find at my hands if I overcome thee. When the Lady perceived
that her prayers could take no place, she left them, and the two Knights began
to run one upon the other so bravely, and with such fury, that King Luisart
beholding them, thought he never saw so cruel a battle, and the which abashed
him more was, that he could not presume how or in what manner the black Knight
had found him in so strange a place, and yet he knew him not: sometime he
thought him to be Amadis, but when he remembered the love he bare unto the Lady
Oriana that he had newly married, he was otherwise persuaded, and likewise he
remembered very well the Combats he had seen Amadis De Gaul make at Windsore
against Dardan le Superbe, and after that with Ardan Canile, wherein he used
all his forces, yet were they not comparable to those of ye black Knights: who
as then found himself as fresh and well disposed to fight as if he had not
fought all the day before. Again when he thought it to be his nephew
Esplandian, for that Urganda had foreshewed many wonderful things of him, he
was soon dissuaded from that opinion, by reason be left him with the Queen his
Mother, not once seeking to receive the order of Knighthood, and although that
since his departure out of Britain he might have obtained that honor, yet did
he esteem it impossble for Esplandian to do so valiantly at the first. Further,
Urganda had always prophesied of him that the first valiant acts he should
atchieve, should be renowned and spoken of by his strange and fearful
navigation in the great Serpent, wherein he should be imbarqued, and for ye
black knight he knew he arrived there in a little Barque unfurnished, whereby
he esteemed it unlikely to be his nephew Esplandian. But he thought he never
had seen so valiant and and hardy a Knight, for the longer he fought, the more
he wearied and labored Matroco. Nevertheless he continued fighting for the
space of two hours together before it could be judged who should have the
victory, but in the end the Giant feeling himself wounded in so many places
(his armor altogether broken, and his shield half cloven in two) began to
mistrust his own force. Wherefore stepping back he stayed his hand, and said:
Knight I pray thee let us breath our selves a while, and hear what I will offer
thee, which cannot be other then to thy honor and advantage. With that the
Knight stood still, and Matroco began to speak, saying: I wonder (sir Knight)
what moved thee to venture in this manner upon this Rock, wherein never any but
thy self durst enterprise to come during my Fathers life, neither yet sithence
that by his death I have been Lord thereof, and besides this thy enterprise,
wherein thou have done the thing that all others feared to do before thee, thou
have also slain three of my friends, whereof two of them as I think were the
best Knights in their time living on the earth, whereby I have just cause to
hate thee more then any man living. But when I call to mind that thou have
done therein like a valiant and hardy Knight, I have some reason to pardon
thee, and to esteem thee for one of the valiantest Champions that ever I saw in
all my life, although I have both proved and vanquished many others longer
practiced in arms, and stronger then thy self. Wherefore if the only cause of
thy arrival in this place was to deliver the King that looks on us, I am
content thou take and lead him hence in safety, and for the same cause likewise
I quit thee of the combat, upon condition that without longer sojourning here,
thou shall presently depart out of this castle that belongs unto me. When the
black Knight had ^eard him, be answered him and said, Giant, as far as I
perceive thou esteemest it a great enterprise that I have done to come hither
and find thee here within thy Castle, where by me those that thou so much
lamentest have been slain, but if thou know the master that I serve, to whom
as duty binds me, I am obedient, thou should presently perceive and plainly
see, this enterprise by thee esteemed much, to be nothing in comparison of that
he is able to do and bring to pass, for that from him only and none other
proceeds all whatsoever I have done, whereby of good right the glory
belongs unto him: and to the contrary, you that are idolaters, serve th^se
that are accustomed to rock, and lull you asleep in all kind of vices,
cruelties, outrages, thefts, murders, and infinite other wickedness, which for
a time do prosper with you, whereby you live in honor, riches, and all worldly
pleasures, and so are nusted in all filthiness, but surely, such manner of life
may well be compared to buildings erected upon the sands, that cannot continue
long, but are most sure to have an evil end, even then when they are esteemed
to be at the top of all their worldly felicity: like as it happened unto
Lucifer and his fellows, whereof it may be thou have heard spoken. Nevertheless
if thou will acknowledge thy former life, and of a wicked wretch (as thou have
always lived) become a virtuous Knight, and as thou have been most cruel and
inhumane, become courteous and pitiful, forsaking thy vain and foolish faith to
believe in my God, who is the most true and mighty Lord of all Lords, I will
not only pardon thee the Combat whereof thou have the worst, but will leave
thee thy castle free unto thy self, and so will be thy friend, upon condition
nevertheless, that from hence forth both thou and I shall employ our forces to
overthrow and destroy all those, that (as thy self) do walk in darkness, from
whence (if thou will believe me) thou shall come out. This answer of the black
Knight moved the Giant in such manner, that like a wild Bear he began to foam
at the mouth, and said unto the Knight, Thou accursed wretch, and of all others
the most vile, do thou so little esteem my force that thou think me
already overcome and vanquished? And therewith he pulled away the pieces of his
Shield that hung about his neck, and threw them on the ground, and taking his
sword in both his hands, he struck at the black Knight, thinking to cleave his
head, but he perceiving the stroke, stepped under the blow, and closed with the
Giant, whereby the sword passing over his head, her upon the pavement with so
great force, that it brake in pieces, and therewith the pummel fell out of his
hand, so that the two Knights being closed together, could not hurt one the
other but with their fists or pummels of their swords, whereby the black Knight
much grieved the Giant, before he could find the means to recover the handle
of his sword, but in the end he found means to unlose himself from the Knight,
and as he recoiled back, shunning the fury of his enemy, the old woman seeing
her son in so great danger, went between them, and weeping most bitterly, said
unto the Knight: Alas Gentleman, if ever you came of woman, or have compassion
of a poor widows estate, I beseech you for the honor of him in whom you
believe, to pity my misery, and leaving me this only son, content your self
with the death of those, that most cruelly you have slain before my face. Lady
(said the Knight) then cause him to ask mercy, and he shall find it in me,
otherwise you labor but in vain. To ask mercy of thee (said the Giant) I can
never be dishonored thereby, knowing it by experience to be most true, that
such power and strength as I I find in thee, comes not from thy self, but
proceeds and is only caused by the favor of thy God, for without his help
thou had no more been able to endure against me, than straw against the
flaming fire, therefore it were great folly in me to fight both against God and
man, but I had rather (perceiving my end to approach) ask him mercy and
forgiveness, then believe any longer in those in whom I have hitherto put my
trust, whereof I am right sorry, so that whether I fight, or fight not, or
whether I live or die, I protest and make a vow from henceforth, never to
worship other then Jesus Christ thy Lord and Master. Meanest thou as thou
say (said the Knight?) I truly, answered Matroco, and therewith kneeling on
the ground, and lifting both his eyes and hands unto heaven, he cried out and
said, Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary, I most certainly believe thee to be the
only, infallible, true, and living God, and that all others whom during my
life I have worshipped and adored, are of no power, wherefore forsaking their
false doctrine, to worship thee according to thy holy Law, I most humbly
beseech thee to be merciful unto me: and making the sign of the Cross upon the
ground, he stooped down and kissed it. Which the black Knight beholding, for
joy thanked God with all his heart, and taking his sword by the point,
presented the handle to Matroco, saying unto him: Truly valiant Knight, among
so many triumphant victories that in times past you have obtained, there never
happened any one so honorable as this, for that herein you have not only
vanquished me, but your self also, that for strength of body are invincible:
wherefore as a victorious Knight I present my sword unto you. It shall not be
so (said Matroco) but the contrary, for I being vanquished, submit my self unto
your pleasure, and from this time forwards dispose of me, my goods and honor,
as you shall think convenient. I pray you then (said the black Knight) have
pity upon the poor prisoners that even now I saw bound within your Galleys, and
let them be sent for hither, that I might speak with them: With all my heart
(said the Giant) and therewith calling his mother, said unto her, Madam, I pray
you send down unto the ships to fetch the prisoners that the Knight desires to
see, and let none of my men set foot on land till I send them further
Commission, which she presently did. But when Master Elizabeth Libee, and the
rest of the prisoners heard the message, they made no little sorrow, thinking
the best comfort they could have would be a most miserable and cruel
imprisonment, but when they entered the first gate of the Castle, where the
Porter and Arcalaus lay dead, they were somewhat revived, and in better hope
than at the first, especially when they saw the black Knight that came to meet
them, who without making himself known to any but to Master Elizabeth, took him
by the hand, and said unto him: My good friend, because I will not that any but
you alone shall know who I am, I pray you in the morning come and ^isit me in
an Hermitage that stands at the foot of this hill, where I will stay for you,
in the mean time you shall find King Luisart in the Castle, who I leave behind
me, but as you love your life, be secret and tell him not who I am. Master
Elizabeth was much abashed when he knew him to be Esplandian, and willingly
would have had more conference with him, had it not bin for the charge he had
given him before, as also that at the same time a Gentlewoman came unto him,
and said, Sir Knight, if ever you will see Matroco alive, make haste and come
unto him, for he is even now fallen upon the ground, and (as I think is dead)
he has lost so much of his blood. Go (said he) to Master Elizabeth, and help
him what you can, for your help will do him more pleasure at this time, than my
presence can comfort him, wherewith he left Master Elizabeth with the
Gentlewoman, and went unto the Hermitage, where the night before he had lodged,
but he got not thither before the Sun went down, being so weary and sore with
fighting all the day, that he could not go further: where he found the Hermit
and the dumb man fitting together, by whom he was presently unarmed, and meat
set before him, for all that day he had not eaten, and having supped, they
laid him in a bed, where the Hermits daughter, when she came to see her Father
used to lie, and visiting his body to see if he were hurt, they found it much
bruised and black in diverse places, but not wounded by reason of the goodness
of his Armor, which no Sword or other weapon could pierce, then they anointed
him with certain ointments that appeased the soreness of his bruises, wherewith
he fell on sleep till the next morning.

CHAP. VI.
Of the great displeasure King Luisart took for the departure of the black
Knight, and what conference he had with Arcabonna Mother to Matroco, touching
her unfortunate life.

THe black Knight being departed out of the Castle he had newly conquered, and
the prisoners entered therein, among the rest King Luisart knew master
Elizabeth, wherefore he rose up (sitting by Arcabonna, Matrocos Mother, who as
then leaned on her lap) and went to embrace him, asking him what fortune had
brought him thither at that time to save the Giants life, being in so great
extremity? And it pleases your Grace (said he) once this day I did not think
he would have had so much need of my help as he now has: But as I understand
by a Knight that I meet going down the hill, he is in great danger of his life:
Nevertheless for the honor of him that commanded me to help him, I will do the
best I can. I pray you do so (said the King.) Then master Elizabeth caused
Matroco to be softly laid upon his bed, and being unarmed searched his wounds,
and perceiving them to be deadly, would not for that time do any thing unto
them but stanch their bleeding, leaving the rest till he had slept, wherein he
was newly fallen. In the mean time King Luisart not forgetting what master
Elizabeth at his coming in had said unto him, asked him what was become of the
black Knight: and it pleases your Grace (said he) as we entered into the
Castle, I met him going secretly from hence, and not minding to return again.
By Saint Mary (said the King) have I received so great aid at his hands, and am
I so unfortunate, that he should depart from hence without knowing him? Truly I
am sorry I stayed here to see what would become of Matroco, if I had not, I
would surely have followed him, and with much importunity have craved his name.
Master Elizabeth (said he) will you upon your faith tell me truly whether you
know him or not? If it be so, if you will do me any pleasure, hide it no longer
from me, for I never had so great desire to know any Knight, not only for the
aid he has done me, but for the valiant enterprise at this present achieved
by him. Your grace shall pardon me if it pleases you, said master Elizabeth,
for it is true that I know him well, but if I tell you any more, I should do him
wrong, for he has expressly forbidden me to do it. I see well (said the King)
you will but increase the desire I have to know him, and that is worse, by the
same means bereave me of all hope ever to see him again. With that they entered
into the Hal, where they meet Arcabonne half dead with sorrow, whom the King in
courteous manner prayed to stay a while, asking her how her son did. He does
(said she) as one in whom I have as little hope of life as of the other that
lies dead in the court, and to say ye truth, it seems that fortune has
wholly bent her self against me, not ceasing continually to heap sorrow upon
sorrow to make me desperate. Notwithstanding I know full well how to be
revenged, and that is, in dispight of her and her cruelties to bereave my self
of life whereof she shall lose her power, which by good reason I cannot well
prolong, seeing she has not spared me one hour of rest since she first began,
still playing her part in tormenting me, but of all other my misfortunes, none
has grieved me so much as the force of this Knight, by whose power (said she
unto the King) I see thee now delivered out of my hands, and from the cruel
torments I had prepared for thee, if accursed fortune had not withstood them.
Madam (said the King) I pray you declare unto me the cause of this your great
malice toward me, and whether at any time I have done you wrong or injury
whereby I should deserve it: that will I show thee, said Arbaconne, not therein
to do thee pleasure, but rather to grieve thee more when thou shall know and
understand that I was born and bred in the same country, wherein to my great
despite thou have reigned overlong, for there I and Arcalaus my brother by
father and mother, were does begotten and brought up in the art of Nigromancy,
which oftentimes we have practiced and put in effect, therewith to torment
diverse persons that never did offend us. In the which art, as age and knowledge
increased, I growing very expert, in the end became acquainted with Cartadaque,
as then Lord of this Castle, and with him I grew in so great familiarity, that
he married me, and with him ever sithence have dwelt here in this Castle, where
not long after I was delivered of a Son called Lindoraque, after that of
another named Matroco, that now lies in this bed, and lastly of the third
called Frerion, whom thou have slain, and my brother also, that went to help
Argantes the Porter of this Castle. And being thus married unto such a husband
as Cartadaque, was so much feared and redoubted in all places, and having three
of the most valiant and worthy knights to my sons, that ever lived, I was so
elevated in pride, and so little esteemed of cruel fortune, that I thought it
unpossible for her to work me any woe. But by tract of time I found it
otherwise, for by little and little she has wholly changed my joy into most
grievous sorrow, and will thou know how? Then I think thou do yet remember
the discord that long sithence happened between thee and Childadan King of
Ireland, and of the battle wherein thou overcamest him, where my deceased
husband minding to be present, expressly departed from hence thither, and as
accursed fortune would, took my son Lindoraque with him, and having traveled
many countries, at the last arrived at the place where my brother stayed for
them, traveling all three together with full purpose and intent to do thee all
the injury they could, and they had scarce entered into a forest not far from
London, but they meet a Knight as then surnamed Le Beautenebreux, riding in
company of a Gentlewoman, that ware on her head a Call all set with strange
flowers, whom my Son (as accursed fortune would) liked so well, that with a
great desire to have her to present unto the Lady Madasine his love, commanded
one of his Squires to go fetch her to him, which the Knight called Le
Beautenebreux, whereof I speak, would not permit, but sent ye messenger back
again well beaten, wherewith my Son being moved, thought to have her by force,
but it fell out otherwise for him, for at the first encounter the Knight with
one blow with his Sword, thrust him into the body, whereof he died, and as much
had chanced to his Uncle Arcalaus, if his horse had not saved him by running
away, having first lost four of his fingers on the right hand. Yet fortune not
contenting her self with this mischief, prepared me a wose, for my husband (who
for his valor and prowess was feared and redoubted throughout all Asia and
Europe) was cruelly slain by the same murderer of Lindoraque, upon the same
day the battle was fought, if thou can remember it, whereby ever sithence I
remained a widow with my other Sons as then very young and tender of age, with
whom I have passed the greatest part of my days most extremely, weeping and
lamenting with continual sadness, which had been more grievous unto me, had it
not been for the hope I conceived of their valor and prowess. But to come to
the point of my discourse, time and reason having in a manner suppressed my
forepassed sorrows, news was brought me of the last victory thou did obtain
by the prowess of the Knight named Le Beautenebreux (now as it is said, called
Amadis de Gaul) and likewise of my brothers imprisonment, wherewith I was so
grieved, that respecting not my old years, I took upon me to travel into
Britain, hoping by some means to get him out of thy hands. But before I arrived
there, I had certain news of his delivery, nevertheless considering with my
self the fore-passed injuries I have received by thy kinsmen, namely by that
wicked wretch Amadis De Gaul, I determined before my return hither to find
the means to make him know that small good will I bear him. But having employed
all my art, and finding it in vain to work any further therein against him, by
reason of a ring he bears daily on his finger, given him by that wicked
enchantress Urganda: I determined to prove my skill (which could not take
effect in him) against thee, being advertised of thy often riding to hunt, with
very few in thy company, where I made thee see one of my Gentlewomen, and a
villain that would deflower her, whom thou thoughtest to succor, and if thou
now remembrest me, I am the very same thou foundest in the pavillion, following
after him that fled before thee, and there thou remainedst enchanted, from
whence we carried thee into our Barque, and without knowledge unto any but mine
own servants, thou wast brought hither by Sea, with full deliberation to cause
thee languish in prison: in the mean time with the help of my allies and
friends, thy country should be invaded, but I find my self deceived. For that
this place which never was conquered by any power whatsoever the Kings of
Turkey, or the Emperors of Constantinople, could ever bring against it, in less
then one day is both conquered and taken by one simple Knight, with the loss of
my two Sons, and others, esteemed Paragons among the best Knights in the world,
whereby it may clearly be perceived, that by means of thy captivity there is
much more mischief happened unto me then sorrow to thy person. While Arcabonne
made this long discourse, the King that still beheld her in the face, remembered
well it was she to whom he spoke in the pavillion, wherefore he said unto her,
In good faith Madam I now believe you better then at the first, yet me thinks
you do me wrong to make me bear the burden of another man's offense. Think
thou so (said she?) No truly, for thy imprisonment only had wrought great
damage unto diverse men, but to me and mine great profit and advantage. It might
be so (answered the King) notwithstanding I will not cease to do you all the
favor and pleasure that I can. In the mean time I pray you take your adversity
with as great constancy as you may. By my soul (said she) thou speak at thy
pleasure, and therewith in a great fury, she went into Matroco's Chamber,
leaving the King that had not eaten all that day, wherefore he called master
Elizabeth and the other company, that mean time had prepared his meat, and
sitting down to supper, they discoursed of the talk he and Arcabonne had
together, till it was time to go to rest when the King went to bed, leaving
Libee to guard the Castle.

CHAP. VII.
How the Giant Matroco died, whereat Arcabonne was in such a fury, that having
failed to kill King Luisart, she threw her self headlong out of a window into
the sea.

KIng Luisart was not fully asleep, but he was forced to awake by means of a
cry of a woman that he heard, making great lamentation, wherefore starting up,
and calling master Elizabeth and the rest of his company, he took a Hatchet
which he had laid under the bolster of his Bed, and went to see what it meant,
and as he passed through the Hall, he perceived Arcabonne coming toward him
(covered only with a Mantle) wringing her hands, and tearing of her hair,
making great sorrow. Wherewith the King went to her, asking her what she meant?
Alas (said she) that which I most feared, and ever sithence yesterday most
assuredly expected, is fallen out: and as she uttered those words, she pulled
out a naked sword that she bare under her arm, wherewith she meant to kill the
King But as fortune would, he perceived the blow coming, and stepped aside, and
with the force of the blow the sword hitting upon the pavement, fell out of the
old woman's hands, wherewith the King stepped upon it, and when he stooped to
take up, Arcabonne perceiving the chamber door where master Elizabeth was, to
be open, she ran thither, and threw her self out of a window into the sea: the
King followed her not, but went into the chamber where Matroco lay, and
perceiving him to be dead, came forth again into the Hall, where he met master
Elizabeth, that told him news of Arcabonnes death. In good truth (said he)
there is no extremity like to that of a woman, behold, I pray you with what
fury she was possessed, for as I issued out of the Chamber, I met her, and
thinking with fair speeches and good persuasions to comfort her, she failed not
much to kill me with this sword that I have in my hand: and as they beheld it,
the King knew it to be the same he wore when he was enchanted, which pleased
him so well, that he said, Ha good sword, the best and faithfullest companion
that ever man had! how many victories have I had by thy means, and what
combats and adventures have I brought to an end by thy help? And by great
misfortune having lost thee, thou knew me, for being in a mad woman's hands,
that with thee would have slain me, thou have not only denied her that favor,
but have fallen out of her hands to return again unto him that never (while his
arm is able to wield thee) will forsake thee. Now (said he to Libee) if we
chance to be assaulted, we have wherewith to defend us. Truly (said master
Elizabeth) I believe all those that could hurt us in this place, are either
dead or fled away, wherefore I am of opinion in the morning to bury them that
are slain, mean time expecting some means whereby we may return into your
Graces country, we will enquire what is become of the black Knight that you so
much desire to know. You shall do well (said the King) and therewith each man
went to rest till the morning, that master Elizabeth and others of his company
went to bury the porter and the rest of the dead Knights, among the which they
knew Arcalaus the Inchanter, that not fifteen days before had arrived in the
Castle; for at his delivery out of prison, being advertised of King Luisart's
sudden departure, he suspected his sister Arcabonne had stolen him away, and
therefore came expressly to the Castle armed in green as you have heard, and
although master Elizabeth had seen him oftentimes before, yet at the first
fight he doubted it was he, considering where not long before he had left him,
wherefore he sent to tell the King, that presently came to see him, who knew
him well, yet I thought (said he) he had still been prisoner in the Ferm Isle:
And it pleases your Grace (said master Elizabeth) he was delibered from thence
before my departure, and therewith showed him the means how, as it is at large
declared in the end of our Fourth Book. Behold (said the King) how great are
the judgments of God! let his body be put into some cold place, for I am well
assured that his soul shall endure more heat than ever it had in this world.

CHAP. VIII.
How master Elizabeth went to find the black Knight in the Hermitage, and what
conference they had.

ARcalaus and the rest being buried, King Luisart went into his Chamber, and as
he looked into the sea, he could not see the ships that Matroco brought with
him, wherefore enquiring which way they went, he was certified, that when
Arcabonne threw her self out of the window into the Sea, they took up her dead
body, and laying it in their Vessels, hoised sayls, and put to sea. Let them go
to the devil (said the King) and we to dinner, if there be any thing to eat:
your dinner is ready (said master Elizabeth) when it pleases your Grace to sit
down: whereupon the meat was brought in, and the King did eat with a good
appetite, but he had taken so little rest the night before, that as he sat at
the Table he fell asleep. Wherefore rising up, he laid him down on his Bed,
commanding his men not to wake him, wherewith master Elizabeth was well
pleased, knowing that in the mean time he might have convenient leisure to go
unto Esplandian, as he had promised, whereupon he departed secretly out of the
Castle, and going down the hill, went so long that he came to the Hermitage,
where he found the Hermit and the dumb man sitting at the door, and he
saluting them, asked if the black Knight were there? the Hermit said no: but
the dumb man made signs that he should go into the Chamber, which he did, where
he found him very melancholy lying upon a bed. But when he perceived master
Elizabeth, he took him by the hand, and said: My good friend master Elizabeth
you are welcome hither, tell me I pray you how you left the Ferm Isle, in this
manner to serve Matroco and his barbarous companions? Wherewith he laughed, for
the Giant had tied him to a chain, and made him row in his Galleys as other
slaves did. My Lord (said master Elizabeth) when you received the Order of
Knighthood, and that King Bruneo, Quedragant, and all our company that were as
then with your father Amadis de Gaul, slept by means of the melodious noise of
nine Trumpets that sounded on the shore, Grasinde my Mistress sent me on a
message to the Marquess Saluder her brother, to certify him of her Marriage
with the Prince of Sansuegue, wherefore I imbarqued my self, and had so good a
wind, that in short time after I arrived at Constantinople, where I found the
Emperor, that took great pleasure to hear me discourse what had happened
sithence the return of Gastilles his Nephew. And the next day when I meant to
return, the Princess Leonorine, who in my mind is the beautifullest Princess
living at this time, sent for me, most instantly desiring me that in the
presence of Queen Minoresse, with diverse other Ladies and Gentlewomen, I would
show her what I had heard touching the Knight with the green sword. For (said
she) although that now we understand he is named Amadis de Gaul, yet will we
not change his other name, till such time he sends us some other of his
lineage, or else return himself to do us service, according to his promise. Then
I showed them of the strangeness of the Ark of Lovers, the singularities of the
Isle, whereof they never had heard, the loss of King Luisart, the manner how you
received the Order of Knighthood, the ceremonies that at the same time Urganda
commanded to be used, the commandment that your father Amadis de Gaul gave you
to come and serve them in this place, and lastly how in the end we fell asleep
in the great Serpent from whence we were carried (not knowing thereof) to the
Palace of Apolidon, where when we awaked, we found all our company together
(only you) Manley, the King of Dacia, Ambor, and Talanque, not knowing what
was become of you. And while I made this long discourse, the Princess Leonorine
would not suffer me to make an end, but interrupting me in my tale, said unto
me: Master Elizabeth, when my Cousin Gastilles returned from thence, I remember
that among other things by him declared, he said something touching the young
gentleman whereof you speak, wherefore I pray you show us what you know of him:
wherein seeking to fulfill her request, I began to show her the manner of your
nativity, how King Luisart found you in the forest with the Lions, of the
letters he received that day, what letters you had on your body when you were
born, whereof some were as white as Snow, signifyng your own name, the rest as
red as blood, showing the name of your love, as yet unknown, by reason the
characters cannot be understood. Then smilingly she asked me how you would know
it, and I answered her, that love in time would learn, and that for certain she
would be of royal blood, and one that should be the beautifullest Lady living
in her time. Truly (said she) he deserves no less, wherefore I pray you
heartily when you see him, persuade him to come hither and fulfill the promise
that his father made us, for I have great desire to see him, that he might be
as much at our commandment, as heretofore his Father Amadis has been, which I
promised her to do, although I said I doubted it would not be so soon as I
could wish. So my Lord I stayed certain days at Constantinople, speaking
continually of you, that done, I imbarqued my self again, where by evil fortune
we fell into the hands of the Giant Matroco, whom as then was upon the Sea.
While master Elizabeth showed the black Knight of the beauty of the Princess
Leonorine, and what she had inquired of him, love entered so far into his
heart, that oftentimes he changed color, but for the time he covered his
intent as much as he could: and entering into another matter, asked master
Elizabeth how he found the means to leave King Luisart* As well as I would wish
(said he) for as soon as he had dined, he lay down to sleep, in the mean time I
came hither to you. I pray you (said the Knight) let him know nothing touching
me. And wherefore (said master Elizabeth) will you hide your self from him,
seeing there is no Prince living in the world, worthier then he to be honored
and served of all good Knights? It is true (said the Knight) but I have done so
little as yet, that I am ashamed he should hear no better news of me, seeing I
am in hope, that in time I shall do great matters, which of themselves will set
forth my renown, without the praise of other men. Seeing it is your pleasure
(said master Elizabeth) I will do so, although it would rejoice him much, to
hear that such unexpected aid should come unto him only by your means. That
shall be at another time (said the Knight) and not now: Wherefore lest he
should miss you when he awaketh, I pray you return unto the Castle, and when
you see convenient time, come hither again to visit me. Wherewith master
Elizabeth took his leave, vidding him farewell, and went the same day he came
toward the Castle.

CHAP. IX.
How Carmelle the Hermits Daughter found the black Knight sleeping in the
Hermitage, and thinking to kill him, perceiving him so fair, she fell in love
with him.

MAster Elizabeth gone from the Hermitage where he left the black Knight, went
so fast and made such haste, that he came again unto the Castle, not missed of
any, yet the King was awake before he came, who leaning in a window, and seeing
him below in the Court, asked him if he had slept: No, and it likes your Grace
(said he) I have been abroad, walking along the country, which I find
environed with the goodliest meddows that ever were seen: come up hither (said
the King) and we will talk with you, but he was no sooner entered into the
Chamber, when Carmelle the Hermites Daughter came to the King, and kneeling
down before him, said, May it please your Grace to entertain me into your
service, that am one of your natural subjects, and will be during life:
wherewith the King took her up and said, Gentlewoman, if you desire any thing
at my hands, assure your self it shall not be denied, for I did never during my
life but honor and pleasure such as you are, and although such favors have
oftentimes turned to my great trouble, therein do I blame no man but my self,
for that God justly sends both good and evil, when, where, and to whom it
pleases him, wherefore I pray you show me who you are. Then Carmelle made a
long discourse, how from her youth upwards she had served her mistress
Arcabonne, and what occasion moved her father to become an Hermit, as you heard
before. Truly Gentlewoman (said the King) if you will return into great
Britain, I will take you with me. I will do (said she) what your Grace
commands: in the mean time I pray you grant me leave to give my father
intelligence who you are, for he will be most ready and glad to do your Grace
service. With a good will (said the King) and tell him I desire to see him,
wherewith Carmelle thanked his Grace, and because it was late, she went again
into her Chamber till the next morning that she rose, and issuing out of the
Castle, about break of the day went down a certain path, she ordinarily used to
go, whereby she came into the Hermitage at such time as the Hermit and the
dumb man were gone to the Barque to fetch such necessaries as the black Knight
wanted, who in the mean time slept in his bed, for after that master Elizabeth
had given him intelligence what the Princess Leonorine had said, he could not
rest, till the very same time when she entered into her Fathers cell, wherein
she found him, and not doubting any thing, went into the Chamber, where she
heard the black Knight s^ort, wherewith being abashed she opened the window,
and perceived him asleep, his Sword hanging at his beds-head, which she took
down, and softly drew out of the Scabberd, finding it freshly spotted with
blood, whereupon she suspected it was he that had slain Frerion, Matroco, and
others in the Castle, and as she looked about her she knew his black Armor,
wherewith she was in such a fear, that she had almost fallen down, and let the
Sword fall out of her hands, but taking courage, she went nearer to the bed, to
know him better, being fully determined if it were he, to kill him as he lay,
and therewith began by little and little to uncover his face, but he showed so
fair, that suddenly the fury she had, changed into so burning a love, that
during her life it was never quenched, in such manner that the more she beheld
him, the more did her love increase, and as he fell on sleep when his mind was
busied with the imagination conceived of Leonorine, after Carmelle had beheld
him long, he turned toward her, and without waking, cast forth a great sigh
saying in his sleep, Alas poor wretch, what shall become of me? The Gentlewoman
knew well he had not seen her, wherefore she imboldened her self to kiss him,
and found his face all wet with tears, whereby she feared he had some
melancholy humor that troubled him, and although she esteemed not thereof,
feeling her new disease much more then his grief, taking all to her advantage,
she hoped from that time forwards to find the means to obtain his love, yet
did she fail thereof, for that love (to show his power) had wounded them both
diversely in one place, and at one time, a thing almost incredible, for who
would ever think that little god would enter into such a place? Where a poor
Hermit lived all alone in most strict manner, with a few cold roots, and not
his belly full of bread: yet did he overcome them both, in the most unfit time
(as it may be thought) that could be found, for the black Knight had endured so
great travel in fighting, and the Gentlewoman seen so many of her friends slain
at one time, that the one had not so much need of comfort, but the other as
much cause to rest. If then it be so (as it is most true) that we are all
subject to this Tyrant, he that has past the flower of his youth, not tasting
of his fury, may not think himself in any thing more happy, seeing it is his
manner to constrain young men to love, and oftentimes old fools to dote. In
that sort the Gentlewoman did penance for the evil she conceived against the
black Knight, and had continued longer there, had it not been for fear to be
discovered. Wherefore with the sword in her hand she returned back again
toward the Castle, and without being once perceived, entered at a postern door,
whereof she had the key, and so went up into her chamber, departing from the
hermitage not long before her Father and the dumb man returned from the barque,
and found the Knight sleeping, who presently awaked, and missing his Sword,
asked them if they had taken it away. No truly (said the Hermit) for we came
but now from the Sea side Wherewith Esplandian esteeming it lost, made account,
that as he had conquered it after a strange manner, so he had lost it by a
stranger means, but the Hermit and the dumb man sought it about the house, and
could not find it.

CHAP. X.
How King Luisart being advertised by Carmelle where the Black Knight was,
departed with her alone to find him out.

CArmelle returned to the Castle (as it is said before) went to the King, who
at the same time was talking with master Elizabeth, touching the wrong he
thought the black Knight did him, in departing thence without being known,
seeking by that means if it were possible to draw from him what he knew as
touching the Knight: but all in vain, for the King was not so subtle to
undermine him, but master Elizabeth was as crafty to prevent him, not intending
to falsify the trust reposed in him: and although the Gentlewoman had
determined to show ye king what she had learned of the Knight, hoping thereby
to obtain her purpose. Nevertheless, seeing master Elizabeth in presence, she
held her peace till he went away, and perceiving the King alone, said unto him,
My Lord, if it pleases your Grace to show me so much favor, as to assist me in
a thing that imports me as much my life, in the behalf of the Knight that you
so much desire to see, before to morrow at night I will show him unto you, if
you think good, in such a place, where you may easily speak with him: and to
the end you shall not suspect me of untruth, I will show you a certain token,
that when you see it, I am assured you will easily believe me. Gentlewoman
(said the King) if you do so, I will not fail if it be possible, to satisfy
your request. I beseech your Grace (said she) when you are both together, it
would please you to be a mean unto him in my behalf to grant me a gift that I
shall ask him. By the faith of a Prince (said he) I will not fail to do it, nor
a greater matter than that, if it lies in my power. Then follow me (said the
Gentlewoman) bringing him where she had laid the sword, and showing it unto
^im, asked if he had never seen it. That I have (said the King, and I would to
God the Knight that knows so well how to handle it, were as near unto me as
it is. You shall see him in the morning (said she) if it pleases you to follow
me. That will I do (said the King) armed or unarmed I esteem not whether, so I
may see him. Then be you ready (said she) when I shall call, and let no man go
with you. Content (said the King) wherewith he went out of the Chamber, and
passing through the Court, he met Libee and others, to whom he said, that in
the morning he meant to walk along the Rock (because master Elizabeth had
certified him it was so goodly a Country) and that none but Carmelle should
bear him company: and falling into other speeches, they passed the time till
they went to rest, but the King could not sleep for the great desire he had to
see the Knight, whereby he was hardly fallen asleep, when Carmelle came to
awake him, saying: My Lord, may it please your Grace to remember your promise?
Let us go (said he) and therewith making himself ready, commanded two horses to
be sadled, one for himself, the other for Carmelle, and issuing out of the
Castle, rode toward the Hermitage. And they had not traveled far, but they
perceived a man coming toward them in great haste, and as he came near, the
Gentlewoman knew him, asking him what he meant to make such haste, and whither
he rode? I ride to the Castle (said be) to fetch Matroco, and his brother
Frerion, with all speed to help their Uncle Lindoraque, who coming to see them,
has met with two Knights armed all in white, that have slain his men, and (as
I think) I left him in as great danger as possibly may be. When the king heard
him, he thought him to be of the black knights company, and said unto the
Gentlewoman, I pray you stay here with this man, and I will ride to see them,
and with that he set spurs to his Horse, and taking the same way the other
came, he perceived afar off the two knights fighting with the Giant, that
defended himself most valiantly with his Mace, forcing them oftentimes to
recoil, but the two knights as bold as nimble, handled him in such sort, that
he knew not how to defend himself, and if he had not slain one of their horses,
it had gone worse with him. Neverthless the knight on horseback seeking to
revenge his companion, was nothing abashed, but when the other rose up, set
more fierce upon the Giant then before, in such manner, that they closed, and
striving together, sought by all means to unhorse each other. Mean time the
knight on foot went unto the Giant, and taking him by the left leg, pulled him
by such force, that both he and the other knight fell off their horses, and
holding each other fast, the Giant fell under with his face upwards, wherewith
the knight that threw him down, thrust him into the face, that he was
constrained to let go his hold, nevertheless rising up again with great force,
and laying hold upon the knight that had so wounded him, he threw him on the
ground, mean time the other gave the Giant such a blow upon the head, that he
began to reel, and therewith stretching out his legs, yielded up the ghost.
With that the king rode somewhat nearer, and perceived the two knights to bear
black Crosses, that showed them to be Christians, wherefore riding boldly unto
them, he went so near that they knew him, whereupon they went to do him honor,
much abashed to see him. But the King perceiving the honor they did him, was no
less abashed, and said unto them: My good friends, I know you not, I pray you
put off your Helmets that I may see your faces, which they did, whereby he knew
the one to be Talanque son of Galaor, the other Ambor de Gadel, son of Angriote
de Stravaulx, whom he friendly embraced, and said unto them, In faith my good
friends, it is not without cause, if it likes you well, to see me here, for
all my life have I desired the companies of your fathers, the like do I of
their children, wherefore for the love of God I pray you show me what strange
adventure has brought you into this Country. And it pleases your Grace (said
Talanque) we seek after a Knight armed all in black, of whom as yet we can hear
no news. Do you know his name (said the king?) That we do (said Ambor) for it
is your Nephew Esplandian: that contents me (said the king) do but follow me
and I will bring you where he is With that Ambor, who before was alighted to
honor the king, mounted again on horsback, and Talanque on the Giants horse,
for his own was slain, and all three together rode the way the king came
thither, till such time they espied the Gentlewoman that stayed for him: who
perceiving them to ride in such haste toward her, was in mind to have fled
away, fearing they had taken the king, and forcibly had him with them, but
perceiving them by their gestures to be his friends, she stayed till they came
to her, saying to the king: My Lord, where has your Grace gotten company so
soon? Gentlewoman (said he) you shall know it all in good time, but what have
you done (said he) with the man that I left with you? Let us know what news he
has told you. Truly (said she) I had no sooner assured him of the death of
Matroco and the rest of the Castle, but he fled over this hill, as if all the
devils in hell had been behind him: yet he told me that the Giant his master
had heard some rumor thereof, and for the same cause was coming to the Castle
to know the truth, accompanied only with two Knights, that he caused to ride
before him, but to their hard fortunes, for he found them both slain, not
knowing who had done it, but only that not long after he met with two strange
Knights, that assailed him, and left them fighting (as he said) together. By
God (said the King) if the first two Knights sped hardly, their master that
followed after them had little better entertainment, for they are all slain
upon the way, and here are the Knights that did it, whom I pray you let us take
with us, for they are friends and companions unto that Knight you have promised
to show me. Let us go then (said she) seeing it is your Graces pleasure: and
therewith they rode unto the Hermitage, at the entery whereof, they found the
Hermit set upon a stone, who being abashed to see his daughter in such company,
asked whither she went. Father (said she) here is King Luisart your Prince and
mine, whom I have brought to see you. And althought the Hermit had not seen him
in long time before, yet he presently knew him, wherewith he stepped to kiss
his feet, which the King would not suffer him to do, but embraced him, and
lighting off his horse, followed the Gentlewoman, till he met the dumb man,
that hearing the noise and trampling of horses, came to see who they were, and
perceiving the king, he bowed his head before him. Nevertheless the king went
foward, not staying to speak unto him, entering presently after Carmelle into
the Chamber, where he found the knight set upon the beds-side. Wherewith
Esplandian presently knew him, but the king taking him up, weeping for joy
embraced him. With that Talanque and Ambor entered in, and perceiving their
companion (that they so long had sought) were mavelous glad, and coming to
embrace him, the King said unto Esplandian: My son, although you have sought by
all means to hide your self from us, yet God has so wrought, that at one
instant we have all three found you out: wherefore I pray you let us depart
hence, and go with us unto the Castle, where you shall be better at your ease
than in this simple Hermitage. My Lord, (said he) I am at your commandment,
with that he went to embrace Talanque and Ambor, asking them (and they him)
what had happened unto them since Urganda caused them to be dubbed Knights. By
Gods help (said the King) you shall stay to hear the sequel until we be in the
Castle, for then you shall have better leisure to declare the same. With that
he called Carmelle, willing her to return with all diligence to the Castle,
and command Libee to bring one of Matroco's Horses for Esplandian. My Lord
(said Ambor) it will be late before he comes hither, he shall rather have my
Horse, and I will go on foot: but you shall not (said the King) get you upon
Carmelles Horse, and let her sit up behind you. In which manner they rode unto
the Castle, after whom the Hermit and the dumb man followed as fast as they
could. But they scarce alighted off their horses, Ambor and Talanque being
unarmed, but Carmelle moved with the extreme passions of love she bare unto the
black Knight, had almost slain her self with the sword that the day before she
had stolen from him, the occasion whereof proceeded from a conceit that he would
disdain her as unworthy of him, he being the son of Amadis de Gaul, as she
understood: yet in the end she remembered the promise the king had made,
wherefore she determined to desire so much of him, to be a means unto
Esplandian, that he would grant she might never be absent from him, but would
serve him during her life with all fidelity, and to the same end, putting her
determination in effect, as they sat all together, she kneeled before the king,
and said, My Lord, now your Grace sees I have kept my promise. That is true
(said he) and while I live I shall not be unmindful of it. My Lord (said she)
then I trust your Grace has not forgotten the gift you promised me: and to
perform your word, I pray you be a means to the black Knight that he will grant
me my request. Gentlewoman (said the King) be you assured I will do it with all
my heart. Your Grace (said she) as yesterday gave me leave to visit my father
in the Hermitage, who as it fortuned when I came thither was gone forth,
whereat I was abashed, because he never used to be far from thence: And finding
the door open, I went into a chamber (that I caused to be furnished) wherein
sometimes I use to lie, when time or foul weather would not permit me to return
unto the castle, where I found this Knight (pointing to Esplandian) which you
also much desired to see, fast sleeping, his Sword hanging at his beds-head,
wherewith not long sithence he has slain those, that from my infancy had
brought me up, and being moved by reason of my no little loss, with a desire to
revenge both my self and my friends, I thought to kill him, and was so near the
point to execute my will, that as I held the Sword drawn in my hand, and began
to lift up mine arm to give the blow, he seemed so fair within mine eye, that
suddenly I was surprised with love, and that so fervently, that were it not for
the promise you have made me, I had not been alive at this present time.
Nevertheless having sithence understood, that he by whom I am in this
extremity, in estate and degree, not to be my equal, whereby I perceive my self
unworthy either to be wife or companion unto him, I have somewhat moderated my
first deliberation in such manner, that I will hold my self more then
satisfied, if it please him I may only continue with him, to serve at his
commandment during my life, which in reason he cannot well deny me, for let him
do what he will, so long as life is in my body, I will never forsake him, if I
be not constrained thereunto. Wherefore my Lord, for the honor of God, I
beseech your Grace to find the means my poor request may once be granted, and
you Gentlemen (said she to Ambor and Talanque) I pray you put to your helps,
that by your favors the life of me poor lover, not beloved, may be prolonged.
The King hearing the Gentlewoman (that while she spoke sometime blushed, and
other whiles waxed pale) make this discourse, could hardly abstain to laugh,
thinking how inconsiderately she had fallen into so great extremity, whereby he
feared if he should make an answer other then pleased her, she would kill her
self, but with courteous speech he said unto her: Gentlewoman, your request is
so reasonable, that I am of opinion he will not deny it: and for my part, I
will entreat him as much as possible I can. My Lord (said Esplandian) I will do
what your Grace commands Grant her then I pray you (said the King) what she
craveth at your hands, that from henceforth she may be called your faithful
servant, her honor always saved, as in the Knighthood you are bound. I will do
it, answered Esplandian, and thereof I assure you (says he) speaking to
Carmelle, who kneeling on the ground kissed his feet, and thanked the King and
him most heartily, reputing her self most happy, in obtaining so great favor.

CHAP. XI.
How Talanque and Ambor showed the King what adventure they had found seeking
for Esplandian their companion, after they had received the order of Knighthood.

YOu heard before in what sort King Luisart was delivered cut of prison by his
nephew Esplandian, but as yet he knew not the manner how he received the order
of Knighthood. Wherefore as they rose from dinner, the King desired him to tell
him how he was made Knight, as also what happened unto him since that time, to
the end (said he) that Talanque and Ambor may do the like. Then Esplandian told
how Urganda came unto the Ferm Island in the great Serpent, what speech she had
with Amadis De Gaul, and others that were with him, the order she used to dub
him Knight, together with Talanque, Ambor, Manely, and the King of Denmark: The
sleep wherein they fell, and that when he awaked, he found himself at the foot
of the Rock of the Enchantress, in company of Sergil his Squire and two dumb
men, also how he conquered the Sword, with his arrival at the mountain, where
he found the Hermit, that dissuaded him from fighting with the Giants. By my
head (said the King) I never heard stranger things. And now Ambor (said he)
what became of you? My Lord (said Ambor) my companion and I were likewise
asleep, and when we awaked we found our selves in a little Barque with our two
horses, in a Haven of the Sea called Armata, in the Country of Norway, (as
then unknown to us) where we landed before a Town, not only to know in what
country we were, but also to seek for victuals. And as we went toward it, the
watch of the town (by reason of certain dissension not long before moved
between them and their neighbors) sent to know what we would have. Wherewith we
made them answer, we were Knights adventurous that came from the Ferm Isle,
cast upon that shore by tempest of weather. In good truth said he that spoke
unto us, our king has so great cause to use your helps, that if you go unto
him, I am well assured he will bid you welcome. We asked him the Kings name,
and what Country we were in. My Lords (said he) the Country is called Norway,
whereof Adroni father in law to Agraies, son to the King of Scots one, of the
best Knights in the world, is our King, I know not whether you know him. And
what cause (said we) has your King to use our help? I will tell you (said he)
he is so old, that one of his nephews, his Sisters son, (procured thereto by
evil counsel) is risen in Arms against him, seeking to have the Government of
the Country, in respect (as he says) his Uncle is no more able to rule the
same. And under that pretense has already usurped a great part thereof, and
now lies in Camp before one of the best Cities in this Land, which the King by
no means can relieve, by reason that most of his trustiest friends have
forsaken him, and hold with the young presumptuous fool, that wins them by
fair promises, a thing that oftentimes happens unto such as fortune favoreth
not, and when men are fallen, they are not only abandoned of strangers, but by
their own kindred and friends, that properly may be termed friends for the
present time. In good faith (said we) if the Town will give us victuals, and
one to guide us, we will gladly go and present our service unto him, not only
for the love of Agraies, to whom we are companions, but for the right he has,
as you have told us. That shall be done (said he) and therewith desired us to
stay till he came again from the City, where he stayed not long, but he brought
what we desired, and a guide that conducted us so well, that the next day about
dinner time we arrived where the king lay. Who being advertised of our coming,
and that we were of Agraies companions entertained us most courteously,
commanding one of his Gentlemen to unarm us in one of his best chambers,
whither he came, and after he had bidden us welcome, began in the same manner
to show us all what the watch had before declared unto us, and what an
unnatural part his Nephew showed unto him, procured thereunto by two Knights,
in whom only he puts his whole trust, because (said he) they are well
assured, that not any of my Knights dares enter into combat with them, they
are esteemed so valiant and hardy. But who has moved them and your cousin
(said we) to undertake so foul an action? Because (said the King) I have no
issue male, and my cousin alleges I am over old to govern the country,
saying, it is fitter for him then for me to do it: but if I can I will hold him
from it, and keep it for my daughter Ol^nde and Agraies her husband: By my soul
(said I) I am of this opinion, that seeing this war is begun only to try the
title you both pretend in one thing, it were good your quarrel should be ended
by the Combat of two Knights of both parts, without the death and destruction
of so many poor innocent people as daily perish by the same means, remitting
the issue thereof to those whom it shall please God to make victorious: and if
it pleases you, I and my companion will be the two Knights that shall fight
for you. But when he heard me speak in that manner, he paused a while, seeming
very pensive, till in the end he answered me and said, Sir Knights, I am not
yet so well acquainted with you, that I should venture to hazard so great a
Kingdom as this is upon your valor: Nevertheless, if you will assure me for a
truth that you are Knights of the Ferm Island, I am content to stand to it
whatsoever may chance. For there can none but valiant Knights come from thence,
being assured (as I suppose) that otherwise the Lord of the place would not
give them intertainment. Then we swore unto him, that what we had said was
true. Whereupon he presently dispatched a trumpet with message to his enemy, to
offer him the combat, who hearing the news seemed very glad, making account
that his two Knights (so much esteemed) would easily overcome any two of the
best Knights the King had. So that returning the messenger again, he sent one
of his trumpets with him to conclude the combat, with the day, time and place
where it should be done, as also what pledges should on both sides be given for
performance thereof, so that on the day appointed, after each party had
solemnly taken their oaths, we entered into that lists, where we had a cruel and
dangerous Combat one against the other, but in the end, right lying in our
sides, we wan the victory. And as we would have stricken off their heads, the
kings nephew desired us most earnestly to grant them their lives which we
agreed unto, upon condition, that from that time forwards he should suffer his
uncle to reign in peace, not molesting him any more, which he promised to
perform. In this Combat we were so wounded, that of force we continued in
Norway longer then we meant to do, where during our abode, certain Merchants
arrived in the City, that had seen (as they told us) upon the Sea, near unto
the Rock of the enchantress, a Serpent greater then any vessel, which so much
astonished them, that they knew not what to do, whereby we heard news of
Esplandian. With that (although we were not altogether healed of our wounds)
yet we besought the King to cause us to be conducted thither, which he
willingly granted, and we took Sea, with so good a wind, that within six days
after we approached the Rock where the Serpent stayed, that at the first made
us somewhat abashed, although we had seen it oftentimes before. Nevertheless,
we found it flashing such flames of fire out of the mouth and nostrils thereof,
that we feared the fire would fall into our Ship, whereby not without much pain
and trouble, we procured our Master and Mariners to approach it, and perceiving
no creature aboard to speak unto, we began to hollow unto them with so loud a
voice, that at the last Sergil appeared upon the hatches, and weeping, told us
what had happened unto his master on the Rock of the Enchantress, and how after
that one of the dumb men had caused him to enter into a little Barque, and
therewith put to Sea, so that he knew not if he were dead or living, for he had
heard no news of him, and there he stayed with another dumb man in the greatest
care that might be. With that we willed him to call the dumb man unto us, and
when he came, by signs we made unto him, we showed him what pleasure he might
do us if he would bring us to the place where his fellow had carried
Esplandian, which as it seemed he was content to do, for presently thereupon he
entered into our vessels and sailed so well, that the tenth day after he set us
on land, hard by the place where we slew the Giant and the two Knights, and so
your Grace has heard what fortunes we have passed since we received the order
of Knighthood. Truly (said the King) if those of Manely and the King of Denmark
be as strange, it may well be said, there never happened the like beginning
unto six young Knights.

CHAP. XII.
How one night as King Luisart was in his bed, thinking how he might return
again into great Britain, he heard so pleasant a sound of instruments, that he
rose up to see where it might be: and what happened after that.

KIng Luisart continued so long in the Castle on the mountain, that at the last
he waxed weary, not so much for the desire he had to be in his own country, as
for the grief he certainly knew the Queen would conceive, by reason of his long
absence, which kind of pensiveness he continued certain nights together, that
by mean thereof he could take no rest, till at the last one night among the
rest about half an hour before day, he heard ye sweetest music that ever
played, wherewith he arose out of his be^, and without making any noise opened
the window, to hear it better. But as then it was very dark, and the wind blew
so hard, that the Sea rising therewith, beat against the hollowness of the
Rock, in such sort that the noise thereof, and the sound of music, made a new
kind of harmony, wherewith he was so much delighted, that he awaked Esplandian,
Ambor and Talanque, that slept soundly, as young men without melancholy humors,
are accustomed to do. But when they heard the music, they stayed not long in
their beds, but went to the window to see whom it might be, but they could see
nothing till day began to appear. Wherewith they perceived the great Serpent
surging on the shore, wherewith they were exceeding glad, making full account
that the arrival thereof brought them some good news: Wherewith they made them
ready, and without longer staying, issued out of the Castle, to see who was in
the same, and as they stood on the shore, they perceived a small Boat, and a
Gentlewoman coming out of it, bearing in her arms a Packet covered with
Laffary, who coming unto the King, with most humble reverence said unto him, M^
Lord, and it pleases your Grace, Urganda recommendeth her unto your Majesty,
and has commanded me to give you intelligence, that being busied to aid the
Emperor and the Empress your Daughter, in a certain thing of great importance,
she has not had the means to come and visit you. Then presenting the packet to
Esplandian, said unto him, Gentle knight, my Mistress that loves and favoreth
you, as it is well known, gives you those Arms, and sends you word by me,
that as she gave you the black Arms, that hitherto you have born (to testify
thereby the sorrow for the loss of the king, that as then was common among all
his true subjects and friends) so in these you shall find the device of the
Lady, that in beauty and comeliness of person surpasses all the Ladies in the
world, as Amadis your father in time past well proved, when she set the Crown
upon her head, in remembrance whereof she has ever sithence born the like
device. Who from henceforth shall be so strongly fixed in your heart, that you
shall never give stroke with sword nor lance, but you will remember her. Which
she said in respect of the princess Leonorine, Daughter to the Emperor of
Constantinople, that by destiny was appointed only unto him. And opening the
pack she pulled out a Helmet, Shield, Haubert, and a Caparison for a horse, all
of white, imbroidered with crowns of gold, and set with Diamonds and Pearls,
which he most willingly received, saying to the Gentlewoman: I pray you in my
behalf give Urganda hearty thanks for the great honor and much good she has
continually done unto me, assuring her, that wheresoever I become, she has a
knight of me ready to obey her, and that for the love of her will bear these
Arms as long as it pleases her. Be it so in the name of God (said she) but
before long time be past, you shall have another mistress, that will constrain
you to do greater matters, for she shall ravish both your heart and liberty in
such manner, that you should loose overmuch, if at sometimes you loose not your
self for her. And to conclude, I tell you that my mistress feels her self as
yet so much bound, and beholding to my Lord Amadis your father, because that by
his means, she recovered her friend, that during her life she will use all the
means she can to do him pleasure, and you likewise for his sake. And as she
delivered the message unto him, Carmelle came thither, and hearing her speak in
that manner, answered her and said, Gentlewoman, I pray you tell your mistress
from me, that she has great cause to recompense them well, by whom she enjoyed
her friend she loves so entirely: and tell her I know many, to whom if such
chance should happen, that would not fail to acknowledge it with the price of
their dearest blood, and their souls likewise if need were. In faith (said the
gentlewoman) I knot not in whose behalf you speak it, but I know assuredly you
touch me at the quick, which she uttered with so good a grace, that the king
could not refrain to smile, having in times past felt the fury of love, when he
first saw the Queen in the country of Denmark. Yet he changed his countenance,
asking the Gentlewoman from whence that music came that he heard in the
morning before break of day. My lord (said she) being sometimes in greater
passions then willingly I would, I pass my melancholy humors with a Lute that
I have, especially when I cannot sleep, which as I think, was it you heard.
What company have you in the Serpent (said the King?) None (said she) but
Esplandians Squire, that I found in a manner dead, for the desire he had to
hear news of his master, to whom also I have brought the goodliest white horse,
and the best harnaised that ever was seen, which my mistress sends him
likewise. Did she command you to say nothing else unto me (said the King?) Yes
my lord (said she) she sends you word, that at my arrival here, you and he
should enter into this ship, that of it self will bring you into great Britain,
and that the fortunes yt not long since happened unto you, are snares the world
sets to entrap those it seeks to deceive, seeming to join green and
flourishing age with that which already is dried up and withered. And further
wills you to put in effect, that which in your self you have determined ^^
do:) which was to forsake his Kingly estate, and live a solitary life) but he
wondered much that Urganda knew it, yet he made no show thereof, but speaking
to the Gentlewoman, he said, Your mistress binds me daily more and more unto
her, being well assured, that without her help I could hardly have found any to
have brought me into my country. Wherefore I pray you tell her, that whatsoever
I have, is at her commandment, and as touching my determination, which (as soon
as I conceited in my mind, I perceived it was known to her) being at home, if
God gives me life, I mean to put in execution. My Lord (said she) she prays
you to commend the keeping of this Castle to Talanque and Ambor, (not taking
any with you but Esplandian, Sergil and master Elizabeth) knowing for certain
that hereafter they shall do such things, that their renown will spread
throughout the world. Wherewish my Lord I will take my leave, and return again
to her with the dumb men, that shall guide me in this little Barque. God have
you in his keeping (said the King.) Then the Gentlewoman with her two Mariners
entered into the Barque that brought Esplandian thither, and setting sail put
to Sea.

CHAP. XIII.
How King Luisart imbarqued himself in the great Serpent, and of the message
Esplandian sent by Carmelle unto the Princess Leonorine, daughter to the
Emperor of Constantinople.

THe Gentlewoman that brought the message with the two dumb men, imbarqued and
put to Sea, far from the Rock: King Luisart and the rest went unto the Castle,
where he stayed not long, for according to the advice Urganda had given him, he
desired Ambor and Talanque, with Libee and the rest of the company to keep the
Castle, promising with all speed to send them provision of all things
necessary, whereof they wanted. But when Esplandian saw there was no remedy,
but of force he must obey the King (much displeased to depart so far from the
borders of Constantinople, where he hoped to find her whereof master Elizabeth
had brought him the first news) he took his faithful servant Carmelle aside,
and said unto her: My good friend, I was in mind never to falsify the promise
I have made you, nor the gift you required at my hands, nevertheless, trusting
more in you then any other, I pray you take it not in evil part, if (to save my
life) I send you to a place, whither I thought to have gone my self in person,
but it pleases the King (as you well know) that I shall bear him company. My
Lord (said she) I most humbly thank you for the honor it pleases you to show
me, swearing unto you by the living God, that I take no pleasure but in
fulfilling your desire, wherefore I pray you fear not to command me what you
think good, for whatsoever may happen thereby, I will be obedient unto you
during my life. My good friend (said Esplandian) embracing her, I will one day
recompense your good will, and seeing you are minded to do me so much favor,
you must then take your journey to Constantinople, on message to the Princess
Leonorine, the Emperors daughter, to whom (having presented my most humble and
hearty commendations) you shall on my behalf say, How that at such time as I
received the order of Knighthood, I was commanded by my lord Amadis my father
to repair to her fathers court, there to discharge him of the promise he made
unto her (which was either to return again to do her service, or to send one of
his lineage thither in his place) Nevertheless, considering with my self his
great valor and prowess, and the great beauty that is reported to be in her,
which my small desert in reward of him that gave me the commandment, I am
afraid to undertake the same. Notwithstanding, it has pleased her (by master
Elizabeth) to put me in mind thereof, although while breath is in my body I
will never fail to be her Knight. And to the end she may give credit to your
message, you shall present this ring unto her, which she knows well, as being
the same she gave unto my father, to put him in remembrance of his promise. My
Lord (said she) I will fulfill your commandment, but if you go so far from
hence, where shall I find you, when I come back again? In this place (said
Esplandian) whither I will return as soon as I have ^rought the King into great
Britain. Then calling Libee, he ^ommanded him, that presently after he had set
sail, he should cause a ship to be prepared for Carmelle, to go on message
where he should send her, that done, he went to find the king and master
Elizabeth, that stayed for him in the Serpent, the which presently upon his
entering therein, of her self began to set forwards with such speed, that in
short space they left the coast of Turkey, and the twentieth day after, they
discovered ye Ferm Isle, where she stayed, which those of ye country
perceiving, advertised Amadis and the rest of the company, who in great haste
ran unto the Haven, but they were no sooner come thither, when they espied the
King, Esplandian, master Elizabeth, and Sergil, landing out of a little boat.
Wherewith being all abashed, but much more pleased stepped forwards to receive
them, and after many imbracings and salutations on either part, Amadis
presented the Giant Balan to the King, whom as yet he had never seen, and
therewith set forward toward the palace of Apolidon, where^f Oriane and the
rest of the Ladies having intelligence, the great sorrow that so long time they
had used for his absence, was converted into joy, which much more increased,
when the king in presence of them all, rehearsed the manner how Esplandian
delivered him out of Arcabonnes hands, and the great prowess he showed against
Matroco, Frerion, and Arcalaus their uncle. Oriane knew well the great desire
and much grief the Queen had, because she heard no news of the King, wherefore
the same day she sent her Danish Gentlewoman to advertise her of his arrival,
who made such haste, that within six days after she arrived at London, at such
time the Queen sat down to dinner.

CHAP. XIIII.
How King Luisart departed from the Ferm Isle, accompanied of diverse Knights,
Ladies, and Gentlewomen, and being near London, in a forest they met four
Knights, that sent to ask four courses with their lances against Esplandian.

THree days King Luisart continued in the Ferm Isle, and the fourth day he
determinded to go see the Queen, and to the same end, with all that company of
Knights, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, he set forwards toward London, and traveled
so fast, that they were within a days journey of the City. And as they entered
into a forest, where they used commonly to chase ye Heart, they saw in the high
way four knights, well mounted and armed at all points, each his Squire by his
side, bearing their shield and lances, for they had their helmets on their
heads. And with that they perceived a Gentlewoman coming toward them, riding
on a palfrey, and being near them, speaking to Esplandian, she said, Sir knight
with the white arms, those four knights you see in the high way before you,
send you word by me, that they would gladly know the cause why you bear the
device of crowns, wherein if you satisfy their desire, in such sort that their
honors be not stained, they will from henceforth refrain to inquire the same
any more: otherwise, they give you by me to understand, it were best for you to
leave them, or else that you defend them well, as being the most honorable
devise that is in all the world. When Esplandian heard her speak in that
manner, in courteous sort he answered her, and said, Gentlewoman, to satisfy
their request I pray you tell them that the devise and the arms I bear was
given me by Urganda, but for what cause I know not, nevertheless I bear them
for the love of her, as also that they like me well: and if this content them
not, tell them, me thinks the occasion of combat between me and them is so
small, that for this time I would desire them to forbear the same. In good
faith (said she) smiling, you speak with reason, for they are Knights that seem
to have much need of your council, but notwithstanding good sir, I pray you be
not unprovided, for your excuses will not be received. Gentlewoman (said
Esplandian) if they assayl me, it shall be against my will. Truly (said she) as
far as I perceive, the great beauty that is in you, together with the rich arms
and goodly horse you ride upon, are worse bestowed then ever was any, when you
are not ashamed to make an answer so little to your credit. Nevertheless,
either you must forsake the way to London, and this good company, or defend ^he
brave devise you bear, as they have sent you word. The way (said Esplandian) is
common to all men, and out of it (for them) I will not g^, wheref^re if they
assayl me, I must of force defend my self. And because the Gentlewoman was not
known among them, they all mused who she might be, as also who the four Knights
were that sent her, to whom she returned again Mean time Esplandian lace^ on
his Helmet, taking his Lance in his hand, ready to fight if occasion served.
Wherewith Amadis and the rest of the company were exceeding glad, doubting lest
the King had spoken in favor of him, when he thewed what he had done, but they
had not ridden long, but one of the four Knights came riding softly toward
them, and about a careers length from them, calling to Esplandian and said, You
sir Knight that would not satisfy our desires, defend your self from me.
Wherewith he set spurs to his horse and Esplandian likewise, who at the first
encounter cast him so strongly out of his saddle, that in long time after he
could not rise again, therewith his lance brake: with that ye second Knight
came forwards, willing Esplandian to take another lance, for he meant to
revenge his companion. Which Amadis hearing, sent him his lance, that he
willingly received, and being in a rage to see himself assailed without cause,
he ran against the knight and brake him so surely on the breast, that he
overthrew him both horse and man. Well (said the king) to the standers by,
judge you if it be possible to do better? My Lord (said Agraies) I never saw
two fairer strokes given with a lance, the rest I will leave to consider of
till I know those that ran against him. Let us see the end (said the king) and
calling a Squire, he sent his lance unto Esplandian, for as then the third
kinght prepared himself to run, and spurring their horses, set forwards so
fiercely, that breaking their lances, they met so strongly, body and shields,
and heads together, that Esplandian had much ado to sit upon his horse, and the
other had such a fall, that he lay still upon the ground. Whereat the fourth
knight being abashed, said unto himself, Truly, both the king and Urganda have
good reason (as they do) to assure the valor and prowess of this knight, seeing
it it much more then they warrant it to be: Nevertheless, I must of force try
him, otherwise I should do both my self and him wrong. And with that he called
Esplandian and said, Knight, although I well know the small courtesy that I
and my companions have showed unto you, yet I must not refuse to do the same
that they have done before me, wherefore I pray you send to some of your
company for another lance, that we may see who shall bear the honor of this
enterprise. I will do it (said he) seeing you constrain me thereunto, upon
condition that if I can, I will serve you in the like sort I have done your
companions. With that Gransador that heard them speak, gave him his lance,
which he presently charging, they met together with such force, that their
lances brake close unto their hands, neither of them removing out his saddle,
wherefore the Knight of the forest turned to Esplandian and said, Sir Knight,
let us yet try one blow more, and I will quire you for this time. You might
content your self (said he) with that is done, but seeing you are so void of
reason, I am content to try it with you, till one of us be beaten off his
horse. Then he sent Sergil to fetch another lance, and he brought him one
somewhat bigger and shorter then those he had before, wherewith he stroke the
Knight of the forest so valiantly, that he overthrew him, himself being
constrained to embrace his horse about the neck, or else he had fallen as the
other did that lay on the ground, yet he rose before Esplandian had run out his
course and as he returned back, he stayed him by the armor and said unto him,
Before God sir Knight, you have sufficiently showed that in valor and prowess
you are second to none but to your self: but he answered not a word, but
holding down his head (ashamed of that had happened unto him) passed forth.
With that the King came thither to know what Knights they were that had been
overthrown, amongt the which he knew Galaor, for he had put off his Helmet to
do him honor when he saw him come, whereat the King was so well pleased, that
he alighted off his horse and ran to embrace him, the like did Amadis, saying
unto him, with a smiling countenance, How now brother Galaor, how long have you
used to be a keeper of the high ways? You see (said he) that I and my
companions have sought to try whether this Knight be of such force as we have
found him, and what has happened you may well judge. When Esplandian
understood his uncle Galador (fearing to have offended) he lighted off his
horse, and kneeling down before him, asked pardon for his fault. Nephew (said
he) it is I that have done the wrong, and therefore I told the king that you
are a better knight then I, and marvel not if I sought to prove it, because I
thought to do it with mine honor, but I found the contrary, which from
henceforth shall make me think the things foreshewed of you will be
accomplished so well, that the glory of your father, and the reputation by many
knights in times past obtained, shall from henceforth be extinguished, you
having so easily overthrown three of the best knights in Great Britain, and my
self the fourth. What are they (said the king?) My Lord (said Galaor) the first
that ran was Sendale of Gonaste, the second Galuanes, the third Angriote
d'estrauaulx, and my self has done worse then they. Whereat the king and all
the company began to laugh, and embracing them, caused them to mount on
horseback, riding toward London, where in the way the king prayed them to tell
him how this enterprise was devised. My Lord (said Galaor) having understood by
the Danish Gentlewoman (that my Lady Oriane not long since sent unto the Queen,
to bring her news of your return, and what had happened unto you during your
imprisonment) the valiant acts by you declared of my Nephew Esplandain, we
conceived such a jealousy against him, esteeming the honor you did him
thereby, to proceed rather of fatherly love then otherwise, that we determined
secretly to depart ou^ of London to prove his force, as now you have well seen:
and to move him thereunto, we sent the Gentlewoman with the message you have
heard. Of my faith (said the king) the device was good, and has fallen out
well. In this manner devising of sundry things, he came to Mirefleur, where the
Queen met him, praising God for his unexpected return, and considering his
trouble past, with the grief she had for his long absence, seeing him there
safe and in good health, she thought her self well recompensed with his
presence. The next day in the morning they set forwards toward London, where
the people wept for joy to see him, for there was never Prince better loved of
his subjects than he. Being there, Esplandian began to be weary of the place,
longing to hear news of Carmelle, that he had sent to Constantinople, as you
have heard before. And therefore every day he devised means to get license to
depart from thence, pretending a cause of returning to the Castle called the
defended mountain, showing the king what promise he had made to his Companions,
which if he did not perform, they should have cause to complain of him, but the
king would not in any sort grant to his request, yet in the end, overcome with
much importunity, he was content, wherewith he took his leave of all the Court;
and upon a monday in the morning taking horse, accompanied only of master
Elizabeth, and Sergil his Squire, he took his way toward the Ferme Isle,
hoping to find the great Serpent there, wherein they might imbarque themselves.

CHAP. XV.
How Esplandian riding toward the Ferm Isle, was assailed by a strange Knight
that watched him in the Forest.

ESplandian departed from the King, and having taken his leave of all the
Court, as you heard before, took the crookeddest way he could, through woods
and forests toward the Ferm Isle, thinking not to be perceived of any, that
might hinder his enterprise. And having ridden three miles, he entered into a
Forest, which having almost passed, he came unto a great river whereupon the
king had built a house, called Bellerose, where oftentimes being on hunting, he
used to resort. And as he thought to pass the Bridge, he perceived on the other
side a Knight armed at all points ready to fight, that cried unto him with a
loud voice, and said: Sir knight, you must ask me leave if you will come over,
for according to my promise, I have taken upon me to keep this bridge for the
space of one whole year, wherefore if you think good, you may take some other
way. With that Esplandian was much grieved, perceiving that either of force he
must fight, or seek another passage, wherefore he would willingly have excused
him, and said: Sir knight, I pray you then show me which way I were best to go,
for by me you shall have no cause at this time to trouble your self. You must
return again to London (said he) for other passage there is none, unless you
will loose your horse, and go on foot. Rather then I would do so (said
Esplandian) I will prove if. I can win yours, and therewith lacing his helmet,
took his lance and road unto the Knight, who no sooner perceived him coming,
but setting spurs to his horse, ran toward him, whereby they met so fiercely
together, that both the knights fell off their horses, in such manner, that
master Elizabeth and Sergil, thought verily they had slain each other, but they
stayed not long before they rose again, and laying hand on their swords, there
began between them the cruelest and most dangerous battle that ever was seen:
wherea^ master Elizabeth much abashed, said unto himself, Good God, what may
this mean, I believe for certain that some devil of hell has transformed
himself into humane shape, to destroy us all. Mean time the two Knights
continued in most cruel fight, still increasing their mights, cleaving shields
and armors, in such sort, that all the field was covered with pieces of the
harness, and dyed with blood that issued from their bodies, till at the last
knight of the bridge stepped back and said unto Esplandian, Sir Knight, take
another way, and I am content to quite you of combat, for you are the
valiantest knight that ever I dealt withal, and it should displease me much, if
by your wilfulness you would be cause of your own death. In good faith (said
he) I had done it at the first, had it not been the fear I had, that you would
esteem me a coward, but knowing very well that the honor of this combat cannot
be had, but only by the death of one of us, or both together, I will try my
fortune, till I be no longer able to weld a sword. Is that true (said the
knight?) Then let us see to whom fortune will be favorable* And therewith
covering themselves with that little of their shields that rested in their
hands, they began the combat crueller then before, and though all the day they
had not given a stroke, so that after many cruel blows with their swords, they
closed together, and wrestling long time, they sought to cast each other to the
ground. But seeing the little advantage gotten thereby, they began again to lay
on with their swords with such fury, that Sergil looked for no other but when
they should fall dead upon the ground, not being able to judge who would have
the victory. Whereat master Elizabeth was so much displeased, that he could not
abstain from weeping, saying unto himself, Alas what fortune is this, must the
best Knight living in the world, and in the flower of his age loss his life at
that time by so hard a chance? Cursed be the day that ever he met with him,
that is the cause of so great loss. And to say truth, if God had not provided
for them, the father had slain the son, and the son the father, for the Knight
of the bridge was Amadis De Gaul, who being over curious of his sons glory
would prove his force, and the better to do it, the day before Esplandian took
his leave, he departed secretly from the Court, and stayed for him at the
bridge, bearing an unknown armor, where after many attempts on either part
given, Amadis perceiving both their dangers, said unto Esplandian: Knight, you
see well you cannot overcome me, and I assure you, I never had to do with any
Knight, that ever put me to so great extremity, wherefore I am content to let
you pass. But not I you (said he) unless you tell me your name. I will not deny
you that (said Amadis) wherefore cause master Elizabeth to come hither, for I
think we have both need of his help. Then Esplandian called him unto them, mean
time Aamdis put off his helmet, so faint and weary, that he was constrained to
lean unto a tree. But when Esplandian knew him, and perceiving the fault he had
committed, he cast forth a great cry, and said: Alas wicked wretch that I am,
and therewith he fell upon the ground, whereat master Elizabeth and Amadis
thinking him to be in a swoon, ran to lift him up, but it was not so, only
that it grieved him he had dealt in such manner with his father, who said unto
him, Son, although I am as sore wounded as possible may be, without death, yet
have I not received so much hurt, as conceived pleasure, perceiving the valor I
find to be in you, wherefore be not discomforted. Notwithstanding he could not
content himself, but cursed his own life, being (as he said) the most unhappy
man that ever was born of woman. And continuing in that grief, ye blood in
diverse places ran out of his body, whereby he waxed faint, which master
Elizabeth perceiving, and knowing assuredly, if remedy were not speedily had,
they were both in danger of their lives, he said unto them: I pray you for this
time leave off your sorrow, and let us presently go to Mirefleur, not far from
hence, for you both have greater need of rest, then of longer staying in this
place, wherewith he and Sergil set them on their horses, and with great pain
brought them to the castle, where their wounds were dressed. Such was the
combat between the two Knights as you have heard, yet some write, that Amadis
was so wounded by Esplandian, that in the end with a thrust of a lance into
the right shoulder, and other blows with his Sword, he was slain in the field,
which Oriane hearing, threw her self out of a window, and brake her neck. But
it is not true, for they reigned after that both in France and great Britain,
and had another Son named Perion, and a Daughter no less beautiful then her
Mother, that married Arquisil Son to the Emperor of Rome. But I cannot conceive
from whence those liars could invent such a thing, if they understand not by
(death) the shadows that Esplandian caused his fathers valiant acts to be
covered withal, by the light and pleasant shining of his own, whereby his
fathers were so much had in oblivion, that there was no more brute of them,
then if they had never been done. But to return again unto our matter, you must
note that news went presently unto the court, what had chanced to the two
knights. Wherewith the King and Oriane much displeased, departed from London,
and came to Mirefleur, when master Elizabeth began the second time to dress
their wounds Whereby he perceived them out of danger, and cured them so well,
that within seven days after they could walk about the Chamber, which put
Oriane in better comfort then before, and it fell out well for her, for if her
melancholy had longer endured she had for certain died at that time. And
because the King had not as yet understood the reason that moved them to fight,
one day when he found Amadis in good disposition, he prayed him to tell him. In
faith my lord (said he) I was desirous to have the difference of our two forces
known, being assured, that whatsoever chanced thereby, it could not be but to
mine honor: for if my son be a better Knight then my self, his honor for the
present time, will increase my glory past. Before God (said the King) your
enterprise was but rashly undertaken, I pray you another time let us leave such
youthful parts for those that are but entering into arms. Believe me, and it
pleases your Grace (said he) I was never better beaten in all my life. It is
no matter (said the King) seeing you have both escaped with your lives, now
seek means to be healed of your wounds with as much speed as you may, and from
henceforth let us war only against Hearts and other wild beasts that are within
this forest, as my huntsmen have showed me this day.

CHAP. XVI.
How the King of Denmark, Garinter, and Manely, succored Vrganda, that certain
Knights would have slain, because she aided the Emperors Son of Rome.

YOu heard before of the adventures of Esplandian, Ambor and Talanque, after
they had received the order of Knighthood, now you shall hear what became of
Garinter King of Denmark, and Manely, who sleeping as others did by the sound
of six trumpets that played on the shore, the next night they found themselves
with their Squires in a little Barque, so far out of all knowledge, that
although they had landed they knew not where they were, and it was so dark,
that they could not see each other, till at the last they perceived a fire not
far from thence, that moved them to go thither, to see if they could find any
that would show them in what country they were, therefore leaving their Squires
to keep their Barque, they took their shields, and mounting up a little hill,
they perceived a fire burning circle wise, in the middle whereof they saw a
woman holding a young child in her arms, and about the fire stood ten knights
all armed, that sought to take her, but by no means they could come near her,
she was so well defended by the fire. And as they went nearer unto it, they
heard one among the rest that said unto her, Ha, thou false and accursed
wretch, thy devilish spirits and familiars can now no longer help thee, but at
this time thou shall surely die. And although Manely and Garinter had their
helmets on their heads, yet the woman they so threatened, knew them well,
calling them and said: Help me my sons, and fail me not I pray you at this
time: With that Manely and the King of Denmark knew her by her voice, wherefore
laying hands on their swords, they marched toward the ten Knights, whereof one
of them stepped before the rest, asking them if they knew that wicked woman
that had done him the greatest mischief that ever was. By God sir Knight (said
Manely) you lie in your throat, she is not wicked, but faithfuller for her
part, then you for yours. Wherewith they ran each upon other, and there began
the combat of ten Knights against two, and although the match was not equal,
Manely and the King of Denmark setting their backs together, laid valiantly
upon them, yet in the end they could not have resisted, but Urganda playing her
part, put out the fire, and taking her two knights aside, left the rest in the
dark, striking each other as if Manely and the king of Denmark had been with
them, Mean time Urganda and her company got into the thicket of the wood, and
having traveled long, at the last the moon began to shine, when they were
weary, whereby they determined to stay a while and rest themselves till day
appeared. Mean time the two knights desired Urganda to show them how she came
thither, and whether she knew the country. My good friends (said she) having
long since learned by my art, that this little child s^n to the Emperor of
Rome, and of the Empress Leonor his wife, should be stolen away by the Traitor
that assailed you, who is Son to Garadan, that Amadis (as then called the
Knight of the green Sword) put to death in the country of Bohemia, in defending
the right of King Casimor, as soon as you fell on sleep in the great Serpent, I
made all the haste I could unto this place to succor it, according to my
promise made (being in the Ferm Isle) in presence of Amadis and diverse others
Knights, where I arrived at so good a time when the villains which you saw,
came to a shepherds house, where a poor nurse dwelt, to whom they delivered
this little child to give it suck. And seeing it was time to put my enterprise
in practice, I went out of my Barque, and making as if I had been robbed by
certain thieves, ran toward them, crying out and weeping bitterly, wherewith
they all came forth to see what it might be, and perceiving me in that manner
asked the cause of my grief. Ha my lords (said I) it is so, that as my husband
and I passed through this wood, we met eight thieves, that slew him, and not
content therewith, have taken away my horse and my budget, wherein there is a
great sum of money. Which they believing to be true (not that they were moved
with compassion for my loss) but respecting their own particular benefit,
hoping to get a Booty by them that had robbed me, scattered themselves in
companies to find them out, where they stayed so long, that the shepherd and
his wife went out of the house, and thinking to have their parts, left me alone
with the child, that not long after I took in mine arms, and went away. But as
it fell out, the nurse came in, and missing the child, called to them for help,
who running in great haste, followed me so fast, (that had it not bin for night
that overtook them) and the great fire you found about me^ I had never escaped
their hands. And what would they have done with this poor infant (said Manley?)
You shall understand (said she) that the Son of Garadan having conceived a
mortal hatred against the Emperor, either because he could not have the
Entertainment he thought he had deserved, or else grieved (as I think) that he
could not attain unto the Empire, as he pretended: determined not only to
revenge himself upon this little child, but to kill the Emperor likewise if
ever he have the means. By God (said the king of Denmark) he is a wicked and
cruel-hearted man, but assure your self that God will not permit it to be so.
Nevertheless I am in doubt this child will endure much woe, seeing you have no
means to give it suck. Let me alone with that (said Urganda) for I have certain
herbs about me, with the juice whereof I will nourish it, if need be, eight
days together. What (said he) will you then stay here so long? No (said
Urganda) for as soon as it is day I will return unto my Boat that stays here
at the shore. But Madam (said they) what shall become of us, for we are arrived
here, not knowing who brought us hither? But for Gods sake, if you have heard
any news of our Companions, let us know it, and where we may go to find them.
My friends (said she) you must first let destiny have his course, and endure
many hard adventuces, and when time serves you shall have your desires. And in
that manner sometimes talking and sometimes sleeping, they passed the time away
till day began to appear, when they three together went to the Seaside, where
they entered into Urgandas Boat, wherein four Gentlewomen and two Dwarfs stayed
for her.

CHAP. XVII.
How Vrganda departed from the two Knights, and being guarded by two Dragons,
went unto the Emperors Court, to deliver them their young Son, for the loss
whereof all the Court was in an uproar.

FOr a time Urganda stayed with the two Knights, not minding presently to ease
the Emperors mind with the recovery of his Son, in the end she caused them to
return unto their Barque, willing them from that time forwards to arm
themselves against the assaults of fortune, although she seemed never so
variable and unconstant. For (said she) therefore was the Order of Knighthood
instituted and appointed, that thereby it might appear more excellent. And they
were no sooner departed, but she set foot on land, and mounted on a palfrey
with the child in her lap, she rode forward, with two Dragons to guard her,
one upon her right hand, the other upon the left, that bare her company till
she came to Triol, where the Emperor held his Court. And approaching the Town,
she met great companies of knights that went to seek the child, who seeing
those horrible beasts casting fire out of their mouths, for fear they began to
fly, whereat Urganda smiled. At last Florestan King of Sardinia coming that
way, (having ridden a great compass about to pursue Garadans son) and returning
as then all weary and sore traveled, with his horse tired, perceiving the
people to run so fast, asked them the cause, wherewith they showed him a far
off what they had seen: but he not abashed, went toward the Dragons, thinking
if it were possible, to fight with them, and as he came nearer unto them, he
knew Urganda, and spurring his horse, he thought to salute her, but the more he
pricked him forwards, the more the horse gave back, whereby he was constrained
to light down, and saluting her, he took her by the hand, but the Dragons
vanished away, whereat he was abashed, which Urganda perceiving, said unto him,
In faith sir knight, they have good cause to give you place, knowing well the
magnanimity of your invincible courage. And for my part, I esteem my self
better guarded (being in your company) then I did before, wherefore I pray you
leave me not, till I have delivered this child unto his mother, which I have
recovered from the villains that had stolen it from her. Is it possible Madam
(said Florestan) that the Emperor should receive so great a pleasure by your
means? Show me I pray you (if it pleases you) how you procured the same? You
shall know it (said she) when time serves, till then content your self, and
mounting on horseback, I pray you bring me to the City of Triol. With that
they rode together till they came to the Emperors Court, where they found the
Empress half dead with sorrow, but when she heard the good news Urganda
brought, her sorrow turned to exceeding joy. And for that the Emperor being
armed, was ridden out to seek the child, as others did, she sent men on all
sides to certify him thereof; he having intelligence, thanked God with all his
heart, and turned back to see Urganda, that told him in what manner she found
the child, as you have heard before. Where we leave her, and return to show
you of Manley and the King of Denmark, who in the mean time were at Sea in so
horrible a tempest, that they thought to have been drowned.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the strange adventures that the King of Denmark and Manley had, after they
departed from Vrganda, and what pastime they had with two great Apes in an
Island, where by chance they arrived.

AFter the king of Denmark and Manley departed from Urganda, they entered into
their Barque, where their two Squires stayed for them, and so imbarqued,
presently hoised sail, and put to sea, the weather very peaceable and calm: but
they had not sailed long, when a contrary wind began to rise, wherewith the
waters grew so high, and the sea began to swell so big, yt one while it seemed
to mount to the skies, and again to descend as low as ye bottomless pit of
hell, whereby their little barque was oftententimes covered with water, having
neither Mast, Sail, nor Cable, but all rent in pieces. And that which abashed
them most was, that night coming upon them, it was so dark, they could not see
the length of their boat, in which torment they continued for the space of
thirty days together, till at the length it cast them upon an Island, where
(being arrived about San-setting) they landed. Then commanding one of their
Squires to keep their boat, being armed at all points, they went into the
Island to see if they could find any fresh water, or other victuals, for they
had not sufficient in their barque to serve them for a week: at the last they
found a goodly fountain, shadowed with many great trees, whereby they sat them
down, and putting off their helmets for to drink, Argenton their Squire that
was with them, said unto them: if you think good, you shall stay here while I
go up this high rock, where (it may be) I shall find a house, or some country
man that will show us in what place we are arrived. Go (said the King of
Denmark) but take heed thou loosest not thy self. With that the Squire left
them, and took his way through the wood, but he had not gone a long bows shot,
when he perceived a great Bear coming toward him, wherewith he was in such
fear, that with a loud voice he cried out for help, and finding no other
remedy, he was constrained to climb into a high tree. The knights hearing their
squires cry, supposed he had need of them, and with that they ran in such haste
to help him, that forgetting their helmets behind them, left them by the
fountain, and they had not run far, but they espied the Bear climbing against
the tree, wherein the Squire was desending himself as well as he could, but the
beast forsaking her first prey, ran unto Manley, being next unto her, thinking
at the first encounter to throw him on the ground, but he stepping aside, gave
her such a blow with his sword, that therewith he cut off one of her ears, with
a piece of her jaw, but the Bear turned again, and taking him most fiercely
ab^ut the body, thought to strangle him, wherewith he had almost lost his
breath, when the King of Denmark came unto her, and with one blow out one of
her legs clean from the body, whereby the beast in great anguish forsaking her
prey, fled into the thicket of the wood, and the King after her, and longer had
followed, had it not bin for the weight of his armor, that wearied him
overmuch, wherefore returning again unto his companion, they two help their
Squire Argenton to come down the tree, who as yet for fear trembled like a
leaf, whereat they both began to laugh, Manley asking him if he were a cold: no
(said he) but I was in the greatest fear that ever I had in all my life, or
ever I hope shall have again: and surely I believe there are no other people in
this Island, than devils disguised in strange forms, or else such proper
Gentlewomen, as she that of late embraced you so courteously, wherefore I am of
this opinion, that for our better security, it were best for us to stay by the
fountain, or in our barque till the sea be somewhat pacified. In truth thou
say well (said the King of Denmark) but in the mean time be thou of a good
courage, and fear nothing. I know not what courage I should have, (said he) but
I pray you for Gods sake let us be gone, unless you will see me die here. As
far as I see (said Manley) thou will never die in fight, as long as thou
find means to run away. Not if I may (said Argenton) for if I should, it
were done but like a fool. In which manner talking together, they came unto the
Fountain, where they espied two old apes casting their helmets (they had left
behind them) one at the other, as lightly as if they had bin at Tennise,
whereat the two knights and Argenton laughed so heartily, that they were almost
overcome with laughter: for the apes had no sooner spied them coming, but in
great haste they put the helmets on their heads, and climbing up the trees,
skipped from branch to branch, sometimes up and sometimes down, like two
tumblers. As God help me (said Manley) I like these apes well, for they knew we
were so melancholy on the sea, that they meant to make us merry on land, yet I
trust they shall not carry away my Arms without a Combat. Wherewith they took
up stones, and threw at them, but they turning about, grinned with their teeth,
making mouths and mowes, sometimes scratching their arses. Wherewith the King
of Denmark took such pleasure, that he desired Manley and Argenton to let the
apes alone, and as then it began to be night Wherefore they sent the squire to
fetch his companion, with ye rest of the victuals they had in their barque,
because the sea rose so high, that they doubted their barque would be cast on
shore, and break in pieces, who stayed not long before they came again, and
after the knights had eaten of such victuals as they had, they put off their
armor, and slept till the next morning, when they awaked, finding their helmets
lying by them, but not their Armor, for those new men of war had put them on so
properly, that by their countenances it seemed they had some great combat to
fight one against the other, in the top of the high Elms, whereof there were
great plenty. But that sport liked not the two knights, that were loath to die
in that place for want of food, but made their account, either to put
themselves again unto the mercy of the waves, or else go further into the
Island to seek meat. Wherefore making bows of wood, which they stringed with
their garters, and cutting arrows to them, sharp at the points, they shot at
those woody champions, so long, that at the last they compelled them to skip
down, whereby they took them, and pulled off their armor, which done, they let
them go, not doing them any hurt.

CHAP. XIX.
How Fandalo the Pyrat sailing on the Sea, was by tempest of weather, cast upon
the Island where the King of Denmark and Manely were, against whom he fought,
and what happened unto them.

YOu heard before how the King of Denmark and Manely were by fortune cast upon
the Isle of Apes, where their boat was cast away, they having not victuals
longer then for two days, but God holp them, for the next day as they were upon
the top of one of the highest rocks, they perceived a ship at Sea, which being
driven with the wind, not long after was cast upon the shore hard by the place
where they were. Wherewith the two Knights went down to speak with them that
were abord, and calling with a loud voice unto them, there appeared a man upon
the hatches, that asked them what they would. We pray you in courtesy (said
Manely) show us who is the master of your Barque: it is (said the man) a great
Lord, that before you escape, will make you know how he uses to handle such
youths as you are. And though he do so (said Manely) we are now in such
necessity, that it shall please us well to endure the worst that he can do unto
us, to be rid out of this hunger which we now endure, and still begins to
assayl us, wherefore cause us to speak with him, and if it please you, let us
know his name. Those that have fallen into his hands (said the man) call him
the devil of the Sea, although he is well known by the name of Frandalo, for by
his valor he has brought in subjection the greatest part of all this Sea,
pilling and taking all he finds, and by force of weather has been
constrained to put into this Island, his other vessels being scattered so far
abroad, that he can hear no news of them, and the worse for you, considering
the rage he now is in. With that there appeared a Squire on the hatches, who
seeing the two Knights armed in white, seamed with black croselets, he cried as
loud as he could, and said, My lord, here are they that slew you good cousin
Lindoraque. Wherewith there appeared a great Giant, that asked Manely and the
King of Denmark why they had so cruelly slain his cousin? By my soul (said one
of them) we never saw the man, whatsoever the Squire says, for I can assure
you that since the time we received the order of Knighthood, my companion and I
were never in any place, where we have had any great occasion to try our
forces. You lie fasely (said he that accused them) I know you better then you
think I do, and to justify the same (said he to Frandalo) the Gentlewoman that
you now hold prisoner will satisfy you more. By my great God (said Frandalo)
you shall then dearly buy it. You will do no more then you can (said Manely)
and for my part I assure you I am well content (seeing you will have it to be
so) that you say we have slain your cousin, although it be not so: Nevertheless
the glory thereof will redound to us in your behalf: and it may be death to you
(said Frandalo.) And therewith caused the Gentlewoman to be called up, who
perceiving the Knights armed in like arms Talanque and Ambor had, said: Alas
what may this mean? these arms bel^nged to two Knights, great friends unto my
lord and master. For Gods sake Gentlemen, I pray you tell me (said she) how you
came by them, for if they of whom I speak were here, they would not leave me
long in this captivity. Gentlewoman, (said the King) if it pleases you to name
them, and that in any sort we are acquainted with them, whereby the bond of
amity, may bind us for their sakes, assure your self we will not fail to do for
you the best that possibly we may. The one (said she) is called Talanque, and
the other Ambor, companions to the Knight which I serve. Manely hearing that,
answered her presently and said: Gentlewoman, tell us I pray you when we depart
from hence where we may find them. My lords (said she) if you can do so much
with this Giant that he grant me liberty, I will conduct you thither, and show
you strange adventures they have done, which I am sure (if they be your
friends) will like you well. With that Manely desired the Giant Frandalo to
give the Gentlewoman liberty, but he seeing him so earnestly entreat, began to
laugh, and said unto him: Before you escape out of my hands, it may be her
entreaty for you will much more avail with me, then yours for her shall do. In
the mean time I will provide you both of an honorable estate within my Galleys,
making you Knights of the order of mine ears, with diverse others that have
been there long time. You speak at your ease (said Manely) being in a place for
your advantage, so do not we, that expect not any favor either on land or sea,
having neither boat nor victuals to receive us, but if you be the man you boast
your self to be, either come out to fight with us, or else send us a boat, and
which of us two you chose, shall come and heal you of the pride, that makes
you so hardly know your self: Upon condition nevertheless that you alone shall
fight with him, and as fortune favoreth the combattants, the gentlewoman shall
go with him that remains victor. Content (said Frandalo) although I know full
well, I shall win but little honor to fight against such lacquies as you are:
which he said, in respect the eldest of the two Knights had not above seventeen
years of age: wherewith he called for his shield, and entering into ye Barque he
took from the Gentlewoman, went on land, where calling the two Knights unto
him, he said: Children, pity your own young years, and rather yield your selves
unto me, otherwise you are both dead without all remedy. Thou art mad (said
Manely) we are yet strong and in good health, and how esteemest thou us to be
dead that were never sick? In good truth, I hope before the cake be parted, to
make thee King of the unhappy wretches: Wherefore choose either me or my
companion to fight with thee mean time the other shall enter into thy Barque to
keep the gentlewoman thou have refused me. Alas poor man (said Frandalo) it
appears well thou know not what is good for thee: for if two of the best
Knights in all Asia, had undertaken this combat against me, I would make no
more account of them, then a wolf does of the sheep. By reason then, you that
are such beardless boys, what can you look for at my hands? We look to break
thy idly head (said Manely.) Truly (said Frandalo) seeing thou have so good a
courage, I will give thee the honor to fight with me, for the last that ever
thou shall have. And if thou think good, send thy companion to entertain the
Gentlewoman, for as I suppose he is better made for such a matter. With that
Manely took the King of Denmark aside, and said unto him: You have heard
Frandalos words, I pray you grant me the combat, and go you into the ship, and
as it pleases God to prosper me, do after what you shall think convenient. The
king of Denmark perceiving it in vain to strive, entering presently into the
boat, wherewith the Giant landed, and with the same boarded the ship wherein
the Gentlewoman was. With that the two knights prepared themselves to fight,
but before any blows stricken, Manely said to Frandalo, Giant I pray thee leave
us the Gentlewoman and her Barque, and before thou speedest worse, we give thee
leave to sail where thou think good. Art thou afraid already? (said
Frandalo.) Ask me mercy, and I will save thy life, otherwise be thou assured, I
will hang both thee and thy companion upon the top of these high trees Defend
thy self then (said Manely) wherewith they covered themselves with their
shields, and began the combat, though (as it seemed) far unequal, for that
Frandalo on his mothers side issued from the strongest race of Giants in all
Turkey, and of his father of the valiantest knights in all the world. And Manley
young and unexpert in arms, having never been in fight but when he succored
Urganda, yet the valiant blood of Childadan king of Ireland his father, wrought
such force in him, that he had rather die then endure the least spot of
dishonor, and well perceived Frandalo he had not to deal with a child, as he
esteemed, but rather a Knight hardy as a Lion, and one that used him in such
manner, yt his shield being hewed and his armor all unbuckled, at every stroke
he drew blood from his body, in such abundance, that the grass was died
therewith, whereat those in the ship were much abashed, especially the king of
Denmark, that never thought to find such prowess in his friend Manely, but the
Gentlewoman that knew Esplandians force, as likewise theirs she left in the
castle on the mountain, seeing Manely and his companion armed in the like arms,
made her full account (if they were of the Ferm Isle) Frandalo could not long
resist. Wherefore she said to the King of Denmark, In good faith sir knight, I
am well assured it will not be long before I be delivered, for Frandalo waxes
very weak, see you not how he begins to recoil? You poor slaves (said she)
what think you thereof? I think it will be now or never that you must be free.
Whereat they all began to look up, perceiving the Giant so weary, that
recoiling back, he said unto Manely, Knight, thou art not able to resist me
long, wherefore yield thy self, or else thou dyest. I grant the like to thee
(said he) if thou will deliver us the Gentlewoman and her Barque, with all thou
tookest from her, otherwise thou must do better then hitherto thou have done,
if thou mindest not to lose thy head. It is too well guarded (said the Giant)
and as he would have spoken more, Manely lifted up his sword, charging him with
greater fury then before. Wherewith Frandalo (ashamed to see himself so hardly
handled by him whom he made so small account of) put forth all his strength, in
such manner, as at that instant Manely was sore wounded, but the more he felt
himself hurt, the greater grew his courage, especially when he felt the blood
run within his harness, so that with an accustomed fury, all fear clean laid
aside, he set so fiercely on his enemy, that he constrained him to turn his
back, running to wards the Sea, wherein he waded to the shoulders, and Manely
after him, but being lower in statute then the Giant, could not enter so far
into the water as the Giant, unless he should have drowned. In the mean time
four of the sailors entered into the boat, and with all speed went to fetch him
aboard, wherewith the boat, and with all speed went to fetch him aboard,
wherewith the slaves brake their chains, and with the aid of the King of
Denmark set upon the Pirate, and others that held Frandalos part: whereof the
greater number were thrown into the Sea. Which Frandalo perceiving, thought to
speed no better, but he determined by fair means to obtain that, which his
force had utterly denied him. Wherefore with a weak and feeble voice he called
to Manely and said: Sir knight, If I have offended, I pray you pardon me, for
what I have done to you, was only in hope to win the praise, that such as
haunt arms most commonly desire. Wherefore by reason you ought to bear with my
unhappy fortune, and show some courtesy in my behalf, especially for that I am
so wounded, that my life cannot be long. Frandalo (said Manely) I grant thee
thy request, upon condition thou be obedient to my will: which the Giant swore
to do. Then Manely desired the King of Denmark to take him into the ship, and
give order to the Surgion to cure his wounds, which done, he prayed him to send
the Barque again to fetch him aboard.

CHAP. XX.
How the Knights being in Frandalos ship, (staying for calm weather) desired
the Gentlewoman to show them to whom she appertained, and what she had seen
done by the Knights whereof she spoke.

THe combat ended as you heard before, and the Knights aboard Frandalos Ship,
staying for calm weather, the King of Denmark sitting at the foot of his
companions bed, (who as then was not fully healed of his wounds) desired the
Gentlewoman to show him where she had seen Talanque and Ambor. My Lords (said
she) being well assured that you are their friends I can certefie you for truth
that I left them in good health, and in such a place where they have obtained
honor, and had not so soon forsaken them, if at the commandment of the best
knight in the world, I had not been sent (when Frandalo took me) to
Constantinople, whether (if it pleases you to bring me) I will there show you
what strange things he did, I being present: till then I pray you crave it not
at my hands, otherwise you shall do wrong both to him and me. God forbid we
should (said the King:) with that they called him that accused them, Frandalo
asking him how he knew them, that he durst affirm a thing unto his master which
they never once so much as thought. The Squire fearing death, fell down at
their feet, and shaking like a leaf, said unto them, My Lords, I beseech you be
not abashed, if I sought to revenge my master, that long since was slain by two
Knights, wearing the like arms. Where was it (said Manley?) Hard by the place
(said the Squire) The defended Mountain, where I found this Gentlewoman
speaking to a Knight unarmed, with whom I left her to go unto Matroco and
Frerion, but at that instant I understood that a Knight armed all in black had
slain them both, and conquered their Castle. For certain (said the King) it was
Esplandian, for he wore such armor, and for him only as I think that victory
was reserved. With that the Gentlewoman began to smile, which Manley
perceiving, said unto her, Gentlewoman, I charge you by the faith you owe unto
the thing you love best in all the world, show us what you know of him. The
thing I love best in the world (said she) is he of whom you speak, for the rest
require it not at my hands, for you hear no more of me before I be in the place
where he has sent me, we will bring you thither the sooner (said the King of
Denmark) wherewith he called the Patron of the ship, asking him in what time
they might be at Constantinople? if we have a good wind (said he) I will bring
you thither in less then four days. But Frandalo feared that more then any
thing in the world, for he had robbed so many of the Emperors subjects, that he
looked for no pardon at his hands. Whereupon he desired the two knights rather
to cast him into the sea. For (said he) I know, if he once lay hold on me, he
will put me to most cruel death: but he shall not (said the king) rather will
we die in your defense, for you shall speed no worse then we. Wherewith the
Giant thanked them, and as they were devising together, the wind came good,
then the Patron caused the ankers to be hoised up, and setting sail, put to
sea, with so prosperous weather, that within four days after about break of the
day, they discovered the City of Constantinople, entering into the Haven. Then
the two knights asked the Gentlewoman what she would do. My lords (said she) I
have express commandment from my master, to speak unto the Emperor and the lady
Leonorine his daughter, to whom I pray you let me be conducted, and in their
presence I will satisfy your request in that you have desired at my hands.
Wherewith they issued out of the Ship, taking Frandalo with them, determiming
to present him to the Princess Leonorine, to whom they went (because the
Emperor was ridden abroad two miles from thence to chase a Heart) and finding
one of the Princess Squires at the gate, the King of Denmark spoke unto him and
said, companion I pray you tell the Princess that I and this knight have
brought a strange lady unto her, that if it were her pleasure would gladly
speak with her. With that the Squire went in and staid not long before he came
again, leading them into the Princess chamber, where they found her in company
of Queen Minoress, with diverse other Ladies and Gentlewomen, but she was easy
to be known among them, for in beauty she surpassed them all, Manley and the
king of Denmark thinking they had never seen a fairer Princess, whatsoever men
reported of Oriane, Olinde, or lady Briolaine. And as they entered into the
chamber, she stepped forth to receive them, wherewith they kneeled down to kiss
her hands, the King of Denmark speaking unto her and said: Madam, we are two
knights of the Ferm Isle, that by strange adventure were driven into the
Mediteranian Sea, where we expected nothing else but death, but in the end
having endured a great tempest for the space of thirty days, and as many nights
together, when our victuals began to fail, we landed in an island unhabited,
where our vessel brake in pieces, so that we perceiving nothing but death
before our eyes (and altogether desperate of any succor) by fortune the ship
wherein this knight and this Gentlewoman (pointing to Frandalo and Carmelle)
sailed, was by the same tempest of weather, cast upon the Isle where we not
long before had landed, where there happened a mavelous combat between him
and my companion, and my self with some of his Pirates in the ship, who by
force I overcame: and my companion was victorious of the Giant. And
understanding by this Gentlewoman, that she had a message to deliber unto you
from a Knight armed all in black, (whom we sought after) we determined to bring
her to your presence, and withal to salute and honor the Emperor your father,
in regard of the service that my Lord Amadis owes unto you, whose singular
friends and welwillers we are and always will remain. And for that at this time
we have not any thing (besides our selves) more worthy the presenting to your
Grace then Frandalo our prisoner, we most humbly beseech you to receive him
into your service, and be a means to save his life, as we have promised him.
The Princess Leonorine glad of that present, for the renown of the Pirat, being
accounted a man of great power and experience, thanked them most heartily, and
calling one of her officers, she commanded him to entertain the two Knights in
the best manner he could, as also to look unto Frandalo, until the Emperors
return, who (said she) will be glad of their arrival, specially to understand
by them some news of Amadis, mean time she kept the Gentlewoman with her.

CHAP. XXI.
How Carmelle declared her message to the Princess Leonorine, and what
conference they had touching Esplandian.

THerewith the King of Denmark and Manley departed from her presence, the
Gentlewoman remaining with the Princess, that led her into her privy chamber,
asking her of what place she was, and from whom she brought a message unto her?
Madam (said Carmelle) being persuaded that as yet you know not him with whom I
serve, I most humbly beseech your Grace to pardon my holdness, if before I name
him, I give you to understand, that whereas he is accounted among the rank of
the most valiant Knights living in the world, of whom by reason of his great
courtesy and valor he is no less esteemed, then feared and redoubted of all
villains yt hear him named. Notwithstanding one thing overcomes him and
vanquisheth his most courageous heart: which is your Grace my goody Lady (said
she) whom he loves, honoreth, and desires to serve while life indureth. But
knowing not if his service would be accepted of, he durst not presume to come
himself in person to offer you the same: although (by him that next after your
self, may most command him) he had express charge to present it unto you, as
bound thereto by promise. And to the end you may give credit to my words, he
sends you this ring, which is the very same you gave to Amadis, being in this
Court, if your Grace can call it to remembrance. With that Leonorine took it in
her hand, and beholding it long time, she said unto the Gentlewoman: Truly this
ring was sometimes mine, which I gave unto the best Knight now living in the
world. In faith (said the Gentlewoman) a better Knight then he has sent it you
again, and that is my Lord Esplandian his son. I never saw him, that I know of
(said she: True it is, master Elizabeth told me of a young Gentleman son to the
Knight with the green sword, that not long since was made Knight in the Ferm
Isle, Urganda being present, and the next day was carried away in a strange
ship, of whom as then they could hear no news. Madam (said Carmelle) I know not
who the Knight with the green sword may be, but he whereof I show you, has had
such a beginning in arms, that if it be your pleasure to hear it, you will be
abashed thereat: tell it I pray you (said the Princess) But as the Gentlewoman
began to speak, one brought the Princess news the Emperor her father was come
from hunting, and asked for her: wherewich she knowing what pleasure her father
would take to hear news, took Carmelle by the hand, and led her into the
Emperors Chamber, and doing reverence unto him, she said: My Lord, here is a
strange Gentlewoman, (that can tell you news of the good Knight with the green
sword, and of his son likewise, of whom master Elizabeth made a long discourse)
and she has been conducted hither by two Knights of the Ferm Isle, whereof one
of them has fought with Frandalo and has presented him unto me, and staying
your return, I have sent them, into a chamber to refresh themselves. Daughter
(said the Emperor) both they and the Gentlewoman are most heartily welcome: My
Lord (said Carmelle) God preserve your grace: and without further honor unto
him, she stood still and help her peace, whereat all the company began to
smile, thinking that want of civility caused her to forget her self. But not
long after they changed their opinion, Carmelle beginning to speak in this
manner. My Lord, I have been nourished all my life among the best Knights living
in ye world, yet let not your grace find it strange if at the first (being in
your Majesty's presence) I have used so little honor to your Grace, whereby
your Gentlewomen should have cause to laugh at me: For that want of
understanding how to behave my self in presence of so great a Prince, is not
the cause thereof, but only the joy I conceive in my self, to be a servant
unto him, whom I more esteem then any man living: and I only hold for my lord
and master, not knowing any worthier then he. And if it pleases your Grace to
know who it is, together with the cause of my arrival in this country, I pray
you send for the two knights brought yt me hither, and I will show such things,
whereat (it may be) your Grace will be abashed. Gentlewoman (said the Emperor)
you shall therein do me great pleasure. Wherewith he commanded a Gentlewoman to
go fetch the two strange knights, who coming into the Emperors presence, having
kissed his hands, and he welcomed them in courteous manner, he willed two
chairs to be brought, wherein he set them, being a Prince that always
entertained strangers with great honor, especially if he knew them to be of
foreign countries. That done, all the Knights, Gentlewomen, and Ladies went
near to hear the Gentlewomans speech, when she turning unto the Emperor, said
in this manner: My Lord, I think your Grace has long before this time known
the Castle, called the defended mountain, ye which (during the life of valiant
Chartadaque, and since that time) you and the king of Turkey have diverse times
assailed to win, although in vain, it has always been so well defended by the
Giants Matroco and Frerion, yet in one day a knight alone has conquered it,
and slain the two giants whereof I spoke, with their uncle Arcalaus and
Argantes the Porter of the same. And which is more, has delivered King
Luisart, that lay prisoner therein, no man knowing it, for he had been
surprised in great Britain, and secretly brought from thence by Arcabonne Lady
of the Castle: The which lady falling in despair, threw her self out of a
window into the Sea. And to the end your Grace may know how all has happened:
it is so (said she) that Arcabonne (who as then I served) having intelligence
of her brothers imprisonment in the Ferme Isle, departed expressly from the
Castle, hoping to deliver him, but before she got thither, he was set at
liberty. Notwithstanding (she being loath to loose her labor) to be revenged
thereof, did so much by her Art, that she got king Luisart (as then hunting in
the forest) into her Tent, the king thinking to succor a Gentlewoman, that as
he thought a knight would have deflowred: where he was so cruelly enchanted,
that losing all his senses, he was transported without any man's knowledge into
the dungeon of the Castle, where my lord and master found him. And continuing
her discourse, she showed in what manner Esplandian was made Knight, and
seeking to find she king, was carried by the boat of the great Serpent into the
Isle of the Enchantress, where he conquered the shining sword, and after that
brought in a little barque to the foot of the rock called the defended
mountain, the speech he had with the Hermit, the combats with Argantes,
Matroco, and Frerion, the desperateness of Arcabonne, the determination she had
to kill him, when she found him sleeping in the hermitage, ye love wherewith she
was suddenly surprised. And lastly, the means how king Luisart knew him: for
(said she) he is son of Amadis his son, and of the Princess Oriane. And because
at his departure from his father he gave him command to come and serve the
Princess Leonorine your daughter, with the other Ladies, according to his
promise, he has expressly sent me hither, humbly beseeching them to pardan the
stow performance of his fathers will: but to amend his fault committed, he will
shortly be here to fulfill his charge as long as they please. Gentlewoman (said
ye Emperor) I knew his father for one of the best knights in the world:
notwithstanding you have showed such strange things of his son, that I
certainly believe he far surpasses him. He shall be heartily welcome when he
comes, but if my daughter will follow my counsel, she shall not pardon his
long absence till he come in person to desire the same: and let him be assured
he shall not depart so soon from hence as Amadis has done. At the least, we
will make him so good cheer, and my Daughter likewise, to whom I give express
commandment to do it, that he shall not have occasion to dislike our company.
Mean time the two Knights shall remain with us for pledges, assuring you I will
give them all the honor and good entertainment that I can devise. My Lord (said
she) the desire they have to understand the things declared to your Grace, has
caused them for to come hither, with whom by great good fortune I met; for
Frandalo, whom he (pointing to Manley) has most valiantly conquered, had taken
me prisoner, not far off from the place where I first imbarqued: but as fortune
would, there arose so great a storm at sea, that all his Vessels separated one
from the other, his ship was cast upon an Island, wherein (by the same tempest)
these two knights not long before arrived. And with that he showed what speech
they had with Frandalo, and what passed between them: Wherefore my Lord,
acquitting my promise made unto them, I have at large declared the Adventures
of the good knight their companion: In faith (said the Emperor) they have
showed themselves right valiant knights, and made a worthy present unto my
daughter, for which I give them thanks. My Lord (said Manley) we humbly beseech
your Grace, that from henceforth you will accept his service, for it is his
only desire, as he has promised us. Is that possible (said the Emperor?) For
he is the vildest villain that ever lived on earth, and has more wronged my
subjects then ever any did. My Lord (said the King of Denmark) he will become a
new man, and therefore my companion did present him to your daughter, which
promised for to save his life, which we beseech your Grace likewise to perform.
I am content to do it (said the Emperor) at your requests, though he deserves
it not. While they sat talking, Gastilles that stayed in the forest to look
unto the hounds, entered into the Hall, and presently knew Manley and the king
of Denmark, having seen them in Great Britain before they were made Knights,
wherewith he asked them when they came thither? and being made acquainted with
the Gentlewomans message, he asked her if she knew the names of the other two
that stayed in the Castle? for seeing they are armed (said he unto Manley) in
the like Arms, it is certain they are of your company. That is true (said the
Gentlewoman) for they were all made Knights together, the one called Ambor, the
other Talanque. I know them well (said Gastilles) for Ambor is the son of
Angriote d'estrauaulx, one of the best knights in the Country of Great
Britain. In truth (said Manley) we were in great care how to find them out,
but seeing they are in the Castle called The defended mountain, if it pleases
the Emperor, we will go unto them. I am content (said he) so you promise me not
to depart before eight days are past. My Lord (said they) we are at your
commandment. Being Dinner time, the Emperor rose up and went into the Hall with
the two Knights, and the Princess Leonorine took the Gentlewoman with her, as
destrous to hear further news of the Knight Esplandian.

CHAP. XXII.
What passed between the Princess Leonorine and Carmelle, touching the Message
she had brought.

YOu heard before how Carmelle in presence of the Emperor, showed the great
desire she had to slay Esplandian, and when she thought to do it, she was so
overcome with love, that during her life she determined not to love any other,
which the Princess Leonorine (that already pretended part in him) had not
forgotten, but returned with Carmelle into her Chamber: with a smiling
countenance she said unto her, Is it possible Gentlewoman (said she) you loving
the knight with the black arms so well as you report, that you could leave his
company so soon? Madam (said she) I was presently given to understand he loves
another: wherewith I comforted my self, judging his heart like unto mine own,
that he could not choose but sometimes feel the like sweet passion he caused me
endure. What hope then rests (said the Princess) unto you? The same (said
she) I know to be far different between him and me, for when I am in presence,
beholding the excellency of his person, I then receive some comfort, which to
him is utterly denied, seeing that already he endures for her sake, that as
yet he never saw, and that (Madam said she) is your own person, as I said
before. Surely (said the Princess) his love is very strange, the foundation
whereof I cannot well conceive. Madam (said Carmelle) I fear e're it be long,
he will not be able to endure the great extremity wherein he now is fallen,
only for your sake especially, if at his arrival here, he find himself
rejected of your Grace, having no desire, but to fulfill your pleasure, whereby
he may account himself your own, esteeming it the greatest favor, that ever he
can have. In good faith (said she) I will not refuse him so small a thing, nor
a greater, as occasion serves, but I pray you tell me why he calls himself
the black Knight. That can I not well do (said Carmelle) only that upon a
night as king Luisart, he, Talanque and Ambor, were all asleep in one chamber,
they heard so pleasant a sound of music from the sea, that they rose out of
their beds to hear it, and it was so dark they could not see, but when day
appeared, they espied the great Serpent at the Haven, whereat they were so
glad, that descending down the hill, they went unto the shore, where they
perceived a Gentlewoman in a little boat coming to land, bearing in her arms a
pack covered with blew Taffata: which from her mistress Urganda she presented
to Esplandian, saying unto him, Sir Knight, my mistress sends you these arms,
and wills you by me to leave the same she gave you, when you were in sadness,
and to arm your self with these, that bear the devise of her, which at this day
is the beautifullest creature living in the world (as Amadis your Father well
did witness, when he set the Crown upon her head.) And for ye love of her your
power and courage shall so much increase, that your renown shall spread
throughout the world, your mind moved with so amorous a passion, that many
times you shall desire death. And opening the packet, she took forth a white
armor all set with Crowns of gold, enriched with Pearls and Diamonds most
sumptuous to behold: which Esplandian (with hearty thanks unto Urganda and the
messenger) received willingly. This as I think madam (said Carmelle) is the
cause, why he has bin called the black knight, but I suppose seeing he has
changed his devise, he will likewise change his name. The Princess Leonorine
knew thereby, that all these things were said as touching her, wherewith she
felt an alteration in her mind, for that love by little and little began to
burn her heart, which she had willingly covered, but Carmelle by ye changing of
her color, which sometimes waxed pale and sometimes red, the sundry motions
wherewith sweet love did prick her tender heart, perceived it full well in such
manner, that being no longer able to abstain from sighing, as if he had spoken
to her self, she said I pray God this beginning may prove a happy end.
Wherewith Carmelle perceiving her masters suit to prosper with effect, the
better to increase the desire of the Lady, she said unto her: Madam, he has
commanded me not to stay long here, for till my return he does continue in
exceeding pain, and never shall be free if he receive no comfortable answer
from your Grace. Gentlewoman (said the Princess) I were the most ungrateful
Princess living on the earth if I should do so, but tell him I pray you from
me, that I give him hearty thanks for the courtesies he offers me by you, and
when he once arriveth here, he shall soon know ye great good will I bear him.
As also that I hold him for my knight, for proof whereof, you shall on my
behalf present him with this hair lace, as being the first present that
Grimanaise my grandmother gave to his Appolidon, being but her lover. Wherewith
taking a cloth of tissue from her hand, she unbound her hair, and delivered the
hair lace unto her, and sending for a gown imbrodered all with Crowns of Gold,
gave it her likewise. But (said she) because the two Knights have promised the
Emperor not to depart from hence till eight days are past, you shall stay for
them, and all together return unto the Castle called the defended mountain,
which she willingly granted.

CHAP. XXIII.
How news was brought unto the Emperor, that Armato King of Turkey had besieged
the Castle of the defended Mountain, and of the charge he gave Frandalo with
Manley, and the King of Denmark, to go succor it.

IN manner as you heard before, the two Knights of the Ferm Isle and Carmelle,
stayed at Constantinople, where there arrived a certain Ship, that brought a
Squire on message from Talanque and Ambor to certify the Emperor, that Armato
King of Turkey, advertised of the death of Matroco had besieged the Castle, the
defended mountain both by land and Sea, desiring him to send some aid,
otherwise they should be constrained to yield the same, not having victuals nor
men for to defend it. The Emperor hearing those news, and considering the truce
between him and the King of Turks, as also that he had not any men prepared
for to send, neither Gally, Galliace, Ship nor Brigandine ready for the Sea,
stood somewhat in amaze. But considering with himself of what importance that
Frontier Castle might be unto him if the enemy should obtain it, he determined
by all means to hinder him from the same. Wherefore calling for Frandalo, and
taking him aside, he said unto him: Well Frandalo, you are now my prisoner, and
it lies in me either to hang you like a thief, or deliver you with greater
riches then ever you possessed, which I promise you to do, if from this time
forwards you swear to be my loyal subject, and faithfully to serve me when you
are employed My Lord (said he) I beseech you Grace wholly to forget the faults
by me committed to your Majesty, swearing of my faith, (if it pleases you to
pardon my offense) you shall from henceforth find a servant of me, that in
time will make you know by effect how much I esteem this favor at your hands.
Will you do it (said the Emperor?) I and it pleases your Grace (said he.) What
is become of your Navy (said the Emperor) that in times past you held upon the
Sea? My Lord (said Frandalo) the winds and tempests that lately happened on
the sea, has so scattered them, that I can hear no news of them: Nevertheless,
I am of opinion, they may easily be brought together, wherewith I will do your
Grace service, if you think good. Do it then (said the Emperor) and that with
speed, for I have determined to raise the greatest army that ever has been
seen, therewith to drive Armato king of Turkey out of the Frontiers of my
Empire, whom not long since has besieged the defended mountain. And while my
forces are preparing, you with the two knights that of late came hither, shall
go before, and using means to assemble your men, shall in the mean time give
the Turks somewhat to do. My Lord (said Frandalo) God give me grace to do you
faithful service: then be you ready in the morning (said he) to depart from
hence, wherewith he commanded Frandalos ship to be rigged and prepared with all
things necessary, and finding Manley and the king of Denmark, he told them that
he had received news from Talanque and Ambor touching the castle of the
defended mountain, and what he had determined to do as concerning their relief,
showing them what had passed between him and Frandalo touching the same.
Wherefore my good friends (said he) because I well perceive the great desire you
have to see your companions, me thinks it were good you imbarqued your selves
with him, who goes before to advertise them of the aid I mean to s^nd them. My
lord (said Manley) it is our whole desires. In the morning (said the king) you
shall have your Barque ready and furnished with all things necessary, and some
other of my ships likewise to second you, attending the great army my self does
mean to bring. But before their departure he gave them diverse rich presents,
which they refused, contenting themselves with the honor and courteous
entertainment he had already given them, and taking their leave of all the
court, especially of the Princess Leonorine, they took Sea, and Carmelle with
them, hoping to have her masters great good will for the good news she brought
him. But before we pass further to show you what became of them, I think it not
out of our History to leave Esplandian no longer at Mirefleur, but show you
what became of him, being healed of his wounds.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How Esplandian healed of his wounds, took leave of King Luisart and all the
Court, to go unto the Ferm Isle, where he left the great Serpent, wherein
(accompanied only of master Elizabeth and Sergil) he imbarqued himself to
return unto the Castle of the defended mountain.

MAny days and nights did Esplandian staying at Mirefleur, after the dangerous
combat between him and Amadis his father, before his wounds were fully healed.
But in the end having license of the king and others that might command him, he
took his way toward the Ferm Isle, accompanied of master Elizabeth and Sergil.
And traveling without any adventure worth rehearsing, at the last they arrived
at the palace of Apolidon, at the foot whereof they found the great Serpent,
wherein presently they imbarqued themselves, but she removed not from thence
till midnight following, when she began to sail so swiftly, that the next day
they were out of sight of any land, and so continued for seven days together,
the eight day they discovered a goodly country, and having a calm wind the
Serpent put a shore, which Esplandian perceiving, determined to land and walk
along the coast, till he found some one or other that could show him in what
country he had arrived. And destring master Elizabeth not to depart thence
before he came again: he, Sergil, and their two horses entered into a little
Boat, and taking land, they entered so far into the country, that they came to
a little hill, at the foot whereof they perceived a goodly meddow, and certain
houses, whereunto they went. And they had not ridden far, but a Lacquy that
kept four horses, whereof one was a Bay, and greater than the rest, came unto
Esplandian, and speaking to him in the Almain tongue, asked him why he went to
his own mischief? Esplandian that in his youth had learned that Language, asked
him wherefore? Because (said the ^acquie) that at the next house my master is
newly alighted, and is at dinner, and if he see you, you die therefore. Thy
master (said Esplandian) And what does he? He uses (said he) to kill or put in
prison far braver fellows than your self: wherefore if you will believe me, you
shall return again, if you mean not to speed as I have told you. But Esplandian
staying not, passed forward till he came unto the door, where he espied a Giant
set at dinner, and four squires all bare-headed waiting on the board. But as
soon as the Giant saw him, he rose up, and leaning on the cloth, said unto him:
Thou unhappy wretch, who has sent thee hither in my presence, armed as thou
art? By my great god Janos, I must needs say thou art a fool, or else art weary
of thy life. Come hither to me, and put off thine Armor, because thou shall not
have so much pain to go on foot to thy lodging that is prepared for thee.
Forwards you villains, said he unto his squires, throw him off his horse, and
carry him to his fellows. Wherewith one of them (thinking to play the diligent
servant) ran unto Esplandian, to serve him for a Squire: but (whether
Esplandian was offended, or for that he had the left stirrup in stead of the
right) he gave him such a blow on the face with his Gantlet, that he felled him
to the ground: whereat the Giant was in such a rage, that he scarce had the
patience to arm himself to be revenged. Wherefore sending to fetch his great
Bay horse, mounted thereon. Mean time Esplandian lacing his helmet, took his
sword in hand, staying for his enemy that ceased not to threaten him, who
stayed not long before he came, bearing a great lance upon his thigh, and so
great a cimiter hanging at his sadle how, that a strange man would have much
ado to list it up. But as you see a Cock holding up his head, and standing
ready to receive another Cock wherewith he fights, so Esplandian having felt
the injury he had received at the giants hands, seeing him approach, began to
shake his leg, ready for to charge his enemy. But the Giant called him, and
said, Vassail, content thy self with the honor thou have already gotten, by
putting me in so great choler, that without any regard I have taken arms
against so vile and wretched a thing as thou art: Fly then from hence without
constraining me to do thee any hurt, otherwise thou art most sure of death, for
twenty knights hardier then thy self, cannot once remove me. Esplandian hearing
his great brags, made no account thereof, but in mockery said unto him, Those
thou have already ^lain, can never hurt thee, but I that come for to revenge
them, hope before that we depart to send thy soul unto the Devil, to whom thou
have commended it so often, although it were much better for thee to take the
counsel thou have given me, and shun thine own misfortune, being well assured,
that in thy great misshapen body there rests nothing but a base and servile
heart, that causes thee to speak in such sort as thou do. That shall thou
presently see (said the Giant) and couching his lance, ran toward Esplandian,
who did the like against him: But the Giant missed his blow, so did not
Esplandian, for with the force of his blow he made the Giant double his body,
in such sort, that his Gaul brake in his body, and ran out at his mouth,
wherewith he presently died. They that beheld it were thereat abashed,
specially the Giants Squires, who presently began to fly, but they had not run
far, when Esplandian overtook them, threatening to slay them if they would not
show him the place where their master kept his prisoners, which they promised
to do. And leading him along by the foot of the Hill from whence he had
descended, they came into a narrow way full of stones where stood a watch of
twenty men all armed, each man with a hatchet in his hand to defend the
passage: when the captain of that band perceived the Giants squires coming
toward them, he asked them where they found that unhappy fellow? and saying
so, thought to lay hands upon Esplandians bridle, but with a blow of his sword
he cut his arm in sunder, wherewith the rest set all upon him. But in short
time he dealt so well among them, that he laid most part of them dead upon the
ground. But he had so many men about him, that in the end his horse was slain,
and he in danger to be overthrown. Yet he behaved himself so valiantly, and
with so great a courage, that he remained Victor, his enemies flying as fast as
possibly they might: and among the rest, the lacquy that he found keeping the
four horses, who saving himself in a vault, cried with a loud voice, and said,
Come forth my Lord, come forth, your son Bramato is slain, and all our
companions likewise. With that there appeared a great old Giant with a long
white beard, who seeing Esplandian with his sword bloody in his hand, and most
of his men lying dead about him, he cast cut a great sigh and said, O immortal
Gods, wherein have I so much offended you, that you should suffer my only son,
and all my men to be slain in such manner by this one knight? But I hope your
wraths will not be so much increased against me, as that yeu will not give me
leave to be revenged on him. And as he uttered these words, being covered with
his shield, he went unto Esplandian, and holding his sword in hand, stroke him
flatling with the same upon the arm, in such manner that he was astonished: and
with the force of the blow the sword sliding down upon a stone, brake in three
pieces, wherewith Esplandian stepped to him, and with great dexterity struck
him so fiercely on the face, that the blood in great abundance ran out of his
forehead. Whereat the Giant was in such a rage, that casting down his Shield,
took the piece of his Sword in both his hands, and with all his force stroke at
Esplandian that stepped aside, and perceiving the Giants arm coming toward him,
with one blow cut off his hand, whereby his Sword fell down. Nevertheless he
seemed not abashed, but embracing Esplandian with his left arm, thought to
crush the breath out of his body, but it happened otherwise, for as he held
him, Esplandian having his right arm at liberty, thrust his Sword into the
Giants body, wherewith he died. Then calling Bramatos three Squires that he
brought thither to show him the prisoners, he asked where they were: My Lord
said one of them, on that side the vault is the two Giants lodgings* that you
have slain, and under it are the prisoners that you seek in a most dark prison
above a hundred paces long, and but two paces broad, whereby the prisoners (in
great number) have no means to rest themselves, being constrained to stand
upright for the narrowness of the place. Go before (said Esplandian) with that
the Squire went forward, and Esplandian followed after, and they had not gone
long, but they entered into a goodly palace, and going lower, he heard the
lamentable voices of the poor prisoners dying for want of food, whereat he took
such compassion, that the tears ran down his eyes, asking the Squire for the
keys? There they hang (said he) upon a nail. Open the door (said Esplandian)
which he presently did, wherein they entered, and Esplandian calling the poor
wretches that lamented, said unto them, My good friends, come all forth, and
thank God for your liberties. You may well judge if they were glad to bear
those news, for that some of them had remained therein above thirty years
together, being in all twenty Gentlewomen, thirty Squires, and fifty Knights,
among the which Esplandian knew Grandalin and Lazinde, who by evil fortune
(after the conquest of Sanfuegue) traveling the country, were met by the
Giants, and kept in prison with the rest, where they endured great misery.

CHAP. XXV.
How Esplandian commanded the prisoners he had delivered to go unto
Constantinople, there to thank the Princess Leo^orine the Emperors Daughter,
keeping only Gandalin and Lazinde with him.

THe Giants slain, and the prisoners set at liberty, Esplandian that as yet had
not taken off his helmet, not long after made himself known to Gandalin and
Lazinde, that were no less abashed to see him in so strange a place, then
wondered at the great prowess he had showed for their delivery. It was then
about Sunsetting, and Esplandian had neither eat nor drunk of all that day,
wherefore he determined not to depart thence till the next day in the morning,
for he found great store of victuals in the place: Commanding Sergil with one
of the Squires to go seek the Bay horse he left at the house where he slew
Bramato, for his own was slain, which they presently brought unto him, passing
the night in the Giants house with the best victuals they could find. The next
day in the morning Esplandian called ye prisoners that he had delivered, asking
them what they meant to do? Sir Knight (said they) we are wholly bent to do as
pleases you. Then my friends (said he) you shall go to Constantinople, and
there give thanks unto the Princess Leonorine for the grace it has pleased God
to give you by means of a knight that belongs unto her. And if she asks you
my name, tell her only what manner of arms I bear, showing her that I willed
you to submit your self unto her mercy. In faith (said Gandalin) my companion
and I were determined not to leave your company so soon, but seeing it is your
pleasure, we are content to do it. You and he (said Esplandian) shall keep me
company till you mean to travel further, the rest shall do as I required them.
Sir Knight (said he) that showed him the prison, they shall find within the
house all the furnitures and other things that were taken from them: show them
where they be (said Esplandian.) Whereunto he willingly obeyed, which done,
they all left the Giants house, the prisoners taking the way toward
Constantinople, and Esplandian with Gandalin and Lazinde, armed at all points,
went toward master Elizabeth that stayed for them in the great Serpent, and as
they were about half a mile from the Giants house, they met a knight all armed
with two squires attending on him, who in courteous manner saluting Esplandian
and his company, asking them what country men they were. Sir knight (said
Esplandian) we are all of great Britain. Alas (said he) can you tell me any
news touching a thing that has grieved me full sore? What is that (said
Esplandian) can you tell me (said he) what is become of King Luisart? For I
have bin certified of a truth that he is lost, not knowing where, how, nor for
what cause. And for my part I swear unto y^u, I have already sought for him in
diverse countries, and can hear no news at all, and I am determined never so
leave traveling before he be found again, if it be p^ssible for mortal man to
do it. You are bound thereunto (said Esplandian) seeing he deserves it, as you
know right well: Nevertheless if it pleases you to put off your Helmet, and
make you known unto us, that have bin bred and nourished in his house, I assure
you we will satisfy your mind so well as touching him, that we cannot choose
but like it. My Lords (said he, putting off his helmet, I am Norandel his son.
When Esplandian and the rest perceived that, they made themselves known unto
him, embracing each other most courteously. Ha my lord (said Norandel) I pray
you for Gods cause, if you know any thing touching the king, hide it not from
me. Uncle (said Esplandian) about a month hence I left him at Mirefleur in
good health God be thanked, making good cheer: showing him in what manner he had
delivered him out of prison, with all that passed touching the same. I marvel
then (said Norandel) what adventure brought you hither. By my soul (said
Esplandian) that can I not well tell, only that I was brought hither by the
great Serpent which I left at the Seaside, wherein master Elizabeth stays
for me. Then he showed him how he departed from the Court, his arrival in the
Ferm Isle, his imbarquing to take Sea, and what time they were at sea before
they discovered any land, till in the end (said he) we espied this country,
where Sergil and I took land, in good time for Grandalin and Lazinde, as
hereafter they may show you. But you (said he to Norandel) tell me of your
faith, how was it your chance in so good time to meet with us? In truth (said
Norandel) the peace made between Amadis and the king, I departed from the Court
to seek some strange adventures that commonly are found in this country of
Almaigne, where I had no sooner arrived, but I had certain news of my fathers
absence, whereat I was so grieved, that to find him out I have traveled the
countries of Denmark, Poland, Russia, Swethland, Hungary, and all this country,
even unto this place, where it is said there dwells two Giants, who as they are
all of one nature, exercise innumerable cruelties against those they meet, the
younger of them waiting continually about this place for such as pass this way.
And therefore when I saw you first, I thought one of you three to be the Giant,
thinking to fight with him, or lose my life therefore: which I will yet do if
you let me pass. By God (said Gandalin) you lost your labor seeking for the
King, so shall you likewise do if you take this enterprise in hand? Wherefore,
said Norandel? Because (said he) you see him here in presence that eases you
of that burden. With that he showed him in what manner Esplandian had fought
with the Giants, and how he, Lazinde, and diverse others were prisoners in
their house, from whence Esplandian had delivered them. Before God (said
Norandel) the news likes me well, for I never thought in long time any such
adventure would have happened unto him, not knowing he had received the order
of Knighthood. You see it so (said Esplandian) and master Elizabeth can tell
you more, if it pleases you to go with us. Let us go then (said Norandel) for
I would gladly see him: With that they rode toward the Sea, till they espied
the great Serpent wherein they imbarqued themselves: where Norandel, Grandalin
and Lazinde, understood by master Elizabeth what had happened to Esplandian
from the day he received the order of knighthood. And although Norandel
determined with all speed to return into great Britain, yet he changed his mind
when he heard so strange and mavelous news of his Nephew Esplandian, to whom
he said: My Lord, seeing fortune has brought us so well together, I pray you
let me not leave your company till some occasion be ministered unto us. Uncle
(said Esplandian) I am content, and I pray you let it be so. In that manner
they passed the rest of the day in the great Serpent, minding the next day
because she stirred not, to take land again to see if they could find any more
adventures: And they had scarce fallen asleep, but the Serpent began of it self
to sail forward so swiftly, that by sun rising they had lost the sight of any
land, not ceasing for to sail six days together before they espied land: the
seventh day when the Sun began to shine, it stayed at the Isle Saint Mary,
which master Elizabeth presently knew, having bin there before with Amadis de
Gaul, when he fought with Landriaque: wherefore he said unto the Knights, In
good faith, I remember that once as I traveled on the Sea with my lord Amadis,
we were cast upon this Island by so great a tempest, that we thought verily to
have been drowned: And if then at sea we had great fear of death, being landed,
our fear did more increase, and that with so good cause, that I cannot choose
but tremble to remember it. What said Esplandian?) Can a danger so long time
past breed so great a fear as you seem to have? Sir (said master Elizabeth)
some men to hide the truth, make a great matter of a small, but if you had seen
as much as I then saw, and that which as yet you may behold, if it pleases you
to go where I was once, you shall find that I have no less occasion, and there
is Grandalin that can witness it as well as I. I pray you bring us thither
(said Esplandian) with that they caused the horses to be unshipt, and going to
land, they mounted up the Island, til they came to the castle where Amadis
stayed certain days to be healed of his wounds, where they found a knight that
kept it for the Emperor, who being advertised by master Elizabeth what knights
they were he had brought thither, bad them heartily welcome, offering them all
the pleasure he could show, but they staying not there, went forwards to the
place where Amadis fought with Landriaque, where the Emperor had erected both
their Images so like unto them, that there wanted only life to express the
same: Which master Elizabeth showed unto the knights, and to the end (said he)
you believe me better another time, I pray you behold well the form of this
great devil, who before my lord Amadis arrived had utterly destroyed this most
fertile Island. And therewith he showed them from point to point what had
passed touching the same, as you have heard at large set down in the third book
of this our History, whereat they were all abashed, especially to think how
Landriaque could be slain or overcome by one knight alone; For although this
image were but a senceless thing, yet it made them abashed, which having long
time beheld, and visiting other places worthy memory, they returned to the
great Serpent, which presently departed from the Isle, and with a good wind,
in five days after arrived within half a mile of Constantinople, where it began
to cast forth fire in so furious manner, that the sailers and others that
perceived it, flew all away, doubting the fury of that monster, wherewith the
Citizens were in such a fear, that news was brought unto the Emperor who as
then was talking with the Ladies, whom he led unto the towers of his palace to
see what it might be, when they perceived the great Serpent, and the Sea raging
so sore about it, that it seemed a gulf of fire, wherewith they were in such a
fear, and the Emperor likewise, that he commanded all men to be armed, fearing
it would come into the Town, and so destroy them all. But Gastilles that had
seen it oftentimes, assured the Emperor that it was the Ship of the knight
Esplandian, which Urganda brought first into great Britain. And to the end my
Lord (said he) you shall not doubt thereof, if it pleases you I will go see if
the son of Amadis be there, and bring him unto you. Do so I pray you (said the
Emperor.) With that Gastilles went unto the Haven, entering into a Gally that he
found ready to put to sea, commanding the master thereof to row unto the great
Serpent, but whatsoever he could say, the master would not stir one foot, till
such time he threatened him with fear of being hanged. Wherefore h^ising up his
anchor, the company began to row forward, but it was impossible for them to come
near the Serpent by a good bow shot, and withal the sea it was so high, that
the waves cast them back again into the Haven with so great a force, that the
Gally was in danger to be cast away. Which the Princess Leonorine perceiving
(who till then thought assuredly Esplandian had expressly come thither for to
see her) began to despair of her good hope, and making her complaint, said unto
her self: Alas Monster, Ship, Galley, or what vessel soever thou art, wherefore
art thou now so cruel unto me, in not suffering him that is within thee to land
at this our Haven, to the end mine eyes might enjoy his presence, but rather as
if thou had conceived a jealousy rewards us, thou usest all means possible
to hinder the ship wherein my cousin Gastilles saileth, not to approach near
thee, that he might bring him hither, or at the least that we might hear some
news of him. But in faith, all well weighed and considered, I think thee rather
to have reas^n, and my self without consideration, for that so excellent a
thing ought not to be so lightly set at liberty. Therefore it is no marvel if
thou refuse him unto us, fearing lest thou should loose him, seeing thou
may well vaunt that in thee there rests so val^rous knight, as in regard of
him all others may be naught esteemed. I would to God, that we being both
together, might never depart out of thy body: for being with him, his only
presence would breed in me so much contentment, that I should think my self to
have attained unto the top of all felicity: and if his love be such as Carmelle
has assured me, it cannot be, but that he suffers the like passion I now
endure, by overmuch desire to see his person. Wherewith she remained in such an
ecstasy, that by the changing of her color, it might easily be judged her
heart was not at ease, which in the end compelled her to sigh, and at the same
instant to repent the speeches she had used unto Carmelle, as also of the rich
gown that she gave unto her. For (said she unto her self) what know I, if my
sweet friend seeing her apparelled therein, would embrace her, not for the love
of her, but for the Gown that once belonged unto me* And if it be so, it is not
to be doubted, but she will by all means seek to join her lips to his, yea and
her body likewise: which would be worse, seeing she is neither so evil favored,
nor of so bad behavior, but it may be in a heat he would both forget himself
and me. But ^ut alas, what said I? Truly I do him wrong to be so jealous of
him, considering the chaste love that is between them both, and therefore if it
so fall out, that in respect of me he shall embrace her body, beholding her
apparelled in a thing that sometimes served me, it will be much more glory unto
me till I my self may once embrace his body, as in time I doubt not but I
shall. But if Leonorine were in pain, Esplandian had no less, both solicited
with like jealousy, for the great distrust of their not meeting at that time:
and gladly would have approached nearer to each other, had it not been that the
one was on land under the government of another man, the other at sea within a
bessel which he could not command. In the mean time the great Serpent setting
forwards, made such speed, that in very short space it passed the Straights of
Bosphore. Wherewith the Princess Leonorine was like to swoon but she refrained
it as much as possible she might, fearing to manifest that, she most desired to
keep secret. Whereby she withdrew her self half dead into her Chamber, and
making as if she desired to sleep, threw her self on her bed, commanding her
Gentlewomen to depart the chamber: they being gone, she began again to renew
her sorrow, and almost drowned in tears, said unto her self: Alas, now I surely
see and well perceive my grief to be wholly without remedy, having seen the
thing (that in all the world I most entirely love) so near unto me, and at one
instant so suddenly to depart, that it is uncertain whither he is gone. Ha
cruel torment: that still increases in me so covertly, is it possible that
from henceforth I can so well dissemble as yet I have done? Truly no: for if in
time past I enforced my self to esteem the desire I had a singular pleasure
unto me, now seeing I well perceive my accursed fortune to approach, and my joy
to fade, in manner as soon as it was conceived, I desire naught but death:
which to me would be more acceptable, then live in so great pain, not hoping
any ease. And leaving so, she gave so great a sigh, that Queen Minoresse heard
it: Who fearing she had been sick, opened the chamber door, asking her how she
did? Wherewith the Princess perceiving that discovery, to excuse her self the
best she could, she told the Queen she dreamed. Madam (said the Queen) it is
not long since the Emperess sent to see what you were doing? Is it not your
pleasure to rise and go unto her? Let us go (said she.) In the mean time
Esplandian with his companions sailed so long, that within two days after they
perceived the Rock of the defended Mountain, and not far from them the Vessels
and Men of War Frandalo had assembled, that stayed for a wind to surprise the
Turkish Army on the Sea, who perceiving the great Serpent making toward them,
began to arm themselves, thinking it had been some Monster that came to devour
them. But Manely and the King of Denmark that had seen it oftentimes before,
were very glad, giving them to understand what succor they might have thereby,
whereat they all rejoiced, especially when they perceived Esplandian, Gandalin,
and the rest, that Manely and the King of Denmark knew, wherefore causing a
boat to be made ready, they with Frandalo and Argenton, the king of Denmarks
squire (a very good mariner) entered into it, and rowing to the great Serpent,
Esplandian received them with great joy, asking Manely what fortune had brought
them thither. In faith (said he) it is not long since we departed from the City
of Constantinople, to discover and to hinder the passage of victuals that are
daily brought by sea from the town of Notolia to Armato king of Turks, who not
long since has besieged the Castle of the defended mountain, expecting daily
the coming of the Emperor with a great Army to drive the Turk from thence. But
we have had so contrary a wind, that it has bin impossible for us to effect
our charge. In good truth (said Esplandian) I would never have sought you in
these Countries, neither do I know what became of you after we fell asleep in
this Vessel, I pray you tell it us. Then Manely began to show how he and the
king of Denmark when they awaked found themselves in a barque upon the coast of
Italy, where taking land they found Urganda, and after that by cruel tempests
they arrived in an Isle, where a Bear assailed them, in which Isle they saw two
great Apes that showed them much sport. But (said he) we thought to have
starved therein for want of meat, for our victuals were clean consumed, when by
fortune Frandalo arrived in the same Isle, with whom I fought, and overcame
him. And because our barque was cast away, we entered into his, wherein we found
a Gentlewoman that told us news of you, whom for your sake we conducted unto
Constantinople, and from thence have brought her back again. As far as I
understand (said Esplandian) you have not always slept, and I believe that
never any Knight had so strange adventures at their first entering into Arms,
unless it were my lord Amadis my father, which I would hardly have believed,
had it not been for the signs and evident tokens that we saw in the Isle Saint
Mary. What were they (said the king of Denmark?) We saw the Image of Landriaque
(said Esplandian) with whom he had so long and perilous a combat, It is true
(said Argenton) that such combats against monsters, do oftentimes strike the
hardiest Knights with fear, and the Combat of our Apes made sorrowful knights
re^orce. In good faith (said Esplandian) thou have reason, and I like thee well
for thy mirth, but I pray thee heartily return again and fetch the Gentlewoman
that is in thy masters Ship, and bring her hither, that I may speak with her,
which he presently did: and as she entered into the great Serpent, Esplandian
embracing her, asked if if the had seen the Emperor, and the beautiful Princess
Leonorine his daughter? I my lord (said she) both of them desiring your arrival
in that country, especially the Princess Leonorine, with all the Ladies and
Gentlewomen, being fully determined not to pardon the great fault you have
committed in their behalfs, to have deferred off so long before you come to
serve them, according to the promise made by Amadis your father, as I assured
them: yet I think their displeasure is not s^ great, but you may well find
means to pacify the same. My good friend (said Esplandian) you are heartily
welcome, we will talk together when better leisure serves. Which he said,
fearing she should have pr^ceeded further, wherewith the standers by might have
intelligence of the love he bare unto the Princess: wherefore leaving the
Gentlewoman, and turning to Manley, he said: In faith I cannot well excuse my
self, but that I do them wrong, for the first commandment my father gave me at
such time I received the Order of Knighthood was, that in his place I should go
and serve them, to quit the promise he had made. Nevertheless f^rtune has ever
since given me so many crosses thereby to hinder my intent, that I could
neither fulfill his will, nor satisfy their expectations. While they were thus
devising, two of Frandalos Brigantines, that by him were sent to espy the
enemies navy, brought news they had seen great numbers of their Foistes and
Galleys sailing to the East, to fetch Victuals for the Navy, and that the rest
that remained behind would easily be overcome, if it pleased them to set upon
them: which the knights understanding, were of opinion, that without longer
delay they would assail them, and presently therewith hoised up their ankers,
making as secretly as they could toward Armatos Fleet, ^et they determined not
to set upon them before the break of day, hoping to take them sleeping, which
in truth fell out. The first that set upon them was the great Serpent, that at
her arrival entering among the enemies, cast fire so fiercely at her mouth and
nostrils, that when they awaked it put them in such fear, that ^ sing courage
without str^ke given, they all began to fly: Nevertheless it could not save
their lives, but that the greatest part of their vessels were drowned by means
of a contrary wind that rose so suddenly on the sea, whereby it raged in such
sort, that neither Mast, Sail, B^ard, nor Oar could hold, but were broken all
in pieces: yet did not Frandalo lose any of his fleet, neither did the camp
once move thereat, for they were not seen of any other then the Sentinel of the
Castle, that presently told Ambor and Talanque, whereat they received great
pleasure, especially when they espied the great Serpent, and Esplandian
therein, with whom they talked l^ng time before he came to land. At the last
they concluded to avoid all danger, that the Rampires they had made before the
gate, should for that time not be broken, but they would let down a ladder of
cords, whereby they might mount up into the Castle, Frandalo having given order
for the safety of his ships, which was presently done.

CHAP. XXVI.
How Armato King of Turkey had intelligence of the overthrow of his Army at Sea,
by Frandalo and his company, and what enterprises happened on both parts.

THat Aid entered into the Castle of the defended Mountain, Esplandian desirous
to see the enemies Camp, presently mounted upon the Walls, accompanied only of
Talanque and Ambor, that showed the Tents of Armato, the Bassias, Begberbeys,
and Sangiaces, whereof some were lodged within the Base-Court, which they
conquered at their first coming thither, wherewith Esplandian was much grieved,
and asked Talanque how he suffered them to come so near? Assure your self (said
he) it was not with our wills, but we defended it as long as possible we might,
and the Portall likewise, which at their first coming they assailed. But we
defended it so well, that without their Mine they had never won it, yet did it
profit them but little, for that suddenly we destroyed all their Mine, that had
cost them fifteen days labor. Which Armato perceiving, sought to begin again,
which we by diverse sallies would not suffer him to do: but whatsoever we could
do, in the end their force prevailed, and we constrained to f^rsake the same,
and retire unto the Castle, and that in good time, for we were scarce entered
into the dungeon, but they fired it, whereby the Portal fell down, giving us at
that time one of the most cruel assaults that ever place sustained, being so
meanly guarded as it was, and assure your self, that there is neither loop-hole
nor window, but they raised ladders or some other engines against it, and with
lances, fire, and sword, gave us so much to do, that we were in doubt to be
overcome. Nevertheless they were as hotly repulsed, for Libee gave them such
entertainment with a dram of Powder, that he set on fire, as they began to cry
out victory, but upon a sudden their cry became so pitiful, as nothing but
sorrow and lamentation could be heard among them, wherewith there were so many
of them burnt and singed, that never since they durst approach so near,
although we have given them diverse skirmishes, but for the space of eight days
we never issued forth, by reason (as you know) if we should often issue forth,
it is imp^ssible but some of our men must of force be slain, and the death of
one of ours would be more loss unto us, than the slaying of a hundred of their
men would profit us. You have done well (said Esplandian) for all wise Captains
ought to consent themselves with the sure defending of a Hold committed unto
them, not hazarding themselves to loss as long as possible they may. But for
the further safety of this Castle, I think it good we take counsel what were
best to be done, lest we be surprised. Wherewith they went into the chamber
where Matroco died, where they met together, and (among diverse things
propounded) it was concluded, the next night they would issue forth to slay the
enemies watch, which would easily be done, seeing they had not any alarm in
long time before. Wherefore every man went to refresh himself, till about
eleven of the C^ock at night, when Frandalo and the rest armed themselves. And
as they were all assembled in the Court, Esplandian standing in the middle,
spoke unto them and said, My good friends, we are not now among the Combats of
Great Britain, where Combats are fought more for fantasy or vainglory, than
upon any just occasion: But this War we make against the proper enemies of our
Faith, summoneth us not only to do our endeavors, but also to defend the honor
and liberty of the name of Christians: wherefore my good companions. I beseech
you let every man cast fear aside, preferring virtue before any inconvenience
whatsoever. Assuring you (if we do so) that before it be day, king Armato and
his army shall well find we are not so faint-hearted as he esteems us Then
calling Norandel unto him, he said: Uncle, you, Manely, and the king of
Denmark, with a hundred men, shall issue first to slay the Sentinels, and if
you could do the like unto their watch, our enterprise would be brought to pass
as we desire. But whatsoever chances, set you upon them, and fear not the
repulse, for Gandalin and Lazinde shall second you with two hundred more, by
which means you may easily retire if you be constrained thereunto.
Nevertheless, let no man stir from hence till Frandalo and I be first gone out,
for that we two alone will go into their Camp, to see what countenance they
make, and as fortune favoreth us, we will presently join with you. With that he
sent for two gowns of cloth of gold, and two Turkish caps, whereof he gave one
unto Frandalo, and kept the other for himself, and being armed under their
apparel, were let down (by the ladder of cords) on the sea side, and feigning
to be some of the sea captains went straight unto the Camp, where they were
stayed by the Sentinels, but Frandalo speaking the Arabian tongue, could so
well dissemble, that he made them believe they went to advertise the Great Turk
of a thing of great importance, whereby they let them pass. Mean time Armato
King of Turkey sat devising in his tent with his familiar friends, touching the
loss of ships, whereof not above an hour before, he had received news by one of
his mariners, that saved himself in a small Frigot: but the Turk could not by
any means imagine how it came to pass, seeing his spies that were newly
returned from Constantinople, had brought him news that the Emperor stirred
not, neither made any preparation to assayl him. And as Frandalo and Esplandian
entered the tent, they heard the mariner tell how that cruel overthrow happened
by means of a monster of the Sea, that came with the enemies fleet. That (said
he) put us in such fear, with casting fire out of his mouth, nose, and eyes,
that thereby the most part of our men were burnt to asher. By all my gods (said
Armato) it is some devil that envyeth my prosperity And it pleases your Grace
said one of his Bassaes, (that had failed in the Mediteranian Sea, and hear^
speaking of the great Serpent) there is nothing but art Magic used therein,
whereof I am most sure, as having diverse times bin certified there^f. Wherewith
they heard a great alarm, for Norandel and his company had issued out of the
castle with white scarffes about their heads for to be known, and had so well
surprised the watch about the base court, that they had slain them all, whereof
Armato had intelligence, as also that the enemies had gotten the issue of the
Portal, wherewith he was so moved, that in a great rage with very small company
he went thither himself Esplandian and Frandalo following after, as if they had
been of his company. But before their arrival, Norandel had recovered the
pallasadoes of the fortress, and there sustained the whole Turkish forces,
staying Gandalins coming Now the entry of the Court was so narrow, that more
then three men could not pass through it at once, whereby those of the castle
had in manner as much advantage as their enemies. Which Ambor, Talanque,
Gandalin, and Libee made them well feel, coming likewise upon them, for as the
king arrived, they thrust them clean out of the place, whereby they fled in
great haste, till the Turk himself caused them to stay, and seeing him, they
took courage, turning their faces, whereby the Skirmish began much hotter then
before, Armato himself showing great prowess, when Esplandian that was still
behind him, took him by the middle, and in despite of them all, carried him
unto the walls of the Castle, crying with a loud voice, Be of good cheer my
companions, we have taken the King. At the which cry the Turks set so fiercely
on them, that had it not bin for Frandalo (who as yet had not showed himself)
they had recovered him again, but he j^yned himself with Manley, Norandel, and
the rest that sustained the force of all the enemies so valiantly, that
Esplandian had means to put Armato in sure keeping, and to return again unto
the battle before it was ended. But it continued not long after, for that news
was presently carried to the Camp, that the king was prisoner with two of his
chief captains, taken by Grandalin and the King of Denmark, wherewith they were
so much abashed, that by little and little they began to retire, the like did
they of the Castle, contenting themselves with the booty they had gotten.

CHAP. XXVII.
How Armato King of Turkey was committed unto the custody of Gandalin, and what
conference he had with Frandalo.

THose of the Castle retired, as you heard before, Esplandian called Gandalin
and Libee, praying them to look unto King Armato, as also to the two Turkish
captains, and appointing the watch as time required, went and laid him down
upon his bed, not ceasing all the night to think on the speech Carmelle used
him touching the Princess Leonorine, whereby he could not fleep till day began
to appear, when Frandalo and the rest of his Knights entered into his chamber,
to talk with him, not only as touching the intertainment of their prisoners,
but of other things that much imported them* And as they were in counsel
together, Grandalin came unto them, showing them that King Armato desired for
to speak with them, whereupon they went out of the chamber to hear what he
would say. Frandalo could speak the Arabian tongue better then the rest, for
that he had served the King of Turks, and he knew him very well, wherefore
Esplandian destred him to speak for all the rest. And entering into the Chamber,
Frandalo went first, who kneeling on the ground, kissed the Kings hand. With
that Armato thinking he had been prisoner, asked him where he was taken. My
Lord (said he) I am now become a Christian, and a Knight of Jesus Christ, that
has done me so much grace, not long time since to call me to be one of his. A
Christian (said the King) is that possible? By my soul it makes me more
abashed, then the cruel fortune that is now happened unto me: for that all
Knights following arms ought patiently to bear those hazards that they fall
into, using necessity as a virtue. But thou unhappy wretch (that through fear
and want of courage) haste forsaken our just and holy law, wherefore take
thou not a r^pe and hangest thy self, as unworthy to go upon the earth? My Lord
(said he) you may say what pleases you, as being privileged for the greatness
of your estate, yet I can assure you, I never had so cowardly a heart as you
esteem I have, but rather account my self happy to have done that I have done.
Yet will I not refuse to do you service (my honor still reserved) in any thing
I can. With that Armato remembered himself, and thought he did him wrong,
wherefore moderating his choler, he said unto him: Friend Frandalo, If it
grieveth me to have lost you, let it not seem strange unto you, seeing now I
had greater hope then ever I have had to be served by your means. But seeing it
is so, you know how I have used you heretofore, now I pray you (if you may do
any thing for me) to find the means with your companions that I may be
delivered from hence by some reasonable composition. My Lord (said Frandalo,
pointing to Esplandian.) This is he that has all power and authority in this
place, both over you and me. With that Armato looked upon him, and perceiving
him so young without a beard, thought Frandalo said it to excuse himself,
wherefore he asked if he mocked him. God forbid I should do so my Lord (said
Frandalo) but I pray you believe me, for it is true, that my Lord Esplandian
standing here before you, is be and none other that slew Matroco, Frerion,
Arcalaus the inchanter, and Argantes the Porter of the castle, which he
conquered, as you have been advertised. By my head (said the king) I would
hardly have esteemed him for so brave a man: but seeing it is so, I pray thee
do somewhat with him touching the thing I told you of even now. Believe me my
lord (said Frandalo) there shall want no good will in me: and with that he had
him God morrow, and leaving him with his guard, they went into the Hall, where
they found the table ready covered for dinner, for it was about noon time. But
as Esplandian rested ill that night, so be made but a mean dinner, not being
able to withdraw his mind from thinking on the princess Leonorine which was the
cause that the Tables being uncovered, he went in his chamber, without any
company, only the king of Denmark, whom he loved as himself, where being
together, he began to show him the cause why be sent Carmelle to
Constantinople, as also what affection he bare to the Princess Leonorine. And
to the end said he) you be participant of my joy, I pray you let us have her
here, that she may show us what she learned in her voyage. My lord (said the
king of Denmark) if you saw her apparrelled in the gown the Princess gave her,
I am assured you will scarce know her at the first. Will you that I send her
word to bring it hither? It is well said (said Esplandian) with that he called
a Squire, sending him to Carmelle, that as then was in company of Arcabonnes
Gentlewomen: but understanding Esplandians pleasure, went presently to apparel
her self as he willed her, and having a mantle on her shoulders because she
would not be seen, went to him in his chamber, where she found him and the King
of Denmark talking together: but as soon as he espied her, he took her in his
arms, and setting her in a chair covered with velvet, said unto her: My good
friend, I mean to show my companion you see here, how much I love and esteem
him, wherefore I pray you show me before him what intertainment the Princess
Leonorine gave you, knowing you came from me, and whither I find any favor in
her sight. My lord (said she) as soon as I was arrived, and that she understood
the cause of my coming unto her, I found her no less yours then you hers:
whereby I may esteem you the happiest Knight living in the world. And know you
why? She is so fair, and of so comely personage, that unless it be her self
none can resemble her, and of truth she does far surpass all other Ladies, for
being alone in her private chamber playing on some instrument, or singing for
her pleasure, she steals and ravisheth the hearts (separated from the bodies
of such) as either hear or see her: and if at sometimes she attireth her self
after the Italian manner, with a cap of that country fashion, then you may see
her fair and glistering hair, part giving a certain shadow on her vermilion
cheeks, the rest knit up together, invironing her head, showing with far better
grace then any crown that she could wear, be it of stones, laurel, or the
finest gold that may be found But if that be a temptation unto man, her two
humble and modest eyes (like two suns) give them as many deaths, as they at
times behold the same, and again reviveth them better then at the first, and
all at one instant: whereat you must not be abashed, seeing that love it self
does often skirmish and strive in them, thereby to yield both pain and pleasure
unto those that do behold the same: and if he touch her, he fears to hurt
her, as being in most extreme passions ^f love. And not without a cause, for
that nature having made her, brake the mould, that she might be the only
perfect creature, accompanied with so many virtues, that love finds nothing
in her but bones to gnaw upon And I assure you my lord that speaking unto her
of those things you had given me in charge, I plainly perceived her by the
changing of her countenance to be charged with the like disease whereof you
still complain: for sometimes she blushed, and again became pale, and other
while was at such an exigent, that she could not answer me a ready word:
especially when I presented her with the ring that she once gave to Amadis your
father, as she told me afterward: In recompense whereof she sends you this
hairlace, which she most earnestly desires you to keep for the love of her,
and as the first Jewel her Grandmother Grimanaise gave to the Emperor
Appolidon, being but her lover. Expressly sending you the same as an assured
token of the love she bears unto you, and the good will, she will be ready
always to show you during her mortal life. With that she took a little box out
of her bosom wrapped in a piece of Taffata, and gave it unto him, which
Esplandian received, and taking it out of the box, he sighed tenderly and said:
Ha most fortunate present, (the first witness of the perfect alliance that the
most loyal lovers that ever lived had together, from whom is descended the
Paragon of all beauty) happy to have approached so near her person. But I much
happier that receives it, as more affectioned to serve her then any other
living on the earth: and it pleases God, while life indureth, I trust thou
never shall depart from me, but I will keep thee as carefully as I desire she
should hold my heart. Yet this is not all (said Carmelle but behold the
recompense of my labor, and saying so, she cast the mantle from her shoulders,
showing them her rich gown all covered with crowns of Gold, which put
Esplandian in mind of that Urganda sent him word by her Gentlewoman, when she
sent him the white armor set with the like devise, confirming in his mind the
hope that until then he had holden doubtful: whereat he felt the greatest ease
that possible he might. And as they beheld the great and excellent workmanship,
with the great and costly imbroidery of Pearls and precious Stones wherewith it
was all covered, Grandalin came and knocked at the door, to show them that
there were a great number of vessels discovered on the sea, and fearing them to
be some new supply of Turks, was of advice they should be ready to receive
them. Whereupon each man ran to arms, causing more men to go into their Ships
for their better safety: yet that alarm continued but a while, for that the
Pennons and Banners of Constantinople were perceived on their Ships, by such as
they sent out for to descry them: some of them coming back again in great haste
to show them that Gastilles as general of the Army for the Emperor, was coming
to succor them: whereof the Turks having intelligence, presently brake up their
Camp, being gone far from the Castle before any of the vessels come near the
shore: Nevertheless, those of the castle set upon their rereward and in the
chase slew so great a number, that had not night come on (considring the evil
order they held) there had not escaped a man of all their camp. In the mean
time Gastilles with his army came unto the mountain, where Esplandian, the king
of Denmark, and diverse others stood ready to receive him: and after many
courtesies and welcomes on all parts given, Gastilles asked them how they dealt
with their enemies? As well as may be (said Esplandian,) but we could not by
any means cause them to stay till your coming, but they are fled from hence as
soon as they heard news thereof: Then he told him of the larums and issues by
them made during the fiege, as also of the taking of King Armato. That is good
news (said Gastilles) God be praised therefore, if mine uncle the Emperor had
been advertised thereof before my departure from Constantinople, I had not
found the means to come send to visit you, which would have displeased me much,
neither would he have bin at charge to furnish such a Navy: but he was in doubt
you were in great necessity, that at my putting to sea he commanded me to make
all ye speed I could, til he came in person with four hundred sail that already
are prepared if our forces should not be sufficient to sustain the Turkish
army: but for this year he shall be excused, if there happen no other adventure.
I pray you (said Esplandian) come to land, and go with us into the castle,
where we will confer of all things with some better leisure: Which he agreed
unto, wherewith he and some of the principal captains of his army, entered into
the knights boat, and with them went up into the castle: where being arrived,
Gastilles yt knew king Armato, desired Esplandian before he did any thing else,
that he might see him, wherewith he brought him to the chamber, where he sat
as pensive as any man could be, Gastilles did him honor, as to his estate
appertained. But king Armato would hardly look upon him, but said unto him:
Gastilles, I marvel much why the Emperor your master (contrary to his faith and
promise) has broken the peace agreed upon between us, and for a thing so
little importing him as this place does, whereunto he never had any right, as
you well know. But I perceive from whence the same proceeds: because he would
every man should know she little faith and less loyalty that is in him, which I
shall one day make him know full well, if ever I escape out of this prison. My
Lord (said Gastilles, your honor saved) the Emperor my master has in him all
the parts that belong unto a wise virtuous, and hardy Prince, such as he is,
and it seems unto me (under your correction) that by good and just cause he
has done no more then he might do: seeing it is evident that this castle has
bin conquered by Christian knights, whom he is bound to favor with all the aid
he can, not only to defend our Law, or because they have desired his aid, as
being the first and greatest Monarch in the world, but to sustain the right
that both he and his Predecessors have always pretended to these Marches. And
where you threaten to make him feel the small Loyalty whereof you accuse him,
at other times heretofore you have met each other with your Forces, where you
sped so hardly, that I rather believe you speak in choler then with reason,
especially considering the estate wherein you are at this present. Gastilles
(said Armato) although I were dead, I have sufficient number of Captains and
good Soldiers in my Country to revenge my Cause, and a son likewise, that is
not born to endure the injury done unto his father: and thus much I assure
thee, that if I thought him to be other, I would stay him with mine own hands
as soon as I should see him. My Lord (said Esplandian) that Prince, Knight, or
Gentleman that uses such unfit speech as you do now, is commonly holden for a
man of no capacity, especially when he is in a place where humility rather then
threatenings would become him better: Have you already forgotten the prison
wherein you are, and in the hands of those that have so small occasion to wish
you well? My lord, virtue is never better known to be in man, but then when he
is in most distress: Wherefore if until this time you have not known what
constancy does mean, learn hereafter to discern the same, using words worthy
your estate, and not such, nor so injurious as you have uttered unto my Lord
Gastilles, who in this place represents the person of an Emperor, (a greater
lord then you) in whose mercy your life or death consists: for we are all his
soldiers, ready to do him service. The king perceiving well that he had done
them wrong, and fearing to be hardlier used then he was accustomed to be, said
unto Esplandian, Sir Knight, I pray you pardon my impatience, considering with
your self the great grief and melancholy humor wherein I am, when I (that was
wont to be feared and redoubted of all the Princes in Asia) am now constrained
to obey the will and pleasure of my greatest enemies, which unto me is so
extreme grief, that I die each day a hundred times, because I cannot die. But
Esplandian answered not one word, but leaving him with his guard, taking
Gastilles by the hand, led him into one of his best chambers, where they
supped. The next day they assembled all together, and after many matters
propounded, it was agreed among them (according to Frandalos advice) that they
should enter into Turkey, being as then in great perplexity, as well for the
taking of king Armato, as for the overthrow of his Army, as it shall be showed
unto you hereafter, for at this time we will cease to speak thereof: returning
to show you of King Luisart, that during this time, for the most part held his
Court in the City of London.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How the greatest part of the Knights that used to be at King Luisarts Court,
returned unto their own houses, and of the Coronation of Amadis and Oriane at
London.

YOu have heard before of the Combat between Esplandian and Amadis his father,
and how after long time of their abode at Mirefleur, staying the healing of
their wounds, Esplandian desiring to return unto the Castle of the defended
Mountain, took his leave of king Luisart, the like did diverse of ye knights
that as then were at court: as Galaor king of Sobradise, Agraies, Gransador,
Balan, Galuanes, and Angriote d'estrauaulx, some to see their wives, others to
taste the ease and pleasant rest of their mansion houses: whereby it happened the
Court was less replenished with knights than it had been in long time before,
especially by reason of the news they heard from ye castle the defended
mountain, whither diverse young knights traveled to aid Esplandian. King
Luisart therefore so meanly accompanied as I said before, being very old and
decrepit, began to be melancholy, and to have the palsy, setting aside all
hunting, hawking, arms, and chivalry, or any other pleasure whatsoever: And
with a remembrance of death, so much abhorred all things past, present, and to
come, that he esteemed them vain and altogether transitory: whereby he
determined to depose himself of all kingly estate and government of his Realm,
to pass the rest of his time in a solitary and religious manner, especially when
he called to mind the great perils from whence he had escaped, and above all
his last most dangerous and cruel imprisonment. Nevertheless, for a time he
kept it secretly, until one night he being a bed with the Queen, where they lay
talking of the fickleness of this world, he discovered his whole mind unto her,
and how he determined to make Amadis his son King and Governor of his Country:
to the end he might freely and without any interruption withdraw himself to
this castle of Mirefleur, where (by Gods help) he meant to live a solitary
life. The Queen that was one of the wisest and devoutest ladies in her time,
confirmed him so well in his opinion, that they agreed to return to London,
there to accomplish their pretense. And the next day they departed from
Mirefleur, accompanied of Amadis, Gransador, and others, and coming to London,
after they had remained there a certain time, the Queen sent for all the
nobility: who being arrived at the court, caused a scaffold to be made in the
principal place of all the City where the people might repair. And as he and
the Queen both apparrelled in their royal Robes, each set in a chair of Estate,
Amadis sitting somewhat lower on his right hand, and Oriane on the left, were
come thither, a Herald crying thrice, that all the people should keep silence:
the King with a stately countenance and Princely magnanimity turning to the
people, said unto them: My good friends and loyal subjects, before I begin to
show you the cause why I have made you to repair unto this place, I will put
you in mind of part of the dangers and great hazards wherein I have often
fallen since the death of my brother of famous memory king Falangris, when it
pleased God to call me unto the government of this land, and as I think there
are yet many of you living that can well remember the danger wherein both I and
my country thought to fall, when by the means and subtilty of Arcalaus the
inchanter, I was delivered into their hands that long time before had conspired
my death, from whence my son Amadis delivered me: Yet not long after by evil
counsel, I made war against him, which ended as all men know, fortune envious
of my felicity, afterward prepared me such a banquet, that without his help I
had been prisoner with king Aravig^e, and utterly overthrown. And that which
has yet more astonished me was, that when I thought my self sure and cut of
danger of all mishaps, a worse than all the former suddenly chanced unto me,
the which (considering the place wherein I was) I thought verily to have bin
the end and consummation of my days. Nevertheless the Lord God regarding me in
pity, sent my young son Esplandian to my sorrowful prison, from whence he has
delivered me, as no doubt you have heard. Now my good subjects you all see me
to be very old and white haired, having already attained to the threescore and
tenth year of my age, which makes me think it time now to forget all worldly
pleasures, and to serve God to whom I am so much bound: And for this cause I
have determined from henceforth to forsake all royal dignity, and leave you my
son Amadis for your King, to whom at this time I yield both my Crown, Scepter,
and all the right I have unto the Government of this Land, praying you all as
much as possibly I may, that hereafter you will be faithful and true subjects
unto him, as you have always bin to me. And although he be but my son in law,
if I knew him unworthy of the place, believe me my good friends, I would sooner
choose a near stranger for my s^ccessor, than I would do him: but there is not
one among you but knows well his great deserts, and of what Race he comes,
that at this day may well be called one of the most noble and happiest Linages
in all the world, as being descended from the valiant Trojans, whereof the
memory shall endure for ever. He is a Kings son, heir unto the Crown of France,
and now your Prince and Governor, and so I leave him unto you, with my Daughter
your Queen and lawful Princess, holding to my self only the Castle of
Mirefleur, where (with Gods help) the Queen and I will end our days
religiously, serving God, as we are bound to do. Then calling Amadis, giving
him his Royal Mantle, he willed him presently to put it on, the like did the
Queen to Oriane. Mean time the silence was so great, that nothing could be
heard among the people but cries and lamentations, moved with pity and
compassion to see the determination of their Prince: who being apparrelled in a
simple robe of black cloth took his son and the Queen his daughter, set them in
their Regal Seats, and in presence of all the people set each of them a crown
of Gold upon their heads, causing them to be proclaimed by the Heralds, King
and Queen of great Britain: That done, every man departed, some weeping, and
others glad, for the advancement they hoped from ye new king, who from
thenceforth began so wisely to govern his country, yt never was any prince
better beloved nor obeyed of his subjects. King Luisart within short time after
(accompanied of the Queen and Grumedan) went unto Mirefleur as he had
determined to do, where they lived so austerely, helping and being present at
every hour when service was to be said, as readily as the poorest of the old
men that remained there, for the administration and service to the religious
women in the Monaster of the dev^ut Abbess Adalasta. But when king Amadis
perceived his means to recompense those of whom in his young years he had
received great pleasure and service, he began to exalt Arban de Norgalles,
giving him one of the fairest Islands in his country, to Gandales the lands of
the Duke of Bristow, to Gandalin (as then absent) he gave the lands of Arcalaus
ye inchanter, he made Angriotte d'estrauaulx great master of his horse, Guilan
de Pensife high-steward of his house, Ardan le nain his chief carver, and
married the Gentlew^man of Denmark very richly. Not long after the Queen was
brought to bed of a goodly Son and a fair Daughter both at one birth, the Son
named Perion, and the Daughter Brisenne: At whose nativity great joy was made
throughout all the country, especially at London, where the same day one of
Norandels Squires arrived, that told king Amadis how Esplandian, and his master
met together in Almaigne, where the day before he had slain two Giants, and
deliver ^o Gandalin, with diverse other Knights, Squires, Ladies, and
Gentlewomen out of prison. Know thou (said the King) what way they took
afterward? My lord (said the Squire) they made account to go unto ye castle
called the defended Mountain, to help them that are therein, being in great
necessity which the King understanding, sent presently for all the Pilots that
might be found, and in all haste caused to rig and arm the greatest ship he had
to sail into the East to his son, who in the mean time (moved thereunto by
Frandalo) departed from the castle of Matroco with the Emperors army to invade
the Turks country, as in the next chapter you shall hear.

CHAP. XXIX.
How the Town of Alfarin in Turkey being assaulted, was taken by Esplandian and
the rest of his company.

NOt long after the Siege of the defended Mountain was raised, and Gastilles
arrived at the Castle, as you heard before: Frandalo had advise by Belleris his
Nephew, (that returned out of Turkey, where he had been to see what news in the
Country) that Alf^rax Son to King Armato, and Governor of the great City of
Tesifant, understanding the imprisonment of his Father, with the overthrow of
the Turkish Army, was departed from the town of Alfarin, where he had left the
beautiful Princess Heliaxa his wife, daughter to Amphirion King of Medea, to go
with all diligence to set order in his own government, and raise more men,
thereby to resist the Christians power if they entered further into the country.
Which understood by Esplandian, Gastilles, Ambor, Manley, and the king of
Denmark, they determined to enter into Turkey, whereunto by many reasons
Frandalo persuaded them, showing them what means they had to besiege the town
of Alfarin, not above two days journey from them, being hardly provided of
victuals, and no Garrison therein: Wherefore it was agreed among them, that
Gastilles with his Navy of ships should depart the next evening in as secret
manner as he could, to see if he might surprise their Haven, and that they on
the other side would travel all night, whereby they might besiege the Town both
(...) land and sea, entering therein before the Turks should hear nows thereof.
And as they agreed, they put the same in execution: in such manner that
Gastellis (giving forth that he would return again unto Constantinople) about
Sun-fitting took ship, when he put to sea, the moon shone bright, wherefore
hoising up their ankers, they set sail: And they had not sailed long, but he
called his chief Captains together, discovering his enterprise unto them
wherewith presently leaving the way to Constantinople, they made toward the
town of Alfarin. On the other side, Frandalo slept not, when he perceived his
time, (all the company being already advertised that he meant to go by night)
they issued out of the castle, every man carrying victuals with him for the
space of four days: And they traveled so long, that about the break of day
they came unto a great forest, where they stayed in ambushme^t till the next
night following, when they issued forth, and about three of the clock at night
they came unto a path that went two ways, where Frandalo caused them to stay,
and calling Esplandian, said unto him: My lord, I pray you let us two and no
more take the way that leads on the left hand, and Belleris my nephew shall
guide the rest of our company to the mountain of Yarebreh, from whence they may
easily see if our Navy be near the city of Alfarin, and then as they find the
enterprise go forward, they may assayl the place, or else remain in ambush till
occasion serves. You and I will follow on this way, that will bring us to ye
adventurous fountain, by the which lies the great way that leads to
Tesifant, where most commonly are found diverse strange adventures, and if by
fortune we might meet the Princess Heliaxe, that as to morrow should depart
from Alfarin to go unto her husband, we shall not loose our labors. Let us go
(said Esplandian:) with that Belleris and his company went their way, and
Frandalo, Esplandian, Sergil, with the King of Denmark, took the other way, who
about the break of day arrived at the adventurous fountain, where there stood
four great copper pillars all gilded, and at each pillar hung a table with
certain writings therein, the contents thereof when time serves you shall hear
declared, as also the occasion why they were set up. Being arrived there, not
far off they perceived a light that issued out of a Laffata pavillion that
stood upon the side of the fountain, whereunto they approached as covertly as
they could, where they perceived a most beautiful Gentlewoman combing of her
hair, and not far from thence twenty Knights all armed keeping watch about her,
among the which was a squire holding a horse all trapped with cloth of gold.
But Frandalo and Esplandian were no sooner arrived, but they were discovered,
yet they fearing a greater ambush, the most part of them losing courage, began
to fly away: which the two Knights perceiving, entered among them, and at their
first coming overthrew four or five of them unto the ground, forcing them that
were behind to return again, wherewith there began a fierce and cruel battle,
for those that first began to run away (looking back and perceiving only two
Knights that set upon their fellows) were so ashamed, that they turned again to
help them: nevertheless without the force of three Giants that held against the
knights, they could not have endured so long against Esplandian and Frandalo,
but they three fought so valiantly with them, that the two knights were in the
greatest danger then ever they were before. And as you see a Boar foming at the
mouth (followed of a troop of dogs) set his tail against a tree, and with his
tuskes tear and rent the flesh of the boldest dogs that do assayl him, so were
Frandalo and Esplandian among the Knights they had assailed, striking both on
the right hand and the left with so great fury, that at one instant two of
their principal enemies were slain, so that there remained but one Giant to
fight with them, with whom Frandalo made his party good, while Esplandian
followed the rest, that as then began to fly But when the Giant perceived
Esplandian return, being in fear of death, he stepped aside and said unto
Frandalo, Sir Knight, you and I have often been companions in many haughty
enterprises, I pray you therefore show me the favor to receive me unto mercy,
otherwise you might be blamed of those that know us both, for I am your cousin
Foron. Whereat Frandalo was much abashed, and could hardly be persuaded
thereunto, wherefore he prayed him to put off his helmet, and if it be true
(said he) that thou art Foron, I will use thee both like a friend and kinsman.
Wherewith ye Giant disarmed his head, whereby Frandalo knew him and embraced
him, whereat Esplandian was much abashed, not knowing what had passed between
them, with that he went nearer unto them, asking upon what cause that
salutation proceeded. Then Frandalo told what the Giant was, desiring him
likewise to take pity on him: which Esplandian agreed unto, then they three
together went unto the pavillion, at ye entry whereof they found the
gentlewoman talking with Carmelle, no more abashed at the overthrow of her men,
then if she had seen them iustle for their pleasures She was apparrelled in a
gown of Damask all imbroidered and set with Pearls and precious stones,
Frandalo presently knew her, as having seen her oftentimes, especially the same
day she was married to Alphorax, where he justeled and did so valiantly, that
she entertained him for her knight, wherefore lighting on foot, and pulling off
his helmet, he saluted her in most humble manner. Wherewith she being abashed
to see him that she esteemed wholly to be hers, so to have behaved himself
against her guard, said unto him: How now Frandalo, is this the service I
looked for at your hands, having received you for my Knight? The devil take
such servants, seeing you are so fainthearted unto her, that hitherto has
reputed you one of the most courteous knights that ever was girt with sword:
but now I find I am deceived, for I should rather have suspected any other then
you to be a doer in this enterprise, whereby I cannot but be much abashed.
Madam (said Frandalo) since ye time I became your knight, at the last Tourney
that I ran, a lord of greater power has entertained me into his service, whom
I will serve during my mortal lose, seeing it has pleased him to show me so
great favor, being well assured, that when you know him as I do, you will esteem
me happy, how cowardly or villainous soever you account me now. What is he
(said she) tell me of your faith? it is Jesus Christ (said Frandalo:) yet will
I never fail to do you all the honor and service that I can, as also now at
this time, so my companion be content, for without him I cannot do it. Frandalo
(said Esplandian) you may command me, for I am ready to do what pleases you:
Wherefore delay not to do all the pleasure and service you can unto this lady
if it be your will. Wherewith Frandalo thanked him most heartily, and said to
Heliaxe: Madam, seeing he will have it so, I pray you from henceforth put all
your trust in me, and I will not fail to be careful for you: Mean time I pray
you get upon your palfry, that I may bring you to a place where you may see far
better tourneys then any at your wedding: afterward (if it pleases God to
favor us) you shall easily perceive how much I esteem and have in remembrance
the favors you have heretofore showed unto me, being but a simple knight, and
you a great Princes to command far better then my self: for never was Princess
more honored and esteemed among her own subjects then you shall be of them, to
whom I mean to bring you, which may be an example unto Kings and mighty
Princes, to whom God has given power and authority, who being advertised of
the honorable and good intertainment made to you by us, they may be moved
hereafter to take pleasure in entertaining the meaner as well as the greater,
considring the mutability of fortune, as by your self it well appears.
Frandalo (said she) you may make as many excuses and fair promises as you list,
yet can you not deny but you have done me wrong, yet in doing as you say you
will, your reputation will be better to the world, although your faith has
failed to our goods: wherefore let us go where it pleases you. With that she
got upon her palfrey, and Frandalo bare headed leading her horse, till they
came near unto the town, where they heard a great noise, that made the two
knights think, either their enterprise to be discovered, or that their
Soldiers assailed the Town. And fearing they had bin repulsed, began to repent
themselves of their long staying with the Princess, to whom Frandalo in most
courteous manner said: Madam, Is it not your pleasure (mean time that I and my
companion go unto the town) to stay here for us with this Gentlewoman and my
cousin Foron? I truly (said Heliaxa) and I will not depart from hence before I
hear of you again. With that Frandalo and Esplandian ran in great haste toward
the Town, where they found their companions fighting with those of Alfarin,
among the which were Talanque, Ambor, the King of Denmark, Gandalin, Lazinde,
that had given the town a hard skirmish on that side, thinking to give them so
much to do, that in the mean time the army by sea might assayl the water gate:
but they were too soon discovered, whereby they found great resistance on all
sides: Nevertheless Norandel and Belleris had gotten the Barriers, and repulsed
the enemies unto the pallisadoes Which Esplandian and Frandalo perceiving, they
lighted on foot, and being covered with their shields, their swords in their
hands, passed through the prease, and with bold courage, went so far, that they
slew great number of the enemies: for the Alfarins to defend their city issued
out of the gates, and the Christians to win it, did most valiantly, but the
place was so narrow, they could not hurt their enemies so much as in the oopen
field. Whereby it happened, that Frandalo and Esplandian minding either to win
or loose, stepped so far forward, that the Alfarins flying into the town, and
they after, found themselves alone within the same among their enemies, and
that so far, that had it not bin for Frandalo, Esplandian (that took no care
but only to kill and overthrow the enemy) had been enclosed by them, put he
pulled him back. Whereby the two Knights perceived the danger they were in,
wherefore by little and little they got unto the steps, that went upon the
wall: where they sustained many hard assaults without being hurt, although the
enemy ceased not to throw Lances, Stones, Darts, and all other weapons at them
they could find, none of them daring come to handle strokes, for if any
advanced himself to show his prowess, it cost him his life, or else was thrown
down headlong. Mean time Norandel and his company, that had seen Frandalo and
Esplandian shut into the town, sought by all means to scale the walls, or else
to break the gates: but all in vain, for they within defended it so with Oil,
scalding Water, Logs and Stones, that diverse of them were overthrown, and ended
their lives most miserably. And fighting in that sort, a knight all armed came
from the Haven, crying with loud voice and said: Be of good courage my
children, be of good courage, defend this quarter well, for our enemies on the
seaside have not as yet found means to set one man on land, and yet have lost
above two hundred of their men. By God (said one of them) I see not one that
stands idle, yet can we not overcome these two knights. Why so (said ye
other?) They are (said he) entering in among us, and we have bin these two hours
fighting with them, but all in vain, for the youngest of them fights so
valiantly, that we dare not approach them: And which is more, he and his
companion in despite of us all have gotten those stairs, where they now defend
themselves, and that so well that we can find no means to drive them thence
although many of our men have been slain by them, and others cruelly wounded. I
am of opinion (said the knight) that we receive them unto mercy, for it may be
they are such men, yt for to have them again, the enemy will be glad to give
king Armato in change, and return again into their country. Whereunto they all
agreed, and therewith the Knight that had given them that counsel, made signs
unto Esplandian that they would parley with them, whereby the assault ceased
for a time, and the knight spoke unto them in this manner, Sir knights, you see
it is impossible for you to escape from hence, and it were great pity that two
so valiant knights should die so young now in the flower of your ages. But this
we will do, yield your selves, and we will save your lives. Sir knight (said
Esplandian) if we die at this time, we are quit for ever after, but so much
there wants thereof, and we have so good hearts and so sure a confidence in
Jesus Christ, in whose quarrel we fight, that we hope he will give us means not
only to escape this danger, but to spoil the Town and lead you prisoners with
us: Wherefore take this counsel for your selves, and yield you unto us before
the wrath of God be further moved against you. When they that stood about them
beard those words, both great and small began to cry with a loud voice, saying:
Stay that villain, let him die, or we will die here at his feet: wherewith they
assailed them so fiercely, that they were constrained to get upon the highest
steps. But not long after they repulsed the enemy so valiantly with stones
(whereof they sound great quantity upon the Portal) that from that time
forwards they had no longer stomachs to assayl them. But Norandel and the rest
being without, understanding the noise and the voice of their companions, whom
they esteemed dead or taken prisoners, determined to set fire on the gates,
while the rest assailed the town: Wherewith every man ran to fetch wood, which
the Alfarins perceived, but to conclude, they could not shun it, but whither
they would or not, the Drawbridge and the gates were set on fire: wherewith
they were so abashed, that most part of them began to fly unto the great
temple of Jupiter the principal place of strength within their City, the rest
staying behind, with full determination rather to die then suffer the
Christians to enter the Town. And seeing the gates burnt down, so many of them
ran to fetch water, that not long after the Christians had means to assayl the
town on that side, which assault continued so long that day failed, yet could
they not enter, by reason of the great resistance the Alfarins made, but the
two Knights that were above did them so much hurt with blocks and stones, that
not any of them durst appear, whereby the Christians became masters of the
town. Wherein great number of people, both men, women, and children, were put
to the sword, and more had died had it not bin night, specially on the water
side where Gastilles and his army entered with most great fury. Nevertheless
fearing lest the Alfarins should assemble again, and in the night they might be
repulsed, be commanded a retreat to be sounded, being well assured the next day
to have the town at their pleasure. And for the same cause he sent to the army
on land that they should do the like: wherewith every man retired, ser^ing
watch in those places where most need required. The town in this sort being
conquered, and the people gotten into the great temple of Jupiter, Esplandian
minding not to lose the Princess Heliaxe, nor ye Giant Foron, that he and
Frandalo left with Carmelle, desired Grandalin and Lazinde to go fetch them,
and with them he sent Sergil his Squire to bring them to the place, which they
presently did, and made such haste, that they found her sitting by a great fire
that Foron had made, where lighting off their horses and saluting Heliaxe,
Grandalin said: Madam, my lord Esplandian prays you to come unto the place
where he stays for you. My friends (said she) I know him not, true it is I
was brought hither by two Knights, whereof one is Frandalo that I have known
long time, but for the other I assure you as far as I remember I never saw him
before. Madam (said Carmelle) he is Son to the valiant Knight Amadis de Gaul,
whose same is spread so far about the world. Truly (said Heliaxe) I have heard
of him so have you (as I think said Carmelle of my Lord Esplandian his Son: for
he alone conquered the castle the defended mountain, and now lately has taken
king Armato your father in law, and I can assure you he is one of the courteous
knights living-in the world. I am much abashed then (said she) how he showed
himself so uncourteous in my behalf, not speaking unto me while I was in his
company, yet me thinks being his prisoner, he could have done no less then
comfort me, either with good speeches of fair promises, whereof he has used so
few, that while I live I shall never think well of him. Madam (said Carmelle)
you take the matter otherwise then it is, for if he refrained to speak unto
you, it was by reason of the great acquaintance he perceived Frandalo to have
with you, unto whom he is so great a friend, that he was not only content to
give him leave to entertain you, but much greater favor would he do unto him if
he can. You may say what you will (said she:) Nevertheless, if he have no other
excuse then that you allege in his behalf, he shall never lose the disliking
he has gotten at my hands. Madam (said Gandalin) I am well assured he will
amend that fault when it pleases you, wherefore I pray you determine what you
mean to do, for he has commanded us to do as pleases you: My friends (said
Heliaxe) I would gladly sleep till it be day, then I will be ready to go where
you think good, but I pray you tell me what noise it was I heard of late within
the Town. Madam (said Lazinde) It is not yet three hours since the Town was
taken by assault. Good God (said she) what miserable fortune was that for the
poor inhabitants, I think they are all put unto the Sword. No madam (said
Lazinde) the greater part have saved themselves in the great Temple of Jupiter,
but they will hardly escape when it is day, for our Generals are determined to
burn the Temple. If it be so (said she) that Frandalo has any credit with his
companions, and that he that sent you be so courteous as this Gentlewoman
report him to be, I hope they will take pity on the poor people: at least, if
not for the love of them, I trust upon request for my sake they will not refuse
it. And to the end I come not thither too late, I pray you when day appears
let us presently depart, wherewith laying her down upon a cloak, she passed the
rest of the night, not greatly to her ease.

CHAP. XXX.
How Gandalin and Lazinde brought the Princess Heliaxe, and the Giant Foron
into the Town of Alfarin to Esplandian and Frandalo, and of the honorable
entertainment they had.

HEliaxe that had not slept all that night, being grieved for the loss of the
town of Alfarin, the ordinary abiding place of Alphorax her husband, and withal
the pleasantest and most delicious place of all Turkey, perceiving day to
appear, waked the two Knights, making her account if she might get into the
town before the destruction of the temple, the people that were fled into it,
(by her request and humble supplication to Esplandian and Frandalo) should be
saved. With that they all mounted on their horses, and made such haste, that
they entered into the town, as the Christians began to assault the fortress, and
when Frandalo perceived the Princess Heliaxe, he rode unto her, bidding her God
morrow, and taking her palfry by the bridle bareheaded, brought her to
Esplandian and his company that did her great honor, knowing her to be a Kings
Daughter, and wife to so great a Prince. With that she asked Frandalo which of
them was Esplandian, Madam (said he, pointing unto him) here he is ready to do
you any service that he can, as he has assured me But when she perceived him
to be so young and of so great beauty, she was abashed to think how nature had
furnished him with so many good perfections, especially of so great and
incomparable force, whereof he had the commendation among the most valerous
Knights: wherewith she said unto Frandalo, In good faith I have heard him
commended in diverse places for one of the best Knights living in the world, and
of mine own knowledge I have seen him, considering his young years, so that if
he abound as much in courtesy as he does in valor and beauty, I think him to
be the bravest Gentleman that may be found: which I shall presently see if he
grant me one request. Madam (said Esplandian, blushing at the praises she used
in respect of him) If I do it not, you shall be the first that ever I refused
gift unto all my life: and considering your great beauty and most courteous
behavior, how should it be possible for me to disobay your will? I pray you
then sir knight (said she) to pardon the poor people that are within the
Temple, and grant them unto me, with leave to send them where I shall think
good, not hurting them any more. In good truth madam (said Esplandian) you
shall not be refused for so small a matter, and I will do so much with the
other Knights, that they shall give consent, as also to your own liberty and
the Giant Forons, to guide you where it pleases you, which Frandalo did most
earnestly at your hands before you arrived here: And for his sake look what
else you will command at our hands, we are ready to perform it with all our
hearts. For the which the Princess Heliaxe thanked him most heartily, and
turning to Frandalo, said unto him: Sir Knight, the good that you and your
companions do unto me, shall never be forgotten on my part, but I will by all
means seek to acknowledge the same, although presently I cannot do i^:
wherefore if it pleases you, cause your soldiers to retire, that these poor
distressed people may come forth according to your promise: In the mean time I
will go comfort them, for I am in doubt most part of them are rather dead then
living: with that she desired Carmelle to bear her company, they two going to
the Temple gate, which they found fast shut and rampired up: then she called so
loud, that some of them spoke unto her: but never did men by pardon from their
Prince, brought back again from the Gibbet, more rejoice, nor were better
comforted then they when they knew her, thinking the Prince Alphorax had made
some agreement with their enemies. Wherefore they opened a little wicket,
whereat she and the Gentlewoman enrered into the Temple, they sking the
Princess how it was her chance to come thither in so good a time to succor
them, that looked for no other favor then most cruel death. My friends (said
she) I have done so much with the Christians (by Frandalos means) whom I have
known l^ng time, that they are content to let you issue forth, your lives
saved, and go where it pleases you, and my self likewise that had fallen into
their hands as well as you: wherefore choose whither you will follow me to
Tesifant where my lord Alphorax is, who for my sake will show you all the favor
and c^urtesie he may. When the poor people understood the agreement made for
them by the Princess Heliaxe, they all agreed to go with her, and not forsake
her, giving her most hearty thanks for the good she had wrought them. Then
(said Heliaxe) let those that have armor put it off* and come all forth with
me. Then s^e being accompanied in that manner, came unto Esplandian, and showed
him great numbers of women and little children that stood about her, said unto
him: I pray you sir knight behold the good whereof you are the cause, and think
what damage it had been if these poor filty souls had suffered death for no
offense, wherein you are worthy great commendations. And yet (said she,
smiling) while I live I shall not forget the small account you made of me when
Frandalo and you found me before my pavillion, after the overthrow of my
Knights. Wherefore Madam (said Esplandian?) I marvel (said she) why you ask me
such a question, seeing you might well conceive what grief I had in mind, yet
did you not so much as once salute me, or use word unto me: in good truth it
was but discourteously done of you. Madam (said he) I beseech you pardon me,
for the fault I committed in your behalf, was not done for want of bringing up,
but fearing to breed some jealousy in Frandalos mind, seeing him so much
affected to do you service, together with the good countenance you showed unto
him, although you had lost your men. This excuse (said Heliaxe) is not to be
accepted, neither shall you escape so easily therewith: which she spoke with so
good a countenance, that her seeming to be offended, contented all the company:
wherefore Esplandian said unto her, Madam, I am content to make amends for this
great fault, or to do what penance it pleases you. The penance (said she)
that you shall have shall be, that according to the promise of mercy you have
made unto these poor people, as also of favor in mine own behalf, you give us
leave to go unto the City of Tesifant to my husband, that for the same we think
the better of you. Madam (said Esplandian) you have already understood our
minds, wherefore you may freely go whither it pleases you, and I my self will
be your guide if it be your pleasure. With that Heliaxe gave them many thanks,
and taking her leave, got upon her palfrey, and being accompanied of Foron with
a great number of the poor people, took the way that went to Tesifant, Frandalo
going with her above a league and more, and further would have gone although he
were wounded in diverse places of his body, but she desired him to go back
again. For (said she) although like a good and courteous knight you have had ye
means not only to serve me, b^t also to save the life of me and mine, it may
be I shall not have so the like to do the same for you if you fall into my Lord
Alphorax hands: who as I think e're now is advertised of my misfortune, whereby
I am in doubt he is already in the field with great number of men to succor me.
And if it should be so, I know him so impatient, that if he meet with you
(being already moved with the loss of Alfarin, as als^ the injury my Knights
have received, and my self likewise as he will suppose) the pleasure that you
do me would breed a danger no further, but turn back again. Frandalo knew her
counsel to be good, wherewith he committed her to God: leaving her in the guard
of his cousin Foron, and therewith returned the same way that he came. It was
then somewhat late, wherefore Heliaxe having traveled unto the adventurous
fountain, and finding her pavillion as yet standing up, determined not to
depart from thence till the next day in the morning, that she took the way that
led to Tesifant. And having ridden till noon, she met the Prince Alphorax, with
a great number of Knights that all night had stayed upon the way to the Castle
the defended fountain, thinking th^se that had taken his wife would lead her
thither, to have her in safe keeping, and such was their opinion yt brought him
news thereof. But they met not any man in the way, wherefore they returned again
to go unto the advanturous fountain, much grieved when they perceived the
Princess Heliaxe coming toward them, to whom Alphorax ran, and imbrasing him
with a loving kiss, asked her how she had escaped from the enemy. My lord (said
she) when I shall have told you how, yet am I in doubt you will hardly believe
it. And to say the truth, it seems fortune has taken pleasure in one day to
make me know both the good and evil she could do unto me. Then she showed him
of the overthrown of her Knights, the words that passed between Frandalo,
Esplandian, and her: and lastly the honest entertainment they used in her
behalf. Truly madam (said Alphorax) it is very strange, and I cannot imagine how
these Christian dogs (having taken my Town of Alfarin by assault) having used
so much humanity, not only to these people, but have saved your honor, being
such and so beautiful a Lady as you are. But it is to be thought, that our gods
having compassion on me, have preserved you, as the thing I love and most
esteem off in this world. Pet if I live but one year longer, I swear and
promise unto you to assemble so many men together, that the City of
Constantinople and her perjured Emperor shall suffer and endure much woe: in
such manner, that the memory thereof shall not be extinct for one thousand
years after my decease. Heliaxe that perceived him enter into choler, to
pacify the same, answered him and said: My Lord, you may do it when it
pleases you, but at this present you see here a great number of poor desolate
people, I beseech you speak unto them, and comfort them as well as you may, for
their whole trust is in you, with that Alphorax going unto them, gave them many
gracious and comfortable speeches, and with them returned to the City of
Tesifant.

CHAP. XXXI.
How Gastilles took his leave of Esplandian, and sailed to Constantinople, and
of the arrival of Palomir, Bransil, and other Knights of great Britain at the
town of Alfarin.

THe town of Alfarin brought under ye subjection of ye Knights of the Castle
the defended fountain, as yet heard before, Gastilles having prepared himself
to return to Constantinople, went unto Esplandian, and said unto him: My Lord,
when I departed from the Emperor, he gave me express commandment with all speed
to advertise him what I had done, to the end he might determine either to come
himself in person, if occasion served, with the army he is already preparing,
or else wholly to break off his enterprise, for it now beginnineth to be
Winter, and seeing (as it is Gods will) that your affairs on this side are in
good estate, I am determined as to morrow to depart hence to Constantinople,
that the Emperor understanding by me what has passed on this side the Sea, he
shall not be forced for this year to be at further charges, whereof before this
time I had willingly certified him, had it not been the daily expectation I had
to see the end of this our last enterprise, which God be thanked is fallen out
as we desired. My lord (said Esplandian) seeing the Emperor (as you say) by
your return may receive both pleasure and profit, you shall do well to make
haste thither: one thing I beseech you do form, that is, most humbly to
commend me unto his Grace, assuring him, that not any subject he has, is, or
shall be readier to obey him than my self: and as touching our pr^ceedings, for
that you have personally both seen and been an actor in the same, you can
advertise him at large. Show him likewise I pray you, that I keep King Armato
as his pris^ner, attending his pleasure what shall be done with him, but not
the Castle of the defended mountain, for I have conquered the same in favor and
under the protection of the Princess Leonorine, keeping the same at this
present only to her use and as her servant, as I mean to continue during life.
But if it pleases his Grace to give the Town of Alfarin to Frandalo, not only
thereby to increase his will and desire to serve him, but also for that he
deserves a greater reward: s^ doing, me thinks he shall therein show the
part of a liberal Prince, considering the service he has done and showed in
all places where he has been employed: You shall tell the Emperor also, that
according to my Fathers will and commandment, I hope shortly to be in
Constantinople, to present my self before his Grace and the Lady Leonorine, as
by the Gentlewoman Carmelle I have given the^ to understand, wherewith I think
you are not unacquainted, praying you in the mean time to make my excuse unto
them, in that I have deferred it off so long; for in a manner you are not
ignorant what has been the cause. My Lord (said Gastilles) the Emperor my
Uncle so much desires your company, that I never saw man more grieved, nor
woman, than the Princess my Cousin, when they perceived the great Serpent pass
before Constantinople, to cr^ss the Straights of Bosphore. I will show them
what you say, and in the morning about break of day, I mean, God willing, to
set sail. Will you not (said Esplandian) first go visit Frandalo, Manely, and
others, that lie wounded in their beds, to know if they will send any message
to the Emperor? That I will (said Gastilles.) Go then (said Esplandian) and I
will bear you company. With that they went to Frandalo's lodging, where they
were no sooner entered, but the watch that stood upon the Tower over the water
gate, discovered about three miles in the sea, a great Ship that with full sail
made toward the Town: whereby they advertised Gastilles, who presently caused
two Brigandines to go forth to see if they were friends or enemies: and they
were not long before they returned again with the great Ship in their company,
wherein were Palomir, Bransil, Helian le delibere, Garvate du Val Craintif,
Bravor son of the giant Balan that king Amadis had newly made Knight, Imosel de
Burgoigne, Ledarin de Faiarque, Listoran de la tour Blanch, Trion cousin to
queen Briolanie, Tentilles le Superbe, Guil le bein esteem Grodonan brother to
Angriote destravaux, and the two sons of Isamie Governor of the Firm Isle, with
many others that had imbarqued themselves in great Britain, to go to aid
Esplandian: and coming to the Castle of the defended Mountain, they had
intelligence by the fishermen at sea, of the overthrow of Armatos navy, his
captivity, and the taking of the City of Alfarin, whereat they much rejoiced,
especially when they knew by Gastilles soldiers that not any of their
companions were slain in the assault. They being arrived at the Town, as they
began to land, Esplandian with diverse others went thither to receive them:
where between them were many salutations and welcomes given: which done,
Esplandian led them to his lodging, where they refreshed themselves about two
hours before they went to visit Frandalo, of whom Esplandian gave such
commendations, that they desired him to bring them where he lay, which he
presently did: but when Frandalo knew who they were (being ashamed to see them
use such courtesy to him) could not well tell what to say: and as he
entertained them, Palomir spoke unto him, and said: Sir knight, I and my
company have heard so great commendation of your valor, that there is not one
of us but would be ready to obey and serve you as our Chief Commander:
wherefore, we beseech you, use all diligence you may to be healed of your
wounds, that we may presently go into the field under your conduction. My Lords
(said Frandalo) I pray you pardon me, I am well assured that my valor is none
such as you report, whereby I deserve not the praise you give me, neither did I
ever any thing worthy commendation, but only by my Lord Esplandians means.
Nevertheless I hope, if God spares me life and health, so to behave my self,
that all men shall know the desire I have to do service unto Christendom, and
particularly unto every one of you. Companion (said Esplandian) I pray you take
care to be cured of your grief: that done, we will take order for the rest: and
for that these Knights are weary with their long travel on the Sea, I pray you
give them leave for to depart, and in the morning we will visit you again.
Which he said, fearing lest too much talk might cause him fall into a fever,
for Gastilles before that had been devising with him above two hours together,
touching the conference between him and Esplandian as concerning his return
unto the Emperor. With that the Knights bad him farewell, and went out of the
chamber: on the other side Gastilles made all haste he could to depart from
thence the next day in the morning, and taking leave of all his friends, the
same night he entered into his ship: and when day began to appear, he set sail
with so good wind, that within eight days he discovered the city of
Constantinople, entering into the haven: which ye Emperor understanding, went to
receive him, and going with him to the palace, asked him what he had done in
his voyage, and whether Armato were retired from the siege or not. My lord
(said he,) The good knight Esplandian and his company most humbly commend
themselves unto your Grace, especially Frandalo, whom I can assure you to be
one of the best servants that ever you had. With that the Empress accompanied
with ye Princess Leonorine, Queen Minoresse, and diverse other Ladies and
Gentlewoman came thither, to whom Gastilles doing humble reverence, they bad
him welcome, and because he stayed to do Esplandians commendations to the
Princess Leonorine, the Emperor said unto him: Truly nephew, you shall make an
end, to show us what has happened in your voyage, then if it please you, you
may court ladies. Wherefore I pray you tell from the beginning what you have
done. My Lord (said he) at our departure from hence we had so good a wind,
that without any let we arrived at the castle the defended mountain, yet could
we not make such haste, but that Esplandian with his great serpent, and
Frandalos ships had already drowned and overthrown certain of the enemies
ships, and made the rest to fly, and the next day after king Armato was taken
prisoner, his army overthrown and put to flight: but the sport was when I
saluted the Turk, and that he knew me, then he told the great rage the Turk was
in, the threatenings and speeches he used unto him, the overthrow of the twenty
knights at the adventurous fountain, the skirmishes and assaults at the town of
Alfarin, the danger wherein Esplandian and Frandalo found themselves, the
taking of the town and of Heliaxe, her delivery with the peoples that fled to
the temple of Jupiter, and how that before he imbarqued himself to return, a
great ship arrived there from Great Britain with diverse Knights therein, whose
names and sirnames he rehearsed, as having seen them with King Amadis. Further
my lord (said he) the good Knight Esplandian willed me to show you that he
keeps King Armato till your Grace shall dispose of him, as also the City of
Alfarin, but for the Castle the defended mountain, he says he minds not to
yield the same to any other then to ye Princess Leonorine, in whose name he
has conquered it, hoping as her servant and no other to defend the same. When
will he be here (said the Emperor?) With all the speed he may (said Gastilles)
as he has promised me. In good faith (said the Emperor) I would it were this
day before to morrow, I have so great desire to know him by reason of the great
chivalry that daily increases in him, in such manner, that if heretofore the
Knight with the Green Sword has been esteemed the best in all the world, now
his son diminishes a great part of his glory. And all being well considered, I
think that Amadis has not done more in ten years time, then Esplandian has
accomplished in the space of ten weeks: But touching Frandalo, is he so well
disposed to our service as you make report? My Lord (said Gastilles,) It is not
possible to do better then he has done: wherefore, my Lord Esplandian willed
me to show you, that for the better entertaining him in his proceedings, he is
of advise that your Grace should give him the City of Alfarin, not knowing any
man worthier then he to keep it* In good truth (said the Emperor) Esplandian
and his companions have had the pains to conquer it, wherefore I am content
they have the disposing thereof: Nevertheless, if they rest upon my consent
therein, I am well content it shall be so, and I will not cease to show him
greater favor, if he persevere as he has began. And you Daughter (said he to
the Princess Leonorine) what say you to this that my cousin Gastilles has told
you touching Esplandian, that says he keeps the Castle the defended
mountain for you only? My Lord (said she) I know not how you and many others
esteem so much of him, considering the small obedience he shows to his
father, for if he were such a Knight as he is reported, he had long since come
hither to acquit the promise whereunto he is bound: which makes me verily
think, the speech Carmelle used of him, and all that he has sent you by word
of mouth by my cousin Gastilles, are only but dissimulations. And I for my
part am not yet determined (although he reports himself to be my knight) to
accept him for the same, much less to pardon him before he comes in person to
excuse his fault, then I will consider what I have to do. The Emperor that
perceived his daughter speak with such a choler, and therewith to blush more
then ordinary, could not refrain laughter, and said unto her: What daughter, do
you refuse the service of the best Knight in all the world? I my Lord (said
she) and so should every master his servant, when he flies from his presence,
and obeys not his commandments no more then he has done both yours and mine
Truly sweet heart (said the Emperor) I like you well, I would to God that
nature had furnished you with a body like unto your heart, if she had, she had
made you a perfect man, and not a woman as you are. Now nephew you bear my
daughters answer, I pray you let Esplandian know it, that he may make haste
hither, lest he l^se not her good will. And although the Emperor spoke it as in
jest. Esplandian took it otherwise, when he heard the news by a Squire that
Gastilles sent unto him.

CHAP. XXXII.
How Frandalo accompanied of fourscore Knights, issued out of Alfarin toward
Tesifant, and of the taking of Eiraca Captain of the Town.

THe Knights of Great Britain arrived in the Town of Alfarin, (as you heard
before) Frandalo and others that were hurt being healed of their wounds,
Belleris that ceased not continually to hearken after Alphorax, was advertised
by his spies, that he continued in the City of Tesifant, which he and Branfil
told unto the rest of their company, who therewith being somewhat encouraged,
very earnestly desired Frandalo to lead them forth, and bring them to some
place where they might lie in ambush to surprise Alphorax or some of his
company if they chanced to stray abroad. Frandalo not willing to deny them any
reasonable request, agreed (with the consent of Esplandian) to depart the next
night following, and to take with them to the number of fourscore Knights and
no more, which Esplandian liked well, he minding to be one. Whereupon those
that were appointed for the journey prepared themselves, and about Sunsetting
issued out of Alfarin, Frandalo and Belleris knowing ye country so well, that
they needed no other guides, but traveled strait toward Tesifant, and having
ridden till eleven of the clock at night, they came unto a cross way, where
Frandalo advised them to divide themselves in two companies, willing the
Knights (that before that time had never bin in Turkey) to hold close together.
For (said he) the wars in these countries are far otherwise then they are in
Great Britain, where Knights use most commonly to travel alone without company,
and although they chance sometimes to ride in companies, the least occasion
that happens makes them separate themselves, but here those that use arms
travel in great companies together, whereby the combats that are fought here
most commonly are rather battles then incounters. And more then this, if three
hundred Turks chance to surprise one hundred, thirty, twenty, or less number of
their enemies, they take a pride to put them to death, preferring revenge
before a certain kind of honor, that (as I have understood) is kept and
observed in the West parts, where combats are in a manner equal. Wherefore my
friends (said he) I pray you separate not your your selves but march all in a
company, assuring you that in the place whither we go, we shall not fail to
find men sufficient against whom we may employ our forces, and show what
valor is in us. I know that within half a mile of Tesifant Alphorax uses
oftentimes to lie at a house that he has caused to be made, called Gruobinach,
where if it be our good fortunes we may chance to find him, wherefore I am of
advise that we divide our selves in two companies, my nephew Belleris shall
take the left hand, and lie in ambush near unto the village of Jentinomele,
from whence he may easily perceive when any man issues out of Tesifant, and I
with Esplandian and the other half of our company will follow this way that
brings us unto a valley near to Gruobinach, where we will secretly stay if
need require, to succor each other: where unto they all agreed: but before they
departed thence, they found their enterprise to be far more dangerous than they
esteemed it, as hereafter you shall hear. Belleris and his company leaving
Frandalo, traveled so long, that about two hours before day they met six
soldiers, whom Belleris saluted in the Arabian language, asking them of what
place they were? My Lord, said they, we are going to the town of Srasse. My
good friends (said he) we travel this night to Tesifant to advertise the prince
Alphorax of the great damage and destruction the Christian dogs continually
do, and within short space have done unto the country round about: for they are
issued out of Alfarin, and have taken and carried away all they can find: and
as yet are abroad, not ceasing to execute all tyranny they can devise:
nevertheless, if it pleases him to give us aid, we know the place of their
retreat, where we may easily enclose them, and not one of them shall escape.
What are you, said the Soldiers, that bring us these news? Friends (said
Belleris) I am Roussan, cousin to Eiraca, chief captain of Tesifant. We can
tell you good news of him, said the Soldiers wherewith we think you will be
well pleased: for he is not far from hence, being ridden out of Tesifant with
two hundred Knights to go unto Falandy, to see the same be not so lightly
surprised as Alfarin was. But because he willed us to ride before, we will stay
no longer: wherewith they bad them farewell. Friends (said Belleris) the good
fortune I wish you I pray God may happen unto you. With that the soldiers
passed on their way, but they had not gone far when Belleris sent after them,
and fearing they would discover his enterprise, caused them to be slain: and
therewith presently dispatched one of his Squires on message to Frandalo, to
advertise him of the enemies being abroad with a very strong and huge company:
whereupon he wished him to join with them. The Squire made all the haste he
could, but before the news came to Frandalo, Belleris met with Eiraca and his
company about the Village of Jentinomele, being upon them before they had time
to put on their helmets. There did the Captain of Tesifant show himself to be
no young beginner in arms, for that like a valiant and hardy knight he entered
among the Christians, and being seconded by his men, did most valiantly defend
themselves, and assailed the enemy, although at their first encounter ten of
their bravest soldiers were unhorsed and overthrown. And as Eiraca entered into
the prease, Norandel and he met together with such force, that Norandel was
wounded in the left shoulder, but not sore hurt, and the Captain of Tesifant
loosing his stirrops, was thrown over his horse with so great strength, that
with the fall he was forced to lie upon the ground, and could remove neither
hand nor foot, which the Lurks perceiving, to relieve their Captain, did so
valiantly, that they overthrew four of the British Knights, who nevertheless
rose presently again, and with their swords in hand, thrust so many of the
Turks horses into the sides and flancks, that in short space more than twenty
of the Turks were overthrown likewise, and many slain outright: at that charge
Enil and Gavarte were hurt, and the rest so bardly handled, that without
Frandalos company that came to succor them, they had all been overthrown: and
in truth they had almost strayed too long, but the squire that Belleris sent
unto them, could not overtake them before they were in the valley where they
should have met. And although they had heard the sound of their blows, yet did
they not suspect any such peril, until the squire had done his message;
wherewith they ran with all the speed they could unto the place; where
Belleris and his companions (being out of breath) did nothing but rec^il, and
defend themselves against their enemies blows, that had slain diverse of them,
but that the captain of Tesifant would have them to be taken and presented to
the Prince Alphorax. Nevertheless Frandalo, Esplandian, and the rest of their
company, made them change opinion: for when they perceived their companions so
hardly matched by the enemy, they entered among them with such fury, that had
it not been for Eiraca (who at that time behaved himself most valiantly) they
had overthrown the Turks at their first onset, but by reason of the great
resistance he made, they continued fighting half an hour after, wherein he
maintained himself so well, that Esplandian could never take him before he had
overthrown him, and pulled off his Helmet, wherewith he yielded: mean time
Frandalo and his companions being in the midst of their enemies, laid so well
about them, staying horses, pulling away shields, and doing so valiantly, that
wonder it was to behold them, yet did not the Turks once seem abashed, but
still fought most courageously, until such time they perceived their Captain
taken prisoner, which caused them to fly and turn their backs: but not all of
them, for there lay more then one hundred and fifty of them dead upon the
ground, the rest saved themselves by means of the dark night. It was then about
an hour before day: and Frandalo fearing that those of Tesifant (hearing of the
overthrow) would issue forth to cut off their passage, presently caused Captain
Eiraca to be remounted, and all the Christians that wanted horses, and with all
speed rode back again to Alfarin, not the same way they came, but another way,
somewhat farther about; wherein they traveled so long, that about Sunrising
they entered into a great wood, where they alighted to refresh both themselves
and their horses: and staying not long there lest they should be surprised,
they made such speed, that about sunsetting they arrived in the town: mean
time news came to Tesifant of the overthrow of their men, wherewith Alphorax
was in such a rage, that in a manner he seemed desperate. But for this time we
have sufficiently discoursed of Martial affairs, now me mean to bring Love in
place, who desiring to minister some comfort to the Princess Leonorine that
lived in great pain, expecting the arrival of her friend Esplandian, caused him
to depart from Alfarin to visit her in the City of Constantinople, as in the
Chapters following you shall hear.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the great grief Esplandian had, understanding by the messenger that
Gastilles sent unto him, what displeasure the Princess Leonorine had conceived
against him.

YOu heard before how Gastilles showed the Emperor what Esplandian had done,
and what message he sent unto him, and to the Princess Leonorine, as also what
answer she made, which Gastilles by his Squire writ and sent unto him, having
charge from the Emperor so to do, thereby to procure his speedier Arrival in
Constantinople. The Squire with his Letter made such haste, that he arrived at
Alfarin about five days after the taking of Eiraca, and meeting Carmelle at the
gate, asked her if he might find Esplandian at convenient leisure to deliver
him a Letter from Gastilles, but Carmelle being subtle, suspecting it to be
some news from the Princess Leonorine, that might move Esplandian, who as then
seemed discontent, answered him and said: My good friend, you can hardly speak
with him at this time, but f^llow me and give me the letter, and I will present
it unto him, and cause him to return you an answer. The Squire did as she
willed him, and followed her to Esplandians lodging: where entering into his
chamber, she found him sitting on his bed talking with the king of Denmark, and
delivered him Gastilles letter, which when he read, the tears ran out of his
eyes, and therewith cast forth a great sigh, saying: O Lord? but Carmelle that
beheld him, doubting the cause to be as she suspected, asked him if he were ill
at ease. Ill? said he, I that I am, and so ill that I would to God I were dead:
and look I pray you, said he, whether I have cause or not: wherewith stretching
forth his hand, he gave Carmelle the letter, and turning his face, began to
make the greatest sorrow in the world: but when she had read the contents, she
esteemed not thereof, but said unto Esplandian: What my Lord? are you abashed
at so small a matter? By my soul I now perceive very well, that the affections
and loves of men are far different and much unlike the passions that we simple
women endure, when we fall into the like extremities: and know you how? you men
do most commonly take pleasure to manifest and make known your love either by
word of mouth or outward shows, and many times dissemble more than you mean to
do: and which is worse, how much the more the Lady or Gentlewoman you love is
of great desert, or high lineage, so much more glory do you take to make it
known, not only that you bear her affection, but that you are beloved and
favored of her above all others: which is clean contrary to the nature of women
(I mean such as may be termed wise and of good understanding) for how much the
greater their parentage is, so much more fear they have to manifest their
amorous passions, in such manner, that most commonly has in word, gesture, and
countenance, they outwardly deny that which they have most deeply engraved in
their hearts and minds: and not without good cause, for that the thing which
redoundeth to your praise and commendations (as you think, which is the
manifesting of your love) breeds to them a certain spot in their honor, which
oftentimes they can not easily deface. Wherefore it is more than expedient, to
observe this modesty and constancy in us, not that I mean to restrain my self
unto this law, seeing that all my glory and felicity depends upon you, in
such manner, that I desire no greater happiness in this world, then that the
love and dutiful obedience I bear unto you, should be published and made known
unto the world, to the end that all those that shall hear of your great valor
and my mean estate, may know my great good fortune, to have the mean to serve
you as I do. Wherefore my lord, in my opinion you ought to take the speeches
Gastilles has written unto you, to be used by the Lady Leonorine in good part
and greatly to your advantage, for I dare warrant you on mine honor, that your
affections are both alike: and to say the truth, she has behaved her self most
wisely to dissemble the matter so well as she has done in the Emperors
presence. I deny not but she has some cause to be impatient, considering the
message I delivered unto her in your behalf, but that is easy to be cured: and
although the love she has born you so long time should be wholly extinguished
(which I can hardly believe) even as a b^ne that is broken in two pieces and
set together again, is stronger in that place than in any other part, so being
there and in her company, shall win that you find broken and by that means
make it stronger than ever it was before. Therefore I am of advice (that
fulfilling her desire) you go unto her, and that as soon as possibly you may.
Alas Carmelle (said Esplandian) what good or what service did I ever do unto
her, thereby to have deserved at her hands the least favor among an infinite
number I have received from her? Especially by the report of your own mouth. If
therefore she has just occasion to be offended with me, having offended her so
much, can I hope for any other at her hands than mere disdain and mortal
hatred? My Lord (said Carmelle) I am a woman, and know the nature of women
better than you do, or then all the men in the world besides, I pray you
therefore believe me, and go and see her, and if so be she entertain you not
according to your desire, then never give credit to my words again. In faith my
good companion (said the King of Denmark) Carmelle gives you so good and wise
counsel, that either you ought to give credit to her speech, or else wholly
drive this fantasy out of your mind, considering (as is most true) that
sometimes, and very often, how much the more fervent and extreme the love of a
woman is, so much the sooner is it dead and wholly extinguished, for that their
inconstancy is such and so great, that for the least occasion in the world they
are over ready to love, and much more inconsiderately do they forget the same
again: not that I accuse the Princess Leonorine of so great lightness, but to
say the truth as commonly we find, and for my part I know not upon what
occasion you ground your love, whereby you should make so much account of her,
seeing yt she never saw you, nor you her, but are only content to conceive well
of each other upon a certain ronown that has spread abroad, and set forth the
great perfections yt are reported to be in you both: which in truth may be
compared to a fire made of straw, that is no sooner kindled but presently
consumed: wherefore be not then so much abashed if the Princes Leonorine show
her self at this present so smally affected toward you, for those that love
most deerly, do oftentimes fall into discourtesses and coldness of affection,
that they disdain, or (at the least) in the twinkling of an eye, wholly forget
those that for a long time they have loved most entirely, and that for their
sakes shall have hazarded their lives in most dangerous adventures. Did you
never hear how Brisarde behaved her self in regard of Troilus, after the
destruction of Troy, she loved him so well that she would needs die in his
arms: when she was constrained to forsake him, the Greeks thinking verily she
would have slain her self: and yet was she scarce issued out of Troy but she
wholly forgot her love Troilus, and transported that vehement love she had born
him all her life, to Diomedes King of Thrace. O God? What inconstancy? what
lightness? what foundation upon a sandy ground was that? This unconstant woman
among other precious ornaments given her by Troilus her friend, had a pair of
perfumed gloves, which within one hour after her captivity she gave unto her
new friend Diomedes in token of the love and amity she bare unto him. What had
Troilus said then if he had bin present? would he have believed her? I think
not. And what a point of honesty, I pray you, did Cliteninestra show unto her
husband, when in steed of welcoming him home at his coming from the siege of
Troy, where he had remained ten years together* she caused him cruelly to be
murdered by Egistus her ruffian. But will you hear more examples of the like
matter? and as he began to proceed, Esplandian said unto him, My good friend, I
pray you do not this wrong unto my lady Leonorine, but let me here your counsel
how I may from henceforth govern my self to satisfy her desire. Go and see
her, said the king, and if you think good, I will bear your company. Shall we
go and leave our companions? (said Esplandian) that will I never do: wherefore?
said the King: are not Frandalo, Manley, and the rest of their company strong
enough to defend the town in your absence? I am of advise that you send
presently for them, and give them to understand that by reason of certain news
you have of late received, you must be constrained to leave them for the space
of eight or fifteen days: and in like sort dispatch Gastilles squire, and write
unto his master, that you thank him heartily for ye good remembrance he has
had of you, and that with all speed you will send a messenger expressly unto the
Emperor with an answer to that it has pleased him to command to be written
unto you: in the mean time, I will take order to prepare a ship to bring us to
the castle the defended mountain, where we will imbarque our selves in the
great Serpent, that will not fail (as I think) to bring us unto
Constantinople, and determine with your self what company you mean to take with
you My good friend (said Esplandian) do as you think good, I am content to
hazard my life in your hands It suffices (said the King) but I pray you speak
unto our companions, and dispatch the squire. With that Esplandian called for
ink and paper, and wrote unto Gastil^es as the king of Denmark had advised him.
Next day in the morning Frandalo and the rest of the company came into his
chamber as they used ordinarily to do, and being together devising of diverse
things, Esplandian said unto them: My good friends, I am constrained to leave
your company for the space of fifteen days or three weeks, to go about certain
urgent affairs that import me much: I will take with me my brother the King of
Denmark, Gandalin, Enil, Carmelle, and no more. I pray you think it not
strange, for if I were not constrained thereunto, I swear unto you of my faith,
I would not do it. There was not any among them that once would ask him whither
he went, but answering him, said: That he might go whither it pleased him, and
that they for their parts would keep the place till he came again, although he
staid a whole year before he returned: by this means Esplandian by little and
little framed himself to take his voyage. while the king of Denmark caused the
ship that brought the knights of Great Britain thither, to be made ready, and
upon a monday in the morning Esplandian and his company imbarqued themselves to
sail unto the castle the defended mountain, but they were no sooner put to sea,
but the wind falling contrary, ye Sea rose so high and so furious withal, that
neither mast, sail, nor cord could hold, but brake all in pieces: in which
manner they continued for the space of ten days, and as many nights, so that
neither master nor mariners could tell in what part they were, for that during
that time, the clouds were so thick and the mist so great, that it made the air
so dark and obscure, that those that were in the Ship, could scarce see one the
other, expecting nothing else (without the mercy of God) then the overthrow of
their ship: which they thought verily had happened, when they arrived at the
rock of the Enchantress, whereupon they were driwen about three of the clock
after midnight: wherewith the sailers cast anchor, and going on land, stayed
till day appeared.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How Esplandian and his company went up unto the broken palace of the
Enchanteress, and of the strange things they found there.

ESplandian and his company being on land, not knowing the place where they
were arrived, caused a great fire to be made, about the which they thought to
lie down and sleep, but they heard such a noise from the top of the Rock, that
they were all abashed: with that the wind began to cease, and the Sea to wax
calm, the sky showing full of Stars, and withal the Moon shone so bright, that
it seemed as light as if it had bin day; wherefore Esplandian desirous to know
what the noise might be, determined to mount up the Rock, but he was counseled
by his company to stay till the next day in the morning. When Esplandian knew
it certainly to be the Rock of the Enchantress, he said unto the King of
Denmark: I good truth I think I have been here before, and take it to be the
place whither the great Serpent brought me the same day I received the order of
Knighthood, which puts me in better hope of our voyage then I had before:
which he said, remembering the scroll with the prophecy that he found in the
lions paw. Then he told the King of Denmark how he conquered the Sword he bare,
the death of the Serpent, and all that he had seen upon the Rock, and it is
called (said he) the Rock of the Enchantress. By God (said Gandalin) you say
true, for I remember, that pursuing after a knight that led a Gentlewoman away,
I found your father king Amadis and Grandasor here, and the knight likewise
that I sought that had hidden himself in the old palace upon this Rock: then
he told them from point to point what had happened unto him, and the great love
the knight bare unto the gentlewoman he had carried away by force, but (said
he) before we departed she agreed with him, and they promised marriage to each
other, although before that time she hated him most deadly: nevertheless,
understanding that the force he used unto her was only done for the love he
bare her, she clean forgot her former hatred, changing it to a most exceeding
love. In good faith (said Carmelle) as far as I perceive, no man ought to
despair of any thing he takes in hand, no more will I during my life: which
she said in respect of Esplandian, who in time as she thought might love her,
and wholly forget the Princess Leonorine. And so long they talked, that day
began to appear, then Esplandian said to the King of Denmark: Companion, I pray
you stay here or me while I go up, for I will have no body with me but Gandalin
and Enil, and they shall go with me, not that I fear any danger that may happen
unto me, but only because they may help me to lift up the tomb whereof I told
you even now. My Lord (said the King) I pray you offer me not so much injury,
for I will not leave you though it cost me my life, especially in this place
where I have most great desire to see that I never saw before. Seeing it is
your pleasure (said Esplandian) let us go, and let our Squires bring some
victuals with them, if we need to eat before we come back again: which the
Squires did, wherewith they began to mount up the Rock, and traveled so long,
that about Sun-sitting they came unto the hermitage, where the great image was
erected, whereof you heard before, where they stayed all night, the next day
they traveled again, and came unto the lake that ran before the old palace,
and because it began to be dark, they determined not to travel any further for
that time, and to say the truth they were weary: but all night the serpents
that issued out of their holes to drink of the water, ceased not to hiss and
pass before and about them to assail them, which they had not failed to do, had
it not been for the virtue of Esplandians Sword, whereunto no venomous things
might once approach or come near. Nevertheless they rested not, but as soon as
they might see, rose up and went on their way: and pas^ng by the ruinated
monuments, they came unto the palace of the Enchantress, where they found the
gates shut, whereat Esplandian gave so great a blow with his foot, that they
opened, and they entered into the place where the shining tomb stood with the
Lion upon it. Then Esplandian said unto the three Knights: In good faith when I
was here before, I could not lift up this plate, I pray you each man prove what
you can do, then I will see if I be grown stronger in the back then I was at
that time: wherewith the King of Denmark assailed to do it, but what strength
so ever he used, it was impossible for him, the like did Gandalin and Enil, but
they sped no better then the King, whereat Esplandian began to laugh, and
taking it by the two ends, lifted it up so easily as if it had been a piece of
dry wood, yet was it a piece of Crystal of three fingers thick, and about ten
or twelve foot long: under it they found an azure stone, the fairest and most
orient color that ever was seen that covered a Ceder chest, which smelt as
sweet as any Balm, the Chest being shut with a lock of Emerald-stone, having a
key of Diamonds that hung by it at a Chain of fine Gold, all most artificially
composed: the stone taken up and the Chest opened, they found the Image of
Jupiter lying therein all of massy Gold, garnished with many Pearls, Rubies,
and other inestimable rich Jewels, especially a Crown that he ware on his head,
about the which were placed certain Carbuncles in form of Greek Letters, with
these words.

Jupiter is great God of all Gods, and in his right hand he bare a Table
containing this prophecy, When time shall come, that my art and knowledge
shall fail, the heart of the hand enclosed herein, and life restored by them
that were the cause of death, the Grecian sheep long time nourished in pleasant
pastures, shall be constrained to feed on a herb bitterer then Gaul, by means
of the extremity the hungry Sea-Wolves shall put them unto, whose number shall
be so great, that they shall cover the Sea in diverse places, in such wise, that
the poor sheep enclosed in their great Forest, and diverse of their lambs being
dead and torn in pieces, their shepherd (having in a manner lost all hope of
restoring them again,) with anguish of heart and mind, in abundance of tears
shall lament their great misfortune. Then shall come the brave Lions whelp, by
whose means the great troop of wolves shall be driven away and destroyed.
Nevertheless, he shall take from the shepherd his great power, and the best
beloved of his sheep, whereupon he shall seize, in such sort, that his strong
teeth and sharp claws shall enter into her heart, and the entrails of her
body, the rest of the flock resting in the power and government of him and his
fierce company, whereby not long after it shall come to pass, that the great
deceitful Serpent, the Enchanted Sword, and this high Rock, shall sink into the
bottom of the Sea, and shall never after be seen again of any man.

But although Esplandian understood the Greek tongue, yet could he not give any
interpretation or exposition to this prophecy, no more could any of his
company: wherefore they determined, not to stay long about the same, but were
more busied to behold the stones and great riches they saw within the tomb,
which they determined to take with them, and return unto their ships without
staying any longer, for their victuals began to fail: wherefore Esplandian
willed Carmelle to take the Lion, he and the king of Denmark took the plate of
Crystal, Gandalin and Enil the azure stone, and the Squires the Ceder Chest
with the Image of Jupiter. And in that sort they issued out of the palace,
descending down the rock, till about evening they came unto the hermitage,
where they stayed all night: the next day they went on till they found their
ship, wherein about Sunsetting they imbarqued themselves: and because
Esplandian would not be seen in Constantinople without the great Serpent, he
commanded the master of the Ship to direct his course to the castle called the
defended mountain, whith he did. But having sailed about two days and more, as
the King of Denmark sat talking with Esplandian about the Letter that was sent
unto him, he asked him if he thought not good that he should make a voyage unto
the Princess Leonorine to understand the truth of her affection toward him.
For (said he) it may be Gastilles has mistaken her words, or the Emperor
himself has commanded him to write unto you in such sort, that thereby you
should make the more haste to go thither: at the least I should know of her
what her pleasure is, and how you shall govern your self in respect of her. Ha
my good friend (said Esplandian) you have touched me now even at the quick, if
you would do me so much favor, you shall bind me for ever unto you: mean time I
will stay for you in the gulf where I found you with Frandalo, when we raised
the siege of the castle the defended mountain. Assure your self (said the King)
I will do my good will. There was belonging to their ship a little Pinnace,
which the master took with him (besides the boat) to save himself and his
people if any tempest should happen, wherein the King with certain mariners to
guide him entered, and taking their leave of Esplandian, sailed forwards with so
good a wind, that in short space they lost the fight of the great ship. But
the next night following there happened such a tempest, that at the break of
day their Pilot knew not where he was, and without knowledge of the place he
was constrained to abandon the Pinnace unto the mercy of the waves, which
continued for the space of forty days together, in which time they endured so
many fortunes, yt it would be over-tedious to recount them, and we should
likewise digress from the matter whereunto we are entered, to bring our History
unto an end. Let it therefore suffice you to know, that their victuals being
spent, they chanced to arrive in the Island of the Giant Drapheon, where the
King of Denmark and his squire lost their wits and became mad, by force of a
water that they drunk out of a fountain called the fountain of Forgetfulness,
that sprang in that Isle, where they were taken and kept in a cruel prison,
from whence in short time after they were delivered by the means of a
Gentlewoman that fell in love with the King, and caused him to recover his
health, arms, horse, and a ship, with all things necessary for himself and his
Squire, and having done, she with them put to Sea: and coasting the country of
Trevisane, they came unto an Island where the people of the country would have
burnt a Gentlewoman because she could not find a Knight for to maintain her
quarrel: but the King fought for her, and overcame him that accused her, and
taking the Gentlewoman with him, put to Sea again, and sailing six days
together along the coast, he perceived a maid out of a tower, wherein the Lord
of that country kept her prisoner, for the cause which she declared to the
King out of a window that looked into the Sea, for whose sake the king took
land to fight with the Lord till he delivered the poor Gentlewoman out of
prison: such were the adventures of the King of Denmark, which are rehearsed at
large in the great Chronicles, that master Elizabeth wrote not long after the
Coronation of Esplandian: wherein the prowess and adventures of the British
Knights and others remaining at Alfarin, are likewise registered and orderly set
down. For this time content your selves to understand the manner how and in
what sort Esplandian and the Princess Leonorine saw each other, how afterward
Urganda came to Constantinople, of the armies both by Land and Sea, of the
cruel battle between the Turks and Christians: which ended, our History
likewise shall be finished, but having many things to describe, before I come
to that point, we will return to Esplandian, that was not smally abashed at the
long absence of the King, expecting from day to day some news of him, that had
left his company only for the cause you heard before.

CHAP. XXXV.
How Esplandian having stayed Garinter King of Denmarks return about two weeks
space, and perceiving no news of him, determined (by the counsel of Carmelle)
to go in person to the City of Constantinople.

AFter that Garinter King of Denmark had set sail toward Constantinople as it
is said before, Esplandians ship arrived at the gulf where he promised to stay,
and they lay at anchor for the space of two weeks, not hearing any news of his
desired message: wherewith he doubted either that the King of Denmark should be
drowned, or that forturne had carried his vessel some other way: wherefore he
thought to send one of his mariners to enquire of him. But before he did it,
he determined first to speak with Carmelle, and taking her aside, said unto
her: My great friend, you know for what cause the King of Denmark left us, and
the reason of his voyage, as also the promise he made unto me to return again
with all speed, but we can hear no news of him at all, which makes me
assuredly believe either he is dead, or that the storm he was in has cast him
in some country so far off, that he cannot by any means do as he has
promised, wherefore I pray you give me your advice what I were best to do: for
those that are in the like mind that I am, although in some things they have
their understandings whole and perfect, yet are they commonly to seek in that
which concerns them as touching those points. My lord (said she) seeing it is
your pleasure to use my counsel, I will tell you truly what I think therein, and
so much I can assure you, that if you should search throughout the world, you
shall hardly find one that can come near me in judging the passion wherewith
you are molested: for the same is in me that is in you, and I feel it as well
as you do, and it may be more, but the ease and great contentment I receive by
your presence, has given me so many remedies, that I delight in my grief, and
live not, but only to cause my sorrow to endure To tell you truth, at such time
as you began to use speeches unto me of the king of Denmark, I thought upon his
long absence, and me thinks it were best we sailed unto Constantinople,
assuring you that I have devised a means to bring you unto the Princess
Leonorine, whereby you may both see and speak with her, without being known of
any other then her self, if you think it good. And to bring it to pass, (we
being arrived there) it shall be necessary that all those of our ship be
advertised (if any man asks for you) to say, that you stayed in the castle
the defended mountain, mean time you shall lie in the bottom of the ship, and I
with Gandalin and Enil, will go unto the Emperor, to whom I will say that you
sent me to the Princess Leonorine, to present unto her in your behalf, that
which you have conquered in the Rock of the Enchantress, and for the rest let
me alone. When Esplandian heard her speak in that manner, he beheld her for a
while, and at last said unto her: My good friend, I fear not death, neither can
it be more bitter or sharper unto me then the life I now endure: but I fear the
dishonor of my Lady, and the injury that thereby I might do unto the Emperor,
who by his courtesy has so much bound my father unto him, as if I should
wrong him, it would be a blemish to my honor while I live. Nevertheless, I am
content to hazard my self in all the dangers you shall think convenient: that
is sufifcient (said Carmelle) I pray you then be merry and make good cheer: for
if ever woman accomplished the thing she took in hand I will bring this to
pass. Wherewith leaving Esplandian, she called the Patron, and willed him to
set sail for Constantinople, whereunto he obeyed, and had so good a wind, that
within three days after they entered into the haven: where being arrived,
Esplandian told his men what (by the counsel of Carmelle) he had determined to
do, commanding them expressly not to make it known to any man of his being
there, but that they should say they left him in the castle the defended
mountain. For (said he) I am not now in such estate as I would be to present my
self before so great a Prince as the Emperor is. And to the end you be not
found liars, I will stay in the bottom of the ship till you return again: then
he, Carmelle, Gandalin, and Enil spoke together, where the gentlewoman showed
them at large how she meant to bring her enterprise to pass, I will presently
(said she) cause the tomb we brought from the Rock of the Enchantress to be set
up in the same sort we found it, upon the hatches of the ship, then will I go
tell the Emperor that I have one of the singularest things abord that ship that
ever was seen, and we find means to bring him hither, where I will show him
the Lion with Jupiter, and all the rest of the furniture, which having seen and
perused, I will tell him that you send it to the Princess Leonorine, He being
gone unto his palace, you shall go into the Cedar Chest, and so will I cause
you to be carried into the princess chamber lying in the same, whereof I will
secretly advertise her, and by this means she may speak to you, and you to her
what you think good. I but (said Esplandian) ^ell me how I shall come out
again? I will desire her (said she) to give me the Cedar Chest, therein to bury
the body of Matroco that died a Christian, wherein you shall be enclosed, and
to morrow in the morning I will cause you to be brought hither again. By God
(said Gandalin) it is the prettiest devise that ever I heard, and now I confess
that I was never but a fool in regard of C^rmelle. Meddle you not with any
thing (said she) but rest content, let me alone to work my will, and to the
same end let us presently begin: then Esplandian went down into the bottom of
the ship, and the gentlewoman prepared the tomb as she had determined before:
with that she, Gandalin, and Enil, landed and went unto the Emperor, whom they
saluted most honorably, but Carmelle did him no reverence: for (as it is said
before) she esteemed not of any man living, how great a Prince soever he were,
but only of Esplandian: she and Gandalin were known in Constantinople by reason
of their being there before. Wherefore the Emperor received Gandalin very
courteously, and with smiling countenance said unto him: Friend Gandalin,
although your presents has procured great melancholy in my mind, remembering
I have often seen you here with the man, that in all Christendom I most
entirely love, whom I am utterly persuaded I shall never see again, yet you are
heartily welcome, and I pray you tell me how does the knight with the Green
Sword. My Lord (said Gandalin) it is long since I left him to come into this
country, nevertheless I am assured wheresoever he is, he is a prince ready to
do your Grace any pleasure he can. In good faith (said the Emperor) I believe
it well, and I am glad of the honor I understand he has received at the hands
of King Luisart, that voluntarily has deposed himself of all Princely dignity
to invest him therewith. My Lord (said Enil) that is true, I can assure your
Grace thereof, as one that was present as his Coronation: and although I could
wish king Amadis the Monarch of all ye world, Truly when I beheld the gesture
and humble countenance of good King Luisart, I could not refrain weeping, for
compas^^on I had to see him, and not I only, but all the people that beheld
him. I pray you, Sir knight (said the Emperor) show me how it was, for that all
wise men are bound not only to enquire of all virtuous actions, but also to
imitate them as near as possibly they may: with that Enil showed him at large
the whole order of the same, as you heard it before. Whereat the Emperor
(holding down his head) mused for a while, and then said: I am certainly
persuaded it will be long before we find a better Prince then king Luisart is,
or one that has passed his young years with more wisd^^ (...) magnanimity of
courage, and as I understand, both fortune and virtue have been favorable unto
him: fortune in giving him force to overcome and obtain honor against diverse
misfortunes and hard adventures that she her self had prepared for him: and
virtue, for that in the end of his days she has set him in the way to enter
into paradise. And leaving that discourse: he changed purpose and spoke to
Carmelle, of whom in jest he asked, if she were still tormented with the
extreme passions of love toward Esplandian as she had been in times past. My
Lord (said she) if there be any change since I spoke with you, it is, that the
love, servitude, and affection I bear unto him, are augmented in me, and daily
more and more increase. Whereat every man began to laugh. In good faith (said
the Emperor) we may then very well persuade our selves, that you came not to our
Court to move any of our Gentlewomen to love the good knight your master,
although he should expressly command you to do it. My Lord (said she) you judge
as in reason it ought to be, nevertheless I take so great a pleasure in serving
him to his contentment, that I will except no service whatsoever: and to speak
truth, my arrival here is to ask your Grace a gift, neither gold nor silver,
but only that it would please you to go unto the haven, to see a present that
my Lord Esplandian sends to the princess Leonorine as her knight. In good
truth (said the Emperor) you require a thing at our hands, that we should
rather desire at yours. Come then my Lord (said she) for I may not stay long
here. With that the Emperor (accompanied of diverse Noble men) went unto the
haven, and being there, entered into Carmelles ship, she showed him the crystal
tomb, then that of azure stone, and lastly the Image of Jupiter: whereat the
Emperor stayed longer to behold it than the rest, not so much for the richness
thereof, as to read the prophecy it held: and having read it, was not a little
abashed: which Carmelle perceiving, spoke unto him and said: My Lord, all this
you see has continued above two hundred years in the broken palace of the
inchantress, yet in all that time not any knight (how valiant soever he were)
could ever conquer the same, nor yet so much as see it, until my lord
Esplandian arrived there, that is become Lord and possessor of the same, as you
now behold. Truly (said the Emperor) it is the goodliest present that ever I
saw, and worthy the greatest admiration: for although it be of incomparable
riches, yet do I esteem it of no value in respect of the great science and
wonderful knowledge that was in her to whom it first belonged, as she makes it
well appear by the threatenings she used against us in this table: God grant all
may fall out better than I doubt it will. My Lord (said Carmelle) although it
be such as you esteem it, yet do I fear that my Lady your Daughter will not
make so much account thereof, that in recompense of the same she will acquit
the good knight Amadis and the master that I serve, of the promise they have
made unto her. I know not that (said the Emperor) but I am well assured, that
no earthly treasure can be comparable unto the valor and virtue of your master:
neither will I ever give my consent that Leonorine shall make that exchange, as
desiring the company of Esplandian, much more than to have all the treasures in
the world within my coffers: and with good reason, for that the wickedest
person living on ye earth may be rich of gold and silver, but not of virtue,
which is not abundant unto any but to th^se that seek it: wherefore if you
think good, carry your presents back again, for Esplandian cannot be acquitted
unto us, but only by his presence. My Lord (said Carmelle) I am commanded to
leave them with the Princess Leonorine, whether it be upon that condition or
not: and if it be your pleasure (seeing she is not come hither with you) I will
cause it to be carried into her chamber. My daughter (said the Emperor) is with
her mother the Empress about a mile hence to take the air, when she comes home
you may present it unto her, and assure your self she will not refuse it: not
so much for the value thereof, as for the good I wish to him that sent it her,
as she knows full well. Wherewith he departed out of the ship, and being a
land walked to wards his palace, not without much talk with his knights and
noble men, touching the excellency of the tomb. Which the more they spoke of,
the more they esteemed it, in such manner, that they all acknowledged never in
their lives to have seen so rich nor so singular a present.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How Esplandian was put into the Cedar Chest, and with the tomb carried into
the Princess Leonorines Chamber, and what conference they had together.

THe Emperor and his company gone as it is said before, Carmelle called
Esplandian, that in the mean time lay in the bottom of the Ship, and told him
the manner of their proceedings, as also the speech the Emperor had with
Gandalin and Enil, and all what had happened, as it is before rehearsed By my
soul (said Esplandian) I was never in the like pain, for hearing all you speak,
only the Lady Leonorine, I could not tell what to think: but when the Emperor
told you she was not in the City, believe me, it comforted my heart. Did not I
play my part well? said Carmelle. That you did, and as well as one could wish,
(said Esplandian) and if it be true which is commonly said: That a good
beginning makes a good ending, I hope I shall not fail to bring my purpose to
pass. And while they devised together it waxed night, so that the Empress
returned into the City: which Carmelle understanding, caused Esplandian
presently to lie down in the Cedar Chest, in such sort, that the air entered
therein on all sides, and covering it with the Azure and Crystal Stones,
Gandalin, Enil, and their Squires took the tomb, and with the Gentlewoman went
out of the ship and came unto the palace, where they found the Lady Leonorine
(being already advertised of the goodly Present sent her by Esplandian) in
great devotion staying for Carmelle, for it had been told her, that in the
evening she would bring it to her lodging: wherefore she had no sooner espied
it, but she (with many other Ladies and gentlewomen no less curious to behold
ye same) met her in the hall. With that Carmelle (perceiving her come) stepped
forwards, and doing reverence unto her, said: Madam, the good knight Esplandian
sends you this Present, that not long since he conquered in the Rock of the
Enchantress, according to the good fortune and happy destiny above hundred
years past predestined of him: which he sends unto you, expressly to give
you to understand the great desire that daily more and more increased in him to
be your faithful Knight. But before you proceed further, it is convenient you
grant me two requests: the one, that neither you nor any other shall look into
the tomb until the morning that I return again with the key to open a Cedar
chest, that you shall find therein: the other, that after you have opened it
you shall give it me, to carry with me to the place, where my father keeps
his hermitage, therein to bury the bones of Matroco that died a Christian, as
you have understood. Carmelle my friend (said the Princess) that am I content
to do: nevertheless I am much abashed why Esplandian deferreth the time so long
before he comes to see the Emperor. Madam (said she) I will tell you that to
morrow: mean time, I pray you, determine where you will have our men to set
down their charge. In the Great Hall (said Leonorine) that my Gentlewomen may
see it at their ease. In faith Madam, you shall pardon me (said Carmelle:) this
place is too open and over common to leave so precious a thing standing
therein: I deny not to let them have the pleasure to behold it, but having seen
it, for the more safety it shall be set into your own chamber, whereof you and
none other shall have the key. With that they that bare the tomb, entered into
the hall and set it down, till Leonorine and the rest of the Gentlewomen had
beheld it long: and if Carmelle had not been there, assure your selves it had
been better visited than it was: but she would not depart from thence till it
was shut up. Which done, taking her leave, as she went out she took the
Princess aside, and giving her the key of the Chest wherein Esplandian lay,
said unto her: Madam, I leave you in this tomb two inestimable treasures,
although their difference be great, as you may well perceive you being alone:
for it is sure, that under this key lies the thing, that in all the world you
most desire to see: and without staying Leonorines answer, she went out of the
chamber, and with Gandalin and his company returned to the ship, leaving the
Princess in a mavelous doubt by reason of the words she used unto her: and
therewith did so certainly persuade her self, that her friend Esplandian lay
dead within the same, that she was constrained to cause all her gentlewomen to
depart the chamber, only Queen Minoresse that stayed to bea^ her company: with
that she threw her self on the bed, and almost drowned in tears, began to make
the greatest sorrow in the world Queen Minoresse abashed at so sudden
alteration, knew not what to think, but perceiving her grief to increase still
more and more, went unto her and said: Madam, I pray you hide ye cause of this
sorrow from me no longer, for I swear unto you of my faith, if by any means I
may relieve the same, I well deal therein as for my self. Leonorine that never
ceased sighing, could not answer her one word, but with much importance at the
last answered her and said: Alas my good friend, for Gods cause let me be in
rest, and let it suffice you that you know, that I never was so desirous for to
live, as I am at this present to die. What Madam? (said the Queen) will you
tell me nothing else? No, (said she.) In good faith then (said the Queen) you
shall do me wrong, and I shall have good cause to think the love and favor that
in times past you have shown unto me, to be altogether fained: whereat I am
much grieved, seeing I have born such a mind to you, that I would never have
failed to hazard not only my honor but my life and soul both for your sake:
when the Princess heard her spoke with such affection, she was somewhat better
assured, and thereupon said unto her: Seeing you are so desirous to know the
cause, you shall hear it presently, upon condition you shall promise me to be a
means rather to hinder my days than any ways to further them seeing I am fully
determined to die. You may yet well remember (said she) the first time yt
Carmelle came hither to bring us news of Esplandian, son to the good Knight
with the green Sword, that had commandment from his father (as she said) to
come hither to serve us in his place, according to the promise he had made unto
us being in this court: and Carmelle said, that for that cause only Esplandian
had sent her unto Constantinople, to give the Emperor and us to understand
thereof: but there were other matters in the wind, for she came expressly to
entreat me to be good unto her master, who for the great love and affection be
bare unto me, lived in the greatest pain that p^ssible could be. Whereupon it
happened, that being vanquished and overcome with an infinite number of reasons
that she made unto me, I confirmed in my heart, that which his renown had
already imprinted in my mind; and therewith determined for to wish more good to
him than to my self: not that I ever thought to commit any fault that might
redound to my dishonor, but only for the glory to have so worthy a knight
ready at my commandment: whereby this fire did so augment in me, that ever
since I would not think on any other thing than upon Esplandian, with whose
love my mind has been so moved, that his long absence has almost procured my
death: yet the hope I had from day to day to see him, has made me able to
sustain my grief with so great patience, that neither you nor any other, as I
think, could ever perceive it in me. But as the Sailor on the Sea being in a
tempest, thinking at length to arrive at some haven for to save himself,
suddenly meets with a Rock that breaks his ship in pieces: so I (most
unfortunate Lady) hoping by the presence of him I so much desire to see, to be
at the end of my great sorrow, am now fallen into the gulf of desperation,
considering the speech which Carmelle used to me, who speaking softly, said in
this manner: Madam, I leave you within this tomb two inestimable treasures: the
one is the thing that in all the world you most desire to see: which makes me
verily think it can be no other thing than the dead body of Esplandian, and
that (as it is very likely) he has desired at his death to be brought unto me
to weep and lament over him, as I mean to do during the term of my life: which
if it pleases God shall not be very long. And saying so she cast forth a great
sigh, swooning in Queen Minoresses arms: who being abashed to hear the Princess
use those words so far from the estimation she always had conceived of her,
knew not at the first what counsel of comfort to minister unto her:
nevertheless considering the extremity she was in, minding to provide for two
accidents that both at one instant presented themselves, she ran in all haste
to fetch cold water, which throwing in her face, she revived again. Wherewith
the Queen said unto her, What Madam? will you throw the helve after the
hatcher? Will you be holden for a fool, and loose the reputation that is spread
of you throughout ye world? Where is the constancy, the modesty, and the wisdom
wherewith you were wont to be adorned? Must you for one word (which you
misunderstand) forget your self so much? Suppose it were true that Esplandian
should be dead, can you call him again by this tormenting your self? For Gods
sake be patient, and if the worst be, you may prove if it be so and not fall
into this kind of fantasy upon your own imaginations: Carmelle has told you
that the thing you most desire in all the world is enclosed in this tomb: is it
therefore to be said Esplandian should not be alive? Think you he is the first
man that has done the like for his beloveds sake? This I assure you, that
although I break the tomb and all that belongs to it, I will presently see
what may be in it. Alas cousin (said the Princess) I fear you will see it over
soon for me, for if he be dead (as I think he is) assure your self I will bear
him company before it be day. I pray you (said the queen) be not unhappy before
your time, but let me work the feat: hold then (said Leonorine) here is the key
that Carmelle left me: which the Queen took in her hand, and entering into the
chamber where the tomb stood, she lifted up the Crystal plate; that done, she
spoke aloud, and asked if any body were within the same: Esplandian (to whom
one hour seemed a whole year) staying for that time, and hearing the Queen
speak, answered presently, and said: I Madam. Who are you? (said Minoresse.)
Madam, said he, I am the happy or unahppy knight Esplandian, that put my self
into this tomb, ready to receive either death or life, as it shall please the
Princess Leonorine to dispose. Are you (said the Queen) Esplandian, son to the
good knight with the Green Sword, that by messages has so oftentimes promised
to come and serve us? I Madam (said he) and that to accomplish my word, have
caused my self to be brought hither in this manner. If you will promise me
(said the Queen) and swear not to pass my commandment in that I shall appoint
you to do, I will cause you both to see and speak to her you desire so much to
serve? That will I promise you, (said he) and a greater matter likewise, so my
Lady be content. It is enough (said the Queen) wherewith she lifted up the
second plate, and then opened the Chest wherein he lay, and coming out, he used
great reverence to the Queen, but as then he knew her not, till she said unto
him: Sir Knight, it may be you have heard of me before this time, I am
Minoresse, that to deliver my Lady and you from the great pain you both endure,
has taken you out of this your prison: Wherefore I pray you stay here a while,
till I return again. With that she went unto the Princess Leonorine (that mean
time for fear shook like an Aspen leaf) and with a merry countenance said unto
her: Madam, when we have a long and hard Winter, it is commonly seen there
follows a pleasant Summer: and after great sorrow comes exceeding joy. You
have bewailed your Knight Esplandian for dead, but never in all my life have I
seen a dead creature buried that was so fair, and of so pleasant countenance,
as the dead man I have found within the Tomb: I pray you come and see if I be
deceived or not. When the Princess heard the Queen use those words touching
Esplandian, and to laugh withal with joy, her heart leaped in her body, and
rising out of her bed, without speaking any word, she ran presently into the
Chamber, at the entery whereof she espied him she had so much lamented: who
presently kneeled down to kiss her hands. But Leonorine was not as then
disposed to use Ceremonies, but forgetting her accustomed modesty, and the
gravity required in her Sex, especially the shamefacedness that commonly is
seen to be in wise and virtuous Ladies, could not so much command her own
affections, but cast her self into Esplandian's arms, kissing him with so great
affection, as if she had seen, loved and known him all her life time. And
assure your self, if Queen Minoresse had not drawn her back, and reproved her
lightness, that at that instant those two Lovers had died in the place, for
that both their spirits had abandoned all their viral parts to meet together at
their mouths, and to embrace each other, even to the extremity of their lips,
ready to pass further. I say not but that Queen Minoresse did them wrong: and
likewise, if any man would accuse Leonorine of folly or inconstancy, I answer
him again, that she is most easily to be excused both of the one and the other,
for although she never had seen Espladian before that time, and that in reason
she should have known him better before she showed her self so private unto
him, you must suppose (as it is true) that love had of long time before so well
engraven him in her mind, that she ceased not to see him every day with her
inward eyes. And as Nature had studied to make her most perfect in all
perfections whatsoever, love had likewise taken pleasure to make her the best
beloved and the truest lover that ever was before her time. Wherefore it is not
to be marvelled, if at the first she showed so good a countenance to her
friend, considering the pain and grief she had endured since the time Carmelle
brought her news. These two lovers being thus before each other ( Esplandian
still kneeling seemed to be ravished, yt queen Minoresse could not refrain to
say to Leonorine: Madam, me thinks you should do well to command the Knight to
rise up, and lead him into your chamber, where you may talk together while the
night endures, if you think good: but to let him kneel still on the ground, in
good faith it is not well. My good friend (said Leonorine) he has fled from us
for almost two years together, now I mean to keep him so near me, that she
shall not easily escape away: with that she took him by the hand to lift him
up, but he would not stir, but said unto her: Madam, Gastilles not long since
sent me word being at Alfarin, yt you were much offended with me, I pray you
show me the cause: for if ever I committed fault against you, it has bin only
in loving you with all my heart, as I am bound to do Nevertheless, if in your
advise I seem to have presumed overmuch, pardon me I pray you, and give me
what punishment you shall think good. My friend (said she) your absence has
procured me so great cause of grief, that I both pray you, and command you,
from henceforth not to absent your self from me long again. Madam (said
Esplandian) having (with your leave) made another voyage to my companions, that
may think ill of me, leaving them in their chiefest need, to come hither for my
pleasure: I swear unto you of my faith I will never offend you more in that
manner, or any other way whatsoever. I am content to grant you that (said she)
so you return as soon as possible you may: And for the rest I will that from
henceforth you love me in such sort, that not any other but my self shall have
power over you, and that you be my Knight: Now I pray you stand up, and I will
show you further of my mind. With that Esplandian rose up, and Leonorine taking
him by the right hand, led him into her chamber, where she set him a chair, and
she sat by him, there they began to show the pains each of them had endured, in
what manner their love did first begin, who was the mean thereof, and the end
whereunto they pretended, which was their future marriage. In which discourse,
they grew into such alterations, that if queen Minoresse had not been there as
witness to their talk, considering the heat they then were in, I think not, but
in time they would have easily proceeded to a further matter. In that manner
the two lovers passed the night till day began to appear: which Queen Minoresse
perceiving, went to Leonorine, and said unto her: Madam, the secretest follies
are always best, it is almost day, and it may be the Empress may send some one
of her women, or come her self in person to visit you, for that yesternight
very late it was told her you were not well. I pray you give this knight leave
to depart, and let us shut him in the Chest, as we found him at the first. Alas
how hard were those words unto Esplandian, and no less unto the Princess, who
foreseeing the danger that might fall out if they were sound together, said
unto him: My good friend, this happy night that has favored us so much, shall
cause you if you think good, to remember the promise you have made unto me: I
pray you let me see you again as soon as possibly you may. And as she ended
those words, the Queen that stood as a stout watch, heard some body come up the
stairs, wherewith being in great fear, she told the Princess Lenorine, which
made Esplandian presently go into the other chamber, and without having time to
take any longer farewell, laid himself down into the Cedar Chest, yet Leonorine
could not abstain, but must of force kiss him before he was shut in, and as
they laid the Crystal Plate upon the tomb, Carmelle knocked at the door, and
with her Gandalin and Enil, and the rest of the company that the night before
had brought him thither. With that Queen Minoresse opened the door, and they
entering in the chamber, Carmelle saw Leonorine that came unto her, to whom
after she had done her reverence, she said: Madam, I am commanded by him that
sent me unto you, not to stay any longer here, is it not your pleasure to give
me leave to depart, and cause the chest to be delivered unto me, according to
your promise? Gentlewoman (said the Princess) I have made you promise thereof,
and I will keep it, alth^ugh I had rather it should stay together as it is,
then to separate it asunder. Take it when you will, you shall find it in ye
same place where yesternight you caused it to be set: with that the Ladies and
gentlewomen being advertised of her rising came into her chamber, which
hindered Leonorine to speak so secretly with Carmelle as she would have done,
but only gave her the key of the chest, which she caused to be taken out of
the tomb: that done, G^ndalin and Enil, and the two Squires, took it up between
them and carried it away, Leonorine saying to Carmelle: I pray you thank the
knight (in my behalf) that has had me in so good remembrance. And find the
means if it be possible that (according to the promise and messages he has
often sent unto the Emperor, part whereof have bin done by your self) he will
as soon as he can, come hither to see us. Madam (said she) I will do it with
all my heart, as she that desires to please, serve and obey you. Fail not then
(said the Princess) and so God have you in his keeping. That done, Carmelle
followed them that carried Esplandian, leaving Leonorine accompanied both with
joy and sadness: with joy, to have seen him that she held dearer then her self,
and with sadness, for his so sudden departure. But the hope she had of his
speedy return, eased her grief much. Carmelle having brought her purpose to
pass as you heard before, desiring not to omit any thing that seemed necessary
to be done: and to avoid all suspicion, sent Gandalin and Enil before unto the
ships, and went unto the Emperor, whom she found walking in the gallery who no
sooner perceived her, but he asked if the Present that Esplandian sent unto his
daughter, were yet in her ship. No my Lord, (said she) I caused it yesternight
to be carried into her chamber as I promised you, and have left it all with
her, only that which was given me for my part. What is that? (said the
Emperor.) The Cedar Chest (said she:) wherein (if it pleases God) I will cause
the body of Matroco to be buried, that as yet lies in my fathers Hermitage.
But my lord, because as this morning I determined to sail unto the Castle the
defended mountain, to him that sent me hither, I pray you give me leave to
depart. Gentlewoman (said the Emperor) when you were last here, I sent him word
by you, what joy and great pleasure it would be unto me for to see him here, I
pray you once again show him what I said: Assuring him, that being here, he
shall have of me all honor and good entertainment we can devise. My Lord (said
Carmelle) God preserve your Grace and send you life: And therewith taking her
leave, she returned into her ship, where Esplandian and his company stayed for
her.

CHAP. XXXVII.
How Esplandian put to Sea, thinking to arrive at the Castle the defended
Mountain, and of the great adventures he found.

ESplandian entered into his ship, and Carmelle being returned as it is said
before, they determined not to stay longer, fearing to be discovered: wherefore
they caused ankers to be hoised, and setting sail, made toward the Castle the
defended mountain, but fortune by a great storm and contrary wind carried them
another way, driving them along the coast of Alfarin, where the wind ceased,
they sailing almost hard by the shore, and at the same instant when they espied
among the Rocks certain horse and footmen fighting together: whereat
Esplandian marvelled, and said unto Gandalin and Enil: I pray you, seeing we
are arrived here at this instant, let us go see from whence the occasion of
their combat proceeds, and if we may, help them that have the justest
quarrel. Let us go (said the two Knights) wherewith they presently landed, and
mounting on their horses, commanded the sailers to stay for them, and in great
haste ran unto the place where the combat was, and appr^aching the same, they
knew their companions by the white crosses they bare upon their armor, and
seeing them in danger, and enclosed on all sides by great number of Turks,
Esplandian spurred his horse over the stones, and entered into the prease, but
not very far, by reason the Turks kept a strait place, where he must pass, from
whence at the first he was repulsed: Nevertheless in the end Gandalin and Enil
seconded him so well with the help of those that fought on the other side, that
notwithstanding the great resistance the Turks made, they enclosed them on all
sides, and beat them down: yet some of them by the swiftness of their horses
saved themselves, whereby the Christians remained victors, not losing one man.
The knights that had been aided in the manner, could not imagine which way ye
other three knights came: but when they knew them, never were men gladder,
praising God of his great mercy showed unto them. Wherewith Esplandian asked
them how they came thither: My lord (said Elian le delibere,) I and my
companions had so much entreated Belleris to lead us into the country, that all
this night he has been our guide: we being issued out of Alfarin, thinking to
surprise ye town of Galatia that lies upon the seaside not far from hence,
and to the same end we stayed in ambush, but perceiving our enterprise to be
discovered, and thinking by little and little to retire, we were enclosed in
such manner, that if God had not helpen us by your means, without doubt we had
al been overthrown and destroyed. By the faith of a knight (said Esplandian) if
you had considered the country where we are, and that the loss of one of our
men is greater to us then a thousand others, if we were in Christendom, you
would not have hazarded your selves so much: but what is past, cannot be
undone. And to the end we speed no worse, let us enter into my ship that
stays for me. My Lord Esplandian (said Belleris) Occasion is offered now unto
us, and let him go that refuses it, when time serves. You see the overthrow
of the Turks, which is such, that I certainly believe, there is not one man
left within the Town. Wherefore I am of opinion, that we ride thither in as
secret manner as we may, then if we see occasion, we will set upon the gates,
and it may be shall enter the Town without resistance, mean time send one of
your Squires to certify your sailors, that they sail unto Alfarin, or else
that they stir not from thence before they hear news of us. This counsel liked
them well, and they all agreed unto it: with that Belleris marched on before,
Esplandian and the rest following after, riding close together upon a Causie,
where not far from thence they espied one sitting upon a sharp Rock most
hideous to behold, whereat they spurred their horses thither to see what it
might be, where they saw a woman so old, impotent, and withered, that her
breasts hung down beneath her navil, apparelled in a Bears skin, whereon hung
her long, white, and knotted hair, where she had lived among those Rocks in
all tempests and stormy weathers for the space of six score years together. By
which means, her naked body showed like the bark of an Elm tree or some ancient
Oak, whereby not one of them but began to laugh, asking Belleris if he had
heard of her before. I truly (said he) for she is so near of lineage to King
Armato, that she was his great Grandfathers Sister. And although that in her
young years she has been endued with all the gifts of nature, yet would she
never marry, what means soever her friends could use, but gave her self
continually to study the Art of Magic, in such short, that none could surpass
her in the same, whereby she has foreshown long time since, that before she
died, the land of Turkey should be overthrown, and brought in subjection unto
strangers. And for this cause she has caused this Rock to be hewn, wherein
she has made two chambers, where continually she abides, apparrelled in the
same manner you now behold her, and as it is commonly reported, she is very
near ninescore years of age, and that you may know her better, it is she that
caused the gilt pillars with the Tables hanging at them, to be set up at the
adventurous fountain, which you my Lord Esplandian (said he) might peradventure
see, when you found the Princess Heliaxe, and overthrew her guard in that
place. Truly (said Esplandian) I would gladly know how she passes the time,
being so solitary as she is. My Lord, (said Belleris) that could never be
known, yet it is thought, that she has carried great number of books into the
Cave, wherewith she delights her self. I marvel (said Esplandian) why no man
ever adventured to go into the Rock? So they have done: (said Belleris) but
they returned again so well beaten and cruelly handled, that at their coming
forth, some of them dyed. Let us speak unto her (said Esplandian) and it may be
she will tell us no goodness: wherewith they went nearer unto her, but she
presently rose up and fled into her Cave, at the entery whereof she stayed,
saying to Esplandian: Knight, Above a hundred years before thou wast born, I
did foreshew the destruction of this country by thy arrival here, therefore I
choose rather to lead this miserable and cruel life, then to fall into thy
hands, and live in miserable captivity. With that she went in, and could no
more be seen, whereat they all began to laugh, and without longer staying went
on their way, wherein they perceived coming toward them about sixty or
fourscore Knights, all armed ready to fight: whereupon doubting them to be
enemies, they stood still, causing Enil and Belleris to ride forwards to know
the truth, who crossing the field, and staying under a tuff of Cork, they
perceived one of the company to bear a red ancient with a white cross, and
therewith they knew Frandalo that ma^ched before them, whereupon they returned
to their companions: who glad of those news, went to meet them, and coming in
sight each of other, Frandalo thinking to be surprised, willed his companions
to stand close, and the better to provoke his enemies to fight, he sent two or
three of the best horses in his company to skirmish with them, but they
perceiving their white crosses knew them presently to be Belleris and his
company that they went to seek, which Frandalo knowing, spurred his horse
forward, much abashed to see Esplandian, whom he verily thought to be in the
Castle the defended mountain: wherewith they embraces each other, talking of
their adventures past.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How Frandalo and his company of Christian Knights, surprised the town of
Galatia, and of their message sent unto the Emperor of Constantinople by
Gandalin, to crave more aid.

THe Christian Knights being met together, Esplandian asked Frandalo wherefore
he rode abroad with so great a company: My lord, said he, this morning I was
advertised, yt Belleris my nephew had issued by night out of Alfarin with certain
knights, to see if they could meet with our enemies, and fearing they should
find some ambush laid for them yt would be stronger than themselves, I told my
lord Norandel your uncle, by whose advise we took this way to follow him, but
for that neither we nor you have met with any company to provoke us to fight, I
pray you let us return again the best way we can unto Alfarin: but my Lord
(said he) what adventure has brought you hither in so good time to find us
here? What adventure (said he?) Truly you may well term it so: for Gandalin,
Enil, and I, thinking to sail unto the Castle the defended mountain, fortune by
tempest of weather, drove our Ship so near this coast, that we might plainly
behold Belleris and his company fighting against a great number of the enemy,
that had driven them among the rocks: whereupon we landed, and entered so far
among the enemies, that in the end the victory was ours: after that by your
nephews counsel we were riding toward Galatie, the which (as he assures us)
will be easily gotten without great resistance, considering the overthrow we
have already given them. Truly (said Frandalo) it may well be so, and seeing
fortune most commonly aideth all hardy adventurers, let us go forward, and
follow me, for I know a way whereby I will bring you thither without being
discovered. Let us go (said Esplandian) and with that they followed Frandalo
that went softly before them, till they came unto a little hill within a mile
of Galatie, from whence they might easily perceive who issued or entered the
town: where they beheld great numbers of men, as well horsemen as footmen,
who being advertised of the overthrow of their men, went to succor them,
thinking to find the Christians in the place where they had fought, but they
were behind them: which the two knights (they had sent out to discover)
perceiving, ran to advertise Frandalo and his company, who being glad of the
news, went forward in all haste, and suddenly set upon the gates, where slaying
the watch, they entered and took the Town, wherein there were none but impotent
and weak people to defend the same: which done, they drew the Bridges, and went
upon the walls to keep watch, and to behold the enemies countenance at their
return, when they understood thereof, which was not long after; for a
countryman leaping over the walls, ran presently to advertise them. If they
were sorry for it is not to be d^^bred, for that besides the loss of their
goods, they lost their wives and children, thinking they should all be sent
prisoners into a strange country, whereat they were much grieved: but one
Knight among the rest being a man of some stomach, perceiving their sorrow bad
them be of good courage, animating them in such sort, that they all determined
either to loose their lives or else to win the town again: and thereupon (more
moved with rage than with reason) they returned to the town, and assailed it in
such furious and indiscre^^ manner, that a great part of them lost their lives
in the assault, being repulsed and driven away by Frandalo, Esplandian, Enil,
Gandalin, Elian, Tiron, and ten other of the most principal Christian knights:
who to increase more fear in the Galatians, issued out of the town and stew a
great number of them: but as a Cat that is enclosed and assailed (before she
begins to defend her self) seeks by all means to shun and avoid the fury
of the man, and finding her self out of her hole, and no means of succor left
her, becomes so furious and ^old, that she begins to assail him, from whom
she first fled away, and oftentimes does him mischief: So these poor people,
seeing nothing but present death before their eyes, by reason of the chase that
the ten Christian Knights made after them, being wholly desperate and out of
all hope of obtaining mercy, began to take courage again, and in such sort,
that desiring to revenge their lives, they turned their faces toward the enemy
with such courage, that having set upon the Christians, in the end Frandalo was
stricken down, Esplandian and the rest being enclosed in such manner, that they
had all lost their lives in that place, had they not been aided of their
companions, and night that came upon them, which was the cause they left each
other: whereupon the Christians returned into the town, and the Turks rode
toward Tesifante to the Prince Alphorax, who being advertised of their
misfortune, to comfort them, spoke unto them and said: My friends, I am not a
little sorry for your losses, whereunto (if our gods permit us) I will take
such order, and he revenged in such sort, that it shall be spoken of so long as
the world endures. For I hope not only to drive these thieves out of my
country, but to go in person to sp^yl and utterly destroy the City of
Constantinople, with his wicked and accursed Emperor, and all the Christian
Monarchy. Which to bring to pass, it is not long since I sent my Ambassadors
unto my Friends and Allies, who have all given me their promise to aid and
succor me with all their Forces and Powers, whereof some are already arrive^ at
Tenedo, where we (upon certain matters touching our Countries) are to assemble
together: and staying the time till I have means to do better for you, I will
give order that certain money shall be given you to sustain your wants: F^r the
which the Citizens of Galatia thanking bim most heartily, remaining in
Tesifant, where they continually lamented their great losses: on the other side
Esplandian, Frandalo, and the rest of the Knights that had gotten the Town,
considering with themselves that it would be impossible for them to keep and
defend so many places with so few men, agreed among them to send Gandalin to
Constantinople unto the Emperor, to show him what they had of late done to
Alphorax, and won the town of Galatia, being one of the most famous havens in all those parts, and for that cause besought him to send them Gastilles, or some
other of his Captains, with some Forces to aid them, otherwise they should be
constrained either to leave Galatia, or else Alfarin, considering their small
number, and the continual alarms that the enemies gave them: and the better to
move him thereunto, they sent him the greatest part of the rich Jewels they had
conquered in the town. But they had neither Barque nor Pinnace ready to send,
wherefore they were constrained to take that wherein Esplandian came thither:
which at that time (as fortune would) lay still at anchor staying their
pleasure. Wherewith Esplandian sent Sergil to cause the ship to come thither:
which done, and Gandalin ready to imbark himself, Esplandian took him aside,
and said unto him: Friend Gandalin, you have always been faithful and trusty to
my father, which gives me cause to disclose my secret unto ^ou before all
others: when you come to Constantinople (said he) you shall see the Lady
Leonorine, to whom you shall present my most humble Commendations, showing her,
that I will not fail very shortly to accomplish my promise and her commandment,
and withal you shall present her the two Slaves that were given me, which I
send to wait upon her, that by their presence she may have me in remembrance:
and knowing you are not to learn how to use your speeches in such cases, I pray
you Gandalin let me find in you that which I expect. My Lord (said he) God
give me grace to do you service. Then fare you well (said Esplandian.) With
that Gandalin with all his charge entered into the ship, and having set sail,
had a good wind, that in short time after he arrived in Constantinople: where
being landed, he caused two squires to bear the Presents he had brought; and
entering into the palace, he found the Emperor talking with diverse of his Noble
men: the Emperor perceiving him, went to embrace him, asking him where he had
left ye good knight Esplandian, and whether he meant not shortly to come and
see him? My Lord, said Gandalin, he commends himself most humbly unto your
Grace, and has sent you word by me, that not above fifteen days past, he,
Frandalo, and others of our company, have taken the town of Galatia. Galatia?
(said the Emperor) By the faith I bear to God, that is good news: for as I have
been informed heretofore, it is one of the riches towns in all Turkey, but I
knew not well how they can keep it. Full well my Lord, (said Gandalin) so it be
your pleasure to send them some aid: otherwise they shall be constrained in the
end, either to abandon that to keep Alfarin, or Alfarin for that: which would
be a shame for them, and great damage both to your Grace and all Christendom.
Have they found great riches therein (said the Emperor,) or have they lost any
quantity of their men? My Lord (said Gandalin) some of the enemies were slain
in the taking thereof: and with that he began to show him the manner how it was
done, and causing the cases wherein the presents were, to be opened, among other
things he showed him the images of Nabuchodonosor king of Assyria, of Alexander
the great, and that which he most esteemed, the true and lively representation
of Hector of Troy, armed at all points, as he was when he fought against the
Grecians: and surely the Emperor had reason to make so much account thereof,
for that Agamemnon was content to receive it for his part, as being esteemed to
be the richest jewel in all the city of Troy, for that Hector himself had
caused it purposely to be made while the Grecians lay before the City, by one
of the cunningest workmen that could be found, and set it upon the chief Gate
of the Palace of Ilion, which long after fell into the hands of the kings of
Turkey, that had erected it in the Marketplace of Galatia, placing it upon a
high marble pillar, which Gandalin showed unto the Emperor, as he heard
reported in the country: wherewith the Emperor was so well pleased, that he
could not refrain to say: In good truth I should not be better pleased with the
taking of the City of Tesifante, than I am at this time with this goodly
Present, and I pray you tell the knights that sent it, I thank them for it with
all my heart My lord (said Gandalin) they did think it would be more acceptable
unto your Grace than all the vessels of gold and silver that they found within
the Town, part whereof they have likewise sent unto you, that are in this other
Case, which he presently caused to be opened, and after they had perused them,
Gandalin caused the two slaves that Esplandian sent, to come nearer, presenting
them to the Princess Leonorine, saying unto her: Madam, the good knight
Esplandian not knowing what greater Present to offer you (next unto himself)
then these two young maids, he sends them unto you as your slaves, to the end
every man may know, that as you are the goodliest lady that ever nature framed,
so is there not any creature living on the earth, that better deserves to
command such as command others, than your self: wherefore if you show him the
courtesy to accept them at his hands, he will esteem it for one of the
greatest favors that ever he received. Leonorine that knew as well how to
dissemble her affections as any woman living on the earth, and desiring to have
the same opinion that always had run of her, to continue still, with a
dissembled kind of anger, answered Gandalin, and said: Sir knight, it seems
by your words, that Esplandian is disposed to mock me; and that you esteem me
to be a woman of light credit: could you of your faith think me so very, a
child, that I should not well perceive (that if Esplandian were so much at my
commandment as you say) he would not have deferred the time so long to come
hither unto us, were it only but to acquit the promise king Amadis his Father
made us above six or seven years past. But I know his mind full well, he means
to content us with words, and many messages that from time to time he sends,
together with an infinite number of excuses, but all to no purpose, whereof
while I live I will not accept one of them for his discharge: let him therefore
come himself, and then it may be I will believe that to be in him, I have so
oftentimes heard reported. When the Emperor heard her speak in that sort, he
showed by his countenance that he took great pleasure at his daughters choler,
and said unto her: My sweet friend, what will Ganda, lin say to see you so
uncourteous toward him, that honoreth you so much: I pray you sweetheart
moderate your choler, and take that he sends, for if you refuse it, he shall
have great occasion to dislike thereof: And you see that for your sake he does
so many valiant acts, that the good Knight with the Green Sword could never do
the like. My Lord (said she) I believe for valor he is not inferior unto his
father, but for courtesy his father surpasses him. In faith Madam (said
Gandalin) if you knew him as well as I do, it may be you would commend him more
then now you blaspheme him, seeing that if he has deferred the time to come
hither, it is only because he thinks he has not as yet done sufficient in
arms, whereby he should deserve one spark of favor at your hands, considering
your estate and the small valor that is in him, although at this day he is
esteemed the best Knight that ever bare arms for these hundred years
Nevertheless, seeing you accuse him of that, that ought most to excuse him, I
promise you of mine honor, leaving all things apart, presently upon my return
he shall come hither unto you, to do whatsoever it shall please you to command
him. Gandalin (said the Princess Leonorine) think not (whatsoever I say) that I
either take pleasure or displeasure at his presence or his absence, but only
as my Father does, and I for his sake, knowing the great love and affection he
has always born to King Amadis his Father, and continued ^he same to his Son.
But hereof am I well assured, that he cannot so excuse himself, or make us
think other, then that herein he has done us wrong. Nevertheless, seeing it is
the Emperors pleasure, I will keep the Present he has sent me, upon the
promise and assurance you have made of his coming hither as soon as you shall
be arrived at Galatia. Truly Leonorine played her part, very cunningly here:
for hardly would it have been thought or once imagined, that Esplandian and she
had so faithfully given their hands and hearts as they had done in the presence
of Queen Minoresse, as you heard before* and Gandalin for his part knew not
what to think although he had born Esplandian in the tomb, and set him in her
chamber as you likewise heard. Then the Emperor asked him how long he meant to
stay. My lord (said Gandalin) as little as I may, for it were not fit form to
live at rest, while my companions are in arms: Wherefore I most humbly beseech
your Grace to give me my dispatch as soon as possible you can. Gandalin, (said
the Emperor) I will presently send for my admiral, and will cause men in all
haste to be prepared, that within six or seven days they shall be ready to
depart. With that he went into the Garden to recreate himself, and the Ladies
with him: where when Ganlin perceived Leonorine in an Arbor of Myrtle trees,
walking pensively alone, he went unto her and said: Madam, my Lord Esplandian
commanded me to certify your Grace, that since the time he departed from you,
and that he received so great favor at your hands, his heart (that wholly is
yours) has so longed after you, that he has thought to die a thousand times
with grief, for the loss of your presence. And to say the truth, I have known
many men troubled with the passions of love, but I certainly believe there was
never his like, nor that more wisely could dissemble it, which makes me
greatly to doubt his person. For that it is impossible, considering the grief
he still indureth, together with the small comfort he received of his familiar
friends, (not knowing his disease) but that he must in short time end his days:
whereby great damage should then arise unto all Christendom, considering the
strange beginning of Knighthood and great prowess that is in him: which is
such, as that if he continue as he has begun, he will bring that Order in
greater estimation then ever it has been before: wherefore Madam, seeing I
have always (as it may be you are already adver^sed) been a Servant to his
father, and that I am acquainted with the nature of his son, and the danger
wherein he is like to fall into, if you show him not some favor, I have
presumed to show your Ladyship the hard case wherein he was when I left him, as
also that he has expressly commanded me to assure you, that his only intent
and desire is to be in your presence. Yet perceiving the danger wherein his
companions do remain, he knows not what excuse to make, whereby he might take
occasion for to leave them: wherefore he beseeches you to impu^e his long
absence unto fortune, and not to him that is born only to love, serve and obey
you. In uttering whereof Gandalin showed so sorrowful a countenance, that he
made Leonorine ready to weep, In which kind of office he had so well bin
exercised from his youth, that no man could surpass him in the same. Friend
Gandalin (said the Princess Leonorine) I know not what you mean I should do for
him more then already I have done, nor yet for what cause you should imagine
that I seek to be the means of his death: seeing that if he were but sick, I
know my self so feeble and impatien^, that with grief and sorrow I should not
be able to live one hour after. Let it therefore be far from you, once to think
yt I would ever be any other man's then only his: and think it not strange, if
in the Emperors presence, or before the world, I dissemble as I do, for I would
not in any case, that the least inckling of the burning love wherein my heart
continually flameth toward him, should as yet be once perceived, chiefly for
the great good I wish unto him. Madam (said Gandalin) I am well assured he will
receive an extreme pleasure to hear these news, and yt he will leave all things
to come hither, if you think it good. That is my desire (said she) and I pray
him so to do, and you to persuade him thereunto. While they were devising,
Tartary the Admiral (so called of ye place of his birth) entered into ye garden:
being a man issued of a mean house, but advanced unto great authority by his
great with and valiant courage, so that he commanded over all ye Grecian seas.
The Emperor and he talked long time touching Gandalins message, concerning aid
to be sent unto Galatia, and in the end he willed in all haste to prepare
thirty galleys and Foists, with two thousand of the best soldiers he could
find to man ye same. The Admiral Tartary according to his charge, executed his
Commission in such sort, that within six days after he was ready with his navy
to set sail, and depart from thence.

CHAP. XXXIX.
How Vrganda arrived at Galatia, and of the danger wherein she was by the
subtilty of Melie the Enchantress.

THe Admiral Tartary and Gandalin having taken their leaves of the Emperor, set
sail, and passed the straights of Constantinople, and without any adventures,
arrived at Galatia within one week after their departure: if they were well
received by the Christian Knights, it is not to be doubted, for their number
was so small and so dispersed, that they were in doubt to be able to keep that
Town, with Alfarin, and the Castle the defended mountain. But when they saw
such aid, they were in better hope, and having received the Admiral, they
divided their two thousand men, as need required. Mean time Esplandian had no
small desire to know of Gandalin if he had spoken with the Princess Leonorine,
and how she did: for the which cause being in his chamber, he sent for him.
Where talking together, Gandalin showed him from point to point what speeches
had passed between the Princess and him, not only before the Emperor, but also
in the garden And of my faith sir (said he) you do her wrong, considering the
good means you have both to satisfy her and your self* for what excuse soever
you can make, you are not so sore charged on this side, that you may not spare
some time to go and see her, which she craveth at your hands. That I will do
(said Esplandian) but I must find the means; take you care for that (said
Gandalin) and let me go sleep, for I never had more need: Go (said Esplandian)
and be here again betimes in the morning. Wherewith Gandalin took his leave,
leaving Esplandian alone in great care how he might find some convenient excuse
to leave his companions in ye extremity, but God provided for him: f^r the
same night about an hour before day as he began to slumber, he heard a most
pleasant sound of music, which you must understand, came out of the great
Serpent that he left in the Castle the defended mountain, which at that time
was arrived before the town of Galatia, but little did he think of any such
thing, or that Urganda had bin therein, because he thought her to be in great
Britain. This mellody continued for the space of half an hour and more, which
done, he heard such a noise of Trumpets Clarigals, Phifes, and Tabers, that
sounded so high, that the sentinels of the town thought verily the enemies navy
had bin arrived before the same to lay siege unto it: whereupon they caused an
Alarm in the town, each man running to the walls, being all of that mind till
day, when they might behold the great Serpent (wherein Urganda was) all hung
with long pennons and streamers: whereat Esplandian was so glad, that going
down unto the Haven, he presently entered into a boat with Talanque, Manley,
and diverse other of the principal captains to see who might be there. And
rowing near unto it, they knew Urganda that stayed for them on the hatches and
stretching forth her arms, spoke unto them and said: My good friends, you are
most heartily welcome, I pray you come up into my ship, that I may embrace you.
With that Esplandian entered, and as he meant to salute Urganda, she kneeled on
the ground to kiss his feet, whereat he being ashamed took her up, and said
unto her: Madam, I never thought you would have taken pleasure to mock with me,
seeing I account my self much more bound to you then to any creature living in
the world. And therefore for Gods cause, if at any time I chance to offend you,
punish me I pray you in some sort or other. Most happy Knight, (said she) The
aid I hope for at your hands before many days shall pass, moved me to do as I
have done, wherefore I beseech you take it in good part. And with that she
embraced him, and after him, Talanque, Manley, and all the rest, every man
doing her great honor, desiring her to show them the cause of her so sudden
coming thither. My good friends (said she) you ^^all know it at some other time
when better leisure serves: mean while I am to tell you that it is necessary
for you shortly to go unto the City of Constantinople, where you shall enter
all armed and apparrelled in the same armor I have brought hither for you, and
thus must I tell you, that if you should defer it till another time, it would
be prejudicial to you all Wherefore I counsel you to do it upon the first day
of the next week, assuring you to be as well received of the Emperor, as ever
were any knights, which your ease and pleasure in his company, shall continue
until ye rolling wheel of fortune turning about, shall bring with it many
travels, passions, and adventures, which shall cause many griefs and sorrows
both to you and others. And the better to make you believe that al I say is
true, I tell you that I my self shall fall into two of the greatest dangers of
my self that ever I had, whether it be here or in another place I know not. And
which is worse, I cannot by any means avoid ye same, not knowing any cause how
nor wherefore it should be so, although it be in a manner ready to fall upon
me. Madam (said Esplandian) before you shall receive any hurt in our presence,
we will all lose our lives to succor you. My good child (said she) man's destiny
of force must be accomplished. But I pray you let us enter into some other
talk, for this makes me melancholy. Madam (said Manley) Is it not your
pleasure to go into the Town? I (said she) and I pray you send for Norandel,
who at this present I know is at Alfarin, and I will give you as great cause to
rejoice as ever you had: for that within my ship I have brought the King of
Denmark, wounded in a combat that he fought against Garlante Lord of the Isle
of Calafre, that by force would have taken two Gentlewomen from him. And
although Garlante be esteemed a hardy and valiant knight, yet did the king
bring him in such case, that unless he had craved mercy, the king would have
stricken off his head: which he spared upon condition, that during his life he
should never after injure any knight, which Garlante swear and vowed in my
presence, for that by chance arriving there, during their combat, I heard what
passed between them. And because I perceived the King to be in danger of his
person by reason of the great number of wounds he had upon his body, I would
not leave him, but caused him to enter into my ship, and laid him in the best
bed, where now he is almo^^ healed. Ha (said Esplandian,) what good news are
these, of my faith I thought verily he had bin dead: wherefore madam, I pray
you for Gods cause let me crave the means to see him: with that Urganda led him
where he lay, but when they saw each other, Esplandian could not refrain
weeping, with the great pleasure he took to see the King. Nevertheless, for the
time they had no great speech together, neither would Urganda permit them to do
it, doubting lest the King (being yet out weak and feable) might thereby be
hindered of his health. Wherefore she caused Esp^andian to go forth, and
entering with her into the boa^ they rowed to the shore, from whence they led
Urganda (...) best lodging in the town, with as much honor as they c^uld have
done to the Queens Brisenne or Oriane, if any of them had bin there in
presence. The next day Esplandian pitying the great number of women and little
children that had bin kept within the town from the time that it was taken,
said to his companions, that it would be better to give them leave to depart
from thence, then to hold them still, for that the longer they continued in the
town, the more charge they put them to: and to keep them prisoners (said he) or
in longer servitude, God may possible be offended with us. Wherefore if you
will believe me, using rather mercy then rigor toward them, I am of opinion
that we send them al to Tesifant to ye Princess Heliaxe, who will thank us for
it, and so shall we be rid of so much charge. To this all the knights agreed,
and Carmelle was appointed to execute ye message, and he yt had seen the great
number of people yt were about her, especially women, weeping most bitterly to
behold themselves banished and driven from their own houses, surely he could
not choose unless he were hard-hearted, but have pitied their estate. But let
them go, and let us hear what danger fell unto Urganda yt next day after, who
being welcome to ye knights, took great pleasure to hear them show of ye
adventures they had found in ye Turkish country, since ye taking of Alfarin.
And each man after the other discoursing what they knew, Esplandian remembered
ye old woman they saw among the rocks, where she continued, whereat he could not
choose but smile, which Urganda espying, sked him the cause. Madam (said he) I
thought upon the beauty of a young maid, that I and some of our company chanced
to see not far hence, being the best furnished of all things for to beautify
her that might be found, and the better to describe her unto you, I can assure
you (upon Belleris word) that it is at the least eight or nine score years
since she first could go and speak, yet has she so fresh and gallant a color,
that to behold her well, I cannot compare her better then unto the bark of
those great Elms we commonly find along the high ways as we ride in great
Britain, her hair is as white as Snow, and for want of combing all knotted
together, which sets her out so well, that to behold it spread abroad upon a
bears skin (which she wears for a gown,) there is not any man living that
would not be surprised with a sudden and vehement love, in the beholding of
her. Urganda that had heard of her before, and above all things was much
desirous to see her, because of her great skill, said unto Esplandian: In good
faith I know her better then you think I do, and am well assured, that in her
young years she has bin one of the goodliest Ladies that ever you saw. For she
is both daughter, sister, and aunt unto a King, and is called Melie, who for to
learn the perfect art and science of Nigromancy, has so much condemned the
world, that for her inheritance she has chosen a Rock* wherein she has caused
a cave to be dug, where she now remains and lives in great misery, and I
swear unto you of my faith, that it is above twenty years and more since I
determined to come and see her, but other affairs that touched me nearer, have
still hindered my desire. Madam (said Esplandian) seeing you are so near, you
may do it now, and all we will be your guides. I pray you let it be so (said
she) and let us go as soon as we have dined: which done, and the tables
uncovered, every man made preparation to go with Urganda to behold that sight:
but Esplandian would have but threescore with him, who being well horsed and
armed at all points, issued out of Galatia, Urganda on her palfrey, riding
among them, Belleris was their guide, and when they came near unto the cave
where they had found Melie, they espied her set cross legged upon the point of
a Rock, with that Urganda prayed them to stay, that she alone might speak
secretly unto her, which the Knights agreed unto. Wherewith she rode forwards,
and being near unto her, she said: Madam I pray you^ve not offended that I come
to see you, and offer you my service. Who are you? (said she) I am (said she)
Urganda le Discogneve, that have always had a great desire to see you. Ha
Urganda, the wisest Lady among all others (said Melie) your coming hither
pleases me right well, light down I pray you, that you and I may talk of such
things as we have taken great pains to learn and understand: for although you
have been the only occasion of the Christians arrival here, whereby our poor
country indureth so much woe, yet I cannot but excuse you, knowing the faith
and duty you are bound to show to your religion. Wherefore I pray you come
near, and sit down by me. Urganda perceivrng her to be old and feeble, did as
she required, hoping by force to stay her there, whether she would or no, till
her company were come thither, minding to give her unto them to bring her to
Galatia, but she met with as crafty a mate as her self, for the old woman
perceiving Urganda to be near her, went unto the mouth of her Cave, and said
unto her: Urganda, It would grief me that these Knights should hear our talk,
wherefore let us go in. Whereat Urganda made no difficulty, thinking verily,
that if she might once lay hands on her, she would use her at her pleasure:
wherewith she followed her, but she was no sooner entered, but Melie stepped to
her and held her so straight by the threat, that she had no means to call
Esplandian or any of the rest to help her. But they fearing the worst, ran in
all haste unto the Cave, and the first that entered was Talanque, and after him
Manley, and they had no sooner stepped in, but they fell down as if they had
been dead, and their fall was so great, that Esplandian that followed them
heard it, but he had a remedy about him against all such adventures, and that
was his good Sword against the which no enchantment whatsoever could ought
avail, which he first found to be true when he entered into Arcabonnes chamber:
he perceiving his two companions in such case, being much grieved thereat,
willingly would have relieved them, but that he espied Melie holding Urganda
under her knee, seeking by all means to strangle her: which caused him first to
succor her, threatening Melie if that she did her hurt, she should dearly buy
it, but for all his threatenings she ceased not to use all the means she could
for to destroy her, until Esplandian went near unto her, and with his Sword
thought to cleave her head. Wherewith she began to fly, thinking to be safe
within the chamber where she wrought her charms, but as she stepped upon the
threshold of the door, Esplandian caught her by the bears skin, and whether she
would or not, held her so fast, that she could go no further. And as he lifted
up his arm to kill her, he remembered that he should do wrong, thinking it not
convenient for a Knight to defile his hands in the blood of a simple woman nor
able to resist: and surely the thought of his, moderated his color in such
sort, that he purposed not to do it, minding only to draw her out of the
vault: wherewith he took her by the hair, and pulled her with all his force.
With that he espied a great old Ape, with two eyes burning like flaming fire,
that lept upon him for to tear his flesh, but he gave him such a blow with his
fist between the eyes, that he stroke him dead. And passing forward, brought
Melie out of her Cave, and leaving her in Frandalos keeping, went in again to
see if Urganda were alive, where he found her in such pain, that it seemed the
soul would depart out of her body, whereat he had so great pity, that he took
her in his arms, and set her in the air, the like he did to Talanque and
Manley, who within one quarter of an hour after, could not call to mind what
had happened unto them, but were as whole and as well as ever they were before.
Wherefore they mounted on their horses, taking Melie with them that sat upon
Sergils horse, and he behind her, holding her in his arms, lest she should
escape. And God knows with what joy Urganda showed them what fear she had bin
in, which as she said was such, that she thought verily to die. But (said she)
even as one nail drives out another, so the joy I have of my delivery, makes
me in a manner to forget the pain wherein I was. And with that they entered
into the Town, being almost night.

CHAP. XL.
How Carmelle arrived at Tesifante, and spoke with Heliaxe, and of the
mavelous combat which Esplandian, Frandalo, Gandalin, and Enil fought
against three Giants and twelve Turkish knights.

CArmelle traveled so long with the women and children of Galatia, that they
arrived at Tesifant, where they found both their fathers and husbands, as many
of them as had saved themselves, as it is said before. Esteem I pray you what
grief they had to think upon their exile, and loss of all their goods: surely
there is no heart so hard, but would have wept with grief to behold great
numbers of men and women, with diverse little children about them, and not
having any means to give them bread or drink. Whereof the Prince Alphorax
having news, and hearing of their sorrow, could not refrain to say in presence
of them all: Ah immortal gods, it must needs be, that either for some great sin
of me or mine, this cruel war is moved in my country: O gods immortal, let your
wrath, appease, and of your infinite goodness let it rather please you that all
the mischief which you send upon these impotent people, fall only upon me that
alone have moved your indignati^ns: if not, then I beseech you give me grace,
that to your gl^ry I may drive these cursed Christians (enemies of your holy
laws) out of my country, swearing unto you, that if you vouchsafe your aides, I
will make so great a slaughter of them, that thereby your wraths shall be
appeased, if it be so that the small endeavor I have hitherto used to drive
them hence be the occasion of your anger toward me. Then he asked them how
they got away. My Lord (said he that brought him news) a fair gentlewoman named
Carmelle (as I hear say) has brought them hither, and desires to speak with
you and the Princess Heliaxe. Lady (said Alphorax to his wife, do you know her?
I my Lord (said Heliaxe) for she bare me company all that day that I fell into
Frandalos hands, being very ready to do me all the pleasure and service that
she could devise: wherefore my Lord, I pray you let her have that honor and
entertainment she deserves. Lady (said Alphorax) I am well content therewith.
With that some of them ran to fetch Carmelle who being come in presence of
Alphorax, went presently unto the Princess Heliaxe, and without salutation,
said unto her: madam, you know the lord and master that I serve, who only has
authority over me, think it not therefore strange, if in any sort I have not
humbled my self before the prince Alphorax or to you: And to the end Madam,
that you should know the cause of my arrival here, I think the taking of
Galatia is not unknown unto you, whereof at this present the Christians are
Lords and Masters, having conquered it from you by force, not finding any
Garrison therein, but a number of women and little children: which my Lord
Esplandian and his company send unto your Grace, committing them unto your good
discretion. Assuring you (their Religion only excepted) they are ready to do
you any service that they may. Carmelle (said the Princess) this is not the
first favor they have showed unto me, I am of long time so much beholding to
them, that be it in their adversities or their prosperities, I will never be
unmindful of the same. Nevertheless, I am assured, that at this day I have not,
neither yet shall ever have the means to do it (as I think) unless that
variable fortune turn her rolling wheel, and abase them as much as now they are
advanced, then (if it so fall out) they shall full well perceive how much I
esteem their virtues and favors they have shown unto me. Carmelle (said
Alphorax) have they willed you to deliver no message unto me? No my Lord (said
she) but I tell you plain, they are determined very shortly to come and visit
you, in such manner, as will not greatly like you. By all my gods (said
Alphorax) I will ease them of that burden, if they make not the more haste;
for I have so many men preparing, that I mean to go in person to
Constantinople, to destroy the wicked Emperor and all the Christians. Then
shall my wife have means (if she think good) to acknowledge the favors toward
them, which they have shown unto her, as she says. My Lord (said Carmelle)
Men's enterprises do oftentimes fall out contrary to their expectations, and God
that is in Heaven above, commands and disposes of all things as it pleases
him, and not as we would have it. Now Madam (said she to Heliaxe) I have done
the commandment of those that sent me hither, wherefore I beseech you let me be
safely conducted to the place from whence I came. My Lord (said the Princess to
Alphorax) I pray you show her so much favor, for it would grieve me much that
she should receive the least injury in the world: which he granted unto her,
and withal Heliaxe gave her for her pains one of the richest Gowns she had.
Wherewith she caused her to be conducted by twenty knights, unto the Town of
Galatia: where being arrived, she showed them what she had done, as also what
speeches the prince Alphorax used unto her, which Urganda marked well, saying
unto the knights: In faith my good friends, as touching Alphorax high words,
they are the fruits of his nature, being altogether proud and arrogant:
Nevertheless, I can assure you, that fortune promises him great matters. And
because it will not be long before they do happen, I will now use no words of
them: praying some of you to show me so much favor to return again unto Melies
Cave, to fetch her Books that we left behind us. Which being in my possession,
it may be they will serve hereafter to do both you and many others pleasure.
Esplandian hearing Urganda speak with such affection, and knowing the desire
she had to have the Books, answered her and said: Madam, before I steep I will
see if I can fulfill your pleasure. And without longer staying, he desired Enil,
Frandalo, and Gandalin, to bear him company: who presently armed themselves,
and being on horseback without any other company then their own Squires, issued
out of the Town, leaving Urganda with Norandel, that was newly come from the
City of Alfarin. The four Knights rode so long till they came unto Melies rock,
where not far from thence they found three Giants and twelve Knights, that with
a loud voice stood at the mouth of the Cave calling Melie, for the shepherds
keeping sheep in the fields (having seen her led unto Galatia) ran to tell them
news: and to know the truth they were expressly come thither. Esplandian and his
company knew them well to be their enemies, wherefore they determined to give
them battle although their number was far greater: wherefore being covered with
their shields, and their swords ready in their hands, they entered among them,
Esplandian met the first Giant, Frandalo the second, and Gandalin and Enil the
third: and Esplandian gave his giant so great a blow, that therewith he made
him take so great a leap, that both master and horse lay upon the ground, not
once removing hand or foot: but it fell out otherwise with the rest, for they
having broken their spears upon Frandalo, Gandalin, and Enil, their horses
being loosely bridled, bare them at least a mile from thence, before they could
make them stay. With that the four Christian Knights were enclosed by twelve
Turks, whereof three of them at the first charge were stricken dead unto the
ground: wherewith the fight began to be most perilous and fierce, in such
sort, that before the two Giants could return again, five other of the Turks
were in such case, that the best of them was hurt to death, so there rested but
four: which Esplandian and Frandalo left fighting with Gandalin and Enil, to
meet the two Giants that in great haste came toward them to help their
companions: and as they met together never was there braver fight, for
Esplandian thinking upon the Princess Leonorine, gave not one blow but he made
the blood to follow on him that had the stroke: whereby the rock became all
bloody, yet he found his enemy no less able to require his blows, so that in
short space his shield was so hewed and cut in pieces, that there rested
nothing but the leathers in his hands: whereat he was in such a rage, that
rising in his stirr^ps, he gave his enemy so great a blow upon the coife of
steell, that he struck it off, wherewith the Giants eyes started in his head,
which made him b^w his neck upon the horses main, and withal let fall his
Sword. With that Esplandian struck him such another blow between the neck and
shoulders that he cut off his head: wherewith the horse ran up and down the
fields with his dead Giant on his back: mean time Frandalo handled the other
Giant in such sort, that he had put him out of breath. Gandalin and Enil for
their parts doing no less, for they two fighting against four, behaved
themselves so couragi^usly, that they slew two of their hardiest enemies: yet
the other two would never yield, although they were still ready to fly,
especially when they perceived Esplandian coming toward them. And to say
truth, it was not possible for them to make any resistance: yet he stayed a
while, because he perceived some of them that were stricken down to rise again,
and take their Swords in hand: whereat he turned about, but it chanced that his
horses foot lighting between a cliff stuck fast, and was forced to fall down,
whereby Esplandian was in the greatest danger of death that ever he had, by
reason that his enemies were on all sides about him ready to thrust their
Swords into his belly: a thing very easy to be done if God had not provided
for him, and given strength and agility to his horse to rise again with his
master on his back: who perceiving himself at liberty, and having his Sword in
hand, made such execution on the Turks, that he left not one alive: wherewith
those two that fought with Gandalin and Enil fled along the mountain, as if all
the devils in hell had been behind them, and not being pursued saved
themselves, leaving the Giant behind them for a pawn, to whom Frandalo granted
life, not only because he asked mercy, but for that he was in a manner dead.

CHAP. XLI.
How Esplandian entered into Melies Cave, to fetch her books, and of an assault
made upon him, Frandalo, Enil, and Gandalin, as they thought to return again
unto Galatia.

THe combat ended as you heard before, each man caused his wounds to be
dressed and bound up in the best manner they could: then Esplandian entered into
Melies Cave to fetch the books he sought, where he went into a fair chamber
being four square, about the which there grew so much Ivy, that it might verily
be judged to have been placed there for the hangings of the chamber: in this
chamber at each corner there hung four Lamps, yt burnt both night and day and
never went forth, so cunningly could the Enchantress show her Art in that
place: and as Esplandian looked well about him, he espied the door of another
chamber, in the middle whereof stood a great Candlestick all of Massy Gold with
seven branches, and in every branch a wax Candle that burned continually: hard
by it stood a Cypres-table, whereon lay Melies books, some covered with plates
of Gold and graven upon it, others with Silver, bound and emboised round about,
which Esplandian took and carried with him out of the Cave, giving them to keep
unto his Squire, and mounting on their horses, they rode the same way they
came, thinking presently to be at Galatia again. But they were stayed sooner
than they looked for, for the Turks that fled away (as you heard before) made
an Alarm at a little Town not far from thence, whereby there issued twenty
horse and forty footmen, who being assured that four Knights only and no more
had overthrown their men, made all the speed they could to enclose them,
especially those that were well horsed: Frandalo and his company perceived them
afar off yet could they hardly shun them, but of force must fight, or else
endure the shame to fly away. Wherefore Esplandian was in mind to try their
fortune, and to send one of their Squires in all haste unto Galatia, to
advertise them of the danger they were in, that they might succor them: whereto
Frandalo would not give consent, showing what great pain and travel both they
and their horses had endured all that day, as also the great number of their
enemies in regard of them, in such sort (said he) that if we take upon us for
to fight with them, I am in doubt, that thinking to win honor, we shall be
counted rash and presumptuous fools. What then? (said Esplandian) will you
endure the shame to fly away? In good truth (said he) for my part I had rather
endure the hazard of life or death, what ever shall happen. Then we will do
thus (said Frandalo:) my Squire shall run unto Galatia to advertise Talanque
and the rest how we stayed behind. Mean time, I know a bridge not far from
hence, whether we will go and defend the same, till our aid shall come, where
we cannot be assailed by them all at once: otherwise think with your self what
means we have to resist so many men both on horse and foot, that come
purposely to assayl us. Let us go then (said Esplandian) wherewith leaving the
way on the right hand they turned to the left, as Frandalo led them: and they
had not ridden very far but they came unto a little river somewhat deep, over
the which there stood a bridge, where they had no sooner arrived, but they were
presently charged by their enemies, especially by one of the Turks that was
most brave and sumptuous, and best mounted of them all, as being their captain:
who bearing a great lance in his hand, began to cry most vehemently in the
Arabian tongue unto Esplandian and his companions, saying: You dogs, you fly
away, but by our gods it shall cost you all your lives: wherewith Enil that
heard his threatenings better than the rest, turned his face, and set spurs to
his horse, the Turk and he meeting so fiercely together, that Enil was hurt in
the right arm, and the Turk thrust clean through the body, wherewith he fell
presently stark dead unto the ground: Which set his companions in such a rage
to see their champion thus suddenly slain, that they thought to enclose Enil,
but he found means to recover the bridge: surely whosoever had seen the great
prowess of those four champions, might with good reason esteem them as they
were, specially Esplandian that stroke not one blow in vain. And although they
were but few in comparison of their enemies, yet they did twice or thrice
overthrow diverse of the Turks that seemed boldest to adventure forward, in such
sort, that had it not been for the footmen that came upon them, the horsemen
had but little prevailed: whereat it is not to be marvelled, because the
greatest part of them were Citizens, altogether unexpert in arms, and fitter
for banquet at a table than to guide a horse or break a lance: whereby in less
than a quarter of an hour the four Knights had done them great hurt: and so
much, that neither the horsemen nor footmen durst once set forward to enter
upon the bridge, till one of them determined to make proof, thereby if it were
possible to enclose them round about. This Turks name was Tluacam, a valiant
and hardy knight, as he well showed before the combat ended: for although the
water was deep and the other side hard to climb up, yet he waded through, and
at diverse times bare eight more of his companions over: which Frandalo and the
rest perceiving, they were constrained to divide themselves, Esplandian and
Enil staying at the end of the Bridge where the combat first began, Frandalo
and Gandalin standing at the other, and God knows what trouble they had, for
Tluacam desirous to win honor or to loose his life, with his lance in hand,
charged Gandalin in such sort, that both man and horse had like to fallen to
the ground, and withal he brake his spear: wherefore taking his Sword in hand,
striking on both sides, and thinking to be seconded by his fellows, put his
horse in such a fury, that whether he would or not, he bare him to ye middle of
the bridge: where thinking to stay, ye horses feet slid from him, whereby both
he and his master fell into the river and were drowned whereat the Turks gave
so great a cry, that they seemed mad, and bowing down their heads thinking to
acquit their loss, used all the force they could on both sides the bridge to
enter upon the four knights: who sustained their assault so bravely, that the
Turks at last were forced to recoil, whereof nine were thrown into the water,
but Esplandian and his company were so weary, that in a manner they could fight
no longer. With that they perceived their aid in all haste coming toward them:
the occasion why they stayed so long was because Frenace, Frandalos squire,
that went to seek Manley and the rest, thinking to find his master where he
left him, had led them thither, but not finding them there, supp^sed them to be
gone unto the bridge: and to say truth, they arrived in very good time, for
that Esplandian and his three companions were almost clean out of breath: but
when they perceived their aid, never did poor prisoners that were set at
liberty more rejoice, nor were better pleased: and the Turks on the contrary
side never more astonished, yet they held close together, determining rather to
revenge their deaths than once to yield unto their enemies: so that before the
Knights of Galatia could enter in among them, they gave them much to do,
although in the end they overcame them, whereby not one escaped alive, to carry
news unto their friends. Enil at the first onset had been sore wounded, as you
heard before, wherefore he caused his wounds to be searched: the like did the
rest of the hurt Knights. Which done they set forward to Galatia, contenting
themselves for that day with ye victory it had pleased God to send them. And
coming to the gate, they found Urganda ready to receive them: who knowing how
all had past, and the danger wherein Esplandian had been, jestingly said unto
him: In faith my Lord, said she, if I were afraid of death when I fell into
Melies hands, I believe you were not in much better case since that I saw you
last, as I understand by those that know what damage you were in. Madam (said
he) I know I am a mortal man, and that my life and death are in the hands of
God, as it pleases him to dispose, and I confess unto you, if we had not been
succored, that in the end we could not have endured: yet am I well assured,
that before it had come to pass, we had laid so many enemies on the ground,
that the rest should have had greater cause to lament their loss, than boast of
their conquest. Urganda perceived by Esplandian words that he liked not her
speech, whereupon she said unto him: My Lord, pardon me I beseech you, and
excuse the indiscretion of a woman, specially in me, who at this present had
forgotten my self. Madam (said Esplandian) you may command me, and likewise set
me forth for a coward, hardy, or any other what it pleases you to term me. In
which manner talking together, they came unto his lodging, where master
Elizabeth (newly come from Alfarin) visited his wounds, and the rest likewise
that had cause to use his help.

CHAP. XLII.
How the Knights of great Britain that were at Galatia, imbarqued themselves
with Vrganda in the great Serpent, to sail unto Constantinople, and what
happened unto them.

THe Knights that had been hurt at the last encounter, for the space of fifteen
days after were forced to keep their chambers until their wounds were healed:
during which time, Urganda took great pleasure in reading Melies books which
Esplandian caused to be brought unto her: wherein she found such wonderful
conjurations and devises of Magic Art, that she was abashed how she that had
them so long time in her possession, knew no more than yet she did, esteeming
the Enchantress Lady to have been the perfectest scholar that even studied in
that art, as it well appeared by her books. Now the time approached wherein it
was expedient (according to the destinies appointed) that Esplandian and his
companions should go unto Constantinople: wherefore as soon as their wounds
were healed, Urganda caused them to be assembled, and standing in the midst
of them all, she said unto them: My good friends, knowing part ^f the
prosperities and adversities which the heavens foreshew unto you all, I came
hither specially to see Esplandian and you, of whom I have received great
pleasure, perceiving at my arrival the love and amity that is among you, with
the great desire you have to accomplish the order of knighthood: not for the
glory and recompense of this world, but only for the increasing of our faith
and the service of God, that shall reward you for it: and to the end you may
continue in this forwardness, and that the thing which I pretend, may happily
fall out, I will from henceforth not only employ my person by my Art, which
has pleased God to lend me, wherewith I will advise you what I shall find
convenient and necessary for the augmentation of your honors already spread
through out the world: which to begin I am of opinion, that you all imbarque
your selves with me in the great Serpent, that shall bring us unto
Constantinople to the Emperor, for without him it is impossible that this great
enterprise you have taken in hand can come to good effect: as also that he
himself before many years are past, shall be found in mavelous necessity, and
such, that he shall account himself most happy to have your aid: and with good
reason, for that in the end both he and you shall overcome those hazards
according to your desires. Then shall you plainly know, that this that I
foreshew unto you is most true. While Urganda used these words, all the company
stood still intentive for to hear her: and had it not been that they esteemed
her words to be most true, they had doubted of the threatenings she used against
the Emperor, he being so great and puissant a Monarch. Nevertheless the issue
of that trouble which she assured unto them, gave them some ease and
contentation of mind: in expectation whereof, they made account in the mean
time to prove their strengths and forces, that thereby their valor and
magnanimity might be further spread abroad. And as touching their voyage to the
Emperor, as Urganda gave them direction, it was only the thing whereupon
Esplandian did aspire, hoping that if the wars were openly proclaimed in the
Grecian Empire, and the Emperors danger so imminent, to show such valor and
prowess in martial exploits, that he would not only free and acquit his father
of the promise he had made to serve the Ladies, but confirm the love that ye
Princess Leonorine bare unto him, in such sort, that he might obtain her for
his wife: which caused him to speak for all his company, assuring Urganda that
not one of them but was ready to obey and go where it pleased her. My friends
(said she) then I pray you to morrow in the morning cause your horses to be
shipped in my ship, and for armor take you no care, I ^or^ provide you thereof
so well, that each man shall find himself content: let it suffice you to
imbarque your selves and set sail: for often times an enterprise deferred over
long, falls not out as men desire it should, not for want of good and wise
counsel, but by the negligence of those that are appointed to execute the same.
Thus was their voyage to Constantinople agreed upon, in such sort, that all the
knights of great Britain entered into the great Serpent, taking with them
Frandola, Melie, and the captain of Tesifant that had been taken prisoner, as
you heard before, leaving the Admirals soldiers for garrison in the town.
Which done, the ship went forward of it self, sailing toward the Castle the
defended mountain, where being arrived they took Armato king of Turkey and his
two captains with them: or Urganda willed them so to do: and six days after,
the great Serpent arrived within half a mile of Constantinople, where she
stayed. Then Urganda caused her Knights to be armed with the armor she had
brought, which were white, with a red cross both before and behind, most comely
to behold. They were in all forty Knights, whose names are as follows:
Esplandian, Frandalo, Norandel, Talanque, Manley the wise, Ambor of Gandel,
Grauate of the fearful valley, Gandalin, Enil, Trian cousin to Queen Briolany,
Bravor son to the Giant Balan, Belleris, Elion le Delibere, Licoran of the
white Tower, Listoran of the silver bridge, Landin of Sariaque, Imosil of
Burgondy, Ledadrin of Ferraque, Sarquiles cousin to Angriotes, Palomir,
Branfil, Tantiles the proud, Galbron Son of Isamel, Carpin his Brother, Carin
of Carante, Attalion Son of Olivas, Bracele Son of Bandoyvas, Garamante Son of
Norgalles, Amphinio of Almain, Brandony of France, Penatry of Spain, Flamene
his brother, Culspicio of Bohemia, Amandario of little Britain, Silvester of
Hungaria, Manley of Swethland, Galfary of Italy, Galiot of Scotland, Amandaly,
his brother, and Calfeur the glorious. Being arrived, the ship was presently
espied by the Citizens which they knew, having seen it before when it put them
in such fear, as you have heard, but hoping for him that used ordinarily to
sail therein, they all ran unto the walls, and along the shore to see him land,
wherewith the noise and rumor was so great, that the Emperor had news thereof
being as then talking with the Ladies. Those news pleased the Princess
Leonorine so well, that she no sooner heard the great Serpent named, but she
rose up and went unto the windows to see if she could espy her love Esplandian:
but the ship was somewhat too far off, neither did it move from the place
whereas it lay. Wherefore fearing to be deceived as she had been before, she
began to change color: which Queen Minoresse perceived, and jesting said unto
her: Madam, do you make this pitiful countenance to dissemble the joy you have
conceived, or for fear I should beguile you of him that comes to see you? How
now cousin (said she) how long have you learned to mock? In faith I never
thought upon the first of those two points, and much less am I in doubt of the
second, for you know as much as my self and yet I am not ignorant that when the
great Serpent was there where I now behold it, he whom we expect came not
hither, wherefore I fear (and with good reason) that we shall now be served in
like sort: and as she ended her speech, the ship came within a bow shot of the
haven where they might perceive one of her sides to open, from whence they put
out a boat, and not long after they saw Carmelle and two other gentlewomen come
forth, the two Gentlewomen playing most sweetly upon two instruments, which
they did till they arrived at the shore: from whence they went unto the
Emperor, who knowing Carmelle, had better hope to see Esplandian than ever he
had before: and going unto her to ask what news, she made no more reverence
unto him than she used at other times to do, saying unto him: My lord,
Esplandian my master (that you so much desire to see) is now arrived before the
town in the great Serpent with diverse other Knights his friends and allies, and
Urganda la Discogneve, desiring you to show them the favor to stay in your
Palace, where they mean to come and visit your Grace. Truly Carmelle (said the
Emperor) I never heard message in all my life that pleased me so well, I am
content to do as they desire, although I was determined to meet them, and to
give them that entertainment they deserve: But seeing they will have it
otherwise, I will satisfy their desires. That is sufficient (said Carmelle) we
will then return to thom again, to certify your Graces answer. Go (said the
Emperor) and tell them from me, that they shall he most heartily welcome. With
that Carmelle with the two Gentlewomen departed toward the Haven: mean time,
whosoever had beheld the Princess Leonorine, might easily have judged the
alteration of her heart, it was so full of joy, that without Queen Minoresse
that caused her to refrain, she would peradventure have done something whereby
her honor had been blemished, minding to leave the Empress her mother, and go
to meet Esplandian, whose absence had procured so great sorrow in her mind. But
the Queen as a wise and discreet lady persuaded her so much, that she stayed at
the window, whereby her alteration might not be perceived. Carmelle stayed not
long, but went into the boat, rowing to the great Serpent, where being entered,
there were presently two boats more put forth that brought horses to land,
which done, they returned again to fetch the knights, and those that would went
forth, and among them six gentlewomen, three of them sounding the recorders,
then ceasing, the other three played on the Lute and Vials, in that manner
being landed and mounted on their horses, they entered into the City the six
Gentlewomen marching first, after them the two Turkish Captains that were taken
at the siege of the Castle the defended mountain, then the Captain of Tesifant,
next followed Armato, and with him the Princess Melie, apparrelled in the
bear-skin as she had been taken, then followed the forty Knights two in a rank,
armed horse and man in one sort of armor, in the midst of them road Urganda,
talking to Esplandian and the King of Denmark. And as they approached the
Palace, the Emperor, the Empress, and the Ladies met them, where the Emperor
coming to Urganda, did her as much honor as if she had bin the greatest Queen
in the world. Mean time the Knights being among the Ladies, gave occasion to be
found no less courteous, then prompt and valiant in arms, especially
Esplandian, who coming to the Princess Leonorine, kneeled on the ground to kiss
her hands, but she refused it making the whole company believe, she was
offended with him for delaying the time to come unto the court as he had
promised. Which the Emperor perceiving, could not refrain to smile, and said
unto her: How now daughter? Is this the good entertainment you show unto your
knight, and the thanks you give him, for coming expressly hither to serve you? I
pray you call to mind, that he deserves a better countenance, were it only
for his fathers sake, to whom you are so much beholding. My lord (said she)
that is the cause I am so much offended with him, for if he resembled the
knight with the green Sword as much in courtesy as in countenance, he had not
stayed so long to obey his fathers will, and to satisfy the requests that you
and I have made unto him by Carmelle and others, as your Grace knows Before
God (said the Emperor) and say true: yet I could never have bin persuaded you
would conceive displeasure so long time, considering what he has done, and the
rich presents he sent to you. My Lord (said she) if he has done any thing for
me it was without my commandment, I had rather he had done less in those
things, and that he had bin more obedient to his fathers will and mine. Madam
(said the Emperor to Urganda) you see in my daughter how great the choler of an
angry woman is. My Lord (said she) she has reason so to do, for that
Esplandian obaying his father, ought to confirm himself both to her will and
yours. And having failed therein, all he says that he has done for her sake,
may be accounted nothing, although I am assured, that the remembrance of my
Lady your daughter has made him (being in fight) enter into such danger, that
it was most strange how he could escape. Wherefore Madam (said she to
Leonorine) he deserves pardon for the same, and so I pray you grant him. While
Urganda spoke, the Princess beheld Esplandian with so great affection, that in
a manner she lived and died in him: and he for his part by her felt in what
sort love uses those he holds in his power. Whereby she continued a time
without answering Urganda not for any evil will to her in using of th^se
speeches, but rather feeling such alteration in her mind, that she trembled
like a leaf. But in the end she remembered her self, and said unto her: Madam,
seeing it is your pleasure that I remit his offense, I am content to do it,
upon condition, that if he forget himself as he has done heretofore, you shall
bear the punishment for him. With that she took him by the hand, and made him
rise up, changing speech, because the Empress (that in the mean time talked
with the King of Denmark) came thither, whereby Esplandian was constrained to
leave the Princess, and salute her. The Emperor all that while had given no
entertainment to King Armato, as knowing him not, but when they showed him
which was he, he embraced him and said: My Lord and brother, I beseech you
pardon my ignorance, in not entertaining you before this time, as not knowing
you, but I will amend the fault when you think good. My Lord (said Armato) I am
now (as it pleases fortune) in place where you may command me, yet I pray you
call to mind who I was, and what I may be, and do for me as you would I should
do for you if your case were mine: Considering with your self, that the like
hard fortune may fall on you, and that it is no less virtue to intertain the
vanquished courteously then to overthrow the puissant enemy. With that the
Emperor led him into his palace, the rest following after him, and when they
were in the Hall, he left them with the Empress to speak unto Frandalo, and
taking him aside, said unto him: Frannalo, to let you know how well I do
account of the great good service you have done for me, I will that from
henceforth you shall be my chief Standard Bearer, in which place I now estaplish
you. For the which Frandalo thanked him most humbly, accounting himself most
happy to have so great authority.

CHAP. XLIII.
How Norandel and Queen Minoresse fell in love one of the other, and what
conference they had together.

THe Emperor being among his Knights, making them all the charge and honor that
he could devise. It happened that the princess Leonorine and Queen Minoresse
seeing the King of Denmark and Norandel together, called Carmelle, and asked
her who they were. My Ladies (said she) you have seen him that has the least
beard here before, (which is the King of Denmark) for he came hither with
Frandalo, the other is Norandel king Luisarts Son, esteemed for one of the
hardiest Knights living on the earth. I pray you (said the Princess) desire
them to come hither, that we may speak with them. With that Carmelle called
them unto her, and as they were before the two Princesses the more they beheld
the excellency of their beauties, the more they marvelled at it, and not
without cause, for next unto Leonorine there could hardly be found in all
Greece one that matched Queen Minoresse, especially in comeliness and good
behavior, but if she had some perfection in her, nature had not forgotten her
self in forming the two Knights, especially Norandel, who till that time had
never felt the stings of love, no more had Queen Minoresse. Nevertheless, that
little thief surprised them so covertly, that he bound them both, making them
captives one to the other, in such manner, that after many Questions and
Answers propounded they drew themselves apart, leading ye King of Denmark
talking with the Princess Leonorine, the Queen asking Norandal what he thought
of ye Princese. Madam (said he) although I have heard her esteemed for one of
the goodliest Ladies in the world, yet did I never think her beauty had been
such as now I see it is, althought you are little behind her in yt respect,
whereby I might esteem my self most happy if I had bin asleep that day I
enterprised to take my journey hither. Wherefore (said the Queen) have you had
so ill entertainment in this Court? No Madam (said he) but there is one has
stolen that from me which I have most carefully kept during my life. The Queen
not knowing what he meant, was thereat abashed, asking him what it was, and
whither he knew the thief. I Madam (said he) and it rests in you to do me
justice, if it be your pleasure: for you and none other have that whereof I
speak. In good faith (said the Queen) you shall pardon me, for I have nothing
of yours that I can remember. Madam (said Norandel) since the time I first did
know what belonged to a man, I kept my liberty, not alienating it to any one:
But coming hither (I had no sooner set mine eye on you) but I found my self of
a freeman a bondslaue and captive to your Ladyships good favor: which I beseech
you afford me, in recompense of the liberty you now have taken from me. Truly
fix knight (said she) you have at this present run too far astray, for if you
beheld me as you should, you had not found me such a one as you say, and would
have bin twice advised to use such speeches as you do Nevertheless, I will not
take them at your hands (being a stranger) in so evil part as mine honor does
require, and I think likewise you speak far otherwise then you mean: which she
said to undermine him. Thereby to see if Norandels words were spoken from the
heart, who hearing that overthwart answer, was much astonished, but being moved
with love, answered her and said: Madam, pardon my boldness I beseech you, but
I swear unto you, by the faith of a Knight, that I have discovered the secret
of my heart: and if you will not believe me at this time, I hope in time to
come to do so much, that you shall well perceive what great desire I have to be
your Knight, if it will please you to grant me so much favor to accept me for
the same. When Queen Minoresse perceived him so earnest, as that in uttering
those words she showed great affection, she esteemed in her mind to have
sufficient argument that might persuade her to believe his words, wherewith she
answered him and said: My Lord Norandel, If you do as you promise, I well
believe that you say: and for the accepting you to be my Knight, me thinks I
should do wrong to refuse so small a favor to so courteous a gentleman as you
are: wherefore I both grant it and desire it of you. With that she took a
little ring (she commonly wore) off from her finger, giving it unto him for a
witness of their new confirmed aliance: And had it not bin that the Emperor was
ready to go to supper, they had no sooner left talking, but the Empress went
in, whereby Queen Minoresse was constrained to follow after, taking Melie and
Carmelle with her, to whom she did all honor and good entertainment she could
devise: Supper being done, and the tables uncovered, the Princess Leonorine
that had seen Norandel and Queen Minoresse talking with so great affection,
doubted some feathers in the wind, wherefore taking her aside, said unto her:
Cousin, I believe the knight that entertained you so long, told you some news
out of Great Britain, or something else that pleased you full well, I pray you
fair Lady tell me what it was, for you were very earnest to harken thereunto.
How now Madam? (said she) since when I pray you, did you learn to mock? Call
you that mocking (said she) which is done in earnest? I pray God the mockery I
mean to you, may fall out as I desire it would, then shall I at the least have
as good advantage at you, as you have had at me, which would please me well,
not so much to have a companion in mine own estate, as to yield you in exchange
the like pleasure I have received at your hands, when you first were made
acquainted with the love between Esplandian and me. Wherefore fear not to utter
your mind unto me, otherwise I will from henceforth have you in a jealousy,
for that you have already done, or yet would do. Madam (said the Queen) rather
than you should do so, I will declare to you the secretest thing I know. The
Knight (said she) whereof you speak (I know not by what means) has so
captivated my mind, that I feel the thing in my self which I never thought
would have happened unto me. And as they that are molested with a continual
Ague, do find the taste of water better than the hope of life to them: so I
likewise, that was accustomed not only to contemn the force of Love, but blame
all such as yield to his might, (esteeming their estate rather voluntary than
forcible) find my self so much surprised, that if God help me not, I am in the
greatest danger that ever poor woman was. What (said the Princess) think you my
Lord Norandel is of so hard a heart and little courtesy, as that he would
disdain the love of so fair and comely a Lady as you are? Do you perceive by
him that his mind is placed elsewhere? No Madam (said she) but to the
contrary, he protested to be wholly mine, without any further advantage, then
that I have accepted him for my knight. Truly (said Leonorine) I am glad
thereof, and if you had done otherwise, he might surely have complained, and
you much more, to have refused so great a good, when it is offered without
dissimulation: else if it be otherwise, it is no good, but rather a curse. I am
of this opinion (said she) that my Lord Norandel would rather die a thousand
deaths than bear that mind: wherefore determine I pray you, to use him well,
assuring you, that I will not fail to succor you in what I may, and will do for
you as you have done for me. So long they talked together, that the Emperor and
his company risen from the Table, came to see the Ladies. Nevertheless neither
the Princess nor Queen Minoresse could have the means to entertain their
friends, but only with a look, whereby (their hearts panting in their bellies)
were somewhat eased: when night approached, every man withdrew him to his rest,
but when Queen Minoresse found her self alone, and in her bed, she began to
think upon the speches that Norandel used unto her, sometimes determining to
assay, if by any means she could drive the same out of her mind, and then
presently changed thoughts, and said unto her self: Alas, was there ever
greater constancy in a woman, then that I always had until this time? Must I
now of force yield up the fort, that against so many hard assaults I held
invincible? Alas, I now perceive it is of force, wherefore it is better
presently to seek for remedy, then to consume thus secretly as I do. Alas what?
If I chance in this sort to yield unto mine own desire, (poor soul that I am)
then do I manifestly perceive the danger wherein I fall, and the thraldom that
I bring my self into, from whence while I live, I shall never escape. Wherefore
it were far better for me to bridle mine own affection, and command that which
commands me, then do that which hereafter I might repent. With that she held
her peace, and turning on each side, like one not well at ease in body nor in
mind, she had no sooner resolved one thing, but presently dissolved it again,
so great was her inconstancy therein. Nevertheless, having well debated with
her self all the pleasures or displeasures that might chance thereby: In the
end, with a loud voice she uttered these words: I know not what may come to
pass, but Love promises me great things: Wherefore if the worst fall out, and
that from henceforth I forget my self, he shall bear the blame, and not I, that
will do nothing but under his protection: In which opinion, she fell a sleep,
and the next day Norandel and she finding means to talk together, they
confirmed their love in such sort, that they determined to use the same more by
wisdom, then by passion: which those that are in like case, ought to follow,
thereby to attain unto the point of their desired joys, which in times past
before, was commonly called the gracious gifts of Mercy.

CHAP. XLIIII.
How Vrganda declared unto the Emperor the signification of the Prophecy that
was found in the tomb, and of two Dragons that carried her with King Armato and
Melie up into the air, and set them in the middle of the City of Tesifant.

YOu heard before how Carmelle in her ship, showed the Emperor the tomb that
Esplandian had conquered in the Rock of the Enchantress with the Image of
Jupiter, and the Prophecy he held within his hand, which the Emperor remembered
so well, that he never ceased to think thereon. Whereby, the next day after the
arrival of that noble company in the City of Constantinople, he calling to mind
that there could no person be found in all the world better able to resolve his
doubt, then Urganda was, caused her to go into the closet, where the Emperess
with the Princess Leonorine, Queen Minoresse, and no more, stayed for her: they
five being together, the Emperor caused the Image of Jupiter to be brought
thither: which done, he said unto Urganda: Madam, I pray you do me so much
pleasure as to declare (if it be possible) what are the meaning of the Letters
that this Image holds. With that Urganda read it, and having considered
thereof, she said unto the Emperor: My Lord, the great knowledge and skill that
this Idol has foreshowen shall in time to come be lost, is already happened:
for as you know, the power of Jupiter and of other gods, has been suppressed
and abolished by the coming of Jesus Christ: and as touching these words, The
bondslave of the bond of slavery shall be burried here, and life restored by
him that suffered death. These are hard and obscure terms, yet will I declare
them to your Grace as well as possibly I may. With that Leonorine and Queen
Minoresse thought: she would have spoken of the Knight Esplandian that had been
put into a Cedar Chest, as you heard before: wherewith they being surprised
with a deadly fear, began to behold each other in most pitiful manner: which
Urganda well perceiving, intending to ease their minds continued her discourse
in this manner: My Lord (said she) this Prophecy was written concerning Matroco
Lord of the Castle of the defended mountain, who as you know was always a Pagan
till his latter day that he became a Christian, whereby long time he continued
a bond-slave of the bond of slavery: for such ought the Sect of Idolatry to be
named: but Esplandian perceiving his repentance, suffered him to be buried in
the hermitage, where as yet Carmelles father does remain, who since that time
has so much honored the Giants body, that she has buried his bones within the
Cedar Chest, that you Madam (said she to Leonorine) if you do remember, gave
unto her: And touching these lines which contain these words, That life shall
be restored by him that suffered death: that is likewise to be understood of
him, for that loosing this transitory life, he has obtained the eternal in
Abraham's bosom: so great grace has he received at the hands of God by the
merit of his Sons passion, in whom he did believe, as I said before: and so my
Lord (said she) you have heard what I can say as touching this strange
Prophecy. Ey but (said the Emperor) what means the rest? My Lord (said she) I
can tell you no more of it than can my Lady your daughter, or Queen Minoresse,
but so much I can assure you, that in short time you shall see it come to pass:
and if in any point it concerns you, the best is it will all fall out to
greater good of your soul, than to any power or worldly glory: wherewith for
this present I pray you content your self. I truly (said the Emperor) and so
will I always do: for so my soul be well, I esteem not the misery or torments
of my body. And with that he left Urganda with the Empress, and went into the
Hall, where great number of Knights and Gentlemen stayed for him: with whom he
passed the rest of the day in all pleasant delights: mean time fortune by
little and little began to play her part, and to spread the nets wherewith she
meant to enclose that troop, thereby to work the envy and great tribulations
that afterward fell upon them: the beginning whereof was such as you shall hear.

About a mile without the City, the Emperor had built a sumptuous Palace,
called Vaelbeniatnof, as like to that of Apollidon in the Firm Isle, as well
could be devised: which place was compassed with a Park furnished with all
things requisite for man's delight, whither he meant to lead the Ladies, with
Esplandian and his company, as also king Armato, to feast them in the same, and
for that purpose within three days after their arrival, they departed from the
City of Constantinople, and went to Vaelbeniatnof, going into the park, wherein
they found the hunters, and at their first entrance a great Heart was singled
out, which in the end after long chase was killed almost before the Ladies: and
going further, they espied a Bore so fiercely hunted by dogs, that they made
him turn, and with his Tusks stroke the dogs, that none durst set upon him: but
at the last one of the hunters struck him in the throat, and so he died: so
long this sport endured, that supper time drew on, wherefore the Lords and
Ladies entering into the palace found the tables covered, and sitting down,
were served in most sumptuous manner: and having supped, they began to dance,
which continued till midnight, minding the next day to begin their sport again:
but fortune minding to bear a part, did so trouble the feast that she gave them
well to understand, how she can work in all things at her pleasure: for the
next day about evening the Knights and Ladies being in the Park, some talking
with those to whom they bare affections, and contenting their mind with such
devises as love to pass the time in pleasure, put into their heads, others
running about and taking pleasure to gather flowers, and do as most delighted
them. Melie (from whom till then they could not hear one word) went unto
Urganda, and before them all spoke unto her and said: Madam, I marvel (if it be
so that your learning and skill be such as is reported) why you make no sport
unto this company. Melie (said Urganda) where you are present I will not
undertake to do it before you, but you should rather do it, being well assured,
that the Emperor would be thankful for the same. If it pleases him (said she)
I am content, upon condition, that after me you do the like, or better if you
can. Truly (said the Emperor) it is but reason: and I pray you both to do it.
My Lord (said Melie) then command Urganda to lend me a book that I was wont to
have, whereon the picture of Medea, (and her name written over it) does stand,
then shall you behold some of mine art, and if Urganda never knew it before,
she may learn it now of me. In good faith (said Urganda) that will I not deny
you: with that she called one of her Gentlewomen, willing her to fetch the
book: mean time Melie took King Armato by the hand, and making as though she
would speak a word with him, they walked a while together, then they sat them
down hard by the place where the Empress and the Ladies were talking with each
other, and staying till the thing Melie had requested, were brought unto her,
she having it in her hand opened the book, and then began to read, making
certain signs with her eyes lifted up to heaven and calling Urganda, prayed her
to come thither, saying she should see that she never had seen before. Urganda
not doubting any treason by Melie prepared, went and sat down by her, and next
her King Armato, so that she sat between Melie and him, where Melie began to
turn the book, showing them certain prophesies, and other strange devises,
which continued not long but the air began to be covered with a round black
cloud, and therewith it seemed so dark, that they could not see each other, at
the last the cloud opened, and they beheld two horrible Dragons coming down out
of the cloud that drew a wagon, and stayed right before Urganda, who by Armato
and Melie was so straightly embraced, that whither she would or not they thrust
her in, and they after her. Wherewith the Dragons seeing their wagon charged,
flew up into the air, and carried them away, Urganda crying for help, but all
in vain: for in less than the twinkling of an eye she was out of sight:
wherewith there was such a noise among the company, that Esplandian, Talanque,
Ambor, Manley, and the rest of the Knights that came thither with her, swear
never to rest above one night in a place before they found her out: so that the
same day taking their leaves, both of the Emperor and others, that by them were
left in sorrow, they entered again into the great Serpent, but before Esplandian
went, he spoke unto the Princess Leonorine, beseeching her not to take in evil
part his enterprise taken in hand for the love of her, to whom he found himself
so much beholding, promising her that presently (having found Urganda) he would
return again. My good friend (said she) me thinks you should do this at better
leisure, and not in so great haste as now you do: yet am I well content to do
as pleases you: but forget not I pray you (said she) to return again as you
have promised. Which Esplandian vowed upon his faith: mean time Norandel and
Queen Minoresse (as much grieved as might be) knew not what countenance to
hold, having their hearts so seized with care, that the Queen was constrained
to withdraw her self into her chamber, and lay upon her bed, shutting the door:
whereby Norandel had no means to take his leave, but imbarqued himself,
charged with an infinite number of griefs and sorrows: with that the great
Serpent began of it self to set forward, and within two days after arrived at
the Castle of the defended mountain.

CHAP. XLV.
How the two Dragons set Vrganda, Melie, and King Armato in the middle of the
City of Tesifant, and of the great army that Armato prepared to enter into
Greece.

THe Dragons bearing Urganda, Melie, and King Armato, in the air, flew so
swiftly, that before day they were right over the City of Tesifant, where they
set down their charge: that done, they flew away, and never were seen again.
King Armato was exceeding glad when he perceived himself to be in place whereas
he might command, and went unto his palace, where finding the guard, he made
himself known unto them, they presently went to advertise the Prince Alphorax,
who much abashed at those news, start out of his bed, and casting a furred gown
upon his shouldiers, ran to embrace his father, who seemed to be so changed,
not only because his beard was longer than he used, but by reason of the great
grief and melancholy he had so long endured, that the Prince began to weep,
and say unto him: My Lord, you are more than heartily welcome, for Gods cause I
beseech you tell us how fortune has been so much your friend to deliver you
out of the misery wherein you have continued so long, to my no little grief.
Son (said he) Melie can tell you better than my self, for she is the only
means of my good hap, and has brought with her Urganda discogneve, (of whom
heretofore you have heard.) And as he left speaking, Melie and Urganda entered
into the hall, wherewith the rumor of the Kings return was so great within the
City, that all the people ran unto the palace for to see him, being as glad of
his arrival, as Urganda sorry to see her self in such a place, and that which
grieved her more, was that Melie in presence of them all, spoke unto her and
said: Urganda, two things move me to save thy life: the one, for that in my
captivity thou have not once suffered an evil word to be used to me, neither
permitted that any man should do me harm: the other because I certainly know
that King Armato has by thy means received all the good intertainment he had,
during his hard imprisonment. Nevertheless, the mischief thou have procured
unto this country (being the only cause the Christians entered into the same)
is sufficient to make thee endure perpetual imprisonment: wherein by mine art I
will so straightly enclose thee, that thy Art shall naught avail thee ever to
get forth. But although that sentence might well abash Urganda, yet she showed
such constancy, that she never changed color, determining with her self to
endure whatsoever should fall out, wherefore she said unto Melie: Madam, you
may do with me as pleases you, but in reason you ought not to use me otherwise
then you your self were used when I had the like authority over you, as you
have now of me, otherwise you shall do wrong both to your self and me: To me,
that am old and ancient, putting me in prison, wherewith you threaten me, (not
having offended you,) and to your self, in preferring cruelty before the
courtesy that has bin found in you: where to Melie answered her not a word,
but commanded her to be shut into a great tower standing in the midst of thy
City, over the which she wrought such conjurations, that Urganda knew without
Gods help, it would be impossible for her ever to come forth: yet she lived in
hope, considering the mutability of fortune, and the King Armato himself had been casually delivered, who continued certain days in his great City of
Tesifant, without making any show to be revenged. But in the end he sent
Ambassadors to all the Princes in the East that were his allies and
confederates, desiring them to enter into arms, not only to drive the
Christians out of Galatia, Alfarin, and other places that they had usurped in
his Country, but to destroy Constantinople, with all the Christian Monarchs,
and therefore wrote a Letter unto them, the Contents whereof do follow.

ARmato, by the providence of our immortal gods, called to the Government of
the puissant Country of Turkey, the Frontier and Bulwark of all the Pagan Land,
to all Caitifs, Kings, Soldiers, Admirals and Governors of the Countries
situated in the East parts, sends greeting:
Being returned out of prison, from whence we are now delivered, I thought good
to give you to understand, that not long since there is a Knight come out of
the South into the Marches, descended (as men say) of the Race of Brutus the
Trojan, to whom for our injustice (as it is very likely) our gods have given
power to conquer the Castle of the defended mountain, slaying Matroco and
Frerion, two of the best Knights in all the East parts: and which is worse (the
number of the Christians increasing more and more) they have sought all means
to destroy our holy Law: which to prevent, we entered into arms, and having
raised a mighty Army, thought to drive them out of our quarters: but having
long time continued siege before the Castle of the defended mountain, and
brought it to such extremity, that they had no victuals to sustain themselves;
he of whom we were most in doubt, the first beginner of those wars, found means
by the aid of a villain named Frandalo (that sometime belonged unto us) to
enter therein, and by subtilty to take us prisoners, in such sort, that our
Army being overthrown, we remained prisoners in their hands, where they have
holden us in straight keeping almost for the space of a whole year together:
mean time our fortune continuing worse and worse, they have by treason seized
upon the Towns of Alfarin and Galatia, two of the best Ports in all our Realm:
which they had never taken in hand without the aid of the traitorous and
disloyal Emperor of Constantinople; who for to aid and succor them, has falsely
broken the Truce concluded between us, and raised so many men, that without
your aids, we are in danger to fall into their hands, a thing that would
concern you much, seeing we (as you know) are the Frontier and Rampart to you
all. Wherefore in the name of all our gods, we pray and desire you, that not
only for the safeguard of our Law, but for the profit and utility of all the
East countries, you will assemble your Forces in so great number, that thereby
we may drive these Christians out of our Country, and conquer the Empire of
Constantinople, even to France, and the Countries of Great Britain, which will
be both easy and profitable unto us.


These Letters written and the Messengers dispatched, they made such haste,
that before the end of July following there were so many men assembled at the
port of Tenedos, that the Christians had news thereof, as hereafter you shall
hear. One day among the rest as Belleris, Talanque, and Manley being issued out
of the Castle of the defended mountain, hoping to take some Turk in the way to
Tesifant that might tell them news, not only of the King Armato, but of Melie
and Urganda, as day began to appear they came unto the adventurous fountain,
where they beheld the pillars of brass, the pavillion, and the field-bed that
Heliaxe had left there, with a great Serpent lying therein, which presently
began to run away, and the Knights after, thinking to kill her, but their
horses durst not go near her, yet she began to complain and weep as bitterly as
a woman traveling with child. Wherewith there appeared four men well mounted
and armed at all points, that cried out and said: Sir Knights, depart from
hence and trouble not our gentlewoman in this sort, or it shall cost you your
lives. And scarce had they ended their speech, but they ran each at other, the
strange knights breaking their spears in such manner upon the Christians, that
Manley and his companions thought they had run against them with long strawes.
Yet could not one of them couch his lance, but ran their course without once
touching them. Mean time, the Serpent entered into a hole, and could no more be
seen, and as they turned their horses to run another course, the four Knights
would not abide, but flying away, cried unto them and said: Sir Knights, our
Gentlewoman is safe, for the rest content your selves if you think good. Get
you hence to all the devils (said Talanque) and ill fortune might he have that
follows after you. With that they three returned unto the fountain, not
without great laughing at their adventure. And as they were before the
pavillion, they perceived a Knight that watered his horse, to whom Belleris
riding, asked him his name: What have you to do therewith? (said he.) So much
(said Belleris) that either you shall tell me presently with good will, or else
shall fight with me. You shall fail in the one, but not in the other: for
although you be three, yet am I well content to prove what the Knights of Great
Britain can do. When Talanque heard him speak so boldly, he could not refrain
to say: By God Sir Knight, that you shall prove without delay, and setting
spurs to his horse, ran fiercely against the other that refused him not, but
struck him so sure, that he overthrew him to the ground. Which Manley wondering
at, set forward to revenge his friend: but if the first sped ill, he sped no
better, no more did Belleris: all three rising up again, ashamed at their
falls, which minding to amend by dent of Swords, the other Knight fled along
the wood, crying so loud, that they might hear him say: Sir Knights, another
time sit better on your horses, and trouble not your selves to follow me, if
you mean not to lose your way. In Gods name (said Talanque) what may this mean,
shall we have no better fortune all this day, I think we are enchanted. Let us
mount upon our horses and follow after him, that we may know whether God or all
the devils in hell have determined to cross us in this journey. Wherewith they
mounted, determining to follow after the other, but they heard a lamentable
voice, wherefore they stayed to see what it might be. With that they espied a
woman with her head undrest, crying out for help: And after her ran a Lion
ready to devour her: whereat they being moved with compassion, thought to step
between them, but the Lion began so horribly to rore, that the horses stricken
with fear, bare their masters above two long bows shot from thence: mean time,
the woman and the Lion vanished away, whereat Talanque and Manley more abashed
then before, asked Belleris if ever he heard of such adventures. In good faith
(said he) those that are desirous to see strange things, must repair unto this
fountain: For there are many (and such as yet you have not seen) that wonder it
is to hear, and will you know how it comes to pass? Me^ie had devised them
long time since, wherefore it is not to be marvelled No m^re I do not (said
Manley:) nevertheless, were it not for the enterprise we now have taken in
hand, by the faith of a Knight (said he) I would not depart from hence before I
had seen them all. That shall be at another time (said Belleris:) let us now
keep on our way, that we be not discovered. With that they held on the left
hand, always riding toward the City of Tesifant: and having ridden about five
miles space, they met ten men on horseback all unarmed, leading two
Gentlewomen, one of them being somewhat fair and well aparelled. But the ten
men were in so great fear, that leaving the Gentlewomen, they ran and saved
themselves not being pursued, for the three knights stayed with the
Gentlewomen, of whom they hoped to hear such news as they desired. And in
effect, after they had somewhat assured them, there asked them what news of king
Armato, and whether he were still prisoner. My Lords (said the eldest
Gentlewoman) it is not long since he escaped out of the Christians hands, and
is returned to Tesifant with Melie, that has shut Urganda in a Tower, from
whence she shall never depart without her leave. That is good news for us then
(said Belleris:) and what has king Armato done since his return? Does he not
(said he) mean to be revenged on them that kept him prisoner so long? I truly
(said she) for all the Kings, Souldans, Cailiffs, and Admirals of the Pagan
Law, have promised him to arrive at Constantinople, and to destroy all
Christendom. And as it is said, the most part of them are already arrived in
the Isle of Tenedos. In good faith (said Belleris to his companions)
considering the speeches of these gentlewomen, I am of this opinion, that we
meddle no longer with them, but return unto our hold. Whereunto they both
agreed, and letting the Gentlewoman depart, made so great haste, that about two
hours after sunsetting, they arrived at the Castle of the defended mountain,
where they showed their companions what adventures they sound in the
adventurous Fountain. And at our departure (said they) we found ten men on
horseback leading two Gentlewomen, by whom we have for certain understood, that
Urganda is straightly shut-up in one of the Towers of Tesifant, and so
enchanted therein by Melies conjurations, that she is like never to come forth,
as also that the Pagan Kings assemble themselves together in the Isle of
Tenedos, to overrun the Emperor of Constantinople, and all the Christians
country.

CHAP. XLVI.
How the Pirate Crescelin, nephew to the admiral Tartary, brought certain news
to Esplandian of the great Army that the Lords of the East parts prepared to
come unto Constantinople.

THe report that Belleris, Talanque, and Manley used to their companions as
touching the great preparation the Pagans made to invade the Empire of
Constantinople and all the Christendom, caused them to think thereon, in such
sort, that they took counsel to determine among themselves, whether it were
better for them to augument the Garrisons of the Castle of the defended
mountain, Alfarin, and Galatia, or go to Constantinople to aid the Emperor. And
as they were in debating of the matter, Crescelin nephew to the Admiral of
Greece, (that not long before had stolen ten Galleys from the Emperor to rove
upon the Sea) came to advertise the Knights, that as he sailed into Phrigia, he
had discovered in the Isle of Tenedos, so many Galleys, Foistes, and other
vessels, of the enemies, that the Sea seemed covered therewith, who without
doubt assembled to overrun the Emperor and destroy all Christendom: wherefore
(said he) I thought to let you understand the same, not only because you might
provide for them, but also to desire your favors to entreat the Emperor in my
behalf: assuring you, that if he pardon the offense I have committed against
his Majesty I will from henceforth do him so good service, that he shall like
it well. My Lord Crescelin (said Esplandian) I have always heard the Emperor
reported to be one of the best Princes living in the world, and most easy to
be appeased, when with reason men reconcile themselves unto him: wherefore I am
assured, that if he know you mean faithfully to serve him as you protest, that
he will not only forget your fault, but do you much more good then to others
of his men: and the better to incite him thereunto, I am of this opinion, that
with your ships you presently return to the Gulf Propontide, and there (if it
be possible) shall find the means to take some Turkish gally, thereby to know
the truth of their intent: and if you will, Belleris shall go with you, and
according to your reports, we will determine what were best for us to do,
whereunto the Pirate willingly condescended: so that the same day he put to
Sea, and with Belleris they coasted the country of Thrace unto Solombre, where
staying secretly at the entry of the Gulf, they continued certain days to
bring their enterprise to pass: mean time Esplandian not being idle, and
thinking upon the news that Crescelin brought, was of advise that Frandalo and
all the other Knights of Great Britain should return to Constantinople to aid
the Emperor (which he desired them to do:) and I (said he) with the King of
Denmark, Gandalin, and Enil, with the garrison of this place, will stay the
return of those that are gone to Tenedos, and having spoken with them, either
we will remain here still, or presently follow you. Esteem I pray you, if this
opinion of Esplandian were liked of by Norandel, for that from ye day he left
queen Minoresse, he had not shown a pleasant countenance, but was so
melancholy that every man wondered thereat: and although the rest were not
infected with the like disease, yet was there none that started back, but all
agreed to Esplandians mind: whereupon without long delay, they imbarqued
themselves with so good a wind, that the seventh day after they arrived at
Constantinople, whereof the Emperor being advertised was exceeding glad, going
to meet them at the haven: and having embraced them one by one, not seeing
Esplandian in their company, he asked where they left him: with that the
Knights told him what intelligence they had received by Crescelins means from
out of Asia, ye great danger prepared against him by the Kings of the Cast, how
he and Belleris were returned to see the countenance of the enemy, and to know
more certain news: and lastly, what the occasion was why Esplandian stayed
behind in the castle of the defended mountain, with ye king of Denmark,
Gandalin and Enil. The Emperor hearing these news, was much abashed, yet like a
stout and valiant Prince dissembled what he thought, and not long after
(minding to prevent all inconveniences) in all haste caused Constantinople and
his other towns, places, and havens of the Sea, to be provided of victuals and
munition as he thought meetest for them: mean time sending forth his captains
throughout all his Empire, to assemble men in all places, that might be ready
when occasion served. Thus did the Emperor take care to provide for his
affairs: wherein Norandel mean time to govern Minoresse, who minding to try him
like gold within the furnace, one day among the rest showed him a harder
countenance than usually she did, faining she had received news that he loved a
lady in great Britain: wherein Norandel by all means sought to excuse himself:
but the more he seemed constant, so much more did the Queen make him believe
she thought the worse of him: wherewith he was in such perplexity, that he
could not choose but say: In faith madam, as far as I perceive, you mean to end
my days, for the wrong you do me is so great, that it cannot well be judged but
by such as know your cruelty: and yet the affection I bear you is so great,
that neither I nor any other can well express the same, if presently they do
not show the beauty and perfection wherewith nature has adorned you. Wherefore
estranging me from your wonted favor, I perceive my life begin to shorten,
wherewith I am not grieved, were it not, that dying, I should loose the means
to do you service, but not the benefit of loyalty: for whether I live or die,
the same shall still accompany my soul unto the place of rest. Which words when
Norandel had uttered, the tears trickled down his cheeks. Whereat Queen
Minoresse took such pity, that forgetting her dissimulation, with a smiling
countenance she answered him and said: My good friend, I now believe you well,
and therefore I pray you pardon my indiscretion: for so it is, that this that I
have done, has been only to avoid the means that should procure you to
attempt the same. Now I well perceive your constancy (according to my counsel
at your last departure hence) remember I beseech you how necessary
dissimulation is to such as are infected with the like disease: I mean, it
should not be between us two, but before the world that they perceive it not.
Madam (said Norandel) I will not, if I may offend your Grace, knowing mine own
constancy so well, that impossible it were for me to withdraw my love from you,
as also not to serve and honor you, yea though you should reward me with the
greatest cruelties that all such as love and are not loved, might endure. While
they thus devised together, the Princess Leonorine (that served them as a
watch) entertained Frandalo and the rest, and making as if she knew not the
cause of Esplandians return to Constantinople, she asked it of them, faining to
be displeased at the same, but they excused him: in like sort they did unto the
Emperor, as you heard before.

CHAP. XLVII.
How Crescelin and Belleris returned to the Castle of the defended mountain,
with a ship that they had taken from the Turks, by whom they understood the
enemies pretense.

NOt long after that Crescelin and Belleris departed from the Castle of the
defended mountain, sailing as secretly as they could along the coast of
Phrigia, fortune favored them so well, that a Brigandine sailing to Tenedos,
charged with Turks fell into their hands, whereof they left but four alive: by
whom they certainly understood, that the army of the Princes of the East was to
depart from thence within a month or six weeks after at the furthest, and sail
to Constantinople, which they hoped easily to surprise, having by their espials
had intelligence that the Emperor made no preparation to withstand them. Which
having heard, they returned without longer stay to give advise unto Esplandian,
who fearing that the Emperor would not be able to withstand their might,
determined to use the aid of all his friends, minding to send Gandalin and Enil
unto them, with Letters to the same effect: especially to his uncle the Emperor
of Rome to whom he wrote as follows.

My Lord, the danger I see prepared against all Christendom, constrains me to
send this messenger unto you, by whom at large your Grace may understand who
great and puissant an Army all the Kings and Potentates of the East (enemies of
our Faith) have lately raised, by the persuasion of Armato king of Turkey,
therewith to overrun not only the Empire of Greece, but all the Land of
Christendom, and wholly to extinguish our Faith and holy Law. And for that all
those of whom you hold the place, have always bin the true Defenders of the
Christian Faith, as also that the case touches you so near, I am of this
advise (my lord) that you ought to spare neither money nor men, but to assemble
your Forces in all haste, and prepare your Vessels to aid and succor the good
Prince, who is the Frontier (as you know) both unto you, and all the Potentates
that hold the Law of Christ. I write the like unto the King my Father, and to
most part of all the Christian Lords, to whom I send Gannalin. And for that
Enil has in charge to certify your Grace by word of mouth, what it shall
please you to demand: I will not trouble you with many lines, beseeching you to
give credit unto him, as to my self. The like he wrote to the King of
Sardaigne: which two Messages Enil had in charge, to whom he gave ample
Instructions and Remembrances of the Advertisements and secret Intelligences he
had received from the Turkish Coast: not only of the number of men both on
horse and foot, but also of the multitude of their Vessels and other warlike
Instruments: commanding Gandalin to go with him till he came unto Cicilia,
where he should provide shipping to sail into Great Britain to Amadis his
father, and from thence to France unto king Perion, then to Sobradise to
Galaor, likewise to king Bruneau, to Quedragant, Dragonis, and Gosquilant: to
whom he sent several Letters. Gandalin carrying them likewise the same
Instructions that Enil had unto the Emperor, commanding them expressly to assure
them all, that he would not depart from the Castle of the defended mountain,
before their arrival there, but meant to keep while breath was in his body.

Gandalin and Enil had so good and prosperous a weather, that in less than
fifteen days after their departure, they passed the Country of Messine, and
landed at Saragource, where Gandalin hired a Brigandine to execute his charge.
And to the end you may understand what effect their Messages did work, I will
leave Gandalin traversing the Mediteranean Sea, and entering into the Ocean, and
speak of Enil that arrived at Ostre, where as then he found the Emperor
accompanied with King Florestan, devising only of hawks and hounds: but when
they espied Enil, presuming he brought some ill news, they asked him where he
left Esplandian? Enil knowing how to behave himself, kissed the Letters, and
gave one to the Emperor, the other to the king of Sardaigne: which having read,
and perceiving them to be of credit, took him apart, where he discovered unto
them all you heard before. With that the Emperor leaving Enil with King
Florestan, went unto the Gentlemen and Knights that then were present, and said
unto them: My friends, we must all to the Wars: my Nephew Esplandian has
advertised me (by this Gentleman expressly sent unto me) that the king of Turkey
and all his Allies are in arms, and have raised a mighty Army to assail my
brother the Emperor of Constantinople: but I vow to God (if he give me life and
help) that before the month of September next ensuing, I will be there with
such a Force, that I will make him twice repent how he so rashly does assail,
and learn him to defend himself. Wherefore let every man be ready, for I will
go my self in person: And calling king Florestan, he asked him if he would go
with him? My Lord (said he) to morrow I will send to all my Ports and Havens
that all the Ships of War that can be found may be in a readiness: mean time I
will in all parts assemble men to do as my Nephew Esplandian has required. My
Lord (said Enil) my Lord Esplandian has written by Gandalin to king Amadis,
and other of his friends, whom he has desired to join with you, so that I hope
about one time all your Armies will be ready, and that without long staying for
each other, you will assemble all together. Truly (said king Florestan) it was
well devised. With that diverse captains were dispatched into sundry places to
give order for their men, and to ballast, rigge, and prepare Vessels for their
Voyage into the East. Gandalin on the other side coasting the Isles of Majorque
and Minorque, leaving Guinea and Barbary, passed the straits of Gibraltar, and
had so good a wind, that in few days without staying in Spain, he arrived in
Great Britain with King Amadis, who as then continued in London, and presented
him with the Letter that Esplandian sent, showing him likewise his charge by
word of mouth, the good and evil adventures that he had since he departed from
Mirefleur, and among the rest the overthrow of the Turkish army on the Sea, the
taking of King A^mato, the occasion why the siege rose up before the Castle of
the defended mountain, the arrival of Gastilles, the taking of Alfarin, and of
the captain of Tesifant, the surprising of Galatia, the loss o^ Urganda: and
lastly, all what you have read at large in the chapters going before. And to
the end my lord (said he) that order may be had to prevent the inconvenience he
foreseeth to be prepared against all Christendom (if it be not succored) he
has expressly willed me to show you, that he has had certain intelligence,
that all the Kings of the East parts have sworn and promised together to
overrun all Christendom: which is very likely, considering the great
preparations and assembly of men they have already made in the Isle of Tenedos:
which is such, that as our spies report, they are at least six hundred sail of
Ships, and about four or five hundred thousand men. God will help us if it
pleased him, said the King Amadis, for my part, I will do what possible I may,
and will likewise advertise King Perion my father, and my brother Galaor. My
Lord (said Gandalin) I have also charge to travel unto them, and likewise unto
Gasquillan, Don Brunean, Quedragant, and others, to whom Esplandian has
written in like sort as he has done to you, and has expressly given me in
charge to see King Luisart, and do his humble commendations unto him. It is
great reason (said the king:) nevertheless I am of this opinion, that before my
mother the Queen you do not once declare the occasion of your coming, but give
her to understand that all is well, but not unto the king, if you find him
alone: for he is a man (as every one well knows) to take all things with
patience as they shall fall out: and because my Sons affairs require no delay,
I pray you Gandalin after you have refreshed your self a day or two, go on your
journey as you have in charge. So Gandalin that day remained there, during
which time Queen Oriane talked long with him: the next day he departed to see
King Luisart and Queen Brisanne at Mirefleur, who knowing he came of message
from Esplandian were exceeding glad: the Queen, although she were wise and very
aged, yet could not change her woman's nature, but before the king spoke any
word asked him for her son: but Gandalin (accustomed readily to devise excuses,
as he had been instructed by King Amadis) told her that he had left him in the
firm Isle not well at ease by reason of his long travel, but not so ill (said
he) as that he could not have taken pain to come hither and see you, but he
feared lest his sickness would increase: where he thought it better for him to
keep his chamber a while, than to entertain a long and envious ague for a long
space: which the Queen easily believed: and for the hope she had shortly to see
him, she made no account thereof: nevertheless, the same evening Gandalin told
King Luisart all that you heard before, wisely excusing himself of the speech
he used before him unto the Queen, as King Amadis had given him charge: wherein
king Luisart commended him, and for the rest he promised to think thereon while
he traveled unto those with whom he had to do. In this sort Gandalin being
dispatched, returned to king Amadis, who in ye mean time (persuaded by Queen
Oriane) wrought a marriage for him, as you shall hear. You have read in the
beginning of our history of the services the gentlewoman of Denmark did for
them, and the things wherein she and Gandalin had been exercised: wherefore it
was reason, that having been partakers of their youthful toys, she should also
taste some of their prosperous fortunes. Wherefore Queen Oriane moved king
Amadis to make a marriage between them two, but he thought the match unfit,
because the gentlewoman was already aged, and Gandalin being young and lusty:
nevertheless,) as all women that are wise and of a quick conceit, can bring
their enterprises to effect, the Queen found means to get the kings consent:
whereby Gandalin was no sooner come from Mirefleur, but he took him aside, and
said unto him: Gandalin, the queen is desirous to have you stay with us, not
only for the love she knows I bear unto you, but also for the good she
wishes you. And for this cause she would have you marry with the gentlewoman
of Denmark, whom she loves, and will do much both for her and you, if you
consent thereto: you know her long time since both to be wise, good, and
virtuous, and for my part I pray you and counsel you thereunto. Gandalin would
gladly have excused himself, and to say the truth, he was too young for so old a
match: nevertheless having from his infancy learned to confirm his will to that
of Amadis, he was content to do as pleased him: in such sort, that in less than
three days after the marriage was celebrated and ended. Mean time king Amadis
took the letters and instructions that Gandalin should carry to Gasquillan and
king Brunean, and sent them by a gentleman of his named Handro, cousin german
to the Countess of Flanders, desiring them as much as possible they might, to
aid his son in his so good a cause: but the next week following, Gandalin more
affected to the service of Esplandian than to court his wife, departed from
thence to travel into France unto king Perion, and from him to Sobradise to
Galaor. Mean time king Amadis sent for all the Pilots, masters, and mariners
of his country that he could find, commending King Arban of Norgales, to take
care for all things requisite for the enterprise and charges of such a voyage,
both for men and vessels. In this manner did the affairs touching these wars
proceed through the greatest part of Europe while al ye kings in the East by
little and little assembled themselves together, as you shall hear.

CHAP. XLVIII.
How the great City of Constantinople was besieged by the Princes of the East,
and of the sallies that were made by those of the City to keep them from the
same.

THe army of the Pagan Kings daily assembling in the Isle of Tenedos, the
Emperor mean time fortified his city of Constantinople both with men and
victuals in the best manner he could, commanding those that had charge of his
army by Sea to cause all his vessels to come into the Haven of the Town, which
he caused to be barred with a chain, that on that side he might be cut of
danger. Then he sent diverse brigandines unto Natolia, to discover the Pagans
army, and bring him certain news: Mean time, the country people reaped all
their corn, and brought it to the City. Within eight days after the Brigandines
that were sent forth, discovered in the straights of Hellespont the great Fleet
of the Turks that lay at Abidos, where they stayed a certain time to take in
victuals and other munitions necessary for their ships. Whereof the Emperor
being advertised, caused his men to muster, giving Frandalo charge of the
Dragon-gate, so called, because that at the foundation of the city, when it was
named Brisance, there was found a mavelous Dragon under the foundation of the
gate, which Dragon was bound, chained, and nourished so long time, that it was
thought most strange. Norandel had charge of the Gate called Equiline, and
Gastilles his nephew of that called The Well, so named of a great and profound
well that stood hard by it. And causing the other gates to be rampired up,
provided for all things as a wise and valiant captain should do in such a case.
With that a Grecian that had bin taken by the Turks, came into the City, and
assured them for certain that the Souldan of Liquie was himself in person with
king Armato, and almost all the Kings of the east, having two hundred Galleys,
as well great as small, fifty great ships, thirty mahomes, and one and twenty
caf^rds, that are thips not much unlike to galleys: besides thirty foistes and
diverse brigandines, barques, galions and sciffs, where in they had laid their
victuals and other munitions: and for their number of footmen, they might be
about some three hundred and fifty thousand men: saying likewise, that Alphorax
had the chief charge at Sea, and Armato on land, and that their determination
was never to depart from Constantinople, till they had destroyed it, and from
thence would go to Rome, and further if they could. The sixth day after, this
great Army (passing the gulf of Propontide) came into the straights of
Constantinople, entering in the great sea, where they remained during the siege,
robbing all the country about, where first they stayed a week before they landed
any of their men: mean time, certain galleys and small ships set forward to
make an alarm in the haven, from whence (to their great loss) they were
repulsed, for that six of the principallest of them were sunk in the Sea.
Nevertheless, the next day following they began to land, and in great numbers
thought to win the gate: there is were many brave blows both with Sword and Spear
given on both parts, and many a valiant man ended their days, and became meat
to fishes. There the Knights of Great Britain showed themselves not to be
unacquainted with such dangers, and who so had beheld Norandel, Frandalo,
Manley, and Talanque repulse the enemy, that thought to advance themselves,
might easily judge with what desire they f^ught. But what should I stand longer
to describe this conflict? To conclude, the gate was defended, and the enemies
repulsed from the same, yet their number was so great, that notwithstanding the
valor of the Emperors men they landed and lay within two bows shot of the City,
they of the City being forced to retire. The Pagans being on land, divided
themselves into four parts, in such sort, that the City was so well besieged,
that not a man could enter or come forth without their leave. Wherefore King
Armato presently caused great number of ladders to be prepared, the most part
of them double, hoping before the week were ended, to assault, take, spoil, and
destroy the City. But they within slept neither night nor day, but made
artificial fires, with all other things requisite for such a charge. The Pagans
stayed not long to execute their purpose, so that upon a monday in the morning,
they came in great fury to set fire on the gates, and to seal the Town,
although for that time they lost their labors, and many of them their lives,
where in the end they were constrained to retire to their no little shame and
great confusion. And in their retreat, Norandel with four or five hundred men
issued at a postern-gate, and set upon them behind, which put them in such
fear, that they drove them to their tents. Yet not being content with this
first repulse, they determined on Friday after either to die, or enter into the
town. And the day appointed, ran unto the walls, where the number of the
assailants was so great, and the assault given in so many places both by sea
and land, that if God had not provided for them, it is most certain the town
had been taken: especially on Frandalos side, for the most part of his men fled
away from their guard: whereby it happened, that more then a hundred Turks
mounted on the walls, but they stayed not long, for that the Emperor (who
during the assault stayed in the midst of the City with the rest of all his
power to aid such places as had most need) advertised thereof, marched to
Frandalos quarter, and with such force repulsed the enemy, that he made them
glad to get them thence, in such sort, that they received no less loss at the
second assault, then at the first. It is true, that ten of the Knights of Great
Britain were slain at the conflict, which much grieved their companions,
especially for the loss of Ledarin, of Feiarque, of Trys, and Imosil of
Burgundy. This second assault having had such issue as you heard before, Armato
went to counsel with all the other kings and princes to know what they should
do, where it was concluded to keep their tents, and so enclose the town: for to
get it by assault, they knew full well they should but l^se their labors,
wherefore they meant no more to try the same: but many times made skirmishes
with that City to their no little loss. Thus they passed above a month without
doing any thing worthy the rehearsing, till one day among the rest, a
gentlewoman belonging to the Souldan of Liquy came on message to the gate that
Norandel had in charge, of whom she asked if the Knight of the great Serpent
were among them. Wherefore? said Norandel. I bring him (said she) a letter from
the chief and most courteous knight in all Asia. Norandel desirous to
understand the contents of the letter, said he was the man. Then look upon it
(said she) at your leisure: And if you think it good return an answer: with
that she turned her horse, and rid the same way that she came. Which done,
Norandel opened the letter, the contents whereof are these.

ROdrigue Great Souldan of Liquie, Friend to the gods, and Enemy to their
Enemies, Defender of the Pagan Law:
To thee that call thy self Knight of the Great Serpent, greeting:
Know thou that the cause of our long Voyage by Sea to enter into these
Countries, has been in hope to be revenged of the Outrages that my Uncle
Armato King of Turkey has received at the hands of thee and thy companions, not
having once offended thee: and although we are most sure of the destruction of
the wicked Emperor that favors thee in thy so wicked and damnable
enterprises, and that before long time be past, both he and his shall end their
lives by our hands, yet should I be much grieved, that this misfortune should
happen unto thee before I have proved my body against thine, because of the
renown that is spread of thee throughout the world. Wherefore choose whether
thou will accept of the Combat between us two alone, of ten to ten, a hundred
to a hundred, or of greater number as thou think good. Swearing unto thee by
all our gods, that those thou shall bring with thee for that cause, shall
receive no more displeasure than thy self, unless it be by such as are ordained
to fight with them, according to the Agreement we shall make. Wherefore make me
an answer worthy such a Knight, that thereby thy honor be not stained.


Norandel having read this Letter, showed it to his friends, who were all of
advice to grant the Souldan his request. But Norandel would determine nothing
before he made the Emperor acquainted, under whose conduct during the siege, he
had submitted himself: whereupon he went to speak with him, and having showed
him the Contents of the Letter he had received in Esplandians name, and the
counsel of his companions, the Emperor asked him what he thought therein. My
Lord (said he) if it pleases you that I, and nine others which I will choose,
shall undertake this combat, you shall do us much favor. My good friend (said
the Emperor) you see the estate wherein I am, and the time wherein I ought to
keep, not only you and others wherein I put my whole affiance, but the meanest
soldier in this City. Nevertheless, I will so much agree unto your will, that
if you and your companions think it good, I am content you do it. My Lord (said
Norandel) both I and they most humbly crave it of your Grace. Well then (said
the Emperor) if it pleases God, you shall win honor thereby, as you have done
before in many as perilous adventures as this is. Norandel thanked the
Emperor, and the same day caused his Knights of Great Britain to be assembled
together, by whose advice there was an Answer framed to the Souldans Letter,
the contents whereof do follow.

THe Knights that are servants to Jesus Christ, being at this time with the
Emperor of Constantinople, for the defense and augmentation of the Christians
name,
to thee Rodrigue Souldan of Liquy, like greeting thou have sent unto the
Knight of the great Serpent:
A Gentlewoman that says she belongs unto thee, that has given us a Letter
directed unto him, the contents whereof are in two points. In the first, thou
complainest of the enterprises he has made against thine uncle King Armato: in
the other thou show a desire thou have to prove thy person against his, or a
greater number against a greater, as he shall think it good. But for that the
Knight thou writest unto at this present is not here, nor in place whereas he
can return thee answer, we thought it convenient in his behalf to satisfy thy
request, and to accept the offers thou have made unto him: assuring thee, that
here is the son of a King, and nine other Knights with him that will fight with
thee and as many more of thine, if thou be content therewith: Advise thy self
then herein, and having received thy answer, with safe conduct safely to go and
come, we will not fail to be in the place where you shall appoint.


This Letter sealed up, Norandel gave it to one of his squires to bear it to
the Souldan, who made him answer that he desired only to prove his body
against the Knight of the great Serpent and no other. But (said he) if those
that sent you hither have any desire to fight against ten of my Knights, they
shall find them ready, being as great gentlemen and of as high a lineage as
they are. And as touching their safe conduct, I will so well provide for it,
that they shall have occasion to think well of me: wherefore return thou unto
them, and let me know their answer. With that the Squire having his dispatch,
went and came so often between them, that in the end the combat of ten to ten
was fully agreed upon, and the Lists appointed hard before the Town: whither
the next morning the ten Knights went, whose names were as follows. Norandel,
Garvate of the dreadful Dale, Talanque, Manley, Ambor de Galdel, Elian le
Delibere, Bravor son of Balan, Trion cousin german to Queen Briolany, Imosil de
Burgoigne, and Listoran of the silver bridge.

CHAP. XLIX.
How the ten Christian Knights entered into the Lists, and of the Combat
between them and ten Pagan knights that belonged to the Souldan of Liquie.

ALl that night the ten Knights watched in the principallest Church of
Constantinople, confessing themselves, and praying unto God as if they should
presently die: The next day as the Sun began to appear, the Emperor accompanied
of diverse Noblemen, the Emperess, the Princess Leonorine, Queen Minoresse, with
diverse other Ladies and Gentlewomen, came unto them, where they heard Mass
devoutly; that done, they returned unto the Palace, where Norandel and his
nine companions armed themselves, the Ladies serving them for squires, in such
sort, as Norandel received such favor at Queen Minoresses hands, that she sound
means to help to buckle on every piece of his Armor one after the other. As she
was busy about him, he found means to say unto her: Madam, the honor that you
do me, makes me so courageous, that this day I hope to make it known to those
that shall behold us fight, how much my strength is now increased by your
means. But if it pleases you to bestow some favor upon me, that I might bear
the same about my Armor, I should account my self for one of the most happy
Knights living on the earth. My good friend (said she) the most precious Jewel
that I can give unto you, is my heart, that shall acc^mpany yours, to the end
that being united together, they may the better preserve both your life and
mine. And taking a Bracelet of Gold, that from her infancy she had always kept,
she tied it about his right arm. And this circle (said she) being round as you
behold it, shall without ceasing be witness of our loves, serving as a Rampart
to this Army: which (if it pleases God) in defending, it shall so well defend
his master, that he shall return in as good health as I desire he should.
Norandel thanked her most heartily: mean time Leonorine entertained Talanque,
Manley, and the rest, to whom she said: My friends, I hope the Lord will show
you so much grace, that the Victory shall be yours, for the Combat you take in
hand is not for to defend the honor of a Gentlewoman, but the glorious Faith of
Christ. If therefore it be so, the strength proceeds from him, be you then
well assured, that he will impart so much to you as you shall want. Madam (said
Talanque) at other times we have been at the like feast, from whence we have
returned to the great expense of those that called us thither: as (if it be
Gods will) we hope this day to do the like. Wherewith taking their leaves of
her, they went to find their horses, and being mounted, the Emperor with great
number of Knights and Gentlewomen brought them to the gate: And committing them
to God, the ten Knights marched bravely to the place of Combat, where the
Souldan with a great number of his friends met them, asking them whom the
Emperor had appointed Judge on their side. Souldan (said Norandel) we desire no
other Judge then your self, that are accounted a courteous and most faithful
Prince. By all my gods (said he) I had rather die a thousand deaths, then you
should endure the least injury in the world: we believe it well (said all the
knights) With that he caused them to enter into the Lists at one end, and the
ten Pagans at the other: but before they entered into fight, he called Norandel
and his companions, and said unto them: My friends, I pray you let me show you
what the custom of my Country is in such affairs: then if you think good, you
may observe it; if not, my knights shall keep your custom if it be indifferent.
Show us then (said Norandel) what it is, and if the same be reasonable, we will
not refuse it. You shall understand (said he) that all knights justle one
against one, to the end that all men may know the excellency of the Victor: And
if any one be overthrown, he that is on the horse back shall not assail the
other before their companions have run out their course: Then he that is on
horseback shall a light, and shall fight it out by dint of sword with him that
before was overthrown. Because it chances oftentimes, that the best knights
that are, fall into such inconvenience, only by the fault and means of bad
horses, which cause them diverse times either to fail in striking of their
enemy, or else not to run their right course: which cannot be excused in th^se
that are on foot, to whom it is permitted to succor each other if need require.
Truly (said Norandel) that custom is well ordained, and I and my companions will
observe the same: wherewith the Souldan went out of the Lists, causing his
Heralds to proclaim the fight: With that a Pagan stepped forth against
Norandel, that refused him not: but covering himself with his shield, they met
so fiercely, that their spears were broken to their wrests, meeting body to
body with so great strength, that the Pagan fell over his horse tail, lying
flat upon the ground: but Norandel had no hurt, only that his horses shoulder
was thrust out of joint, so that he lighted off, staying till the rest had run
their courses, as he had promised. Then Garvate du Val Craintif ran against one
of the other, and they charged each other in such sort, that their feet failing
in their stirrops, they were both cast out of their saddles. Then Talanque ran
against the third Pagan, to whom fortune was more favorable then to any of the
rest: for they ran so well, that neither of them once started aside, or moved
in their saddles, and yet brake their spears in many pieces. The like chanced
to Manley and Ambor, but not to Bravor the son of Balan, for he hit him that
ran against him right in the breast, and threw him from his horse. And
presently therewith Imosil of Burgundy had so great a stroke with a lance that
his eyes started in his head, and was therewith so much astonished, that his
horse bare him to the side of the barriers, where he fell down flat. Elian le
delibere, and he that ran against him, were constrained to hold by their horses
mains. Listoran of the bridge missed his stroke, and his enemy likewise: the
like happened to Trion, and the last that ran with him. That done, all they
that were on horse back, lighted down to fight with swords, and there began
between them such a fight as the like had not been seen of so few Knights
together, maintaining themselves so brabely one against the other, that the
strongest of them was so weary and out of breath, that they were constrained to
rest. And as Norandel leaned upon his Sword which he rested on the ground, the
bracelet that Minoresse gave him fell downward upon his arm, which put him in
so good remembrance of her, that clean forgetting all the travel he had taken
before, he spoke so loud that every man might hear, and said: By God, sir
Knight, this rest does not beseem us: many men will from henceforth be in doubt
of the great glory that now we mean to win. Wherefore let every man show forth
what we can do, and let no man spare. Wherewith taking the little piece of his
shield that rested in his hand, and lifting up his arm, he gave so great a blow
unto his enemy, that he made him reel therewith: and doubling it struck him so
surely on the helmet, that with the blow the Turk was forced to kneel down, and
let his sword fall out of his hand: which Norandel seized upon being ready to
strike off his head, if he had not cried him mercy: which Talanque and Manley
perceiving, employed their forces in such manner, that it might easily be
judged they would soon obtain the victory. As for Bravor he had already
stricken his knight down, wherefore he ran to help the rest, and Norandel
likewise. With the which help it soon appeared, that they which rested yet to
overcome would not long resist: for in short space they found themselves in
such extremity, that unless the Souldan of Liquie had desired the Christian
Knights to stay a while, they had all died: but calling Norandel unto him, he
said: I pray you (said qe) proceed no further in this combat, and content your
selves that I account my Knights for vanquished, as in truth they are, and so
hardly handled, that the force you shall from henceforth use against them,
shall more be holden for a kind of cruelty than any chivalry. Nevertheless if
my request may take no place with you, do as you think good. Souldan (said
Norandel) if they acknowledge it at our hands and ask us mercy, they shall not
fail to have it: for it was never our custom to use force to such as could not
stand against us. Content your selves (said he) that I that am their Lord yield
you the victory, and I pray you therefore show mercy unto them, swearing unto
you by my crown (if you do them so much good) that while I live, I will not be
unmindful of the same. With that the ten Christian Knights went out of the
field, and mounon their horses, took their way unto the City, where the Emperor
stayed for them, for he had seen the issue of the combat, and now they
returned victors: but he heard not what words had past between them, till they
being lighted off their horses, told him what was done, for the which he
praised God, esteeming more of them for their courtesy they had shown unto
the enemy.

CHAP. L.
How Queen Calafre came to aid the Pagans, and of the mavelous assault that
she gave to the City of Constantinople.

THe renown of this War undertaken by the Kings, Taborlans, Souldans, Califfes,
and Princes dwelling in Tartaria, India, Arabia and other countries in the
East, against the Emperor and his Empire of Constantinople, was spread so far
abroad, that it was known to the puisant Queen Calafre reigning in Califorine,
a most fertile and pleasant country confining on the head of the river
Borisleness, hard by the foot of the Riffee mountains. This country whereof I
speak, was sometimes peopled with good Knights and men of all quarters, but the
women upon malice devised a means to kill them all, establishing a law among
themselves, that from that time forwards they would acknowledge for Lady and
Queen one of their own country w^men, governing themselves as the Amazons used
to do. Whereby it was* not lawful for any of them to use the company of men
above once or twice a year, upon the days and times by them app^inted, when
they went of their own country and used their neighbors help, with whom God
knows if they found not means to make them pay the usury of the time lost, in
such sort, that most of them returned home with child: but the bringing up of
their children was far different, for the maiden children were kept alive,
burning their right paps, but not the men children, for as soon as they were
born they put them to death, having agreed not to suffer one alive, or else so
few, that they very easily might overcome them. For this cause oftentimes they
warred against the Tartarians b^rdering on their country, putting them to great
trouble by diverse and continual invasions, as well by sea as by land. In their
laws and customs they observed so great rigor, as that if any man (by
casualty or otherwise) fell into their hands, he proved for food unto a great
number of grissons, nourished among them when they were young, being so tame and
gentle, that never any hauk knew better the Faulkoners lure, then those gentle
birds knew the voice of her that ordinarily fed them. To come unto the point,
this queen of Califorine being a woman of great spirit, valiant, hardy, young,
fair, and of good behavior, hearing of the wars undertaken against the
Christians, was desirous to be there, not for any ill she wished them, but
only for to know them, and to see their country that bare so great renown. And
for that cause she assembled great numbers of the principal Ladies of her
country, showing them what honor they might obtain in that voyage: which may
peradventure be such (said she) that by our force and great prowess we may
greatly augment our Empire, being feared and redoubted of each man, and not
continue always buried among these mountains, as they in times past did, of
whom at this present we now possess and enjoy the place. The Queen in this sort
could so well persuade them, that they moved with a mavelous desire to go
with her, presently prepared their ships, and set sail for Thracia, with so
good and prosperous a wind, that the tenth day after the assaults of
Constantinople, they arrived in the army of Armato, where they were honorably
received: and after diverse speeches used by the Souldan of Liquy, and other
Princes of the camp unto the Queen of Califorine, specially touching their
determination concerning that great enterprise, she being sorry they had done
so little against the town, desired them that she might once have leave to try
her fortune against it, by means that she would use. And the better to induce
them thereunto, she told them she had fifty Griffons that would not fail (being
let out of their cages) to seize upon the Christians without hurting of her
women, because they knew them and had been nourished with them. And while they
take their flight (said she) I will give such an assault against the town, that
without doubt we will enforce the same: for if the Emperors soldiers appear
but to defend the walls; my Griffons shall be ready to carry them clean away,
as the Merlin does the Lard. But to the end (said she) your men receive no
hurt, let them abide within their tents till they be shut into their cages.
When King Armato and the Souldan of Liquie heard the great zeal and affection
she showed to employ her forces, as also the invention that she had, they all
agreed that the next day after she should do what liked her Whereupon she sent
presently to her that kept the Griffons, that she should give them nothing for
to eat of all yt day, yt when they meant to use them at the assault, they might
greedier: and further sent word by sound of drum, that all her companies should
be ready the next day early in the morning, to give assault unto the City.
Queen Calafre having in this manner provided for her enterprise, at the time
appointed all her women armed according to their manner (the most part of them
bearing bows) ran with great fury unto the walls, and with their ladders began
to mount up: with that the alarm went about the city, all men running to defend
the same: and as they were some upon the walls and other places of defense, the
Queen made sign to let the Griffons loose, which being hungry and flying over
the town, seized upon such as they could find abroad: wherewith the Emperors
soldiers were in so great fear, that most part of them that fought, forsook
the walls to hide themselves. Alas what pity was it to see soldiers, citizens,
knights, and others, yea women and little children, and all whatsoever they
could get into their claws taken up into the air, and sometimes having taken
them up, they let them fall upon the stones, whereby they had a strange and
cruel death: surely if God had not kept the City better than those that had the
charge, it is most sure it had been taken at that time. But there happened a
strange case, for as the Griffons held their prey, and that the Knights of
great Britain with some small number of others, resisted the assault made by
the women, the Turks (that had been advertised not to come out of their tents
while they assailed the town) moved with too greedy a desire to sack the City
which they thought surely had been taken, ran unto the assault making such a
noise, that the Griffons (feeding on their preys) left the bodies they had
seized upon, and flying up again, seized on them that they saw come running to
the town, whereof in short space after they made so great a butchery, that more
than four hundred Turks were presently slain by them: mean time those within
the town perceiving that good fortune, did so fiercely repulse the
Californiens, that their principal women lay dead within the ditches: wherewith
the Queen was forced to retire, knowing her enterprise would not take effect as
she desired it should, not by reason of her soldiers, but in that they kept
not in as they had promised. Wherewith she commanded to take the birds again,
but the Falconers could not by any means make them to come in, before they had
slain and devoured above a thousand Turks and others, whereof they only sucked
the blood. Wherewith King Armato and the Souldan of Liquie were so grieved,
that from thenceforth they began to show so hard a countenance to the Queen,
that she was in the mind to return into her country, not offering from that
time once to give stroke with sword to their advantage. Yet not long after she
was appeased, and fought with King Amadis, as it shall be showed you at large
in the end of this our fifth Book. And that we may have the better means to
attain thereto, we will now return again unto the Christian Princes, that
assembled their powers and forces to help the Emperor, imbarquing themselves,
as presently you shall hear. But before they arrived at Constantinople, many
good Knights both of Great Britain and others were slain within the City, not
only in the assaults made against it by the Pagans, but at the last assault
made by the Queen Calafre, among the which, none were so much lamented as
Ledarin de Faiarque, Trys, Imosil of Burgundy, and the two sons of the Giant
Balan.

CHAP. LI.
How the Christian Princes as well of the East as West parts, assembled their
Forces to aid the Emperor of Constantinople, and of their navigation.

IF you have read the discourse of this our History, it has been showed you
before, how Enil went unto the Emperor of Rome, and Florestan King of
Sardaigne, and what became of Gandalin after he had passed the Straights of
Gibraltar, and entered in the Ocean Sea, even to Great Britain and other
places, where he found King Amadis and others, to whom he had charge to go: Now
we must declare the rest. You shall therefore understand, that Gandalin having
sojourned eight days in London, more by the commandment of king Amadis and
Queen Oriane, than for the pleasure that he took in the woman they had caused
him to marry, knowing the affairs wherein he had left his companions, departed
from thence, and traveled so long, that he arrived in France, and went unto
King Perion to whom he gave the letter that his son and grandchild sent unto
him: and withal declared the state of the East countries, as they then were,
with the inconvenience that might fall unto all Christendom, if the Empire of
Constantinople were in obedience to the infidels. So well could Gandalin tell
his tale, that the good old King Perion moved with a holy zeal, determined to
go himself in person, and to take with him great quantity of ships and men,
furnished for the wars. Gandalin stayed not long with them, but while he
prepared himself, he went into Scotland, Norway, Sobradise, Denmark and
Sweathland, and did his Embassages so well, that all the Kings and Princes to
whom he went, determined with all speed to aid Esplandian, in such sort, that
in short time after their ships were ready, and those of Sweathland, Norway,
and Denmark, come unto the port of Suer, from whence setting sail, they coasted
along Freseland, Holland, and Braband, till they arrived at Bulloigne, where
King Perion had prepared great number of Ships, Hulkes, and other vessels:
which being furnished with men, victuals, and munition necessary for the wars,
hoised sail and put to sea. And coasting Normandy, came to little Brittaigne
where they ankered in S. Mathews Haven, where the Kings, Luisart and Amadis
accompanied of Grumedan and diverse other Knights, were arrived to refresh
themselves: having passed the Isle of Sorlingue, the Irish men imbarqued
themselves at the cape Antiquan, and the Scots at cape Balso. And having sailed
the way that the Brittons had past, joined with the Western Princes that went
that voyage, in such sort, that within three days after they set sail, and
having a Northeast wind, they discovered the coast of Spain, passing the Port
of Finis terre in compostelle: after that the cape S. Vincent: and drawing in
the left side, they passed the straights of Gibraltar, and leaving Barbary and
Guinde on the right hand, sailed toward Tamar, Austora, and Lagarde, minding to
leave Majorque and Minorque, to enter into the straights of Busina and Monaco,
and from thence to sail to the ports of Elese and Corse, where they met with
Florestan King of Sardaigne and his Fleet, but before they arrived there,
fortune was so contrary unto them, that certain of their Gallions could not
follow the ships, but stayed behind to the number of eight, being so scattered,
that they made account they had been lost. Nevertheless, the next day they
arrived all at Port S. Luce, where without longer staying they passed forward
to go to Regi, where the army of the Emperor of Rome, (coming from Osty) lay at
anchor staying for them. Where they continued six days, not only to take in
fresh water, but also to calk and mend their ships and other vessels that had
need: the seventh day having a good wind, they hoysed ankers, and setting sail,
coasted along the country of Morea, coming to Cape de Malvasie, where the wind
fell somewhat contrary: but in the end the sea waxing calm, put forward to Cape
Calon, and the Isle of Negrepont: and entering into the Archipelago they
discovered the side of the Cape Athos, till they approached Galiopi, leaving
the I Will of Tenedos, because they would not be discovered by the Turks that
Armato had set there to keep a passage for his victuals to be brought unto the
army: where they stayed not long but they entered into the goulfe of
Propontide, coasting Thrace, till they came unto the Port of Salombre, which is
not above thirty miles from the City of Constantinople, where they landed, that
they might the better approach the Pagans camp: with that they agreed among
them that King Childadan and Quedragant should be Generals of the army by Sea:
and having left sufficient number of men for the furnishing and safe keeping of
their ships, their Fleet sailed toward Constantinople, hoping to set upon
Alphorax and his army by Sea before they should perceive them. But it fell out
otherwise, for the Turks that had spies in all places, discovered them, not
suffering Alphorax to fight, desiring him most earnestly only to keep the
entry of the straits, to take all means from the town to be victualled on that
side. Which King Childadan and Quedragant understanding, would not hazard
themselves, but ankered within half a mile of the enemy, staying for king
Luisart, the Emperor of Rome, and those that marched by land, mean time giving
diverse skirmishes to the enemy with their Pinnaces, but Alphorax for all that
would not leave his hole, lying as close as possibly he could: on the other
side Armato and his company being advertised of the great aid that came toward
the town, caused their forces to assemble, determining to keep the side of the
great sea, by the which they might easilier recover victuals, as well from
Natolia as out of Tartaria. The Kings Amadis, Perion, and others made such
haste, that the ninth day after they encamped themselves in the sight of
Constantinople right before their enemies, in a place that seemed most
convenient. But if the Pagans at the first were much abashed to see those
succors, the Emperor and those within the town were not much less, doubting it
had been some new forces come against the town: for they had not any
intelligence of the sending of Gandalin and Enil to the Christian princes, that
brought with them a multitude both of ships and men, as well Knights as others.
Now to return to the Christians Fleet: King Childadan knowing that Alphorax
played the fox, desired Quedragant (having equal power with him) to be content
that he with threescore Pinnaces might skirmish with him, that thereby if it
were possible, he might provoke him to come out, which he agreed unto:
wherefore setting sail, he made toward his enemy, so near, that they were
ready to fight hand to hand: nevertheless Alphorax for that time would not
touch the bait, but entered farther in the straights: wherewith King Childadan
retired, and came unto the haven of the City, making the bravest show that
might be seen: those of Constantinople perceiving the Handirols and Streamers
of Great Britain, and of other Christian Princes, made him answer with the
like, and so high, that the noise of the Trumpets, Clerons, and Tabers was so
great, that Armato and all the Pagans might easily hear it. With that King
Childadan was received by the Emperor, Norandel, and others, to whom he showed
what aid was come unto them, and what princes had taken the voyage in hand. In
good faith (said the Emperor) they bind me for ever unto them, yet am I much
abashed how they understood of the wars between Armato and me. What? my Lord
(said Childadan) did Esplandian never tell you thereof? No I assure you (said
the Emperor) nor any of his companions, as far as I know. Is he not in the City
(said the King?) In good truth (said Norandel) he would not leave the castle of
the defended mountain, minding to keep it, if the Pagans came to besiege it.
Assure your selves (said Childadan) he will not long stay there before King
Amadis sends for him: for we determine presently to give battle, and if he
should fail at such a journey, it would grieve him ever after. Much other talk
had the Knights of Constantinople with Childadan and those that bare him
company, where he stayed till the next day in the morning, that he entered into
his ships to return unto Quedragant.

CHAP. LII.
How Esplandian and the king of Denmark were sent for by Gandalin that went
unto the Castle the defended mountain, where they stayed, attending the succors
of the Christian Princes, and of a Letter that the Souldan of Liquie and Queen
Calafre wrote unto King Amadis and Esplandian.

KIng Childadan returned to Quedragant as you heard before, and the army on
land encamped in fight of the enemy, Amadis was advertised by those that had
bin in the City of Constantinople, that Esplandian and the King of Denmark were
at the Castle of the defended mountain, whereupon he sent Gandalin to fetch
them, Gandalin took shipping, and had so good a wind, that without any
adventure he arrived there, where he declared unto them how King Amadis and
almost all the Christian Princes were encamped within half a mile of the Pagans
host, and al what he and Enil had done concerning their charge. And because
(said Gandalin) that our men are determined shortly to give them battle, they
pray you to come unto them. Truly (said Esplandian) Gandalin my friend, you
have wrought the matter well, and I thank you for the pains that you have
taken. My Lord (said the King of Denmark) are you not determined that we go
unto them? For my part, I had rather lose one of mine arms, then fail thereof.
Brother (said Esplandian) to morrow if it pleases God, the great serpent shall
bring us thither: before that time it had always used to sail of it self, but
as then it failed. For when they were entered into it, it stirred not, whereat
Gandalin much abashed, could not refrain to say: By god, this vessel is like to
the horse with the white leg, that failed us when we have most need. Friend
(said Esplandian) I am surely persuaded that this proceeds by reason of
Urgandas imprisonment, who at this time is in Melies power, and so well
enchanted, that her art profits her as little as this vessel does us that
moved by her enchantments, which at this present has no means to stir, as you
may well perceive. And Esplandian said true, for at the same time the country
wherein Urganda dwelt, called the unknown Island, (because it was always
invisible) was as then discovered and seen of all men. With that Gandalin
counseled them to enter into the Pinnace which Esplandian the the King of
Denmark did, and having a good wind, sailed toward Constantinople, and on a
sunday in the morning they espied the vessels of king Childadan and Quedragant,
which not long after they boarded, where Esplandian and the King of Denmark
were received with great joy: after that he went to see his father and the rest
of the Knights that were on land, and after an infinite number of imbracings
and welcomes on all sides, they determined to visit their enemies somewhat
nearer, whereby many brave skirmishes were made, where the women of Queen
Calafre were continually in arms, and among the rest, a sister of the Queens
named Liote, a hardy and valiant Lady, that took a Frenchman prisoner, which
certified the Souldan of Liquie that Amadis de Gaul King of Great Britain,
and Esplandian his Son were in the army. Whereof the Souldan and Queen Calafie
being advertised, determined together to write unto them, the contents whereof
do follow.

Rodrigue Souldan of Liquie, mortal enemy to the enemies of our gods, and
Calafre Queen of Califorine, a country most rich and abundant in Gold and
precious Stones, give you Amadis de Gaul King of Great Britain, and your son
Knight of the great Serpent, to understand, that the occasion of our arrival in
these countries, has been for these two causes. The one in hope to destroy all
Christendom, and the other to prove if we may (...) from you the renown that is
spread abroad of you, to be the two best Knights living in the world for we
account our selves for such, as that if you will accept the combat of your
persons against ours, we will evidently make it known, that our valor is no
less then yours. And to the end the glory of the victors may be known, the
vanquished shall remain in their powers, to dispose of them as they shall think
convenient. Advise your selves therefore to answer us herein by this our
messenger, to whom we have given charge to declare unto you (if you refuse this
combat) that from henceforth we shall have just occasion to attribute to our
selves the advantage of the praises and endless glories that fortune heretofore
has given you, and to esteem of you as meanly in time to come, as you have
been highly renowned heretofore.


This Letter given to the Gentlewoman that bare the first to Norandel, she went
unto the Christians camp, and being advertised which was Amadis tent, entered
therein, as he sat talking with king Luisart, Esplandian, and other good
knights. Where kneeling on the ground, she asked which of them was the knight
of the great Serpent and his father. Amadis spoke unto her and said:
Gentlewoman, I am the one, and this is my Son. Is it your pleasure to speak
with us? The gentle woman casting her eye upon Esplandian, marvelling at his
great beauty, spoke and said In good faith king Amadis, I verily believe that
this is he, for I have heard him in diverse places esteemed for the same that
now I do behold in him. Gentlewoman (said Amadis) if you came into our camp
only to see him, you now have your desire. That has not bin only the cause
(said she) but to bring this letter which the Souldan of Liquie and queen
Calafre send unto you both: wherefore having read it, I pray you return an
answer. With that ( Amadis having taken it in his hand) the Gentlewoman
departed out of the rent attending their resolution. King Amadis having read
it, showed it to King Luisart and the rest that were in presence, wherewith
there a rose great controversy among them concerning the refusal or
acceptance of the combat, for that the most part of them were of advise it
should not be accepted, showing diverse great and evident reasons to confirm the
same, as the greater number of enemies they had before them ready to give them
battle, and if it happen (said they) that fortune should be contrary to King
Amadis and Esplandian (in whom partly consists our hope) such hard chance
would breed great fear in diverse men that are now very willing and ready to do
the best they can. Others held the contrary, saying that it would be shame unto
them all, for that refusal only would much encourage the enemy: but they were
of this opinion, that it might well be required that the number of the
combatants might be greater. In good truth (said Amadis) be it of two against
two, twenty against twenty, or of greater number, the victory is in the hands
of God. Wherefore in refusing thereof, I should do my self wrong, and cause a
great blemish to all Christendom, that would not be defaced in long time after.
Besides I have great hope of Gods help herein, for whose faith and honor I have
undertaken this voyage. When Esplandian heard his fathers mind, he spoke
boldier and said: That he would take that combat upon himself alone, not only
against the Souldan and the Queen, but against two others more with them,
rather then it so should be refused: whereupon it was concluded, that Amadis
and he would fight, and sending for the messenger into the tent, Amadis said
unto her: Gentlewoman, you shall tell the Souldan and the Queen that I and my
son are content to do as they require, wherefore set them choose what arms they
will, and for the place it shall be between their camp and ours: assuring them
on the faith of a King, that not one of our soldiers shall once remove how
soever we speed, which we desire likewise at their hands: and if it be their
desire to have the combat fought this day, we are content to do it. With that
the Gentlewoman returned, and coming to the Souldans tent, she declared her
message unto them, being such as you have heard: whereof the Souldan was glad,
but especially the Queen, for the great desire she had to see Esplandian,
whereof she asked the Gentlewomen what she thought of him. Madam (said she) I
have in my life time seen many men and women that nature had endued with great
beauty but by the gods I confess it is all but painting in regard of that I
have found in him: for he is so fair and beautiful, that the more I think
thereon, so much the more it makes me conceive such beauty to be rather divine
them humane. That is much (said the Queen.) I know not (said the Gentlewoman)
what you mean by that word Much, but I am well assured, if you had seen him as
I did, that you would say as much as I do, and it may be more. Truly (said the
Queen) before I enter in combat with him, I will first see him unarmed, and
speak with him, not as an enemy to an enemy, but as friends commonly do one
unto the other. Madam (said the Souldan) seeing it is your desire, it were good
our Gentlewoman went again unto them, to desire them to give you leave to come
and visit them in their camp, not to procure them any cause of envy but to do
them honor: and for that cause to desire their safe conduct. This counsel
seemed good unto the Queen, and without longer staying she sent the Gentlewoman
back again unto Amadis and Esplandian whom she found yet in the Tent whereas
she left them. With that she told them what her message was, and the great
desire the Queen had to see them before they entered into combat. King Amadis
could not refrain laughing to hear the Gentlewoman express the affection her
mistress had, asking king Luisart what he thought therein. Son (said he) deny
not her request, for I assure you (since our coming hither) I have heard the
Queen to be esteemed a wise and beautiful Princess. You hear our answer (said
Amadis to the Gentlewoman) let the Queen come hither when she thinks good,
for she shall be heartily welcome. With that the Gentlewoman returned to the
Queen, who being greatly pleased with that answer, determined the next day to
go unto them. But she knew not well what manner of apparel she were best to
wear: sometimes she thought it fit to go as she used when she went to battle,
and then presently changed opinion, thinking a woman's apparel would be more
seemly and convenient, seeing she went not to try their forces, but only to
win the love and favor of Esplandian, if she might procure the same. And
thinking on it all night long, in the morning when she meant to apparel her
self, she was resolved to dress her as women use to do* thinking she had means
enough afterward to show her self in habit of a Knight, whereby she might be
seen both in the one and the other sort. Whereupon she caused her most precious
Robes to be brought unto her, and apparrelling her self, forgot not any thing
that might once beautify or adorn her person, or that in her opinion would
deck her well, the better to be liked. And to bear her company she took twelve
of her own gentlewomen, so well furnished and set forth with Stones and Pearls,
that the like was never seen. That done, she sent unto her ships for a most
strange and monstrous beast: whereupon sometimes she used to ride in great
pomp. It was as big as a great Dromadary, the hair long and somewhat yellow,
black spots, his two ears hanging down unto his knees, having but one eye,
shining brighter then a burning glass, and stood right in the midst of his
forehead: out of his mouth there issued two great teeth like horns, and
although his feet were cloven like an ox, yet was there no Heart in all the
world that could outrun him, were it in plain way, or over rocks. In that
manner she entered into the Christans camp, of whom she was not a little
wondered at before she came to King Luisarts tent, where Amadis, and in a manner
all the principal captains of the army stayed for her, praying Quedragant to go
out to welcome her, which he did with great courtesy: for he had no sooner
espied her, but he stepped forward, and doing her great reverence, holp her to
descend, and taking her by the arm, led her, into the tent, where the Lords
were all assembled, of whom she was most honorably received. But when she
beheld Esplandians beauty, she was so much surprised with the love of him, that
she repented her coming thither, not so much for the small hope she had to win
him, (being diverse in religion) but doubting that the fantasy newly entered
into her mind would so much estrange her force (by overmuch thinking upon him)
when she went to fight, that thereby she should be in danger to lose the honor
and reputation she had gotten in arms among the best Knights in all the world:
which to prevent, she determined to stay the less time there, knowing the
nature of love to be such, that it can steal the hearts of all persons, and
commonly makes himself possessor of it, before he that has it in possession,
can perceive it. And as the Princes entertained her with diverse sweet and
pleasant speeches, she returned to Esplandian and said: Sir Knight, for two
most excellent graces that are in you, I have taken the pains to come and visit
you: The first is the gift of beauty, which is such in you, as I could never
have imagined the same: The other is the force of your body and magnanimity of
your courage, whereby you are accounted altogether invincible. The one I have
seen which mine eyes to be so perfect, that I never hope to see the like again,
although I lived a thousand years and more: the other, the combat you shall
have against the most puissant Souldan of Liquie will be a witness unto us: and
had it not bin that he requested me to fight against King Amadis (because his
only desire is to prove his body against yours) I would have tried it my self.
Of one thing can I well assure you, that if the honor remain to us and life to
you, I will afterward tell you a thing that much imports me, and which I
greatly desire to let you know before I sail into my country. Now for this time
I have satisfied my desire: wherefore my Lords (said she unto all the Princes)
I beseech you pardon me in not using longer speeches, for I know full well that
my long staying with you, (thinking to find that I hoped for) might possibly
cause me to lose my self, wherewith I should be overmuch displeased, for that
before sunsetting I hope to be in place where I will show such valor in arms,
that he which never could be vanquished by man (as it is reported) shall now
receive an overthrow at a simple woman's hand. Madam (said King Perion) fortune
can do much when it pleases her, if you do as you say, truly you shall do more
then we can well believe, but commonly the workman is known by his work, and
because the issue of ye combat is the glory of him or you, til then we will
defer our judgments. And although Amadis perceived himself much outraged by
the queen, yet he made no sign thereof, but taking her by ye arm, led her where
her company stayed, and as she mounted to return, with a smiling countenance he
spoke unto her and said, Madam, when we come to dealing of blows, I beseech you
show me not the greatest extremity you can, because I was always a friend to
women, and ever will be during my life: whereunto the queen answered not a
word, but rode unto ye Pagans camp to arm her self. Mean time Brian de Moniaste
arrived in the Christians camp, who having bin sent by the King of Spain his
father with a great power of men into Africa, to besiege the town of Cesonie,
after called Centie, was advertised by a pirate, of ye christians enterprise,
and how their army and great fleet had passed the cape of Finis terre,
presently sent unto his father to desire him to give him leave to go that
voyage: whereunto by much importunity he granted. For which cause Brian brake
up his siege of Cenite, and entering again into his ships sailed to Cicile, and
from thence to Galipoli, and so to Constantinople, where he joined with the
Christian princes that received him most gladly.

CHAP. LIII.
How king Amadis and Esplandian his son, fought against the Souldan of Liquie
and Queen Calafre, and of the battle fought the same day both by sea and land,
between the Christians and the Pagans.

QVeen Calafre returned to the Pagans camp as you heard before, presently armed
her self, and the Souldan likewise, and stayed not long before they came unto
the place where the combat was assigned, where not long after they found
Amadis and Esplandian: and because the camps were not well assured of each
other (notwithstanding the oaths and promises on both sides made) they set
themselves in order of battle, not stirring one foot: King Perion sending word
to Quedragant and King Childadan, that as they had intelligence from the enemy,
they should set upon their Army by Sea: the like word was sent unto the Emperor
of Constantinople, that he might likewise be prepared: and as the four
Combatants were ready to strike each other, the Souldan called Amadis and
Esplandian, asking them if they would not swear and keep promise (according to
the agreement sent unto them by his gentlewoman) that the vanquishers without
impeachment should lead away the vanquished. I truly, said they, therefore
beware of us. With that Amadis made toward the Queen, and the Souldan against
Esplandian, to whom he gave so great a blow with his lance into the shield,
that he pierced it through: whereby diverse thought assuredly he had been
wounded to death, but it was not so, for the lance passed under his saddle
without any further hurt: but Esplandian gave him his exchange, striking him so
fiercely, that he made him loose both stirrup and saddle and fall upon the
ground, with so great might, that he rolled twice or thrice before he stayed,
in such manner, that the helmet flew off his head. Queen Calafre ran against
King Amadis, and he against her: and as they were in the middle of their
course, Amadis turned the butt end of his lance against her, and passing
forward would not strike her: yet she held her lance down and struck his horse
in the steel of his forehead, and withal they met so strongly body to body,
that therewith the Queen fell down, and Amadis was constrained to light, his
horse was so astonished with the truncheon of the lance that stuck within his
forehead. But the Queen rose presently, and with her sword in hand went toward
Amadis, the like did the Souldan to Esplandian that had suffered him to take
breath and lace his helmet, not for any good he wished him, but that at the end
of his career he espied the princess Leonorine standing on the walls of
Constantinople, whereat he was so abashed, that every man said, the Souldan had
hurt him in the body. Nevertheless within short space after they knew the
contrary: for he lighted on foot, where between them two was fought the most
perilous combat that ever was seen, for Rodrigue was as valiant a Knight in
arms as any in his time: but Esplandian handled him in such manner, that
oftentimes he made him clean forget the subtilties that commonly he used in
such affairs, and in the end used him so hardly, that it might evidently be
seen the victory would be his. Mean time the Queen used all her force to
overcome King Amadis, whom holding in his hand a great truncheon of a lance in
stead of a sword, gave her such a blow on the crest of her helmet, that he made
her eyes start within her head. Wherewith she being much offended, spoke unto
him, and said: What sir Knight? Do you think me either to be a dog or else a
country clown, that you seem to beat me with a staff? By my head before you
escape out of my hands, there is no armor you have but will be needful for you
to the safeguard of your life. Calafre (said Amadis) all my life time I have
been a servant unto Ladies, and if at this time I should begin with you to show
them ill^ the good that others have received received at my hands would be less
esteemed. You account me then (said the Queen) one of that number: but you
shall presently feel that I am something more: with that she took her sword in
both hands, and in great choler gave him such a blow, that she clave his
shield in two, and thinking to double her stroke, Amadis stepped unto her and
plucked hers from off her neck, with such force, that she was constrained to
kneel upon the ground. Nevertheless she rose presently again, and thinking to
be revenged, used all her force to charge Amadis, who turning aside gave her
such a blow with his truncheon hard by the ear, and therewith made her so
astonished, that her sword fell out of her hand: wherewith he stepped forward,
and taking her by the helmet, said unto her: Now you shall be my prisoner
whether you will or not, as well as the Souldan is prisoner to my son. With
that the Queen looked aside and perceived that Amadis said true: wherefore she
said: Truly I am your prisoner, seeing fortune will have it so: and therewith
Rodrigue and Esplandian came unto them, and they four going out of the lists,
went unto the Christians camp: the Pagans that saw them led away in whom in a
manner consisted most of their hope, when the camps should join in battle, made
countenance to rescue them: which caused the Christians to stand all day in
order of battle: mean time they agreed among themselves to send the Souldan and
the Queen unto Constantinople, Gandalin having charge to bring them thither,
and present them to the Princess Leonorine, from Amadis and Esplandian, who
thanked them most heartily. And before he returned again unto the ^amp, a
soldier of Thrace (that had dwelt in Tartaria above twenty year together) came
and yielded himself unto the Christians, and told King Perion and Luisart, that
their enemies determined the next day in the morning to surprise them before
they were aware, whereof they advertised the Emperor of Constantinople, to the
end he might be ready. There were in the City forty thousand men, whereof he
appointed thirty thousand to issue forth upon the enemies rereward, as soon as
they perceived the battle once begun, and gave likewise intelligence to King
Childadan and Quedragant, that his spies had brought him news that Alphorax had
unfurnished his ships of men to strengthen their army on land, trusting to the
straights which they mean to keep, hoping thereby to sail into the Majorque
seas, if fortune favor not their enterprise: and there it would be good (with
the other Christian princes advise) that they should set upon him, and that
Frandalo with his Fleet should second them. Which news understood by the two
Generals of the army by sea, they sent unto King Amadis and the rest of the
Commanders in the Camp, to know their advise: whereunto answer was returned,
that they should follow the opinion of the Emperor of Constantinople, which
they should execute upon the next day in the morning: whereupon Frandalo ceased
not all night to make and prepare diverse kinds of artificial fires, wherewith
he made account to burn the most part of Alphorax ships, which he did, as
hereafter you shall hear. But to return to King Armato and his forces: About an
hour before day, according to their former determinations, they began to march
against the Christians, thinking to find them sleeping, and thereby to stay
their watch before they should have means to set themselves in order of battle.
Nevertheless they found themselves deceived, for they were already set in order
of battle, standing close, with great desire to receive their enemy as they
did: the Emperor of Rome had the vantguard, and with him king Luisart: King
Amadis, king Perion, Galaor, and Esplandian the main battle: and Florestan,
Bruneo, and Balan, the rereguard. On the Pagans side there marched first, the
Souldan of Alaxa, threescore Knights, two Califfes, and four Tamorlanes, that
in great fury set upon the Emperor of Rome and his battle: where at their first
arrival many a brave Knight was stricken down, both on the one side and the
other, for Esplandian and the Christian Princes being joined together, gave not
one blow but it was a deadly stroke: yet at the first they were repulsed by the
great quantity of arrows the enemies shot against them, which flew in so great
number, that hailst^nes never fell thicker out of the skies: whereby it fell
out, that both vantguard, main battle, and reregard, endured much pain: with
that Norandel, Talanque, Manley, Trion, Landin, Licoran, Imosil, Palomir, Enil,
Elian, and to conclude, all Esplandians companions with thirty thousand men
chosen by the Emperor, issued out of the City: which small troop (resolutely
determined) did so abash the Pagans, that in a manner they all lost their
courages: whereby they presently began to recoil as far back as they advanced
themselves, wherewith those that before had bin in fear took courage again, and
turning their faces on the enemy, recovered the ground that they had lost, in
such sort, that with good cause they might well cry, Victory. On the other
side, Quedragant and Childadan setting sail, made toward the Straights, at the
entry whereof Frandalo overtook them with fourscore vessels of all sorts: and
as they had spoken together touching their enterprise, (considering the great
power of their enemies) it was agreed that Frandalo (that had proved them at
other times) should first set upon them: wherewith he began to sail forwards,
and Alphorax likewise against him, giving a sign of battle to his men, who with
great courage entered upon ten of the best Galleys the Christians had, and sunk
them in the sea: yet Frandalo naught abashed, set fire on more than an hundred
of their Ships before Childadan entered into fight: but not long after, he and
Quedragant came unto them, where good defense prevailed. In which fight they
continued for the space of eight hours without any sign upon which side the
victory would fall, until Quedragant boarded Alphorax ship, and entered by
force, staying all that were therein. What need I stand longer to discourse?
The Turks seeing their Captain dead, and their manifest overthrow before their
faces, being ready to fall into the Christians hands, began to fly, and by
force of oars entered into the Majorque sea: but not all, for there were taken,
burnt, and drowned about two or three hundred Galleys, Galliasses, Foists, and
Brigandines, the rest saved themselves in such sort as you heard before: to
whom night was so much assistant, that the chase endured not so long as else it
would have done. Alphorax dead, and his Army overthrown, the Christians
assembled themselves together, staying to hear news from their Army on land,
which in the mean time had so much to endure, that wonder it was how they could
hold out: and among the rest the good old King Perion and Luisart seeing
Esplandian raging like a lion followed by the Hunters, would not leave him
fearing to loose him, and so long they followed him, striking both on the right
side and the left, that they found themselves enclosed by above a thousand
Turkish horsemen, not having any other aid than Grumedan Duke of Bristol,
Guilan, Brandoyuas, Nicoran of the silver Bridge, Cendil de gonate, and a few
others. Surely those eight or nine caused those that met them to buy full
dearly their approach, as not being the first danger wherein they had fallen:
nevertheless in the end being over weary and sore traveled with the blows they
had given and received, they were clean out of breath, and the worst was their
horses were slain under them, and they themselves so sore wounded, that they
were all slain in the place, only Esplandian that in a manner could scarce lift
up his arms, when King Amadis his father with a great number of Frenchmen
found him there: whereat the battle begun fiercer than ever it had been, for
Amadis and his company seeing the Kings dead, and their companions lying on the
ground, and Esplandian fighting in the middle of them on foot, they were in a
manner mad, and therewith made such slaughter, that the Turks were forced to
separate themselves, and Esplandian horsed again, and being on horseback,
notwithstanding all his wounds, ^e showed well that his body was not weary, for
he followed the enemies in such sort, (moved with grief to see his friends
dead) that in short space (by the aid of his father and the rest that followed
him) he forced the Souldan of Alaxa and his soldiers to turn their backs and
fly, and in his flight gave him such a blow with his sword upon the head, that
he struck him dead, and more than an hundred Pagans with him: Amadis likewise
did so valiantly, with all the knights of France, Great Britain, and
Sweathland, especially the king of Denmark, Talanque, Ambor, and Norandel, that
wonder it was to see, yet had their valor little prevailed without the aid that
the Emperor of Constantinople brought thither, with a great Troop of Horsemen
that the Emperor of Rome had likewise gathered together: by which means King
Armato with thirty other Kings and their Retinue, were clean overthrown, and
the most part of them put to the sword: the Christian Knights making such
slaughter, that the blood ran about the field in such abundance, as if it had
rained blood a whole day together: and greater had the abundance been if night
had not come on, which separated them, the Western Princes remaining encamped
in the field, till day opened, that they might accomplish their desires. Mean
time Amadis caused Watch and Sentinels to be set in all places, because he had
been advertised that King Armato that had fled away, assembled his men by
little and little, which to do he caused horns and drums to sound throughout
the field, making fire round about the place where he had retired, sending two
Knights to the sea side to know what had happened to his son: but news was
brought him that he was slain, and all his ships burnt and drowned, except
fifty or threescore that were at the end of the straights of the Majorque sea,
staying to hear news of him: assure your selves that such news pleased him not
too well, nevertheless, perceiving it more convenient to supply his own
necessity than to spend the time in sorrow and tears, he called such captains
as he had together, with whom he determined presently to depart, and before day
to imbarque that small number of men that rested, before the Christians should
perceive the same. With that he commanded from place to place that every man
should presently retire, and without noise make toward the sea: where being
arrived, they entered into their ships flying toward Tartaria in all the haste
they could: whereof the Emperor of Constantinople being advertised, sent
Frandalo and diverse Galleys with him to follow them, but all in vain: in the
mean time the hurt Knights and soldiers were brought into the City, and the
dead buried each according to his degree: wherein the Emperor showed great
affection, especially as touching the burial of the Kings Perion and Luisart,
for whom, Esplandian (coming to the Empire) and those that succeeded after him,
caused two Pyramides to be made, not any thing inferior to those which sometime
were erected in the City of Memphis, as well for the Kings Miris, Chemnis, as
others: and hard by them they buried the bodies of the valiant knights Balan,
Helian, Polimner, Enil, Grumedan, the good old man, and diverse other knights
that died in that battle, fighting in the defense of the faith of Jesus Christ,
with whom their blessed souls do now remain in joy. And because no mention has
been made of Queen Calafre since her captivity, neither of the aid that she had
brought unto the Pagan kings, it seems the reason that I should declare the
occasion why her women fought not with the rest: you must understand, that the
Queen perceiving her in one day to be taken not only with the love of ye
knight Esplandian, but by the force of his father king Amadis, not long after
she had been in the company of the Princess Leonorine, to whom Gandalin brought
her, she sent unto her Sister Lyote to will her with her women to return to
sea, keeping a part from all the Pagans, without once stirring from thence, for
any thing whatsoever should fall, till she received further news from her,
which was partly the cause of the enemies overthrow: for they doubting some
treason, being separated in that sort, from that time forward were in some fear
and in greater suspicion than before: and not without cause, for that if Lyote
had aided king Armato both by sea and land, as she might have done, if her
sister had not forbidden her, it is likely her esquadron of women being twenty
thousand strong and somewhat more, had done great mischief to the Christians:
but God of his goodness provided better for them.

CHAP. LIIII.
How after the Pagans were driven out of Thrace, the Emperor of Constantinople
renouncing his Empire, invested Esplandian therewith, marrying him to his
daughter the princess Leonorine.

THe Obsequies and Funerals of the Kings, Princes, Lords and others, that died
in the battle, being finished, the wounded cured, and all things set at rest:
the Emperor of Constantinople knowing that Amadis and those that were come with
him from the Western parts, would return again into their countries, desired
them to assemble, showing them that his meaning was to let them know what he
determined to do before they went from thence? The next day in the morning they
all met in the Emperors great hall, and he standing in the midst, spoke unto
them and said: My brethren, Lords, and good friends, the bond wherein I stand
bounden unto you is so great, that although it has pleased God to make me
Emperor of all Grecia, yet I am well assured, it is far beyond my poor ability
to satisfy you for the same, esteeming the honor and riches that I now have
(next under God) be it little or much, to proceed from you: I am now threescore
years of age, wholly aged and decrepit, by reason of the pains that in my
youthful years I have continually taken in following arms: so it is I have but
one child, which is a Daughter, the only staff and hope of my old years, whom
I have determined (if you think good) to give in marriage unto the valiant
Knight Esplandian, and with her likewise to invest him with the Empire and
Government of all my Countries. And the better to live solitarily, and to
separate my self from worldly company, I have determined to go (with the
Emperess my Wife) into the Monastery that I caused to be made, there to live
religiously, calling upon God, and doing penance for the evils I have
committed heretofore. Wherefore my good Lord and friends I pray you, if this my
determination like you well, let every man give consent, and you first (said he
unto king Amadis) to whom the matter touches nearer than to any of the rest,
as being father and son. My Lord (said he) my son shall do as you command him.
I will tell you (said the Emperor) I remember that among other Prophecies which
ought to happen in this our time, there is one that makes me (as I think)
agree with you in one consent. Esplandian has on his body (as I have
understood) certain characters, which show his name and others that in no wise
can be read, but only by the woman that is ordained to be his wife, let us now
see if it be my daughter or not: with that he sent for the Princess Leonorine,
who being brought thither by the Emperess and diverse other Ladies, the Emperor
desired Esplandian, to open his doublet and show them the letters he had born
upon his body from his mothers womb, which he refused not, but before them all
showed them openly, where every man might easily perceive the white characters,
containing this word Esplandian but they could not know the red: wherefore the
Emperor caused his Daughter to come near, asking her what she could do therein?
My Lord (said she) not long before Melie betrayed Urganda, she and I being
alone in my chamber, she sent to fetch one of the books that had bin taken from
her, covered with gold, whereon the Enchantress was engraven, and I remember
that I saw therein the like characters that Esplandian bears on his body, and
over them their signification, which is nothing else but his name and mine.
Daughter (said the Emperor) if you have the book still, cause it to be brought
hither: whereunto she obeyed. The book being brought, she showed him the place
that Melie had read unto her, containing that which follows:

The happy knight that shall conquer the sword and the great treasure enchanted
by me, shall from his mothers womb bear his name in white characters, and the
name of her that shall be his wife in red characters upon his body, which red
characters shall be so difficult to understand, that no man living in that time,
how wise or learned soever he be, shall express the same without he see this
book, which will teach him what the seven characters do signify, representing
the seven words that follow, Leonorine Daughter of the Emperor of Greece.

In good faith (said the Emperor) here is a strange case, and shows well yt
the Enchantress Lady had more knowledge in art magic, then any that lived in
her time: and seeing my daughter has so well divined, I am determined that you
(said he to the Archbishop of Thrace) do grant unto Esplandian that which
nature before his birth had promised to him, which is my daughter Leonorine. By
which means the marriage was solemnised and finished the same day with no great
ceremonies, the Court being as yet troubled for the death of so many princes
and great Lords that were slain in the battle. But let it suffice to know, that
those two Lovers enjoyed the thing which they so long desired, Esplandian the
same day being proclaimed Emperor of Greece, according to the commandment of
his father in law: who within two months after, with the Empress his wife, went
to a monastery and place of devotion. And because queen Calafre had always
pretended to marry with Esplandian, perceiving her intent frustrate, she could
not refrain to speak in presence of the^ all, and said unto them: My Lord, I
beseech you give me leave to declare my mind. It is certain (said she) yt those
which know me are not ignorant yt I am one of the greatest and most puissant
princess in all the east parts, by reason of the great quantity of gold and
precious stones that are within my countries. As touching my lineage, I am
daughter of a Queen of ancient race, and as noble as any that ever was in the
world: so it is that fortune brought me into these marches, promising me
shortly to return laden with great number of slaves and abundance of treasure:
but to the contrary, I that pretended and sought the captivity of others, find
my self taken and better holden prisoner then they that are in their mortal
enemies hands. This imprisonment whereof I speak, is not that whereunto I am
bound by the faith I have given unto king Amadis, having vanquished me by
force, which I certainly know to be wholly subject to fortune: but the
imprisonment whereof* I now complain, is that wherein my heart has enclosed it
self, and has the only moving by the sole beauty and favor I have found in
the new and most happy Emperor, esteeming my self to be such, that I hoped
(leaving my law to accept of yours) to have had him for my lord and husband,
although my hope by little and little began to diminish, when I perceived ye
Princess Leonorine to be more recommended in all perfections then any that ever
I heard of, or ever have seen: so that (speaking against my self) it had been
impossible to find a more equal match, nor more conformable one unto the
other, then the marriage of them together: which makes me believe that fortune
extends wholly to eternize this my passion, wherein I will (if I can) s^ much
impeach her, that forgetting my first affection, and if it will please him to
give me another husband worthy my estate, I will accept it willingly together
with baptism and the law of Christ, which you do hold. When the Emperor
Esplandian saw her good pretense, he began to comfort her in the best manner he
could, and calling Talanque (a fair lusty and well disposed Gentleman) he said
unto the Queen: Madam, this Gentlewoman I offer unto you, is my cousin, and son
unto King Galaor, one of the best knights as I think living in the world, I
pray you at my request refuse him not for your lord and husband, assuring you,
that I know no Princess (how great soever she be) living in the world, but
might content her self with him. The Queen beheld him with so good affection,
that she easily believed Esplandian, and said unto him: Upon your word my Lord
I will accept of him, and from this time forward yield my self to be his wife,
and will for his sake do so much, that the Island wherein I and others my
predecessors would not suffer a man to live, shall from henceforth be governed
by him as other c^untries are by their Kings and Princes. And because her
sister Liote was not at that assembly* but with her ships lying in the
straights (as Queen Calafre had commanded her as you heard before) she desired
the Emperor to send for her, who presently sent ye admiral Tartary to fetch
her: she being come, and having heard her sisters mind, easily agreed thereto,
and by the same means was married to Manley the wise, both espoused at one
time, and being baptized, caused all their army to do the like: which done, not
long after those new married couples taking their leaves of the Kings, Princes,
Lords, Ladies, and Gentlewomen of the Court, they imbarqued themselves, Manley
having with him the vessels wherein Childadan his father arrived in the east,
and Talanque those of king Galaor, which they caused to be fraighted and laden
with all things necessary for so strange a country. And setting sail for
Californie, not without great trouble, (which in the end they overcame) they
arrived in safety, where afterward they had many battles with their neighbors
bordering about them, whom they overcame, augmenting their dominions with many
great lands and territories. But because the subject of our History is not
further to entreat of them, we will for this present leave them to go on with
that which afterward was done in the City of Constantinople. You heard before
of the love of Norandel and Queen Minoresse, that daily increased in them more
and more, which the Empress knowing full well, caused them to be married
together, the Emperor giving to Norandel the Castle of the defended mountain,
with the towns of Alfarin and Galatia, for the which he recompensed Frandalo
with the rich, fertile and well peopled Isles of Galatines. Mean time the
Emperor Esplandian not forgetting the imprisonment of Urganda, one day among
the rest (not long before the Princes of the West imbarqued themselves to
return into their countries) he showed them in what sort Melie had taken her
away, and by enchantment carried her to the great city of Tesifant, where he
held her prisoner in a great tower, desiring them most earnestly to give him
counsel what he might do therein. Son (said king Amadis) it were good you sent
unto Armato to offer him for her the Souldan of Liquie that is your prisoner:
and if he refuse you so to do, we will enter into his country and fetch her
thence by force. Whereunto they al agreed, so that without longer delay
Carmelle was sent to Tesifant, i^barquing her self with four squires, and three
gentlewomen, and with a good wind arrived at the castle of the defended
mountain, where she remained certain days, staying for king Armatos pasport
which by one of her women she sent to fetch, who found Armato as melancholy as
might be, feeling as yet his fortune past, specially the death of his son
Alphorax, which without ceasing he continually lamented. With that the
gentlewoman gave him to understand the cause of her arrival, wherewith he was
so well pleased, yt presently he caused Carmelles safe conduct to be made, and
giving it to the messenger, said unto her: My friend, return unto your mistress
and assure her from me, that she may come unto my court as often as it pleases
her, remembering well the pleasures she showed unto me during my imprisonment.
The gentlewoman thanked him most heartily, and returned to Carmelle: who within
few days after went to Tesifant to Armato, where she declared at large the
effect of her embassage, which heard by king Armato and considring with
himself, that for Urganda he might recover one of his greatest friends, and
thereby cause the Christian Princes for a time to refrain the overrunning of
his country, sent presently for Melie, desiring her in all affection (for his
sake) to grant to his desire and the pleasure of the Christians, considring the
offer made by them was both advantage unto him and his. Melie desirous to
please Armato, brake her enchantments, and without delay Urganda was delivered
unto Carmelle, upon condition, yt she being arrived in the city of
Constantinople, should likewise set the Souldan of Liquie at liberty, which she
swore and promised to do: which done, taking their leave of Armato, they
traveled so long, that they came unto ye castle the defended mountain, where
Urganda caused them to leave Carmelles ship to enter into the great serpent
that as yet she found there, which presently of it self began to sail, as it
had always done before Urganda was in prison, in such manner, that without
impeachment they arrived in the Haven of Constantinople, where the Princes and
lords being on shore, descended to the water side to receive Urganda: And
thinking to bring her to the palace, she desired them to stay there till a
prophecy were accomplished, that should be done before the sun went down,
which they agreed unto: not only to please her mind, but likewise desiring to
see what it should be. With yt they were abashed that the great serpent began
to leap and labor in the water, as if it had bin in the greatest storm yt ever
was, although the sea was very calm, but only about the serpent, where it raged
in most horrible manner, but that which most abashed the beholders was, that the
vessel cast forth such horrible cries, that not one among them but his hair
stood upright upon his head for fear. And having continued in ye manner about
half an hour and more, ye serpent thrust his head into the water, wherewith it
sunk and never was seen again And with that they perceived a far off a great
rock, which being driven by the waves, came within half a bow shot near unto
the shore, on the top whereof stood a woman bareheaded, and c^vered only with a
linen cloth to hide her privities, being invironned by more then a thousand
serpents as well great as small, which stung her in such sort, yt she wept and
lamented in most pitiful manner, whereat the knights of great Britain had so
much compassion, yt they thought to enter into the ships, to go and help her:
which Urganda forbad them. For (said she) besides ye dangers that may happen,
you shall lose your labors, because she whom you behold (which is the
inchantress lady) has ordained it to be s^. With yt the rock sunk into the
water and the gentlewoman vanished out of sight, but not long after she
appeared again upon the waves, flying from the fury of a monster of the sea,
that with his throat open followed after, ready to devour her, in such manner,
that she came right un^o the haven, crying with a loud voice unto Esplandian:
Gentle Emperor, I pray you help me for none but you can do it: wherewith
Esplandian stepped forward, and holding the sword he conquered in the old
palace of the enchanted R^ck in his hand, ran unto her, and thinking to go
near the Monster the Gentlewoman that fled from it, caught hold of his sword,
and whether he would or not took it away, wherewith she threw her self into the
sea, and the monster after her. Whereat every man began to laugh, saying to the
Emperor, that if a gentlewoman had predestined the same unto him, and kept it
long time, another gentlewomen or she her self upon a sudden had taken it from
him again. With that Urganda was led unto the palace, accompanied by the
Emperor with all the kings and knights: where not long after the Souldan of
Liquie was delivered and sent to Tesifant, and about the beginning of the next
week after the western pinces took shipping: and being imbarqued with Urganda
(recommending the Emperor to God) sailed forwards, till at the last every man
arrived at his desired haven, namely king Amadis, that found Oriane very sad
for the death of her mother newly deceased, which much more increased when she
knew her father king Luisart was dead. But in the end, time made her to forget
her sorrow, but not so soon as Amadis could have wished.

CHAP. LV.
How the Emperor Esplandian sent Norandel to take possession of the country he
had given him, and of the taking of Tesifant.

NOt long after the western princes were departed into their countries, the
Emperor Esplandian would that Norandel should go unto the Castle of the
defended mountain, and other towns that he had given him, to make war against
king Armato, for which cause he gave him a great number of soldiers, with the
which to make short he assailed the king of Turkey, and had battle together,
wherein many a valiant knight lost their lives: nevertheless, the victory fell
on Norandels side, whereby he caused Armato to fly away, retiring to his city
of Tesifant, which being known unto the Emperor, he departed from
Constantinople, and with a great army going into Turkey, joined with Norandels
power, and besieged Tesifant, but fear seized so well upon Armato, that he found
means to fly away, and leave the town, which not long after was taken, and the
Princess Heliaxe brought unto the emperor, who used her courteously, and sent
her again unto her fathr, Ampheon king of Medea, giving her diverse rich
Presents. News being spread throughout the country of Turkey of the fight of
king Armato, as also of the taking of Tesifant, diverse towns and cities yielded
to Esplandian, that gave them likewise to Norandel: and because winter came on
he returned into Thrace, where two of his nephews, sons of Galaor came to visit
him, and to receive the order of knighthood: which he gave unto them with both
armor and horses, minding to request them to travel to Tesifant unto Norandel,
there to begin their first intrance into arms, but they desired rather to take
the way to Californie, where Manley and Talanque had great war against their
neighbors; which the Emperor perceiving, caused all things necessary for so
long a voyage to be given them, with so good Pilots, that in the end they
arrived at their desired Haven, where they attained to great honor and
estimation among the best Knights. But not to enter further to discourse of
them, we will for this present let them rest. And let it suffice you to know,
how that as time passed, Perion succeeded in his fathers seat, and Garinter
married in the east parts with Heletria queen of Citharee, and was the best
knight in all the world. And because it is declared at large in the sixth and
seventh books of this our Histdry, we will pass it over at this time.

CHAP. LVI.
How Vrganda sent to desire king Amadis, the Emperor Esplandian, Don Galaor
king of Sobradise, and others, to come unto the Firm Isle, and of the
mavelous enchantments that she made over them.

URganda being in her Isle not as yet discovered, taking great pleasure to read
Melies Books, knew by her art death to be near unto the Kings and Princes whom
she most loved, and haing great sorrow that worms should consume the flesh of
so valiant Knights, devised to prevent the same, which to do she took sea,
accompanied of her two cousins Juliande and Solisde, with diverse other
Gentlewomen, and went unto the Firm Isle, where being arrived, she sent to the
Emperor Esplandian, Amadis, Galaor, Florestan, Agraies, and Gransador, praying
them most earnestly to come unto her to the palace of Apolidon, for matter that
touched them most near, otherwise she sent them word, if they did it not, that
before long time past evil would happen unto them, and that master Elizabeth
should bring with him the book that he made of the Adventures of the knights
living in his time, as also that they should (...) the space of three quarters
of an hour, those whom she had caused to sit down (as you heard before)
remained in a trance without all knowledge, as if they had been dead: and with
that there appeared a cloud so obscure and thick which environed the place,
that never after it could be seen, till Luisart of Greece son to Esplandian
brought that enchantment to an end, by means of a sword which he conquered, as
it shall be declared to you in the sixth Book: wherein is described one of the
most pleasant and delectable Histories that ever was read. At which time all
the Princes, and the rest were revived again, and not before. The Emperor
Esplandian at that time had a son after his grandfathers name called Luisart,
as then about the age of eight years: King Amadis a son and a daughter, the son
named Perion, and the daughter Brisene that married the eldest son of the
Emperor of Rome: King Galaor two sons, the one named Perion, and other
Garinter, of whom I have showed you before: Florestan the King of Sardaigne two
sons, the one named Florestan after his father, that reigned after him, and the
other Palmindan of Almain after his grandfather: Agrayes Earl of Salandry two
sons, the one called Languines, the other Galmenes: King Brewneo one son named
Vallade, and a daughter named Helisenne that married Quedragants son, and bare
his fathers name: King Childadan two sons, the eldest called Abies of Ireland
after his grandfather, whom Amadis slew the first day he entered into
Knighthood. And although these princes left such heirs as you heard before, yet
would they not during their fathers absence, take on them the names or titles
of Kings, h^ping by Gods help, that they should once return as well as ever
they were. For the which cause they having attained to the age and strength to
bear arms, passed into Ireland, there to be made Knights b^ King Childadan,
being as then very weak and withered with age: which done, they followed
strange adventures, doing many valiant feats of Arms, which are at large
declared in the Book that follow, which in time may come unto your hands, when
it pleases God.

FINIS.

