THE MARROW OF HISTORY OR, THE Pilgrimage of KINGS and PRINCES.

TRULY Representing the variety of Dangers inhaerent to their Crowns; and the
lamentable Deaths which many of them, and some of the best of them, have
undergone.

Collected, Not only out of the best Modern Histories; but from all those
which have been most famous in the Latin, Greek, or in the Hebrew Tongue.

Showing, Not only the Tragedies of Princes at their Deaths, but their
Exploits and sayings in their lives; and by what virtues some of them have
flourished in the height of Honor; and overcome by what affections, others of
them have sunk into the depth of all Calamities.

A Work most delightful for Knowledge, and as profitable for Example.

Collected by Lodowick Lloyd, one of the Gentlemen in ordinary to Queen
Elizabeth.

And Corrected and Revived by R.C. Master of Arts.

London, Printed by E. Alsop, dwelling near the Upper-Pump in Grubstreet, 1653.

To the true Lover of all good Learning, the Truly Honorable CHARLES DIMMOCK,
Esquire, etc.
SIR,
I Have here preferred to your observance and protection, a work of great Art,
and of greater Industry; you shall find in it a Summary of almost all the
Kingdoms and Commonwealths upon the earth, and what were the men of Power,
which commanded in them, and also what were as well their Excellencies of
Understanding as of Sovereignty; it being a Gift unto great men, who are called
unto extraordinary places, to be endued for the most part with extraordinary
abilities.

Here, as from a Turret of Speculation, you may look down upon the Vulgar, and
every where behold how near of kin is Misery to Mortality; and raising
afterward your Contemplation higher, you may look up on those who have been
the Potentates and Princes of the Earth, and observe how empty is the Title of
Greatness, and how vain in the Grave is the Prerogative of Kings; insomuch
that if the Dusts of Alexander the Great, and of Bucephalus his Horse, were
committed both unto one Urn, I do believe that Aristotle himself could not
distinguish betwixt them, either by his Philosophy, or his Flattery.

Sir, It it is then easy to be seen that it is only Virtue that crowns the
lives of Princes, and after their deaths does raise them higher then their
Pyramids; yet in many Examples you may distinctly here observe, that even the
best of Kings, and those of them who have been nearest unto Heaven, have often
stooped under the greatest Visitations, as the highest Hills are most often
checked by the lowdest Thunders.

But others there have been, whose lives by their Lust and Cruelty, have been
covered with infamy, or by their Sloth, with silence; as Tertullian speaks of
Sardanapalus, that if he had not been famous for his Riot, no man had known him
to be a King; therefore those depraved Affections are here described, and by
many Examples abundantly illustrated, in the pursuit of which so many great men
and Conquerours upon Earth have both delighted and perished.

They are produced as a Caution unto all, and the Book may serve as a Mirror
unto the Best, in which they may observe the uncertainty of humane condition in
the Pilgrimage of this life: It precisely (Sir) devoteth it self to your
protection in whose Example, as in a purer Mirror may be read all the
Influences of Honor and of Chivalry; which that you may long live to dispense
amongst us, is the daily prayer of him who is,

(Sir) Your most humble and most devoted Servant. ROB. CODRINGTON.

THE PILGRIMAGE OF KINGS and PRINCES.
CHAP. I.
That all Princes are but Pilgrims, and some Pilgrims are higher then Kings.

THis at first may seem a paradox; but upon a deliberate consideration it will
easily unriddle it self: For if you look upon a King (in the first place) as he
is but a man, he is a Pilgrim, and no more. He begins his journey in his
cradle, and travels every year from sorrow unto sorrow. The pleasures and pomp
that courts him are but momentary, like a flash of lightning, that is rather
the subject of his memory then his eye: But the troubles and the dangers are
perpetual, and lie as heavy upon his heart as the Crown upon his head. This was
not unaptly resembled by the Tyrant, who (his friend affecting the crown) did
invite him to a Banquet, where there was nothing wanting either for abundance,
or magnificence; the Sea and Earth were examined for their rarest provisione to
satisfy his palate, and on the Cupboard India did appear in all her treasures;
This indeed did promise a welcome above the invitation; but behold, over his
head a sword hung upon one hair, and by its ponderous burden carrying a
certain Death in its point, did threaten a sudden destruction to him, so that
the edge of his appetite being taken off, and the Banquet ended, there needed
no man to say so much as, Much good d'it you, to him.

And yet for all this, I know not by what secret temptation of Ambition it
comes about, that the Crown is the only object of all great Spirits, not
considering what cares hang round about the ring ols of it. This was that which
made the great Turkish Emperor, seeing a shepherd sitting on a hill, and
making melody to himself, as he marched with his puissant Army against
Tamberlane, O happy shepherd (said he) who has neither any remarkable Town,
nor any Army to lose.

Agreeable to this, is what at least the Poets enform us of Henry the fourth of
England, who lying on his Deathbed, and sending for the Crown, his Son came to
visit him, and beholding the Crown on the pillow, and his Father so fast asleep
that not the least motion of breath could be discovered to come from him to vex
the lightest feather on the pillow, he took the Crown away, conceiving his
Father to be dead. Not long after his Father did awake, and missing the Crown,
demanded where it was, and who was so bold as to take it away? It being
answered, That his Son had it, to whom it was due by the right of succession,
his Son came in, to whom his Father said, That if he knew with what travel both
of mind and body, and with what danger of both it was purchased, he would never
be so hasty to take it away, but keep far from it, as from the center of all
sorrow and affliction.

And if the whole life of man is but a Pilgrimage, the life of Kings is the
greatest pilgrimage of al, A pilgrimage it is both of the mind and of the body,
to which they are most subject, who have the most and the greatest Kingdoms.
Their life is a perpetual vexation, whether you look upon them as greedy to
possess the Kingdoms of others, or solicitous to defend their own. No sooner
one trouble is ended but another begins, occasioned either by covetousness or
ambition, or by jealousies extrinsick or Domestic; sometimes they fear the
over-growing power of their neighboring Princes; sometimes they do lie in wait
to entrap them; sometimes they fear the conspiracies of their own servants;
sometimes of their own children; for you are to understand that in this nature,
the condition of Princes is of all most miserable. How many Kings may I number
up who have been all deprived of their lives by the unnatural conspiracy of
their own children! Justin makes mention of an Emperor of Persia, who by
diverse Concubines had fifty sons, who all held in a conspiracy with the eldest
to take away the fathers life, for no other cause but that they conceived he
lived a little too long, and they were resolved to depend no longer upon
expectation.

And it appears to me a great wonder that the spirits of men should be so much
blinded and that Princes should be so misguided by the Prince of the air, that
although they are assured within themselves, and may be convinced by a thousand
examples, that a revenge not to be avoided, does attend such desperate
contrivers, yet no age almost has been without a President of such horrible
Parricides. Irenus King of the Molossi, having conspired with some of the
Nobility, who were most near unto his father, did not long after by poison take
away his fathers life, and being himself invested with the Crown, although he
enjoyed a long time a happy and quiet life, yet he was tormented in his
conscience within him, and having lost the love of his subjects, he at last
lost his own life, his people having made war against him, and being taken by
them he was beheaded in the same place, in which he conspired his fathers death.

The Histories can afford us a thousand examples of the same nature, but
Herodotus makes mention of Enanthus a Prince, as unblemished in his
conversation as innocence it self; who passing through a world of afflictions
which like waves came rolling upon him, one on the neck of the other, was first
banished, and afterward put to death by his subjects, and dying, confessed
that it was the first hour of his happiness, being to pass from a Labyrinth
of sorrows and perplexity into an everlasting Elysium of Peace and Rest.

But to give you an instance what miserable Pilgrims Princes are, you may
behold Nebuchadnezzar who from the height of glory was by divine vengeance
metamorphosed into a beast, and wandering from field to field in a worse
condition then a Pilgrim, he fed on the grass of the field for seven years
together, and was wet with the dew of heaven, and at the last returning to
himself, he acknowledged the divine power, and the divine Justice, which taught
him to understand in what a frail condition he stood and how uncertain is life,
and the glory of mortality like the Lilly in the field, which appears in the
morning in all its beauty, and more richly apparelled then Solomon in all his
glory, and before the evening it is gathered and fades away, and is seen no
more.

Just so are Kings, the flourishing array
Of the proud Summers meadow, which to day
Wears his green plush, and is to morrow Hay.
Therefore Philip the father of Alexander the great, revolving with himself
what a pilgrimage this life is, and especially the life of a King, which as it
is more full of state then the life of others, so it is also more full of
danger, commanded his Page every morning to come unto him, and to pronounce a
loud, O Philip remember that thou art mortal, which though his son seemed to
forget, and therefore would be esteemed immortal, and have divine honors done
unto him, yet whosoever shall take the pains to behold him aright in the height
of all his victories, he shall find that his life was the greatest pilgrimage,
nay I may say the arrantest slavery that was in the world: for what did he do,
but became only a slave to his own ambition to inslave the world and to make
it stoop to his yoke. A plundring Pilgrim he was, and under the pretense of
glory and of conquest, he enjoyed no rest either by day or by night, but
traveled from place to place, uncertain in the morning in what field to take
up his lodgings the night following, or where he should dine the next day, but
as if he would try providence, as well as victory, he did put all things to the
adventure; and indeed it was providence that did protect him, for into how many
dangers did he rashly run, from which he was miraculously preserved, and by a
rare happiness, made his rashness always to be the increase of his glory. I
shall on this subject speak something of him, which Curtius never thought on,
which is, that when he took a poor Pyrat prisoner; he asked him, how he durst
be so insolent as to commit such robberies on the seas. The Pyrat nothing
dismayed, made answer, he did it with the same confidence as Alexander himself,
who went up and down plundering and destroying the world. And when Fate had put
a period to his life and Empire, it is observable how this invincible spirit
became heavy and timorous, which on purpose in this place I do insert, because
many who have delivered his achievements to memory have left it out and it may
more plainly appear what momentary things great Princes are, when that power
does forsake them which does lead them to their high undertakings. Alexander
being come to Babylon, he put off his clothes one evening to anoint himself, to
make his body more nimble in some exercises in the field with his companions,
in which he much delighted. The sport being ended, as he returned to put on
his clothes, the young Nobles who were with him beheld a man who sat in the
Kings seat, and had put on his royal habiliments, and the Diadem on his head.
They amazed at it, demanded who he was; the man would make no answer at all, at
last being threatened that he should endure the greatest torments if he would
not confess what he was, he at last spoke in Greek, that he was a poor fellow,
who being unjustly condemned to death, was delivered from it by the God
Seraphis, who seated him in that place, and commanded him to put on the royal
habiliments. The wonder increasing that there being so many of the guard and of
the Kings associates, in the field and in and about the Pavillion, and not any
of them should either discover the man either coming into the Pavillion, or
putting on the clothes. Alexander was so possessed with horror at the
strangeness of the spectacle, that he became as a dead man, and for the three
days following was so mute and stpid, that he appeared as another creature, he
would neither speak to any, nor return any answer being spoken unto, till he
went unto the house of Thessalus Medius, where he drank the fatal poison, and
being carried afterward to his own chamber, he lamented with himself the
condition of man, and more precisely of Princes, who in the height of all their
luster, like the sun at noon, were suddenly eclipsed by ungrateful clouds;
howsoever it is worth your observance, that even in his death desiring to
traduce the world with a false belief of his immortality, he desired Roxane who
was present with him, and at that time great with child by him, that she would
give way that some who were most faithful to her, and to himself, might take
his body (he finding an impossibility of recovery, and death apparently to grew
upon him) and throw it into the River of Euphrates, that the army and the world
might conceive, that invisibly he was advanced from mortality, and translated
into the number of the Gods, which when Roxane by no means would give way unto,
affirming that the power which protected him from so many dangers, would
preserve him still, he was passionate against her, that in pretense of love she
should deny him immortality and dying in the flower of his youth, he
acknowledged how momentary and uncertain at the best is the condition of
Princes.

And thus Alexander you see, who contended to be above the reach of mortality,
and to be no Pilgrim, became the greatest Pilgrim in the world; for he not
only living was in a perpetual travel both of body and of mind but he did not
rest being dead, for his body was carried from place to place, until it was
brought at last to Alexandria, and afterward conveyed unto Memphis.

And to speak the truth, the condition of Kings is more lamentable then the
meanest of their subjects, who may enjoy their lives with safety, which is
permitted but to a few Kings, so true is that of Juvenal.

Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguini pauci
Descendunt reges and sicca morte tyranni.
By a dry Death, without a bloody end
Few Kings to Ceres son in Law descend.
For this reason the Honorable Sir Francis Bacon, who said. That God did most
for Kings, and that Kings did least for God, did affirm, That there was so many
cares and dangers depending on a Crown, that no wise man would take it up to
have it, especially considering how many excellent Princes who have been as
admirable for their justice as for their fortitude, and for their continence as
for either, have violently lost their lives by their ungrateful subjects. Of
this I shall give you examples pregnant enough in its due place, and conclude
this chapter. That Princes are the greatest Pilgrims, by the example of the
best of Princes, which was David himself.

And this is as easy to prove by his confession, as by his sufferings; He is
hunted, he says, like a Partridge upon the mountains, he is like a Pelican in
the wilderness, he is as a Sparrow upon the house top: You may behold him
persecuted from place to place, yet giving life to the King who would take his
life from him; You may behold him flying out of the Kingdom, and disguising
himself in a safe madness, to protect him from the violence of his adversaries;
You may behold him exposed to all the dangers that malice could imagine,
reviled by his own wife, cursed by his own servants, and conspired against by
his own son, and driven out of his City by him, so that he might well say, I am
a stranger in the land, and my life is waxen old with heaviness, and my years
with mourning.

CHAP, II.
The attractive Liberality of Princes.

But before I proceed to give you examples of it, I shall exhibit to you, that
the pleasures and the splendours which commonly attends the Court, and do cast
such a false show of Glory on it, are but as so many flatterers, who would
persuade to things which are not and only leave a dazzle on the eye, the easier
to delude and betray the underastnding. It is virtue only that makes Princes
glorious. I will first give you a general survey of the virtues and vices of
Princes, by which in the pilgrimage of this life, some have attained to the
height of honor, and others have sunk into the lowest infamy. And first, to
deface the vice of Avarice, I will in this place show you the virtue of
Liberality; to put the churlish covetous out of countenance, I will extol the
liberal, which in taking is shamefaced, in giving joyful: For a measure in
taking and in giving, is the true nature of liberality; Neither can he that
takes all things though he give much, be named liberal in nothing.

Agesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians, so observed the laws and rules of
Lycurgus, that he was wont to say unto the Citizens of Sparta, that gifts are
more dangerous sometime to be received, then hurtful to be refused. Which
Phocion, the whole glory of Athens, at what time Alexander the Great had sent
him great gifts, wealthy presents, jewels, and treasures from Persia, did show
a true example thereof of in refusing the same, saying I will not learn to
take, lest I forget to give. The like answered Zenocrates the Philosopher to
the self same Alexander, when that he did send great sums of gold and silver
for love and affection unto Zenocrares, he said he wanted neither gold nor
silver: Which when it was told unto Alexander, he said; Has Zenocrates no
friends then that want money? Alexander has more friends then either the
substance of Darius, or the wealth of Persia can suffice: A Question is here to
be demanded, Whether of them both was more liberal, the Prince in giving, or
the Philosopher in refusing? When certain Ambassadors of the Samnites came to
Rome, and being at Fabritius house, they perceiving the liberality of Fabritius
to be such, as it were pity wealth should want to so noble a Gentleman, at
their return from Rome unto their Country, not forgetting the free dealing of
Fabritius at Rome, these Ambassadors minding to gratify Fabritius with the
gold of the Samnites, sent gifts and presents to him unto Rome, for their noble
entertainment; which were refused with an answer, that Fabritius had rather
rule and govern them that were ruled by gold, then to be subject unto gold;
alleging the answer of M. Curious to the Ambassadors of Macedonia, offering
large gifts and treasure after the like sort, That to possess much is no
wealth, but covetousness; to desire nothing, and to give is perfect wealth and
liberality: A sound proof of two liberal Gentlemen.

When such ruled Rome, then the Romans excelled all the world, bountiful and
free and most beneficial unto all, and covetous unto none When L. Lucullus
house was a common hospital to all the poor Greeks that traveled from Athens
Sparta, and Thebes, yea, from al Gree^e unto Rome, then Rome was liberal. When
Pomponius Atucus did send unto Cicero being banished, two hundred thousand
Sesterces, unto Voluminous and Brutus as much, then Rome was beneficial When the
Senators restored Faucula and Oppia, two poor women of Campania, not only unto
their ancient liberty, but doubled their wealth and riches, for their true
meaning and service to the Romans, the one praying and sacrificing for their
good success, the other toyling and traveling about the soldiers business at
the siege of Capua, where Fulinus was Captain, then Rome was merciful.
Liberality in noble persons is most commended, for in liberal giving; and
beneficial doings, are Princes compared unto Gods. Fabius Maximus having
certain of his soldiers taken by Hannibal in the wars of Carthage, did send
unto the Senators of Rome for money to redeem the Roman soldiers from
Hannibal, according unto Martial law, but being denied of his suit, he
commanded his son straight to go to Rome, to sell all the lands and livings
that he then possessed about the City of Rome, and to bring him money. The money
being brought, he paid Hannibal, redeemed his soldiers brought them free to
Rome upon his own charge, and being blamed of the Senators that he sold his
land, he answered, that he had rather want patrimony in his Country, then love
toward his Countrymen; he had rather be without living in Rome, then to want
the good will of tho poor soldiers. Alphonsus the great King of Arragon was
wont to rejoice more in one little sentence that Titus Vespatianus would often
say, then of all that he had read all the days of his life: This Emperors
golden sentence was, That day to be unhappy in the which he neither gave or
granted any thing to some man, saying, That no man ought to depart from a
Prince sad. Ho judged time lost, when no body fared the better by him, and
thought no man should depart without some benefits done, or gifts given to
some, or others Liberality does purchase to the Prince, faith and love; to the
Nobleman, service and homage; unto all men, benefits and good turns. Wherefore
Alexander the Great, not so desirous to take, as willing to give, was wont to
say to any that demanded where his treasures, wealth and substance that he got
in the wars were kept, by poynting with his singer to his friends, it is
hidden, says he, in the hearts of my subjects. What can be more commended in a
subject toward his Prince, then faith and truth? What may be more praised in a
Prince toward his subjects then liberality and lenity? The liberality of the
poor is good will. A poor Scholar sometime of Greece, being in Rome, thought
good to salute Caesar the Emperor coming from the Capitol toward his palace
in a few Greek verses, thinking thereby his penury should be somewhat looked
upon by Caesar: But Caesar surnamed Augustus, answered the Scholar in writing
again the like Greek verses, which when it was delivered to the poor Greek, he
delighted much in the reading, commended highly the verses, and approached unto
Caesar where he was in his Chariot, opened his purse, and gave unto the
Emperor four single halfpence, saying, Hold, not according to thy dignity and
calling, but according to my ability and poverty I give this reward. Certainly
the poor Scholar was more commended for his small gift to the Emperor then
the Emperor himself was praised for his liberality unto all the people in
Rome. The poor Poet Antilochus was as liberal to his power for his verses made
unto King Lisauder, as Lisander was in his calling to give him his hat full of
silver. Simple Sinae^es was as liberal in offering a handful of water of the
river Cydnus unto the great King Artaxerxes of Persia for want of better
ability, as Artaxerxes was princely in gifts, and beneficial unto Sinaetus, in
rewarding liberally the liberality of Sinaetes, with Phiala aurea cum mill
Daricis. Chaerilus had no better present for a proof of his liberality toward
Alexander the Great, then to show his good will unto him in writing, whereby he
showed himself more willing then able, which being accepted, he was liberally
rewarded, for every several verse a piece of gold. What greater gift can any
man give, then that which proceeds from the heart? Of all treasure, says
Aristotle, the mind of a man ought most to be esteemed; the Mite of the poor
woman offered to Christ was no less made of, and esteemed then the Gold,
Myrrh, and Frankincense of the great Sages of the world. For the gift makes
not the giver liberal, but the giver makes the gift liberal. Wherefore a poor
Student of Paris going home to his country Scillia, and being urged through
penury, wanting money, to go to a great learned man's house (as though he might
go to some of the Bishops of England) tarrying there a long while without
either meat or drink, perceiving the house to be gorgeous, fair and brave
without, and full of hunger, thirst and cold within, he wrote with a coal on
the wall a sentence of Cicero, Non domo Dominus, sed domus Domino honest and
^est. As though he might say, fair buildings want more liberal dwellings, then
liberal Lords fair houses, for the house is praised by the man, and not the man
by the house.

Fair houses and wealth do hardly make men liberal; it is said that fair things
are coupled with pride, and wealth joined with covetousness. In the beginning,
all men were liberal, until private wealth began to practice with money,
covetousness was not known for as money did increase, fo covetousness grew.
In Rome says Pliny money was not seen four hundred years and more, after the
building of Rome. Then was Rome true and beneficial bp reason of liberality,
which after waxed wealthy and false, by means of covetousness. That City was
most famous chiefly for her liberality, wherein Rome excelled all the world; if
the death of Princes, of Noble men, yea, of all men can sufficiently bear
witness of their lives, considering virtue and fame shall prove that by death,
which life hardly may utter (for no man is well known during life.) The death
of Epaminondas that most renowned Prince of Thebes, and Conqueror of all
Greece, was a sure and a certain show of his liberal life. The last day of P.
Aemilius, who triumphed in life time over the proud Macedonians and Liguriant,
was a true token of his frank and free dealing in life. In life manner we may
say of Maenemus Agrippa, and Scipio Affricanus, the one victor ove^ the
Samnites, the other triumpher over Carthage and Numantia, whose renowned lives,
made their deaths famous: whose worthy deaths, do revive their noble lives.
Their beneficial dealing and liberality, was well known by their deaths: so
liberally they lived, that their friends found no money hidden, no gold kept,
no treasure preserved, no wealth at all, though diverse time by victory and
triumphs, by conquest and fortune they psssessed Kingdoms and countries in the
time of life. The greatest Prince in his time Cyrus, the first King that
brought the Monarchy unto Persia, slain by Tomyris, had on his grave being
buried in Scithia, in no gorgeous Temple, nor sumptuous Tomb, but in an open
field, this Epitaph Here heth Cyrus the great King of Persia, contented now
with seven foot, who could not be satisfied sometime with seven Kingdoms: what
Caesar, King, or Prince soever thou art, spare this place unto Cyrus. And when
Alexander the great, passing with his army unto Scithia and India, had read
this Epitaph, and perceiving the slippery estate of Princes, the uncertainty of
life, and mutability of fortune, he much doubted the state of his own life:
howbeit, at that voyage he forgot by means of Mars, the Epitagh of King Cyrus,
until he returned from India, from his wars into Babylon, where he married
Statira King Darius daughter, whom before he conquered: where such liberality
was showed, such magnificency done, such gifts given such banquets kept that
Alexander upon his own charges married the most part of the Nobles of
Macedonia, unto the Ladies of Persia, the feasts during five days amounted to
the sum of three and twenty thousand Talents, every Talent valued at fourscore
pounds, he repeating often the Epitaph of Cyrus, would suffer none, though diverse
Princes were present, to be at any charges but himself, only saying that which
fortune gives unto Alexander, the same will Alexander give unto his friends,
for Cyrus grave is appointed unto Alexander: in this Alexander passed all
Princes, in taking all, and giving all: private faults may not deprave open
virtues, every man has a fault. Alexander was known to be a drunkard; Julius
Caesar was noted to be ambitious; Antiochus the the great King of Syria blamed
for lechery. Alcibiades of pride; P^rrhus of incredulity; Hannibal of falsehood;
Dionifius of tyranny. I may number up infinite Princes, who for one vice may
not be forgotten for their diverse virtues: Virtue must not be hidden for that
vice is manifest. Phrine a Courtisan sometime of Greece, though for her
slanderous life, worthy reprehension, yet for her liberality she ought well to
be remembered, for after Alexander the great had subdued that famous City of
Thebes, and made the walls thereof even with the ground: she offered to
re-edifie the same upon this condition, that upon every gate of the City this
sentence shall be set. This City Alexander the great threw down, and this City
Phrine the Courtisan builded up again. The like I have read of Queen Rhodope,
sometime a Courtisan, and a lewd woman, who made up the brave and sumptuous
work, called the Pyramides in Egypt, where she used such liberalliry, such a
vast expense of money, that for her nobleness she was well worthy to be
commended, though for vicious living she was otherwise to be blamed. Men and
women were desirous then to be liberal: Then Princes were as liberal and
beneficial with such lenity and humanity unto the poor, as they grew afterward
to be hard and covetous with severity and cruelnesse. Therefore Anaxilaus a
liberal Prince, was often wont to say, that the chiefest commendations and
noblest virtues which could be in a Prince, were, not to be overcome in
beneficial doings. Attalus King of Assa, languishing in sickness, and ready to
die, bequeathed his Kingdom and Scepter of Asia, unto the noble Romans by
testament, fully and freely to bestow it on whom they would, for that they were
so liberal and beneficial sometime toward him, whilst yet fortune favored
him not.

A liberal Prince cannot be void of love. Antigonus was wont to answer
Aristodemus, one of his Council, who was brought up of a boy in his Kitchen,
when he spoke any thing against princely gifts, and found fault with Antigonus
liberality, that his talk did smell of the Kitchen: A fit reprehension for such
a saucie servant, who hindered Kings from doing good, and moved Princes to do
evil. I would such Sycophants should be so answered by Princes, as Aristodemus
was of King Antigonus. Worthy of perpetual memory was Artaxerxes for his
passing liberality toward the poor soldiers that came from the Lacedemonian
war with him, he made them that came on foot unto him, to go home on horseback;
he that came on horseback, he sent him home in a chariot; and he that had a
village before he came unto him, he gave him a city at his going away from him.
A Prince worthy of Subjects, and a Captain most fit for Soldiers. What made
Julius Caesaa to be beloved of his soldiers? What caused Alexander to be
honored of all men? Magnificence and liberality; The one in the great Wars at
Pharsalia, at what time he conquered Pompeius the Great, having all the
treasures and substance of Pompeius brought before him, took nothing from the
soldiers but Pompeius letters: The other, after he had vanquished King Darius,
having a great chest full of treasure, where he found in present coin, two
hundred thousand pound, beside other inestimable treasures and jewels took
nothing from his soldiers but a little book named the Illiads of Homer,
wherein he delighted more to read the noble acts of the Greeks, and the worthy
feats of the Troyans, then in all the wealth of Persia. Thus liberality
maintained their fame; Thus their magnificent benefits so spread forth their
noble names, that happy was he that could be a soldier unto Caesar, or to
Alexander. I remember a certain King in Syracusa, named Hiero, who
understanding the liberality of the Romans, and perceiving the penury of
victuals which then the Romans sustained in the wars of Tharsimenos, did send
three hundred thousand bushels of wheat, and two hundred thousand of barley,
with great sums of gold and silver to ease the Roman soldiers,, and fearing
that his gifts would not be taken, nor his presents received, considering the
nature and liberallity of the Romans, he willed the Ambassadors to say that it
was an homage and service of good will, sent to honor the Romans from Hiero
King of Siracusa an excellent policy to practice beneficence, with manifest
examples of a liberal heart. O Rome how happy have thou been, through thy
liberrlity and good will have won the hearts of all Kingdoms and countries,
Until Ninus time all things were common, no division of ground no hoording of
money, no covetousness known no greediness of Kingdoms, no desire of wealth:
in fine, for the space of two hundred and fifty years, for the simplicity,
innocence and true dealing of people, it was worthily called the golden world,
and then a man could not find a covetous person, and now a man cannot find a
liberal friend; then no man knew to do evil, and now no man knows to do good;
then no man did take, and now no man does give: in fine, then one for another
and now all for themselves. What made Cimon a liberal Gentleman of Athens, to
be so famous in Greece? his liberality amongst nigards he only counted
liberal, and all Athens besides covetous, whereby he deserved renown and glory,
amongst so many nippers of money, he only showed himself bountiful and
liberal. What caused Flaminius to be so much spoken of amongst the Romans? his
liberal gifts amongst so many greedy takers, his open benefits, amongst their
private wealth and hidden hatred? What moved the Agrigentines to honor so much
the manly Gillias, to advance his fame to extol his name? his liberality. Such
covetousness then was in Athens, Rome, and Agrigentum, that then worthy were
these of admiration and praise, who avoided the cankered state of avarice. Thus
from the golden world, it came unto the silver world, and then to that hard
metal the iron world for the covetous people can never be satisfied. The young
Partridge, by nature is ready to flee as soon as she comes out of the shell,
the wild duck to swim, the Lion to go, and man only born ready to seek and
travel for money. Where might a man find out such a man as Ari^^ides was in all
Greece now? who was so liberal, that having all the state of Athens under his
government, gave all to the poor Citizens, a little excepted which brought him
unto the ground. Where should one meet with such a one as Pelopidas in all
Sparta? being blamed of his friends and counselors, for his large gifts and
liberallity, exhorting him to make much of money, considering how necessary
money is to Princes: yea said Pelopidas, to such Princes as Nicomedes, a lame
man both dumb and deaf. Where should a man seek in Thebes for such a man as
Epaminondas? who when he heard that he who carried his Target after him, had
taken money for the dismission of certain prisoners taken in the wars, Give me
(said he) my Target, and go you to keep an Inn, for if you love money, you are
not fit to carry Epaminondas Target: with so much honor is liberallity
attended, that those Princes who have been famous for the most fortitude have
been famous also for the most liberallity, yet neither liberallity, nor fame,
nor fortitude, can reprieve a Prince from the ingratitude of death.

CHAP. III.
What Princes were advanced one way, and were oppressed by an other.

HOw some men are exalted and others oppressed, Histories do record. All the
Kings that ever reigned in Rome, almost from base birth and slender progeny,
were advanced by fortune to sit in the royal throne, and enjoy Princely
Scepters. Romulus the first King and builder of Rome, born of Rhea, a Vestal
Virgin, and daughter unto Amulius, was left as a prey unto beasts, forsaken of
all in Rome, so hated of his own grandfather, that he found more friendship in
a she Wolf, then he had at his grandfather Amulius, more kindness of the Wolf
for his nourishment then love of his mother, though he was born of her.
Notwithstanding, contrary to the expectation of Amulius, being not thought of
in Rome, he was by a Woolf preserved, and by a poor Shepherd brought up to be
a King of Rome. The like happened unto Cyrus at three days old, when he was
commanded by his grandfather King Astiages to be drowned, and delivered unto
Harpagus chief officer about Astiages, by King Astiages own hand, to be killed
and destroyed: yet by fortune, a Bitch (he being left as Romulus was) fed him
and gave him milk and life when his Parents appointed death for him, and being
thus brought up by a Bitch, he was the first and most renowned King that ever
reigned in Persia. Even so may I allege of Paris King Priamus son called
likewise Alexander, who being commanded to be killed as soon as he was born, he
was brought up by a Bear to be a famous Phrigian Prince. Thus Cyrus by fortune,
found more friendship in a bitch then in his own mother: Romulus more love in a
Woolf then in all Rome: Alexander more kindness in a Bear then in his father
Priamus. What shall I say of Pelephus the son of Hercules, who was fostred by a
Heart or of Camilla and Semiramis, the one brought up by a Mare, the other by
birds of the air to be such famous Queens, as the one ruled the Volscians the
other the Babylonians; How fortune appointed little Ants to feed King Midas,
and Bees to feed Plato, the wealth of the one, and eloquence of the other did
certify the same: but I will declare first the extolling and advancement of
simple and base men unto Princely seats. Tarquinius Priscus, a stranger born in
Corinth, the son of Demaiat^s a banished Merchant from his country, became a
famous King in Rome: yea so famous I say that he enlarged the confines of
Italy, amplified the wealth and state of Rome, augmented the number of the
Senators, increased the order of Knighthood, and left Rome so happy at his
death, that the Citizens thereof would have traveled twice as far as Corinth,
so that they might enjoy again so noble a Prince. Tullius Servius, a poor
stranger, was likewise advanced unto the same place by fortune: and Tullus
Hostillius a shepherd, was from feeding of beasts extolled to be the King of
Rome. Thus fortune to show her might, exalts the poor, and oppresses the
proud. Thus from banished strangers, from simple shepherds, most famous
Princes, and noble Kings have proceeded. Fortune as Seneca says, from low
birth, and base conditions, has made Princes; many have been advanced from the
Plough to sit in seat of Kings, as Gordius, who from the plough became a King
in Phrygia: Fortune took Agathocles from his fathers shop being a Potter, and
made him King in Sycilia: she brought Darius from the Stable of Cyrus to be a
King in Persia: she brought Giges from a Shepherd to be the wealthiest King
that ever reigned in Lydia: Justinus a swine-heard from feeding his Swine,
became the mighty Emperor of Constantinople. And Carpenters likewise may brag
of Telephanes, whom fortune adva^ced to ye Kingdom of Lydia. Shall not
Husbandmen extol fortune, which made Valentianus Emperor in Rome? How much did
fortune favor learning, how brought she the greatest Princes in the world to
honor simple men, and caused the cruellest tyrant to esteem and reverence the
same? King Dyonisius that wicked tyrant of Sicilia, when he heard that divine
and noble Philosopher Plato was coming unto Sycilia he made certain of his
Nobles to go meet him on the sea, and in a ship bravely appointed, and
gorgeously apdressed with Sails of purple silk to bring him to land, where
Dionisius himself did attend his coming in his golden Chariot, with four white
horses trapped over with gold, and having taken him into his own Princely
Chariot, he talked unto him reverently, used him honorably, and so entertained
him, that if Jupiter had descended from the sky, greater honor could he not
get in Creet, then Plato a poor Philosopher Aristons son of Athens obtained in
Sicil. Aristotle born in Stagira a poor Physicians son named Nichomachus,
merited such fame that not only Philip King of Macedonia, thanked God that his
son Alexander was born in his time, under whose tuition Alexander five years
learned Philosophy, but also Alexander the great, Conqueror of the world
honored and saluted him as his Master, unto whom he said that he was no less
bound for his learning and virtuous education, then he was unto King Philip his
father for his birth, he declared the same being in India, a country far from
Greece, and in the midst of his great wars, he did write unto him of the state
of India, of the success of his journies, and the prodigious and monstrous
sights that he saw in his expedition. That mighty Artaxerxes King of Persia,
hearing of the fame of that learned Hypocrates, did send unto the chief
Governor of Hellespent earnest letters for Hypocrates, promising him great
honors, and an equality to the chief rulers of Persia, and to be a fellow and
friend unto mighty Artaxerxes.

Bion being demanded what was the most dangerous thing in the world, he
answered, to be most fortunate. Phocion, that learned Athenian, was wont to
say, that better it were to lie careless upon the ground, safe and sound, then
to lie with trouble of mind under cloth of States in danger and peril. A
certain wise Prince, before he was crowned King, did take the Crown first (as
Valerius says) in his hand, and after looking and musing a while upon it, he
said, O Crown, more noble then happy, whose peril to enjoy if men understood,
no man would take thee from the ground, though thou did offer thy self unto
him What felicity happened unto Alexander the Great, whom fortune so advanced
to be a King of Kings, a Conqueror of Conquerors, yea to be worshipped as a
God, and to be called the son of Jupiter, whose fame compassed the whole earth,
in so much, that Thalestris Queen of the Amazons came from Scythia unto
Hyrcania with three hundred women to lie with Alexander thirty days to have a
child by him; and yet in Babylon that fortune that so exalted him, did likewise
oppress him, being in his chief fame, and but thirty two years old, poisoned
by his kinsmen and friends, and so left and forsaken of all men, that he was
thirty days unburied, as a beggar, not as a King, and rather like a beast then
the son of Jupiter. In the same manner fortune served Julius Caesar, who after
the glory of so many conquests, was in his own city of Rome, and in the Senate
house amidst his Counselors, treacherously slain and murdered with Bodkins
and Daggers, by his most trusty friends Brutus and Cassius, that he had twenty
and three wounds in his body. This was the unfortunate end of so fortunate a
beginning. How did fortune deal with famous Xerxes, whose huge armies dried up
rivers, whose infinite numbers of Navies covered the Ocean seas, whose power
and force all Greece trembled at; fortune that promised all Greece to him, did
give him over into the hands of Themistocles his enemy to be vanquished, and
unto the force of Artabanus to be slain. A little better she used Mithridates
King of Pontus, who after many victories in diverse countries, and noble
triumphs against the invincible Romans, she at length to his great discomfort,
after he had lost his wife, children, and all his friends, did leave him in his
old age a prey unto Pompeius. Therefore was Plato wont to thank God, that he
was born a man, and not a beast; in Greece, and not in Barbary; and thanked
fortune, that he was a scholar unto Socrates, who always despised fortune and
her power: For fortune never does a good deed, but she requiteth the same with
an evil turn afterward. Pyrrhus that valiant King of Epyrus, whom fortune
guided so famously, that he was counted by Hannibal the second soldier and
Prince for his magnanimity and courage, unto Alexander the Great, was killed by
a silly simple Argive woman with a Tile stone. Hannibal, whose name was so
terrible unto Rome by the space of sixteen years, was driven into exile, and
became a banished abject from his Country, and weary of his life, he ended his
days with poison in Bithinia. Alcibiades, whom fortune so favored that he
excelled all men in personage and birth, in wisdom and honor, in strength and
wealth, and in all kind of virtues, was brought to such banishment and penury,
to such infamy and reproach, that he was compassed round, and taken by his
enemies, and burned in his bed with his whore whose name was Timandra. Cambyses
and Nero, whose cruel and unhappy days both Rome and Persia long time felt;
their fate was such, that after much tyranny and bloodshed, being weary in
murdering of others, they slew themselves: This was the end of their cruelty.

Polycrates, who ever sailed with prosperous winds of fortune, so that he was
named fortunate Polycrates, at length (being so served of fortune as other
Princes were) he was taken and hanged by one Orontes, an Officer of King
Darius, in the open sight of Samos, where he a long time flourished, and in the
end was hanged on a high hill named the mount of Mycale. These evils happen by
fortune, yet we see them not; she gripes us with her hands, and yet we feel it
not; she treads us down, and yet we will not know it. Happy is he that
accompanies not with fortune, though diverse think themselves happy that he
fortunate: As Gyges and Croesus, two Kings of Lydia so wealthy that they judged
no man so happy as they were; and yet was Aglaus the poorest in all Arcadia,
and Byton the simplest of all Greece (the one by the sentence of Solon, the
other by the Oracle of Apollo) judged far more happy then they. The very tyrant
Dyonisius, being banished from his Kingdom of Corinth, would often say in his
misery That happy twice were they that never knew fortune, whose fawning face
in the beginning does purchase cruel death in the end. Wherefore a certain
Lacedemonian called Diagoras, being in the Games of Olympia in Greece having
his children, and his childrens children crowned with Garlands of Fame, for
their virtuous acts and qualities, said, that it were great happiness for him
to die presently at such a sight of his childrens Fortune; and being asked the
cause, he said, That Fortune never pleased that man so much at one time, but
she would at another time displease the same as much again. And most true it
was spoken unto one of the thirty tyrants, who being in banquet with diverse
Nobles and Gentlemen, when the house fell and slew them all; yet he escaping,
bragged much of his fortune that he so saved himself, a simple man hearing it,
said to him, Never boast of Fortune at any time, for that she spares thee now,
she will the next time more sharply plague thee. Which came so to pass; For his
flesh was made a food to his horses, and his blood was the drink which was
appointed for them.

If Fortune, whose wavering steps are never certain, were as little trusted of
the most as she is most deceitful and false to all then Cicero would not have
spoken, that they which seek Fortune are blinder then Fortune; she never
advanced any to dignity, but she suppressed the same again unto misery, as
Tarquinius the proud, a King that Fortune made famous diverse ways, of Princely
Progeny of passing personage of incredible beauty and of all noble qualities;
but Lucretia, Collatinus wife, was made the only snare to catch him, and to
take him, by whom he was deprived of his government, and banished out of Rome,
to range countries in misery and pain after long felicity and pleasure: even so
Dionisius King of Siracusa, after many Princely pleasures, renowned fame, great
glory, yet in the end was banished his country, and driven to keep school in
Italy. In the like sort, that noble and valiant Scipio Affricanus was deceived,
whose prowess and magnanimity augmented much the fame of the Romans by
conquering of Afric and Carthage, and notwithstanding, he was driven to
exilement and misery, where he died after many triumphs and victories like a
poor beggar. O uncertain state and slippery wheel of Fortune.

And because fame follows fortune, and proceeds from Fortune, as the smoke
comes from the fire (for as Fortune is variable, so is Fame diverse) if we seek
Histories, we find the fame of poor men for their poverty is great, as well as
the fame of the rich, for all their riches: poor Codrus and ragged Irus, are as
famous in respect of being Beggars, as Midas and Craesus two wealthy Kings of
Lydia. Does not Aristophanes make as much mention of Cleonimus the Coward, as
Homer does of stout Achilles? Poliphemus and Enceladus, two huge monstrous
Giants, not so famous in Virgil for their bigness, as Conopas or Molon, two
little dwarfs of two foot length, are renowned in Plini for their smalnesse.
Juvenal and Claudian, report no less of the little Pigmies, then Ovid or Maro
of ye huge Ciclopes. If Fame proceed of poor men for poverty, of dwarfs for
their smalnesse, of cowards for their cowardice, as much as it does flow of
rich men for their wealth, of Giants for their bigness, and of stout men for
their courage: What is it but a pilgrimage in which we live and travel here?
For fortune and fame run together as constantly as they are themselves
uncertain. Plini that famous Historiographer, writes of one named Messala, who
was so forgetful and weak of memory, that he forgot his own name, and yet he
was as famous for his obliviousness, as Hortensius was renowned for that he
could pronounce out of hand with his tongue what he wrote with his pen. Seneca
the Philosopher commends one called Calvisius, that he was likewise so
oblivious, that he could not often name those daily friends that he used
company withal. What greater Fame could Cyneas have for all his memory, when he
was sent from King Pyrrhus as Ambassador to Rome, where the second day, in the
Senate house, before all the people of Rome, he named all the Senators by name?
What greater renown could King Cyrus have for his noble memory, for naming
every soldier of his by name, being in the Camp? What Fame has King
Mithridates for his diverse and sundry languages, which he, without an
Interpretor, could speak unto two and twenty Nations, being his soldiers, but
only that they are recorded in books, where likewise Calvisius, Messala, and
such oblivious men that forgot their own names are committed into History. Does
not Homer, the Trumpetter of Fame, write of Militides an Idiot, who after the
destruction of Troy, and the death of King Priamus and all his sons, would come
to succor the Troyans? Homer (I say) does not forget Militides, no more then
he does Agamemnon. What should I speak of silly and wicked Herostratus, who for
burning the Temple of Diana, is everlastingly remembered: And millions more of
the like nature, who are mentioned by ancient writers? Thus you see we travel
all one way in the vale of misery, and the condition is alike of the greatest
Princes and the poorest Beggars; and if there be any difference, it is in that
oftentimes the King is the more unfortunate of the two.

CHAP. IIII.
Of magnanimity of Princes, and their fortitude of mind, where and when it was
esteemed.

AS Justice without temperance is often counted injury, so magnanimity without
respect unto prudence is but tyranny. This virtue proceeds from a valiant and
a sober mind, joining both the body and the mind together, so that the wisdom
and policy of the one, the strength and courage of the other, are united and
always ready to defend the cause of their country and the quarrel of their
Prince, and society of friendship: unto this therefore every good man is born,
preferring common commodities before private wealth Hercules pondering much,
what he might best do, and to what he should apply his noble mind, there
appeared unto him two goodly women, the one, as Xenophon does describe, very
gorgeous and brave, rings of gold on her finger, a chain of gold about her
neck, her hairs composed and frisled, with pearls and Diamonds hanging at her
ears: the other in sober and comely apparel, of modest behavior, of shame
faced countenance: they stood both before him. The first said, Hercules if thou will serve me, thou shall have gold and silver enough thou shall feed daintily,
thou shall live princely, thou shall enjoy pleasures: In fine, thou shall have
all things at thy will to live with ease and rest. The other said with comely
countenance, If thou will serve me Hercules, thou shall be a Conqueror of
conquerours, thou shall subdue Kingdoms, and overthrow Kings: thou shall be
advanced into fame, renowned in all the world, and shall deserve praise both of
men and women. Which when Hercules understood taking into consideration the
idle service of the first, and the exercise of the second, he took her as his
mistress, and willingly became a servant to her. Wherefore according unto
promise made, he enjoyed fully the fame and praise by due deserts; he overcame
Lions Dragons, Bears, and such monstrous huge wild beasts, he did destroy
Kingdoms and countries; he had that fortitude of mind, that he conquered
Giants, and subdued Tyrants enlarged liberties, set free Captives and
prisoners: and briefly that magnanimity was in him, that he never effended just
men, nor hurt innocent men, he preserved diverse Kings and countries, he never
spoiled good country, nor subdued a just King, but wholly addicted himself to
merit fame. He destroyed the Serpent Hydra, the Dragon the Lion, the wild Bore
and terrible Bull, conquering Geron, Cerberus, and Diomedes, cruel Tyrants. He
took the gilded Heart, he vanquished the Centaures, and the ravening birds named
Stimphalides, was there any tyranny in these his enterprises? but Hercules they
say, was more aided of the Gods, then helped of man. With these his princely
acts and renowned feats, noble Theseus was much enamored, insomuch that he
emulated the virtuous life of Hercules, he tamed wild beasts, slew monsters,
overcame cruel Creon the Tyrant of Thebes, he descended also as the Poet says
unto hell, to imitate the feats of Hercules, to resemble his magnanimity, to
augment Hercules fame, erecting alters, appointing sacrifice in memory of
Hercules, hoping that others would do unto Theseus as Theseus did unto
Hercules. Next unto Theseus for antiquity of time, that valiant and renowned
Greek Achilles, succeeded, who was the only stay and comfort of his country
the very hope of Greece, his magnanimity, valiant courage, worthy acts, and
famous life is at large set forth in Homers Illiads, which Homer, Alexander the
great so esteemed, by the reading of the achievements of Achilles, being
brought up in school, in his fathers days, with that learned Philosopher
Aristotle, that he never went to bed but he had Homer under his pillow, and
there fell in love with the prowess of Achilles, honored his life, and
magnified his death insomuch that he went unto Illion in Phrygia, where that
famous City of Troy sometimes stood, to see the grave of Achilles, where, when
he saw the worthy monuments of his martial chivalry, his famous feats and
renowned life depainted about the Temple, which environed round his sumptuous
Tomb, he brake out into tears, beholding the tomb, and said. O happy Achilles
who had such a Poet as Homer, that so well could advance thy fame. And thus
Alexander being moved by Homer to imitate Achilles, minded nothing else but
magnanimity and courage of mind, as Curtius, and Diodorus Siculus can well
testify, whose life though it was but short, was a mirror unto all the world,
that being but twenty years when he began to imitate the acts and feats of
Achilles, in twelve years more, (which was his whole time of life) he became
King over Kings, a Conqueror over Conquerours, and was named another Hercules,
for his prosperous success in his enterprises, insomuch that Julius Caesar,
the first and most valiant Emperor that ever was in Rome, after his great
conquests entering into the Temple of Hercules in Gades, and reading the life of
Alexander painted round about the Temple, his worthy fame declared, his noble
deeds set forth, his victories and conquests in every place described, such
monuments and mirrours in memory of his noble life every where expressed, he
fell into the like tears for Alexander, as Alexander did for Achilles.

Thus was one in love with another for magnanimities sake, each one so desirous
of others fame, that Caesar thought himself happy if he might be counted
Alexander, Alexander judged himself renowned if he might be named Achilles,
Achilles sought no greater fame then Theseus, Theseus ever desired the name of
Hercules. Therefore Agesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians wondered much at the
singular magnanimity and prowess of Epaminondas, sometime Prince of Thebes,
who with one little City could subdue all Greece. This Epaminondas having wars
with the Lacedaemonians, people no less renowned by war then justly feared by
Epaminondas after great victories and triumphs; was after this sort prevented
by Agesilaus, in the wars of Mantinia, that all the people of Sparta were
counseled either to kill Epaminondas, or to be killed by Epaminondas whereby
the whole force and power of Lacedemonia was fully bent by commandment given by
Agesilaus their King, to fall upon Epaminondas, where that valiant and noble
Prince by too much policy was wounded to death, to the utter destruction of
all the people of Thebes; and yet being carried unto his tent alive, he
demanded of his soldiers the state of the field, whether Thebes or Sparta was
conquered, being certified that the Lacedaemonians fled and that he had the
victory, he forthwith charged the end of the spear to be taken out of his
wounded side, saying, Now your Prince Epaminondas begins to live, for that
he dies a Conqueror. We read not of Epaminondas his parralel, who being
compared unto Agamemnon for his magnanimity, was angry therewith, saying
Agamemnon with all Greece with him, was ten years about one town, the City of
Troy Epaminondas with little Thebes in one year conquered all Greece. An order
was observed amongst the Lacedaemonians before they did go to the wars, they
were by their Laws charged to make solemn sacrifice unto the Muses; And being
demanded why they so did, since Mars has no society with the Muses; Eudamidas
then their King, answered For that we might obtain as well of the Muses how to
use victory gently, as Mars to become victors manfully.

These Lacedaemonians were so valiant, that having banished their King Cleonimus
for his extraordinary pride and violence did make Arcus King in his place: Who
being in Creet, aiding the people of Corcyra in wars with the most part of the
Citizens of Sparta, Cleonimus their exiled King consulted with Pyrrhus King of
Epyre, and persuaded him then or never to conquer Sparta, considering Areus was
in Creet, and that Sparta was not populous to defend any strength of invasion;
they both came, and pitched their field in the open face of the City of Sparta,
assuring themselves to sup that evening at Cleonimus house. The Citizens
perceiving the great Army of Pyrrhus, thought good by night to send their women
unto Creet to Areus, making themselves ready to ^ie manfully in resisting the
host of the enemy, and being thus in the Senate, agreeing that the womankind
should pass away that night, lest their nation at that time should be quiet
destroyed by Pyrrhus a great number of women appeared in armor, amongst whom
Archidamia made an Oration to the men of Sparta, wherein she much blamed their
intent, and quite confounded their purpose, saying, Think you, O Citizens of
Sparta) that your Wives and Daughters would live if they might, after the death
of their Husbands, and destruction of Sparta? Behold how ready we are, how
willingly the women of Sparta will die and live with their Husbands: Pyrrhus
shall well feel it, and this day be assured of it.

No marvel it is that the children of these women should be valiant and high in
their resolution. If Demosthenes, who was so much esteemed in Athens, had said
in Sparta that which he wrote in Athens, that they who sometime ran away should
fight again, he should have the like reward that Archilogus had who wrote in
his book, that it was sometime better to cast the buckler away then to die for
which he was banished the confines of Lacedemonia. At what time the noble city
of Sagun^um was destroyed, the Senate of Carthage having promised the contrary,
the renowned Romans, though the league was broken, and peace defied, yet the
Senators did send Fabius Maximus as their Ambassador, with two tables, the one
containing peace, the other wars, which were sent to Carthage, either to choose
peace or wars; the election was theirs, though the Romans were injured. Hardy
then the Romans were, when Scaenola went alone armed unto the Tents of Porsenna
King of Hetruria either to kill Porsenna or to be killed by Porsenna, greater
fortitude of mind could be in no man: a more valiant heart also was seen in no
man then in Cocles, who alone resisted the whole army of King Porsenna, and
when the draw bridge was taken up, he leaped in all his harness from his
enemies into the midst of the river Tybur. And though he was in diverse places
sore wounded yet neither did his fall hurt him, nor his Armor press him,
neither the water drown him, neither thousands of his enemies could kill him,
but he swam through the river Tybur unto Rome, to the great admiration of King
Porsenna, and exceeding joy of Rome; so that one poor Roman gave the repulse
to the whole Army of a King. Valiant was Rome, and the Romans feared, when
Popilius was sent Ambassador to Antiochus the Great, King of Syria, when
Antiochus (either for pride or pomp of his person, or contempt of Popilius)
refused to answer the Roman Ambassador; but was presently enforced to answer
the Senate of Rome, and give satisfaction to the demands of the Ambassador,
before he might go out of a little round circle which Popilius made with his
riding Rod. Rome was then faithful, when Pomponius a Roman Knight and soldier
under Lucullus, who was General in the field against Mithridates King of
Pontus, was taken prisoner by Mithridates, and was sore wounded and mangled,
the King demanded, If he should give him Quarter for his life, he would be true
to Mithridates? to whom the poor wounded Roman answered, Pomponius will be unto
Mithridates as Mithridates will be unto Lucullus: So true and faithful were
Romans, as they were stout and valiant, insomuch that Scipio being almost
threescore years of age, and was desired by a young soldier to buy a brave
Buckler, and a fine Target, said, That a true Roman must not trust to the left
hand, where the Buckler is, or to hide himself under a Target; but must trust
to his right hand and show himself in field in open sight. This magnanimity had
the people of Scythia, at what time Darius King of Persia was marching with his
Army toward Scythia, they having intelligence thereof, like people of great
magnanimity, sent certain Ambassadors to meet Darius, to signify his welcome
unto Scythia by presents sent by their Ambassadors: When the Ambassadors met
with King Darius, they began to tell their message, and opening in the privy
chamber the Wallet where their presents were, they took out a mouse, saying,
Unless you creep like this mouse to some country, or swim like this frog to
another, or fly like this bird to a third, these arrows shall pierce your
hearts: The presents were a Mouse, a Frog* a Sparrow, and five Arrows; rare
presents sent unto a King, simple gifts, small charges, but yet containing
valor, fortitude, and contempt of Darius, ^ather to move him to war, then to
entreat for peace. Though Scythia was bare, yet was she stout; though rude and
barbarous, yet valiant and manfull. It is not in the nature of the place, or in
the number of the persons that magnanimity consists, but in the valiant
heart, and noble mind: Wherefore Leonides King of Sparta was wont to say unto
his soldiers that he had rather have one Lion to lead a whole herd of Deers,
then to have a whole band of Lions ruled and led by one Deer; applying his
meaning unto King Xerxes, who had ten hundred thousand ships on the Seas
sailing toward Greece, so many as all Greece could hardly receive so many that
diverse rivers and floods were dried up by his huge Army, a proof (says
Justine) more of his wealth then of his magnanimity. Leonides (knowing well the
manner of Xerxes, that he was seen first in the flight, and last in the field;
whose glorious pomp and numerous army was not so famous and terrible at his
coming to Greece, as his departure from Greece was shameful and ignominious)
began so persuade the Lacedaemonians, being but four thousand in number,
willingly to die in the streights of Thermopylae for the renown of Sparta;
exhorting them to dine as merrily with Leonides their King, as though they
should ^up with Pluto. But persuasions to these that were already persuaded,
were superfluous; spurs unto those that might not be stopped with bridles, were
needless, as in the Thermopylae was well seen and proved to the noble fame of
Leonides, and great shame of Xerxes.

It is not in multitude of men that magnanimity of men consists, but in wise
and valiant hearts, for wit and courage joined together (says Salust) do make
men valiant: Wherefore Agamemnon that most renowned Emperor of all Greece at
the siege of Troy, would often say, that he had rather have ten wise Nestors,
then ten strong as Achilles, ten such as Ulysses, then ten such as Ajax:
wisdom in war avails much. Plutarch recites four famous and renowned
Princes, and either of these four had but one eye, to the advancement of their
renowned fame, the first was Philip King of Macedonia, and Father unto
Alexander the great, whose wisdom in wars, whose policy in feats, whose
liberallity unto his soldiers, whose clemency and humanity to his enemies, in
fine, whose success in his affairs were such, that his son Alexande^, doubted
whether the valiantness of his Father, would leave any place to Alexander
unconquered. The second was Antigonus King in the self-same place succeeding
after Philip, whose wars with Mithridaies King of Pontus, and Pyrrhus King of
Epire, fully set forth in Plutarch, do yield due honor and renown unto him for
his force and magnanimity: The third was Hannibal Prince of Carthage, the whole
stay of all Lybia, for sixteen years, the scourge and terror of all Rome and
Italy, whose name was so terrible for his courage and hardiness, that
Antiochus King of Syria, and Prusia and King also of Bithinia, rather for fear,
then for love, Hannibal being then but a banished man did receive him with
hon^ur. The fourth was Serto^ius a Roman Prince born in Sabina the thunder of
whose Fame was nothing inferior to the proudest, these were not so famous by
their prowess and chivalry one way, as they were notorious and spoken of, for
that either of them had but one eye. These renowned Princes and singular
soldiers, excelled all men in wisdom and prowess, as is recorded by Plutarch
in their lives. Philip for temperance of life, Antigonus for faith and
constancy to his friend, Hannibal for truth and patience for his county,
Sertorius for his clemency and gentleness toward his enemies, and all of them
for their passing courage, invincible stoutnesse, and worthy enterprises,
although they were incomparable, yet were they all deprived of their eyes, as
Philip lost one of his eyes at the siege of the City of Methron, Antigonus at
Perinthia, Hannibal in Hetruria, Sertorius in Pontus. When the people of
Thasius had erected altars, and appointed sacrifices to honor Agesilaus in
their Temples for his Fame of fortitude, they sent Ambassadors to certify the
King thereof, who reported that as Apollo was in Delphos honored as a God, so
Agesilaus was in Thasius: but the King as he was valiant, so he was wise, and
much detesting the assentations of the people, he demanded of the Ambassadors,
and desired them, that if their country could make Gods, they would make some
first for their own country; saying, Agesilaus had rather be a King in Sparta,
then a God in Thasius. While hidden hatred was exempted, while civil wars were
not known, while Athens sought no supremacy over Sparta, while Sparta sought no
mastery over Thebes, then all the power of Persia, the force of Macedonia might
not stain one little town in Greece: but the insolency of Princes, the desire
of Fame, the felicity of renown, the honor of glory was such, as Alexander the
great answered King Darius Ambassadors, who coming from Persia to Macedonia to
treat of peace, tendering unto Alexander the daughter of Darius in marriage,
with all the country of Mesopotamia, and twelve thousand talents yearly beside
and the assurance of the kingdom of Persia after Darius days: as there wanted
no princely liberallity in Darius offering, so there wa^ted no princely
stoutnesse in A^exanders answer, saying unto the Ambassadors, tell your master
Darius King of Persia that as two suns may not be in the firmament so two
Alex^nders may not rule one earth. Such high and valiant minds could be subject
in no wise, neither D^rius unto Alexander, nor Alexander unto Darius. Such
stoutnesse reigned in Princes to maintain states that as Archestratus the
Athenian was want to say, that in the City of Athens two Alcibiades might not
rule: so Ethocles the Lacedemonian did likewise speak, that two Lisanders could
not agree in Sparta. So opposite were Princes, so high and lofty of courage, so
valiant of heart* so noble of mind, that though fortune could not so often fawn
and favor their estates; yet she could not bereave them of their valiant
minds, nor spoil them of their magnanimity, nor diminish their courage, as may
appear by that worthy and most ancient soldier Mithridates King of Pontus who
after he had plagued the Romans with wars for the space of forty years, during
which time, he showed himself no less hardy and stout in resisting the strong
force of Roman, then valiant and courageous in attempting the fortitude of
Romans; and though he were by fortune forsaken in his latter days and spoiled
of all health, friends, children, countries, kingdoms, and all worldly wealth;
yet to spite fortune his mortal foe, he went to Cel^ae, thinking with them to
pass over into Italy, to let the Romans understand, that though friends and
countries by fortune were spoiled: yet neither fortune with her spite, nor all
the Romans with their force could subdue King Mithridates valiant heart. It was
then the only joy of Princes not to be conquered. In this only they
triumphed, that they could not be vanquished. In this gloried they most, in
that they were free from subjection. Cercilidas being one of the wise men named
Ephou in Sparta, hearing the thundering threatenings of King Pyrrhus
Ambassadors, the slaughter and murder that King Pyrrhus intended upon men,
women, and children, the cruel destruction and last confu^ions of the
Lacedaemonians, answered no less stoutly then wisely the Ambassadors of the
King, saying. If Pyrrhus your master be a God, we have not offended him, and
therefore doubt him not: but if Pyrrhus be but a man, tell your master that the
Lacedaemonians be men likewise, and therefore we nothing fear him at all. The
valiant Pyrrhus thought so well of himself, and judged all men so inferior
unto him in their achievements, that being at the victory of that noble City
Tarentum, where he saw such feats attempted, such acts done, such stoutnesse
showed by the Romans, that dismayed at the manhood and boldness of them,
thought that if magnanimity were lost, the spirit thereof should be found in a
Romans heart; insomuch that beholding of them, he cried out and said: O how
soon would Pyrrhus conquer all the world, if either he were King of Rome, or
Roman soldiers subject unto Pyrrhus. Of these Romans Hannibal being enforced
to forsake Carthage, was wont to say unto King Antiochus of Syria, that Rome
would never suffer equality, but be Prince over all. Rome was compared unto the
Serpent Hidra of Lerna, that having so many heads, when one was cut off,
another sprung up; insomuch that all the world might not destroy Rome, being
either injured, or overcome by the enemies. Licinius having lost diverse of his
soldiers unto Perseus King of Macedonia (who afterward was subdued by that
valiant Roman Pompey the great) Perseus did send certain Orators to speak for
peace, who eloquently persuaded Licinius to consent thereto, after a long
debate, and the learned council, and pithy persuasions of the Orators, it was
answered as briefly and plainly by Licinius, that the best way for King Perseus
to obtain peace of the Romans, was first to restore the prisoners he had taken,
and then afterward to send his Ambassadors to the General Licinius, otherwise
the whole country of Macedonia should feel the force and magnanimity of the
Romans. To speak of the conquest and victories of Julius Caesar, of the
resolution of Merellus, of the Fortune of Silla, of the severity of Marcellus,
being therefore called the spur of Rome and of Fabius named the Target of Rome
of diverse more valiant Romans, it were infinite; but I mean not to molest the
Reader, to prove the renowned Romans most worthy of this valiant virtue
magnanimity. Claudian makes mention of one Camillus a noble Roman, who having a
long time laid siege at Philiscus, and could not prevail, the Schoolmaster of
the City taking his scholars with him, under pretense of walking out of the
town, came and offered the scholars unto Camillus saying: by this means you
may do what you will unto Philifeus, for here be their children, whom to redeem
I know they will yield up the town. Camillus having regard to the Fame of Rome,
and loathing much to show such treachery, rewarded the Schoolmaster after this
sort, he did set him naked before his scholars, fast bound with his hands
behind him, and every one of his scholars with a rod in his hand, saying unto
the boys: bring him home to your Parents, and tell your friends of his
falsehood: and the poor boys having an opportunity to requite old beatings, were
as glad as he was sorrowful, laying on load, and jerkt him with so many
stripes, as loitering trevants may best be bold to number, until they came
unto the City, where they told their Parents the cause thereof, who weighing
the clemency and humanity of Camillus to be such, they gladly and willingly
yielded themselves and their City into the hands of Camillus, knowing well,
that he that would use them so being his enemies, could not use them ill by
yielding all into his courtesy, who might have had all by tyranny.

Now because this virtue was often seen in diverse Queens Ladies Gentlewomen and
others. I may not omit the pilgrimage of their lives. We read of two Queens of
the Amazons, Penthesilaea the first, and Hyppolica the second; the one so
valiant against the Greeks at the destruction of the noble City of Troy, that
she feared not in open field to encounter face to face with that valiant Greek
Achilles; the other so hardy that she shrunk not at the force and stoutnesse of
that renowned Champion Theseus, who being commended by Theseus for her singular
stoutnesse and courage was married to him, which certainly had happened unto
Penthesilaea, had she not been taken by Achilles, Camilla likewise Queen of the
Volscians, beside her Princely profession of sacred viginitie, which she vowed
unto Diana, was so famous for her magnanimity, that when Turnus and Aeneas were
in wars for the marriage of Lavinia, King Latinus daughter, she came Bellona
like unto the field resisting the violence and puissance of the Troyans with
the Rutils, and brought aid unto Turnus, That noble Zenobia, the famous Queen
of the Palmyrians, a Princess of rare learning, of excellent virtues, of most
valiant enterprises, after that her Husband named Odenatus had died, took the
Empire of Syria, and attempted the magnanimity of the Romans, and a long time
she withstood in wars that noble and renowned Emperor Aurelian, by whom the
Emperor was wont to say, when it was objected to him, that it was no
commendation for a Prince to subdue a woman; That it is more valiant to conquer
a woman, being so stout as Zenobia, then to vanquish a King, being so fearful
as Xerxes. The ancient Greeks, as Herodotus does witness; were much amazed at
the magnanimity of Artemisia Queen of Ca^ia, who after that the King her
husband died, did show such fortitude against the inhabitants of Rhodes, that
being but a woman, she subdued their stoutness, she burned their Navies, wasted
their wealth, vanquished and destroyed the whole Isle, entered into the City of
Rhodes, caused her Image to be set up for a monument of her chivalry, and the
perpetual memory of her victory. O renowned Ladies, O most worthy women that
with feminine feats have merited manly fame! How did famous Teuca Queen of the
Illyrians, govern her subjects after the death of her husband King Argon, who
being warred on by the Romans, repelled their force broke their bonds and
discomfited their armies to her perpetual fame and commendation? she governed
the people of Illyria no less wisely, then she defended the puissant force of
the Romans stoutly: She lived (as Histories report) as soberly and chastely
without the company of man, as she governed her country wisely and stoutly
without the counsel of man.

It were sufficient to repeat the ancient Histories of two women, to prove
fully an everlasting pr^ise and commendation unto all women: The one written in
Herodotus in his first book of Queen Tomyris of Scythia; the other mentioned by
Valerius and Justine, of Cleopatra Queen sometime of Egypt. The first, after
that Cyrus had made havoc in her Kingdom of Scythia, killing, destroying, and
burning all, without any regard of Princely clemency, or respect unto a woman's
government; and not satisfied therewith, he slew also the Queens own son, named
Margapices, thirsting more and more for blood: Insomuch that the valiant Queen
being much moved to revenge Margapices death, weighing the greedy rage of
Cyrus, came Lion like to field, either to lose her own life, or else to revenge
her sons death, and pressed upon Cyrus at that time more like a grim Gorgon then
a silly Scythian, and ^lew him in the field; and haling him up and down the
field, she cut off his head, and bathed it in a great Tun full of blood,
appointed for that purpose, saying, Now Cyrus drink thy belly full of that
which thou could never have enough of. Thus valiant Tomyris revenged
tyranny, requiting the death of her son with the death of two hundred thousand
Persians.

The other was Cleopatra, who after that Julius Caesar was murdered by Brutus
and Cassius, and that Marcus Antonius was by Augustus invaded with a puissant
Army for his perjury and falsehood showed unto his Uncle Caesa^; she, I say,
Cleopatra having the most part of Arabia and Syria, confederated with her
friend and lover Antonius against Augustus, being then the second Emperor of
Rome, and having with the forces of Egypt aided him a long time, until that she
perceived, that Augustus prevailed, and that Antonius was vanquished, lest she
should be conquered by Augustus, she conquered her self, yielding rather her
body a prey unto Serpents then to become a subject unto Augustus. Hannibal
could do no more, but to poylon himself rather then to yield to Scipio. Let
Semiramis with her valiant force and stoutness be commended at Babylon, where
she reigned forty years a Widow after King Ninus her Husbands death. Let
noble and famous Atalanta, with her Bows and Spears, and feats of Arms, be
praised in Arcadia. Let Hypsieratea, that followed her Husband King Mithridates
in the wars as a Lackey unknown be extolled in Ponius. Lot Helerna, Janus
daughter, with all her fortitude be spoken of in Latin; And let Deborah be
famous amongst the Israelites. These women were no less famous for their
pilgrim^ge, th^n the worthy Conquerors and Champions of the world: They were in
no point inferior to men, and in many points far excelled Princes and Kings:
Surely the world was then very weak, or women were very strong and resolute.
And to omit particularly to touch any more of women, I will open and declare
their virtues in several Countries. The women of Lacena would together with
their husbands go unto the field: yea they went soldier like unto Missena to
fight in field. The women of Cimbria would kill those that first fled the
field, though they were the next friends or kinsmen unto them. The women of
Saca had this custom, either at their marriage to be conquered by their
husbands the first day, or else to be conquerors over their husbands all the
days of their life: their combat (says Aelianus) was for victory, and not for
life, The women of Persia would meet their husbands and sons flying the field,
lifting up their clothes, showing their nakedness, saying, Whither flee you, O
you Cowards? will you again enter into your mothers wombs? will you creep into
your wives bellies? This they ^id in the wars betwixt Cyrus and his Grandfather
Astyages. The women of Sparta would go unto the field to see in what place
their Husbands and friends were wounded; if it were before, they would with
gladness and joy show the same unto every man, and bury the body solemnly; if
their wounds were behind* they would be so ashamed of the same, that they would
leave them unburied in the field. The women of Scythia called Amazons, lived as
conquerours over men, and not conquered by men, until Alexander the Great
destroyed them and their Country, which before were so valiant, that they
weighed not to encounter with Hercules in the field, and after with Theseus in
open battle; they blushed not to meet the valiant Greeks at the destruction of
Troy. Magnanimity which was then for the defense of countries, is now turned
into Tyranny to destroy countries: so that the toil and travel, the great
dangers, and high attempts that men took in hand, was nothing but a pilgrimage
of life; some going, some coming, some born, some dying, some winning, some
losing, some beginning their race, and some ending their life; much like a
Comedy played on stages, where every man acts his appointed part, shifting
himself into sundry shapes and fashions. To make an end of this subject,
whatsoever we do we do like pilgrims; whersoever we go, we go a pilgrimage; and
thus we live, and thus we die.

CHAP. V.
Of Martial Triumphs, and the solemnity of Kings and Princes.

AFter that Mars had moved first Ninus, King of the Assyrians unto wars, who
was the first after the flood, that invaded the confines of Asia: the world at
that time for the simplicity of the people, and temperance of life, and
specially for that it was not populous, was called the golden world, for the
space of two hundred years and a half after Noah, until Ninus first framed
wars, whence in short time after proceeded sundry wars in several countries.
Insomuch that to animate the soldiers, and to stir their Captains with greater
courage to defend their countries, they invented glorious triumphs, whereby the
deserved fame of the Conquerours might be renowned. And as the victory of it
self was either more or less, so were the triumphs appointed to be
correspondent unto the same.

The Lacedaemonians a people most studious of war, had appointed several
triumphs according unto the state of the victory: for if through deceit or
craft, they had gotten a victory, they would kill a Bull to do sacrifice unto
their Gods. If again through strength and courage they had purchased a victory,
then in triumph thereof they would kill a Cock. The Athenians at any victory,
would crown the Conqueror with a Garland made of Oken leaves, in triumph of his
success, properly appointed for him that defended the estate of Cities, or the
persons of Citizens: Thus Pericles and Demosthenes used often to triumph in
wearing the crown called Civica Corona, the Civick Garland. This order also was
observed among the Greeks, that the victors might only make a triumphant show
of their victory not to move any enmity, or to maintain discord against the
enemy, as sometime the Thebans did, who were of all Greece with one consent
accused, for that they made a perpetual monument of the victory against the
Lacedaemonians to stand in brass, rather to stir enmity and discord amongst
their successors and posterity, then justly to triumph in their present
fortune. The Princes of Carthage used such triumphs, as at the yielding of the
Empire of Carthage, by Hasdrubal unto his brother Hamilcar, who was Hannibals
father, and oftentimes triumphed against the Romans. It is read in Justine that
at the beginning the triumphs were not gorgeously, nor sumptuously appointed,
as they were in process of time: for the Romans who far excelled all
countries* had no such triumph when Romulus had vanquished Acron King of the
Senenses. He did wear nothing else but Bay Leaves in triumph thereof: for first
the branches and bows of trees were cut down in triumph. Secondly diverse fresh
flowers were gathered. Then they invented Garlands made of Time, intermingled
with silver, and with gold. At length diverse kinds of Garlands were so used in
Greece, that at their banquets and their drinkings they had their Garlands on
their heads, for as the world grew in wealth so it grew in sumptuousness: for
the triumph of Romulus was far inferior to the gorgeous triumphs of Camillus,
and yet Romulus was a King, and Camillus was but an Officer. Time brings
things unto perfection. In time Rome waxed so wealthy that Camillus I say was
carried in a Chariot all gilded and wrought over with gold, having all white
horses gallantly furnished, a Crown of pure Gold on his head, all the Senators
and Consuls of Rome going on foot before him unto the Capitol of the City, and
thence unto the Temple of Jupiter: where to honor the triumph further, they
slew a white Bull as a sacrifice unto Jupiter, and thence he was brought
triumphantly unto the City of Rome unto his ow^ house. Even so in Greece and
Carthage, in time they grew into such pomp and sumptuous triumphs, that there
was as much study to invent brave shows and solemn sights in triumphs, as there
was care and diligence to have removed the enemies: when Epaminondas ruled
stately Thebes; when Hannibal governed proud Carthage; when Leonidas bare sway
in war like Sparta: then Greece and Lydia were acquainted with solemn and brave
triumphs. In Ninus time the triumphs were in Assyria. In Arbaces time the
triumphs flourished amongst the Medes. In Cyrus time the triumphs were in
Persia. In Alexanders time they were in Macedonia. In Caesar's time they were in
Rome, and thus always from the beginning of the world, triumphs followed
victories. And here I mean a little to entreat of the triumphs of the Romans,
which far diverse ways surmounted the rest, whose Fame was spread over all the
world: and yet imitating in all things the Greeks, insomuch that Rome always
had Athens as a Nurse, or a pattern to frame their laws by: for although the
Kings were banished as well in Athens as in Rome, yet they ruled and triumphed
more by Orateurs in Athens, and by Consuls in Rome, then by Kings. Therefore as
Plini says they exercised such feats of arms they contrived such policies,
they used such solemnities in triumphs, that Rome then was noted to be the lamp
and lanthorn of Mars. They had (I say) diverse Garlands made only for the
triumphs of wars: Plini counts seven sorts of Garlands, which the Romans had:
the first made of pure gold, appointed only for the triumphs of Princes: The
second of Laurel, which of all was most ancient in Greece, and in Italy
appointed for the triumphs of soldiers: The third of all kind of sweet
flowers, appointed to him that restored Cities to their liberties again: The
fourth made of Oken leaves, to him that defended Citizens from death: these two
Garlands were of great honor in Rome, but especially in Greece the one Cicero
wa^e in Rome, for his invectives against the conspiracies of the wicked
Cacelin; the other Fabius Maximus did wear, for that he saved Rome from the
second wars of Carthage, where Hannibal was Captain. The fifth Garland was
appointed for him that assaulted the walls of the enemies first, and entered the
town: The sixth for him that attempted the tents of the enemies: The seventh
bestowed upon him that boarded first the Navy of the enemy. These three last
Garlands mentioned for the scaling of walls, the boarding ships, and attempting
the tents, were made all of gold. and given by the Princes or Senators to the
aforesaid Soldiers,

There was likewise in Rome a decree concerning the triumphs, yt none might
triumph unless he had been before some Officer in Rome, as Dictator, Praetor,
Consul, or such like: and if any (unless by the Senate) had won any victories,
though their conquest were never so great, and their victory never so famous
(as Pub. Scipio for all his victories in Spain, and Marcus Marcellus for all
that he took the great City of Syracuse) they might in no wise by Law make any
claim of Triumphs, because they were not appointed by the Senator. Then Rome
flourished and was defended from diverse injuries, and saved from enemies. At
what time M. Curious triumphed over the Samnites, Mae: Agrippa over the Sabines,
Paul Aenilius over the Lygurians, Marius over the Numidians, Pompeius over
Armenia and Pontus, Scipio surnamed Affricanus over Carthage and all Lybia,
Julius Caesar over all Europe and Afric; Rome was then feared of all the
world, and now Rome is despised; then Rome might say, Roma vincit, now Rome may
say, Roma vista; then Roma at mata, now nermis; then Roma, now Ruina: But time
consumes all things.

That victory that was not manfully gotten, and valiantly won in the field, was
rather counted tyranny then victory: For when Lucius Pius in a banquet that he
made, had filled the people of Sarmatia full of wine, and made them so drunk,
that all the Nobles and Captains of Sarmatia yielded themselves as subjects
unto the Empire of Rome, for which at his return home to Rome, he required
according to the custom, to have a triumph done unto him for the victory of
Sarmatia; the Senators having understood the manner of the victory, and how,
and after what sort Lucius Pius subdued ye Sarmatians, he was openly beheaded
by decree of all the Senate, and a slanderous Epitaph set upon his grave, to
manifest the deceit he used in stead of magnanimity, that he deceived them by
wine, whom he ought to have subdued by force. The Romans were not in those days
contented that any of their Captains should use vicious dealing, or show any
fraud or guile in wars unto their enemies; but at last as wars grew common in
all Countries, so deceit and craft was thereby augmented, and triumph exiled:
Then the Assyrians warred on the Persians, the Persians on the Argineans, the
Argineans on the Athenians, the Athenians on the Lacedaemonians the
Lacedaemonians on the Sydonians the Sydonians on the Rhodians, and the Rhodians
on the Scythians, with all kind of policy, right or wrong they cared not, so
that victory were gotten: So that the triumph then, is now turned into
captivity; magnanimity then, unto craft and deceit now; In fine, victory then
unto tyranny now. And so with Caesar I end, Ex bonis principtis mala or iuntur.
Such is the state of life, the pilgrimage of man which is daily worse and worse
as it waxes to the end: For in the beginning, renown and honor was the cause
that all men attempted dangers and great perils, and now in the end, gain and
profit moves wars; then was their desire to overcome Lions, Bears, Elephants
Tigers, Panthers, Rhinocerots, and such wild and savage beasts that might
renown their achievements, and now for the most part forgotten, they descend
into the Vale of Death.

CHAP. VI.
Of the first finding out of Laws and Orders, and of all invention of things
general, and of Time,

THe world growing into its maturity, diverse men found means to set things in
order, which at the beginning were rude and barbarous; as amongst the
Athenians, Draco; amongst the Egyptians, Mercury; amongst the Argives,
Phoroneus; In Arcadia, Apollo; in Tire, Charandes; in Italy, Pythagoras: Other
things no less necessary for the manners and civility of men, then for the
life and food of men, were found. And because Time is the beginning and end of
all things terrestrial. I think it expedient in this place to declare the
co^putation of Times and Ages: For with the Egyptians at the first, they
counted their years by the Moon, attributing unto every year thirty days, as
both Herodotus and Macrobius do agree. The The Arcadians as Putarch in the life
of Numa does write, had three months in every year appointed. The people of
Caria finished and ended their year every sixth Month. The Greeks did number
three hundred fifty and four days in their years, which want of our years
eleven days and six hours. The Romans at the beginning in the time of Romulus,
who was their first King, had their year in ten Months compted, counting their
first month March and giving that name unto it after his fathers name Mars;
April was named of Aphros in Greek, which is Foam, whence Venus was born: May
was called a Majoribus, of the Elders; June of the youth called Juniores: These
four were of Romulus named. The fifth month was then called by Romulus,
Quintil, which Julius Caesar in his time named July. and Augustus Caesar named
the month called Sexulis, August; and so in order, September, October,
November, December. Numa Pompunus, who succeeded Romulus, added January and
February, and so named them according to the name of Janus, who was the first
King of the Latins, and Februus who was supposed to be the inventer of the
Lustration: For as the Greeks did count all things by their Olympiades, so did
the Romans by their Lustra. Then was the use of Clocks unknown insomuch that
Authors herein do much vary, and seem to be ignorant of the inventers of them.
First, some think that Herme, in Egypt found them out by a beast sacrificed
unto Seraphis; some again attribute the invention unto Anaximines in
Lacedemonia, and that they were found out by a shade; some unto Scipio surnamed
Nasica in Rome, by a water: But uncertain it is by whom, and by what means
Clocks first were found. Some again do count their day, which is four and
twenty hours, from sun rising unto sun rising, as the Babylonians use; some
from sun setting to sun setting, as the Athenians; some from midnight to
midnight as the Egyptians; some again from midnight to noon again, as the
Vmbrians do: Thus diversely have hours and days been counted.

Now after laws were invented, and orders made, and time divided, men as yet
rude and raw, leading their lives beastly and bruitishly, for want of civility,
having neither houses, Towns, or Cities, to inhabit, but some having in Caves
of the ground their chief mansions, others had their best garments made of
green bows and branches of trees, some hid themselves in shadows of the woods,
some in Dens like wild beasts, until nature first by reason opened a way and a
means thus unto further civility. Then houses were made, and Cities builded,
high towers raised, strong walls invented: King Cerops erected Athens:
Phoroneus builded Argos: Diospolin in Egypt was by Threson builded. Likewise
the first tower after the deluge of Noah was made by Nimrod; then Temples were
builded Pythias in Perenna made a temple unto Minerva: Romulus in Rome builded
a temple unto Jupiter, and thus diverse men in sundry countries have been the
builders of monuments. By this means came Pallas unto great fame, for that she
was supposed to be the first that invented sciences, amongst the Grecians in
Athens; for this purpose was Ceres in Sicilia renowned, for that she was
thought to be the first that sowed corn, and taught husbandry, for this reason
were Typhis and Jason so worthily commended, that they among the Greeks were
the first that sailed the seas. Then was money found in Mount Pangaeum, and
coined in Aegineta, which as Plini says had been better unknown then found;
money being found wars insued by Ninus, who was the first that ever warred
after the deluge Then Idolatry sprung up by Me^issus King of Greet: Images and
pictures were first made by Epimetheus. Tribute was appointed first by Darius:
Fighting on horseback by the Centaures was first practiced. Immediately things
were found apt and necessary unto wars, after that Mars first invented the way
thereunto. Then the Lacedaemonians people of great antiquity, found first the
Helmet, a Sword and a Spear, the Scythians found first the use of Bows and
Arrows; the Thracians were ancient in feats of chivalry; for that Mars as they
supposed was born with them, who was honored as the God of wars, and found out
diverse things necessary for wars, Happy was that man that might then invent
something or other to profit his country: and thus the wit of man sought so
deeply, and studied so painfully, that from a rude and lumpish Chaos, the world
waxed beautiful, and men waxed civil, and all things became ripe and perfect
by the industry of man. Afterward the world grew unto such ripeness, that
liberal sciences were found and used in all places, as things necessary unto
man, and there was nothing unsought that might induce profit: both herbs,
stones, trees, and all things within the compass of the earth were searched to
what end they were and used accordingly unto some purpose. Vulcanus and
Promotheus found out the profit of the fire, Anacharsis the Scythian first
found bellows to blow the same; as Ceres taught to plough the ground, Argeus
did invent the dunging of it. Urania found first Astrology, the people of
Chaldea, straight practiced the same. Errato invented the use of Geometry, the
people of Egypt straight exercised the same. To be brief, Clio first found
Histories, Melpomene Tragedies, Thalia Comedies, Polyhimnia Rhetoric, Cal^ope
Poetry, or rather Palias her self, whom all the Greeks supposed to be the first
founder of sciences, and arts; Simonides invented the art of memory as the
register and sure recorder of knowledge to keep the same; the virtues of herbs
were found by Mercury and Chiron, and by others; Hyppocrates and Avicen first
professed Physic, though the most part do attribute to Apollo the first
exercise in Physic and unto his son Aesculapius the practice of Surgery.
Dedalus in Creet was the first Carpenter. Amphion the first Musician in Thebes,
Tages the first Soothsayer in Hetruria. Nothing escaped man's in^ustry: Aristeus
King of Arcadia first found the use of Honey, and the nature of Bees; the
Lydians to die Wool, the Egyptians found out the first use of flax the
Phrygians to sew first with needles the Hetruscans Weaving: Nature left nothing
unsought for her own profit, as Plautus says, she is always desirous to invent
and to know new things.

Victories and triumphs were first invented by Dionisius. Crassus made the
silver garland first to be worn in Rome. The Phrygians made the Chariot first.
Hunting was practiced by Artaxerxes and laws thereunto appointed. Epeus for
that he invented the brazen horse in Troy for the Greeks, is famous. Perillus
for that he made the brazen Bull in Agrigentum for Phalaris the tyrant is
renowned, though the one was made to satisfy tyranny, and the other to
accomplish treason: Yet such was the desire that men had to Fame, that always
they studied and contrived what best might advance their Fame, and might be the
memorial of their attempt travel. What a thing was it to see in ancient time
the invention and policy of men in all countries, what orders what laws were in
all places, to conserve that by wit, which afterward they destroyed by wars.
What was not invented in Rome before Julius Caesar and Pompeius altered it,
before those wicked members Sylla and Marius spoiled it: before that rebel
Catiline disturbed it: before Marcus Antonius and Augustus quite destroyed it.
So that policy of men in observing laws and orders in their wisdom in framing
them, their magnanimity in defending them, were topsey turvey thrown down
afterward by cruel Tyrants and wicked Princes: as Caligula, Nero, Tiberius,
Heliogabalus with others: so that time finds all things, and ends all
things: time makes, and time destroys.

CHAP. VII.
Of the sumptuous and wonderful Buildings of Kings and Princes,

I Thought it convenient to place the strange and wonderful buildings, which
were made by men's hands, together with the mavelous works of nature; and the
rather because amongst them are so famous, that for the renown thereof, they
are named in number the seven wonders of the world. The first was called
Pyramides, which the Kings of Egypt made by the City of Memphis, a miracle so
made, that twenty and two years, six thousand were occupied and traveled in
the same: either, as Pliny says, to busy the vulgar people lest they should
be idle, or else to show and brag their superfluous wealth in making so
stupendous a work. The second, were the walls of Babylon, which Queen
Semiramis unto her perpetual memory had made a monument amongst the Persians.
In making of these walls, she kept three hundred thousand men at work, they
were made of two hundred cubits height and fifty cubits broad, having a hundred
gates, wrought of brass round about, to come and go unto the city, and from
the City: And upon the walls were made three hundred towers: she brought
Euphrates one of the four Rivers of Paradise to pass through the midst of
Babylon. The third in order was the sumptuous tomb of Mausolus King of Caria,
which Queen Artemesia his wife made so gorg^eous, that it was twenty and five
Cubits high, and in compass four hundred and eleven foot, and wrought round
about with six and thirty pillars and broad beams: hence all the monuments
and brave buildings of Emperors and Kings took their pattern, for it was so
curiously wrought, that upon the East side, that famous workman Scopas showed
his skill: upon the West side that renowned Leocares wrought his cunning: upon
the North side Briax a man of great name applied his part: and upon the South
side Timotheus did what he could to win renown. These four famous workmen
had more fame by making the tomb of Mausolus, then for all the works that
ever they made before. These two noble Queens are not to be blotted out of
memory all the while that the name of Babylon is read of in books, or the
Tomb of Mausolus spoken off with tongues. Now to pass further to speak of
that monument and miracle which excels all the world for work, I mean the
great Temple of Diana amongst the Ephesians, in the building of which all Asia
were occupied two hundred and twenty years, almost with all powers of the
world. This Temple was made nigh the seas for fear of earthquakes: it was
four hundred twenty and five foot long, two hundred and twenty foot of
breadth, it had a hundred twenty and seven pillars, which for the wealth
thereof, every one after another was made by a king, The chief master of this
work was Ctesiphon, whose fame thereby was spread over all the world The fifth
was the high tower which King Pcholome m^de in the Isle of Pharos, to benefit
the saylors upon the Seas. This Sostratus made so high, that in the night time
there hanged a Candle for a light and mark unto poor Mariners, which could be
seen for the height of the Tower almost every where. The other two and last of
the seven wonders, were two Images, the one for Jupiter, made by Phydias, of
Ivory in Olimpia. The other made for Phoebus in Rhodes, by Lindus, whose
immensity was such, that it was threescore and ten Cubits high: so great was
this Colossus, that when it fell down by an earthquake, it seemed a wonder to
the beholders: every finger that he had was bigger then a man of this age.
These seven huge and monstrous works were called the seven wonders of the
world, which Pliny and Plutarch speaks of in diverse places. Some suppose that
the royal Palace of Cyrus, which that cunning workman Memnon made, might be
justly numbered with these worthy and famous works. But to proceed to other
sumptuous buildings, though not counted of the seven wonders, yet allowed
amongst the best for the stately work of the same, and of no inferior fame:
as the Laberinth made by Dedalus in Creete, of such difficult work, that he
that came in, could not without a guide go out again. Three others were made
like unto that, the one in Egypt which Smilus made, the other in Lemnos which
Rhodus wrought, and the third in Italy which Theodorus made. These four
Labyrinthes were so curiously wrought, that Porsenna king of Hetruria took
hence example to make him a monument after death, to bury and eternize
himself. Again, after these there were other wonderful works made by the
kings of Egypt called Obelisci, such renowned and famous buildings that when
Cambyses, king of Persia. at the siege of the city Sienna saw but one of them
he was in such an admiration that he thought them invincible. Phyus made one
of forty cubits. King Ptolome made another of fourscore cubits in Alexandria:
and diverse others which for their fame were then counted as m^rva^lous as any
of the seven wonders. But let us speak of sundry buildings, as well of cities
and towns, as also of temples, houses, and palaces, whose fame thereby long
flourished: as Romulus was famous by building of Rome. Cadmus by building of
Thebes, a city of Boetia in Greece. And Ogdous by the building of the city of
Memphis in Egypt Neither may I escape any, since I have taken upon me to recite
all, whose renownes and names by these their works do yet live I must not
escape Alexander the great, who in his great wars made a city of his name,
named Alexandria. I must not forget King Darius, who likewise built up Susa a
city in Persia. These two kings, though they destroyed thousands of cities, yet
they builded some cities. Neither may I omit Caesar Augustus, who made a famous
city in memory of the great victory over Antonius and Cleopatra, and named it
Nicopalis, that is in english the city of victory King Ninus, an ancient King,
made the city of Ninive, within two hundred years after the flood of Noah,
Sichem builded Sidon: Agenor Tire. Then the world waxed populous, and kings
began to build every where for the furtherance of civility, and increase of
policy and wit, in which the world in the beginning was very raw: for as the
world grew into civil order and the knowledge of things: so cities and towns
were builded. Castles fortified, and high walls raised for a Bulwark, and a
Defense unto the same: so by little and little the world was full of cities.
Then Siracusa was builded by Archias. The city of Argos was erected by
Phoroneus. Laodicea by king Antiochus. And so briefly to recite them over, the
noble and famous city of Troy in Phrygia, was builded by Dardanus. Arpos, a
town in Apuleia, was built by Diomedes: and so Telegonus builded Tusce in
Italy, being the son of Ulisses a Greek. Capis likewise builded the city Capua,
to which Hannibal laid a long siege: but least I might be too long in
rehearsing the builders of famous cities, having just occasion to respect the
time. I will end with the Cities and Towns, always considering that women
ought not to be forgotten, as Semi^amis Queen of Persia, who builded the city
of Babylon: Queen Dido, who builded the warlike city of Carthage. Danae the
daughter of king Acrisius, who builded in Italy a great town called Arcade.
Diverse Queens and noble Women, are for the like no less famous then Men were.

Now pausing a while, we will repeat those that increased the Commonwealths,
and beautified them with other kind of buildings. Amongst other miracles, and
woundrous works. Mount Athos was made of Xerxes navigable, even unto the sea,
eleven years he kept thirty thousand men to bring his mind to pass. Caesar
made in one day two famous bridges: the one over the River Rheum, and the other
over the river called Ara, which was almost incredible. Alexander the great
made such a dining-roome at the marriages of the nobles of Macedonia with the
women of Persia, Aelianus does witness, that a thousand Persians, and a thousand
Macedonians, and five hundred others with swords and silver Targets lodged in
that house, while the marriages continued. Traian the Emperor made such a
Bridge on Danuby, that for length, breadth and height, all the world could not
show the like. What should I rehearse the Temple which Solomon made in
Jerusalem, unto the which, the Ephesians with their temple of Diana, and the
Carthaginians with the temple of Juno must give place, needs must Alexander for
all his bravery and Clodius house, which was the spectacle of Rome yield unto
the golden hall of Nero: but of finenesse of works, if the rareness of skill,
if I say the worthiness of, wonders might rlaime place, and justly challenge
fame, I should praise Spintharus for the making of the Temple of Apollo in
Delphos, or Meleagenes for his work in Prienna, in making the Temple of Minerva.

I should commend Epeus for his cunning about the brazen horse in Troy, I
should commend Perillus for his brazen bull in Agrigentum, yea and Vulcanus,
who as Poets feign, was appointed by Jupiter to work only for the celestial
gods. I commend the Image of Diana in Chios; which was so skilfully made, that
unto those that came unto the Temple she seemed glad and joyful: and unto those
yt went out of the Temple, she seemed sad and angry. I should praise the
artificial golden birds made by the Sages of Persia, and the curious work of
Pallas Temple in Illyon, and the work and invention of noble nature, unto which
nothing is hard: It pierces the clouds, it wadeth the Seas, It compasses the
whole world: the cunning workm^n, the skilful Carpenter, says Cicero, guides
every man as a Captain. I might have occasion in this place to speak of the
work of nature, but that it is needless, considering how familiarly she
instructs a man unto those works, which are most strange and mavelous.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Painting and Poetry, and how much they were countenanced by Princes.

HOrace that learned Poet, affirms that the like reputation and dignity is
given unto a Poet, as unto a Painter: naming the one a speaking picture, and
the other dumb poeste. For painting unto the ignorant, was as printing unto the
learned. Where the one viewed with the eye, and the other read with the tongue.
Painting and graving were the ancient monuments of Greece, and so much
esteemed, that Phrydias waxt so famous, as Plini does witness, for that he
made the Image of Minerva in Athens, so artificially and so subtly, with a
great Target in her hand, wherein were graven the wars of the Amazons, and the
combat of the Giants: the rebellion of Centaures and the Lapitheans, that all
Greece wondered much thereat. Nealces in like sort did set forth the wars
betwixt the Egyptians and the Persians, so lively to behold, and so worthily
wrought; that the beholder thereof might be as well instructed in sight, as the
learned in reading the history thereof. That cunning Philoxenus did also as
effectually set forth the wars between Alexander the great King of Macedonia
and Darius King of Persia in colors, as either Curtius or Diodorus did
express it with writing. The noble Painter Timantes, at what time that worthy
Greek Agamemnon at the siege of Troy, was enforced by an Oracle to sacrifice
his daughter Iphigenia, to mitigate the fury of the Gods: he beholding the
woeful hap of Agamemnon, and the sorrowful state of the Greeks; the solemn
sadness of the sacrifice, the order and state of of Iphigenias death, did so
set it forth, that it was more lamentable to behold it in colors then rufull
to read it in letters. A science belonging unto noble minds: and sometimes so
esteemed of the Greeks, that their fame thereby much was augmented. What almost
was done or written in Greece, but it was straight set forth in colors? No war
any were, but it it was painted out in Greece. No strange history of any thing
but it was expressed in common colors: insomuch that philosophy it self, which
was so honored then in Greece, was set forth in Tables. That learned Zeuxis
did paint in a table the picture of Jupiter, sitting in his throne, with the rest
of the Gods about him: where likewise was showed the history of Hercules, how
he yet in his cradle slew the two great Snakes, or rather Dragons, where his
mother Alemena, and his supposed father Amphytrio, did fearfully behold the
death of the two Dragons, and the escaping of young Hercules their son, being a
child. Nichomachus did lively express the boldness of Theseus and Perythous
in attempting their voyage to King Plutoes region, blazing in Tables their high
enterprise, taking away Queen Proserpina from her husband Pluto. So skillful
was Licias, so cunning was Philiscus, that they made a subtle Chariot wherein
Apollo and his sister Diana, and his mother Latona were perfectly graven, and
the nine muses orderly set, and that upon one stone. Praxiteles excelled all
men in the like, for he graved in marble stone, the image of Venus so perfectly
and so lively in each point, that a certain young man says Plini fell in love
with the image, and came often in the night when none know, to kiss and clip
the image of Venus: as sometime was read of Pigmalion the cunning Greek, who
likewise fell in love with his own handy work, in garnishing and decking with
fresh flowers his own handy work. But to speak of Apelles, Pirgoteles and
Lisippus, their fame was spread over the whole world insomuch that Alexander
the great commanded that none should paint him in colors but Apelles: none to
grave him in stone but Pirgoteles: and none to carbo any part of his Princely
person but Lisippus. It were too much to speak of Calycratis, P^y^aerides, and
diverse famous men more, wherewith Greece sometime flourished: whose fames and
worthy reports, made Paulus Aemilius that noble Roman, from Rome to send unto
Athens for two men, the one a Philosopher to teach his sons, the other a
Pointer, to set forth in tables the great triumphs and victories which he got
over the Ligurians and Persians: and one man being an excellent Philosopher and
an excellent Painter named Metrodotus was sent from Athens unto Rome for the
purpose. Poets and Painters were much set by in ancient time: for even as these
aforesaid Painters were famous and renowned so were Poets honored and esteemed.
For we read that Alexander the great would never go unto his bed without Homers
Iliads and his dagger under his pillow. He so much esteemed Pindarus the Poet
that he spared a whole street in Thebes from burning for Pindarus house, which
was in that street. That renowned Emperor Augustus so honored Virgil that
being dead, his books were worthily honored and embraced of Augustus. So that
noble Emperor Gratianus advanced the poet Au^onius unto the office of a Consul
for his learning and knowledge in poetry. The fable of Chaos, the deluge of
Deucalion, the rebellion of Giants, with innumerable more, under the shadow of
fables have great wisdom and knowledge. At what time King Philip of Macedon,
the long enemy of Athens, had demanded upon condition of peace, ten Orators of
Athens to serve him, and to remain with him in Macedonia, Demosthenes, that
sugared Orator, made an open Oration before King Philip, where he brought the
fable of the Woolf and the Sheep that as the Woolf did offer peace unto the
Sheep upon condition the dogs should tarry at home: so King Philip offered
peace unto the Athenians upon conditions that the Orators, which as dogs do
bark at the Woolf, barked at him, should be taken away, and so soon he would
destroy Athens being spoiled from their Orators, as the Woolf would the sheep
without dogs. This fable much edifieth the vulgar people. Menenius Agrippa a
Roman Counselor, rehearsed oftentimes the fable of the belly and the other
members, when he went to make any foes friends, or to bring rude rebels against
their Prince and their country, unto amity again. With the which fable he
reduced and brought again those that offended most against their country, to
be the chief assistance and helpers unto their country. Thucidides does
witness, that by a fable, that noble Captain Peticles put such a courage into
the Athenians, being sore oppressed and vexed, and in a manner become a spoil
unto their enemies, that they did win the victory, when before they were
almost overthrown. The noble Consul Cicero, by the fable of Giges ring, how he
went invisible unto King Candaules wife, and made him a cuckold, made
application of it unto those glorious persons that often delight in their folly
and evil behaviors, as sometimes the Poets feign of Ixion, who bragging and
boasting of Juno, he got the centaurs engendered of a cloud in stead of Juno,
Quintilian says, that fables contain under feigned words, most excellent
wisdom: for Erasmus does often repeat the fable of grasshoppers and the ants,
to exhort men to travel and to labor with little ants. Plato that divine and
noble Philosopher, in his second book, de Rep. does use the like fables.
Aristotle in his Rhetoric does use fables. Mark how fables ease the
Philosopher in his study, help the Orator in his perswasio^s, garnish the
Divine in his sermons: and in fine they bring pleasure in any thing. Thus I
thought good to write in the commendations of Painting, and Poetry, of which,
for the secret friendship and for the affinity of one with another, much more
might be spoken, I mean not those fond foolish and fantastical fables,
fostered by women and old men sitting at the fire, where often the idle brain
is occupied: but those wise and prudent fables of Poets which contain wisdom
in sense, though they seem light in words, which durst not be opened plainly
in those days, for the Tyranny of Princes, which then would not have their
faults touched by any, yet were they covertly reprooved in fables Poetical: As
the fable of Sphinx, of Circes, of Tantalus, of Acteon and of others.

CHAP. IX.
Of Eloquence, the Delight and defense of Princes in their pilgrimage.

PYrthus King of the Epycotes, the defender a long time of the Tarentines, was
wont to say of Cineas his Orator that he wan more victories through the
eloquence of Cineas, the^ through the force and puissance of all his Epir^tes
besides: for through eloquence Cineas would make the stout enemies to yield:
and by eloquence would Cineas move the cowardly soldiers to victory, Valerius
a noble and eloquent Roman, at what time the Kings of Rome were expelled, and
their names quite banished, and the popular state having such liberty thereby
that the whole City through sedition and late sprung liberty, was like to come
to ci^ill ware amongst themselves, had not Valerius appeased the fury of the
people, being ready in hearts to become enemies unto their country, finding
them triumphing much, and rejoicing within themselves, and divided one from
another to maintains discord: he reduced them not only through his eloquence
unto peace and quietness: but also brought them unto such state, that where
Rome was like to fall over to greatest ruin, Rome at that time began most to
flourish and prosper. Great was the force of eloquence in Marcus Antonius, who
with his sugared and sweet persuasions turned the furious rage and tyranny of
the soldiers of Marius and Cinna, being sent by these two cruel Captains to
kill him, unto such lenity and mercy, that having their swords naked drawn,
and ready to kill him, having heard Antonius his eloquence, as men convicted
with words, would not perform the execution, though they had great rewards
appointed: nor could they of themselves though enemies they were unto Antonius,
find in their hearts to kill him. Pericles wanne such renown in Athens by his
eloquence who sometime was a scholar unto Anaxagoras, that he had the
government and rule of Athens committed to him, as to one in whose words the
people reposed more credit and trust, then they did in the force and strength
of al Athens beside: Insomuch that when he would speak any thing unto the
people, such mellifluous words and sugared sentences proceeded out of his mouth,
that they were amazed or astonished to hear him: being always never weary of his
counsel. We read that their eyes did water to see him, their ears were
allured to hear him, their hearts were convicted to yield unto him Cowards are
made courageous, and stout tyrants are made gentle and merciful: Cities
preserved, victories gotten, and all by eloquence. What is it but man is able
through comely gesture, and apt pronountiation to bring to pass? What could
escape Cicero in Rome? What might have avoided Demosthenes in Athens? Whose
known eloquence, whose learned persuasions, whose sweet and sugared words,
could not as well move emnity in Athens toward King Philip, as it could kindle
love in Rome toward Pompeius.

Such is the excellency of eloquence, that it moves as well men to behold for
the gesture, countenance, and pronunciation, as it does enforce men to hear for
the Majesty and sweetness of words. For Hortensius was not so eloquent in
words, but he was as comely in gesture, and so excellent in either of them,
that when he spoke before the people, Senators, and Citizens of Rome, they were
no less enamoured with his sight then they were allured and enticed with his
words; for he labored no less outwardly to please the times, then he studied
inwardly to please men, Therefore Demosthenes, the Well and source of flowing
eloquence, being demanded what was the chief part of eloquence, answered that
it was pronunciation; again, being demanded what was the second part of
eloquence, he said pronunciation: And so the third time being likewise
demanded, said as before, pronunciation: Insomuch that he traveled and studied
oftentimes to have this pronunciation, being somewhat by nature let to
speak, putting stones in the roof of his mouth, and wrestling with nature until
he had the perfection of pronunciation. When Aeschines had forsaken Athens for
certain causes, and was come unto Rhodes, whose fame for his eloquence was
spread not only in Rhodes, but well known in all Greece: after he was desired
by the Citizens to recite some Oration or other, of his own making, whereby the
Rhodians might see and hear that which long before of all men they heard
praised: He to satisfy the request of the City, repeated an Oration that he
made against Ctesiphon, wherein the people of Rhodes mused much at his
eloquence: And when he had ended his own Oration that he inveighed against
Ctesiphon, to put the people in a greater admiration of eloquence, he recited
another Oration that Demosthenes made in the defense of Ctesiphon against
Aeschines, wherein the people were amazed at the eloquence of Demosthenes more
then at the first: Which when Aeschines saw that his enemy Demosthenes was so
praised (for they were one envious of another he was enforced to speak, that if
the Rhodians might but hear Demosthenes himself, then would they rightly praise
him, since they praised Demosthenes Oration in Aeschines mouth; for no man has
so great a delight to tell another man's story, and especially his enemies, as
he has pleasure to set forth his own. Plato therefore that famous Greek,
attributing unto every man due honor, when certain men skillful in Geometry,
came to ask Plato's counsel concerning the measure quantity, and longitude of
things, he counseled them to go unto Euclides, where they should be sufficed
and fully satisfied of their demands, for that Euclides might more aptly speak
in Geometry, for it was his profession. For every man, says Aristotle, may
boldly speak in that which he professes; and therefore Apelles that noble and
cunning Painter, when a Shoemaker came unto his school, and feeding his fight
with the worthy works of Apelles, he found fault with a latchet of a shoe,
Apelles, because he was a Shomaker, gave him place and amended it. The second
day the Shoemaker came again, and found fault in the hose; then Apelles
answered and said, that a Shoemaker ought not to judge of any thing but of the
shoe.

Every man that thinks himself eloquent, for that he has his tongue at will,
and can shift matters skilfully in his own judgment, is not that eloquent man
which Cicero speaks of, nor has those parts of Rhetoric wherewith he can
persuade to good, and dissuade from evil. The eloquent man does comfort the
afflicted, he expels fear and terror from men, he stops again the stout
and insolent. This man is able, faith Cicero, to win towns, countries, castles
and kingdoms: this eloquence in adversity is solace, in prosperity an
ornament, in youth laudable, in age delectable, in all men profitable*
Wherefore, not without cause did M. Antonius use to say, that oftentimes he saw
and heard fine tongued men, but he never saw nor heard any eloquent man: For
though, says Cicero, we follow Nature as a Captain, unless Art be coupled and
united to it, we follow a rude and barbarous Captain What Captain was Paulus
Aemilius, being in wars with King Perseus? In a certain clear night, when the
Moon upon the sudden shifted her self from sight, and the night became very
dark, all the soldiers of Paulus, yea, Paulus himself, being their General and
Captain, were dismayed and quite discouraged, thinking it had been some
prodigious show, to pregnosticate mishap to come, and being ready to yield, in
heart and courage, until Sulpitius began to persuade the rude Soldiers with
reason, opening the causes unto the Soldiers, and declaring the effects of the
superior bodies so eloquently, that being before dismayed, they were by the
eloquence of Sulpitius persuaded to fight valiantly; and where through fear of
that sudden sight and change of the Moon, they were ready to yield as captives
to King Perseus, they were moved and stirred by the eloquence of Sulpitius to
become Conquerors and Victors over King Perseus, in the self same night.

The like did Pericles sometimes amongst his soldiers of Athens, at what time
the sun so darkened, that great terror and fear came upon the soldiers: he
eloquently persuaded his soldiers, and told them as he heard of his master
Anaxagoras, the cause thereof, and quite expelled fear from the soldiers by
reason, and made them bold again through eloquence. In Afric there was in the
time of Anascarimis a Philosopher named Afranio, who being demanded what he did
hear all the days of his life, answered: to speak well, the second time being
asked what he taught unto others, answered likewise to speak well: at the last
he was demanded what he knew in any science, he said, I know nothing but to
speak well: so that this old Philosopher Afranio learned nothing, taught
nothing nor knew any thing but to speak well: and most certain it is, that he
that consumes all the days of his life, to learn to speak well, and knows
nothing else but to speak well, spends his time very well.

CHAP. X.
Of those Kings and Princes, and others, who had their Pictures and Images, for
a show of their deserved Fame erected.

THe greatest honor that both Greeks and Gentiles used toward those that
deserved well in the Commonwealth was to advance them by pictures painted, and
images gloriously graven: thinking thereby either to inflame the^ further to do
good, or else to discourage the^ again from doing evil, by banishing and
neglecting their pictures. which when Favoritus the Philosopher heard, that the
City of Athens had rejected his picture, because Adrian the Emperor was angry
with him, said: I am right glad thereof, for better said he had it been for
Socrates to have had his brazen picture broken, and thrown away for some show
of displeasure by the Athenians, then to be deprived of his life for nothing by
the Athenians; for the surest estate of all is not to be known. Agesilaus
therefore, King of the Lacedaemonians, understanding that the inhabitants of
every country in all Greece, had decreed to put up the picture of Agesilaus for
a memorial of his virtuous and noble acts, to be as monuments of his life after
death: returning then from Egypt unto Greece, being very sick, a little before
he died, he wrote letters unto Greece, that they should make no pictures no
images no painted shows, no graven work of his person, nor yet of his life,
saying: If I have done well in life, the virtue thereof is a sufficient
monument when I am dead. Cato Senior was of that opinion, that he had rather
that men should ask why has not Cato his Picture set up, then to asks why has
Cato his picture set up. A number of sage Philosophers and wise Princes have
lothed and utterly neglected this kind of flattery, which then was thought to
be the greatest fame and commendation of all things, to have their pictures in
places set up to make mention of honor and dignity which thereby is meant,
either for restoring of liberty lost, or in defending from tyranny, or in
saving of Cities, or for such things done, pictures were erected to advance
their fame thereby. Thus Aristogiton and Armodius, because they delivered
Athens from the tyranny of Pysistratus, had their pictures, with great
estimation set up of the people of Athens. Likewise Marcellus because he
subdued Syracusa, vanquished the French men at Padua, and gave the repulse unto
Hannibal at Nola, had his picture set up in the Temple of Pallas, with an
Epigram written in letters of gold, unto his great praise and commendation.
Eutropius says, that Claudius Emperor of Rome had his picture made with a
golden Target in his hand, because he vanquished the Goths which were about to
spoil the county of Macedonia. Numa Pomp. the second King of Rome, and Servius
Tullius the sixth King had their pictures a long time amongst the Romans in
great honor and fame. Selostris King of Egypt for his martial feats and
virtuous acts was honored in his country with diverse pictures. Polydamas that
strong Champion in the games of Olympia, for that he being without weapons and
naked, slew a terrible Lion, and held fast by the foot a huge great Bull, and
with the other hand stayed a running Chariot, had his picture therefore erected
and set up in Olympia. In Athens how many pictures were set up of noble men and
learned Philosophers, as Conon Euogoras, Phocion, Isocrates and others, which
were now up and now down as mutable fortune favored or frowned, the state and
life of men being uncertain and changeable. As Demosthenes having his picture
in Athens had this Epigram written round about the picture. If Demosthenes had
had courage and strength as he had wit and eloquence, neither Philip nor his
son Alexander, nor all Macedonia had ever vanquished Greece: yet this
Demosthenes was exiled and banished Athens diverse times. So hard was it to
please the people then, which had the chief government in Athens and Rome, that
for a small displeasure conceived, yea for nothing, they were ready to requite
good men with cruel deeds, as banishment and death. As in Rome, Cicero for
Clodius sake, after sure and sound service often showed toward his country, was
afterward enforced to flee unto Greece from Rome, where so well he was before
esteemed. The like I may urge of Aristides, Thrasibulus, Hippias, and
Thucidides, men sometimes honored in Athens with pictures, for the noble and
excellent defense of the City, and yet for nothing not long after exiled, the
pictures taken down, and the monuments broken. So Popilius, Opimius, Metellus,
Scipio, and L^vius, with others, were sometimes in Rome highly honored with
pictures, and yet at length the like fortune as these aforenamed Greeks had,
did accrue unto them. Such is the uncertain pilgrimage of man the wandering ways
of the world, the mutability of fortune, as there has been full proof showed
of the same from time to time in all places, in banishing, in murdering yea,
again in worshipping and honoring. As for example, we read that Alexander the
great was born in Pella, a town in Macedonia, and died in Babylon. King Cyrus
was born in Persia, and slain in Scythia; Hannibal born in Afric and buried
in Bithinia; Cleomenes King of the Lacedaemonians born in the City of Sparta,
yet his grave was made in Egypt. Crastus and Pompeius the great, born in Rome:
the one died in Assyria, the other in Egypt. Paulus Aenilius died in Cinna. T.
Gracchus in Lucania; Augustus Caesar in Nola. Trayane the Emperor in the East
part of the world, with other famous men born within the City of Rome, as the
Cornelii, Scipioes, Catots, Decii, all Noble families, who died like pilgrims
in the world, scattered one from another. So in Athens Themistocles, Theseus
Solon were flourishing with others: yet in Syria, Cyprus, and Persia, were they
buried. King Jugurtha born in Numidia, was buried in Rome. Again King Aegeus
born in Athens, Pharao in Egypt, Ajax in Greece, Leander in Abidos: yet their
graves and burial was in the bottom of the sea. Mark how puissant Princes of
the world, and mighty Cae^ars were subject unto fortune. And see again the
learned and sage philosophers, which as I said before, had their persons
esteemed, their pictures erected, yet not able to avoid the furious frets of
Fortune. As Pythagoras born in Samos died in Metapontus, Virgil born in Mantua
buried in B^undusium. Terence born in Carthage, brought up in Rome, ended his
life in Arcadia. These Princes and famous men had notwithstanding in diverse
places their fame spread, their name advanced, and their pictures every where
erected. Gorgius Leontinus was the first amongst the Greeks for his wisdom
and eloquence that had his picture set up in Delphos, in the Temple of Apollo.
His scholar Isocrates had for his wit and passing eloquence, in Olympia his
picture erected. Demetrius, Theophrastus scholar, after he had ten years with
all diligence and industry governed the state of Athens, having three hundred
and threescore pictures in Greece erected and set up for his fame and reonwn in
administration of the Commonwealth: yet were they all broken and taken down
through envy afterward, and when Demetrius heard of the inconstancy and envy of
the people, in showing their malice therein he said: though they pull down my
pictures yet can they not banish the virtuous cause of the pictures;
Mithridates King of Pontus made a worthy monument at Sylo unto Plato, about the
which as Plutarch says was writtgn this sentence: Mithridates made this
picture of Plato, and dedicated the same unto the Muses. Mutius Scaevola had
his picture in Rome, for that he delivered the the City of Rome from Porsenna
King of Hetruscans: For the like Cocles was not forgotten of the Romans. It
were unto small purpose to speak of Lucullus, of M. Attilius and Octavius,
whose fame and renown made their pictures to be monuments thereof? And why
should I busy my self with infinite names of men, since women well deserved
the same, as Tanaquil, Tarquinius wife: Cloaelia a Virgin of Rome, yea as
Quintilian says, Phrine for her beauty was commended by pictures, so common
were they for all men, that I refer those who will read further of this unto
Plini, where he may at large satiefie himself in this subject. I should be ever
much charged to recite the places persons, and time, only this, that pictures
were erected to advance the fame of Princes and deserving men, and to stir them
further in such proceedings as were the cause of these their pictures, of which
as before is spoken, they shall find in Plini variety of examples.

CHAP. XI.
Of Kings and Heroes who defended diverse from death, from Serpents, Dragons,
Lions, and of cunning Archers.

EVen as by these valiant and noble Conquerours, not only Towns, Cities, and
Countries, were defended, but also Serpents, Dragons, Licus, and other
monstrous and wild beasts were slain: so diverse and sundry captives and
prisoners were deliverred from death unto life. How many did famous Hercules
that offspring of the Gods, save from the gulf of Av^ntine, where that Cacus
both day and night murdered the passers by? How many delivered he from the
huge monster Chymaera. which continually with flashing of fire, feared and slew
many valiant men? For he had three heads, one of a Lion, the second of a
dragon,, the third of his own monstrous proportion. He again slew Sphinx a
terrible beast in Ethiopia, which with his sight destroyed men: he overcame
Geron, Cerberus and Diomedes, and diverse other enterprises, as is before
rehearsed. Perseus after that Neptune had defloured Medusa in the temple of
Pallas, the Gods being displeased therewith, turned every hair of her head
unto Snakes whose sight was so venomous, that whatsoever he was that beheld
her, dyed presently: Perseus slew the same, whereby he delivered diverse that
should else have perished. Cappadox being then tribune of the soldiers in
Africa under the Emperor Dioclesian, killed a huge serpent, and delivered a
young Phrygian, made even a prey for her mouth. Even so Alc^n a noble Archer of
Creet, shot at a dragon which had his own son in his claws ready to be
devoured, and slew him, and so saved his son unhurt.

But I will digress here from the skillful Archers and speak a little more of
the famous and renowned conquerors of wild beasts, of monsters, and of
serpents as Bellerophon, King Glaucus son of Corinth, being accused of
fornication with Queen Stenobia King Proetus wife, he was judged to dye, and
to be devoured of the Monster Chimaera, which he valiantly subdued and slew in
the dungeon. The fame of Lysimachus is spread over all the world, for that he
killed a Lion being but a soldier under king Alexander. The name of Coraebus
shall not be forgotten amongst the Peloponesians, for the overthrowing of that
terrible monster in Greece.

The renown of At. Regulus shall always be revived when any man does think
of the great serpent that he slew by the flood Bragada, which as Pliny says,
was a hundred and twenty foot long. Did not these noble men benefit their
countries much in saving thousands lives, which should have been destroyed by
these monsters? The Poets feign that Cadmus, Agenois son, did kill a Serpent
whose teeth engendered and brought forth out of the earth armed men, which
fought and destroyed one another. Again such was the fortunes of young maids,
as B^lsaria when Carphurinus Crastus was taken captive of the Messalins, and
should be offered for a sacrifice unto Saturn, she delivered Crassus from
death and made him conqueror where before he was conquered. Calluce, a young
woman after Troy was by the Greeks destroyed, when her father king Lycus
sailing into Lybia, had appointed to kill Diomedes, for a sacrifice to appease
the Gods for wind and weather, she delivered him from the king her father,
and from present death. Plutarch writes of these two maids that their fames
hereby may never be forgotten. To speak here of those who delivered men from
death, from captivity, from perpetual prison, it were necessary; howbeit short
Histories are sweet, and few words are pleasant: therefore I will not speak of
Lucu^lus, who being in wars with Mithridates King of Pontus delivered Cotta
from thousands about him. I will not write of Lucillius a Roman soldier, when
he saw that Brutus at Philippi, who was compassed round about with enemies, he
himself ran with a few soldiers with him amongst the nemies, because Brutus in
the mean while might save himself. Neither will I much mention Quintus
Cincinnatus, being then Dictator in Rome, who delivered Quintus Minutius from
the hands of the Sabines and Volscians: But according unto promise, I will
touch partly on those that deserved fame another way. For fame is not bound
unto one kind of quality, but unto diverse and sundry virtues; therefore with
these renowned Conquerors and defenders of countries, I will join most
excellent and expert Archers, who likewise have done noble acts worthy feats
and mavelous things: As ^^erdes was such an Archer that he would kill the
flying birds in the air; Catenes could do the like, as Curtius in his sixth
Book does affirm. Alexander the son of King Priamus, when neither his brother
Hector with his courage, nor Troylus with his force, nor all the strength of
Phrygia could resist that noble Greek Achilles, he slew him with an arrow.
Acastus won immortal renown for killing of the huge wild Boar, that spoiled
Calido^ia. Princes in times past were taught to do feats of Archery; Great
Hercules himself was taught of Euritus the science of shooting, that he could
kill any flying fowl, or the swiftest beast: as sometime he killed the birds
called Harpies; and slew the swift Centaure Nessus: we read in the first of
Herodotus, that Commodus the son of Marcus, surnamed Aurelius Emperor sometime
of Rome, begotten of Empress Faustina, was so skilful in shooting, that
whatsoever he saw with his eyes, the same would he kill with his bow: likewise
I find, that the Emperor Domitianus was so expert in his bow, that he could
shoot (when any hold up his hand) betwixt his fingers a great way off. The
people of Creet passed all men in this faculty. The Parthians were so cunning
in shooting and throwing of darts, that backwards as they fled they would
spoil and destroy their enemies. The Arimaspians excelled the Parthians.
Again, the Schythians and Getes were most famous for this subject. And thus
having occasion to travel as pilgrims, some slew great wild Tigers, huge
Bears, terrible Lions, and such monstrous beasts, that advanced the fame of
such who attempted the danger.

CHAP. XII.
Of diligence, and labors of Princes.

AS Horace that ancient Poet affirms, that the worthyest and greatest virtue
is to avoid vice: so is it (I judge) the greatest commendation unto any man to
embrace diligence and to eschew idleness. For such is the virtue of man's mind,
the rare gifts, and excellent talents, which God and nature have bestowed upon
man that to see the excellency and virtue thereof with external sight, if it
could be seen, it would, says that divine and noble Philosopher, Plato,
inflame great desire, uncredible love unto virtue and would on the contrary,
kindle such hatred unto vice, that the sight thereof, would fear any beholder.

When says Cicero, the world was new, and nothing ripe, no laws made, no
Cities builded, no order set, no commonwealth framed* but all things confusedly
on a heap, without divisions and limits, most like to the Poetical Chaos,
before the elements were discovered, water from earth, and and the fire from
the air: then (I say) we lived brutishly and beastly, without civility and
manners, without learning and knowledge: but when reason began to rule, when
Lady prudence began to practice with policy, when we began to search and to
seek by diligence and travel the nature of things: then diverse men in sundry
countries sought means by diligence to profit their countries. As Moses first
found out letters amongst the Hebrews: M^nno first found out letters amongst
the Egyptians: Rhadamanthus amongst the Assyrians: Nicostrata amongst the
Romans r Phoenices, amongst the Greecians: thus by the diligence and study of
men, from time to time, raw things waxed ripe, strange things became familiar,
and hard and difficult things, waxed facile and easy. Then Solon made laws in
Athens, Lycurgus in Lacedemonia, Zeleucus in Locresia, Minos in Creefe, so
orderly all the whole world was beautified with laws, adorned with wit and
learning. Then began Philo to give laws unto the Corinthians. Then Zalmosis
began to reform the rude and barbarous Scythians. Then Phaleas amongst the
Carthagenians practiced policy, and limited laws. Then I say laws began to
order the affairs, and reason began to rule, so that learning and knowledge was
sought far and near, wit exercised, policy practiced, and virtue so honored,
that well might Tully say, O Philosophy the searcher of all good virtues, and
the expeller of al vices! Then was that commonwealth noted happy* that enjoyed
such a Prince to rule, as a Philosopher; that would extol virtue, and
suppress vice: reward the good, and punish the evil, esteem the wise and
learned, and neglect the foolish and ignorant. I will omit to speak of mighty
and famous Princes, whose care, whose diligence, study and industry, were such,
whose numbers were so infinite, that I might well seem too tedious to molest
the Reader with them. I will therefore in this place speak of the diligence and
travel of poor men, who by their study and labor became lamps of light unto
the world. And to begin with Plato and Socrates two base men of birth, whose
diligence in their life, made them most famous being dead, the one the son of a
poor Citizen of Athens named Ariston: the other the son of a poor Marbler named
Sophroniseus. Might not poor Perictione the mother of Plato, be proud of her
son, when the greatest tyrant in the world, that proud Prince Dionisius, would
honor and reverence him for his learning and knowledge, and take him into a
Chariot as a Prince, and not as a poor Philosopher? Might not that poor midwife
named Phanaerara rejoice to have such a son as Socrates, who being esteemed of
all men to be best learned, being counted of all men most Orthodor, and taken
of all men to be most modest, and most grave, was also judged by the Oracle of
Apollo to be the wisest in all the world. How happy was Elbia? How famous was
Creithes who nursed two such sons as Cicero and Homer? the one the glory of
Rome, the other the sugared and sweet Orator of all Greece. Thus diligence and
travel brought them to fame, that being poor men, they were honored of rich
men, being base men they were exalted of Princes. Oh happy countries of such
women! oh happy women of such children! Oh twice happy children of such
learning and knowledge! The poor Smith which was Demosthenes father, and the
silly Potter who was Virgils father, are more renowned by their children this
day being dead, then known by their own wealth being alive. Thus much happened
unto the silly Smith, and unto the poor Potter, their names shall never die,
whilst either Demosthenes is read or Virgil heard. What might be spoken of
that poor Physician Nichomachus son, I mean that famous and learned Philosopher
Aristotle, whom King Philip of Macedonia so esteemed, that he counted himself
happy to have his son Alexander the great born in Aristotle's time, whose
diligence and study was such, that he had the guard and tuition of that
renowned Conqueror Alexander five years together, who was honored of
Alexander, and not only esteemed of King Philip, but Athens being destroyed by
Alexander, it was restored by Aristotle. Such was the diligence of men, their
care and industries, that their large volumns and infinite books, are witness
of their well occupied minds. How became Plutarch Master to Traian the Emperor?
How was Seneca appointed the Tutor and Schoolmaster of the Emperor Nero? How
came Zeno unto such favor with King Antigonus, but by diligence, and not by
idleness; by travel, and not by slothfulness; by learning, and not by
ignorance. Why did that great and famous Roman Scipio, surnamed Affricanus,
esteem so much the poor Poet Ennius alive, that being dead, he caused his
picture to be set before his eyes, as a pledge of his great love and earnest
good will? It was for the desert that Scipio found in Ennius. Why did Augustus
Caesar, that wise and Godly Emperor, make so much of Maro's books? but because
he was in his time the lamp of Rome, he honored no less his books after he
was dead, then he embraced him alive. The great King Artaxerxes thought himself
half dead without the company of Hippocrates. Pomponius Atticus did think him
happy, when either Cicero was in his sight, or some of his books in his bosom.
Alexander never went to bed without Homer under his pillow. Who will not praise
the diligence of poor Cleanthes the Philosopher? Who will not commend the
travel of Plautus the comical Poet? the one living with a Baker, the other with
a Bruer, with much care and pain in the day time, that they might study in the
night time. Such was their poverty and necessity, that they were urged to
labor in the day such was their affection and desire unto learning, that they
were willing to study in the day time.

Who will not extol Euclides to take such pains, and to incur such danger, to
go in the night time in the apparel of a woman, because he might not be known,
to hear Socrates read Philosophy? Oh painful men, Oh worthy members of their
country that so sought by diligence, that so traveled by study and industry:
and in fine so found by wit and reason the redress of things, to disperse that
diffused Chaos, which Time said Cicero had then scant opened the door unto.
Then after private pain and special study of sundry men in several countries,
knowledge came to that perfection, that from one man in one place, diverse grew
learned and pollitick. Thus from Romulus the first builder and King of the
Romans, Rome in short time had wise and discreet Counselors to govern the
City. From Solon the first lawgiver (after Draco) amongst the Athenians, by
and by, learned and eloquent Orators flourished in Athens. From Lycurgus
amongst the Lacedaemonians, straight grew modest and grave Senators called
Ephori. And thus from one in the beginning diverse proceeded forth in the end:
Thus the Prophets began amongst the Egyptians: the Gimnosophistes among the
Indians: the Caldeans amongst the Babylonians, the Sages called Magi, amongst
the Persians: And so of others in other countries. And thus by diligence, were
all men first commended by their pilgrimage and labor of life, and were well
recorded in memory for their service to their country, Prince, and friends,
that so having finished their pilgrimage in this life, the fame of their merits
were a perpetual memory to them after death.

CHAP. XIII,
Of the first inventors of arts, countenanced by Princes, and of the use of
southsaying.

TThe world being raw and rude, and barbarous, without all civil policy:
Nature of it self first moved men to civilize their manners, and instructed
the ignorant to seek and search things unknown. This Nature wrought in diverse
men in sundry countries a desire to knowledge, whereby men exercised their
gifts to the advancement and commendation of their countries, following as
Cicero says, Nature as a good guide, and a Captain to find out that which
was not known. And because nature was always desirous to be acquainted with
art, as a thing to exornate and beautify her self, she first invented letters
as the foundation and the ground whence all learning does proceed. Afterward
letters were invented amongst the Hebrews by Phylo, and brought unto Greece by
Cadmus, and practiced first in Egypt by Memnon: from Egypt unto Phrygia,
brought by one named Hercules an Egyptian born. Again, among the Hetruscans
letters were first invented and written by Demaratus a Corinthian. Amongst the
Romans as both Plutarch and Solinus do affirm the Pilagians invented letters,
and taught the use thereof. And some Authors of great credit, affirm that
Nicostrata the mother of Evander the Areadian invented letters first in Rome.
So Radamanthus in Syria, and so others in diverse places of the world were
studious and careful to search a way by reason to practice the same by wit,
and to disperse the lumpish Chaos, which yet for want of knowledge had no
perfect form. And now letters being invented. Grammar worthyly came to claim
the second seat of fame whose beginning and entrance unto Rome, was celebrated
by Epicurus, brought by one Crates, being sent as Ambassador from king Attalus,
unto the Senators, at the time of the second wars of Carthage. This is the
well, whence flow all other sciences: for from the faculty of writing, and the
art of speaking, do the rest proceed. Macrobius prefers Dydimus for his
excellency herein. Cicero commends one named Antonius Enipho, whose school
and lecture Cicero long frequented. The force of Grammar chiefly consists in
Histories and Poetry; for Poetry is so commended, that both Moses that mighty
ruler of the Hebrews, and David that wise Prince of Israel, the one in reducing
the people from Egypt, the red Sea opening a way, and giving place unto Moses
to pass through, made Exemetron verses in good meeters, to thank God for his
good success and fortune; the other with diverse Hymns in meeter, and sweet
songs did assuage the just anger of God for his offenses. In Poetry Homer and
Hesiodus excelled for antiquity, the one in setting forth the fame of Mars, (I
mean wars) the other in commending the pains and diligence of Ceres, (which is
husbandry) though Lynus Orpheus, Marcellinus and others were of great
antiquity, yet not of so great a fame. Histories and the profit thereof were
found, as Plyny writes, by Cadmus Mylesius the first History that was written
by any Philosopher, was by Xenophon: but the excellent and worthy fame of
Historiographers in Greece afterward was justly noted in Thucidides and
Herodotus, as it was amongst the Romans in Livi and Salust. Thus from a rude
beginning, came famous and learned writers.

As for Rethorick, it was first invented by Mercury, as Horace says, but as
Aristotle and Quintilian do think, it was by Empedoc^es: then from time to time
from age to age, it came unto that perfection at length that Rethorick was as
necessary to be taught every where, as it was profitable to be used any where.
The Prince of this faculty in Greece; was Demosthenes, who with his eloquence
long guided Athens. Isocrates, Aeschines and others flourished in great fame by
this art in Greece. In Rome Cicero and Salust. were the fountains of all
sugared eloquence. For the beginning of Music, diverse opinions and sundry
assertions are made, where Music was first found. The Greeks suppose that
Dionisius found first Music. The Hebrews think that Tubal, Polibius says,
that Music first was found in Arcadia, Solinus says, that it was first in
Creet. The most do agree and judge, that Orpheus and Linus were the inventors
of it, some again think that Amphyon found Music: but how. where and when it
was first found it is uncertain. But unto that perfection at length Music
came, that the Greeks thought that man not well learned, unless he had some
skill in Music. As for the golden study of Philosophy, which as Cicero says,
searches wisdom hates folly, the only seeker of virtues, and the scourge of
vices; some suppose that it was first from the barbarous people brought unto
Greece, for amongst the ancient Egyptians, Philosophy was first studied and
opened by Vulcanus. Amongst the Persians it was found by them that were called
Magi. Amongst the Indians by Gymnosophistes. Amongst the Babylonians, and
Assyrians by the Caldeans, which as Laertius does witness, were called all
wise men. This art was sought with great industry, and much honored in all the
world, for that it contained all sciences and faculties in it self, as well the
life and manners of men, as also the obscure and difficult nature of things,
with the subtle search of the same in the disputation thereon. Great was the
contention of the Astrologers who was he that first found the orders and
motions of the heavens: some attributing the first invention thereof unto
Prometheus, some unto Belus; some unto Atlas, as Plini in his seventh book
affirms wherefore the poets fain that Atlas does sustain the heavens upon his
shoulders; some attribute it unto Mercurius, some unto Actinus. And thus every
country contendeth about the antiquity thereof. The Egyptians brag of their
antiquity upon this subject; the Assyrians boast no less of their knowledge in
this art. The course of the Moon was first found by Endimion. The eclipse of
the same by Anaxagoras, Thus first nature sought such means as might set forth
her desire by seeking and traveling for knowledge; And physic is not so
little to be esteemed but it might here well be mentioned, considering the
common profit thereof, and how painfully the same was studied by others in time
past.

Physic is either healing with diet, medicine, or sugery. In the first Apollo
was most honored, in the last Aesculapius was chiefly commended, whom the
Greeks supposed to be the first that healed wounds. Afterward Hippocrates born
in the Isle of Coos, made a law, that whosoever recovered health, should write
his name in the temple of Aesculapius, whereby it seems that Aesculapius was
one of the first Physicians. The first physician that ever came to Rome, did
come from Peloponesus named Archagathus, when L. Aemilius, and Marcus Livius
were Consuls in Rome: when he came first to practice physic there, he was
called for the rare sight thereof, first a butcher, at last a murderer. To
repeat several herbs, by sundry men found out in this art, it were over long.
But we will touch on nothing but the first inventers and searchers of arts, and
so come unto Magic which was found, as Plini says, by Zoroastes first King of
the Bactrians, eight hundred years before Illion was builded. This says Plini
might have been better unsought then found for that we see every man desirous
to be acquainted with Devils, and to be taught of Simon the secret counsels of
Devils: insomuch that women go unto school with Circes or Calipso, to learn
sorcery of them. The Egyptians had great felicity in this art, insomuch that
Pharao commanded the priests to show some feats before him, deriding Moses and
his doings. In presence of Moses they converted a rod into a Dragon, which when
Moses saw, to suppress vain incantations, and to show how much the one did
excel the other, he threw his rod unto the ground, and it was converted unto a
Snake, and devoured the Dragon that the Egyptians enchanted. Solomon the wise,
whom at the beginning God so advanced and favored, made and invented ways to
expel Devils. Eleasalus as Josephu does write, used a ceremony in expelling
and conjuring of Devils from any man, to put a ring in his nosethrils, having a
certain herb, or a root, appointed and named of Solomon, within the ring, which
root with his smell drove out Devils and he conjured them not to return to that
man any more. This art in short time grew to that credit, and at this time is
in diverse places in such honor, that a conjurer is more esteemed then a
Preacher. There are such branches in this art that do well merit praise; for
there are diverse kinds of these Magicks, whereby men say they are able to do
any thing, and that by it they know all things. The first part or rather kind
of Magic is called Nigromancy, which is a kind of conjuring the dead bodies to
tell things to come, as at the wars in Pharsalia betwixt Caesar and Pompeius,
it was foreshewed by the ghost of a dead man unto Sextus, the whole chance and
event of that war, and how his father Pompey should lose his head. The second
kind of Magic is called Pyromancy, which is a certain divination by fire, thus
Tanaquil, Tarquinius Priscus wife, when she saw the flames playing about
Servius Tullius head, she affirmed thereby that he should be King in Rome. The
third is Aeromancy, which uses to prognosticate things by the air, as by
flying of Fowls, and tempest of weather as when it rained Iron in Lucania, it
did presage said they, the death of Marcus Crassus amongst the Parthians, or as
Livi writes, when it rained stones in Picen at the second wars of Carthage, it
was to show the slaughter and murder that Hannibal should do in Italy. The
fourth is Hydromancy, to judge things to come by fight of water, as Varro does
report of a boy, that saw the picture or image of Mercury in the water,
pronouncing and reciting all the wars of Mithridates King of Pontus, that
should follow in verses. There are two other kinds of Magic the one named
Geomancy, to declare and expound things by the opening gaping, and moving of
earth: the other Chiromancy, to judge by the lines of han^s called Palmistry,
these are they that Cicero makes mention of in his first book of divinations,
where he says, Cum semitam ipsi nesciant alijs tamen, monstrant viam, they
will teach others that way that they know not themselves. They will teach
others how to have money and substance and yet they are themselves poor
beggars, always in the house of Codrus, hanging at the fleeve of Irus. There is
again a kind of Soothsaying which was first practiced in the land of Hetruria,
where when a certain Husbandman ploughed in the field called l'arquimen, a
certain man appeared in sight, who sprang up from the ground which then was
plowed named Tages, in face and countenance much like a young child: but in
wisdom and discretion far surmounting any sage Philosopher. This Tages taught
all the land of Hetrmia. Plini says, that one Delphos first invented
Soothsaying, and Amphiaraus first invented soothsaying by fire.

Polydorus describes another sort of Soothsayers, who were wont to conjecture
and foreshew by beasts slain to be sacrificed, whether the heart, the liver, or
such like did perish; as Caesar, which when he sacrificed an Ox unto Jupiter,
which had no heart, thereby the Soothsayers prognosticated the infelicity and
mishap of Caesar. Likewise, King Xerxes in his wars against the Greeks, a Mare,
being a stout and warlike beast, brought forth a Hare, a timorous and fearful
thing, whereby they declared the overthrow of Xerxes and his huge army, and the
flight and cowardice thereof. Again, there is a kind of sooth saying by
lightning, thunders and tempests. The folly of men was such, that they thought
nothing to be in the world, but had hidden knowledge concerning man: they would
take nothing in hand without some Oracles of Jupiter or Apollo; they reposed
more trust in flying fowls, in their chirping notes, concerning any attempts
which they took in hand, then in their own force and strength; they had more
confidence in beasts of the field, and trusted more in elementary sights. In
fine, there was nothing almost, but they had more respect either unto the
color, the voice, the proportion, and such like toys, then they had in
themselves, as is before mentioned in the worshipping of their Gods, and
institution of Religion. These foolish toys were first observed amongst the
Chaldeans; from Chaldea they came to Greece, from Greece to Hetruria, from
Hetruria to Rome, and from Rome to all Europe they were scattered. Wherefore
Moses that wise Hebrew, and the singular instrument of God for his people,
commanded that no man should consult with those wicked and abominable faculties
saying unto his people, You shall not believe Soothsayers, neither shall you
trust unto dreams. The Jews were so addicted to observe these augurations, that
they would not go to war at any time, without some warnings and conjectures had
by some bird or beast; insomuch, that one Mossolanus, a Jew born, a wise man
noted in his Country, making his voyage unto wars, as Josephus in his first
book of Antiquity does write, was commanded with all his host to stay, until
a certain southsayer would go to counsel and know the success of the wars:
which then he took in hand, with a bird hard by the army, Mossolanus perceiving
how they were inclined and wholly bent to be instructed by divination, he took
his bow and an arrow, and slew this bird, whereat the soldiers were so amazed,
and the soothsayer so angry, that had not Mossolanus persuaded the people
wisely he had been like, though he was their Captain, to have been by his own
soldiers slain: but after long tumult made, Mossolanus spoke after this sort
unto his soldiers: Do you think that birds, beasts, and such like dumb things,
can foreshew things to you, which know nothing of themselves? for behold the
bird which you trusted most unto, and likewise your soothsayer, could not see
to avoid my purpose when I slew him. Do you trust that creature for your lives
which is ignorant of his own death! O blindness of people which yet remains
in this age. Thus having briefly past the inventers of sciences, in sundry
countries, men were much given to find other necessaries to live by, and
studious to make things profitable for their countries, and careful to augment
the state and life of man to full perfection. For the Cyclopians were the first
workers of Iron work; the Lacedaemonians the first inventers of harness,
spears, swords, and bucklers for wars: people thereby most renowned; the
Athenians taught first to plant trees and Vineyards; the Phrygians made first
the chariots and wagons; the Lydians used first to dress wools, and so the
people of Caria practiced first bows and arrows, and the Phenicians the
Crossebow; then other particular matters were likewise sought out by diverse
special men, in special countries for the use of man, as oil and honey by
Aristeus: Keys by Theodotus the Samian; Ships to sail by Jason, silver by
Ericthomus, gold by Cadmus. Thus every where each man in his pilgrimage did
something worthy of memory. Thrason was renowned for his lofty walls and his
towers, Danaus for his wells and for his digging of water, Cinira for finding
out Copper, Brass, Lead, and such other metals, Ceres for sowing of Corn, and
Bacchus for planting the Vine: thus the world in time waxed not only populous,
but it grew also skillful in things, and plentiful of laws, for the redress
and safeguard of man.

CHAP. XIIII.
Of Patience of Kings and Princes.

PAtience is a virtue says ( Cato the wise) in all adversities, the best
medicine to a sick man, the surest plaster to any sore; it comfort the
heavy, it rejoiceth the sad, it contenteth the poor, it heals the sick, it
eases the painful, it hurts no man, it helps all men: therefore said the
wise man Byon, that that the greatest harm that can happen unto man is not to
be able to sustain, and abstain, For this was Tiberius Caesar much commended of
Suetonius, that he suffered in free Cities and Towns free tongues, Philip King
of Macedonia, when certain Ambassadors of Athens came to him, he required of
them if he might stand in any stead to Athens, to certify him of the same; to
whom Demochares one of the Ambassadors answered, that the greatest pleasure
that he could do to Athens, was to hang himself: the King most patient in such
scoffs and taunts, said: the reproachful slander of the Athenians do make King
Philip better able to revenge their malice by wars, then to move him to answer
their backbiting in words. A Prince not only patient in hearing, but also
wise in answering. As sometime the Emperor Alexander Severus in Rome. when it
was signified unto him (after Antonius was dead) that the barbarous nations
were ready to enter the City of Rome, and that he was much rebuked of the
people, and blamed of the Senators, for the slender care he had to the City: he
(as Herodianus affirms) answered, that it belongs to Princes, to requite the
good, and not to answer the evil: for wisemen will speak evil of no man in the
beginning, least they should be judged fools in the end, whereunto all things
are directed and whereby all things are proved. So patient was Anaxagoras, when
it was told him that his son was dead, to answer merrily. I know my son was
mortal. So patient was King Antigo^us being certified of his son Alc^onus
death, to answer, I looked no other than for his death. So patient was
Pericles, whon he heard that both his sons died in one day, to keep his
countenance merry, his cheer unchanged and his business about the state of
his country not delayed. But Harpalus was of passing patience, being bidden of
Astiages King of Persia to supper, where he had two sons of his ready dressed,
and laid in a silver dish before him on the table, to be eaten by their own
father. The King, nay the tyrant marking the countenance of Harpalus, and
perceiving him not to be moved much at the matter, asked him how he liked his
supper, he without alteration of color, or change of countenance, framed
himself to answer the king merrily, commending much the supper, as one that
knew that patience was the only remedy in tyranny. A second Job in patience,
nay he passed Job, for Job knew that his God did suffer Satan to punish him
for love he had to Job, but Harpalus perceived that this tyrant did this to him
of tyranny and evil will, far from christianity: for in this vale of misery, we
count him wise, and certain we may call him most wise, that can in prosperity be
gentle, and in adversity be patient. Both these examples were seen in one man
in one day at Rome. Paulus Aemilius, having two sons the hope of Rome, and
comfort of the father, the one dead four days before the triumphs of
Macedonia, the other, three days after the triumph, returning from Macedonia
with that noble victory, and such triumphs unto Rome, that no man could find
in his heart to tell this noble Roman of the heaviness in Rome, by reeson of
the death of his children, he perceiving the people of Rome to be sad, and he
so merry, they so heavy with sobs and sighs, and he so glad by reason of his
triumphs and victories, demanded the cause which being at length made known, he
then comforted them, that should comfort him saying: I thank the Gods more to
give me victory over my enemies, to the glory and praise of Rome, then I accuse
fortune to spoil me of my children, which by nature were borne to dye: and
though much it be to my grief, yet wish I the Gods to do the like to the
father as they did the sons, so that the like conquest and glory may happen to
Rome. In this was both magnanimity and patience. Some men are patient in some
things, as in a corporal pain: some in torments: another is patient of
injuries done. I commend them both: but to be patient in all kind of
aflictions and adversity, heaven and earth commends that man. Plyny speaks
of one man Anarchus Augustus most patient in torments. Of one Woman Laena, to
keep silence. So were the Egyptians people of great patience, when they had
rather dye in torments with patience, then to betray any man. The
Gymnosophistes of India were so patient, that from sun rising until night,
upon the hot san^, they continued without meat and drink (says Plyny) going
from one seat to an other, to behold the heavens, the Sun, the Moon, etc. The
Lacedaemonians were most patient in travel, pain, wind, weather, and wars. The
people of Sparta, at what time certain men of Chios came to pilgrimage,
understanding the wise men of Sparta called Ephori, to be in all things most
patient, to move them to anger, they vomited before them, and then went where
the Ephori sat in judgment, and used it as a common stool to discharge
nature. When they came to Chios again they said that the wise men of Sparta
were fools and blocks, because they could not move them to be angry, but not
more patient then the other were beastly. For this kind of patience was
Mithridates king of Pontus renowned, so was Agesilaus king of the
Lacedaemonians, so was Masissima king of Numidia. So patient was the Emperor
Augustus, that he suffered a young man of Sycilia to answer him as boldly, as
he had demanded of him merrily, whether ever his mother had been in Rome, he
being like to the Emperor in countenance and proportion, meaning thereby that
he might be his father if she had been there, the young man perceiving the
sleight of Augustus, answered boldly, and said: My mother was never in Rome,
but my father has been diverse times in Rome: meaning that the Emperor might
rather be his brother that way then he to be his son the other way by his
mother. But because patience is better known by reading of diverse Princes
anger, where they shall see what hurt was done; what wickedness was committed
by impatience, which might have bin redressed and saved by patience: therefore
to avoid prolixity, it shall be spoken in the one, what wants in the other,
but I will first speak of the humanity and sobriety, and other virtues famous
in Kings and Princes.

CHAP. XV.
Of humanity and clemency of Princes.

LIke as pride oppresses love, provokes disdain, kindles malice, confounds
justice, and at length subverteth states: even so humanity stirs up
affection, augmenteth amity, maintains love, supporteth equity, and
preserves Cities and countries. Nothing, says the godly Emperor Alexander
Severus, so joyneth the hearts of subjects unto their Prince, as humanity.
Nothing does purchase honor so much to the noble man, as affability. Nothing
so much kindles love amongst the Commons as mutual humanity. How gently did
Cyrus king of Persia handle Croesus king of Lydya, who being vanquished and
convicted, was by the law, as Herodotus does witness, appointed to dye, he
being brought to the place of execution, began heavily to sigh and say: This
even Solon told me before: at whose sighs Cyrus being with pity convicted,
gave him life. This may be seen in Cinna, a noble gentleman of Rome, and Nephew
unto Pompeius the great, who having conspired the death of that most gentle
Emperor Augustus, who had been oftentimes Cinnas patron and defender, both in
restoring him unto his patrimony, and in augmenting his honor, and in saving
his life: and now likewise having his accusers ready to prove the intent of
Cinna, and in place to stand before Cinnas face, to declare his conspiracy,
where, how, and when he had conspired the Emperors death. While this complaint
was made, the Empress Livia, Augustus wife, came in place, saying: the
Physician, said she does use a contrary pl^ister to those patients that will
not heal with rules of physic. No prince said she, wins such praise by
severity as he meriteth commendation by lenity. For Cinna now being
reprehended, his fault known, to grant him life, does more augment Augustus
fame by lenity, then to make Cinna die for safeguard of the state by Justice:
for Justice without prudence is half tyranny. The Emperor joyed much to hear
such clemency proceed from his wife Livia, and caused Cinna to be sent for and
made him sit in a chair, and willed every man to depart the chamber, then not
repeating Cinnas fault, nor reciting his conspiracy he said: I crave of thee
Cinna in recompense of good will, and pardoning of thy faults good will and love
again and to show me the like good will as I have and will always show unto
thee: and in proof thereof he made him a Consul in Rome, whose princely
cleme^cy therein made his foes to become his friends this his wonderful wisdom
and humanity caused all Rome to love him and his wife alive, and to honor them
both being dead. He was went to answer any slanderous reproach or tanting words
thus gently, that Augustus never weighed slanderous words, so that he might
avoid malicious deeds. We read of the like humanity to be in that most worthy
Emperor Trayane, who when he was blamed by some of his friends, for his too
much humanity toward his subjects, considering that familiarity breeds
contempt, he answered. I will be unto my subjects as I would my subjects be
unto me, for the gentleness and lenity of a Prince never hurts his estate.

In the same place does Brusonius join unto these two noble Emperors, a worthy
example of like clemency; Alexander Severus, who if all Rome had lost humanity,
it had been found again in him: He in like sort, being spoken unto by one of
his Consuls, and being often reprehended of Mammea his own mother, for his
courtesy and facility of speech: I read (said he) that severity grows unto
tyranny, and tyranny in a Prince works his destruction. And that lenity is
the most secure state in a Prince, who sees not the experience thereof?
Certainly Nero, Caligula, and Heliogabulus, were never so cruel, as these three
noble Emperors, Augustus, Traiane and Severus, were gentle and meek. Alphonsus
the great King of Arragon, giving ear a long time to his friends, who found
fault with his often pardoning and forgiving those that offended much his own
person, said, Alphonsus had rather save many by lenity and gentleness, then
lose any by cruelty and tyranny. This King being moved to wars against the
Venetians and Florentines, people very stout in Italy, and ready from Naples to
march forward to meet his enemies, certain Ambassadors coming from the
Florentines to entreat of peace with Alphonsus upon humble suits and
conditions: No conditions (said Alphonsus) shall be denied to them that seek
peace, but frankly and freely to grant it. His humanity was such, that the
Ambassadors were not so ready to ask peace, but he was as ready to grant
peace. Herodotus does write that there was a law among the Persians, that no
man should be punished for one fault, but first they would examine whether his
good deeds were to be rewarded, or his evil life to be punished. Nicanor the
Macedonian, after he had used evil speech every where against Philip,
Alexanders Father, he was complained of unto the king: When the king knew
thereof, he answered gently, That poverty caused Nicanor to speak against king
Philip: Therefore he did send him money to ease his mind, and pardoned withal
his offenses.

How worthy of memory is Theodosius Junior after he was persuaded by his
friends, to revenge these backbiters that spoke ill of him, he answered in this
sort; a Prince ought not to bend himself to revenge faults, but be ready to
pardon offenses, saying moreover: Would God that Theodosius were able to make
his enemies alive again. And to prove that a Prince ought not to revenge.
Adrian the Emperor showed a noble example thereof, he having great enmity with
a certain worthy Roman, and being in great hatred toward this man, before he
became Emperor, the self same day that Adrian was made Emperor of Rome,
meeting his enemy in the street, he said aloud to him before the people.
Evasisti thou have won the victory, meaning that he then being a Prince
elected, might in no wise revenge the wrongs that he received before. O passing
humanity and clemency in princes.

It was Alexander the^ great his saying as Pontanus in his first book affirms
that it was more meet for a Prince to do good for evil, then to add evil to
evil. We read that cruel Nero in the beginning of his Empire was so gentle,
that he wished often he could not read, because he should not put his hand
(according unto the custom of Rome) to the libells for the punishment of the
offenders. And Domitianus in the beginning did so abhor tyranny and cruelnesse,
that he would forbid to kill any beast for sacrifice, though they in the latter
years forgot this natural clemency? What a noble virtue is humanity in a
Prince? what excellency in a noble man? what an ornament in a Gentleman? what
commendation in all men, insomuch that the Snakes of Syria, the Serpents of
Terinthia, the Scorpions in Arcadia, want no due deserved praise of Plini for
their gentleness, and sparing of their natural soil, though they were cruel in
others. What humanity was it in Scipio, having taken captive Hasdrubal, king
Masinisla his nigh kinsman, to restore him home again without ransom? what
clemency used Demetrius to Silla, a Captain of K. Ptolome even as before,
Ptolome showed to Demetrius himself being taken prisoner, the like showed he to
Silla? such has been the lenity of some Princes, that thereby they augmented
fame, purchased great honor, won victories: and such has been the tyranny of
others, that they have defamed themselves, won hatred, lost their estates, and
in fine destroyed themselves. For this purpose was Philip King of Macedonia
wont to instruct his son Alexander, to deport him courteously toward the
Macedonia, to use lenity and clemency to his equals, and to show himself gentle
unto all men, while his father Philip yet lived that he might the better in
that season win favor, and find friendship with his subjects: for then some
came by heritage, some by the sword, and the most came by election. Nothing
says Plutarch does so establish the estate of a Commonwealth, as the clemency
of a Prince toward his subjects, and the love of the subjects toward their
Prince, the one is never seen without the other. King Darius therefore
understanding that his subjects were taxed sore with Subsedies, blamed his
counsel, rebuked their law and made an open oration unto his commons, to
signify how loath he was to molest his subjects and that he was as loath to take
any from his poor commons, as he knew them to be willing in giving all they had
to pleasure their Prince: his care therein showed, and his speech so affable,
and his good will opened, with such courtesy and lenity, inflamed such
benevolence, kindled such a love, caused such a readiness in his subjects and
made them through gentleness so beneficial, that both goods, lands, and lives,
were at Darius commandment. Plutarchus in the life of King Antigonus does
recite a famous history, concerning the alteration and change of Antigonus, who
with tyranny a long while, fomed in blood, and delighted in murder, being
given altogether to wickedness of life, spoiling at all times every where,
sparing no place at any time; but at length having obtained the kingdom of
Macedonia, became so meek, so liberal, so quiet toward his subjects, that he
was of all men wondered at for his sudden change, from so cruel a tyrant to so
gentle a Prince, from a spoiler of all places, to be a sparer now of his
subjects: being demanded the cause thereof, answered; Then I traveled for the
Kingdom of Macedonia, which was to be won with wars and tyranny, and now I
labor for the good will of my subjects, which is to be gotten with gentleness.
The only remedy, the sure way to win good will of the subjects, is always for
Princes to be courteous and gentle Pity in a Prince causes love in the
subjects. Such pity was found in that gentle Emperor Aurelian, when he would
have entered into that City called I^aena, the gates being shut against him, he
did send his Heralds to signify, unless the gates should be opened, he would
not leave one dog alive within the City. The City more stout then wise, refused
to open their gates, until with force of Engines the walls were battered down,
and the City in the hand of the Emperor to do what it liked him. The soldiers
greedy of the spoil, were by the gentle and merciful Emperor, charged not to
meddle with any within the City, until they had license. The Emperor being
charged by the soldiers with his promise, to kill and to spoil all, and not to
leave a dog alive, he kept promise like a Prince, and destroyed all the dogs of
the City, and restored the City again to the inhabitants thereof. This noble
Aurelian had rather his soldiers should want, then that they should not show
mercy, (according to his custom) to the comfortless. Xerxes, the great King of
Persia, used such lenity and gentleness toward his brother Arimenes, with whom
before he was a great enemy, that he made him of a foe, a friend. Porus, a
famous Prince of India, being conquered by Alexander the Great, fearing that
pity might not have place in the heart of such a conqueror, sought nothing else
of Alexander (who willed him to ask any thing, and he should have it) but
clemency. This virtue long waited upon Alexander, till pride (the root of all
mischief) corrupted his gentle heart, and he was by the Medes and Persians
persuaded to be the son of Jupiter. So gentle he was before, the King Darius
did wish either to conquer Alexander, because he might show courtesy unto
Alexander, or else to be conquered by Alexander.

Aeneas Sylvius was wont to use the saying of Sigismund the Emperor, that happy
are those Princes that foster up clemency in Court, and prudent are those
Princes that use humanity in their Cities. It was no small proof of humanity in
the Senators of Rome, at the burial of Siphax King of Numidia, who being taken
by the Romans, and kept in Tiberius house, according to martial law, before he
was ransomed by the Numidians, died at Rome, where such solemnity, honor and
pomp was showed at his funeral; such gifts given, such liberality used, as if
Siphax had died amongst his own subjects, he might have wanted to have such
glorious burial in Numantia, being there their King, as he had in Rome being a
prisoner. That is worthy humanity which is showed to men in adversity: and that
is mere clemency which is done to those banished strangers, as the Romans
sometime did to Prusius King of Bithinia, who being driven to exile by his son
Nicomedes, came unto Rome, where humanity and clemency were used and nourished
in the Senate, and was met at Capua (a City sometime by Hannibal conquered) by
Scipio and Cornelius, and brought to Rome, not like a banish^d man, but as a
noble Prince, with such triumphs and honor done to him, and such passing
courtesy, and liberality of Senators, that although he was banished Bithinia
his Kingdom, and by Nicomedes his own son, yet was he received into Rome by
strangers, and that to the honor and the fame of Rome. Thereby the Romans grew
to that admiration with all people that for their lenity, and surmounting
courtesy, they were of all men beloved; and for their valor and magnanimity
they likewise were of all the world feared. For as to Siphax and Prusius,
wonderful clemency and humanity were by the Romans tendered; so was the like
to Ptolomy King of Egypt, being of his own brother banished, and by them
restored again to his Kingdom.

Rome then was called the Haven of succor, the anchor of trust, the Key of
courtesy, whereto all succourless Princes, and noble Captains sled. Rome
flourished then, while pity and mercy continued: Rome prospered, while humanity
and clemency were fostered. Rome excelled all nations in gentleness and pity,
when Marcellus and Metellus lived, the one Captain of Syracusa, the other in
Celtiberia: The noble Captain Marcellus was so pitiful, that after his
soldiers had conquered Syracusa, with great slaughter and murder of men,
women, and children; he mounted up into a high Tower of the Castle, and there
with tears he lamented the cufull sight of Syracusa, more like to one
conquered, then a conqueror; more like to a Prisoner, then a Prince: so that
any who then saw him, might rather judge Marcellus; a Syracusan captive, then a
Roman Captain. Happy was Syracusa (since fortune was no better) to happen on
such a gentle Conqueror, who was not so glad of his own victory, as he was
sorrowful for the fall of Syracusa.

That renowned Roman Merellus, besieging the great City of Centobrica in the
country of Celtiberia, when he perceived their Bulwarks broken, their Walls
ready to fall, and victory nigh at hand, he began to be moved with pity, and
mercy possessed the chief place in his heart, so that when the women of the City
brought their children in their arms to crave mercy at Merellus hand, he
avoided the calamity and misery that was ready to fall on Centobrica, and
spared the City, and removed his Camp, being conquered himself with pity and
mercy of the ruthful women, and innocent children: Thus gentle Metellus where
he might have been a Conqueror over men, did suffer himself to be conquered by
little Infants. O Rome, happy were those golden days, wherein through clemency
and gentleness thou wast as much loved and honored, as thou have been by
valiant Captains trembled at and feared.

Pompieius the great, when Tig^anes King of Armenia, being by him conquered,
had kneeled before Pompeius face, yielding his Crown and Scepter at Pompeius
his foot, and himself unto his gentleness as a captive; took him in his arms,
embraced him, put his Crown on his head, and restored him to to the Kingdom of
Armenia again. The like courtesy he used toward Mithridates King of Pontus,
being dead, in giving him a royal burial though he knew well the great hatred
that Mithridates had forty years against the Romans, yet in stead of just
revengement, Pompey used Princely clemency.

The gentleness that was then used in Rome, yet, betwixt foes, was such, that
Julius Caesar (that valiant Emperor and Conqueror) was as willing to revenge
the death of his great enemy Pompey upon Photina and Bassus, who slew Pompey,
and did send his head to Caesar; as L. Par^lus was courteous and favorable to
his most mortal foe Perseus. Hannibal, though he was counted the most and
greatest enemy that ever Rome felt, yet moved with Princely clemency, he won
more commendations for the burial of P. Aemilius, Gracchus, and Marcellus,
three noble Romans, then he wan fame by overcomming two thousand Romans in
field. The chief fame that Hannibal was worthy of, was for his humanity and
gentleness, as is proved by these two noble Romans before mentioned, whose
dead carcasses Hannibal caused diligently to be sought for in the field and
solemnly to be buried with honor and renown, though they were his enemies. And
as Hannibal was much commended in Rome, and well beloved of the Romans for his
humanity, so was he fe^red much in Rome for his prowess, and valiant deeds of
arms.

Polycrates, that Tyrant of Samos, was chiefly commended for his gentleness
and courtesy showed toward women which were the wives and mothers of the dead
soldiers, in restoring them unto liberty, in giving them wealth to live, and a
great charge that no man should do them any wrong. Augustus the Emperor, when
he beheld in the City of Alexandria the sword wherewith Marcus Antonius slew
himself, could not refrain from tears to show his humanity; and opening his
clemency of nature to his enemy, he commanded that he should be honorably
buried with his dear friend Cleopatra in one grave.

Cicero in his first book of Tusculans commends much the clemency of Cleobes
and B^ton, in showing such love and obedience to their mother, who being in her
Chariot ready to go to the solemn feast of the Goddess Juno, the horses
suddenly died, and there being no other remedy least their mother should go on
foot they yoked themselves to draw the Chariot ten miles, to their immortal
praise and commendations. I remember a history in Patritius, of one Simonides,
who for that he was moved with pity to bury a dead corpse, left in the way where
no man put it into the earth, as he was passing with his fellows over the seas,
that night before they should sail in the morning appeared unto Simonides the
self-same man whom he had buried upon the way, warning him that day not to go
to sea: so when he should take shipping, he remembering his dream, told if unto
his fellows, desiring them to stay that day: but his company laughing him to
scorn, leaving Simonides on the shore sailed to the seas, where in sight of
Simonides the ship and all his fellows were lost. The like pity was found in
Simon, the son of that most valiant Greek Militiades, who being elected
General over the Athenians, against the great might and force of puissant
Zerxes, in the wars of Marathon, was nothing inferior unto his renowned father
in prowess, but far passed him in clemency and courtesy: this young man for
his lenity and pity, being joined with valiantness, was appointed by the City
of Athens to encounter with Xerxes, whom his father Militiades often plagued,
at the first time of trying his magnanimity enforced Xerxes; after spoil of his
soldiers, and victory of field, to fly unto Persia, he was so pitiful that
he paid a great sum of moneys to have his father Militiades buried, who after
many conquests, and fawning of fortune in victories, died in prison, whose
death and burial, showed no less love and faithfulness in Simon toward his
father, then it showed evidently the pity and mercy he had in redeeming his
fathers corpse to be buried. Wherefore that pitiful Emperor Alexander Severus,
being demanded what is that, which is chief felicity in this world, said, to
foster friends with benefits and gentleness, and to reconcile foes with pity
and rewards.

Alphonsus at what time a certain dog barked at him, took a toast out of his
cup, and cast it to the dog, then saying; gentleness and clemency shall make
foes friends. I know not what greater humanity could be then was in Vespasian
the Emperor, after that Vitellius had killed his brother Sabinus, and had long
persecuted Vespasians son, being at last subdued, he spared not to show
gentleness to Vitellius his daughter, and gave her a great sum of money
toward her marriage. Agesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians, after he had the
victory of Corinth, did not so joy in his conquest, as he lamented the deaths
of so many Athenians, and Corinthians, and as Plutarch does witness, he said,
weeping. O Greece thou spillest more men with civil wars by discord, then would
defend thy state against all the world with courage. To use victory genty, is
more famous then to conquer cruelly; As the Emperor Adrian was wont to say,
that Princes ought rather with pity to say, this I can do, then with tyranny to
say; this I will do. Augustus that most pitiful Prince, after he had
conquered that famous City Alexandria, which the great Conqueror Alexander had
builded, and named it according unto his own name, being moved with pity,
stirred with mercy in sight of the Citizens, who hoped to have nothing but
death, said, for the beauty of your city, and memory of Alexander, as also for
the love I have unto Prius your Philosopher, and for the pity I bear unto you
all, I spare unto you your City, and grant you your life: O sweet sounding
words, from a pitiful Prince, not much unlike his predecessor Julius Caesar,
his own mothers brother, who after vanquishing of Pompey at Pharsalia, sent
letters unto Rome of such love professed, of such friendship promised, that
though Pompey was the only joy of Rome, the long delight of Romans, and the
defender and maintainer of their name and fame, yet being convicted, they
received Caesar as another Pompey, for that he used humanity, and showed
gentleness even to his enemies. For noble hearts ought to contemn cruelty,
Princes minds ought to abhor tyranny. A simple Sparrow which to avoid the
griping paws of a hungry Sparhawk, that would have preyed upon him, fled unto
Artaxerxes bosom, being in the Camp, wh^^ after long panting, as well for fear
as for weariness, in Artaxerxes bosom, Artaxerxes said. It is as little
mastery unto a Prince, or commendation to a valiant Captain to destroy that
which of it self does yield, as it is a fame unto Artaxerxes, to kill this poor
sparrow that fled for succor; Saying again, beholding the sparrow: As I will
not betray thee (thou little sparrow) for that thou have fled for help unto
Artaxerxes, so will I never deceive any man that will have confidence in me. If
this pity of Artaxerxes was showed unto a Sparrow, how much more ought Princes
to show the same unto men. Antigonus though he was a great enemy to Pyrrhus, as
Princes be during the time of war, Pyrrhus being slain by a silly woman in
Argos, and his head brought by Alcioneus unto his father King Antigonus,
thinking to please his father much with bringing K. Pyrrhus head, who long had
molested Antigonus alive: yet the King perceiving the cruel tyranny of his son,
delighting in dead men's heads, took the staff whereon his son Alcioneus carried
the head, and instead of thanks which he looked for at his fathers hands, he
was well and worthily rewarded with stripes; he took Pyrrhus head, and very
honorably covered it and after long looking thereon, he commanded his son
Helenus to carry it to the Kingdom of Epire, where Pyrrhus in his life time
was King, and there to bury it according unto the custom of the Epirots by
King Alexander his own brother. The like history is written in Herodotus of
King Darius, who yielded thanks unto those that brought Histeus head, as
Antigonus did to his son Alcioneus, saying, I do as little joy to see Histeus
head, being dead, as I do lament much such tyranny and cruelnesse to be in you*
who never did see King Darius so cruel to any man alive, as you are cruel to
Histeus being dead.

As Darius was gentle of himself, so he greatly esteemed those that were
gentle; insomuch that being at the point of death, even at that time when he
was so weak that he knew not Polistratus that gave a little water to refresh his
heart, he said; Whosever thou be I know thee not, and for that I am not able to
thank thee, Alexander shall and will requite thy gentleness, and the Gods
shall thank Alexander for his clemency and humanity toward my mother my wife
and children: And with that he stretched forth his hand, and said, Have me
recommended to Alexander, and give him this my right hand and tell him that
Bessus killed Darius, whom thou did see dying. Which when it was told by
Polistratus to Alexander, he much lamented his death, and caused his body to be
brought to his mother named Sisigambis. Thus works clemency and humanity,
that these two famous Princes, Alexander and Darius, two mortal enemies, and
yet not forgetting each others courtesy at deaths door were in love each with
the other, for their humanity one to another; Darius at his death repeating
Alexanders gentleness toward him, and Alexander requited Darius gentleness
being dead.

The greatest fame or commendation that may happen to any man, is to be counted
gentle and courteous: therein are diverse virtues knit and joined in friendship,
as pity, mercy, wisdom, and affability, with others; so that the property of
those men is always, though they can hurt, yet never to offend. As it is the
property of an evil man to revenge, so it is the nature of the good and gentle
to forgive.

Pilistratus showed both wisdom and rourtesie to certain drunkards, who having
in their drink used wanton speech to his wife, and being sober the next
morning, came to Pisistratus to ask him forgiveness for their lewd talk to his
wife, he gently said, Learn to be more sober another time; I know my wife was
not out of her house yesterday: Excusing his wife wisely, and pardoning them
gently. How gently did Alexander Severus use Camillus though he rebelled
against him, and by sleight thought to be Emperor of Rome, and for that being
condemned to die by the Senate, yet he was pardoned by Alexander. How courteous
was Fabius Maximus to forgive Marsius one of his chief Captains, the treasons
and snares that he used against his Master Fabius with the enemies. Such
gentleness did Xerxes the great show unto the Greeks, who were as Spies to
view the power and host of King Xerxes, sent from Athens: and being taken and
brought before the King he not only gently dismissed them, but showed them
courteously all his host and force of soldiers. The greatest victory is always
gotten by gentleness, as Alphonsus King of Aragon by gentleness won Careta,
Marcellus won Syracusa: Metellus Celtiberia as you have heard before mentioned.
Plutarch recites a passing history of great courtesy and humanity of King
Belenus, toward his son Antigonus, who being married to a fair woman, fell in
love with his fathers wife (for his mother was dead) and his father married the
daughter of Demetrius king of Macedonia named Estrabonica, a young woman of
excellent beauty: for this therefore the Kings son languished in love, that he
was like to die, unknown to his father, which when his father knew, he caused
his own wife to be married to his son Antigonus: a rare clemency and great
gentleness for a man to give his wife to please his friend. Pity accompanies
this excellent virtue, clemency, as we read in holy Scriptures, that diverse
good men ceased not to bewail and weep over the state of their enemies. I need
not here to recite Peticles the Athenian, who willed that the dead soldiers of
his enemies, should be buried in the wars of Peloponesus, nor of Hannibals
courtesy in the wars of Carthage, for the burial of Roman enemies. But Moses
that man of God brought with him from Egypt the bones of Joseph. Tobias and
Machabeus, merciful men commanded likewise a solemn burial for the dead
soldiers. And Jehu king of Israel, caused his enemy Jezabel, to be honorably
buried. But as white is better discerned by the black* then by any color else,
so shall humanity and gentleness appear most excellent in reading the title of
tyranny, where by conferring both together, the excellency of the one is
manifest, the terror of the other is odious. The gentleness and pity that our
Savior Jesus Christ showed unto Mary Magdalen, the lewd woman, unto the
prodigal child, unto Peter that denied him, unto the Thief that was hanged with
him, unto Daniel in the Den, to Sidrach in the Fire, to Jonas in the water, was
nothing else, but examples for our learning, to be gentle one unto another,
even as Jesus Christ was unto us all: thus we conclude as Cicero said of
Caesar, that Caesar extolling Pompey being dead, and setting up his pictures,
did extol his own name: so that the clemency that men do show unto others,
does advance their own glory.

CHAP. XVI,
Of sober and temperate Kings and Princes, and where temperance and sobriety
were most used.

SO much was this noble virtue of temperance esteemed with ancient people, that
they thought the greatest pleasure and the happiest life was to abstain from
desired meat and drink. So much was this sobriety of life commended of learned
Philosophers, that Anacharsis the Scythian was wont to write about the pictures
of Princes, this little lesson, Rule Lust, Temper the Tongue, Bridle the Belly.
Whereby the Philosopher diligently persuaded Princes to be temperate of life,
to be sober in talk, and to abstain from filthy feeding. For to subdue
appetite, to vanquish lust, to suppress pleasure is a worthy conquest. He is a
worthy Victor, a famous Conqueror, a puissant Prince, that can govern his own
affection. For even as fishes are taken with hooks, so men, says Pliny are
allured with pleasure. It is the greatest virtue that can be in man to abstain
from pleasure, to avoid these baits, these sweet pleasures, wise Princes have
lothed banqueting and drinking: insomuch that Julius Caesar that famous
Emperor of Rome, for his singular sobriety and passing temperance, was the
glory of Europe, and for his abstinence the only mirror of Italy, who by
overcomming of himself overcame all Europe. Of this Emperor Cato of U^ica
would say, though he was a mortal enemy unto Caesar, for that Caesar used the
company of Catoes sister Servilia, that one sober Caesar should subdue all
Rome. His abstinence was such (says Pliny) that most seldom or never would
this Emperor drink wine. Agesilaus King of the Lacedem^onians passing through
the country of Thasius, being met with then ^bles and entertained of the people
with diverse dainties and rare banquets, to welcome the King unto the country,
he touched not their dainties, but fed only with bread and drink, to satisfy
the importunity of the Thasians. And being earnestly requested and humbly
sought, and in manner enforced (least he should seem ungrateful, not to eat
their meats) he commanded his footmen and slaves the Helots, to feed if they
would on such cheer, saying, That princes might not pamper themselves with
dainty cheer and wines but to use abstinence and temperance: The one is
incident to vice, and shame, the other a nurse unto virtue and glory; for in
eating and drinking there lies hidden that sucking Serpent named
Forgetfulness: To avoid therefore gluttony and drunkenness, which are often
tendered unto Princes, Constantius that most temperate Emperor, kept him
always so hungry, that he would take of a poor woman a crust of bread to
satisfy hunger. It was Licu^gus law in Sparta and Ze^uchus rule in Locresia,
to abstain from delicate meats and sweet wines, as from an enemy unto Princes:
for wise men were wont to say, that meat is only good to expel hunger, and
drink to quench thirst. King Cyrus in his wars being demanded of his host what
he would have provided against dinner. Bread said Cyrus for drink we shall not
want, meaning as Amianus says water. This virtue of abstinence was so honored
then, that Princes which were given to wine were odious to the world. A great
shame it was in Thebes in Leonidas time to make banquets; thus Epaminondas that
brave Prince of temperance, being willed of a rich Citizen being his friend, to
come to a supper he found there such superfluous cheer, such excess of meat
and drink, that he said (being much offended with his friend) that he thought
he was invited to come to eat like a man, and not to feed like a beast. This
Prince knew the incommodity of feeding, and again knew the commodity of
abstinence. A number of excellent virtues do follow abstinence, as continence,
chastity, sobriety and wisdom. A heap of vices wait on pampering Princes, as
gluttony, lechery, drunkenness, and such others. Such was the temperance of
great King Porus of India, that bread and water was his accustomed cheer. Such
was the abstinence of Masinista King of Numidia, being fourscore years old,
that he fed hungerly always and not daintily at any time. Such was the
temperance of that noble Pericles, and of that Greek Tymon, that Aelianus in
his book of diverse histories, commends, the abstinence of the one, and Cicero
in his book of friendship, extolleth the temperance of the other: and so
jointly these two noble Greeks, did avoid always banqueting and belly-chear,
they forsook and fled the company of drinkers, as things more noisome then
profitable, more dangerous then healthy, and more filthy then friendly.
Demetrius king sometime of Macedonia and son unto Antigonus, being much given
to feeding and pampering of himself, grew to that lechery that being not
sufficed with diverse stately strumpets, and curious curtisans, as with that
renowned Lamia, the famous Crisides, the Diamond of that age Dama, and such
other dainty dames, he lusted after a young Gentleman of Greece of amorous
countenance, of passing beauty, and of a princely port, endued with seemly
shamefacednesse, who came from Athens unto Macedonia, to serve a soldier under
King Demetrius, who sought diverse means to accomplish his inordinate lust, by
eating and drinking with this young Democles, and diverse ways attempting to
have his purpose, he followed him privily where Democles went a bathing unto a
close chamber, Demetrius hid himself until the young man was naked, and then on
a sudden enterprized his lust. But when Democles saw the King, and perceived
his wicked intent, to avoid the shameful act and filthy lust of the King and
to maintain temperance of life, and everlasting fame of abstinence, he leapt
naked into a great seething vessel, of hot boiling water, and finished his
noble life, with famous death. O renowned Democles! O vile and shameful
Demetrius! thy death is famous, his life is infamous, thy temperance and virtue
commended, his lust and wickedness justly of all men condemned.

The like history does Plutarch write of Trebonius, a young soldier, of a
younger Captain named Lucius, and Nephew unto that noble Romans Caius Marius.
This Lucius having a charge over rertaine soldiers, designed to him by his
uncle Marius then General, and having a long while devised means to bring his
purpose to pass in accomplishing his lust with Trebonius, it happened on such a
season, that he found Trebonius by himself alone, and offered violence unto
him. Trebonius understanding his Captains desire, made as though he should
obteyn it, and embracing him, he thrust him to the heart with Lucius own
dagger, and so slew his Captain to avoid infamy: which when it came to Marius
his ear, that his Nephew was slain by Trebonius, the cause thereof being
demanded by Marius, and orderly declared by Trebonius, where as it was thought
he should be hanged, drawn and quartered, and suffer most ignominious death, he
was rewarded with a Crown of gold upon his head, written about with this
sentence: This crown and garland won Trebonius by temperance. Had Demetrius
King of Macedonia embraced sobriety of feeding, Democles had not been so famous
by abstinence, as Demetrius might have been renownes through temperance. Had
that Roman Lucius loved continency, as Trebonius honored chastity, Trebonius
had not had of Marius, Lucius his uncle, the praise, the garla^d of
commendations, and he so vile and shameful a death. Certainly, when the people
of Athens fed on figs: the Arcadians on Acorns or Walnuts: the Argives on
Parsley: the Terinthians on Pears: the Scythians on herbs, the inhabitants of
Carmenia and Me^cica, on poor fare: yea, when the whole world fed on those
fruits, which our old mother the earth naturally brought forth, before corn
was sown; then kingdoms and nations were ruled by the law of nature, to
embrace temporance, to honor abstinence, and to observe chastity. which since
grew to that abundance and excess, that the law of God, which was first, the
law of nature which was the second, the law of Princes which was the last,
could not keep men from the excess of meat, which only was the cause of the
sinking of Sodom and Gamorrha: of the often plaguing of the Israelites, of the
just confusion of gluttony and drunkards. When the Gymnosophistes of India fed
only with apples, when the Priests of Egypt abstained from flesh and wine, and
fed on bread and oil, when the Sages of Persia fed on fruits and herbs: then
temperance bare rule, then sobriety governed then abstinence was honored, then
Egypt flourished through temperance, and is now destroyed by gluttony. Then
India prospered through continency and sobriety, and is now vanquished by
drunkenness and temerity. Then Persia was famous, and conquered Kingdoms by
abstinencie, and is now convicted and conquered by abundance and excess. Where
is learned Athens, famous Sparta, stately Thebes? These while temperance ruled,
were feared of all kings, and are now by means of excess, hated and despised
of all Princes. All the while that the Lacedaemonians observed the laws of
Lycurgus, in abstaining from brave banquets and excess of cheer: yea, when
they might not pass unto Asia, for fear they should be allured and entiled
with the sight of the junkets of Asia, then says Cicero, were the people of
Sparta so temperate, that the men did never sit with women, nor the women with
the men. The Milesians made a straight law, as Theophrastus does witness, that
neither their wives, their daughters, nor maids might taste wine, neither durst
any man by the same law praise any wine in presence of women: for wine causes
heat heat moves lust, lust causes murder. Wherefore wise men write that it
is dangerous to praise. three things, in presence of the people. As for a man
to praise the beauty of his wife, for fear of fornicators; (for so did King
Candaules of Lidia praise his wife unto his friend Giges, and he was murdered
thereby, and the Queen his wife afterward married unto Giges:) for a man to
brag of his riches and substance; (for so did Sichaeus show his substance unto
Pigmalion king of Tire, who married the kings daughter named Eliza, and was
slain by the self same Pigmalion, king of Tire and his own brother in law:)
lastly to commend sweet wine in presence of the people does breed a desire unto
lust, and lust unto death. The famous Romans for a long while kept so straight
an order to observe temperance, so straightly was this law looked unto, that
Eg. Maecenius having slain his own wife, as Pliny records, for that she loved
wine, he was by the law of Romulus made for that purpose, saved from death. In
the same place of Plini it is read, that a certain matron of Rome was adjudged
to die, for that she had a privy key unto a cellar of wine. So much did they
observe this temperance, that Cato the Censor appointed by a law certain men to
kiss the women of Rome, to know whether they smelled of wine by their breath.
No man of what degree soever he was, Consul, Censor, Tribune or Senator, might
drink wine in Rome before he was thirty and five years of age. The people of
Messali^tica made and ordained, that the women should drink no other drink then
water. Amongst the Egyptians there was by a law appointed how much wine their
Princes might drink and no more. The Persians fed only then on bread salt, and
water. The prophets of Jupiter in Creet, abstained from flesh and wine. In
Rhodes he was taken a gross brained man, that fed on any thing else but on
fish. The Lacedaemonians were most severe against those that waxt fat by
feeding, insomuch that they would punish their own children with hunger, if
they waxed fat either by feeding, or by idleness Thus abstinence was fostred
as a nurse unto chastity and temperance, then Princes lothed vice, and loved
virtue: then they abhorred gluttony and drunkenness, and honored abstinence
and sobriety.

The learned and sage Philosophers, and men of passing abstinence and sobriety,
being no less studious then careful of temperance despised banquets, refused
feasts, lothed and defied belly cheer, and being allured of Princes, enticed
of noble men, sought of all men, they forsook and fled from the same, saying:
we eat to live, we live not to eat. A golden sentence and worthy to be
observed. Rather had Diogenes feed and lick dishes at Athens, then to feed
daintily at Alexanders table. Rather had that learned Greek, noble Zeno, drink
water, and feed poorly, as an example unto his scholars of temperance, then to
pamper his belly at Antigonus princely table, to show them the way unto
gluttony and drunkenness. Rather had Plato forsake Dionisius table, than to
abstain from his wonted Philosophical cheer. This virtue of abstinence was of
noble Socrates maintained with bread and milk only, and learned Homer honored
it with pottage made of herbs and ancient Pythagoras with beans, Anacharsis a
Scythian Philosopher, being demanded of his estate how he fed, how he did lie,
and how he was clothed, answered: I feed on hunger, I lie on the ground, and am
clothed like a Scythian.

The famous Athenian Aristides, at what time king Dionisius made suit for his
daughter in marriage, though he was a puissant Prince, a mighty king, yet for
his gluttony and prodigal drinking, for his tyranny and excess. Aristides, who
abhorred such vices in Princes, soberly and temperately answered: that he would
rather kill his daughter with his own hands, then to give his daughter in
marriage unto Dionisius. So odious unto good Princes was that excess of eating
and prodigal drinking, and so highly esteemed was abstinence and temperance,
that in Athens a long while in the temple of Ceres, of all the laws of
Triptolemus, three only commandments, as Zenocrates says were highly
observed. The first, Their Gods to be worshipped, the second, Their parents to
be honored; and the third, To abstain from flesh and feeding. O most
temperate life, when abstinence was observed, O most golden world when neither
wine nor banquets were known: then chastity was honored in the temple of
Vesta, then temperance frequented the Capitol of Jupiter, then lust knew no way
to the palace of Caesar, then abstinence walked in the market place, then all
Rome was chaste. Then Rome triumphed, when Kings were deposed for lechery
toward Lucreti^. Then Rome merited fame, when the princely office of December
^iri was put down for the rape of Virginia. When Scipio Affricanus had overcome
the famous City of Carthage, and Numantia, he was not so valiant by his great
and renowned conquest, as he was famous by abstinence: for when he triumphed as
a valiant conqueror, a certain noble young virgin, for her passing beauty and
great admiration of person, was presented unto Scipio, as a rare gift whose
beauty and excellency though Scipio, a long time was amazed at yet he respected
abstinence, as a thing belonging unto a Prince, especially unto a conqueror,
who having overcome K^ngdoms and countries was not to be subdued by lust, he
trusted not his soldiers to guard and guide this Virgin, but with his
presence, brought her home to her father unto Campania saying: were it not that
I am a Conqueror, I had not been able to bring thy daughter home. A greater
conquest surely was it of Scipio to overcome himself then to subdue Numantia or
Carthage. That lesson worthy of a Prince, he learned of Alexander the great,
who thought it a shame unto a conqueror of men, to be conquered by women: and
though in diverse authors and places, this prince is noted a glutton and
drunkard, yet of wonderful abstinence he was toward women, which is rare in a
drunken Prince. For when Alexander came unto Illiria, to the temple of Jupiter
he saw a passing fair woman of comely beauty, viewing still the comely state of
her person, and feeding himself a long time with the sight thereof, his
counselor, and great friend Ephaestion, perceiving that Alexander was taken
in the Briers of beauty said, it is not meet that Alexander should want any
thing that he wishes for; to whom Alexander answered: neither is it an honor
unto Alexander that overcame all men to be overcome by one woman. The modesty
and continency of Princes have been such, that they refused the company of
their own wives, and went in a wilderness solitarily to live to avoid the
occasion of lust, and to embrace the cause of temperance, as Amoebas and
Dionisius surnamed Histrio, being married both to fair women. Clitomachus was
of such modesty, that he might not abide in a place, whether he were at supper,
or any other place, where filthy talk was ministered, but he would avoid the
place and the person as Plini says, where any incivility was: and true it is,
ill language corrupts good manners I read in Valerius, a worthy Roman
history, of one Spurina, a young Gentleman of the City of Rome, whose amorous
countenance and wonderful beauty, and passing state of person, surmounted all
the Ladies of Rome: but he was not so beautiful outward, as he was modest and
temperate inward, and least he should seem with his outward beauty to inflame
the Roman Ladies and Virgins of the City to lust, he so deformed his body, an^
mangled his face with his own hand, that from the fairest creature that was in
Rome, he became the most deformed man in all the world, insomuch that all Rome
knew him not. Spurina is more famous by his modesty therein, then he is now
renowned for his beauty, the one passes like a flower in short time, the other
without prescription of time has immortal fame. Philosophers have been in the
world that have subdued lust, and overcame themselves: yea, and though
attempted with great allurements, yet temperance saved and preserved them, as
Valerius says that Phrine, a passing fair woman, came unto Zenocrates the
Philosophers bed, and being all night in bed with him, could not win the
Philosopher with all her tricks to venery: and the next day being demanded
where she lay all night, with an image of a man, she said, or a man's picture.
The like does Xenophon report of Socrates, who though he were married to two
wives, on a certain time being in talk with a renowned and famous courtisan
named Theodota, a woman of great brags, she boasted much what she could do
unto princes before Socrates, saying that she could make any come from Socrates
unto her, and that Socrates could not make any of her men to come to him: it is
no marvel said Socrates; for to draw men to vice is most easy, and to draw
them to virtue is most hard. I might here bring forth diverse histories for the
proof of modest and temperate Princes, but to avoid prolixity of reading, and
to embrace a compendious history, I omit to speak further of them. I will now
turn my style unto women, where such infinite numbers appear in histories, that
I will touch but two or three, for that I should be overcharged otherwise. The
chaste life of Lucrecia, and noble temperancy of Sophronia, two noble matrons of
Rome, the one ravished, to satisfy the tyranny of the Emperor Tarquinius, by
whom she was deflowred, after that she made her husband privy that his bed was
defiled by Tarquin, she slew her self with her own knife: the other in like
sort, because she could not resist the violence of Decius, to make Decius more
odious, and his deed more shameful, ended her life as Lucretia did. Even so
Medullina being oppressed by her father in the dark, got his ring from his
finger to know him in the morning, who had deflowred her virginity in the
night, and when she knew by the ring that it was her own father, she spared not
to revenge her dishonor with the death of her father, and for that she little
esteemed her own life, her honesty being stained, with that knife that she slew
her father, she also killed her self, as a witness of her own truth and proof
of her honest life. This has made Rome famous. How well was temperance
regarded in Rome when Virginius slew his daughter Virginia, for that she was
deflowred of Appius Claudius? So greatly was it esteemed, so highly honored,
and so straightly looked unto, that Sempronius slew Gallius, that Cervius gelded
Pontus the Roman; both being taken in adultery. How happy and renowned was
Rome, when Sulpitia, Paterculus daughter, and wife to Fulvius Flacc^us the lamp
of Rome, and the lanthorn of the world, was preferred for her temperance, by
the verdict of Sibilla to excel all Asia and Europe. The like temperance was
proved by Cyb^le the mother of all the Gods, to be in Claudia that heaven and
earth extolled the name of Rome. Was not temperance then honored, when Virgins
and young women bought temperance with death some killing themselves, others
burning, and some drowning themselves, and thus by death their lives were
known. Hippo a woman of Greece says Valerius, and traveling to Rhodes on the
seas, and perceiving the Mariners to be greedy and ready to spoil her honesty,
and to defile her temperate and chaste mind, to avoid their purpose and filthy
lust, leapt from board into the surging seas, whose terror she contemned,
less fearing to die, then willing to live, as a woman stained and corrupted,
what way finds not modesty of life, to requite shame; Timociea a woman of
Thebes, being violated by a certain Prince of Thracia against her will requited
the Prince, and eased her mind after this sor^, ^^ith Sabellicus, she went in
an evening to this Thracian Prince, and told him privily if he would follow
Timoclea, she would bring him where such store of substance, and such wealth
was hidden, as would make him the richest Prince in all Asia, to whom he
greedily consented, and went willingly and gladly, thinking to obtain it: and
being brought unto a deep Well, she said, in this Well there is infinite
treasure; but when he stoopt to look unto the bottme of the Well, she threw him
in headlong, and a mighty huge stone she rouled after him. A^tala^t^ was the
mirror of all Ladies, a second Diana, who refused the company of men, living
in the wilderness, abstaining from worldly pleasure, and ended her life in
pure virginity in the deserts of Arcadia. But because I may better begin and
sooner end, with alleging kingdoms and countries for a proof of temperance, it
were impertinent in so large a scope in so ample a matter, to deal with
particular histories.

Therefore to begin with the women of Teutonica: temperance was there so much
esteemed, so well thought off that the women hearing their husbands to be slain
and taken captives by a valiant Roman namede Marius, then Captain for Kome they
came kneeling before him, and besought him courteously and humbly since their
husbands were slain, being women willing to lead a chaste life, they might go
and serve the Vestal Virgins in Rome, to avoid the greediness of Marius
soldiers, and there to end the rest of their lives in the service of Vesta;
but being denied of Marius, clean contrary unto a Roman heart, and to a noble
Gentleman: the next night following, the women of Teunica hanged themselves,
lest they might be a prey to the Roman soldiers, to be defiled by
unchastnesse. The like did the fifty virgins of Sparta, going a pilgrimage to
Messena, and being courted by the gentlemen of Messena for their virginities,
and now ready to be made women that night, they all prevented it with death,
choosing rather to lose life honestly, then to live shamefully, knowing what a
reproach and infamy it would be unto Sparta, and to all the Country of
Lacedemonia, if they esteemed life more then honesty: so they killed themselves
to honor their country, and to defame Messena.

Hence proceeded terrible and long wars betwixt the Lacedaemonians and
Messenians, to the confusion and utter destruction of the Country of Messena:
and these wars continued ten long years, wherein the Messenians shameful
intent was requited with a sharp revenge. We read of a passing good history of
Alexander King Amyntas son, brother to King Philip of Macedonia, who when he
perceived the Ambassadors of Persia to wax wanton with his sisters and
desirous to do villainy unto the King his father, he promised the Ambassadors
that they should accomplish their lust and pleasure with fairer Virgins then
these were, which the Persian Ambassadors should enjoy, they being glad of the
promise, expected the time and their coming, being then in their beds ready
for them, Alexander to chastise such villainy, and to open the same unto others,
caused certain young men to array themselves like women, and such a night to go
unto the Persians, as though they should seem to be women, and to bring either
of them a knife privily: and being in bed, they were commanded by Alexander to
kill the Ambassadors, and their company. Magapy^us, when he heard that his
Ambassadors were slain in Macedonia, waxed mad a long time and was ready to
raise wars, until he had understanding of the cause and order of their deaths.
And for Alexanders temperance, therein he married Amyntas daughter, the sister
of Alexander. This is the sacrifice that the priests of Isis did use to
abstain from flesh and wine: this is the temperance that Numa Pompilius showed
most often in Rome, from women and wine to abstain, This abstinence used Sarah
the daughter of Raguel, this used Judith to have Holofernes head off: and this
used Queen Esther to king Ahasuerus. Worthy examples we read of Kings sometime,
that being most thirsty refused to drink, as Alexander the great, before he
fell amongst the Persians to drunkenness, was so temperate, that having a cup
of water brought unto him in his extreme thirst, he would not drink the same in
sight of his soldiers, least the sight thereof should augment the thirst of
his soldiers, being most thirsty already. Cato Junior leading a great host of
soldiers over the hot sands of Lybia, having no drink nor water nigh them,
waxed so thirsty, that when one of his soldiers brought him in his head-peece
a draught of water by chance he would not drink himself, and leave his
soldiers thirsty, but threw the water upon the ground* because he might
partake of their thirst with abstinence which was much ease to his soldiers to
see his temperance one way, and his humanity another way, and they felt their
thirst much thereby assuaged:

King David being besieged by the Philistines, was desirous to drink of the
water called Bethlem: same stout soldiers of his named Eleazarus, Jesebes, and
Semera ventured their lives for the Kings sake through the enemies: but when
the water came, David drank it not, as one that could abstain from that he
liked best: but because it was brought with great peril, he offered that water
as a sacrifice unto God, for the three soldiers that ventured their lives for
it. A great virtue to abstain from that which a man likes best: and great
temperance there is in abstaining. Romulus being bid to supper to a Citizen of
Rome, drank no wine all supper time, but two or three drops after supper time
unto whom the Host of the house spoke merrily: Romulus said he, if all men
would drink no more then you, wine would be nothing esteemed: to whom Romulus
answered soberly and said: wine would be more precious and dear if every man
would drink as I did, for I drink as much as I would: and if all should do so,
wine would be scant. Noting his temperance in a little, and the gluttony of the
most part in drinking. Hannibal, Scipio, Mithridates, Fabritius, Sempronius,
and Papirius had no less praise for their temperance in abstaining from
offered pleasure, then fame for their victories and triumphs.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Taciturnity and silence in Princes and others, and of the virtue and
commodity thereof.

SOcrates a famous Philosopher, and Master unto that noble and divine Plato,
was wont to charge his scholars to honor and to embrace these three excellent
virtues: Silence of tongue, shame fastness of countenance, and wisdom of
heart, virtues appointed most fit for such noble persons. The wisdom of a fool
lies in his tongue which is the key of his council, and the tongue of the wise
lies hid in his heart for of the abundance of the heart the tongue will speak,
so that silence in tongue is a proof of wisdom of heart. Wherefore that
learned Philosopher Zeno, said, that nature appointed two ears to hear much,
and one tongue to talk little.

In ancient time the Egyptians thought silence such a virtue unto people, that
they caused an image to be made says Pliny, with her finger on her mouth, and
a table written on her breast with this sentence: hear, see, and say nothing;
to represent silence. The renowned Romans so esteemed, silence says the same
Pliny, that she was sa^rificed unto once a year in Rome, imitating the old
Egyptians, erecting an image and named it Angerora, as a great Goddess to
honor for silence sake. The Persians honored nothing so much as silence, and
hated nothing so much as inordinate speeth. The famous Lacedaemonians had
silence in such reverence, that their wise men named Ephori, at what time they
met in places to be merry, fearing in drink to forget silence, the elders did
speak to the company before they sat down at drinking, and pointed to the door
with their finger: Let nothing done or spoken at this table, pass yonder door O
worthy order and renowned law to think of that before sitting, that should do
them no harm after rising up.

The Lacedaemonians used such short speech, that when one demanded of Charillus,
why did not Lycurgus appoint more laws then he did unto his country? he
answered, to few words, few laws will serve. The silence of Mary Magdalen, and
the woman found in adultery, pleased God much, for that they went not with
words, but with sobs, sighs, and silence they came to Christ. Better says
Zeno, it it is to fail from foot or horse, then to lie in tongue. Even so the
learned Athenians held silence in such estimation, that though Athens was
counted the Well of wisdom, the flower of Philosophy, where all the world
came to speak: yet learned they silence also: in such sort, as that worthy
Greek Themistocles, at that time he was banished Athens, and enforced to go
into Persia, where he was much esteemed, and honorably received: being
entreated of the King to show the state of the country, he besought the King to
grant him one year to learn the Persian tongue, and then the king should be
certified in all points that he would demand of Themistocles.

O famous Greek, though banished from Athens, yet ob^erved he the law of Athens
forgot not silence, which was ^o honored in Greece but knew he was in Persia,
a place, ^aith Curtius, where silence was so magnified that sharp punishment
was provided for talkative persons. The people of Sparta wece noted as men
given most unto silence hating so superfluous words, that when the Ambassadors
of the Abderites as Plutarch makes mention had made a long and tedious Oration
before Ag^s King of Sparta, and after much time spent, and many words in vain
bestowed (as vain bablers do) did take their leave of Agis, willing to have an
answer to their King of Abderits: salute your King (faith Agis) from me and tell
him as long as you spoke, so long held Agis his peace; letting them to
understand their much folly in babbling The like answer received ye Ambassadors
of Samos after a long oration of Cleomenes king of ye Lacedaemonians, saying the
first part of your oration I have forgot the second part I understand it not,
and the third part I do not well allow. The Tailor is not expert that makes
Hercules hose to a child's leg* neither can that Shoemaker be good says
Ag^silaus, that frames Titormus shoe to little Molons foot: Neither may he be
counted wise that speaks much to none effect. Wherefore the first thing which
that ancient and learned Pythagoras taught his scholars, was carefully to keep
silence. It was Pythagoras law, that none of his scholars might speak any
thing in five years space after their their first coming unto School.
Pythagoras was no less careful to teach them silence, than it was painful for
them to learn silence. Most hard and most difficult is that silence unto a
young man, that one Messius used, who pined and tormented himself three years,
as Plini says, for silence sake. But Simonides said sometime to a silent man
amongst a number of wisemen: If thou be a fool said he, thou do the part of
a wiseman to hold thy peace: but if thou be wise, thou art a fool that thou
do not speak to wisemen, and so I end: silence in a fool is great wisdom,
and silence in a wise man is mere folly.

Cleanthes therefore being desired of a Gentleman, some short wise sentence to
instruct his son withal, said: learn only this word to thy son, Sige, that is
silence. That noble and renowned Philosopher Zeno, at what time he had prepared
a banquet in Athens, to receive the Ambassadors of Antigonus, King of
Macedonia, where certain learned Philosophers, and eloquent Orators were
present: after many large and subtle disputations, and great ostentation of
Rhetoric betwixt them had at supper, Zeno being demanded of the Ambassadors
why he kept silence all that while, answered, that to keep silence is greater
knowledge than to speak, for silence said Zeno is most difficult to obtain,
and most hard to keep, and therefore most rare to be found. A Gentleman in that
company then named Agatho, hearing Zeno so commend silence, being no less
desirous to learn silence, then having learned it to keep it, prepared a great
stone and held it in the roof of his mouth three year, to avoid idle words
and superfluous talk and to learn sober silence, and virtuous taciturnity.
Alexander the great, when his mother Olimpias did send letters from Macedonia
unto India where then he was at wars, wherein were written much concerning the
state of Macedonia, and great complaints made of Artipater, with diverse more
secret counsels sealed: he reading this news, his friend Aephestion, who knew
all the secrets of Alexander, looking and reading the letters with the King
unto the end, Alexander took his signet from his finger after perusing of
those letters, and joined it close to Aephestions mouth, saying: since in
friendship you fail not in silence break not. Thus was silence in Alexander
honored: but ot Princes which honored silence, Julius Caesar most esteemed the
same: he may justly challenge for sobriety in drinking, and medesty in talking,
the garland of praise. Who after long wars with Pompeius the great, sometime
his special friend, yea, and who married Julia, Caesar's daughter, being
overcome in Pharsalia, and enforced to fly unto Egypt, his treasures,
substance, and wealth, being brought unto Caesar in a great chest, Coesar found
diverse sealed letters and great counsels, which he never opened for silence
sake, but took them altogether and threw the^ into the fire, for that all men
might learn how much he esteemed silence: this done unto Pompeius at
Pharsalia, he said unto his soldiers, that it behoved a Prince to find out
friends, rather then search out foes, The noble Emperor knew well, by reading
of Pompeius letters he might be moved to diverse injuries, and by opening of
secrets, he might accuse diverse wrongfully: therefore he had rather purchase by
silence friends, then by breaking of counsel enmity. How sure and safe is the
reward of silence, histories of Greek and Latin can well report? Had
Calisthenes followed the counsel of his master Aristotle, either merrily, or
never to speak unto a Prince, he had never found fault with Alexander, by
speaking to anger Alexander, and to harm himself. Had not learned Seneca so
reproved the Emperor Nero, the tyrant of Rome, with words, he had not been
rewarded with death. If the Poet Nevius had not written his mind unto Metellus.
If Chius had not been familiar in talk with King Antigonus, they had saved life
by silence, where they purchased death by talking. Therefore Phocion that
Greek, whom sugared Demosthenes called the rasor of Athens, was always afraid
as Plutarchus says, lest any sudden syllable or foolish word might escape his
tongue imprudently. So that silence gains life, and words causes death, as
Miles the ancient Mu^^tian, at what time with Hercules he found fault, for that
he was Linus scholar and taught by him on instruments, for words speaking of
Linus unto Hercules, he was slain of his own scheller, so that silence unto
Princes is most necessary. O noble silence! O rare virtue! O most worthy jewel
thou hurtest no man, thou betrayest no body.

Philippides a noble man of Athens, who for his singular learning, and
dexterity of wit King Lisimachus made most account of, and was most desirous to
please him, most ready to advance him unto honor, willed him to ask what he
would and he should have it; Philippides most humbly kneeing upon his knees,
besought Lisimachus the King in any wise not to open his secret and counsel
unto him; the king demanded the cause thereof, because said he, I know not
whether I am able to keep counsel or no. How much it repugneth the nature of
man to keep silence, Cicero in his book of Offices does manifest the same, for
were it possible says he, unto man to ascend the skies, to see the order of
the bodies superiors, and to view the beauty of the heavens unsweet were the
admiration thereof unle he might show it unto others. And again he says, there
is no such ease unto men, as to have a friend, unto whom a man may speak unto
as himself, giving thereby to understand the grief of silence, and that nature
loves nothing which is solitary. It may seem that silence one way is not so
beneficial, as it is another way most grievous, as is proved by the history of
Secundus the Philosopher, who having company with his own mother in the night
time, either of them most ignorant of the other, his mother in process of time
having knowledge thereof, for very grief and sorrow slew her self. The
Philosopher likewise having understood of his mothers death, knowing the cause
thereof, knew not what to do for that he was ashamed of the filthy act one way,
and most sorrowful for the sudden death of his mother another way: to die, to
burn, to hang to drown himself, he thought it too short a torment for so
heinous a fact, and knowing his mother being a woman, stayed not nor feared not
to kill her self, to ease her sorrowful heart, he conceived that he being a
Philosopher, it stood him upon to find out the painfullest torment in all the
world to plague himself justly for his grievous offense, he therefore vowed
unto God never to speak one word ouring life, such torment he thought was most
painful unto nature, and thus by silence he consumed away his life. Since
therefore silence is suco a burning disease, so heavy in the heart of man, so
hard to keep in, so dangerous to utter, how worthy are they of commendations.
how do they merit fame and praise that can rule their tongues and keep silence?
Therefore a noble Senator of Rome sometime, brought his eldest son named
Pap^^ius unto the Senate house, to hear the council pleading, charging him
whatsoever he should hear in the house amongst the wise Senators, to keep it
in silence: for the order was in Rome, that a young man should say nothing
unless he were a Consul, a Tribune, a Censor, or such like Officer, whereby he
had authority to speak. This young Papirius on a time being importuned by his
mother, and charged on her blessing to tell her the cause and business that
the Senators had, so often to come together, the young man being threatened,
weighing his fathers charge to avoid words one way, said, since you are so
importunate mother, to know the secret of the Senate, you must keep counsel,
for I am charged therewith; There is a long debate in the Senate house to agree
on this conclusion, whether it be more expedient for one man to have two wives
in the City of Rome, or one woman to have two husbands: and most like it is,
that it will go on the men's side. Straightways she went into the City, and
certified the matrons and women of Rome what the Senators were about to
conclude, and appointed certain of them to accompany her the next morning unto
the Senate: where when she came, as one dismayed, she began to declaim against
the purpose and decrees of the Senators, proving what inconvenience might
arise for a man to have two wives, laying before them the dissension that
should be in that house where two women should be married to one man and what
comfort and consolation, it were for a woman to have two husbands: the one to
be at home in Rome to see his children brought up, and to see the city
defended, when the other should be far from home, at the wars in other
countries. The Senators being amazed at her talk not knowing to what it
tended, young Papirius demanded license to speak, which being granted, he
declared the cause of her coming, how and after what sort as is before
mentioned. The Senators commended much Papi^ius wit, as well for his obedience
to his mother, as for silence toward the Senate, and recompensed his wisdom
with the Consulship of Rome. Silence was so observed in Rome, and honored of
Romans, that Demetrius the Philosopher, would often say, that the birds can
fly where they will, and the grasshoppers sing where they will: but in the city
we may neither do nor speak, Euripides, a learned Greek it being objected to
him that his breath did stink, answered nippingly the party, saying: so many
things have so long been hid in my heart, that being putrified there they
stink. I would all men had such a breath, that by long keeping of silence it
might taste thereof. Cato the wise Roman perceived the virtue of silence to be
such that one of the three things (as he himself would say) that he most
repented him off, was to tell his counsel unto another. Plini does commend of
all men, one man named Anaxarchus: of all women, he praised one woman named
Laeena, whom the tyrannt Nycocreon with all the torments and punishments that
he could possibly devise, could not enforce to speak that out, which they
thought should be kept in: but Anaxarchus chose rather to dye by torments, then
to break concealed words, spitting in the tyrant Nicocreons face, and saying,
spare not Anaxarchus carcass, thou troublest no part of my mind. Epicharis
amongst other conspiratours, against that cruel Nero, being diversely tormented
to open the treason against Nero's person, would by no means break counsel, no
more Laeena for all that tyrany used toward her would betray the secrets of
Harmodius and Aristogiton, which only was the cause that she had her picture
erected in Greece.

In like manner Pompey the great, being sent as an Ambassador from the
Senators, and being charged by the King named Gentius, who prevented Pompey in
his Message, to declare the secrets of the Senators, and council of Rome, he
stretching forth his arm, held his finger in the flame of the candle, saying,
When I draw my finger from the candle, I will break the counsel of the
Senators; and so steadfastly he held his hand, and so long, that King Gentius
wondered no less at his patience, then he honored him for his silence. O rare
silence! O passing patience, and that in so great a Commander! Isocrates, an
excellent Orator sometime of Athens lest he should be ashamed of his scholars
by their speech and talk (for tongues bewray the heart,) would never receive
unto his school, but those only who would pay double hire, first to learn
silence, and then to learn to speak to speak nothing but that which they knew
to be most certain, and that which of necessity must be spoken. This was the
order of Isocrates school. Yea silence was of such dignity, of such estimation,
that it possessed place in Princes hearts, that Tiberius Caesar Emperor of Rome,
would often say, Princes ought not to impart their secrets, nor to make any
privy to their counsel, considering how hard is silence to be observed. Silence
was of such credit, and of such force, that Metellus, who used to be close in
the wars of Macedonia, would say, that if he knew his own coat to be privy to
his secrets, he would straight cast off his coat and burn it. For in him to
whom secrets of life are revealed, in the same also is danger of death, for in
the committing of secrets, is life and death also committed. Had not that
famous Hercules, the imp of great Jupiter, and offspring of the gods, revealed
his counsel and opened his heart unto his wife Deianira; Had not that mighty
Sampson, so great in Gods favor, that he was a Judge in Israel, showed his
secrets unto his wife Dalila, they had not been conquered by two women whom
Serpents, Dragons, Lions yea, all the whole world could not annoy; The just
punishment of Princes for frivolous talking. Conquerours of the world of
Kingdoms of countries, and yet conquered by a woman: yea, by a lesser thing
then a woman, a little member never seen, but alas, too often heard, the tongue
only. Tantalus is punished in hell for that he opened the counsel of the Gods,
after this sort; Dainty meats, and pleasant wines before his face, and yet may
he not touch them he has sight of all things, and yet tastes nothing the
hunarier he is, the better, and braver his banquet shines before him, the more
desirous he ie to eat the further he is from his victuals. Ixion for his
telling tales of Juno, is no less tormented in turnling of his wheel in Hell,
than is Sisiphus in rolling of his stone, or Danaes daughters in filling of
their empty tubs. The pain of Prometheris in Caucasus, the punishment of Titius
is duly appointed and of the Gods, say the Poets, provided truly to those that
be braggers and boasters of secrets. I must not in this place forget a worthy
history of King Demetrius, Antigonus son, who being sent by his father to
Pontus, where Mithridates was King being sworn by his father to keep counsel,
of a vision, that he sowed gold in Pontus, and that Mithridates should reap it:
was therefore commanded with his army to pass unto the Kingdom of Pontus, and
without any word to kill Mithridates. His son Demetrius very sorry, for the
great friendship which was of late sprung betwixt Mithridates and him, obeying
his father went unto Pontus, and commanded his people to stay until he went to
know where Mithridates was, who when he came in place, he wrote with the end of
his spear upon the earth in the dust: Flee Mithridates, and straight turning to
his soldiers, he spoke nothing to him, according to his oath for keeping
silence, but wrote a warning to flee; whereby he kept his fathers counsel one
way, and maintained faithful friendship with King Mithridates another way. A
young man of Helespont prating much in presence of Guathena a strumpet in
Greece, she demanded of him whether he knew the chief city of Helespont; to the
which the young man said, Yea forsooth: What? said she, me thinks you know
not the name of it for it is Sigaeum, the City of silence: a just reproach for
such vain praters. Aelianus does write, when the Cranes, from Sicilia take
their flight to flee over mount Caucasus, they stop their mouths with stones,
to pass with silence the dangers of the Eagles.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Age and the praise thereof.

BY on that wise man, would say often that age was the Haven of rest, for that
it was the end of misery, the gate of life, and the performance of all
pilgrimages. And since age is wished of all men, what folly is it to hit any
man in the teeth, with that which he chiefly desires. Wherefore when king
Archelaus had appointed a great feast for his friends, amongst other
discoveries then at the table, Euripides declared the great love which he bare
unto Agathon, an old tragical Poet. Agesilaus demanding why should an old man
be so well esteemed of Euripides? he said Though the spring time be pleasant,
yet the harvest is fertile: though flowers and herbs grow green in the spring,
yet wax they ripe in harvest. The age of man are compared unto the four seasons
of the year. his growing time unto the spring, his lusty time unto the Summer,
his wit time unto the Harvest, and his old time unto the Winter, which does
make an end of all things. Frederick Emperor of Rome, after he had appointed
an old man to rule the City of Scadmenna, was often moved, that he for his age
was not meet to govern such a City, considering the multitude and number of
people that were within that City, they thought that a young man should better
discharge the office: but the wise Emperor perceiving how bent and prone were
the youth of that town, to have a young man to rule over them, answered them
after this sort: I had rather said he, commit the governance of the City to one
old man, then the governance of so many young men unto the City. Better it is
that an old man should rule the City, then the City should rule the young men:
meaning no otherwise then that aged men should only be admitted to be rulers
in Cities, for that there belongs unto them experience of things, and care of
youth. Such was the homage and reverence which was amongst the young Romans,
toward the Senators or old men of the City, as both head and leg, did
acknowledge the same, in doing duty unto age. They had this confidence in age,
that no man might be chosen unto the number of the Senators, before he should
be threescore years of age. The like custom had the people of Chalcides, that
no man before he were fifty years, should either ^ear office within their
Cities, or be sent Ambassador out of their country. Amongst the Persians, no
man could be admitted to be one of the sage rulers, which they called Magi,
unless perfect age had brought him thereto perforce. Amongst the Indians,
their wise men which ruled their country, which were named Gimnosophistae, were
ancient, for time gives experience of governance. Amongst the Egyptians the
like credit was given unto old men, that youth meeting them in the way, would
go out of the way to give place unto age, so that their counselors which were
called prophets were counted men of much time and experience: even so the
Babylonians elected their sage Chaldeans: the French men, their ancient wise
men called Druydes: In fine, noble Greeks did observe the like order in choosing
their rulers and counselors of aged men, as before spoken. The Lacedemonian
youth, were by the law of Licurgus no less charged to reverence age, then
their own parents.

The Arabians in all places without respect of person, preferred their old men
before honor, dignity or fortune. The people called Tartesi had this law so to
honor age, that the younger might bear no witness against the elder. The
reverence said Chylon, that should be showed unto age, by young men, ought to
be such, that they then being young, doing obedience unto age, they might claim
the like when they waxed old of youth. Agesilaus King of Sparta; being an old
man, would often go in the cold weather, very thin in a torn cloak, without a
coat or doublet, only to show the way unto young men to be hardy in age, by
contemning of gay apparel in youth. Masinista King of Numidia, being more then
threescore years of age, would lively and valiantly, as Cicero says, without
cap on head or shoe on foot, in the cold or frosty weather in the winter,
travel and toil with the soldiers only unto this purpose, that young
soldiers should be hardened thereby in their youth, and practice the same for
the use of others, when they came to age themselves, Ihero King of Sicilia,
showed the like example in his old age, being lxxx. years, to train youth and
to bring them up so in young years, that they might do the like in their old
age. For thus judged these wise Princes, that all men covet to imitate Princes
and Kings in their doings. Gorgias the philosopher, and master unto Isocrates
the Orator, and to diverse more nobles of Greece, thought himself most happy,
that he being a hundred years and seven, was as well in his memory as at any
time before, and made so much of age, that being asked why he so delighted in
age, he made answer because he found nothing in age for which he might accuse
it. So said King Cyrus a little before his death being a very old man, that he
never felt himself weaker, than when he was young, The like saying is
reported of that learned Sophocles, who being so old, that he was accused of
his own children of folly, turned unto the Judges, and said: If I be Sophocles,
I am not a fool; if I be a fool, I am not Sophocles; meaning, that in wisemen
the senses waxed better, by use and exercising the same; for we praise says
Cicero the old man that is somewhat young, and we commend again the young man
that is somewhat aged The old is commended that has his wit young and fresh at
commandment, and the young is praised, that is sober and sage in his doings.
When M. Crassus a noble Captain of Rome, being a very old man took in hand to
war against the Parthians a strong and stout people, being by Ambassadors
warned of his age, and admonished to forsake the wars, he answered stoutly the
Ambassador of the Parthians and said: when I come to Seleucia your City I will
then answer you. Whereupon one of the Ambassadors, named Ages^^s, an aged man,
stretched forth his hand, and showed the palm of his hand unto Crassus, saying,
Before thou shall come within the City of Seleucia, bristles shall grow out of
this hand. The stoutness of Marcus Crassus was not so much as the magnanimity
of Agesis, and yet they both were old men.

What courage was in Scaevola, to withstand that firebrand of Rome, Sylla, who
after he had urged the Senators to pron^unce Marius enemy unto Italy, he being
an old ag^d man, answered Sylla in this sort, Though diverse be at the
commandments of the Senators* and that thou art so encompassed with soldiers
at thy beck; yet neither thou nor all thy soldiers shall ever make Scaevola,
being an old man, for fear of losing some old blood, pronounce Marius, by whom
Rome was preserved, and Italy saved to be enemy unto the City.

The like history we read, that when Julius Caesar had by force of arms aspired
unto the office of a Dictator, and came to the Senate house, where few Senators
were together, the Emperor Caesar desirous to know the cause of their absence,
Confidius, an aged father of Rome, said, that they feared Caesar and his
soldiers. Whereat the Emperor musing a while, said. Why did not you likewise
tarry at home fearing the same? Because (said he) age and time taught me
neither to fear Caesar, nor yet his soldiers. For as Brusonius says there are
young minds in old men; for though Milo, the great wrestler in the games of
Olympias, waxed old, and wept in spite of his decayed limbs and bruised bones,
yet he said his mind flourished and was as young as ever it was before. Solon
has immortal praise in Greece, for his stoutness in his age; for when
Pisistra^us had taken in hand to rule the people of Athens and that it was
evident enough that tyranny should proceed thereby; Solon in his latter days
having great care to his country, when that no man durst refuse Pisistratus,
came before his door in Arms, and called the citizens to withstand Pisistratus;
For age (said he) moves me to be so valiant and stout that I had rather lose
my life, then my country should lose their liberty. What virtue then see we to
be in age, what wisdom in time, what courage in old men? The examples of
these old men stir and provoke many to imitate their steps, insomuch that
diverse wished to be old when they were yet young, to have that honor as age
then had. Wherefore king Alexander the great, espying a young man coloring his
hairs gray, said, It behooves thee to put thy wits in color and to alter thy
mind.

The Lacedaemonians, a people that past all nations in honoring age made laws
in their Cities, that the aged men should be so honored and esteemed of the
young men, even as the parents were of the children; so that when a stranger
came unto Lacedemonia, and saw the obedience of youth toward age, he said: In
this country I wish only to be old, for happy is that man that waxes old in
Lacedemonia: and in the great games of Olympia, an old man wanting a place,
went up and down to sit some where, but no man received him, but amongst the
Lacedaemonians, not only the young men but also the aged gave place unto his
gray hairs, and also the Ambassadors of Lacedemonia being there present, did
reverence him, and took him unto their seat, which when he came in, he spoke
aloud: O you Athenians, you know what is good, and what is bad for that which
you people of Athens, said he, do profess in knowledge, the same does the
Lacedaemonians put in practice. Alexander being in his wars with a great army in
Persia, and meeting an old man in the way in the cold weather, in ragged and
rent clothes, lighted from his horse, and said unto him, mount up into a
princes saddle, which in Persia is treason for a Persian to do, but in
Macedonia comendable, giving to understand how age is honored, and old men
esteemed in Macedonia, and how of the contrary wealth and pride is fostred in
Persia: for where men of experience and aged men are set naught by, there it
cannot be, that wisdom bears rule. How many in the Empire of Rome, ruled
the City, and governed the people, of those that were very aged men? as Fabius
Maximus, who was threescore years and two in his last Consulship: Valerius
Corvinus, who was six times a Consul in Rome, a very old man, who lived an
hundred and odd years: Metellus of like age, called to the like function and
administration in the Commonwealth being an old man. What should I speak of
Appius Claudius, of Marcus Perpenna, of diverse other noble Romans, whose age
and time was the only occasion of their advancement unto honor and dignity?
What should I recite Arganthonius, who was threescore years before he came unto
his Kingdom, and after ruled his Country fourscore years unto his great fame,
and great commendations of age? To what end shall I repeat Pollio, who lived in
great credit with the people unto his last years, a man of worthy praise, of
renowned fame, who lived a hundred and thirty years in great authority and
dignity? What shall I speak of Epimenides, whom Theompus affirms that he
lived a hundred and almost threescore years in great rule and estimation. Small
were it to the purpose to make mention again of Dandon amongst the Illyrians,
which Valerius writes that he was five hundred years before he died, and yet
of great memory and noble fame: Or of Nestor, who lived three hundred years, of
whom Homer does make much mention, that from his mouth proceeded sentences
sweeter then honey; yea, in his latter days almost his strength was
correspondent to the same. That renowned Prince Agamemnon, General of all
Greece, wished no more in Phrygia but five such as Nestor was, with whose
wisdom and courage, he doubted not but in short time he should be able to
subdue Troy.

Sweet are the sayings of old men, perfect are their counsels, sound and sure
their governance. How frail and weak is youth? How many Cities are perished by
young counsel? How much hurt from time to time have young men devised,
practiced, and brought to pass? And again of age, how full of experience,
knowledge and provision, painful, and studious is it unto the grave? As we read
of Plato that noble Philosopher, who was busy and careful for his country,
writing and making books the very year that he died, being fourscore and two.
What shall I say of Isocrates who likewise being fourscore and fourteen,
compiled a book called Panathenaicus: of Gorgias who being studious and
careful to profit his country, being a hundred and seven years, was
altogether addicted to his books, and to his study. So of Zeno, Pythagoras and
Democritus it might be spoken, men of no less wit, travel and exercise, than
of time and age. For as Cicero says the government and rule of Comon-wealths,
consists not in strength of body, but in the virtue of mind, weighty and
grave matters are not governed with the lightness of the body, with swiftness
of the foot, with external qualities but with authority, counsel, and
knowledge: for in the one says he there is rashness and wilfulness, in the
other gravity and prudence. As Themistocles and Aristides, who though not
friends at Athens being both rulers, yet age taught them when they were sent
Ambassadors for the state of Athens, to become friends to profit their
country, which youth could never have done. That sage Solon was wont often to
brag, how that he daily by reading, learning, and experience, waxed old.
Apelles that approved painter and renowned Greek, in his age and last time,
would have no man to pass the day idle without drawing of one line. Socrates
being an old man, became a scholar to learn music, and to play upon
instruments. Cicero being old himself, became a perfect Greek with study. Cato
being aged in his last years went to school to Ennius, to learn the Greek.
Terentius Varro was almost forty years old, before he took a Greek book in
hand, and yet proved excellent in the Greek tongue, Clitomachus went from
Carthage to Athens after forty years of age, to hear Carneades the Philosophers
lecture. Lucius, as Philostratus does write, meeting Marcus the old Emperor
with a book under his arm going to school, demanded of the Emperor whither he
went like a h^y with his book in his hand: the aged Emperor answered, I go to
Sextus the Philosopher to learn those things I know not. O God, said Lucius,
thou being an old man, go to school now like a boy, and Alexander the great
died at thirty years of age. Alphonsus King of Sicilia, was not ashamed at
fifty years old to learn, and to travel for his knowledge; and lest he should
lose the use of the Latin tongue, he occupied himself in translating Titus
Livius, though he was a King. I do not hold with age in diverse men, who for
want of discretion and wit, was childish again: but of perfect men, in whom age
seemed rather a warrant of their doings, For even as he that plays much upon
instruments, is not to be commended so well, as he that plays cunningly and
artificially: so all men that live long, are not to be praised so much as he
that lives well. For as apples being green are yet sower, until by time they
wax sweet, so young men without warrant of time, and experience of things are
oftentimes to be misliked. If faults be in old men, says Cicero (as many there
be) it is not in age, but in the life and manners of men? Some think age
miserable, because either the body is deprived from pleasure, or that it
brings imbecility or weakness, or that it is not far from death, or calls
from due administration of Commonwealths: these four causes, says Cicero,
make age seem miserable and loathsome. What shall we say then of those that in
their old age, have defended their countries, saved their Cities, guided the
people, and valiantly triumphed over their enemies, as L. Paulus, Scipio, and
Fabius Maximus, men of wonderful credit in their old years. What may be spoken
of Fabritius, Curious, and Cornucanus, aged men of great agility, of famous
memory in their latter days? How can Appius Claudius be forgotten, who being
both old and blind, resisted the Senators to compound with King Pyrrhus for
peace, though they all, and the Consuls of Rome hereunto were much inclined. If
I should pass from Rome, a place where age was much esteemed, unto Athens,
amongst the sage Philosophers: if from Athens to Lacedemonia, where age
altogether bare sway and rule: if from thence unto the Ethiopians, and Indians,
where all their lives are ruled and governed by old men: If from thence to any
part of the world, I might be long occupied in reciting the honor and
esteemation of age.

Herodotus does write, that the Aethiopians and Indians do live most commonly a
hundred and thirty years, The people called Epeii in the Country of Aetolia,
do live two hundred years naturally; and as it is by Damiates reported.
Lictorius, a man of that Country, lived three hundred years. The Kings of
Arcadia were wont to live three hundred years; the people of Hyperborii lived a
thousand years. We read in the old Testament, that Adam our first father lived
nine hundred and thirty years, and Eve his wife as many; Seth nine hundred and
twelve years; Seth his son called Enos, nine hundred and five; Cainan the son
of Enos, nine hundred and ten; Mahalalehel the son of Cainan, eight hundred
fourscore and fifteen; so Enoch the son of Iared, lived nine hundred threescore
and five years; Enoch his son, named Mechuselah, lived nine hundred threescore
and nine years; with diverse of the first Age, I mean till Noah's time, who
began the second world after the flood, who lived as we read, nine hundred and
five; his son Sem six hundred years, and so lineally from father to son as from
Sem to Arphaxad, from Arphaxad to Sala, from Sala to Heber, the least lived
above three hundred years. This I thought for better credit, and greater proof
of old ago, to draw out of the Old Testament, that other profane authorities
might be believed; as Tithoni^s, whom the Poets fain that he was so old, that
he desired to become a Grash^pper. But because age has no pleasure in the
world, frequenteth no banquets, abhors lust, loves no wantonness, which
says Plato, is the only bait that deceives young men: so much the happier age
is, that age does loath that in time, which young men neither with knowledge,
with wisdom, nor yet with counsel can avoid.

What harm has happened from time to time by young men, over whom lust so
ruled, that there followed eversion of Co^monwealths, treason to Princes,
Friends betrayed, countries overthrown, and Kingdoms vanquished, throughout the
world. Therefore Cicero says, in his book entitled De Senectate, at what time
he was in the City of Tarentum, being a young man, with Fabius Maximus, that he
carried one lesson from Tarentum unto the youth of Rome, where Architas the
Tarentine said, that Nature bestowed nothing upon man so hurtful to himself,
nor so dangerous to his Country, as lust or pleasure: For when C. Fabricius
was sent as an Ambassador from Rome to Pyrrhus King of Epyre, being then the
Governor of the City of Tarentum a certain man, named Cineas, a Thessalian by
birth, being in disputation with Fabritius about pleasure, affirmed, that he
heard a Philosopher of Athens affirm, that all which we do is to be referred to
pleasure; which when M. Curious, and Titus Coruncanus heard, they desired Cineas
to persuade King Pyrrhus to yield to pleasure, and make the Samnites believe
that pleasure ought to be esteemed: Whereby they knew, that if King Pyrrhus or
the Samnites (being then great enemies to the Romans) were addicted to lust or
pleasure, that then soon they might be subdued and destroyed.

There is nothing that more hinders magnanimity, or resists virtuous
enterprises, then pleasure, as in the Treatise of pleasure it shall more at
large appear. Why then how happy is old age, to despise and contemn that which
youth by no means can avoid, yea, to loath and abhor that which is most
hurtful to it self? For Cecellius contemned Caesar with all his force, saying
to the Emperor, that two things made him nothing to esteem the power of the
Emperor Age, and Wisdom.

By reason of Age and Wisdom Castritius feared not at all the threatenings of C.
Carbo, being then Consul at Rome; who though he said, he had many friends at
commandment, yet Castri^i^^ answered and said, That he had likewise many years
that could not fear his friends. Therefore a wise man sometime wept, for that
man dies within few years, and having but little experience, in his old age,
he is then deprived thereof. For the Crow lives thrice so long as the man
does; the Heart lives four times so long as the Crow; the Raven thrice so long
as the Heart, and the Phoenix nine times longer then the Raven. And thus Birds
do live longer time then man does, in whom there is no understanding of their
years: But man unto whom reason is joined, before he comes to any ground of
experience, when he begins to have knowledge in things, he dies, and thus
ends he his toyling Pilgrimage and travel in fewer years then diverse beasts
or birds do.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the manners of sundry People under sundry Princes, and of their strange
life.

THe sundry fashions, and variety of manners, the strange life of people every
where through the world dispersed, are so charactered and set forth amongst the
writers, that in showing the same, by naming the Country and the people
thereof orderly, their customs, their manners, their kind of living, being
worthy of observation, I thought briefly to touch and to note every country in
their due order of living, and to begin with the Egyptians, a people most
ancient, and so expert in all sciences, that Macrobius the writer calls the
Country of Egypt the Nurse and Mother of all Arts: For all the learned Greeks
have had their beginning from Egypt, even as Rome had from Greece, This people
observe their days by account of hours, from midnight to midnight: They honor
the Sun and Moon for their Gods, for they name the Sun Osiris, and the Moon
Isis. Their feeding was of fish broyled in the heat of the sun, with herbs, and
with certain fowls of the air: They lived a thousand years but it is to be
understood, that hey number their years by the Moon; the men did bear burdens
upon their heads, and the women upon their breasts and shoulders; the men made
water sitting, the women standing. The Crocodile is that beast which they most
do adore, that being dead they bury him; a Sow is that beast which they most
detest, so that if any part of their clothes touched a sow, they straight did
pull off their clothes, and wash them over. They were black people, most
commonly slender, and very hasty Cur^ius calls them seditious, vain, very
subtle in invention of things, and much given to wine.

The Aethiopians are a people that live without Laws and reason servants and
slaves to all men, selling their children to merchants for corn, their hair
long with knots, and curled. The Indians were a people of too much liberty, as
Herodotus says, the women accompanying them in open sight: Neither sow they,
nor build, neither kill they any living beast, but feed on barley bread and
herbs; they hang at their ears small pearls, and they deck their arms, wrists
and necks with gold: The Kings of India are much honored, when they come
abroad, their ways are set and decked with fresh flowers, and men in arms
following their Chariots made of Margarite stones, and men meeting them with
frankincense: And when their King goes to bed, their harlots attend him with
songs and mirth, making their prayers unto their Gods of darkness, for the
good rising of their King. Again, the children kill their parents when they wax
old; the maids and young damsels of India are brought abroad amongst the young
men, to choose them their husbands: When any man dies, his wife will dress her
self most bravest for the funeral, and there they are both buried together.
Hercules is much honored in that country, and the River Ganges.

The Scythians are pale and white for the coldness of the air, and full of
courage: Amongst these people all things are almost in common, saving no man
will have his sword and his cup common; their wives they weigh not but are
common one with another. For drunkenness they pass all nations; for in their
solemn banquets, there may no man drink of that appointed cup, which is carried
abroad to banquets, unless he had slain one or other; for it was accounted
amongst the Scythians no honesty for a man to live unless he had killed one or
other. They have no cities nor towns, as Egypt, which was full of them (for it
is written, that when Amazis reigned a King in Egypt, there were twenty
thousand cities numbered within the country of Egypt,) but Scythia is a most
barren and rude country, the people whereof live and feed beastly; a country
most cold, for that no wood grows in the country; no religion, no temples
for their Gods, but to Mars only: their chief weapons are bows and arrows,
When the King dies in Scythia fifty men, and fifty of his best horses must
bear him company and be slain, for that they judge they shall go one way. The
Parthians are a people most thirsty, says Pliny, for the more they drink, the
more thirsty they are, their chief glory they seek is by drinking, and are
given so much to surfeits and drunkenness that their breath for their
inordinate drinking does stink, and wax so strong, that no man can abide them:
their King likewise is so much honored of them, that when he comes in place,
they ever kneel and kiss his foot: He has many Queens, with whom the King
must lie one after another: The King has about his Chariot ten thousand
soldiers, with silver spears in their hands, and the end of their spears all
gold; they honor their King, with the Sun, the Moon, the fire, the water, the
wind, and the years, to these they sacrifice, and honor them as their Gods; to
lie is most horrible with the Parthians, insomuch that they instruct their
young children only to avoid lies, and to learn to speak truth, Of all men
they hate ungrateful men; they judge it most unhonest to speak any thing
filthy, and loath chiefly that which is shameful, either in talk or in doing
insomuch that they will not spit, or make water, but in a place where either a
flood, or a river, or some other water is; Riding, dancing and tennis they
exercise most.

The people of Arabia are long haired, with shaven herds, save that they spare
the upper lips unshaven; their women are common for all men at al times to
meddle with leaving a staff at the door in token unto one another, that she is
with one already, and to let understand that he must tarry until that man go
out, In Arabia, it is not thought amiss for any one to lie with his mother,
and if any that is not kin, take that in hand, it is adultery: they worship as
their Gods, Urania and Dionisius, They are like unto the Babylonians, people of
most corrupt life, and most given unto filthy pleasure, Insomuch that their
daughters and their wives are hired unto every man, walking in the streets,
going unto the temples, meeting and offering themselves unto any stranger. With
the Arabians and Babylonians, we may well compare the Lesbians and the
Sybarites, people passing in that wickedness, given to nothing but to sleep
and venery, insomuch that they weary themselves with all kind of pleasures, and
the excess of their banquets, and the bravery of their women was such that
made all the beholders to muse, and wonder at their excess, as well in
clothing as in feeding, wherein they took glory: they expelled all sound and
noise that might trouble their sleep. So filthy were these nations, that hand,
foot, head and all parts of the body were naturally given to pollute themselves
with venery.

The Arcadians are people of such antiquity that (as they suppose) they are
before the Moon, of this they brag most: they worship Pan as their God, this
people never triumphed over their enemies, nor kept wars with any nations, but
oftentimes served under other princes, These Arcadians, were like to the people
called Averni, for their brags of their antiquity, for even as the Arcadians
brag of the moon, so the Averni boasted of their pedigree and stock, who were
the ancient Troyans, wherefore they would be called brethren unto the stout and
ancient Romans. The Boetians are the rudest people in the world, so that the
Athenians call them as Plutarch reports, bold baiards and blocks, for their
gross understanding.

The Bactrians are most puissant and warlike soldiers, detesting much the
excess of the Persians, but are of such gross sense notwithstanding, that
they give and bestow their old men, and also sick men unto dogs to be devoured,
which dogs for the purpose they nourish and bring up in their country. The
Agrigentines, a people given unto such buildings and banqueting, that Plato
the Philoso- said: the Agrigentines builded as though they should live for
ever, and banquetted as though they should die daily. The manners of the
Assyrians were to bring their sick friends abroad unto the high ways, to seek,
to ask, and to know remedies for their sickness of all kind of men that pass
by: and if by chance without remedy the sick should die, they should bear him
home and bury him solemnly, anointing over the corpse with honey and wax. This
people did wear for their weapons, daggers and targets, and clubs: they did
worship Adad for their God, and Adargatin for their Goddess. The people of
Creet were most expert sea men, and well practiced in wars, abstaining not
only from flesh but also from sodden meat: their thief infamy was in venery
masculin, otherwise for their manners of living, much like unto the noble
Lacedaemonians, which for their modesty in feeding and contempt of wealth, for
their wisdom and study in warfares passed all nations, for a token thereof
they printed in their Targets, the Greek letter L. named Lambda; they brought
up their youth, as Lycurgus that ancient law-setter taught them, in all kind of
study, pain, and labor, with hunger, thirst, cold, and heat, whereby they
might be able to suffer any chance happened, or injury offered; then were they
again brought up in wrestling, leaping, running, swimming, riding, and such
other qualities as might profit their country in time of service, for their
nature was either to win and conquer, or else to die and yield. Learning and
science they little esteemed, insomuch that Athens and Sparta could never
agree, for that the one was addicted to serve Minerva or rather the muses, the
other given unto Mars.

Lycurgus made a law in Sparta, that no man might accompany with his own wife,
but with shamefastness of that filthy act. The candles might not be lighted in
that house where the man was, when that he would go unto his wife. When the
King would go unto wars, before he should go unto the field to encounter with
the enemies, he offered two solemn sacrifices: the one unto Minerva, otherwise
named Bellona, to kindle flames of stoutnesse in his soldiers manfully to
fight, the other to the Muses to moderate their doings in victory as might be
commendable and praise worthy therein: they passed all men in patience: for as
before they brought up their children in such hardiness, that their parents
would have them whipped, scourged, and wounded into the flesh to harden them in
their young years. They suffered theft to be unpunished, for that the exercise
thereof does represent a kind of boldness in wars.

The nature of the Lydians was to delight in superstiticus divinations, in
invention of plays and in theft. As for the art of dicing, and playing diverse
kinds of games upon tables the Lydians first invented the same. They also were
much enflamed by luxurious life, and filthy venery, which they neither spared
day nor night. Pliny writes of a certain Nation called Esteni, which abstained
from all kind of pleasure, insomuch, that they never accompany with women,
never eat flesh* nor drink wine; and thus by custom of fasting they became
naturally chaste: For custom and use (says Aristotle) is another nature. In
that country no man possesses any thing of his own, all things are
indifferent between them, and they live as companions one with another; for in
these their virtues they excel all men in vehement and most ardent love toward
God. Thus virtue most diligent with great care and study was weighed, their
Neighbors wonderfully beloved and made of, so that by this their precept of
life, they have great fame and commendations. They have few Cities, and as few
Towns, and for that they take the earth as a common Mother, they have all one
respect unto all kind of men. The Getes have no division of lands, no limits of
ground, nor any partitions of their goods: they drink blood mingled with milk,
they eat no flesh, and they rejoice much when their friends die, even as the
people called Trauses in Thracia do, when any is born into the world, they
mourn and lament with weeping eyes, that the little child then born, should know
the misery and state of this wretched world: and when any of their friends are
dead, they rejoice and be glad with melody and all kind of mirth, for that he
has past this toiling life. The Thracians, people of great antiquity, were
famous warriors, bragging much that Mars the God of war was born in their
country, much addicted unto drunkenness, selling their children in the market,
and their maids and daughters are common to lie with every man: they judge and
count it most commendation to live only by spoil, theft and wars, they brag if
any have a wound, and think it a fame unto the person. And of the contrary, if
they have no mark in the forehead, no wound in the body, they will judge those
idle men and cowards; the common people worship Mars and Diana for their Gods:
their king only does worship Mercury, by whom the King uses to swear.

Psilli are people of so great folly, that when the Southern wind blows so
long and strong that their lands perish, their waters dry, then they arm
themselves with common counsel to fight against the wind, even like to the
people of C^lta, who use to draw their swords and shake their spears at the
waves of the seas, to revenge the injuries and wrongs done by the seas to them.
The Bithinians were men of like folly, for they would ascend and climb up to
the top of high mountains either to thank Jupiter for his furtherance toward
them or else to curse Jupiter for his cruelnesse toward them. So the Pigmies
being sore troubled and molested with Cranes, did ride on Rams and Goats backs,
with their bows and arrows, a whole band together, in the spring time toward
the sea-banks to break their eggs, to destroy their nests, and to fight with
the Cranes, every third month they take this journey in hand, else would the
Cranes destroy them, for that they are little dwarfs of a cubit long, their
houses are made of dirt and feathers most like unto birds nests, but that they
say they are somewhat larger and bigger.

I know not to what purpose I do recite these countries, since the more I write,
the more I have to write. What should I recite the people, that eat the flesh
of Lions and Panthers, called Agriophagi, or recite those that eat lice in
Scithia called Budmi, or them that eat Serpents, called Ophiophagi, or those
that feed on men's bodies called Anthropophagi; yea, or those that eat their own
parents as the Caspians did. Unto what purpose should I name the Astomians, a
people in India without mouths, who only live with the air that comes unto
their nosethrils, where they receive breath: they can neither eat nor drink, as
Plini says in his seventh book, they live the longer with the sweet smell and
odours of flowers? Unto what end likewise should I speak of those blind
Andabates that fight without eyes, or of those great eared people the Fanesii,
whose ears shadowed and covered their whole body, or of the Monopods, which in
like manner shadow their whole body with one foot, or of the Arimaspians people
in Scythia having but one eye in the midst of their forehead, like the great
Ciclop Poliphemus, which Ulisses destroyed; yea, of millions more, whose
deformity to deprint, whose ugliness to write, were too much charge to the
writer, and too much tediousness to the reader.

I might speak of people in some part of India, who live two hundred years and
more, whose hair upon their heads in their young age is white, and in their old
age black, called Pandorae. I might likewi^e recite a people in Lybia, whose
horses may not be guided nor governed with bridles, be the bitts never so
strong; but with rods most gently are they tamed, be the rods never so weak.
Herodotus, a famous Greek writer, is not ashamed to show how the women
Selencridae, brought forth eggs, whence men were born of such height, length
and stature, that I am partly abashed to alledg his authority therein. Again,
the people called Sorbotae of Aethiope, are said to be eight cubits long. Why
should I speak of the Troglodites, who live in caves of the ground, feeding on
Serpents, being people of wonderful swiftness, and outrun any horse in
Aethiope, and cannot speak, but hiss? Why should I speak of the Massagetes, of
the people Nasomones? I will (according to promise) omit the prolixity thereof,
touching all countries by the way, or some of the chief; as of Egypt with brags
and vaunts of their antiquity: Of the Ethiopians and the people of Caria, with
their simplicity and slavery; so the Carthaginians were false and deceitful:
the Babylonians wicked and corrupted: the Persians drunkards and gluttons: the
Sycilians wary and trusty: so was the cruelnesse of the Caspians: the
filthiness of the Lesbians: the drunkenness of the Scythians: the fornication
of the Corinthians: the rudeness of the Boetians: the ignorance of the
Cymmerians: the beastliness of the Sibarites: the hardiness of the
Lacedaemonians: the delicacy of the Athenians, and the pride and glory of the
Romans. Thus we read that the Spaniards be the greatest travelers, and the
greatest dispisers: the Italian, proud and desirous to revenge: the Frenchman
politic and rash: the German a warrior: the Saxon a dissembler: the Swevian a
light talkative person: the Britain a busy body: the Cimbrian seditious and
fierce: the Bohemian ungentle and desirous of news: the Vandal a mutable
wrangler: the Bavarian a flouter and a scoffer.

These qualities are incident to the aforesaid nations by nature. But because
in this place it were somewhat to the purpose, to declare the glory and state
of Rome, which of all the world was esteemed and feared, and for that Rome had
more enemies then all the whole world beside, to show briefly how they
flourished how their fame spread, and their glory grew. I think it not
expedient to meddle with the antiquity thereof in the time of Janus and
Cameses, but to touch upon their fame by managing of wars, in the time of
Romulus, who being begotten of Mars and Rhea a Vestal virgin, was the first
builder of the city, and also king thereof This King Romulus warred on the
Sabins after he had elected a hundred Senators, to discern and judge the
causes of the City, to defend Justice, and practice the same, and to punish
vice and wrongs, according to the law of Plato, who willed every Commonwealth
to be governed with reward unto the virtuous, and punishment to the vicious.
Again, he appointed certain soldiers, unto the number of one M. to be in a
readiness always to defend the City. After Romulus succeeded Numa Pompilius
the second king, a man very religious and pitiful: he in his time made laws to
observe rites, sacrifices, and ceremonies, to worship their Gods: he made
Bishops and Priests, he appointed the Vestal virgins, and all that belong
thereto. Thirdly came Tulius Hostillius to be king in Rome, whose felicity was
only to teach the youth of Rome the discipline of warfare, and stirred them
wonderfully to exercise and practice the same. Then fourthly succeeded An.
Martius, with the like industry and care of the further and surer state of the
City, in raising the high walls of Rome, and raising a bridge upon the river
Tyber, in amending and beautifying all the streets of Rome. The fifth King was
Tarquinius Pri^cus, who though he was a stranger born at Corinth, yet he
increased the policy of the Romans with the wisdom of Greece, he triumphed
over the people of Tusk, and enlarged the fame of Rome much more then it was:
to this came next Servius Tul^ius who was the sixth and Tarquinius Superbus the
seventh and last King of Rome, who for his misgovernment and lust in the City
against the chaste matrons, for the pride and infringement of the liberty,
having withal ravished Lucrecia, Collatinus wife, was at length after long
rule and government banished Rome.

The first alteration and change of state was then after these seven Kings
governed Rome, two hundred years and a half which was the first infancy of
Rome. Then Collatinus and Brutus, after these Kings were exiled in reward of
restoring liberty and for honest life, were the first Consuls in Rome: they I
say altered the government of the City, from a Monarchy to a kind of government
called Aristocratia, which continued in Rome from the time of Brutus and
Collatinus, until the time of Appius Claudius, and Quin^us Fulvius, which was
two hundred years. In this season, during this two hundred years, was Rome most
assailed of all kind of enemies, stirred unto wars of all nations, for the
space of two hundred years and a half. Then Appius Claudius forgetting the law
which he himself made in Rome against fornication, forgetting the ravishment of
Lucrecia, and the banishment of Tarquinius, for breaking of the same, against
all right and reason willingly and wilfully ravished Virginia, the daughter of
Virginius, and after that her own father slew her in the open fight of Rome,
the cause being known unto all the City, the people were straight in arms to
revenge the wrongs and injuries against the laws. Even as the Kings before
named were exiled and banished Rome for the ravishment of Lucretia: so now the
ten Commissioners, called December. viri, were likewise excluded and rejected for
the ravishment of Virginia.

CHAP. XX.
Of the strange Natures of Waters, Earth, and Fire.

IN diverse learned Histories we read, especially in Pliny of the wonders of
waters, and of the secret and unknown nature of fire, wherein, for the rare
sight thereof, are noted things to be marvelled at. There is a water in the
country of Campania where if any mankind will enter therein, it is written
that he shall incontinent be bereft of his senses. And if any woman kind happen
to go into that water, she shall always afterward be barren. In the same
country of Campania, there is a lake called Avernus, where all flying fowls of
the air that fly over that lake, fall presently therein and die. A well there
is in Caria, called Salmacis, whose water if any man drink thereof, he
becomes chaft, and never desires the company of a woman. The River Maeander
does breed such a kind of stone, that being put close to a man's heart, it does
straight make him mad.

There are two rivers in Boetia, the one named Melas, whose water causes
straight any beast that drinks thereof, if it be white, to alter color to
black; the other Cephisus, which does change the black beast to a white beast
by drinking of the water. Again, there is in India a standing water, where
nothing may swim, beast, bird, man, or any living creature, but they all sink;
this water is called Silia. In Africa on the contrary part, there is the water
named Apustidamus, where nothing, be it never so heavy or unapt to swim, but
will swim upon the water; Lead, or any heavy metal does swim in that lake, as
it is in the well of Phinitia in Sicilia. Infinite waters should I recite, if I
in this would be tedious, in repeating their names, whose strange natures,
whose secret and hidden operation, whose force and virtue were such as healed
diverse diseases: As in the Isle of Avaria, there was a water that healed the
colic and the stone. By Rome there was also a water called Albula, that
healed green wounds. In Cilicia the river called Cydnus was a present remedy to
any swelling of the legs. Not far from Neapolis there was a well, whose water
healed any sickness of the eyes. The lake Amphion takes all scurfs and sores
from the body of any man. What should I declare the natures of the four famous
Rivers that issue out of Paradise; the one is named Euphrates, which the
Babylonians and Mesopotamians have just occasion to commend; the second is
called Ganges, which the Indians have great cause to praise; the third called
Nilus, which the country of Egypt can best speak of; and the fourth is called
Tigris, which the Assyrians have most commodity by.

Here might I be long occupied, if I should orderly but touch the natures of
all waters. So the alteration of the seas, and the wonders thereof appear, as
ebbing and flowing, as saltness and sweetness, and all things incident by
nature to the seas, which were it not that men see it daily, and observe the
same hourly, and mark things therein continually, more wonders would appear by
the seas, then almost reason might be alleged for. God (as the Prophet says)
is wonderful in all his works. So the five golden Rivers which learned and
ancient writers affirm, that the sands thereof are all glistering gems of gold,
as Tagus in Spain Permus in Lydia, Pactolus in Asia, Idaspes in India, and
Arimaspus in Scythia: These are no less famous through their golden sands,
which their rolling waves bring to land in these aforesaid countries, then
Parnessus in Boetia, where the Muses long were honored, or Simois in Phrygia,
where Venus was conceived by Anchises. To coequat the number of these five last
and pleasant Rivers, there are five as horrible to Nature; as Styx in Arcadia,
whose property is to kill any that will touch it, and therefore feigned of the
Poets to be consecrated to Pluto, for thfre is nothing so hard but this water
will consume, so cold is the water thereof: Again, the River Phlegeton is
contrary to this, for the one is not so cold, but the other is as hot, and
therefore called Phlegeton, which is in English, Fiery or smoakie, for the
Poets feign likewise, that it burns out in flames of fire: Lethes, and
Acheron, two Rivers, the one in Africa, the other in Epire, the one called the
river of forgetfulness, the other the river of sadness: The fifth called
Cocytus, a place where mourning never cease. These five rivers for their
horror and terror that proceeded from them, for the strange and wonderful
effects thereof, are called infernal lakes, consecrated and attributed to King
Pluto, which Virgil at large describes. Diverse wells, for the strangeness of
the waters, and for the pleasantness thereof, were sacrificed to the Gods as
Cissusa, a well where the Nurses of Bacchus used to wash him, was therefore
consecrated to Bacchus; so Melas to Pallas, Aganippe to the Muses, and so
forth, not molesting the Reader further with natures of Water, I mean now
briefly to touch the strange nature of the Earth.

Pliny affirms, that there was never man sick in Locris, nor in Croton,
neither any Earthquake ever heard in Licia. By Rome, in the field called
Gabiensis, a certain plat of ground, almost two hundred Acres, would tremble
and quake as men rode upon it. There are two hills of strange natures by the
River called Indus, the nature of the one is to draw any Iron to it, insomuch,
as Pliny says, that if nails be in any shoes, the ground of that place draws
the sole off, There is a piece of ground in the City Characena, in the country
of Taurica, where if any come wounded, he shall be straight healed: And if any
enter under diverse places, as in a place called Hirpinis, where the temple of
Mephis is builded; or in Asia, by Iheropolis, they shall incontinently die.
Again, there are places by the virtue of ground in that place, that men may
prophecy. Diverse times we read that one piece of ground devoured another, as
the hill Ciborus, and the city hard by, called Curites, were choked up of the
earth. Phegium a great mountain in Aethiopia, and Sipilis, a high hill in
Magnesia, with the cities named Tantalis and Galarus.

There is a great Rock by the City Harpasa in Asia, which may be moved easily
with one finger, and yet if a man put all his strength thereunto, it will not
stir. I need not speak of mount Aetna in Sicilia, of Lypara in Acolia, of
Chymera in Lycia, of Vesuvius and Aenocauma, five fiery mountains, which day
and night burn so terribly, that the flame thereof never rests. If any man
will see more of these mavelous and wonderful effects of Elements, let him
read the second book of Plini, where he shall have abundance of the like
examples. There he shall see that in some places it never rained, as in Paphos
upon the temple of Venus; in Nea, a town in Phrygia, upon the temple of
Minerva, and in diverse places else, which is the nature of the ground. About
Babylon a field burns day and night. In Aethiopia certain fields about mount
Hesperius, shine all night like stars.

As for Earthquakes and wonders that thereby happened. I will not speak but
those strange grounds that never alter from such effects before mentioned,
beside the metals, the stones, the herbs, the trees, and all other things are
miraculous and strange, as Pliny in diverse places does witness. And as for
fire it is too great a wonder that the whole world is not burned thereby, since
the Sun, the Stars, the Elementary fire, excel all miracles, if God had not
prevented in keeping the same from damage, and hurt to man: yea, appointed that
the heat of the Sun should not kindle straws, stubbles, trees, and such like,
where the heat thereof (as we daily see) burns stones, lead, and harder
substances: since especially that fire is in all places, and is able to kindle
all things, insomuch, that the water Thrasimenos burns out in flames, which
is unnatural and strange that fire kindles in water; and likewise in Egnatia a
City of Salentine, there is a stone, which if any wood touch, it will kindle
fire-

In the Well called Nympheus, there is a stone likewise whence come flames of
fire, the stone it self burns in the water. A greater wonder it is, that the
fire should be kindled by water, and extinguished by wind. Fire flashed about
the head of Servius Tullius, being then a boy in sleep, which did prognosticate
that he should be King of the Romans. Fire shined about the head of L. Marcius
in Spain, when he encouraged his soldiers to revenge manfully the deaths of
those noble and famous Romans, named Sipians. The mavelous effects of fire
are most wonderful and most strange.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the World, and of the soul of Man, with diverse and sundry opinions of the
Philosophers about the fame.

AMongst diverse Philosophers and learned men, grew a great controversy of the
beginning of the world, some of the best affirming that it had no beginning,
nor can have end, as Aristotle and Plato, applying incorruption, and perpetual
revolution to the same. Some with Epicurus thought the world should be
consumed: Of this opinion was Empedocles and Herachius. Some on the other side
did judge with Pythagoras, that so much of the world should be destroyed as was
of his own nature. Thales said there was but one world, agreeing with
Empedocles. Democritus affirms infinite worlds, and Metrodorus the
Philosopher conceived worlds to be innumerable. Thus hold they several opinions
concerning the making, the beginning, the ending, and the numbers of the world.
What child is there of this age, but smileth at their folly, reasoning largely
one against another, in applying the cause and the effect of things to their
own inventions? And as they have judged diversely of the world, concerning the
frame and nature thereof; so were they as far off from the true understanding
of the Creation of man. Some grossly thought, that mankind had no beginning.
Some judged that it had a beginning by the superior bodies: And for the
antiquity of mankind, some judge Egypt to be the first people, some Scythia,
some Thrace, some this country, and some that country, with such fantastical
inventions, as may well appear to the most ignorant an error. And alas, how
simple are they in finding out the substance of the soul, what it should be,
where it should be, and by what it should be? Some say that there is no soul,
but a natural moving, as Crates the Theban: Some judge the soul to be nothing
else but fire or heat, between the undivisible parts: others thought it an air
received into the mouth, tempered in the heart, boiled in the lights, and
dispersed through the body. Of this opinion was Anaxagoras and also Anaximenes.
Hippias judged the soul of man to be water. Thales and Heliodorus, affirmed it
to be earth, Empedocles is of opinion that it is hot blood about the heart so
that they vary in sundry opinions, attributing the cause thereof either to the
fire, or else to water, either to the earth, or to the air, and some unto the
complexion of the four elements: others of the earth and fire: others of water
and fire: some again reason that the substance of the soul is of fire and of
the air. And thus of approved Philosophers, they show themselves simple
innocents.

How ignorant were they in defining the soul of man? So far disagreeing one
with another, that Zenocrates thinks again the soul to be but a number that
moves it self, which all the Egyptians consented to. Aristotle himself the
Prince of all Philosophers, and his master Plato, showed in this their shifting
reason, which both agree that the soul is a substance which moves it self.
Some so rude and so far from perfection in this point, that they thought the
heart to be the soul: some the brain. How ridiculous and foolish seems their
assertion to this age concerning the soul, and as childishly they dispute and
reason again about the placing of the same, where and in what place of the body
the soul rests. For Democritus judges his seat to be in the head: Parmenides
in the breast: Herophilus in the ventricles of the brain: Strato does think
that the soul was in the space between the eye brow: yea some were so foolish,
to judge it to be in the ear, as Xerxes King of Persia did: Epicurus in all the
breast: Diogenes supposed it to be in a hollow vein of the heart: Empedocles in
the blood: Plato, Aristotle and others that were the best and truest
Philosophers, judged the soul to be indifferent in all parts of the body? some
of the wisest supposed, that every piece and p^rce^ of the body had his proper
soul. In this therefore they were much deceived, in seeking a proper seat for
the soul: Even as before they erred shamefully, and li^d manifestly about the
essence and substance of the soul, so now were they most simply beguiled in
placing the soul as you have heard.

And now after I have opened their several opinions concerning what the soul
is, and where the soul is, you shall here likewise hear, whither the soul shall
go after death, according to the Philosophers which as diversely vary and
disagree in this, as you before heard the diversity of opinions concerning the
substance, and the place* And first to begin with Democritus, who judges the
soul to be mortal, and that it shall perish with the body: to this agree
Epicurus and Pliny. Pythagoras judged that the soul is immortal, and when the
body dies it s^eeth to his kind. Aristotle is of opinion, that some parts of
the soul which have corporal seats, must dye with the body, but that the
understanding of the soul, which is no instrument of the body, is perpetual.
Tho people called Drinda were of this judgment, that souls should not descend
to hell, but should pass to another world; as the Philosophers called Essei,
which suppose that the souls of the dead do live in great felicity beyond the
Ocean Seas. The Egyptians judged with Pythagoras that the souls of men should
pass from one place to another, and then to enter into another man again. The
Stoics are of that opinion, that the soul forsakes the body in such sort,
that the soul which is diseased in this life, and advanced by no virtue, dies
together with the body; but they judge it, if it be adorned with noble and
heroical virtues, that it is then accompanied with everlasting natures. Diverse
of the Pagans hold that the soul is immortal, but yet they suppose that
reasonable souls enter into unreasonable bodies, as into plants or trees for a
certain space.

There were again some frivolous Philosophers, as Euripides and Archelaus,
which say, that men first grew out of the earth in manner of herbs, like to the
fables of Poets, who fain that men grew of the sown teeth of Serpents. Some
again very childishly affirm, that there be nine degrees of punishment, or
rather nine mansions in Hell, appointed and prepared for the soul. The first
seat is appointed for young infants; the second for Idiots and fools (I fear
that place will be well filled;) the third for them that kill themselves; the
fourth for them that be tormented with love; the fifth for those that were
found guilty before Judges; the sixth appointed for strong men and champions;
the seventh is a place where the souls be purged; the eight seat is where the
souls being purged do rest; the ninth and last is the pleasant field Elisium.
And to join these Legends of Lies of old women, with frivolous figments of
Poets, they likewise affirm the like folly of fiery Phlogeton, of frosty
Cocytus, of the water of Styx, of the sloud Lethes, and of Acheron, with other
such whence all Paganical rites, and fond foolish observations first grew I
mean of fables of Poets, and not by the reading of the Holy Scriptures. O blind
baiards in seeking that which they could never find! And as they could prove
and say that the body came out of the earth the moisture out of the water, the
breath of man by the air, and the heat of man by the fire; so could they not
know the worker thereof, how wit and wisdom came from God, how all things
were made by him of nothing. This knew they not, not that they wanted learning,
but that they wanted the knowledge of true Divinity. They could appoint planets
in their several places, in their due seats and just mansions, as Jupiter in
the liver, Saturn in the spleen, Mars in blood, Sol in the heart, the Moon in
the stomach, and Venus in the reins; but they could not agree in appointing a
place for the soul. They could likewise appoint seats for the bodies superior
in man, as the Ram in the head the Bull in the neck, and the Crab, in the brost
the Lion in the heart, and the Fish in the foot, and so others; but they could
in no wise find a seat for the soul, Truly is it said, that God reveals
wisdom unto Babes, and hides the same from the Sages of the world. Hence
grows the beginning of all Heresies, according to the proverb, The greatest
Philosophers, the greatest Heretics: Hereby I say grew almost the invention of
Philosophy, coequal unto the verity of the Gospel: and therefore Paul the
Apostle cries upon all men to take heed of flattering Philosophers. If in this
place I should show their opinions concerning our God and Creator I should seem
tedious: For Diagoras and Theodorus affirm, that there is no God; Epicurus
judged that there is a God, but that he had no care over earthly things. Thales
said, that God was a mind which made all things of water. Cleanthes supposed
God to be the air only. Alcineon judged the Sun the Moon, and the Stars to be
only God. Parmenides makes God to be a continual circle of light, which is
called Stephanen, Crisippus names God a divine necessity. Anaxagoras supposed
God to be an infinite mind, moveable of it self, so does Pythagoras likewise
judge: yea Aristotle imagined God to be a proper nature, as the world, or the
heat of the heavens, or the divinity of the mind, which either of these three
he names God; and so infinite are they, that so simply conceive the majesty of
the Godhead, that far wiser had they seemed unto us by silence therein, then by
uttering such fond fantastical opinions, wherein their too much folly and
error is to all men evident.

CHAP. XXII.
Of worshipping of Gods, and religion of Gentiles.

NUma Pompilius, the second King of Rome, being studious to draw the ignorant
and rude people to some profession of religion, was ye first that appointed
sacrifices to Jupiter, and to Mars. In Rome he elected Virgins to Vesti, and
appointed certain orders in choosing of the same. None by the law of Numa, might
be taken under six years old, and none above ten to be a Vestal Virgin, which
virgins should be thirty years religious, and vowed to Vesta: of the which
thirty years, the first ten years they should learn the order and fashion of
the sacrifices, and religion of the Goddess Vesta. The second ten years they
should sacrifice and employ the ceremonies with rites and honors belonging to
Vesta. The third ten years they should as grave matrons, learn the others late
chosen to be perfect in the rites and ceremonies of Vesta: then if any of them
would marry, they might after thirty years continuance so do. If any of these
Vestal virgins were convicted of whoredom, the law was that in open sight of
the City of Rome, she should be brought to the gate called Collina, and there
alive be burned. Again, if the fire at any time in the Temple had gone out by
any means, their keepers with scourges should whip and scourge them almost to
death.

The same Numa to make the people more religious, appointed twelve men called
Salii with painted garments, singing verses in the praise and commendation of
Mars, with soleman dancing and playing round about the City. Amongst other
sacred orders, he made certain priests called Feciales: these punished
effendours: these revanged the wrongs done to Ambassadors: these redressed all
injuries offered and committed within the City of Rome: these Priests appointed
rites and ceremonies, made sacrifices to the Goddess Bona Dea in a Temple
erected upon mount Aventine: here might no men come to do sacrifice but all
women. Of this Goddess Bona Dea does Cicero make often mention in diverse of his
orations and invectives made against diverse pernicious and wicked Citizens as
Catelin, Clodius and others.

There was in Rome another kind of religion dedicated to Flora, the sacrifice
whereof was called Floralia, This Flora, as both Livius and Dionisius do
report, was a common strumpet, which for that she made the whole City of Rome
her heir, being wealthy at her death, she was therefore thought to be of the
Romans, the Goddess of fruits and was honored of all the lewd women in brave
garlands, decked with all kind of flowers, in gorgeous apparel, and this was
done in the month of May. The Goddess C^^^^ began then to be famous, for she
had her feasts and sacrifices named Cerealia, by the Priests appointed; she was
thus honored: The Priests in white garments, and with lanthorns and
firebrarnds in the night time would come to the Temple, they abstained from
wine, and avoided venery for a certain time they appeinted every fifth year a
great fasting. Minerva likewise began to have such honor in Rome, that she had
three several kinds of sacrifices, one of a Bull, the second of a Crane, the
third of a Weather. The Romans did celebrate in the beginning of the spring,
such feasts and sacrifices to Berecynthia, called the Mother of the Gods, that
every man did offer of the chiefest things that he did possess to pleasure this
Goddess. There were diverse other kinds of sacrifices, and vain superstitious
ceremonies observed then in Rome, whose beginnings proceeded from the invention
of Devils, which of long time were honored as Gods; for then men sought no
help but of their Gods, which were rather Devils: As Polidorus in his fourth
Book affirms of a certain rich man in Rome, who had three of his sons sore
sick of the plague; this man was named Valesius, who every night at home in his
house besought his household Gods called Penates, to save his children, and to
plague him for the fault of his sons: Thus every night praying to his Gods, for
the health of his children, a voice was heard, that if he would go with his
three sons to Tarentum, and wash his sons with the water which was consecrated
to Pluto and Proserpina, they should recover their health. Valesius thought the
way was far, yet for health to his children, he took his journey; and being
ready shipped in Martius field, hard by the river Tyber, he was desired of the
master of the ship, to go to the next village called Tarentum, for a little
fire, for the fire was out in the ship, and the mariners busy about other
things: When Valesius heard the name of Tarentum, he knew straight that it was
that place that his Gods appointed him to go to, for the city of Tarentum was
in the furthest part of all Italy, in the country of Calabria, he willingly
went and brought both fire with him for the Master of the Ship, and water for
the children, which being given to his sons, they recovered health. Wherefore
in memory of this, he recompensed his Gods with this sacrifice: he in the night
appointed solemn plays to honor Pluto and Proserpina, to each several nights
every year for so many sons as he had that recovered health, erecting up
altars, and offering sacrifices in honor and solemnity of Pluto. These were
the Oracles and divine answers which the Devils were wont to give in Idols to
deceive men withal, these I say were they that allured the people to idolatry.

Cicero says, that the chiefest Priests of Rome the Bishops, for that the
sacrifices and feasts, the ceremonies and rites belonging to new made Gods,
grew to such a number that they appointed three men called Triumviri, to be
rulers of the sacrifices, and appointed other three that should keep the sacred
Oracles of Sybilla, The Oracles of Sybilla were written in books, to which they
resorted oftentimes for counsel and admonition, fifteen men were appointed to
know what was to be done in any peril or necessity: as at the wars betwixt
Caesar and Pompey, such prodigious sights were seen, such unnatural working of
the heavens, such terrible sights on the earth, such portentuous miracles then
seen in Rome, that the Senators came to Sybilla to know the effects and ends of
these monstrous shows, and to be instructed of the state of the City; Unto whom
she gave six letters in writing, three of R. and three of F. to be exponded of
their wisemen, whereof the meaning was found the three of R. were these, Reg^um
Roma Ruet: and the three of F. were Flamma, Ferro, and Fame, that is as much to
say, that the monarchy of Rome should perish with fire, sword and hunger.

Dionisius in his fourth book says, that an aged woman brought nine books to
Tarquinius Superbus, being the seventh and last King of the Romans, which she
would have sold for three hundred Crowns to the King, letting Tarquinius
understand, that those books were full of Oracles and divine answers; but he
making a jest of her books, did burn three of them before her face, demanding
of her again, what he should pay for the other six? she answered, Three hundred
Crowns: then he burned three more, and asked what he should pay for the three
books that were left? She answered as before, Three hundred Crowns: The King
marvelling much at the constancy of the woman bought the three books for three
hundred Crowns, and after that time; that woman was never seen in Rome,
wherefore it is thought of the Romans, that she was Sibilla. Therefore these
three books were preserved in Rome as aforesaid under the custody of three men
appointed for the purpose, and she so honored and worshipped, that sacrifice
upon sacrifice was offered to Sibilla in Rome. Thus the Oracles of Sibilla in
Rome; the Oracles of Apollo in Delphos; the Oracle of Jupiter in Ammon, were
the instructors to the Gentiles, and teachers of the Greeks. Moreover they had
such solemnities of feasts, and celebration of banquets, either called
pontifical feasts, for that it was ordained by Priests; or else triumphant
banquets after victories, made of the Emperors, and given to the people; or
else funeral feasts, where honor and solemnity was had for the dead.

As for games and plays to sacrifice and to honor their Gods, they had
Lupercalia, Floralia, Bacchanalia, Cerealia, with diverse and sundry others to
pleasure their Gods, and to mitigate their fury and wrath. For in the days of
Tarquinius the proud, for that diverse women of Rome being great with children,
got sufeits in eating of Bulls flesh, they appointed certain sacrifices to the
Gods infernals, called Tau^^lia, to appease their anger therein again for them
that were sick. Valerius Publicola, who was the first Tribune in Rome,
appointed banquets and feasts in the temple of the Gods, to assuage likewise
their fury, as Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, who were with banquets reconciled to
restore health to the sick.

The homages and services, the sacrifices and solemnities, the banquets and
feests, the mirth and melody, the pastime and sport the great games and plays
that always Greeks and Gentiles have used toward their Gods, were almost
infinite. The honor and reverence that Jupiter had in Creet, the worship and
fame that Apollo had in Delphos, the sacrifices and ceremonies that Mars had in
Thracia, are in books written, and by authority recorded, and I fear they be in
the hearts of men too deeply printed. Pallas had her seat in Athens, Juno was
enshrined in Samos, Diana in Ephesus, Cibeles in Phrigia, Venus in Ciprus,
Ceres in Sicilia: Again, Pan was in reverence amongst the Arcadians, Osiris
amongst the Egyptians, Bacchus in the Isle of Naxus, Vulcan in Lemnos. In fine,
blocks and stones, dogs and cats, oxen and calves were honored and worshipped
as Gods. Thus they wandered in this vale of misery like pilgrims far from the
country that we ought to travel to, where that true and living God is, the God
of salvation and health, which is without end to be worshipped. He is the God
of all men, and yet of the fewest worshipped; he is the Savior, and yet he is
neglected; yea and more rejected of us that be Christians, then the blocks and
stones that were honored of the Gentiles. And for proof hereof I mean to show
the severe laws that were both in Athens and Rome, the two lights of the world,
for observing of their Gods and Religion: Neither the Philosophers in Athens,
nor the Senators in Rome nor the Magistrates and Princes of the world then
would in any wise permit injuries toward the Gods, or suffer any evil report
toward their religion, in such care were they lest they should offend their
Gods, and break their laws, Certain husbandmen found in the lands of L.
Petilius, by plowing therein, two stones whereupon an Epitaph of Numa Pompilius
was written in one, in the other were found fourteen books; seven latin books
entitled, Jus pontificum, the law of the Priests, concerning religion and
sacrifices of their Gods; these books with great diligence and care were not
only commanded to be kept, but also in all points to be observed: The other
were Greek books, entitled Disciplina sapient^ae, the rule of wisdom, which
for that they tasted of Philosophy, and condemned the vain superstitious
religions of their Gods, Petilius fearing lest by reading of wisdom and
Philosophy, their folly and religion should be destroyed, being then Proe or in
Rome, at which time Cornelius and Beb^us were Consuls, by authority of the
Senate in open sight of all the City of Rome burned the Greek books. For the
old and ancient men would have nothing kept within their city that might hinder
their Gods: For before all things they preferred their Gods, and their
religions, and so honored their Priests, their sacrifices, and their vestal
Virgins, more then they honored the Emperors and Senators, as it appears by
a History in Valerius, that when Rome was taken and conquered by the Gauls, and
the vestal Virgins were enforced to bear those things away, shifting more for
the sacrifices and rites of their religion, in carrying their books, their
garments, and their Gods, then they cared for their country, friends,
children, and goods: Insomuch that L. Alvanius, when he saw the vestal Virgins
taking pains to maintein the honor of Vesta undefiled, her sacrifices
unpolluted, in saving the ceremonies and religion of their Goddess from the
enemies, as one that had more regard and respect to their vain religion then
careful of his wife and children, which then being in a Chariot to be carried
and conveyed from Rome, he commanded his wife and children to come down from
the Chariot, and to go a foot, and placed in their room the vestal Virgins with
all their burdens belonging to Vesta, their sacrifices, and other necessaries,
and brought them honorably to the country of Creet where with great honor
they were received; and for memory hereof till this time the people of Creet,
for that they did succor the vestal Virgins in adversity, were by the Goddess
Vesta recompensed no less for their humanity in receiving of her maids into
their town, then she gratified Alvanius for his reverence to her religion,
insomuch, that the coach where her Virgins and her sacrifices were carried, was
afterward more honored and esteemed, than any triumphant or imperial chariot.

In the self same time and troubles of Rome, when the Capitol was besieged with
the enemies, Caius Fabius perceiving how religion was then esteemed, girded
himself like a sacrificer, and carried in his hand an host to be offered to
Jupiter, and was suffered to pass through the midst of his enemies to mount
Quirinal, where solemnities and sacrifices were done to Jupiter, and that being
accomplished, he likewise went to the Capitol through the midst of the Army
with all his company, and by this means got the victory over his enemtas, more
by religion then by strength.

So much was superstition and idolatry honored and observed every where, that
the Persians sailed with a thousand ships to do sacrifice and solemnity to
Apollo at Delphos. The Athenians slew and destroyed all those that envied or
repugned their religion. Diagoras was exiled for that he wrote that he doubted
whether any Gods were or no, and if Gods were, what they were. Socrates was
condemned, for that he went about to traduce their religion, and speak against
their Gods. Phidias that noble and cunning workman, was no longer suffered at
Athens, then while he wrought the picture of Minerva in Marble, for it was more
durable then Ivory; which when Ph^dias thought to draw in Ivory, he was
threatened with death, to vilipend so great a Goddess, and to make her in
Ivory, which was wont to be honored in Marble.

The Romans made a law at the destruction of Canna, for that great slaughter of
the Romans which at that war happened, that the matrons of Rome, who bewailed
and lamented the deaths of their husbands, their children^ their brethren, and
friends incessantly, should not p^^se thirty days in mourning lest the Gods
should be angry, ascriving all fortunes good and bad to their Gods. Wherefore
it was decreed by the Senators, that the Mothers and Wives, the sisters and
the daughters of them that were slain at Canna, at the thirty days end should
cast away their mourning apparel and banish their tears, and come altogether in
white garments to do sacrifice to the Goddess Ceres. For it was thought, and
truly believed among the Gentiles and heathens, that the Gods would justly
revenge those that would at any time neglect their sacrifices. Brennus, for
that he went to Delphos, and spoiled Apollo's temple, and neglected his
Godhead, was plagued grievously, and worthily revenged: So King Xerxes, whose
Navies covered the whole Seas, whose Armies of men dried up rivers, and
shadowed almost the whole earth, because he sent four thousand soldiers to
Delphos to rob Apollo, was therefore discomfited in his wars, forsaken of his
soldiers, prosecuted of his enemies, and compelled to flee like a vagabond
from hill to hill, till he came to his Kingdom of Persia, to his great infamy
and shame. The like was in Carthage, when the City was oppressed by the
Romans, Apollo's temple neglected, and he himself not esteemed, he revenged
the same; for the first that laid hand upon him, lost his hand and his arm,
Thus in Delphos and in Carthage did Apollo revenge his injuries. His son
Aesculapius, a great God in diverse countries, for that Turulius, chief ruler of
the Navies of Antonius, hewed the Groves which were consecrated to his temple,
Aesculapius revenged it after this sort; When Antonius and Caesar were at wars,
after that the Army and Host of Antonius were vanquished, and Caesar a victor,
he brought Turulius to be murdered unto that place in the Grove, where he
neglected Aesculapius. Ceres when the City of Mileton was taken by Alexander
the great, and her temple therein spoiled and robbed by the soldiers, she
threw flames of fire into their faces, and made as (...) blind as neglected her
Godhead and Majesty. Dionisius K. (...) Siracusa, for yt he spoiled the temple
of the Goddess Proserpina, and robbed this Goddess of her golden garments,
flouting and scoffing at her rites and ceremonies, and nothing esteeming her
sacrifice: and again for that he comanded his soldiers to pluck, and take away
Aesculapius beard in Epidaurus a City in Peloponesus in Greece, because his
father Apollo had none, he was brought by the Gods from a King in Siracusa, to
be a poor Schoolmaster in Corinth, and wretchedly to end his life by the just
indignation of the Goddess Proserpina. Juno showed her anger upon Fulvius
Flacchus, for that when he was Censor of Rome, he caused the Marble Tiles to be
brought from the Temple of Juno in Lacinia, unto the Temple of Fortune in Rome;
He having his sons in Illyria at the wars, the one of them by the wrath of Juno
was slain, the other by her command was plagued and tormented to death, he
himself having news hereof, died for sorrow and grief and the Senators knowing
the cause returned the Marble Tiles by their Ambassadors unto Lacinia again.
The wrath of Juno was the cause of the unhappy success of that noble Consul
Varro in the wars of Canna. Hercules forgot not to revenge the contempt and
despising of his ceremonies and rites by Pontius, which once he and his name
received as their God but being by Appius persuaded, who then was Censor in
Rome, to neglect he was destroyed, he and all his name, which were in number
above thirty, and Appius for his counsel was made blind.

Thus the Gentiles and Heathens thought that nothing could escape unrevenged of
their Gods. This made Masinissa King of Numidia to send back the Ivory teeth
that the Master of his Ships brought from the Temple of Juno in Meleta unto
Meleta again. This made the Senators of Rome, to send back again the money
which Pleminius the messenger of Scipio took away from the temple of Proserpina
again, fearing the anger and displeasure of the Goddess. Thus were the people
blinded with vain ceremonies of the Priests, Bishops, and Magistrates. Thus
were the rude people deceived by dissimulations of the Potentates, as Numa
Pompilius one of the first Idolaters that was in Rome, would make the people
believe that he had warnings and admonitions from the Nymph Aegeria, to whom he
said he had access in the night time to be instructed in the ceremonies of
Rome. Lycurgus the lawgiver amongst the Lacedaemonians persuaded the people
that what law soever he made, it was done by the Oracle of Apollo. Zaleucus
made the Locresians believe that his doings and proceedings were done by the
counsel of Minerva. Pisistratus deceived the people of Athens through
dissimulations by a woman named Phia, whom he dressed like Pallas: he was
brought often times by this woman into the Castle of Pallas: and the rude
people thought that she was Pallas her self, and judged thereby that
Pisistratus might do what he would, and have what he craved of Pallas. Minos
King of Creet, was wont every ninth year to go unto a secret place by himself,
and there staying to consult with Jupiter what law he should make to the people
of Creet, as he informed the people, and so deceived them craftily. Thus we see
how Licurgus amongst the Lacedaemonians, Zaleuchus amongst the Locresians,
Pisistratus amongst the Athenians, Numa amongst the Romans, and Minos in Creet
have deceived the ignorant people with counterfeit talking with Gods, making
them to believe that the Gods counseled them. Thus by craft they invented
false Gods, framed ceremonies, and observed vain orders.

Sertorius that famous Sabin, and ruler long in Rome, was wont upon the high
rocks of Lusitania to consult with a white Heart, of whom he was warned to avoid
things, and to do things, to take things, and to refuse things: insomuch, that
to blind the people, he would attempt nothing till he had consulted on the Rock
with this white Heart. L. Sylla when at any time he went unto wars, would in
open sight of the soldiers embrace a certain remembrance, a sign which he
brought from Delphos with him to Italy, requiring that to keep promise as
Apollo had commanded him. Scipio would never take any public affairs in hand,
before he had gone to the Capitol to the secret Alter of Jupiter, and there
continued a while to deceive the people. Thus were they thought to be the
Of-springs of Gods by the common soldiers, whom they deceived with false
shows, and to this effect that the people should flatter and obey them in all
things.

And as Liberius did use to feed Julius Caesar with flattery saying that mortal
men ought to deny nothing unto those to whom the Gods do grant all things; so
did these forenamed Princes hunt for such honor as Caesar or Alexander had.
Mahomet a great Prophet, and a mighty God amongst the Gentiles, whose laws till
this day the most part of the world observe, had such a beginning as aforesaid,
and dissembled with the people, that a Dove that he taught to come every day
upon his shoulders, to feed on certain grains of wheat, which he always did
bear in his ears, was the holy Ghost, and persuaded the people that his doings
and laws were appointed by the holy Ghost, which daily came to instruct him,
and to make orders amongst the people. We read in diverse places of the
scriptures, that the men of Judah did build altars and make Idols upon every
high hill, and under boughs of trees. The Idolatry of the people of Israel,
with the daughters of Moab, using their sacrifice, and worshipping their false
Gods was such, that God the true Messiah did loath and abhor them. Such
Idolatry I say grew among the Israelites, that Jeroboam commanded two Golden
Calves to be made, and to be worshipped, saying: Behold O Israel behold thy
Gods, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. These were those Jews whom
God most esteemed, and they least regarded it: these were his own people, and
yet they sought other Gods, saying to Aaron: Make us Gods to go before us.
Manasses King of Judah, erected and made altars to Baal to go before him.
Holophernes said, that there was no God but Nabuchadonosor. Nabuchadonosor
commanded that all people and nations should kneel and worship the Golden
Image. Solomon having received so great wisdom of God, that no Prince in
Israel had the like, fell in his latter years to Idolatry, to worship the Gods
of strange women. Antiochus commanded Idols to be worshipped, altars to be
erected, temples to be made, swine to be sacrificed, and his own children to
pass through the fire.

Thus was Idolatry maintained, and Calves, Dragons, Serpents, the Sun, the
Moon, and all the Stars of heaven were honored and worshipped as Gods:
insomuch, that when St. Paul went to Athens, and saw the City so addicted unto
all kind of Idolatry, his spirit was troubled within him. Thus they made unto
themselves Gods most like unto them that made them. For as they heard not the
true God and Savior of the world, persuading them unto amendment, and
threatening them with correction: even so their fained Gods having ears heard
not, having eyes saw not, having hands felt not, having nostrils smelled not,
for all the worshipping, sacrifices, and kneeling that they did to them. O
miserable man, to forsake him who is the only savior and redeemer of man, and
to worship those Gods which work the only confusion of man, I doubt least some
with the rich glutton make their bellies their Gods: I fear least some with
Simon make money their God: nay I doubt most of all least some make themselves
Gods with Lucifer, or with Darius King of Persia, who made an edict, that no
man might ask any thing of other Gods for thirty days, but of King Darius. The
original beginning of Idolatry, as learned writers affirm, was that the Prince
of the world, which is the Devil exercising Art, practicing his divinations,
and shifting in such sundry shows, powered such errors into men's hearts (for
that prodigious acts and miracles, which Devils, and men by Devils wrought were
seen) that men were blinded with the shifts of Satan which as St. Paul said
could change himself like an angel of light. So that some by sorcery some by
conjuring, and some by the Devil who goes about like a roaring Lion to increase
his Kingdom, became Gods on earth: some again for strength, some for building
of Cities, some for inventions of things, were had and counted in the number of
Gods: as Isis amongst the Egyptians, Gabyrus amongst the Macedonians Mithia
amongst the Persians: even so by the Rhodians and Messagetes was the sun
honored, amongst the Latins Faunus, by the Romans Quirinus, by the
Babylonians Belus, by the Sabines Sabius, by the Moors Uranios, and so Jupiter
in Creet, Apollo in Delphos, as is before said. They had also certain beasts
appointed for their sacrifices, and consecrated to them, as an Owl to Minerva,
a Heart to Diana, a Sow to^ Ceres, a Swan to Venus, a Cock to Aesculapius, a
Bull to Neptune, a Goat to Faunus, an Ass to Priapus, a Heg to Bacchus, a
Goose to Isis, a Peacock to Juno, besides this, the Persians offer to Phoebus,
a Horse for a sacrifice, the Carthaginians even till the destruction of
Carthage, offered a child to Saturn. The Eagle was appointed for Jupiter, the
Phoenix for the Sun, the Raven for Apollo, and the Pie for Mars.

A further superstition was amongst the Gentiles, that trees, blocks, and such
dumb things were likewise consecrated and hallowed to their Gods; as the Oak to
Jupiter, the Bay to Apollo, the Vine to Bacchus, the Poplar to Hercules, the
Olive to Pallas, the Pine tree to Cybele, the Myrtle to Venus, and the Cypress
tree to Pluto. Thus with beasts, birds, blocks and stones the Gentiles honored
their Gods. There was almost nothing in all the whole world, but it had the
name of a God. Amongst the Gentiles, Dogs, Oxen, Calves, Serpents, Dragons, and
such others were reputed as Gods.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the first beginning of shaving, and of the use thereof, and in what
reverence were the hairs of the head.

THe Lacedaemonians were wont to excel all oother nations, in giving growth to
their hairs of their heads and beards, as an ornament and a comely setting
forth of man. Wherefore Lycurgus did defend the same, saying, that as the hairs
of the head were comely and seemly to beautiful men; so were they a terror and
a fearful sight upon the deformed man for the enemies to look upon. Nicander
therefore being demanded why the Lacedaemonians did so esteem their beards, and
locks of hair upon their heads, he said, Because it is a most natural garment,
and most comely unto man, to have that which is best in sight and least in
charges. The ancient Greeks, and specially the people of Athens, as soon as any
was once past fourteen years of age, had a custom and law that they should be
brought to Delphos, to offer their first down on their chins, and gay and
frizling bushes of their heads to Apollo, as a sacrifice of their first fruit,
and a pledge of their homage to that God. So much esteemed they their hairs,
that they thought nothing to be so acceptable to Apollo as that, who always was
painted young.

The Thracians likewise had such regard unto the hair of their heads, that they
combed it, and decked it upon their forehead, with curling knots upon long
hairs, so that their chief care and study was to trim those which they esteemed
most. In India, the subjects in all things obeyed their Prince and the Laws,
but in shaving their hair, which by no means they would agree to. The Argives
loved so well their hair, that being defeated by the Lacedaemonians at Tiria,
they shaved their hair, and wept and bewailed their misfortune so much, that
they vowed never to let their hair grow, before they would recover again Tiria.

The Greeks honored their long hairs, and so esteemed their beards, that Homer
was wont to call them Carecom^onta, that is to say, fair haired. It should seem
that the Macedonians made much of their hairs and beards, for at what time
Alexander the great, had gathered all his power and force to take his conquest
in hand, being demanded of his soldiers whether in them any thing were to be
amended, the wise Prince considering the great hurt and inconvenience that
should happen chiefly in wars to those that were long haired or long bearded:
and again being loath to offend his soldiers, for that he knew w^ll they much
esteemed their beards, he smiling merrily spoke, I see no want in you to
forward the expedition, but I wish your beards and long hairs were at home
until your return. They marvelling much at his request, Parmento answered and
said that the Macedonians wot not what you mean thereby: then Alexander
perceiving that his soldiers were angry at his desire, replied, because long
hair is dangerous, and specially among the enemies, there is no better hold
then by beards or hairs. But it seemed that they had rather be conquered like
men in their beards, then to be conquerors like boys without beards. As for
the Romans their long hair delighted them so much, that there was no shaving at
all, no Barbers known, until Pu. Ticinius, brought certain Barbers out of
Sycilia to Rome. But for the space of four hundred and fifty years, Rome
nourished their long hair, as that which they best delighted in for those
times. Affricanus was the first that ever delighted in Barbers and next to him
was Augustus Caesar successor of Julius Caesar.

Besides these countries and famous kingdoms, diverse others there were that so
made of their hair, that to observe orders, and to avoid the dangers in the
wars, they did shave diverse parts of their head, much against their will; yet
for custom sake the Maxi^s a people in Africa, do use to shave the right
side, and let the hairs grow on the left. Again, the people which Strabo called
Anases, do shave their hair upon their foreheads, and yet they make much of the
hinder part of the head, where they suffer their hair to grow very long. The
Maceans shave little hair upon the crowns of their heads, and yet suffer all
their hair to hang down in order about their faces.

Herodotus in his fourth book does name a people who are called Machleis and
Abantes, which for that they be warriors, and always in the field face to face
with their enemies, they shave their hair before, and suffer it to grow behind.
The Euboians likewise did let their hair grow behind upon their backs very
long, and yet were enforced of necessity to cut it before for fear of the
enemies. It seemed that either Barbers were scant, or not known in those days,
or else long hair was much set by, and esteemed of all men. For Sueronius that
writ the lives of the Emperors, does report, that the Emperor Caligula was wont
for envy to those he met, to shave their hair off behind, knowing well, that
nothing might molest them so much, as to have their hair off; for he was so
envious, that if he saw any that had fair golden hair, he would have it off
straight with his own hand,

Beards were so much set by, and so esteemed was hair in those days, that women
were forbidden by the Law of the twelve fables, to shave any part of the face,
to prove whether hair might grow or no. Occasions were ministered to them, said
they, by their long hair and beards to know themselves, and the state of their
bodies. For an old man in the City of Sparta being asked why he did wear his
beard so long, he answered, That in beholding the gray hairs in my beard, I may
do nothing unseemly, nor unworthy of such gray hairs; for a good man is always
admonished to live virtuously. Demonax was known by his beard to be some grave
Philosopher, by him that demanded of him what kind of philosophy he professed,
not knowing him otherwise then by his beard. The tyrant Dionisius, to spite
the Citizens of Epidaurus, took the golden beard of Aesculapius away out of the
temple, to move them to greater displeasure. At what time Aristippus was
brought to Simus house, the Phrigian, which was so dressed with cloth of Arras,
and precious hangings that the very floors so gorgeously shined, that he could
not find in the house a place to spit, without some offense, he spit in his
handkercher, and threw it into Simus face, who was all bearded; he being angry
therewith demanded the cause why he so little esteemed him: Because, said
Aristippus, I saw not in all the house so f^ul a place as that, which should
have been most clean, (meaning his beard.) And though it was merrily done of
Aristippus, yet it was not so merrily thought of Simus, who more esteemed his
beard, then Aristippus esteemed all his precious clothes, and golden hangings.
The like did Jeronimus surnamed Rhetris make of his beard; for when I see (said
he) my beard, then I know right well that I am a man and nor a woman; and then
knowing my self to be a man, I am ashamed to do any thing like a woman, either
in word or deed. Much more might be here alleged for the authority of beards
and for esteeming of long hair; for there is no country, be if ever so civil,
but it is addicted to some peculiar qualities; neither is there any man, be he
ever so wise, but does glory in one thing more then in another: As the wise man
in his wisdom, the learned man in his knowledge, the ignorant man in his
folly, the proud man in his person, the self-lover in some part of his body
more then in other, either in his face, body, leg, middle, foot, hand or hair,
and specially many do make much account of their beard, combing, decking,
handling and setting it in order always. But because people are mutable and
full of change, and that time alters all things, we will no further proceed
in this though men may mis-judge of others concerning their long hair and
beards; yet I say judgment is not safe in this point: for it may be that they
prefer the country Poet Hesiodus before the warlike and eloquent Homer, as
Panis King of Calcides, or as Mydas did judge Pan the Piper before Apollo the
God of Music. Hard it is to judge of men whether the bearded man, or the
beardless man is to be preferred, whether the long hair or the short hair most
to be esteemed; for under strange habits are concealed hidden qualities, and
under a ragged cloak (as the Greek proverb is) lies wisdom as secretly as
under a Velvet gown.

CHAP. XXIIII.
Of diverse and sundry fashions of burial amongst the Gentiles.

THe ancient Egyptians weighing the shortness of man's life, little esteeming
the time, did provide such sepulchers against they died, that they accounted
their graves an everlasting habitation: Wherefore in life time they studied how
to make such gorgeous graves as should be perpetual monuments after death:
Insomuch that three hundred and threescore thousand workmen were twenty years
in building a huge and stupendous work to bury their bodies, which for the
bigness thereof, was counted one of the seven wonders, named at this day the
Pyramides of Egypt. Pliny says, that three Pyramides were made in Egypt
betwixt the City of Memphis and Delta: And King Ceopes as Herodotus affirms,
began to make the first, and as Diodorus says, his brother Cephus began the
second, and the third, King Mycerinus, as both Herodotus and Diodorus do
affirm. Some say that Rhodope, a harlot, being married to King Psamneticus, and
left a widow, did make third Pyramide; but to this effect they were made, as
common sepulchers, to receive dead men as guests to dwell always therein, with
such ceremonies first, that being dead, they filled the scull of his head with
sweet odours, and then they opened his body with a sharp stone of Aethiopia,
which the Egyptians have for the purpose, and purged it, and then having
embalmed it with fragrant odours, and sweet spices, they sow up the body, which
being done, they did put it in fine sindon cloth, having the likeness thereof
made upon a hollow work, wherein they put the body, with many other such
ceremonies, only to save the body from any putrefaction. For they think as the
Stoics, so long, say they, shall the soul flourish and live, as the body is
unputrified, and as the bodies perish, so does the Egyptians believe that the
souls decay. The Athenians have such care of the dead, that being dressed with
all kind of sweet odours, they put them in such sumptuous tombs and gorgeous
graves, that the sepulchers are made over with fine glass. The Scythians when
their Kings and noble men die, they must have to bear them company to the grave
one of their concubines, and one of their chief servants, and one of their
friends that loved them best alive; they I say must accompany and follow them
to the grave being dead.

The Romans had this custom, that if any man of countenance and credit should
die, his sons and daughters, his nigh kinsmen and best beloved friends, as
Cicero does write of Metellus, did put him in the fire made for that purpose,
unless he were one of the Emperors, whose funeral pomp was much more
sumptuous: for then his body was to be carried to the market or common Hall of
Rome: on the second day he was to be carried by certain young noble men to
Martius field, where a great pile of wood was raised much like a Tower, and
there after much solemnity and ceremonies done, he that succeeded him as an
Emperor, did first put fire to that work, and then all men were busy to see
the body burned: and when they had burned him to ashes, they would let an Eagle
fly from the top of some high Tower, which as they supposed should carry his
soul unto heaven. The Assyrians did use to anoint the dead bodies with honey
and wax, and with study and care did preserve them from putrefaction. Such
strange order of burial was in India, that the women of that country thought
there could be no greater fame nor worthier renown, then to be burned and
buried together with their husbands.

The Thracians are much to be commended herein, who at the birth of any of
their friends children, use to weep, and bewail the misery and calamity that
man is born to; and at the death of any of their friends, they rejoice with
such mirth and gladness that they past these worldly miseries, that at the
burial of them even when the corpse does go out of the house, they altogether
say with one voice, Farewell friend; go before, and we will follow after. So the
corpse goes before, and all his friends follow after him with trumpets, music,
and great mirth for joy that he is gone out of the vale of misery. Plato that
divine Greek and noble Philosopher, made the like laws in Athens that when any
of the chief officers should die, he appointed that no mourning weeds should be
worn there, but all in white apparel, and that fifteen young maids, and fifteen
young boys should stand round about the corpse in white garments, while the
Priests commended his life to the people in an open oration, then he was
brought very orderly to the grave, all the young children singing their country
hymns, and the ancient men following after them, and the grave was covered with
fair broad stones, where the name of the dead, with his virtuous commendations
and great praise was set upon the stone. The like grave the Italians use at
this day, and diverse other countries. And as these and others had the like
ceremonies to the praise and commendations of the dead: so others little
esteemed and regarded such things, insomuch that the Persians were never buried
till Fowls of the air and dogs did eat some part thereof. The Messagetes
thought it most infamous that any of their friends should die by sickness, but
if the Parents waxed old, the children and the next kinsmen they had, did eat
them up, supposing that their flesh was more meet for them to eat, then by
worms or any other beasts to be devoured. The people called Tibareni, had a
custom that those whom they loved best in their youth, those would they hang
in their age; even so the Albans being inhabitants about mount Cancasus,
thought it unlawful for any to care for the dead, but straight buried them, as
Nabatheans bury their Kings and rulers in dung-hils. The burial of the
Parthians was nothing else but to commend them to the birds of the air. The
Nasomones when they bury their friends, they set them in the grave sitting. But
of all most cruelly deal the Caspians and the Hircanians, which kill their
parents, their wives, their brethren, their kinsmen and friends, and put them
in the high way half quick, half dead for to be devoured of birds and beasts.
The fashion and custom with the Issidones, a rude people in some part of
Scithia, as Plini in his fourth book affirms, is to call their neighbors and
friends together were the dead lie, and there merrily singing and banqueting,
they eat the flesh of the dead, and make the scull of the dead a drinking cup,
and cover it with gold to drink withal. Again the people called Hyperborei,
think no better grace for their friends, when they be old then to bring them
to some high bank of water or great rock, and thence after much feasting,
eating and drinking, in the midst of their mirth, their own friends do throw
them down into the water headlong To seek into histories, many such burials
might be found amongst so many rude and barbarous nations. Notwithstanding in
diverse regions, the funerals of the dead are so esteemed, that the greatest
infamy, the severest punishment for any offendour, was not to be buried; this
the Athenians used toward those that were traitors to their country, and the
Egyptians if any lived amiss, he should be carried dead to the wilderness to
be devoured of vvild beasts. The Persians likewise brought the bodies of men
condemned to be eaten of dogs. The Lybians thought them most worthy of solemn
burial that died either in wars, or were killed by wild beasts. The
Macedonians had great care in burying the dead soldiers in the field. Amongst
the Gentiles there were certain days appointed for mourning at the death of
their friends. Licurgus law amongst the Lacedaemonians was that they should
mourn but eleven days. Numa Pompilus decreed that children after their parents
death, the wives, their husbands, etc. should mourn ten months, though by the
Senators it was enacted in the wars at Canna that the Romans should mourn but
thirty days. Amongst the Egyptians they had a custom to mourn after their
kings died threescore and twelve days, but generally the most custom was to
bewail the dead nine days. In some places mourning was forbidden at their
burial, as at Athens by the law of Solon, in Locretia, in Thracia, in Coos, in
Lybia and in diverse other places. The diversity of mourning was such, that
amongst the Greeks they shaved their heads and beards, and threw them into the
grave with the dead. Amongst the Lacedaemonians when the Kings of Sparta died,
certain horsemen were appointed to travel over all the whole Kingdom,
certifying the death of the King, and the women in every city, did beat their
brazen pots, and made a great and heavy noise for the soon; the Egyptians did
mourn after this sort, they rent their clothes, and did shut their temples,
they did eat no meat, and besmearing their faces with dirt, they abstained from
washing their faces, threescore and twelve days, all which time they lamented
and bewailed the death of their Kings and friends; the Carthaginians at their
funerals did cut their hair of, mangle their faces, and did beat their breasts.
The Macedonians likewise did shave their hair bewailing the death of their
friends, as we read of Archelaus King of Macedonia, who shaved his hair at the
burial of his friend Euripides; the Argives and the Siracusans did accompany
the dead to the grave in white clothes discolored with water and clay; the
Matrons of Rome threw off their fine apparel, their rings and chains, and did
wear black garments, at the burial of their friends, but I burn candle in the
day time, to write of such infinite ceremonies that the Gentiles had at their
burials: therefore better to end with a few examples, then to weary the reader
with too many histories, for all men know that all people have their several
manners, as well in living as in dying, which they alter according to the vital
circumstances, of person, place, and time.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Spirits and Visions.

SUndry and many things happen by course of nature, which timorous and fearful
men, for want of perfection in their senses suppose to be spirits. Some are so
feeble of sight, that they judgd shadows, beasts and bushes and such like to be
spirits. Some so fearful, that they think any sound, any noise, or whistlings
of the winds to be some bugs, or devils. Hereby first were spread so many
fables of spirits, of goblins, of bugs, of hags, and of so many monstr^us
visions, that old women and aged men told their children, who judged it
sufficient authority, to allege the old tales told by their parents in their
aged years. The Gentiles because they were given much to idolatry and
superstition, did credit vain and foolish visions, which oftentimes by
suggestion of devils, and by fond fantasies being conceived, did lead them by
persuasion of spirits, either in attempting or in avoiding any thing; for
Suetonius does write, that when Julius Caesar stayed in a maze at the river
Rubicon in Italy, with a wavering mind, musing what were best whether to pass
the water or no, there appeared a comely tall man, piping on a reed, to whom
the soldiers flocked to hear him, and specially the trumpetters, when he
suddenly snatched one of their trumpets, and leaping forthwith into the river
Rubicon, he straightways sounded an alarm; wherewith Caesar was moved, and
said, Good luck my fellow soldiers, let us go where the Gods do invite us. It
is written in Plutarch, when Brutus was determined to transport his army out of
Asia into Europe, being in his tent about midnight, he saw a terrible monster
standing fast by him, without any words; wherewith he being sore afraid,
ventered boldly, and demanded of him what he was, to whom he answered and said,
I am thy evil Genius, which at Phillippi thou shall see again: Where when
Brutus came, being vanquished by Augustus Caesar, remembering the words of his
foreseen visions, to avoid the hands of his enemies, he slew himself to verify
the same, The like happened to C. Cassius, who by the like apparition was
enforced to kill himself; for he was warned, that the murder of Caesar should
be revenged by Augustus his Nephew. These sights were so seen amongst the
Gentiles. and so feared and esteemed, that all the actions of their lives were
thereby ordered. Tacitus, as Fla. Vapiscus reports, when it was told him that
his fathers grave opened of it self, and seeing as he thought his mother
appearing to him as though she had been alive, did know full well that he
should shortly after die, and made himself ready thereunto. There appeared to
one Pertinax, as I. Capitolinus reports, three days before he was slain, a
certain shadow in one of his fish ponds, with a naked sword in his hand ready
to kill him.

Neither may we so little esteem the authority of grave and learned men, in
diverse of their assertions concerning sights and visions, though diverse fables
be alleged and avouched for truth, with simple and ignorant men. We read in
the sacred scriptures, diverse sights seen, diverse visions appearing, and sundry
voices heard. We read that King Balthazar, being in his princely banquets, saw
a hand writing upon the wall over against where he sat at table, what his end
should be, It is read in ye third chapter of the second of the Macchabees, that
a horse appeared unto Heliodorus, who was servant to Seleucus King of Syria, as
he was about to destroy the temple at Jerusalem, and upon the horse seemed to
be a terrible man, which made toward him to overcome him, and on each side of
him were two young men of excellent beauty, who with whips scourged Heliodorus.
There also appeared to Machabeus, a horseman in shining armor all of gold,
shaking his spear, to signify the famous victory that Machabeus should obtain.

Many such like visions we read of in Scripture; but let us return to the
Athenians, who presaged that when Miltiades joined in battle against the
Persians, hearing a terrible noise, and beholding certain spirits before the
battle, to have victory over the Persians, judging those sights and visions to
be the shadow of Pan. Likewise the Lacedaemonians before they were vanquished in
the battle at Leuctris, their armor clashed together, and made an exceeding
great noise in the temple of Hercules, so that at that time the doors of the
temple of Hercules being fast shut with iron bars, opened suddenly of their own
accord; and the armor which hung before fastened on the wall, was found lying
upon the ground.

Pliny writes in the wars of the Danes, and Appianus affirms in the wars at
Rome, what signs and wonders, what miserable cries of men, clashing of armor,
and running of horses were heard, insomuch that the same day that Caesar fought
his battle with Cn. Pompeius, the cry of an army, and the sound of trumpets
were heard at Antioch in Syria. But I will omit to speak of such things, and
take in hand to entreat of spirits, which were both seen and heard of learned
men, and of visions supposed of the wisest to be the souls of dead men: for
Plutarch writes in the life of Theseus, that sundry men, who were in the
battle of Marathonia against the Medians, affirmed that they saw the soul of
Theseus armed before the host of Greeks, as chief General and Captain, running
and setting on the barbarous Medians, whom the Athenians afterward, for that
cause only, honored as a God.

It is reported by Historiographers, that Castor and Pollux have been seen
often in battles after their deaths, riding on white horses, and fighting
against their enemies in camp, insomuch that Plutarch testifies, that they
were seen of many in the battle against Tarquinius. Hector besought Achilles
after he was slain by him, not to throw his carcass to be devoured of dogs,
but rather to deliver his body to be buried, to his old father Priamus, and his
mother Hecuba: Even so Patroclus appearing in like manner after death to
Achilles, desired him to bestow upon his body all funeral solemnities. Virgil
testifies how Palinurus and Deiphobus appeared to Aeneas, the one being his
Pylot the other his brother in law. Their wandering ghosts never ceased till
such exequies were done to them as Aeneas had promised. It is thought the Witch
Phetonissa of Endor, raised the soul of Samuel at the commandment of King Saul,
to foreshew the end and success of the battle with the Philistines. It is read
in Lucan the Poet of a Witch named Erictho, dwelling in Thessalia that revived
and restored to life a soldier lately dead, at the request of Sextus Pompeius,
to know the end of the wars at Pharsalia. One History I must repeat, which
Plutarch recites in the life of Cimon, that one Pausanias after he had taken
the City of Bizance, being in love with a fair damosel named Cleonices, a maid
of noble parentage, he commanded her father, who durst not resist him, to send
his daughter to use her at his pleasure: When the maid came, he being fast
asleep in his bed, the Virgin being shamefaced and fearful, did put out the
candle, and coming in the dark toward Pa^sanius, she stumbled at the stool,
which with the fall suddenly awaked Pausanias from sleep, thinking some enemy
or mortal foe of his to be there, and having his sword hard by, slew the
virgin: But she being so slain, would never after suffer Pausanias to take any
quiet rest, but appeared to him always, saying Recompense the injury and wrong
thou did to me, by equity and justice: Following him as he fled, from Bizance
to Thrace, from Thrace again to Heraclea, from Heraclea to Sparta, where he
famished for hunger.

Saint Matthew in his seventeenth chapter bears record that Moses and Elias
after they were dead many hundred years before Christ's incarnation, yet
appeared bodily and ghostly on mount Tabor to Christ, where they spoke and
communed with our Lord and Savior. The soul of Lazarus did not only appear,
as John says in his eleventh chapter, but came again both body and soul, in a
true token of our sure resurrection. But as the appearing of those sights at
Gods appointment were most true, so it is most absurd to give credit that the
souls of men after death do either by visions, or by bodily appearance show
themselves: But the Devil is well beaten in experience of things, and knows
best how he may deceive the wisest, for he is subtle and crafty. If the
Mariner does know when storms and tempests arise; if the Physician judges by
the Urine the state and danger of the patient; ^f the skillful Astronomer can
many years before exactly foretell the Eclipse of the Sun and Moon; in fine, if
the practiced soldier knows where the victory will happen: no marvel it is
that the Devil, an old soldier, can foreshew things to come, and make things
apparent of nothing.

What made Theodoricus to observe the terrible and threatening countenance of
Symmachus, whom he slew before, in a fishes head as in a mirror, being brought
before him to the table at supper at the which sight he fell for fear into a
grievous sickness, and so dyed? the devil. What caused one Bessus, of whom
Plutarch makes mention in his book, de sera numinis vindicta, after that he
had killed his own father, and a long while hidden himself as a murderer, at
last being by the devil moved to throw down a swallows nest with his spear, and
killing the young swallows, he was by the company about him misliked for his
cruelty to poor birds, and taunted of his companions for his tyranny therein:
But he answered and excused himself, saying, Why should I not kill those that
accu^ed me of my fathers death, and cried out upon me a long time that I should
kill my father? They which were present being amazed at his talk told the King
thereof, who caused him to be apprehended and examined by that evidence, he
confessed the murder These are the suggestions of Devils, the shifts of Satan
at all times, and in all countries.

Paulina the chaste wife of Satu^^us a Roman, was of such excellent beauty, of
such noble parentage, and of such Godly life, that when Decius Mundus, a young
Knight of Rome, who being enamored with her beauty, sought sundry means a long
time to none effect (for neither gold nor treasure could allure this sover and
chaste Paulina to consent to sin) he perceiving how she was bent to temperancy,
and to renounce all filthy lust, gave himself willingly to dye: In the mean
time the Devil practiced a feat with Ida, a maid who dwelt in the house with
Mundus his father, to bring this purpose to pass: this maid knowing well the
constancy and honest life of Paulina, and how religions she was to serve the
Goddess Isis, invented this fraud; She went and conferred with some of Isis
Priests, opening the whole matter in secret to them promising a great reward,
to fain that their God Anubis had sent for Paulina to accomplish love with him.
This being done by the elder Priests, her husband Saturnius was very joyful
that the great God Anubis had vouchsafed to send for his wife; she being as
glad, boasted and bragged of the same amongst her neighbors, and went to the
temple of Isis, where Anubis was worshipped, being sent by her husband very
brave and gorgeous, where the young and lusty Knight. Mundus by the advice of
the Priests hid himself till Paulina came who embracing her in the dark, did
accompany with her till he had satisfied his lust all that night Then in the
morning the matter being known, she rent her hair an clothes and told her
husband Saturnius how she was dealt withal: Her husband then declared the whole
matter to the Emperor Tiberius, who having perfect knowledge by diligent
examination, did hang the Priests, and Ida the cause of the mischief, and
commanded the image of Isis to be thrown into the river of Tyber, banished
Mundus out of Rome. So that under the color and pretense of holiness, diverse
Matrons and maids have been defloured and men's wives and daughters abused: As
Ruffinus testifies of a certain Priest in Alexandria in Egypt, named Tyrannus,
who used such shifts, and practiced such ways to have his desire accomplished,
and his lust satisfied, with such women and maidens as he thought good, saying,
that the great God Saturn, whose Priest he was, sent for them to come to him;
and there until his wickedness was known, he used under pretense of the great
Saturn which was honored in that City, his filthy lust and horrible life.

We read the like almost of Numa Pompilius, that he bare the people of Rome in
hand, that he had familiar company with the Goddess Aegeria, because he might
purchase the more credit and authority unto his laws and orders. These are the
works and shifts of wicked men, who deceived always the rude people with vain
religion and superstitious holiness, whom the Devil the father of lies did
bewitch and allure them to believe fantastical visions to be the souls of dead
men, the Devils appearing themselves like men, letting them to understand that
they were the souls of such men as they appeared like unto: so Romulus the
first King and founder of Rome, appeared after his death, walking up and down
by Atticus house, to Julius Proculus, charging him to erect him a Temple in
that place where he walked, saying that he was now a God, and that his name was
Quirinus. Remus likewise King Romulus his brother, appearing to Faustulus, and
to his wife Laurentia, sometime his nurse, complained of his miserable death
desiring them to endeavor that the same day wherein he was slain, might be
accounted among their Holidays for that he was canonized amongst the Gods.

We read in Lucan, how that the souls of Sylla and Marius, two famous and
renowned Romans, were always walking and appearing to men before they were
appeased by sacrifice: for the Devils made the people believe after the bodies
were so buried, the souls should have rest by which means Idolatry increased
amongst them, as you heard a little before. What complaint made Hector and
Patroclus to Achilles? What request made Palinurus and Deiphobus to Aeneas, for
the burial of their bodies, which Homer and Virgil rehearsed? Suetonius writing
of the lives of the Emperors, shows how Caligula sometime Emperor in Rome,
after he was dead, being half burned and buried, for that he wanted due
solemnity of burial, appeared in the Gardens of Rome called Lauriani to the
keepers, troubling and molesting them very much, till his sisters caused him to
be taken up, and commanded he should be thoroughly burned and buried.

There was in Athens by report an excellent fair house set to sale, for that no
man durst dwell within it: for about midnight continually there was heard a
great noise, and clashing of armor, and clattering of chains, and there
appeared an image or shape like an old man lean and loathsome to behold, with a
long beard, staring hairs, and fettered legs. This house having a piece of
paper upon the door, concerning the sale thereof, though no man would venture to
dwell in it, Athenodorus a Philosopher returning from Rome, where he abode a
long time with the Emperor Augustus Caesar, and reading the writing upon the
door, hired the house, and commanded his servant to make his bed in the highest
chamber in the house, where he settled himself to mark and behold what things
would happen: being thus in study, first he heard the rattling and sound of
chains, and then he saw an old man beckning toward him to follow, the
Philosopher went after him with his candle in his hand into an inner court,
where the image left him alone and vanished. Athenodo^^s the next morning
caused the rulers of the City to dig up that place, where they found diverse
bones of dead men, these were commanded by the Philosopher to be burned
solemnly, which being burned, the house afterward was quiet, without, either
noise or apparition.

Thus the Devil sows the seed of superstition, and makes his Angels
oftentimes to work miracles? what strange works did that conjurer Bileam bring
to pass by the means of Devils? what wonders wrought that wicked Appolomus by
the help of Satan? What marvels, shows, and sights did Simon Magus use by the
industry of false spirits? what did not Pharaoes sorcerers oftentimes attempt
by the persuasion of Devils? Mark their end, and judge of their life, the one
breaking his neck, and the other drowned in the red sea, and so the rest ended
their lives miserably: too many have been and I fear are yet, that give credit
unto such vain illusions, and fantastical sights.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Dreams and warnings.

AMongst the Gentiles dreams were so observed that the vain superstitious
noting of the same, was the whole trust and hope of their countries, and of
their own lives; when the Kings of India take their rest, they were brought to
bed with all kind of melody and harmony, every day kneeling upon his knees,
beseeching Morpheus the God of sleep to reveal those things unto their King
that should be commodious and profitable to the subjects. They thought
themselves well instructed when either by Oracles they were persuaded or else
by visions suggested. King Pyrrhus knew well that his dying day was at hand,
when he besieged the City of Argos, and saw in the market place a brazen Woolf,
and a Bull, which the Argives for memory of things past, and ancient monuments
had put up, for he by an Oracle did understand, at what time he should see a
Bull and a Woolf fighting together, he should then prepare himself to die.
Alexander the great, after that the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon was pronounced that
he should be unconquered, he doubted not but to subdue the whole world, and so
trusting more to the Oracle of Jupiter, then the mutability of fortune he took
upon him the conquest of all the world, attempting nothing at all without some
Oracle or dream had warned him thereto. For till the great Conqueror Alexander
had seen Hercules in his sleep reaching out of the wall his hand, promising him
his aid and help in his wars, he had not so boldly attempted so high an
enterprise without fear and dread,

In the like manner, unto Hannibal after long perturbation of mind, with great
industry and study how he might annoy and destroy the Roman Empire, there
appeared a young man of wonderful beauty, who told him, that Jupiter sent him
as a Captain before him into Italy, whereby straight he was encouraged the
rather to take the charge in hand, hoping thereby to enjoy triumphant victory
over his enemies. Caesar that mighty Prince and Monarch, and the first Emperor
that ever possessed Rome, thought in his sleep that he committed fornication
with his own mother, which when it was opened by the Soothsayers, and declared
that it was the earth that was his mother, and that he should suppress all the
Princes of the earth under him, he was ensiamed thereby to wars, persuading
himself that he should be a conqueror over all the world.

After that the noble and renowned Greek Themistocles was exiled from Athens
and banished the confines of Greece, having done such service and honor to his
country, as Plutarch worthily mentions, for the subduing of proud Xerxes
King of Persia the great enemy of all Greece, being in great peril and danger
of life in strange countries, he seemed to see in his sleep, a Dragon creeping
upward from his belly toward his face, and as soon as the Dragon touched his
face, he was changed (as he thought) to an Eagle, and carried by the Eagle a
great way through the Air into a strange country, where the Eagle gave him a
golden staff in his hand, and so left him: Whereby straight he was informed,
that he was not only delivered from all dangers, but also should be sought for
by all Greece, to the increase of his fame, and augmentation of his honor.
Brutus clean contrary, after much good success and prosperous fortune, after
he murdered Caesar, at length he was in his sleep by a vision warned to make
himself ready to die at Philippi, where he was enforced in the wars between
Augustus Caesar and him to kill himself.

Thus were they allured and entised to uncertain dreams, to order and rule all
their doings. For as the Poet Ennius says, what they studied and pondered in
the day time, the same dreamed they in the night time. Dreams moved the Heathen
to tyranny; for L. Sylla, the Firebrand of Italy, was warned in his sleep by
Bellona the Goddess of wars, to murder kill and destroy all that ever he
might find in his way, giving him in his hand, fire, in token he should
overcome Rome and Italy. Likewise Eumenes King of the Lacedaemonians, having
wars with Antipater King of Macedonia, was fully persuaded by a dream to obtain
victory; for he dreamed that two Alexanders were with great hosts and armies of
men ready in the field to fight, the one having the Goddess Minerva as a
leader, the other having the Goddess Ceres as their Captain, and after long
conflicts and much slaughter on both parties he thought that the soldiers of
Ceres had the victory, and that they were crowned with ears of corn in the
honor of Ceres, which is the Goddess of corn: And because the country of
Lacedemonia was more fertile then Macedonia, the wise Sages declared the dream,
and said, that Eumenes should have the victory over Macedonia.

Besides these dreams, they had a kind of credit in fowls of the air, in beasts
of the field, in wind and weather, and in diverse other things, where
Soothsaying Oracles and consultations were had. When Xerxes the great King of
Persia, with so many Myriades of men, had purposed and decreed with himself to
destroy all Greece, a Mare (being a stout and a proud beast) brought forth a
Hare (a most fearful and timorous creature) whereby the flight of Xerxes from
Greece with shame and reproach was presaged. And afterward, before he would lay
siege to Athens, resolving with himself to destroy Sparta, and all the country
of Lacedemonia, a strange warning happened to this Prince at supper, for his
Wine before his face was converted into Blood as it was filled in the cups, not
once, but twice or thrice whereat he being amazed, consulted with Wise men, of
whom he was then admonished to forsake his first intent, and to give over the
enterprise which he took in hand against the Greeks.

Midas being yet in his cradle, the Ants were seen to carry grains and victuals
to feed him withal; whose parents being desirous to know the effect thereof,
were certified by the Soothsayers, that he should be the wealthiest and richest
man in the world, and the most monied Prince that over should reign in India.
Plato, that noble and divine philosopher, while he was an infant in like sort
in his cradle, the Bees with honey fed his sugared and sweet lips, signifying
his eloquence and learning in time to come. They were not Bees of mount
Himettum, but rather of Helicon, where the Muses, and Ladies of learning
delighted to dwell. This was that Plato of whom his master Socrates before he
knew him, dreamed, that he held fast in his hand a young Swan, which fled from
him away, and mounted the skies, whose sweet voice and songs, as a wonderful
melody and harmony, replenished the whole skies. They thought it a sufficient
admonition to see any thing happen between birds or beasts, as a sure and
certain show of their own fortune to come.

M. Brutus when he was in Camp against Caesar and Antonius and saw two Eagles
fighting together, the one coming from Caesar's Tent the other from his own, he
knew well when the Eagle that came from his side took flight and was
vanquished, that he should lose the victory. Cicero understood well enough his
death to be at hand, when the Raven held him fast by the hem of his Gown, and
made a noise and ever plucked at him, till the soldiers of M. Antonius came to
the very place, where he at that time was beheaded by Herennius and Popilius.
For in the night before Cicero dreamed, that he was not only banished from
Rome, but that he vvandred diverse strange countries, where Ca^us Marius, a
noble Roman, as he thought, met him, demanding of Cicero why and what was
the cause of his sad countenance, and wherefore he traveled such strange
countries: the cause being known to Marius, he took him fast by the right
hand, and brought him to the next Officer, where he thought in his sleep that
he should have died.

Thus you see that Xerxes by a Hare had warning; King Mydas was by Ants
admonished; Plaro by Bees; Brutus by an Eagle; Cicero by a Raven; Themistocles
by an Owl, of death. Pericles by the head of a Ram, was fully persuaded and
taught by the soothsayers, that he should win the people of Athens from
Thucidides, with whom then he was in controversy. And was not Agamemnon and
his brother Menelaus, with all the Princes of Greece, certified by the Dragon
that climbed a tree, where he slew a she Sparrow, and eight young ones beside,
that they should be nine years in wars with the Troyans, and that in the tenth
they should destroy and quite vanquish Ilium? Was not Julius Caesar admonished
by his wife Calphurnia in a dream, that if he would go to the Senate that day,
he should die? And was not that mighty Monarch Alexander warned by a vision to
take more regard to his life then he did, and to take heed of Antipater, who
afterward poisoned him? Was not Alcibiades that noble Greek certified by a
dream of his miserable death, by which he and his Concubine Timandra might
diverse times see before hand what followed after, had they had but so great a
desire in following of good things as they were bent and prone to seek after
evil; such prodigious sights, such strange miracles were seen, that might well
allure them to a more perfect and upright life. The Sun, the Moon, the Stars,
and all the host of Heaven, wrought great miracles to reduce Princes from evil
enterprises, and to give warning unto others to avoid the tyranny of wicked
Princes: For the Heavens appeared bloud^ at that time when Philip King of
Macedonia with tyranny invaded Greece. At what time Augustus Caesar, after his
uncle Julius was murdered, came to Rome as the second Emperor, there were seen
stars wandering about the circle of the sun, great lightnings, and strange
impressions, like men fighting in the skies, yea, and birds fell down dead in
the City of Rome, and Livi writes that an Ox spoke under the plough these
words to the ploughman, that not only corn should be dear, but also men should
perish, and therefore, said the Ox, thou urgest me in vain to travel. When that
wicked tyrant Nero began his Empire in Rome, trees, pastures, meddows, and
certain grounds about the City (a strange miracle) altered places, and changed
seats one with another, the ground moving from one place to another. Even ^o it
harned at the exilement of King Dionisius, after much tyranny and
bloudshedding, when he was banished from his Kingdom, the salt sea the same
day that he was driven from Sicilia, altered his saltness to sweetness. These
two tyrants Nero and Dionisius, the one coming to his Empire, what wonders
showed the earth it self? the other departing from his Kingdom, what miracles
showed the Sea?

When Darius besieged the City of Babylon, a voice was heard out of the strong
walls of Semiramis, that Babylon should be conquered, at what time a mule
should engender; at the which the soldiers of Darius were discomfited, and
Zopyrus his mule accomplished the foreshewed Oracle. Likewise when Pompey was
vanquished by Caesar, a gr^^n bough grew in the temple of Victory, under the
image of Caesar, and hives of Bees darkened the ensign of Pompey, foreshewing
he should be subdued at Pharsalia. The City of Rome had these warnings a little
before the first Civil wars; there were seen fires ^ining suddenly ab^ut men;
Spiders, Mice, and Worms consumed the gold and substance of their temples,
Ravens devoured and did eat their young ones, the noise and sound of trumpets
were heard in the air, with such other terrible warnings, as might well move
amazement and amendment.

Again, before the second wars of Carthage, an Ox spoke, and said, Rome take
thou heed to thy self. It is noted likewise, when Tarquinius the last King of
the Romans was driven away from Rome, and banished the Kingdom, that a dog
then spoke, and a serpent barked. Too many of these examples are to be read, if
we read histories; for signs and tokens were seen and marked in the heavens
according to the natures and doings of Princes; for when Tiberius came to the
Empire of Rome, there happened such great earthquakes, that twelve famous
Cities in Asia fell prostrate to the ground, two mountains moved, and ran and
fought together in a place by Rome called Mutina field. It is written, that in
the City called Sagunthus, before it was conquered by Hannibal, a child in the
time of the delivery of the mother, entered again into his mothers womb. And in
Plini, Clepidus bears witness, that trees spoke. And though it seem fabulous
to diverse, that such things by nature should speak, yet we see the trial of
this clean contrary, to set forth the wonderful works of God, whereby he might
the more be magnified by these his creatures: For we read in the sacred
scriptures, that an Ass spoke, whereby the more credit may be given to
P^utarch, Pliny, and Livi, which mention that dogs, trees, oxen, serpents, and
other creatures of God did speak, for a wonder and a warning as well of things
to come, as things past. For before the famous City of Jerusalem was destroyed
by Vespasian the Emperor, there appeared a star in manner of a sword in the
sky, there were likewise seen Chariots running up and down the skies, and men
in harness fighting in the clouds, right over the City.

Diverse wonders by nature were wrought, which for the rareness thereof are
worthy to be noted; as Caecilius Agrippa, the first day that he was born of his
mother, did go on foot without help; Likewise Zo^oastres, when all children cry
at their birth, he the self same time laughed: It was strange that Telephus the
son of Hercules was nourished of a Heart. Romulus the first King of Rome
fostered by a Wolf. Cyrus the first King of the Persians brought up by a Bitch,
Alexander and King Priamus by a Bear. Jupiter by a Goat. Mydas by Ants, and
Plato by Bees, and so diverse others. But certainly more strange it was, that
little beasts yea, small creeping worms should be able to vanquish and destroy
famous Cities and Countries: As in Spain a City was un^ermined by Coneys: in
France a City was destroyed by Frogs; in Thessaly a City was overthrown by
Mouldwarps. In Africa a City was spoiled by Locusts. Gyara an Isle of twelve
miles was consumed by Mice, and Abdera a City in Thracia by Mice likewise, and
Amyclas by Serpents. Peradventure these seem not credible to diverse readers,
the learned may read the same in the righth book of Plini, and twenty and ninth
chapter, where he may be satisfied. The works of nature were so wonderful in
all places, at all times, that learned writers for memory of the same, do
recite the effect thereof. It is written that Ammonius the Philosopher had an
Ass frequenting his school with Porphirius to hear his lecture. In the Isle
called Coes, in the ground of a certain tyrant named Nicippus, a sheep brought
forth a Lion instead of a Lamb. Plini does witness that he saw in a City of
Africa, a man changed to a woman in the same day he was married, whose name
was Cofficius, a Citizen of Ti^dria. Pontanus and diverse authors affirm that
Tiresias the Theban, Ceneus and Iphis were changed from men to women, from
males to females by alteration of kind.

Again, some think that as Anaxagoras never laughed, so Zenophantes never wept,
things wonderful and strange to nature; and as L. Pomponius never belcht, so
Antonia never spit There was a Poet sometime dwelling in Coos, of such small
growing and slender body, that lead was put in the sole of his Shoes, least the
wind should bear him from the ground, and blow him into the air. And as he by
nature was small and light of substance: so by the self-same nature was found
in a certain hill of Creet, the body of Orion which was forty and six cubits in
length. What Albertus Mag^us wrote of the secrets of nature, I will omit:
better it is I suppose to be ignorant in some things, then to be skillful in
all things. He says among other things, that there was a woman in Germany that
had threescore sons, side every time at one burden: and there was another
woman named Agrippina in Colonia that did neither eat nor drink for the space
of thirty days. Besides these, there was a man named Philinus that never eat
nor drank all the days of his life but milk only. Cicero says that all the
Iliads of Homer were written and placed within the shell of a Nut. Plini
reports that there was an herb called Acheminis, that if it were cast or
thrown amongst the enemies they straight would take their flight thereupon.
Mermecides made a Wagon so artificially and so small, that a Fly might cover
it with her wing. Strabo did see so well that he could discry the ships that
departed from Carthage from a from a promonto^y in Sicilia, which was above a
hundred and thirty miles. Cornelius Agrippa in his first book of hidden
Philosophy, writes a history of one Cippus King in Italy who being in sleep
dreamed of Bulls fighting all night, and in the morning he had two horns growing
on his head. The learned hold opini^n that imagination and vapors of dreams
may alter things into some other substance, as Caieta and Aenulia two married
women, became men, and Medea by a dream waxed hot in love with Jason: and so
imagination by operation of natural vapors does effect things wonderfully, as
some do by sight assure themselves most certain, and some by conjectures affirm
things to be true: but because imagination is a thing that needs at large to
be spoken off, considering how diversely it works in diverse men, I will in
another place speak of it.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the beginning of Marrrriages, and the diverse manners of the same.

AFter that God had made the world in full perfection, and so beautiful that
the Greeks did call it Cosmos: which is, fair, framing all things for the use
of man, as well the world, as also all that move or grow in the world, he then
made a woman, who should be likewise a further solace to man, and as he made
the world, and all living creatures in it in several proportions, in it he
framed man like himself to behold the heavens, to measure the elements, and to
rule the very Globes and to the end he might multiply the world, he said unto
Adam after he blessed all things on earth: Go and multiply. The multiplication
and the use thereof was so diverse, that diverse countries had sundry orders, as
well in single life, as in matrimony.

And as concerning antiquity of marriage, we read in Tr^gus that noble
Historian, that Cec^ops the first King of Athens before the time of Deucalion,
first framed and appointed matrimony in Greece: But such were their orders in
diverse places, such was their liberties in matrimony, that the Egyptians the
Indians, and the Thracians might marry as many as they would according to the
ability of the man: some ten, some twelve, some more some less. Again amongst
the Scythians, the Persians, and all Barbary, their wives, and daughters were
common one for another like bruit beasts. The Messagetes had this law, that it
was not to be suffered that any of their country should marry but one wise, but
it was lawful for any man to take another man's wife, and to make an exchange,
for so were their wives common to all, but married to one. In Lybia the people
called Augylas, and the people called Nasamones, had this order in their
matrimonies, that the Bride the first night after she was married, should lie
with every guest before she should go to bed to her own husband. The Arabians
law was, that one woman should be married to all her kinsmen, and at all times
lawful for any of her kin to challenge and claim her as his wife, using this
policy, to leave a staff at the chamber door, to give to understand that one
was in bed with her: and when the staff was not there, then they knew that no
body was within, and if any were found of another kindred, it was adultery, and
by law he should die.

Polydorus recites a History for the purpose to be noted, That there was a
Kings daughter of great beauty, which had fifteen tall men to her brethren,
with whom severally oftentimes she did accompany; and being almost wearied,
desirous to take some rest (for she was so fair, and they so many, that always
she had company) she used this policy; to make a staff much like to the
chamber staff, which was as it were a Porter appointed to give notice:
Afterward upon a time one of her brethren had left her in the Chamber, and was
gone out, she straight laid the staff at the door, thinking thereby something to
ease her self, and to rest from venery; but one of her brethren came from the
market, having left all his brethren there, and when he saw the staff at the
door, went straight to his father, and accused his sister of adultery, saying,
that all his brethren were in the market, and that there was a fornicator with
his sister: But the matter being known, he was punished by his father for that
he sl^ndered his sister.

The like liberty in matrimony was sometimes amongst the Medes, and with the
people called Magi, Anthropophagi, and with diverse others. Some of Aethiopia,
and some of Arabia married their own mothers and sisters. Thus people in diverse
manners did lead their lives, and do lead their lites so horribly and filthily,
that better it were not to know it then to know it: But though it be a play and
a sport to the ungodly and wicked, yet it is a horror and ugly monster to the
godly and wise; for to know all things profits the good. Herodotus in his
fourth book does mention certain inhabitants called Poeni, approaching the
confines of Egypt, whose order and law of matrimony was, that the King of that
country should have the first taste of the Bride before her husband. This order
was once observed by the ancient Scots, that the Lord of the soil should have
the virginity of the married woman.

The Assyrians and Babylonians did sometimes marry those that hired their
bodies to all men. The people called Cantabri gave money as a dowry with their
wives to other men. The daughters of the Lydians and the Cyprians might not
marry till they had gained by the hire of their bodies as much as should pay
their dowry. In the mean time did they go from City to City, from town to town,
offering themselves to every man upon the high way; and when they had gained
sufficiently for their dowry, then might they marry, and not before. And thus
were there sundry orders, and several laws to maintain the same. Some again did
lead a life without women, as the Esseni which Pliny affirms that they live
most sober and chaste without women all their life time: Also certain people of
Thrace called Cristae, did likewise avoid the company of women.

The Romans after Rome was built five hundred years and more, kept matrimony
inviolated, till Sputinus a noble Roman, because of the barrenness of his wife,
had a divorcement granted him, when Pomponius and Papitius were Consuls in
Rome. Moses perceiving the Jews much to be given to several vices, some to
covetousness, some to lechery, for the reformation of domestic quietness,
and because the Jews were desirous of other women, either for beauty, or for
wealth, they had a divorcement granted by Moses, to mitigate the fury and
hardness of their hearts, which was rather to avoid the tyranny of the Jews
which they used toward their first wives, and by sufferance then by
commandment. For as the world in most places was too wicked concerning the
liberty of Matrimony; so were they in diverse Countries very straight concerning
Marriages, in so much, that the Ethnicks observed that sentence of Catullus the
Poet, that virginity ought to be ruled by the parents, since one part is the
fathers, the second is the mothers, and the third and last is in the child. The
solemnity in Matrimony in diverse places, imported unto us wise morals, and did
as it were presage a duty and an obedience to things as both Plutarch and Pliny
write of the Venetians, that when a Marriage was solemnized in Venice, the
Bride after that day brings her distaff, and her spindle, and fl^x ready, as
one after that day never to be idle, but occupied always in she affairs of her
house.

The Greeks and Romans also had this custom; they girded the loins of their
daughters always till the day of their marriages, and then that night her
husband should loose the knot, and unbind that which of long time the Virgins
of Greece kept fast bound. Amongst diverse Countries, where sundry solemnities
in matrimony are used, I read not in any History, so solemn a state, and so
worthy ceremonies as we do see in England, which if you mark in all points, you
must needs confess, that outward ceremonies do import a great Majesty and
Dignity in Matrimony.

Again, they had laws in diverse places, that none might marry without some
reverence showed to their Gods before; as the Athenians suffered no marriage
without sacrifice first done to Diana; In Rome a law there was, that she that
should be married should sit in the seat of Faunus before she might see the
Bridegroom her husband: The like was observed in Boetia and Locresia, that
before their youth should marry they should drink one to another at the altar
consecrated to Euelia. In Hetruria they used to kill a hog to sacrifice to
their Gods, and to call upon Juno for good success to come. In Lusitania the
Bride goes to Church with a distaff and a spindle in her hand, and one of her
kinsmen going before her with a firebrand of Pine tree. In Sparta by the law of
Lycurgus, the maids that should marry, should shave the hairs of their heads,
and wear man's apparel; and by the same law they were forbidden to give any
substance with their daughters, but love and good will was to be the whole
cause of marriage.

Moreover they used these ceremonies; To divide a piece of bread in Macedonia,
and in the most part of Greece, for the Bride and the Bridegroom to eat before
they should be married. The like in Rome in Romulus time was used. In Galatia
they did both drink first of one cup appointed for that purpose only. And so
forth in diverse Countries they used diverse ceremonies; as in Carmenia no man
might marry, without he brought the head of some enemy or other to the King, as
a proof of his love toward his Country.

In Maeous no maid might marry, without she had subverted one enemy or other of
her Country. But in some countries they married not, as the Esseni, a people
much given to abstain as well from Wine as from Women. Wherefore Socrates being
demanded what was best, Whether to marry, or no; answered, If you marry you
shall suffer brawling and chiding; if you are single, you shall be solitary and
comfortless. Therefore Pompey the great coming among the Massagetes, who used
once a week to company with their wives demanded the cause thereof: They
answered, Because we would not hear their chidings in the day time nor their
complaints in the night time. But to end, let every man have his own wife, if
he cannot live chaste, for better it is to marry then to burn.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Likeness and Similitudes of Kings and Princes.

ALthough comparisons are odious amongst diverse men, yet for that Pliny and
Plutarch do use them chiefly for necessaries, I shall show how like diverse
Princes were one to another, not in countenance and outward proportion only,
but in life and conversation: Also by comparing the ancient Greeks and the
la^ter Romans one with another (as most certain the Romans imitated the Greeks
in all points) we shall see and perceive by their acts, doings, and life, who
were most like one to another. And first to begin with Ro^^^ius the first King
of Rome; he in all his doings did imitate that valiant Greek Theseus, as
Plutarch in his first book declares. And as by comparing their lives one with
another a m^n may easily judge how like in state and fortune they lived, the
one having occasion to war with the Sabines the other with the Centaurs; the
one in augmenting the state of Italy, and building of Rome, the other in
delivering all Greece from tyranny and ^ondage; of equal travel both and of
like state: for then Italy was in Romulus time, as Greece was in Theseus days.
The next was in Rome Numa Pompilius, who for pity to the poor, and love toward
his Country, and his gravity and severity in Law making, his zeel and religion
to the service of their temples; in fine, for all virtuous doings, in all
respects, was like unto Lycurgus that famous Law maker amongst the
Lacedaemonians: The care that these two Princes had for their friends and
countries, were clean contrary to Theseus and Romulus before mentioned, as is
set forth by Plutarch in his fourth book; Lycurgus was not so studious to call
the Lacedaemonians from vice and sin, but Numa was as careful to instruct the
Romans in all goodness and virtue; so that Rome did bear witness of Numa, and
Sparta of Lycurgus, who for their several and sundry Laws, their virtuous lives
and doings, compared by Plutarch, they may well for their contempt, and
neglecting the honors and dignities due to them, and for care they had either
of them for their people, be like one unto the other. And even so Publicola did
not only imitate Solon in all points, but also translated Solons laws to Rome,
so that one was counted most sage and wise in Greece, the other thought to be
most happy in Rome. So did Numa also follow Lycurgus in all his doings,
imitating his laws and orders in Rome. What comparison is made between noble
Scipio and Hannibal, the one defending the state of Rome the other Carthage,
and either of them in open wars with the other; that to read their lives and
fortunes about the affairs of their countries, what is it else but to see two
noble Captains one like another in magnanimity and courage? whose fortunes,
after many strong and stout services toward their country, was such, that they
both were banished Rome and Carthage: And as they in life were most like, so
did they embrace their deaths likewise. Even so was that stout Greek
Alcibiades, which Thucidides most worthily prayseth, and M. Cotiolanus that
famous Roman, compared for the like magnanimity and state of fortune. Pericles
that renowned Greek, and Fabius Maximus the Roman, who ruled long in Rome and
Athens, were likewise noted one to be like another.

Plutarch in his book entitled The lives o^ Emperors compares Sylla the
Roman to Lysander King of Sparta; compares Ser^o^^us to Eumenes, and likewise
Pompey the great to Agesi^us King of Lacedemonia. If respect de duly had to the
martial feats, and noble acts of Greeks and Romans; If their lives, honors and
dignities be weighed: If on the contrary mishap, evil fortune, banishment, and
such like be considered we must think and judge truly of Plutarch, in comparing
these great Champions, and puissant Princes, as Alexander the great and Julius
Caesar, Demet^ius and Antonius, Nicias and Crastus, men in all their doings, in
all their enterprises, most like one to another.

Some again for wisdom and eloquence were to be compared, as Cicero to
Demosthenes: Some for justice and equity were likened one to the other as Cato
the Senior likened to A^istides the Athenian: For gentleness and clemency was
Pelopidas, King of Sparta, compared to Epaminondas Prince of Thebes: Some again
were compared one to another for their liberality and bounty, as that famous
and liberal Phocion, was judged to be like to that free and noble Athenian,
Cimon: Some were paralelled by misfortune, as Dion, who governed Sicilia a long
time, in favor and great honor with Dionisius then King; to Brutus, who might
command Caesar to do what he would at Rome, and both at length banished.

We read moreover, that some were so like in countenance and face, in
proportion of outward lineaments, that one could not ^e known from the other;
as Antiochus King of Syria, had a servant named Artcon, so like unto him in
face and person in all parts, that when King Antiochus died, the Queen Laodices
dissembled the matter, having the presence of Artcon in stead of her husband
the King, to blind and deceive the people, till she of her own decree had made
another King in Syria. Cornelius Scipio, though he was of a noble family, of
passing prowess, of excellent qualities; yet for that he was in person like
deformed Serapion, he was called of the people Scipio Serapion. Pompey his
father was so like to his Cook Menogenis, that for all his honor and dignity,
he was by the vulgar sort named another Menogenis.

Cruel Nero caused Sporus, for that he was most like unto a Sabine maid whom
Nero loved, most detestably to be made like a woman, to use his filthy lust on
him. They say that Ephestion was so like to Alexander the great in proportion
of person, that Sisigambis, King Darius mother, who knew Alexander as well for
the long wars that was between her son Darius and him as for that she was in
one house with Alexander as a captive, having continual sight and talk with
him, yet was she deceived oftentimes to distinguish Alexander from Ephestion,
and kneeled to Ephestion in stead of Alexander diverse times when she thought to
speak to Alexander.

As for Pompey the great one Vibius, a man of base birth, and slender progeny,
was so like to that noble Pompey, that when he came at any time where Pompey
was not, he was honored and saluted of every man as Pompey by name and
supposed of all men to be Pompey himself, and he so much esteemed him, that he
advanced him unto honor and dignity, and men called Pompey oftentimes by the
name of Vibius, and Vibius by the name of Pompey; so like were these two one to
the other. In the same manner Plancus the Orator was like Rubrius the
Stage Player, who might not be known the one from the other, unless their
apparel would betray them; so like they were, that P^ancus was called Rubrius,
and Rubrius called Plancus, as is before mentioned of Pompey and Vibius. So
Mirmillo was like to Cassius Severus, Messala like to Menogenes, that as before
it is spoken of Antiochus, Alexander, and Pompey, and their companions, so
likewise of these the like may be spoken. Some are likened again for their huge
quantity, and large proportion of body, exceeding the common measure of men, as
Orestes and Achilles are likened the one unto the other for their great height.

Some for their monstrous shape are likened to one another as Gabbara and
Titormus two huge Giants, Piragmon and Poliphemus two huge and monstrous
Ciclops. Some for the qualities of the body are likened one to another, as
Ladas, who was so swift that he would run upon the soft dust without any show
or sight of his steps, he was compared to Polimnestor* who being a Shepherd
did overrun and take a Heart, and for that cause was he brought by his master
unto the games of Olimpia, the forty and six Olimpiade; where he won the
victory of running. Philippides was so swift on foot, that he ran in two days
from Athens to Sparta and therefore compared to Philonides, who ran in one day
one thousand and two hundred furlongs. Some again for strength, as that strong
Roman Cicinius, was likened unto M. Sergius for the strensth of body. Some
again for memory, as Cineas* Orator to King Pyrrhus, was compared to
Metrodorus the Philosopher; to write of these, and to compare the stoutnesse
and the qualities of Princes persons, I might grow tedious, therefore I think
it better to observe measure in things, then with prolixity of writing or
tedious examples molest the Reader: When it was told Caesar Augustus, that
there was a young man of Sicilia that was very like to the Emperor in
countenance and person, he commanded the young man to be brought before him,
where when he came the Emperor demanded merrily, whether his mother had ever
been at Rome; the young man answered, my mother was never at Rome, but my
father has oftentimes been there: and so the Emperor was met with the like
equivocation to him, as he meant to the young man, giving to understand that
the young man's father might be as bold with the Emperors mother, as he thought
he might have been with the young man's mother himself:

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Music and Mirth.

GReat controversy there is for the antiquity of music, some do attribute it
to Orpheus, as the Thracians, which with Horace affirmt, hat the music of
Orpheus could move stones, rocks, and trees: some to Amphion, as the Thebans
do, who honor Amphion for the first Musician, for that with the Harp he caused
stones and trees to follow him, wherewith he builded the City of Thebes: some
unto Dionisius as the Greeks, who say that he first invented harmony; Solinus
affirms that music was first f^^ad in Creet: Polibius says, that music was
first found in Arcadia: Diodorus thinks that Apollo found harmony first;
Josephus judges that Tobal amongst the Hebrews was the first finder of music;
and thus ancient writers diversely do vary herein. But as music is but a sound
in number and measure, as Cicero says, and by diverse means found of men, so
has it been from time to time augmented by man. For first, when Mercury the
son of Ma^a had found, after that the inundation of Nilus had watered all Egypt
amongst diverse other drowned creatures, a sea Snail, the flesh being withered,
and yet the sinews still remaining, striking the same it made a sound: Thus did
Mercury make first a Harp with seven strings to coequat the number of
Atlantides, and then he added two more and made them nine, just with the number
of the Muses; thus was the first Harp made by Apollo though some say it was
made by Orpheus, some by Amphion some by Li^s: yet it is most like that Apollo
made it. For in Delphos, the picture or effigies of Apollo is there set up
having in his right hand a bow and in his left hand the three Graces and either
of them having in their hands several kind of instruments, the first a Harp,
the second a Pipe, the third a Flute. In the chapter of the invention of
things, you shall at large find more concerning music. But now to declare the
harmony of music, the mirth and melody that proceeds from music, the love and
affection that ancient Princes and gravewise men bare to music: Themistocles,
though he was wise and discreet in other things, yet for that, as Cicero says
in his first book of Tusculans, he refused to hear one play on the Harp in a
banquet where he was, he then of the wisest men in Athens was thought and
judged to be of less learning than they supposed him to be: For the Greeks
judged none to be learned, unless he were experienced in music: Socrates the
father of all philosophy, and master of all Philosophers being by the Oracle of
Apollo named and judged the wisest man in all the world in his latter years
being an old man was taught to play upon the Harp, and often found amongst
little children: he being taunted of Alcibiades, for that he found him playing
with a little infant called Lamproces, answered: it is good being to be in good
company. Even so that wise and discreet Prince Agesilaus, king sometime of the
Lacedaemonians, spying one of his men to laugh at him for that he rode upon a
long reed with one of his children, said: hold thy peace and laugh not, and
when soever thou shall be a father, thou must do as a father. We read the like
of noble Architas the Tarentine, who when he was married, having a great number
of servants in his house, he would play with their children and delighted much
in the company of young infants. Certainly either of these three last
mentioned, Socrates, Age^^laus, or Architas. were in those days most renowned
for their wisdom and knowledge, and yet refused they not the company of young
infants.

That mighty and strong Hercules though he was the son of Jupiter, and counted
in all the world most famous, rather a God taken then a man, as Euripides does
testify, would be often found amongst children and young innocent infants
playing, saying this sentence with a child in his hand: I play with children
which for the change thereof is so grateful unto me, as though I were in the
games of Olimpia. The self-same famous Hercules went to school to Livius to
learn to play upon the Harp to solace him in his sadness, and to make him
merry when he was compelled to mourn. In the midst of his triumph went that
great Conqueror Alexander likewise to learn music. That divine and godly
Prophet David played upon his Harp, and served his God with hymns and godly
ballads. It is written that in the marriage of King Cadmus the son of Agenor,
who builded Thebes in Boetia, the Muses played on instruments.

In Greece music was so esteemed, that their sages and wise Philosophers
addicted themselves wholly to music. The Arcadians, the Lacedaemonians, and the
Thracians, though they were people much given to wars, severe in dealing, hardy
in all travels, and in learning most inexperienced, yet would they acquaint
themselves with music till they were thirty years old The people of Creet
brought up their youth in all kind of melody and harmony. The most part of the
world did learn music, save in Egypt, where, as Diodorus in his second book
affirms, music was forbidden, least the tender and soft minds of their youth
should be enticed to too much pleasure. And though some contemn music with
Diogenes, and say that it were more profitable to mend manners then to learn
music: and some with Alcibiades despise music, who was wont to say that the
Thebans were meet men to learn music, for that they could not speak, but that
the Athenians should hate such wanton tunes, for that they spoke without
instruments: Likewise King Pyrrhus being demaanded which was the best musician,
Python or Charisius, he despising them and their music, preferred a great
warrior according to his own mind, named Polysperches: though these I say with
diverse others despised music, yet we read again as wise as they, as stout as
they, used much music, as Aca^les, Alexander the great, Nero, Silla, M. Cato,
Socrates, Cimon. Too many might I repeat: the learned Jopas whose songs in
Virgil are expressed: the Salij, whose pleasant pamphlets Rome a long while
embraced and much esteemed For as music is delightfully pleasant, full of
harmony and melody: so is music terrible also and full of life and courage.

For we read in the old age, while yet the world was rain, that Aliates King of
Lidia, in his wars against the Milesians, had Musicians for his Trumpetters,
Pipers and Fiddlers, as Herodo^us in his first book affirms, to move the
people with music to wars. The people of Creet, as Gellius writes, had
Gitterns and Cithrons playing before them as they went to the field to fight.
The Parthians used, as Plutarch^s in the life of Crastus reports, the beating
of drums at their going into field; the Ethiopians used songs of diverse tunes,
and dancings before they went to wars: the Syrians before they met their
enemies, would sing ballads to honor the fame of the wars, with all kind of
dancing to solace themselves; the Cimbrians did make melody with dry skins,
beating the skins with sticks like drum sticks, at the very entrance to the
enemies. Cyrus the great King did with his soldiers sing to Castor and Pollux,
before he took his voyage to the enemies; the Athenians would sing hymns to
Jupiter before they would go to the field; the first noise and sound that the
Lacedaemonians had as Th^cidides says, instead of Trumpets were Flutes, til' by
an Oracle they were warned of Apollo that if they thought to have victory over
Moslena, they should appoint a man of Athens for their Captain: the Athenians
being right glad of the Oracle, for that the Laced^monians and Athenians were
always enemies one to another, they sent to Athens for a Captain, who
appointed to them a lame and a deformed man, named Dircaeus; in a reproach and
mock of the Lacedaemonians.

This Dircae^s being appointed and made Captain over all the people of Sparta,
he first then invented the trump, and taught all the Lacedaemonians to sound the
trump, which was such a terror to the enemies, the people of Messena, that at
the first sound of the trumpets they fled, and so the Lacedaemonians got the
victory; thus was the ancient music in the beginning so necessary, that every
country endeavored to have skill in music: then Mars claimed music in the
field, now Venus only exercises music in chambers.

This is that kind of gentle and soft music the Egyptians forbad the youth to
be taught, lest from men they would become again women; but shall we join the
old ancient games, the mirth the solace, and the plays that they used in those
days, together with their music, to prove the agility of that time, and the
activities of that age to be much esteemed amongst the Greeks and Gentiles. The
Greeks had four great games appointed: the first in mount Olimpia in Arcadia,
hard by the City Pisa which Hercules invented first to honor Jupiter: this was
so famous amongst the Greeks that even as the Romans used to account their time
by their Consuls, so did the Greeks use to number by the games of Olimpia,
which was appointed every fifth year. Unto this game came all the youth of the
world, both on horseback and on foot, to do masteries, the reward was appointed
for the victors a Garland made of Olive leaves for they came not there for
money, but for mirth and exercise' insomuch that when Tigranes King Artabanus
son heard of the fame thereof, and of the Garlands of Olive, he said: Well
worthy were the Greeks to be spoken of, that so little esteemed money, the
Olive was preferred for the chief reward in Olympia. This same moved first King
Xerxes to wax against the Greeks to his loss and decay. The second games were
called Pithii, and invented of Apollo in memory that he killed the great
Serpent Python, which was of Juno sent to kill Latona, Apollo his mother. Here
was appointed for the victors either on foot or on horseback, a garland made of
Oken leaves. Here likewise all the youth of Greece exercised feats, practiced
policies, used masteries, and proved themselves in any thing that they felt
themselves apt to perform, as in running, leaping, wrestling, riding, swimming
or such like as then was used; the third was called Isthmia, invented of
Theseus in the honor of Neptune. In this play was appointed for the victors
certain garlands made of Pine leaves, having the name of Isthmos, a place in
Achaia where Neptune is worshipped. The fourth game is called Nemea, which the
Argives make in memory of Hercules, for that he killed a great fierce Lion in
the woods of Nemea, according to the name of the play. Here do likewise the
Argives come to exercise youth, and practice feats as the rest do; these four
plays were long in Greece observed, as causes and occasions for men to come
together, to show feats and to try qualities: the first in Olimpus for
Jupiter, the second in Delos for Apollo, the third in Isthmos a place in Achaia
for Neptune, the fourth amongst the Argives to Hercules. In the first play the
garland of victory was made of Olive, in the second play the garland of victory
was of Oak, in the third play they had their garlands of Pine, in the fourth
play of Poplar; and thus then they triumphed in their mirth, they joied in
their victories they gloried in their garlands while the Laurel as Ovid said
was not known. Besides these four famous plays, there were diverse others, as
Pyrrhus play which he invented in Creet, for the soldiers to exercise
themselves in arms, wherein he taught diverse gestures and sundry postures
whence first proceeded the use of wars: this was a kind of d^ncing in arms, as
Dionisius Hali in his seventh book says, which was by the people called
Curetes, maintained in the memory of Pyrrhus. Licaon likewise invented other
kind of plays, where naked men, contrary to Pyrrhus games, did use feats of
activity. Diverse other games were had in great estimation in Greece, being made
and invented of men, but the first inventeur of mirth was as Diodorus says,
Mercurius, which only was invented to recreate the people, and to practice
agility and feats of bodies. Others there were of less name, but of as great
mirth, as diverse kinds of playing at the Ball, which is an ancient game as it
seems in Virgil, and it was much used sometime amongst the Troyans, for when
Aeneas immediately after the destruction of Troy came unto Italy, he taught the
exercise of the ball, before he married Lavinia King Latinus daughter; and at
this day it is much used in diverse countries.

Again, for further recreation, they used sundry kinds of playing at dice.
Herodotus does witness that the old and ancient Lidians did first find out the
dice and Ball, though Plini does report that one named Pythus first found the
play at the Ball: but for the certainty thereof, since so many balls there are,
and the playing likewise is so variable, both Plini and Herodotus may well
agree: for the people of Lydia at a certain time being oppressed with great
dearth, and so plagued with hunger, they invented then diverse kinds of games at
dice, as Herodotus affirms to pass the time in playing, and to forget hunger,
for they fed one day, and they came together the second day to play: thus
eating a little one day to satisfy nature, they played the second day to
forget hunger. Again, there was amongst the ancient Greeks a play much like
unto our chesse play, which one Xerxes a wise man first invented to warn a
tyrannous prince, which he their served, to forsake his tyranny, and to let him
understand by his play, that a Prince ought to be vigilant, and to use his
subjects as his force and strength, even as the play is in moving the Pawns,
the Knights, the Bishops for the defense and bulwarks of the King; thus as the
player I mean Xerxes did show his master the King the effect of the play, how
the King was preserved by playing wisely of the men lest they be lost, so the
tyrant himself understood by the play of Xerxes, how dangerous that Princes
state is, that uses not well his subjects, nor discreetly see and watch for
their commodities, which is the Princes safety.

Another play was used then in Greece, either upon the Dice, or else closely in
hand, called Even and odd. This play came from Greece unto Rome, in the time
of Augustus Caesar the second Emperor of Rome, as Suetonius does write in the
life of Augustus wrote a Letter unto his daughter in Rome, after this sort
Daughter, I send thee two hundred and fifty Sestercij, which I give amongst thy
guests, to play after supper, the Greek play called Even and odd, whether it
be at Dice, or close in hand. Lets likewise were much used for recreation and
mirth, with diverse other sundry games and plays to recreate the mind of man,
which both the Greeks and Gentiles did practice, as well to try their wits, as
also to use pastime and mirth, to draw company together to be merry.

I leave the Greeks a while, and will speak something of the Roman pastimes and
sports, which in nothing were inferior to the Greeks, but rather excelled
Greece, and all the world in all qualities. And lest I should seem tedious, I
will speak of no more but four principal games, correspondent to the Greeks,
and coequal to their number. The first called Lupercalia, brought out of
Arcadia by Evander, and sacrificed to Pan upon mount Palentine: And as Silvanus
does write, the sacrifices were made in the month of February after this sort;
The young men of Rome did convene together, every one bearing in his hand a
scourge, or a whip made of Goats skins, running one to another, and he that was
most swift of foot, escaped stripes; for every one was to run to another in
order, every one his length before the other; and thus they made themselves
swifter in running by reason of the stripes, for he that was overtaken by the
way, was sure to feel the blow: Every man ran naked, to this end, that they
might be the swifter. The women likewise, thinking thereby to become more
fruitful and fertile, offered themselves willingly to receive the stripes of the
rattling thongs. These scourges and whips that they had in their hands made such
a noise, by reason they were made of dry skins, that if made him that ran
before to strain himself hearing the noise, and fearing the stripes.

The second game that the Romans used, was called Circenses; some say it sprung
up first among the Romans themselves in a place appointed by Rome, environed
about with huge and strong walls. Here all kinds of pastime and sports were
used, running with horses, and fighting on horseback in the one end; In the
midst the Champions were placed in arms to fight on foot; In the other end,
wrastlers, leapers, runners, and such like games were appointed; so that the
place was framed accordingly long and large, that they might have room enough
in both ends, and in the midst.

This was the chief and the most ancient play among the Romans, saving
Saturnalia. This sport did Janus invent, who did reign together with Saturn, as
Macrobius says in the memory and monument of Saturn his fellow. This play was
celebrated in the month of December, with such mirth, pleasure, and pastime,
that it far surmounted all other. In this month of December, every man saluted
his friend with rewards tokens, presents, or with any treasure that they had,
to pleasure one another. And because all things were common in the time of
Saturn, which was called the Golden World there was such mirth used, as would
make some men of this time jealous to see it; I believe no^e of this Age would
be content to see his servant in bed with his wife, which in Saturn's time was
tolerable. Some say this play sprung first among the Pelagians, some again
affirm that it began among the Athenians; but how and where it began in other
countries it is no matter, but in Rome it was first framed and invented by
Janus.

The fourth play amongst the Romans was called Gladiatoria, where the youth of
Rome came to learn how to behave themselves among the enemies. In this play
they did fight one with another at the long Spear, the long Sword, the Staff,
and such weapons as then they used in fight, for to embolden themselves: In
this play, being naked, and without arms, they came to fight against their
armed enemies. By this play were the Romans taught boldly to fight with their
enemies, and being hardened at home, did little esteem wounds and blows abroad.
Thus games and plays were chiefly esteemed of the Romans, who, as Cicero in his
Offices affirms, had diverse others in Martius field, hard by Rome, to
exercise the young men to practice feats of Chivalry, to become ready and
prompt in martial affairs, which they only most esteemed.

CHAP. XXX.
A Comparison between the love of Men and Beasts.

IF men be diverse in affection one toward another, as we daily see and try by
experience; how much ought the silly and simple beast, which wants use of
speech, to be commended, that so cares and provideth for its self and his own.
And though Cicero says it be common to all living creatures to multiply, and
to be careful over those that nature procreated, yet men do excel all kind of
beasts, seeing all things are in subjection to man, as well the heavens above,
and all that shines therein, as the earth beneath, and all that live thereon.
And here I marvel much, though the secret working of nature in fierce and
raging beasts be tolerable; yet in a reasonable man, whom (says the
Philosopher) Nature only moves to the best, such enmity, variance and discord
should proceed. It is thought that the Eagle and the Swan be not friends, that
the Dolphin and the Whale cannot agree, and that the Wolf and the Fox are
always at variance: the same of the Dog and Cat, of the Crow and the Kite may
be spoken; but it is well known, that man is most odious to man: and though it
be spoken, Homo homini Deus, yet it is proved, Homo homini Demon. If Nature
made the Lion, the most valiant beast in the world, to fear the little crowing
Cock; if Nature do cause the huge and monstrous Elephant, to tremble at the
sight of a silly simple Sheep; and if Nature move the Panther, a strong and a
strange beast, to quake at the presnce of a Hind: If Nature work so subtily,
that the strongest, mightiest, and valiantest beasts, should fear those that
are most ancient and most simple: how much more might reason rule in us to fear
our God and his mighty works, which we altogether contemn, either forgetting
his glory, or despising his power? though in beasts the heavens have dominion,
yet said David, man by his reason and knowledge of God rules the heavens. But
I will omit to speak further of that, and will return to that which I mean a
little to discuss. I will not speak of the love and affection of man in
general, but of the love mutual betwixt man and wife, betwixt brother and
bro-brother. And as it is a virtue not to be forgotten, so is it a virtue most
rare to find, for every thing in its own kind is most to be accepted, and first
to entreat of the exceeding love, of the wonderful affection that men bare
toward their wives.

We read of that noble Roman Antonius Pius, who loved so well his wife
Faustine, that when she died, he caused her picture to be made, and to be set
up before his face in his bed chamber, to ease some part of his grief with the
sight thereof. M. Plancius sailing with his wife to Asia, with threescore sail
of ships came very gorgeously to the City of Tarentum, where in the midst of
his pomp and great glory, for that his wife Orestella by sickness died, he
sieve himself with a dagger, saying: two bodies shall possess one grave. The
like we read of two young men in Plutarch, the one named Aemilius, the other
Cianippus, who for mere affection and passing love toward their wives, after
long torments pangs and pains conceived by inward griefs that their wives were
dead, did offer their pined bodies a sacrifice unto death, for a pledge of
their true and faithful love. What means does love seek to save it self, and
to be acquainted with ease and pleasure, how carefully the Greek Poet
Antimachus bewailed the death of his wife Lisidides, in such mourning verses
and woeful plaints that whosoever did read them he would be as ready to weep in
reading the doleful Epitaph of Lisid^des, as was Antimachus her husband
sorrowful for her death. Pericles was so loving to his wife, being a noble
Captain of Athens, and he was withal so chaste, that when Sophocles espied a
mavelous beautiful young maid, saying, Behold a passing fair young maid,
Pericles answered and said, Not only the heart and the hands of a Magistrate
must be chaste, but also his eyes must refuse the sight of any but his wife. It
is read, that Pericles being at Athens, he was found kissing and making much of
his wife, and being from Athens, he was found as sad to depart from his wife,
as he was willing to die for his country. Orpheus loved so well his wife
Euridice, that as the Poets feign, he feared not the power of King Pluto, to
redeem his wife, with hazard and danger of his own body. Innumerable are they
that deserve the like fame, so that these few may be a sufficent proof of
others And now I will produce a few examples to prove the like good will and
love from the wives showed toward their husbands, as hitherto you heard the
great love of husbands toward their wives. Alcestes, a noble Qu. of Thessaly,
at what time K. Admetus her husband should die, having received an answer by an
Oracle, that if any would die for the King he should live; which when all
refused, his wife Queen Alcestes offered her self to die to save her husbands
life. Julia the wife oi Pompey the great, and only daughter to that famous and
renowned Julius Caesar Emperor of Rome, was no less obedient to her father
Caesar, then she was loving to her husband Pompey, who though they both were
enemies one to to another, yet she showed her self a loving daughter unto her
father, and a true wife to her husband and so true, that when she saw her own
Pompey coming bloody from the field, as his apparel made a show a great way
off, she supposing yt her husband was hurt, being great with child did straight
fall into travel, and died before Pompey had yet come in.

The love of Artemisia Queen of Caria toward her husband King Mausolus is as
well declared by the sumptuous Tomb. and gorgeous Grave, which she made for him
when he died, counted for the excellency thereof, to be one of the seven
wonders of the world; it was also truly verified by ceremonies at his death, in
making the scull of his head her drinking cup, in drinking all the ashes of his
body as sugar to her wine, and in knitting of his heart to her body, saying,
Though our bodies be parted, yet our hearts shall never be asunder.

That noble Greek Laodamia loved her husband so well, that when she heard that
her husband Protesilaus was slain by Hector at the siege of Troy, she desired
only of God, that she might see his shadow or likeness once before she died;
which when she saw, embracing the likeness of her husband, as she thought, in
her arms, she then presently died.

We read that Queen Ipsicratea loved her husband King Mithridates so entirely,
that she shaved off all the hairs of her head, and did wear man's apparel, and
followed him like a Lackey, for that he should not know her to be his wife; she
had rather go to the wars with her husband like a Lackey, then tarry from her
husband in Pontus like a Queen. Paulina when she heard that her husband Seneca
was put to death by that cruel Emperor and Tyrant Nero, whom Seneca sometime
taught in his youth, but was at length requited with death; when (I say)
Paulina heard thereof, she enquired what kind of death her husband suffered,
which being known, she attempted to die the same kind of death her self as
Seneca her husband.

Likewise that noble Portia, daughter to Cato, and wife to Brutus, hearing that
her husband was slain at Phillipi, for that she could not procure a knife, she
choked her self with coals. The like History is read of Triata, who when she
knew by letters that her husband Vitellius was environed by his enemies, and no
way able to escape, his wife rushed into the Camp, and preast near her husband,
ready to die or to live in the field with him.

What can be so hard to take in hand, but love will hazard it? What can be so
perilous, but love will venture it? Neither water can stay it, nor fire stop it.
Sulpitia the wife of Lentulus, the daughter of that worthy Roman Paterculus,
when she perceived that her husband was appointed by the Magistrates of Rome to
pass unto Sicilia as an Ambassador, and there to continue for a season though
her mother had great charge over her, and very careful and studious she was to
comfort her daughter in the absence of her husband; yet she deceived her
mother, she changed her apparel, and caused her two maids likewise to be
disguised, and went all by night from Rome to Sicily, Aemilia the wife of
Affricanus, and mother to the noble Cornelia, who was mother to those famous
Romans called Gracchi, perceiving her husband to be in love with one of her
maids in the house, and often to use the maid as his wife, though Aemilia knew
well of it yet she never hated the maid, nor opened it unto her husband; But
after that her husband was dead she gave unto this Maid a great sum of money,
and married her wealthily in Rome: A rare thing to be found in a woman.

What shall I speak of the love of Penelope in Greece, toward her husband
Ulysses? or show the constancy of Lucreece in Rome, toward her husband
Collatine? the one twenty years was proved by diverse noble Greeks, yet she
remained true unto Ulisses; the other through force being ravished by proud
Tarquinius son named Sextus, would not be false to Collatinus, but opened the
same, and revenged it with her own death. Now again how well did Queen Tomiris
love her son Margapites, the death of great Cyrus King of Persia with two
hundred thousand of his soldiers can testify: or how Aegeus loved his son
Theseus, who when he had perceived the black sail, he supposing his son was
slain, in that Labyrinth, he threw himself from a high rock into the sea. Why
should I molest the Reader herein since an end can hardly be found? I will but
only recite one worthy History out of Valerius, of a servant to one named
Panopion, who hearing that certain soldiers came to the City of Reatina in
purpose to kill his master, he changed apparel with his master, and conveyed
his master first away safe from the enemies, and he went unto his masters bed,
as though he had been Panopion, and suffered himself to be slain in stead of
his master. A man would think, that greater love could be found in no man, then
for a man to die for his friend, and truth it is: But to find such love in
beasts toward men, is wonderful indeed; Insomuch, that in Leucadia a Peacock
loved a young Virgin so well, that when she died the Peacock also died. And
Pliny says, that in the City of Seston an Eagle being brought up by a young
maid, loved the maid so well, that it would fly abroad, and kill fowls, and
bring them home to the young maid; and when the Virgin died, the Eagle flew
into that same fire where the maid was appointed to have her dead body burned,
and also died with her.

The Persians were wont for favor and affection they baro unto their horses,
to bury them; and the people named Molossi made brave Sepulchers for their
dogs. Alexander the great made a tomb for his horse Bucephalus, so did
Antiochus and Caesar likewise. Such love and faithful trust was found in dogs,
that the great King Masinissa of Numidia never went to bed, but had a dosen
great dogs in his chamber, as his guard to keep and watch him from his enemies,
for sure he was that money might not corrupt them, friendship might not allure
them, and threatenings might not fear them. There was a Dog in Athens named
Caparus, unto whom the tuition of the Temple of Aesculapius was committed, with
all the wealth and treasure therein, which in the night being trained away, the
Temple was robbed, the substance and the riches was stolen thence, but in the
morning the dog found out the falsehood thereof, and made all Athens privy of
the thieves, by raving and running toward them.

We read in Plini of Ulisses dog, which Ulisses left at home when he went with
Agamemnon to Phrygia to the wars of Troy, and being twenty years absent, he
found Penelope his wife and his dog faithful and loving at his return. That
noble Greek Lisimachus had a dog named Durides, that loved him so well, that
even at Lisimachus death, the dog died also. Hiero had another dog that died
even so, and ran willingly unto that flame of fire where his master did burn,
to die with him. I might well speak of Alcibiades dog, which wheresoever he
came, no man might or durst speak any evil of Alcibiades in presence of his
dog. Titus Sabinus dog never forsook his master in prison, and when any man
gave him bread or meat, he brought it to his master in prison, and when he was
thrown into the river Tiber, the dog was seen, as Fulgotius says, to do what
he could to lift up his masters head out of the water, thinking his master had
been alive.

At what time Pyrrhus subdued the City of Argos, there was in those wars an
Elephant which after he perceived that his master was slain, went up and down
among the dead soldiers to seek his master; which being found dead, the
Elephant brought his body being dead to a safe place, where the Elephant after
much mourning died for sorrow. The like examples we read in Plini of horses,
and specially of three, the one Alexander the great, King of Macedonia had; the
second Julius Caesar Emperor of Rome possessed; the third Antiochus King of
Syria had: these three horses suffered no man to ride or touch them, but their
own master, and were so gentle to them, that they kneeled to let them mount on
their backs. Thus beasts did bear fancy to men, obey and love them, and were
most true and trusty to men, and did show such love, as neither Seleucus to his
son An^^gonus, or Pericles to his son Priasus, nor Socrates to his son
Lamproces did ever show. How gentle was a Woolf unto King Romulus, to nourish
him in spite of his Grandfather Amulius? How loving was a Bear to Alexander,
to bring him up against his fathers will King Priamus? How kind was a Bitch to
King Cyrus, to foster him unawares to his Grandfather King As^iages? The Bees
come to Plato his Cradle to feed him with honey, being an infant. The little
Ants brought grains to feed King Mydas, being likewise in his Cradle. O what is
man said the Prophet David that thou art so mindful of him, that thou have
brought all things in subjection to him, beasts of the fields, fouls of the
air, and fishes of the Seas, all things made to fear and to love him, and yet
he neither to fear God nor to love himself. We read in Quintus Curtius of an
Elephant that King Potus of India had, which Alexander the great took captive
afterward, when this Elephant saw the King first, he kneeled down and showed
such honor and homage as was mavelous to the beholders. It is read in
Caelius, of a King in Egypt named Merthes, that had a Crow taught to carry his
letters, and how to bring answer in writing home again. Plini does write that a
Nightingale loved Stesicorus so well, that it would always sing at the beck of
Stesicorus to pleasure him. Heraclides the Philosopher had a Dragon taught to
follow him every where. Ajax likewise had in Locresia a Serpent brought up and
taught to honor him as his master. Agrippina the Empress and wife unto
Claudian, had a Thrush that never departed from her during the Empress life.
Plini has in his book of natural histories infinite such examples to prove the
love that all moving creatures do ow and show to man: as the wild Bull in
Tarentum, the raging bear in Daunia, which Pythagoras so tamed, that all
places, all countries, and all persons, were sure and safe from any danger or
hurt by these wild beasts. This comes by no virtue that is in man but only
by that which God made for man, that all living creatures fear man and love
man; so that if comparisons be made, it shall be evident that there has been
more love in beasts toward man, then in man toward man: yea, then brother to
brother, then the husband toward the wife, or the wife toward her huband,
considering the nature of man and the beast together.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Memory, and Oblivion.

SOme hold opinion, that in the ancient time whiles yet the world flourished
not in learning, that memory then was most set by and esteemed; for whatsoever
was seen or heard, was then committed to memory, and not recorded in books. But
Socrates said, after the use of letters were had, the virtue of memory decayed,
for that care which then was by tradition and memory, with care and diligence
to observe, is now by all put in books, that now our memory is put in writing,
and then was it fixed in mind: insomuch that the noble Athenian Themistocles
passing by Simonides school, who as some suppose taught first the Art of
memory, being demanded whether he would learn the art and faculty of memory,
answered, that he had rather learn how to forget things, then to keep things in
memory, for I cannot said he, forget what I would, and I have things in memory,
which feign I would they were out of memory. Seneca does so report of himself;
that he was of such a perfect memory, that he could rehearse after one, by
hearing, two hundred verses: yea to a greater marvel of his memory, he could
recite two thousand names of men, being repeated once before him, with as good
a memory as he that first named them. The like we read of Aelius Adrianus a
Captain, that having a great army of soldiers under him, if any were absent in
any place about any business, he had in memory the name of the person, the
name of the place, and the cause of the business. Of this excellent memory, to
their perpetual fame was King Cyrus and Scipio, the one a Persian the other a
Roman, which had this fame by memory, that either of them could severally call
their soldiers by name, every one after another, which is most rare, yea most
mavelous, having so many always under them, as both Rome and Persia were
chiefly in their days by them defended, to be able to name so many soldiers,
as either of them both had in their armies. Their memory was such then that
they may not be forgotten now: Julius Caesar was much renowned, for that Pliny
reported, that he could do such things by memory, as in reading, in talking, in
hearing, and in answering at one time, that no fault could be found in either
of these four qualities at one time practiced, whereby he deserves no less
praise by his memory, then fame by his acts. Diverse excelled in time past in
memory, as Hortensius a noble Orator of Rome, was able to speak in any place,
any thing which he premeditated privately, without study openly, he had more
trust in his memory then in books. Carmides of Greece was so famous for that
faculty, that he never heard any reading, but he could repeat it word by word
without writing, were the writing or reading never so long, he would not miss
a syllable. Cineas a noble and a famous Orator, one of the counselors of
King Pyrrhus, being sent from Epire unto the Senators of Rome as an
Ambassador, he but once hearing the names of the Senators, before he came
unto the Senate house, he named them orderly by name, every one after another,
that all the Senators were in a great admiration of his memory, in repeating
so many names in opening so many matters, in concluding so many things: which
when he came unto King Pyrrhus, he recited not only his doings and orations,
but also their answers and replies, every word by word, as then was spoken,
done, or written by the Senators. This Cineas was not so excellent of memory,
but also of passing eloquence of whom King Pyrrhus was wont to say, that he got
more Cities, Towns and Kingdoms by the eloquence of Cineas, then with all the
force and strength of the Epirots beside. It is written in Laertius in his
eighth book, that Pythagoras had charge of God Mercury, to ask what he would
(saving immortality) and he should have have it, and he willed to keep in
memory all things that he heard, and saw and to forget nothing being dead, of
that which he saw being alive, which being granted the soul of Athalides being
slain by Menelaus, entered in Euphorbus, secondly took place in Hermonius,
thirdly in Pyrrhus, and fourthly into Pythagoras, which had such memor^
thereby, that he could describe the state of the living and the dead. Diverse
were famous for memory amongst the Greeks, as Archippus, Lysiades, Metrodorus,
Carneades, Theodectes, and others. Many amongst the Romans, were renowned for
their memories, as Julius Coesar, L. Scipio, Portius, Claudius Hortensius, with
infinite number. What great fame had Mithrid^tes King of Pontus that having as
Pliny and Gellius both report xxii. strange nations, that were soldiers
always in wars under him against the Romans, he could speak xxii. languages,
without interpreter to open his mind unto them. A strange thing it is now to
find a man in this our ripe years, that can speak half a dozen languages. If a
man can but smatter in six or seven languages, he is noted to be a rare fellow,
and yet King Mithridates had xxii. A note of great memory; for some there be in
learning for one language, that they hardly know, they forget another that they
know. That worthy man Lucullus is remembered of Cicero in his fourth book of
Academical questions, for his passing and noble memory. The Egyptians used
notes and figures for their memory, insomuch that they noted the well memoried
man with a For or a Hare, for that the Hare hears best, and the For is of
greatest memory: and if any wanted memory, they compared him to the Crocodile.
We read of Esdras a Priest, that he had all the laws of the Hebrews upon his
finger end. We read of Portius that he never forgot any thing, that he once
read before. He again, would never read that, which once he wrote, but straight
out of hand, his memory was such, he would speak it and pronounce it in order
even as he wrote it before. Memory therefore is likened to a Net, which takes
and stays great fish, and lets through the little fish; and even as books
that be not occupied wax rusty, and did cleave together, so memory, that is not
occupied, says Seneca, waxes dull, and oblivious, as we oftentimes see how
forgetful men wax, either with sickness, age, or such like, that lets the
memory of man: as Orbilius by extremity of age forgot his Alphabets and
letters: Hermolaus had a friend, which in his youth was a perfect Grecian, and
yet in his latter years waxed so oblivious, that he could not read Greek. Plini
says Messala surnamed Corvius waxed so forgetful by long sickness, that he
forgot his own name. And Seneca does write of one Calvisius, that was so weak
of memory, that he did forget the names of those, that he was daily in company
with, as Achilles, Ulisses, and Priamus whom he knew very well. What is it else
for a man to want memory, but to want the name of his known friend, for he is
no man that knows not that man: as Augustus Caesar, sometime Emperor of
Rome, his beadel having forgot when he should come unto the Senate, demanded of
the Emperor whether he would command him to do any thing that he could do? why
said the Emperor, take this letter with thee, that men may know thee, for thou
know no man, for thou want memory.

Cicero does make mention of Curio, that was so oblivious, being a judge, that
he forgot the cause, which he should give judgment upon. Likewise Articus the
son of Sophista was of so frail memory, that he could never keep in mind, the
names of the four Elements. Bamba a certain King of the Goths, by a draught of
drink given by Heringeus his successor lost his memory. It may well be that
drink cutteth off memory. For the Poets fain that there is a river named
Lethes, whose water if any man taste thereof, he forgets any thing done or
past before. In this were the Thracians so dull of memory, that they could not
count above the number of four. Now that memory is praised in some, and
obliviousnesse is dispraised in others, there want no testimonies therein
what may be spoken of those that were counted famous clerks, and the
renovvnedst Orators in all the world, which did not only stay in their
Orations, but also were quite beside their matters? as Demosthenes Cicero, two
noble Orators upon whom depended the City of Athens and Rome, such
imperfection was in them, that Demosthenes was so dismayed at the presence of
Philip King of Macedonia, and Cicero so astonished at the presence of some bold
Senators, that both tongue and countenance failed these noble Orators.

Likewise Theophrastus that grave Philosopher who succeeded Aristotle, many
times was put to silence in the midst of his Oration, before the people of
Athens. So was Heraclitus Severus dumb before the Emperor, Herodus Atticus was
before M. Antonius; so that the presence of Princes, the dignity of places, the
majesty of states, abate and change the worthiness of the person. Some again
challenge to themselves that which altogether they are in no capacity to
apprehend, as Hyparchion, who when he would have contended with Ruffinus, had
not a word to speak, in so much that a proverb grew thereon, applied unto him
that is more talkative then wise, Hiparchion is dumb. Some again with Cassius
Severus, who though all his books were burned by Senators, said that he
carried all his learning in mind and memory, which could not be taken away. For
my learning, said he, is in my mind, and not printed in books.

The greatest excellency that can be in man is memory, and the next thing that
approaches immortality is memory. and so nigh, that if a man could but
remember the end of the things, he should never taste death, but he should live
for ever.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Dissimulation and Craft; of Subtlety and Deceit.

THat Cynick Philosopher Diogenes, making himself ignorant sometime in that
which he knew best, was wont in banquets and feasts to say, if any man had
demanded what kind of meat there was, I cannot name it, but I can eat it; and
so would pass to answer any thing with dissimulations. So likewise Sigismund
the Emperor would say, that he that could not dissemble, could not rule. At
what time Galba, a Citizen of Rome, had bidden a Gentleman named Mecaenas unto
supper, perceiving the Gentleman to be in love with his wife, he feigned
himself asleep, for that Mecaenas might show some part of his will, and love in
the mean season: In the mean time, while his wife and he were in talk, came one
of his servants, to take some things away from the table, supposing his master
had been asleep; unto whom his master said, Sirrah forbear, though I see not
Mecaenas, yet I see you; I sleep to him, and not to you.

The like dissimulation was between Demosthenes and Archia, at what time he
fled from Athens for fear of Antipaters displeasure, and went to the Isle of
Calabria, where in the Temple of Neptune he hid himself, till Archias came, and
promised him what honor and dignity he could enjoy, if he would come unto
Antipater: Demosthenes perceiving his dissimulations, and crafty ways, answered
plainly, to move him to anger, and said, Thou of all men could never play
upon the stage, playing thy part then where truth is oftentimes opened, and now
at this time, thou can not be an Orator to persuade me: whereat Archias waxed
angry, and threatened to hale him out of the Temple; to whom Demosthenes
answered, Now perforce thy dissimulation is broke forth into truth.

I might hereon stay, to note the great dissimulation between Metellus and
Scipio, which was so great, that Metellus feigned that Rome was happy that
Scipio was born therein, and yet was his mortal enemy all the days of his life.
In like case Frederick, an Emperor sometime of Rome, at what time the Senators
would sit about the state of the City, he would say, Before you go into the
Senate house, cast away from you two things that you carry with you: And being
demanded of the Senate, what two things were they, he said, Simulations, and
Dissmulations.

In this Philip of Macedon differed much from his son Alexander, insomuch that
Alexander would exercise nothing but magnanimity and truth; and his father used
all kind of falsehood, as was seen by subduing of the Sarunsians, and the Cities
of Thrace; for under color of peace, he commanded his soldiers to bring under
their Clokes, every one a cord, that at what time King Philip made silence to
speak, the enemies being attentive to hear, he stretched forth his right hand,
for a Watchword to his soldiers, suddenly to bind the enemies with their
cords, and to bring them captive to Macedonia. The like craft used Alcibiades
amongst the Agrigentines, feigning that he had something to speak for the
common profit, as well of Athens, as of Agrigentum, calling them into place as
though he would open something necessary for them, and had the Greeks ready in
the mean time to take the City, and to possess their substance by this craft.

Such craft used Thrasillus, to take the City of Byzantium; such deceit used
Zopyrus, to overcome Babylon; such did Sextus the son of Tarquinius practice
against the Gabians, who when he perceived that his father might by no means
subdue them, he imitated Zopyrus craft, making the enemies to believe that he
was ill handled, and cruelly used by his father, and that he knew well how to
deceive his father, and to betray him unto them, they being ready to believe
Sextus, made him chief of their company: He straight sent messengers to his
father, to signify unto him, that he might do his pleasure with his enemies.
Tarquinius understanding the craft and subtilty of his son, did bring the
messenger into a fair garden, mistrusting (like a wise Prince) the matter, and
gave this subtle warning to his son; Walking up and down the Garden with diverse
noble man, he with his staff did strike off the chief flowers in the Garden,
saying to the messenger, Farewell, tell my son what I do, and bid him do
accordingly. Young Sextus Tarquinius perceiving his fathers mind, flew the most
eminent of his enemies, and having thus oppressed the chief men, he betrayed
the City to his Father.

By this means, and like craft, Conon the Athenian deceived the Persians in
Cyprus. The subtilty that Pysistratus used, to beguile the people of Megaera,
and what Hannibal used in Italy, when he subdued Tarentum, are to like effect;
insomuch that Hannibal was wont to say when the Romans had again won Tarentum,
Eadem art qua prius cepimus, Tarentum amisimus: For by craft Hannibal
vanquished the Tarentines, and by craft did the Romans win the same again.
Antigonus deceived the Citizens of Corinth, under the color of a marriage
betwixt his son Demetrius, and Alexanders wife, who then was a widow, and a
Queen in Corinth; for in the midst of triumphs, and preparations to the
marriage, Antigonus by deceit took the Castle, commanded his soldiers in arms,
and proclaimed himself King in Corinth.

In the same book of Polinaeus, the like History is written of Lysander of
Sparta, and Nearchus of Creet, the one promising to the inhabitants of Miletum,
his aid and help, in defending their liberties, and the people giving credit to
a Kings promise, and trusting to have Lysander their special friend, they found
him their mortal foe; for he deceived them thereby, and took the City of
Miletum unto himself. The other sailing to the haven of Telmessus to renew
friendship with Antripatridas, who then governed the City of Telmessus, under
the color of friendship, he had his men at arms ready on the Sea, to destroy
his friend, and to take the City to himself.

This deceit was not only seen in wars, where much falsehood and perjury is
practiced, but in all things men use craft, according to the proverb, There is
craft in daubing. To speak of Theodectes craft toward his Master Aristotle, to
defraud him privily of his glory; to speak of Sertorius deceit, in winning
authority among the common people; to describe the means that Dionisius used to
get money amongst the Syracusans; or how Pythius deceived Cannius in his bargain
of fish; or how Darius became King of Persia by the neighing of a Mare, and a
million more of such deceits and crafts, were infinite. I therefore refer the
Reader to Poliaenus, where he shall have enough of falsehood. But because craft
is used diversely, I will somewhat touch those that used craft, in altering
themselves into the form of women, some for filthy lust, some for virtues sake,
and some for vice.

What kind of dissimulation was in Sardanapalus King of Assyria, to forsake the
Empire to forgo his Kingdom, to become like a woman to spin and card with his
Concubines, and so from the shape of a man to dissemble himself to be a woman?
What kind of dissimulation did that renowned and mighty Hercules, even the
offspring of the Gods, and son to Jupiter, use, after that he tamed monsters,
slew Giants, overcame Dragons, Lions, wild beasts, and yet he did translate
himself from a champion and a conqueror into woman's apparel, and fashioned
himself like a woman: with such dissimulation he served Omphale Queen of Lydia
like a woman, in the apparel of a woman, at the wheel and at the cards at
Omphales commandment. What kind of craft used Clodius, to bring his purpose to
pass with Pompeia, Caesar's wife, dissembling himself to be a woman, as Cicero
taunteth him in an Epistle that he writes to Lentulus, where he says, that
Clodius dissembled with the Npmph Bona Dea, as he was wont to use the three
sisters. Thus Clodius would at all times go unto Pompeia, in the apparel of a
woman to use such feats, that he made Caesar to divorce his wife Pompeia.

Dissimulations and subtilties, as they are most evil to practice so sometimes
they are necessary to do good; for example, Euclides used the like craft as
before, but to a better purpose; for he practiced it not to feed lust, or to
pleasure affection, but he used it to hear Soc^ates to read Philosophy, and to
learn wisdom from him. For there was a law between Athens and them of
Megaris, for the great hatred the one bare unto the other, that whosoever came
from Athens to Megaris should die, and whosoever would go from Megaris to
Athens should likewise die. Thus death frighted not Euclides, but the love that
he bare to Socrates, and to Philosophy, and wisdom, so emboldned him, that he
would in the night travel from Megaris to Athens, in the apparel of a woman
least he should be known, and he returned before day from Athens, to Megaris
again. This dissimulation and craft of Euclides was far better, and more to be
commended then the doings of the former. Better is Semiramis Queen of Babylon
thought of, in that she perceiving her young son Ninus, to be too tender to
govern the stout Babylonians and Assyrians, and knowing the nature of the
people to be impatient of a woman's government, became in her apparel like a
man, and ruled the Kingdom till her son came to ripe age. More pra^ie ought
^^l^gia a woman of Antioch to have, who though she fained her self to be a man,
and dissembled with the world in that case, yet this was to avoid incontinence,
and to live chaste and solitary, without the company of men. For this cause is
the Greek Virgin M^rina, and Euphrosina a maid of Alexandria, worthily
preferred before Cleocritus and Clisthenes for that they went in the apparel of
men to live in the wilderness, to avoid lust and sensuality: the others went
in the apparel of women to beguile women Caelius does report, that certain
women as Mantinia, Lasthenia, Ax^othea, and Phliasia would come in their
apparel like men, to hear Plato read philosophy in the schools. The cause of
their dissimulations was virtue and honest life; the cause of the others
dissimulation was vice and a wicked life: so that dissimulation is both good
and bad.

For we read at what time the armed youth of Greece, had determined co fetch
home again fair Helene, Menelaus wife, from Troy, where she was detained by
Paris King Priamus son, that then Achilles the stoutest and worthiest of all
the Greeks, while yet he slept in the Tent of Chiron, his mother Thetis
suddenly took him from Chi^ons house, and changed his apparel into the apparel
of a woman, and appointed where he should hide himself with the daughters of
King Lycomedes, where he got one of them with child, and commanded her to
betray him to no man, for she knew that her son Achilles should die in Troy, if
he should go thither. There Achilles was a long while, at the commandment of
his mother Thetis, until the Oracle was given that the City of Troy should
never be destroyed without the help of Achilles, Ulisses being most subtle and
crafty, taking upon him to seek out Achilles, took a little pack full of fine
wares, such as women buy and a strong bow and arrows: thus when Ulisses came to
King Lycomedes daughters, though he knew Achilles to be there, yet because he
was in the apparel of a woman he knew him not, and therefore showed his fine
ware unto the Kings daughters, having a strong bow bent by him: while Deidamia
the mother of Pyrrhus, and the rest of her sisters, viewed the glistering ware
of Ulisses, Achilles stepped in, and took Ulisses bow in hand, and drew it,
whereby Ulisses seeing him draw so strong a bow, he straight perceived, that he
was Achilles. And thus one craft beguileth another, one deceit deceives
another, and one dissembling man finds out another. For by the means of
Ulisses, was the dissimulation of Achilles known. I might have just occasion
here, to speak of those that were much given to soft clothing, gay apparel, and
delicate fare, as Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers, delighted to go brave
in gorgeous apparel, with rich Chains and Kings, and had herein great felicity.
Demosthenes and Hortensius, two famous and noble Orators, the one of Athens,
and the other of Rome, went so fine in their cloths, with such neat and wanton
gesture, that L. Torquatus would often call Hortensius the son of Dionisia, for
that she had great pleasure in dancing, and light gesture of body. But I will
omit such examples and speak of dissembling persons, who thinking to hurt
others destroyed themselves, as that strong Golias, who contemning all Israel
for force and strength, David a weak man overcame him. Hammon was hanged upon
that gallows that he prepared for Mardocheus, even so Absalon going about to
destroy his father King David, was hanged by the hairs of his head by Gods
appointment.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Famine.

CIcero, in his first book of Tusculans questions, does note the saying of
Socrates, that hunger was the best sauce to meat, and thirst the best occasion
to drink. Wherefore King Dioniusis the tyrant, hearing much report of the
Lacedaemonians hard fare, and specially of their pottage, which was called Jus
nig^um, the black pottage, he took a Cook of that Country to be his servant,
to dress his diet in the ordinary way of the Lacedaemonians: the Cook having
taken much pains in making the foresaid pottage, he brought a mess thereof
unto the King, who much longed for it; but as soon as he tasted of it, he spit
it again out of his mouth, and was v^ry angry with the Cook, saying: is this
the pottage that the Lacedaemonians so much brag of, my dog, said D^onisius,
should not eat it: the Cook perceiving the gluttony of the King, said: O
Dionisius whenever thou art to eat of this pottage, thou must bring fit sauce
for it, which is a Lacedaemonians stomach, for the Princes of Sparta have more
pleasure in this kind of fare, then ever King Mydas had in his golden banquets.

What makes any meat sweet? hunger. What causes man to feed pleasantly?
hunger. Or what makes any drink pleasant thirst? For at what time Darius was
enforced of mere thirst to drink of a lake, all defiled with stinking carcases
of dead soldiers being then in the field and compelled to take his flight, he
said after his draught, that he never drank sweeter drink in his life. Though
this King was a proud Prince over the Persians, and had all kind of wines at
commandment, yet his want and penury now, and his thirsty stomach, was the
only cause of this noble drink which he so much commended and preferred before
all the wine that ever he drank before. Even so affirmed King Artaxerxes in his
wars, when his victuals, and all were spoiled by the enemies, of a few dry
figs, and of a piece of a barley loaf upon which he fell so hungerly, that he
spoke after this sort: O good Lord, of how great a pleasure have I been all
this while ignorant.

Lisimachus likewise being in wars in Thracia, against Domitianus the Emperor,
where he and all his soldiers were kept so long without drink, until he was
so thirsty, that he was enforced with all his host to yield as captives to the
Emperor Domitianus, and now being in captivity, having a draught of drink of
the Emperor, he said: O God that I should make my self from a King to be a
captive, from a noble Prince of Greece, to be a bondslave unto the Romans, for
one draught of drink? See what hunger and thirst is: how it has made Kings to
yield, and Princes to be vanquished. Yea it has made King Ptolomy in his own
Kingdom of Egypt, to commend a piece of bread which was given him in a poor
Cottage, and to say that he never eat better meat, nor more comfortable cheer
in all his life, then that piece of bread was.

It was the custom of that noble Emperor Julius Caesar, in all his wars, more
with famine, then with sword, to vanquish his enemies. For this famous warrior
would often say, that even as the physician would use his patients, so would he
his enemies; the rule of the physician is, to make his patient fast to recover
his health, The order of Caesar was, to keep the enemy from victual, to make
them yield. Great is the force of Famine: And by Histories we read, that when
King Cambyses marched toward the Ethiopians, he endured great scarcity of
victuals, and such penury and want of food was among the soldiers, that they
agreed with themselves to kill the tenth throughout all the host, to assuage
hunger; and the Famine continued so long, that Cambyses the King was in great
fear, lest the Lot should at length happen upon him and so to be eaten of his
own soldiers.

Sagunthus a City in Spain, as Eutropius does witness, in great amity with the
Romans, was besieged by the Carthaginians so long, that all the City was
brought unto such famine, that the Lords and the Captains of the City made a
great fire in the Market place, and there brought all their wealth and
substance, and threw it into the fire, and after made their Wives and their
Children to enter into the fire, and last of all, the chief Lords and Captains,
ended their own lives in it lest they should come into the enemies hand: So
great was that Famine, that it was before prognosticated by a Woman in the time
of her delivery, whose child, his head being out, entered into his Mothers womb
again.

The like calamity happened in Caligurium, a City where Quintilian was born,
which being likewise long besieged by Cneius Pompey, to bring them in
subjection, and to keep promise with Sertorius, they lacked victuals, and waxed
so hungry, that all kind of beasts whatsoever being slain, they were
constrained to eat their own Wives and Children. It was seen in Jerusalem, when
that it was destroyed by Vespasian, the Emperor of Rome, that the mothers were
compelled to eat their own children, for very hunger, whose small and tender
bones were left as a show and token of their calamity.

Pliny in his eighth book of Natural Histories, says, that when Hannibal laid
siege to the city Casilinum, the Roman soldiers were in such hunger, that one
Mouse was sold for two hundred pieces of silver, and he that sold the Mouse,
died himself for hunger. The Athenians likewise were brought unto such hunger
by Sylla, who afterward was Dictator of Rome, that one bushel of Wheat was sold
amongst the soldiers for a thousand Drachmes; the common soldiers being poor,
for want of money on the one side, and sore plagued with hunger on the other,
were compelled to eat the green grass of the fields about the City of Athens,
and to gather the moss off the walls of the City, and did eat it: This City of
Athens was oftentimes brought to that misery, as by King Demetrius, by King
Philip, and by his son Alexander the great.

So much was famine feared amongst the ancient Greeks, that in the time of
abundance they used to scourge famine with rods out of their houses, saying,
For as fames, intra divitiae; Away penury, come in plenty. We read in Q.
Curtius, that Alexander was driven by hunger to eat his Camels, and Elephants,
and other huge beasts that carried the trains for the wars. Such hunger and
famine did happen among the Lacedaemonians, that the Citizens of Sparta were so
hungry, that they did eat the very serpents that had been dead a long while,
which multitude of serpents did presage this great calamity to come* and though
they had been dead a long time, yet the Spartans most hungerly did feed on
them, and mitigated the rage of their famine.

Doda King of Syria besieged a great and famous City in Iewry, called Iora,
where the miserable mothers were by mere hunger enforced to feed on the bowels
of their own children. Not much unlike was that horrible and cruel famine in
the country of Apulia, where the soldiers being enforced by the French men,
then their enemies in War, were compelled to take the skins from their
Bucklers, and to warm and boil the hard horns, and to eat them. To speak of the
wonderful calamity, miseries, and plagues that happened through hunger, the
charge thereof were too much; too many authorities are manifest in this behalf.
Antonius, whom Augustus Caesar could never vanquish by force of arms, was
driven to yield in a City called Perusia, by hunger and famine. Wherefore that
noble Athenian, Nicias, always thought the easiest way of conquest was by
Famine, which he showed at Melos, a City of Thessaly, where he made the
Citizens to yield by hunger. O raging force of famine! O terrible misery of
man! which compels the parents to eat the children, the children to kill
their parents: what beast was spared ever, when this happened? The people named
Hymmi, through hunger were constrained to eat their own dogs, as the
Macedonians did sometime feed themselves with Camels, Elephants, Horses, and
such like.

What herb was unsought? What root was not found to feed this cruel Monster?
Sabellicus does witness of a dearth that chanced in his time, that in some
parts of the country of Flaminia, and about the fields Pi^eni, the common
people did live by grass and herbs, and by such like that proceeded from the
earth. Thus was the world ever plagued with famine, as with that Monster that
spoileth and devoureth it self, as we read of diverse that did eat their own
arms and flesh. Again, in the sacred scripture, diverse examples we have of the
like plagues sent from GOD to plague man. But even as hunger one way is most
excellent if meat may be had, so hunger another way is most terrible, if meat
does fail. Therefore Stratonicus never went to bed without a cup of drink by
him, not for that he thirsted when he went to bed but lest he should thirst in
the bed, and so be compelled to do some injury to one or other, for that he
wanted drink. So did Alphonsus King of Arragon, when he saw the poor country
man greedily feeding on Grapes, he said, O would the Gods had framed me to be
such a one as this is. So that hunger is good to those that want food.
Gnefactus King of Egypt his soldiers in the deserts of Arabia wanting
victuals, waxed so hungry that he himself not amongst the country men, and
their homely fare was so acceptable unto him, that he set up a table for a
Monument of the same, in the Temple of Jupiter in Thebes,

Of diverse Famines we read in scripture, as of that in the time of Abraham, who
fled from the land of Canaan into Egypt and Isaac was driven by famine unto
Abimelech King of the Palestines, and all the sons of Jacob were enforced to go
to King Pharaoh, where their own brother Joseph ruled as chief Officer. Famine
is appointed for a just scourge to sin, as appears by David, who for causing
the people to be numbered, had leave to choose either Plague, Famine, or Wars,
which are the instruments to punish offenders.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
Of Wariness.

WE will here leave Apollo in Delphos, and Jupiter in Boetia with their wise
answers and Oracles; we will not speak of Socrates, Solon, and thousands such
as were counted and known wise and discreet among the Greeks and Gentiles: We
will only entreat of those worldly and natural wise men, which by their
prudent policy and wary practices have greatly advanced their fame, as well in
vanquishing their enemies, as by inventing such policies for the obtaining of
the same, as their wits thereby were worthily commended. Hannibal perceiving
the courage and strength of the Romans, used this stratagem: He gathered a
great number of serpents, and put them in huge vessels, and caused them to be
brought to the field amongst his soldiers commanding the Captains and chief
officers to throw the same into the face of the enemies; who being thereby
astonished fled away as men almost in despair of themselves, thinking the
soldiers of Hannibal to be Devils and not Men.

Of the like wisdom was King Cyrus, who ^eing in his Tents, and ready to pitch
the field the next day against the Messagetes, he commanded his soldiers to be
in a readiness that night, to flee from their tents; leaving behind their
victuals and substance, that the enemies being busy about the spoil, and given
up to banquettting, and carowsing of wine he with all his army might unawares
return, and finding the Messagetes more greedy of the spoil, then ready for
their enemies, he did destroy and kill them. So that in wars, says Salust, wit
does as much good as strength, policy sometimes is better accepted then power,
and Virgil says, so that victory be gotten, men weigh not whether it be
through courage or through policy. For Sertorius that worthy Captain of Rome,
was wont by false letters, by dreams and outward religion, to feign and invent
a thousand ways to stir his soldiers to courage. The invention of wit is
much, and so diverse, that too much it were to repeat it. Sicionius deceived
Xerxes with all his soldiers through policy. Pisistratus moved the Athenians,
to revenge his false wrongs upon the chief Officers of Athens. Darius after
Cambises death became King of Persia, by means of a horse, and such like. But
letting pass infinite numbers of such, I will declare what nature wrought in
silly and simple beasts, in flying fowls, and in the very fishes swimming in
the water.

The Lion by nature is taught being very sick, to find out an Ape, which by
outward sports and pastime, does heal his great grief. The huge Elephant is so
subtle when he is like to die, that he will seek by all means the Cameleon,
which he so esteems, that his sickness forsakes him straight. The Panther
knows by nature his ready salve for his sore, for feeling himself not well,
he straight seeks the dung of man, and by the scent thereof, he heals
himself. The stricken Heart feeding on high mountains has that consideration
that at what time he is shot through with any dart or arrow, by feeding of an
herb called Dictamum, his blood stencheth, and his wounds are healed. And the
Bear is so crafty, that by the same nature he is taught being sick, to lick and
eat up little ants for his appointed physic.

Even so flying fowls do know their appointed salve for their sores, being
taught by nature. The Raven, the Duck, the Swallow, yea, the silly Mice do
before hand presage their ruinous state by nature, and know well the decay of
any house, barn, or place where they be, and will change hospitality before the
time, if necessity happen upon them. The little Ants are full of toil and
travel to gather in the Summer, to serve them in the Winter, Of this with
diverse others. Pliny makes mention in his 8. book, chapter 27. and Aristotle
in his book De natura animalium. We read in Aelianus diverse worthy histories of
the like, but especially of the Cranes of Sicilia, which when they be about to
take their flight from Sicilia, over mount Caucasus, they are so crafty and
subtle by nature, that they bear in their mouths certain stones, to stop that
cry and noise, which Cranes most commonly use in flight, lest by hearing of
their voice and the noise they make, the Eagles of Caucasus should destroy them.

The Goats of Creet, when they be shot through with darts and arrows, are of
themselves moved to feed on a certain herb; which straight stencheth the
blood, heals the wound, and expels the venom out of the wound, There is
such craft and subtilty in a little Frog of Nilus, that when the Trout comes
toward him to destroy him, the Frog by and by out of hand, bears a long reed
overthwart this mouth, and so marches forward toward this great champion, that
by no means he can destroy him, for that the reed is longer then his mouth can
swallow the same, and so the little Frog escapes the terror of his enemy.
What a slight has a fish called Polipos, which being desirous to feed on any
fish, he goes and hides himself under some shrub or rock or any other place,
whereby he seems to be, as though he were a tile or a stone, till the fish
come to that place, then he leaps on them, and kills them. So that there is no
beast, no fowl, no fish, but has as it were a certain privilege by nature to
defend himself, and to foil his foe, and by nature taught to practice it
craftily. There is again a kind of knowledge in beasts to know their friends,
and to love them, and to fear their enemies and to avoid them. The Serpents in
Terinthia, the Scorpions in Arcadia, and the Snakes in Syria, as Plini affirms,
will not hurt their country men and known friends, though they find them
asleep, as diverse and sundry times histories make mention thereof. Strange
therefore is the work of nature, which mightily displaieth her self in all
living creatures; and for the proof thereof, I will note one history written by
Quintilian in his 14. book of histories, that in Achaia there was a city named
Patra, in the which a certain young man bought a little dragon, which with
great care and diligence he nourished till it waxed big lying in his chamber in
the night time, and playing all the day time. At length the Magistrates of the
City, fearing lest some hurt should be done by him, considering the fierce and
cruel nature of them, did let him to go to the wilderness where diverse other
Dragons were. And there being a long time, this young man that brought up this
dragon, with diverse of his fellows passing by, where this dragon was, certain
thieves assailed them, and he by his voice was known by this dragon, which as
soon as he heard, he came out of the den, and seeing him with diverse of his
fellows like to be murdered, he flew to the very faces of the thieves, and so
strongly fought with them, that some of them the dragon slew, some were sore
hurt, and some constrained to fly: thus he saved this young man and his
fellows, in recompense of his former courtesy. Surely I think better of this
dragon, then of some ungrateful persons that live now in the world.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of Revenge.

THe best way to revenge any injury offered, is to suffer quietly the same, and
to show virtue toward vice, goodness toward evil, honesty toward scurillity,
which is the only poison unto the enemy; as for an example. Laertius does
manifest the same by comparisons of things: who is he that sees his enemies
fields green, his pastures well grassed, his house well furnished, and all
things in comely order, but is grieved therewith? How much more, says he, when
the envious sees his foe adorned with all virtues, compassed with all
patience, and prospering in all goodness, is he therewith molested? And in
that place of his sixth book, he recites a worthy and a noble example, of due
revenge by Diogenes the Cinick Philosopher, who by chance came where certain
young men were at banquet, making merry, his head being bald, by reason of his
age, he was so flouted and scoft by most part of the company, that with stripes
and strokes they threw him out of the house; the poor old Philosopher revenged
his wrong in this wise: he took a piece of white chalk, and writ the names of
all those that so used him upon his cloak, and so opened his cloak that all men
might read their names, and know how wickedly they had used him, and what
flouts and scoffs he had suffered of those persons, whose names were to be read
upon his cloak, and so brought them in such blame with all men, that they
wished in heart that they never had seen Diogenes, who made all the world to
see their folly, and were ever after noted for ridiculous persons, not worthy
of honest company, and so were they excluded from good and civil men.

Agesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians when he had heard of certain foes of his
that always spoke il of his person, and of his state, he after this sort
revenged himself, he chose and elected them to be chief Captains over his men
of arms, and committed all the charge of his host to his enemies, whereby he
made his foes to become his friends, yea, to be his servants and slaves, to do
what he would command them. So Demosthenes did when he was provoked and
injuriously handled by one who in a banquet was disposed to fall out and fight
with him: No, said Demosthenes; I will never take that in-hand, wherein he that
gets the victory, must bear the shame. O worthy sentence, and most aptly
applied to a wise man.

We read in Brusonius, of Dion of Alexandria, who with silence revenged more
his foes, then with words; for being provoked to anger by a villain and abject,
which followed him through the streets, chiding and threatening him, he answered
not one word, but bad him Good night, when he come to his own door; which when
the enemy saw and that he would not be moved to anger, to take any advantage on
him, he went to the next tree and hanged himself. Thus did Socrates, who being
blamed by his friends for his silence in that he was injuriously handled by his
foe, answered That his enemies could not endamage him, since he was not that man
whom his words did import to be; and being stricken and spurned by the same
man, Socrates was counseled to call the same to the Law before the Judges, to
the which he answered, Which of you if an Ass strike him, will call that Ass
before any Judges, since he is no better that uses me this; for by this am I
known to be Socrates and he to be an Ass. The greatest revenge to a fool is to
let every man know his folly; and the greatest hurt to a wise man, is to
revenge folly; for it was all the revenge of Socrates, when any man spoke il of
him to say thus, The man never was taught to speak well.

So courteous was Fabius Maximus, that when he had heard, that one of his chief
soldiers was about to betray him to his enemies, he called the party before
him, not making him privy that he knew of it, and demanding of him what he
wanted, he commanded him to ask any thing he would have, and made him chief
Captain of his Army: By this means he became most true to Fabius, being before
most false.

This was far from such revenge as Alexander the Great used, who after he had
subdued diverse Kingdoms and Countries, he went to the Temple of Ammon, to know
by the Oracle of Jupiter, whether yet any were alive that flew his father King
Philip, whereby he might show more tyranny, and practice greater murder. This
was far from M. Brutus rage, who was not content to conspire against Caesar,
and to kill him in the Senate House; but also when power failed, when soldiers
decayed, and he was almost vanquished, he made his prayers to Jupiter, and to
the host of Heaven, to plague Caesar and his posterity. This, I say, was far
from Livius Salinator, who being warned of Fabius Maximus, not to revenge
malice upon Hasd^ubal, before he knew the state of the matter, the power of the
field, and the end of the victory, where it should happen yet being more rash
to revenge, then wise in forbearing, he said, that either out of hand he would
kill or be killed.

And in this place I will recite three or four Histories, fit for this purpose.
Phobius wife fell in love with Antheus, a noble Gentleman of Halicarnassus,
being left in pledge with Phobius, chief ruler then of Milesia, and used al
means possible to allure Antheus to requite her love. But he, partly for fear,
and partly for love of Phobius her husband, in no wise would consent to any
filthy desire; Cleoboea, Phobius wife, took the same in so evil part, that she
began mortally to hate him, inventing what way best she might revenge his
discourtesie in refusing her love. She feigned on a time, that she had quite
forgotten her old love toward him, and thanked Antheus very much for the love
and great zeal that he did bear to her husband Phobius, in not consenting to
her folly then when she was in love with him. Thus talking with him, Cleoboea
brought her old Lover Antheus over a Well, where for that purpose only, she
threw a tame Partridge, desiring him to aid her to have her Partridge out of
the Well; the young Gentleman misdoubting her in nothing, as one willing to
pleasure his friend and old lover, went down into the Well to have the
Partridge out, but she revenged her old love, and requited his service after
this sort, she threw a great stone after him, and there killed him; and
straight for sorrow caling to mind the old amity, and hidden love between them,
she hanged her self. This revenge that noble and famous Lacedemonian used, who
had his own wife in such admiration, and was so impatient in love, that he was
as much hated of her, as she of him was honored and esteemed. For she loves
King Acrotatus son so dear, that her husband Cleonimus understanding the same,
went to Epire to King Pyrrhus, persuading him earnestly to go unto Peloponesus,
and to move wars against King Acrotatus, whereby he might revenge the injury
done by his wife, in killing him whom she loved best, thinking it a greater
revenge to kill him whom she loved better then her self, then to revenge it
upon her own person. Valerius Torquatus, for that he might not have Tuscus
daughter in marriage moved wars immediately, and revenged the same with blood.
For what cause did Progne King Pandions daughter of Athens kill her own son
I^is, and gave him to be eaten unto his father, and her husband King Pereus of
Thrace? for nothing but to revenge her sister Phylomela, whom her husband
deflowred. Why did Nero that cruel Emperor kill Seneca his master, and
teacher in all his youth? for nothing but to revenge old stripes which he
received at his master being a boy. For what purpose did Cateline, Silla;
Damasippus, Marius, and others, make quarrels to plague Rome, to punish all
Italy, to destroy the country? for nothing, but for that they could not abide
the one to be above the other. Darius after that he had taken the City of
Babylon he revenged his old malice after this sort, as Herodotus in his third
book affirms: he caused three thousand of the best within the City to be
hanged. Attilla King of Panonia slew eleven thousand virgins, at the siege of
Colonia.

So several were revenges amongst men, so cruel, yea, so foolish that Xerxes
and Cyrus, two great Kings of Persia, when the water of Hellespont troubled
Xerxes, and molested his soldiers, he forthwith commanded that the sea of
Hellespont should have three hundred stripes: and willed three hundred pair of
Fetters to be thrown into Helespont, to bind the sea. Even so did Cyrus,
because the river Gindes did drown one of his best geldings, he made his
soldiers to divide the river into a hundred and fourscore small parts, to
revenge the rage of the river toward him, thinking that by breaking of the
great rage of so great a stream* he well and worthily requited the injuries of
Ginges. These are cruel revenges, too many are of these insomuch that women
revenge their malice after this sort.

So Tomyris Queen of Scithia, to revenge her son Margapites death, slew King
Cyrus, and two hundred thousands of his soldiers; too great a slaughter for
one man's death, and not yet satisfied, till she bathed Cyrus head in a great
vessel of blood. This B^ronice, Pollia, and diverse cruel women have performed.
Princes ought to use advisement in revenging, and wisdom in sufferance. For
as Frederick the Emperor was wont to say, Princes that revenge hastily and
especially wrongfully, are like fair marks for good Archers to shoot at. High
towers and lofty buildings, are sooner fired with lightnings, then low houses,
and small cottages.

Tiberius Caesar Emperor of Rome, being in the Senate house, to punish those
evils, and to revenge those harms, that were by same of the City threatened to
his estate: God forbid, said he, that Tib^rius should have so much idle time to
hear EVIL spoken, much less to revenge EVIL done. Ant^gonus King of Macedonia
besieging a Castle in Greece wherein a number of hold Greeks used for their
pastime and sport, to scoff at this King, knowing the situation of the Castle
to be in such a place, that it might not be subdued: they therefore laughed him
to scorn, as well for his enterprise therein, as also for his slender person,
and crooked nose, which King Antigonus perceiving, said, He would revenge all
their doings by sufferance, and hoped thereby to molest the enemies double
Diverse heathen Princes were acquainted with this revenge; as Lysander,
Agesilaus, and others; for to God only belongs vengeance.

I will not speak here of such revenging of Princes, of Countries, of friends
that all men know: But of rare revenge, which Philosophy taught unto Socrates
toward Xantippe; who being at supper, having a strange guest, named Enthidemus,
his wife Xantippe began to take her husband up, with taunting and opprobrious
words, which because he would not answer, and be moved by her chiding, she
overthrew the Table, with all the Meat, and the Cups: Which when Enthidemus
saw, he was amazed at the raging of Xantippe, and beheld Socrates in the face,
to see how he thought of the matter. But Socrates understanding that his guest
did marvel at his wife, said, Have not you sometime at home a Hen that will
after long clocking with a sudden flight throw down your cups with her wing?
wherewith Enthidemus was fully satisfied, with the wise answer of Socrates, in
not revenging so great a fault.

Phocion, a learned man of Athens, was wont to say, That he had rather suffer
injury wrongfully, then to revenge injury sometime rightfully. This man Phocion
by whom Athens long flourished, at what time he was put to death most
wrongfully of the Athenians, even a little before he should die, being demanded
whether he would command any thing to his son, standing hard by to see his
fathers end, did speak to his son after this sort: My son, said he, this I
charge and require thee, and moreover, beseech thee, that thou will never
revenge the wrongful death of thy father Phocion on the Athenians.

Solon that noble and learned Athenian, was wont to revenge his wrongs with
these words. If the Fisherman do suffer the salt water of the Sea, to sprinkle
upon his face, and upon his clothes, and to wet him when he takes fish how
much more ought Solon to forbear to speak, to win men to be friends unto him.
Surely these three Philosophers deserve more praise and commendation, I mean
Socrates, Phocion, and Solon, for the revenging of the evil with goodness and
virtue, then ever Alexander, or Julius Caesar, or Theseus which revenged evil
with evil. Wherefore Chilon the Lacedemonian, being one of the Officers called
Ephoti, in the City of Sparta, his brother demanding why he might not be
likewise one of the five Ephoti, as well as his brother, said unto his brother,
Because I can suffer wrong, and thou can not. Therefore Princes ought not to
do wrong, nor yet revenge wrong with wrong, but with patience, sufferance, and
goodness, and by doing good for evil. For thus they shall make foes to become
friends, evil men to become good by preventing evil with lenity and
gentleness. It behooves not a wise man to revenge injuries, neither does it
become a Prince to requite evil with the like, but to overcome rather evil
with good. Therefore was it truly spoken of the wiseman, Sapit qui sustinet, he
that can suffer, he is wise.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of Theft, and Sacrilege.

AFter that greedy desire unto wealth had possessed a place in man's heart, and
after that the world was altered from a wealth in common, unto a private
wealth, every man went about with study and industry to augment his own with
the spoil of others. For this cause Princes began one to suppress an other,
to spoil and destroy either others Dominions, moving first noble men to imitate
them in stealing and taking away perforce others wealth: and though it be not
an apt Epithete for Princes to be called thieves, and spoilers, yet truly by
Princes it began, by Nobles imitated, and by all the world at length practiced,
that some became Pirates upon the seas, some sacriledgers of temples, and some
grand thieves of countries and kingdoms. For after the deluge of Noah, there
was neither theft nor sacrilege known almost 300. years, till Ninus the third
King of the Assyrians, who first began to play the thief in Asia. Dionisius,
King of Sicilia, and tyrant of all the werld, the greatest robber that reigned
upon earth, being not satisfied with spoil and theft on lands and seas, became
also a sacriledger in the Temples of the Gods, which he so practiced that after
he robbed the Temple of Jupiter in Olimpia, he passed forth to Locris to spoil
the Temple of Proserpina, and from thence unto Epidaurus to steal the golden
beard of Aesculapius. The tyrant King could not satisfy himself till worthily
he had merited the name of a thief, a Pyrate and a sacriledger.

Xerxes spared not amongst other wilful robberies, to send four thousand of
his soldiers to Delphos, to rob the Temple of Apollo, Spartacus a great
Prince, and a maintainer of thieves, gathered a whole army of fugitive persons,
vagabonds, thieves, and robbers, and marched toward Rome, with a resolution
either to conquer Rome, or to be conquered by Rome, but there was he and all
his rogues vanquished by Pu. Crassus. The City of Rome was often in peril by
thieves and robbers, as by Silla, Catelin, and Marius, famous spoilers of
Italy. And as Cercion did rob and spoil the country of Athens, so Ti^^gias in
Arcadia was renowned for theft. I might in this place speak of the robbery of
the Emperor Nero, of the spoil and wast of that beastly Emperor Heliogabalus,
and of the sacrilege and theft of Caligula. These three Emperors did steal
spoil, and took from Rome, more then ever they gave to Rome.

Marcellinus writes that there was sometimes a King of the Parthians named
Arsaces, which in the beginning of his reign, was then named the master of
thieves, a teacher and a schoolmaster unto all robbers and spoilers: but after
that he had subdued Seleucus, Alexanders successor he became famous and
renowned in martial feats, and civil policy. Herodotus likewise does report
of one Amazis, a King of Egypt, when at any time money wanted, he was wont to
spoil, wast, and take away all that ever he might, either by stealth or force.

Thus the names of Princes were first corrupted, that the Poets judged well and
worthily, Mercury to be the God of thieves: and for the antiquity of theft, it
is thought that Prometheus Deucalions father as Poets do feign, by the aid of
Minerva, stole first fire from Phoebus, for the which fact, he was punished in
mount Caucasus, after this sort; he was bound fast, and an Eagle appointed to
eat up his heart, and to hale his puddings along, in furtherance and memory of
his theft. Hercules and Jason, two of the most famous Princes that ever Greece
fostred, went unto Colchis to steal the golden Fleece. Theseus and Perithous
went unto the Kingdom of Pluto to steal Proserpina away.

There was dwelling in a rock near Athens, a famous thief named Sci^on, who was
wont to throw headlong, strangers that were his guests, from a rock into the
sea, and after that he had continued a long time in spotling, and murdering of
men that passed by, in taking their goods, and lives away, he was in the^ same
sort by Theseus put himself to death, Cacus of whom Virgil makes mention the
son of Vulcan, was so crafty a thief that having a den in mount Aventine, he
used to draw any thing backward by the tail, unto his cave, where he spoiled
it, whether it were man or beast, there should he be brought by flight of Cacus
to he destroyed, till he attempted to spoil Hercules by stealth, who after long
wrestling in his den, with his club slew him. The famous thief Sinius used such
seats and thefts about Corinth, that he would bind any passer by or strangers
unto trees, and there would hew them into small gobbets for their money and
substance.

These three last renowned thieves, are much mentioned of writers. So Capiton
kept himself fifty years in a den, as a common robber to steal and to spoil all
that came near his violence. The Argives were men most noted and infamous, for
this fault, insomuch that a proverb grew of the Argives, Argivi fures, that is
the Argives are thieves. Amongst the Persians there were certain thieves called
Cardaces, permitted without punishment to steal and to rob. The old Germans and
ancient Egyptians might sometime by law, and the liberty of their country be
allowed to steal.

Lycurgus made laws in Sparta amongst the Lacedaemonians, that he that did
steal, without reprehension, or being taken with the theft, should be free, and
he which could not artificially steal being taken, should be punished: insomuch
that Brusonius, in his second book, does speak of a young man, that stole a
young Fox, the owner thereof following after, demanded of the young man whether
he saw a little for or no, the young man denied it, hiding the Fox under his
cloak, but the Fox a subtle beast, willing to show himself to his master, did
bite and scratch the young man so sore, that his puddings gushed out of his
side, who thus suffered himself to die, rather then he would manifest his theft.

Wherefore Theophrastus a noble philosopher, having the examination of a
subtle thief, demanded whether he could blush, or no, to the which the thief
answered that he could not, for he needed not to blush, in a true matter:
therefore says Theophrastus thou art the liklier to be a thief for truth
always appears in a shamefast countenance. Wherefore the wise Cato the
Senior was wont to say that young men that waxed red, were better to be
trusted, then those that would wax pale, for the one signifies shamefastness,
and the other deceit. For Pithias, Aristotle's daughter being demanded what
color was best in man or woman, she answered, that color that shamefastness
brings, which is a blushing countenance.

But to speak of Pirates: Sextus Pompey the son of Pompey the great, kept under
him diverse and sundry Pirates about the borders of Italy and Sicily to rob and
spoil upon the seas, to his great infamy and reproach, being the son of so
famous a Roman, whom Rome a long time so esteemed, that Caesar hardly might be
superior to him. What shall I say of King Pyrrhus, and Caius Verres, whom
Cicero for his sundry thefts and spoil, and for diverse sacriledges by Verres
committed, compared unto the foresaid Tyrant? To speak of infinite Pirates, and
diverse Sacriledgers, it were to none effect, because it is a common practice in
all Countries. Therefore as Diogenes the Philosopher said, when he saw a poor
man led between the Magistrates, to the place of execution, Behold, says he a
little thief between a number of great thieves. God grant that it may not truly
be spoken of diverse Magistrates in sundry places.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of Lust.

THe spoil and slaughter of Lust, did always far surpass all other vices; it
has suppressed Castles and Countries, it has vanquished Kings and Cesars,
overthrown the pomp of Asia, Africa, and Europe, and almost depopulated the
whole world. This vice of all vices is to be abhorred and detested; for there
is no vice but has its center; as pride chiefly has her seat appointed in
puissant Princes and Noble men; Covetousness resideth with old men that be
Magistrates and Officers; Envy with men of sciences and faculties; Usury with
Citizens; Symony with Bishops and Priests; Hypocrisy with Religious men;
Deceit with Merchants: but Lust is common to all men, as well to the subject as
to the Prince, to the learned as to the ignorant, to the wise as to the
foolish. For David and son Solomon, to whom God gave singularity of wisdom,
dexterity of wit to govern the Israilites; yet the sacred Scriptures do witness
of their horrible lust. David lusted for Bathsheba, and that so wickedly, that
he appointed a way to put to death her husband Uriah. Solomon lusted so much,
that he did forget his God that did guide his steps all the while he ruled
justly, and lived godly in Israel.

Aristotle and Socrates in despite of their Philosophy and great knowledge the
one became a slave to Hermia, the other a subject to Aspasia. Sampson and
Hercules, for all their strength and conquest of Giants and monsters the one
prostrated his Club at Deianiraes foot, the other committed his strength to the
beauty of Delilah. The renowned and sugared Orators, Demosthenes and
Hortensitis, the one from Athens came to Corinth, to compound for a nights
lodging with Lais; the other in Rome, with niceness and wantonness, was
judged more subject to lust, then Lord over himself. If then witty and wise
men, if learned and discreet men, if eloquent and subtle men, if strong and
mighty Conquerours have been ruled by lust, deceived by beauty, overcome with
women; what should I speak of Heliogabulus, not well named Emperor, but
worthily called the beast of Rome? What should I recite that Monster and Tyrant
Nero? What should I recite that filthy and vile Emperor Caligula, the only
sink of sin, and shame? not Emperors, but Monsters; not Princes, but Tyrants;
not men, but beasts which defiled their own sisters, kept open stews and
brothel houses, maintaining Whores and Harlots, made Laws, at their banquets,
every man to his woman first, and then to his meat; and at the change of every
dish, every man again commanded by a law to go to his woman: And thus from meat
to women, from women to meat they beastly and brutishly entertained their
Epicurial lust, wherein these Gorgons reposed their chief felicity.

Certainly if Queen Semitamis of Babylon had been matched with Heliogabulus,
Emperor of Rome, it had been as meet a match, if time had served, as one beast
should be for another; for he was not so filthy, but she was as shameless, not
only in procuring diverse to lie with her, but in alluring her own son Ninus to
lust, and as writers report, being a beast, matched her self with a beast, a
horse. Had Pasiphae Queen of Creet been well matched, she had forsaken King
Minos, and come to the Emperor Caligula, where she might have been as bold
with others, as she was with Minotaurus father. Had the Empress Mestalina been
deservedly, according to her life, married she had been more meet for Nero then
for Claudius; for his life and her life did well agree together: for she passed
all the Courtesans of Corinth, all the strumpets of Athens, and all the whores
of Babylon; for she was only mistress and ruler of all the stews and brothel
houses in Rome

What wickedness proceeds from lust? what ungodly incest is brought to pass
by lust? what secret vengeance comes by lust? Lust assured Queen Cleopatra to
use her brother Ptolomy as her husband. Lust deceived King Cynar to lie with
his daughter Myrrha. Lust brought Macarius to his sister Canaces bed. By lust
did Menepron defile his own mother. Lust stays the purpose of all men,
hinders and hurts all kind of persons. Lust stayed King Antiochu^ of Syria
in Chal^idea a whole winter, for one maid he fancied there. Lust stayed
Hannibal in Capua a long season, to his great hurt. Lust stayed Julius Caesar
in Alexandria a long time, unto his infamy.

Lust was the first cause of wars between the Romans and the Sabines; for
Romu^us had hardly built Rome, but he lusted to ravish the women, and to steal
the Sabine maids to Rome, whereby the war first began. The great wars between
King Cambyses of Persia, and King Amasis of Egypt, wherein was a great
slaughter and murder of men, grew by lust to one woman. The ten years betwixt
the Thebans and the Phoceans, was for the lust of one young man in Phoca
toward a young woman in Thebes. The cruel conflicts that was between the
Troyan Prince Aeneas, and stout Turnus, was the lust which either of them did
bear to Lavinia, King Latinus, Daughter. What blood, what tyranny was between
the Egyptians and the Assyrians, between Ptolomy and Alexander, the one King of
Egypt, the other King of Assyria, and all for one woman Cleopatra. Augustus the
Emperor made long wars for Octavia his sister, whom Antonius abused to the
spoil and murder of many Romans. Had Hesione, King Priamus sister, not lusted
to go with Telamon from Troy to Greece; had likewise Helen, the wife of
Menelaus, not lusted to come with Paris from Greece to Troy; the bloody wars,
and ten years siege between the Greeks and the Troyans had never been writ^en
by Homer. Had not lust ruled the five cities called Pentapolis, where Sedom and
Gomorrha were, they had not been consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven
to the destruction of all the people, saving Lot and his children. If lust had
not ruled all the world, the deluge of Noah had not drowned the whole earth,
and all living creatures, saving Noah; his wife and children. Thus lust from
time to time was the only Monster and scourge of the World. And in this our
Age lust is nothing diminished, but much increased; and though we shall not be
plagued again with Water, according to promise, yet to be punished with Fire
most sure we be, unless we detest and abhor this vice.

There is a History in Justine, worthy to be noted of Princes that will not
punish these offenses. Pausanias a Noble Gentleman of Macedonia, being a very
fair young man, whom Attalus by lust abused; and Attalus not contented to
handle the young man so wickedly and ungodly, did bring him also to a banquet,
where Attalus would have used him as before making all men privy how Pausanias
was his paramour as a woman: The young man being ashamed of it, often
complained unto Philip King of Macedonia, and after many and diverse complaints
having no redress, but being rather flouted and scoffed at by Philip,
Pausanias took it so grievously, that after this sort he requited his shame and
injuries. At the marriage of Cleopatra, King Philips daughter, with Alexander
King of Epirus in great triumphs and pomps, King Philip in the midst of his
joys, walking between his own son Alexander the great, who then was but young,
and Alexander King of Epirus his son in law being married then to his daughter
Cleopatra; Pausanias thrust him into the heart, saying, Minister Justice and
punish Lust. Thus died that mighty Prince, as well for the bearing of Attalus
fault, as also for his own wickedness, using the same sin sometime with a
brother in law of his, natural brother to his first wife Olympias.

Lust and intemperancy do never escape without just punishment and due
vengeance. Amnon the son of King David, for that he misused his own sister
Tamar, was afterward slain. Absalom for that he did lie with his fathers
Concubines, died for it. David was plagued for Uriah's wife. The two Elders
that would ravish Susanna, were put to death. This sin is the only enemy of
man: For all sin (says St. Paul) is without the body, but uncleanness and
lust sins against the body. Had not Olofernes seen the beauty of Judith,
yea, marked the comeliness of her slippers, he had not lost his head by it.
Had not Herod seen Herodias daughrer dancing, he had not so rashly granted her
John Baptists head. Had not Eve seen the beauty of the Apple, she had not eaten
thereof.

We read in Genesis, that when the sons of men, viewed the beauty of women,
many evils happened thereby. By sight was Potiphars wife moved with lust toward
Joseph her servant. By sight and beauty was Solomon allured to commit Idolatry
with false Gods. By sight was Dina the daughter of Jacob ravished by Shechem.
These evils proceed from sudden sights; therefore says the Prophet, Turn away
thine eyes, lest they see vanities. The Philosopher likewise says, That the
first offer or motion is in the eye, from sight proceeds motion; from motion
election; from election, consent; from consent, sin; from sin, death. Wherefore
with the Poet I say, resist the violence of the first assault, I mean the eyes:
The evil that happened thereby too long it were to write.

Lust again has its entrance by hearing, as Justine in his twelfth Book does
testify of Thalestris Queen sometime of the Amazons, who having heard the great
commendations, the fame and renown of Alexander the great, ventered her life to
hazard to come from Scythia to Hircania, which was, as Iustine says, five and
twenty days journey in great danger and peril of life, as well by wild beasts,
waters, as also by foreign foes. She had three hundred thousand women of
Scythia in company with her: For the fame she had heard of this great Prince,
she came from her Country, where she was a Queen, to lie with a stranger, to
satisfy her lust. And when she had accomplished her mind, after thirty nights
lying with him, she returned unto her own country again.

Cicero does write, that we are more moved by report oftentimes to love, then
by sight. For as by report, Queen Thalestris came to lie with Alexander, from
Scythia unto Hircania, for his magnanimity, victories, and courage; so by
report came the Queen of Sheba from Ethiopia unto Solomon, to hear and to learn
wisdom. O golden world! Oh happy age, when either for simplicity men could not
speak, or for temperance men would not speak. The innocence of them then, and
the subtilty of us now; the temperancy of their age, and the lust of our age,
being well weighed, and thoroughly examined, it is easily to be seen, how
virtuously they lived in ignorance, and how viciously we live in knowledge.

Before Aruntius, proud Tarquins son, was by lust moved toward Collatines wife,
there was no alterations of States, nor change of Commonwealths, no banishment
of Princes in Rome: And Rome being changed, for this man's lust only, from a
Monarchy unto another state, called Aristocracy, it continued so long in that
form, until Appius Claudius ravished Virginius daughter, which was the occasion
of the second change. And the popular state, which had the chief rule always in
Rome, changed the states of the City, for that lust so reigned.

Thus might I speak of diverse other Countries, where lust was the just cause of
the subversion of them. For by one Venus, a strumpet in Cyprus, all Cyprus was
full of Whores: By one Semiramis in Babylon, all Persia at length grew full of
queans: By one Rhodope in Egypt at the beginning all the country became full of
strumpets. In Rome Flora was honored like a Goddess, having such solemnity,
and on Theaters, which were called according to her own name Floralia. In
Thebes was Phrine so magnified, that her name was put in print upon every Gate
of the City. As for Lais in Corinth, and Lamia in Athens, their Fame was more
heard, then their Honesty known.

It grew in fine to that strength, that all the Princes of the world were as
bulwarks and defenders of lust. Yea, learned Philosophers and wise Lawgivers,
seemed to defend the same in writing. As Lycurgus and Solon, two famous wise
men, the one a Lawgiver among the Lacedaemonians, (people in the beginning more
expert in the banners and flags of Mars, then studious or desirous to haunt the
palaces of Venus:) The other a Lawgiver in Athens (people likewise, more
frequenting at the first, the school of Minerva, then the lurking dens and
secret snares of Cupid) these two famous men made laws to maintain lust, under
the color and pretext of issue; every young woman being married to an old man,
might for children, take choice what young man she would of her husbands name.
So likewise might any young man, choose a young woman, being married to an old
woman.

Aristotle seems to defend this law after a sort. So Abraham's wife Sara after
a sort, willed her husband to accompany with a young maid, for that he might
have children. And Sempronia, a woman excellently well learned in the Greek and
Latin; and Sapho, a woman of no less fame then of learning, defended lust by
their Writings. I might have large scope herein, to prove Lust, as a Lord, to
rule and govern every where.

I have sufficiently, I hope, declared the effect of Lust: For as Princes wise,
stout, and learned, have been hereto subject: so the Poets fain, that the Gods
themselves have yielded to the might of lust. What I pray you, translated
Jupiter to a Bull, Neptune unto a horse, Mercury unto a Goat? Lust. What moved
Apollo to be in love with Daphnes? What caused Bacchus to favor Gnosida? What
made Pan to yield unto Sirinx? lust. What moved wise, learned, stout, and
strong as well as the foolish, the ignorant, the weak, and the simple, but
only that corruption of nature, that seed, and dregs of Adam, which equally
without grace, moves all men to sin? For there is no man, but he is privy to
lust, moved by lust, and sorely assaulted by it. Yet there be some that subdue
lust, some that rule lust, but none that vanquish lust; for as some are born
chaste, so some do make themselves chaste, and some who are thus made chaste are
yet not without some spice of lust.

I speak not of Proculus the Emperor, who kept at his pleasure a hundred maids
of Sarmatia. Neither do I think herein of Sardanapalus King of Assyria, who was
always we^ried but never satisfied with Venus. But I speak of those that
fight, and wrestle against nature: of those I say, that are in common combats
with the world the flesh, and the Devil. For lust says Ovi^, is I wot not
what, and comes I wot not whence, it takes root without breaking of flesh
and pierces the very intrals of the heart without any cutting of the vein, it
is the only business and travel of idle men.

The young Roman Estrasco at mount Celio, beholding the beauty of a Lady called
Verrona, either of them by nature being dumb, one fell in love with the other
so sore, that Estrasco would often go from Rome to Salon, and Verrona would as
often travel from Salon to Rome, the one to see the other, and this dumb love
continued thus thirty years, till it fortuned that the wife of Estrasco died,
and the husband of Lady Verrona died also. Whereby these lovers thirty years
without words, did both manifest their long desire by a marriage* So was
Masinissa K. of Numidia, and Sophronisba, a Lady of Carthage, the one enflamed
with the other, only by a sight that King Masinissa had of Sophronisba.

The like is written of that most valiant Captain Pyrrhus the long defendor of
the Tarentines, and King of Epirots, when he came from Italy unto Neapolis,
being but one day there, he fell in love with a fair Lady called Gamalice, to
the great, infamy of so famous a Prince, and to the great shame of so noble a
Lady. The like lust arrested that noble and renowned Conqueror Alexander, so
that when he thought to give battle to the Queen of Amazons, having a sight of
her at a river side, where they both had appointed to come to talk concerning
their wars, their fury and rage before bent to fight, and murder, was by a
sight changed into a wanton pastime and sport. We do read also that Queen
Cleopatra made a banquet for Anthony her lover, in the Province of Bithinia, in
the Wood Sechin, where the young virgins were not so cunning to hide them in
the thick bushes; but the youthful Romans were as crafty in finding them out,
so that at that one instant of sixty young virgins, fifty and five deserved the
name of mothers. Thus we perceive that by sight we are moved to lust, and by
consent we wilfully sin, the one in the eye, the other in the heart: therefore
better it is with Sophocles, for a man to turn his back from a fair woman, then
with Nero to behold beauty, who looking to earnestly upon the hair of
Poppaeas, was thereby moved to lust.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Of Jealousy.

A Question was propounded to all the Gods, to be answered, whether man or
woman be more jealous. For as the Poets feign there sprung a contention between
Jupiter and Juno, concerning lust and jealousy, and having no equal judge to
determine this matter, it was referred after great controversy unto one
Tiresias, an ancient and learned poet sometime in Thebes, which Tiresias on a
certain time meeting two Snakes, according to kind ingendring together, having
a white rod in his hand, parted at once both their bodies and their lives.
Wherewith Juno being moved to anger, transformed this poet Tiresias from a man
to a woman and being in the shape of a woman seven years, he again found two
Snakes ingendring together, and in like manner striking them, he was again
reduced to his first form. This Tiresias was thought most meet of Jupiter and
Juno, by the consent of all the Gods, for that he had been a woman seven years,
and now a man again, to judge of this question. And being called to the Bar to
give his verdit, he preferred Juno for jealousy: whereby Juno waxed angry, and
made him blind, and Jupiter to recompense his truth, did make him a Prophet.

When Jupiter fell in love with Io, Juno being suspicious and full of
jealousy, caused one named Argos with an hundred eyes to watch Jupiter, who for
all his eyes was deceived Juno thereby was so furious and so hungry with Argos,
that she translated his eyes unto a Peacocks tail, and transformed Io to a white
Cow. There is no such rage in jealousy, as there is craft in love, so that the
straight keeping of Danae King Acrisius daughter in Towers and Castles, could
never keep her from Perseus, neither the hundred eyes of Argos might spy the
craft of Jupiter to Io.

We read of a woman named Procris who was in such jealousy of her husband
called Cephalus, that having him in suspicion for his often going a hunting, on
a certain time she followed him privily into the Woods, thinking there to find
her husband at his wantonness, and hiding her self in a thick bush, to see the
end of the event, her husband passing by the bush perceiving something there to
stir, thinking it had been some wild beast, thrust his wife into the heart with
his dart, and thus Procris was slain of her own husband, for her importunate
jealousy. The like happened to Aemilius wife, who for her suspicious and
raging jealousy, was never quiet, but was busy always to find some fault in
her husband, following him every where, and watching still in privy places,
thinking to find him in the manner; and until she sped of the like chance as
Procris did, she could never be quiet. Cyampus wife named Leuconona, was
devoured by dogs instead of a wild beast, hiding her self in the Woods, to
follow and mark her husbands voyage. Jealousy so moved her, that she could do
no otherwise. A strange kind of sickness it is that so infecteth the mind,
vexes the spirits, and molesteth the heart, that the head is full of invention
and the mind full of thought, and the heart full of revenge.

So jealous was Phanius, that the doors being shut, the windows close, all
privy and secret places prevented, every where as he thought so stopped, that
his wife could not deceive him yet, never thought that love could pierce
tilestones to come unto his wife; but he was deceived, for the lurking dens of
love, and fancies, and the secret search of affection has more privy paths,
whereby Cupid may come to his mother Venus, then the Labyrinth had chambers for
the Minotaur. King Acrisius thought he was sure of his daughter Danae when she
was close bulwarked within a great Castle: Juno thought to prevent Jupiter by
the hundred eyes of Argos, Phanius thought that his wife was sure enough when
the doors were shut, and the windows close, but neither could the jealousy of
Juno prevent it, neither the eyes of Argos spy it, neither the straight keeping
of Danae avoid it, neither the close defense of Phanius defend it.

I must needs commend one called Cippius, that would oftentimes take upon him
to sleep when he did wake, and would pretend to be ignorant though he knew it.
I wish wise men to sleep with Cippius, and to say with Cicero, Non omnibus
dormio, I sleep not to all men, and to be ignorant though they know things. And
likewise I wish wise women to imitate Aemilia, the wife of noble Scipio, who
although she knew things evident by Scipio, yet she made as much of his
Paramour, as she made of her husband, and all for his own sake.

They say jealousy proceeds from love, and love from God, but I say it
comes from hatred, and hatred from the Devil. And yet we read in the sacred
Scripture, that Abraham was jealous of his wife Sarah, saying thus to his wife,
I know that thou art fair, and they will kill me to have thy love. The manners
of the Parthians, were to keep their wives in privy places of their houses,
over whom they were so jealous, that their wives might not go abroad but with
covered faces. The Persians were so suspicious of their wives, that they had no
liberty to go in sight, and they durst not go on foot, but in Wagons covered
over lest they should see or be seen. The Thracians with such care and study
keep their wives, that as Herodotus affirms, they trust no man with them in
company, but their own parents. The old and ancient Romans in times past kept
their wives so close, that their wives as Valerius Maximus says, did diverse
times, either kill poison or with some cruelty or other destroy their husbands,
and it was by a young man of the city of Rome disclosed, yt there was a hundred
threescore and ten, that so killed and destroyed their husbands, for that their
husbands were so jealous over them. But because it is a common disease in all
places, I need not further to write thereof, wishing my friend, never to be
encumbered therewith, but rather with silence to pass it with Cippius, and so
he shall find ease thereby.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Of Idleness.

AS nothing can be greatly difficult to a willing mind, so every thing is a
burden to the idle, one for as labor and exercise of body, and industry and
diligence of mind are sure and strong bulwarks of countries, so are idleness
and negligence the cause of all evil. We read that Alexander the great, least
he should be acquainted with idleness at any time, even in the night time used
this art, to hold a silver ball when he went to bed in his hand, having a
silver basin upon the ground that when the ball should fall, he being fast
asleep, the shrill sound thereof should wake him, and make him mindful of his
enemies: so fearful was this noble prince of idleness, that to shake off
sleep and slothfulness, he studied and traveled, how he might avoid it. For
Alexander the great being called the son of Jupiter, and fully persuaded with
himself that he was of the linnage of the Gods, had special regard of sleep and
lust, whereto he being so much subject, knew himself to be a man: wherefore he
oftentimes wrastled with nature in that behalf. In the selfsame place of
Marcellinus it is read, that Julius Caesar the greatest and most renowned
Emperor that ever reigned in Rome, followed this order, and practiced this
policy, least he should be idle at any time. For first, to suffice nature, he
slept a certain time appointed. Secondly, he would be occupied in the affairs
of his country. Thirdly he traveled in his private study. Thus least he should
be idle, nay rather, least he should lose any time he divided every night into
three parts, first to nature, secondly to his country, thirdly about his own
business. The mighty Prince Philip of Macedon as we read in Brusonius, was of
such care and diligence, that when his soldiers slept, he always watched.
Again, he never slept, until his friend Antipater were first awake. So that
between King Philip and Antipater, diligence was as much honored and embraced,
as slothfulness was feared and hated.

Epaminondas that renowned Prince of Thebes, being studious and profitable to
profit his country, so hated idleness, that finding one of his Captains in the
Camp in the day time sleeping, he slew him straight with his own hand, and
being reprehended by his Nobles and Counselors, for that cruel fact he
answered them in few words, I left him as I found him; comparing idle and
drowsy men to dead men, for men are born to travel and watch, and not to take
pleasure and steep. How did Scipio in Africa overthrow the Tents of Siphax?
how vanquished he his host of soldiers, slew his army, and how took he King
Siphax captive himself. Livius says, that the diligence of Scipio, and the
sloathfulnesse of Siphax being a sleep, when he should be waking, was the cause
thereof. Had Demosthenes loved idleness, he had never been able to prevent
that famous Prince Philip King of Macedon: he was so careful and diligent to
the state of Athens, that that worthy Captain and great Conqueror Philip, was
wont to say, that he doubted more the diligence of Demosthenes, then he feared
all the force of Athens. Had Cicero slept, during the conspiracy of Catelin, he
had never been able worthily to boast of himself. O happy Rome, that ever I was
thy Consul. Studious travel, saved oftentimes Rome from diverse enemies.

Quintilian recites a worthy history of a famous scholar named Hippias, who
to avoid idleness after long studying of his book, would exercise himself in
something or other, least he might seem to be idle, insomuch that he applied
himself to diverse faculties at void hours, and used to practice the faculty of
a Goldsmith, of a Tailor, of a Shoo-maker, insomuch that at length he became
his own Tailor, his own Shoemaker, yea, to make his own rings so artificially,
as though he had been brought up in the school of Praxiules. What is so hard
but diligence will attempt it? What is so deep, but travel will wade through
it? What is so strange, but study will know it? Labor and diligence are of
Wise men much commended by the example of the Be, that is busy and careful,
and knows how to profit her self and others. If the little Ants be so
praised, for that they toil in the Summer to provide against the Winter: If the
silly simple Worms do provide things necessary for them and theirs: How much
more ought man, who is born to profit his country, his Prince, his friends and
his parents, to consider the commodity of diligence, and the danger of
idleness? But it is before mentioned, vices are covered with the names of
virtues; as the idle man is noted to be a quiet man, the ignorant termed an
innocent.

Caelius does write of a certain Emperor named Attalus, which so well loved
idleness, that he gave the government of the Empire to his friend Philopenes
for that he would be idle. We read again of one Vatia, a great ruler and
Mastrate in Asia, that loved idleness so well, that the people used a proverb,
when they saw any man idle, to say, He is an idle scholar of Vatiaes. The
Emperor Licinius and Valentianus were such enemies to learning, and so
ignorant, as Egnatius does report, that they called Learning the only poison
of the world, and named them that were learned, the Asses of Cuma.

Who hated learning so much as Heraclides and Philonides which were so
ignorant, that they were as Caelius does testify, had of the common people in
great derision, These blind men did call others Asses of Cuma, when they
themselves were far inferior to any Ass in the world. For diverse Asses had
more reason then Philonides or Heraclides had. We read that Ammonius a great
philosopher of Alexandria, had an Ass which would keep company with Origin and
Porphirius to frequent the school of Amonius, to hear him read Philosophy and
to his scholars, the Ass was taught to know the reader, as the scholars were
to know the school at the time of reading.

The sacred Scripture commends tons the Ass of Balaam, who was likewise taught
to speak and to show the prophet Balaam the will of God. But the idle and
ignorant, will neither learn to know time, place, nor person, neither to profit
themselves nor others. These lasie members, these idle and ignorant beasts, are
the children of Morpheus, sleeping always in the cave of Pamedes, to whom it
well may be spoken, as Aurelian sometime an Emperor of Rome. spoke unto one
Bonosius, that he was born to drink, and not to live.

The Romans used to punish idleness so sharply, that the Husbandman that had
his ground barren, and his Pastures, Meadows, or Fields untilled, any other man
should be there placed, and he put out. The Gentleman that had not his horse
ready, and in good liking, with all things thereunto belonging, should be
suspected to be an idle member unto his country, and should be hated and
eschued by the people. The common people might use no kind of private pleasure,
as plays, pastime, or any other idle sport, but at times appointed. The gates
of Rome were opened day and night, to come and to go for the good of the
Commonalty, and as Plutarch writes, the life and manners of all men were
strictly examined, whether they lived idle or no. And if any did resist the
order of the Magistrates, his head should be cut off, and offered to Jupiter in
the Capitol of Rome, his family to the temple of Ceres, his children should be
sold as bondmen to the Tribunes and Censors.

The Lacedaemonians were most studiou^ to expel idleness, and brought their
children up always in hardness to practice them in the Arts of Industry, and
hated Idleness so much, that if any in the City of Sparta waxed gross or fat,
they straight suspected him of idleness; and if any young man waxed fat, they
had appointed laws that he should fast, and live poor, until he were again
changed into his first estate,

The Egyptians, an ancient people, when the country of Egypt began to be
populous, to avoid idleness, as Pliny reports, made the great building
called the Pyramides, which for the mightiness and strange working thereof,
was named one of the seven wonders of the World, in which there were kept at
work, threescore thousand young men, who continued a long time in the making
thereof, and only to avoid and banish idleness. The Athenians so abhorrid and
detested idleness, that when a certain man was condemned to die, for that he
was found idle in Athens, a citizen thereof named Herondas, as Plutarch
testifies, was as desirous to see him, as though he had been a prodigious
Monster; so strange and so mavelous was it to hear, or to see any idle man in
Athens. The people called the Massilians, would suffer no travelers, neither
Pilgrim, nor Sacrificer, nor any other stranger to come within their City, lest
under color of religion, or of pilgrimage, they might corrupt the youth of the
City, with the sight thereof to be idle. The Indians had a law, made by their
Wisemen called Gymnosophists, that after meat was set on the table, the youth
should be examined, what they had done for their meat, and what pain and labor
they had used all the morning before; if they could make account of their
travel, they should go to dinner; but if they had been idle they should have
no meat except they had deserved the same. The like did the young men of Argis,
who made an account to their Magistrates of their occupations and works. The
Areopagites, as Valerius affirms did imitate the Athenians in commanding
their youth to avoid idleness, and to exercise travel, the one as necessary to
any Commonwealth, as the other is most dangerous. So that some countries are
naturally given to travel, as the Lydians, Phrygians, French men, with others.
Some again are given to idleness, as the Persians, Corinthians and others.
Some by law were forced to sly idleness, some by punishment were feared from
it, some by death were enforced to labor for their living. Thus this Monster
Idleness is beaten every where, and yet embraced in most places; every man
speaks against idleness, yet a number are in love with it; Magistrates and
Officers are appointed to punish it, and yet they often favor it.

CHAP. XL.
Of Wrath and Anger, and the hurts thereof.

THe famous and noble Philosopher, Aristotle, did charge his scholars always
being in Anger or Wrath, to behold themselves in a glass, where they might see
such alteration of countenance, such a palenesse in color, that being before
reasonable men, they appear now like brutish beasts. Wherefore that great
Philosopher perceiving the furious and hasty nature of Alexander, wrote from
Athens unto India, where this noble conqueror was at wars with King Porus, to
take heed of Wrath and Anger, saying, Anger ought not to be in any Prince
toward his inferior, for he was to be mended with correction, nor toward his
equal, for he might be redressed with power; so that Anger ought not to be, but
against superiors; but Alexander had no coequals. Yet in vain was Aristotle's
doctrine to Alexander in this point: for being in a ba^quet when Clitus his
dear friend commended his father King Philip in the former age, to be the
worthiest, and most renowned Prince, Alexander wexed upon a sudden so angry,
that any man should be preferred before him, though Philip was his own father
which was commended, and Cli^us his especial friend that did commend him that he
thrust Clitus into the heart with a spear. So hasty was this Prince, that
Calisthenes and Lysi^achus, the one his Historian and counselor, the other
his companion and friend, for a few words spoken were either of them slain:
Silence therefore, says Aristotle, is the surest reward to a Prince.

We read that King Tigranes of Armenia, whom Pompey the great did conquer,
waxed so angry by a fall from his horse, because his son was present, and could
not prevent his fathers fall, that he thrust him with his dagger into the
heart; and was so sorry afterward, and angry withal; that he had likewise
killed himself, had not Anaxarchus the Phllosopher persuaded him. Anger in a
Prince (says Solomon) is death; terrible is the countenance of a King when he
is oppressed with Wrath; hurtful to many, and dangerous to all is the anger
thereof. Nero was so furious in anger, that he never heard any thing, if it
were not to his liking, but he would requite it one way or other with death,
insomuch that in his rage and anger he would often throw down tables, being at
dinner, and dash cups of gold wrought with pearls against the walls, and fling
all away, more like to a furious Gorgon of hell, then a sober Emperor in Rome.

Such fury reigns in anger, that Orestes the son of Agamemnon slew his own
mother Clytemnestra, suddenly in his Wrath. Such madness reigns in Anger;
that Ajax Telamon, that famous and valiant Greek, after that Achilles was slain
in the temple of Pallas by Paris, at the destruction of Troy, waxed so Angry
because he might not have Achilles Armor, which was given before to Ulisses,
that he beat stones and blocks, fought with dead trees, killed beasts, thinking
to meet with Ulisses amongst them. If Anger make men murderers, if Wrath make
men mad, without wit or reason to know themselves or others, let them imitate
Plato in his anger, who being angry with any of his scholars or servants would
give the rod to Zenocrates to correct them; Because he was angry, the learned
Philosopher misdoubted himself, that he could not use moderate correction. Even
so Archicas would always speak unto his servant that had offended him, Happy
art thou that Architas is not angry: Thereby giving his man to understand how
dangerous Wrath is.

Aristotle says, the angry man sees not the thing which lies under his feet.
Augustus Caesar Emperor of Rome, destred Athenedorus a Philosopher of Greece,
which a long time accompanied Augustus in Rome, and now was ready to depart to
Athens yt he would write some sentence that the Emperor might think of him in
his absence. The Philosopher took a pen, and wrote in a little Table this
sentence: Caesar when thou art moved to anger, speak nothing till thou have
recited the Greeks Alphabet: a worthy lesson and a famous sentence, well
worthy to be learned of all men.

There is nothing, neither can there be any thing more ugly to behold, then
man's face when he is angry, nor to be feared because he has no rule over
himself. All the painters of Persia had much to do to draw in colors the
terrible countenance and fiery face of Queen Semiramis, when she heard that her
City of Babylon was besieged by the enemies, being then dressing of her head:
she came with her hairs hand flying in the wind half amazed at the news. Her
picture in this discontent and fury, stood as long as Babylon continued, as a
monument and a terrible mirror to posterity.

We read of the like history of Olimpias, whose anger was such, when she
thought of her son Alexander, that she straight ways like a raging Lion or a
cruel Tiger, dug up the body of Iolas, Alexanders murderer, and tare his
body in small pieces, and gave it to the birds of the air. Such anger was in
Marcus Antonius toward Cicero, that he was not contented at Ciceroes death,
but commanded his head to be set before him on the Table, to feed therewith his
wrathful heart, and greedy eyes; and his wife Fulvia to show her anger, pulled
out his tongue, and pinned it to her hood, and ware it on her head, in token of
her cruel and Tigrish heart.

The noble Roman Metellus was so inflamed against Pompey, for at what time he
was appointed by the Senators of Rome, to succeed Metellus in his
pro-consulship in Spain. Metellus perceiving that he was discharged, he brake
for very anger, all the furniture of wars, and dedestroied all the provision,
he famished the Elephants, and permitted his soldiers to do what injury they
could against Pompey; so great was his anger that to hinder Pompey, he injured
his native City of Rome. The property of anger is, to hurt diverse, in seeking
to offend one. As he is not wise that cannot be angry, so he is most wise that
can moderate anger.

The fame and renown that both Themistocles and Aristides got, in vanquishing
their anger one toward the other, was great: for being sent both as
Ambassadors for the st^te of Athens, traveling over a high hill, Themistocles
said unto Aristides, shall we both bury our anger on this hill and go as
friends, and not as enemies? and there though the cause was great they became
friends one to the other, forgetting and forgiving one another fault. Anger
and wrath are the only poison of the world, whence hidden hatred does proceed,
for to nourish the one is to feed the other. Therefore it is written, that
hidden hatred, private wrath, and young men's counsel, has been the very cause
of diverse destructions.

Manlius Torquatus, after he had conquered Campania, and triumphed over the
Latins, returning into the City with noble fame, though the Senators of the
City, met him in triumph, yet the young men of Rome more disdainful then
courteous, were more willing to have his death, then desirous of his life, the
cause is known in Valerius. I will omit to speak of Caligula, whose anger and
hatred was such that he wished Rome had but one neck, that with one stroke he
might strike it off. Neither will I recite H^logabalus, who amongst writers is
named the beast, and not the Emperor of Rome. The histories of Catelin, Silla,
and Appius, for their anger and hatred toward their country, and native City,
are extant in Plutarch and Salust: by this anger and wrath proceeded invectives
and declarations, and then envy and malice began to build their bowers, by
their chief Carpenter anger, and mischief and vengeance, does always depend
upon them. And because anger is the only counsel of all mischief, I will speak
of those two monstrous furies, incident always to anger, I mean Envy and
Malice, and shall refer that to Envy and Malice, which might have been spoken
on this subject.

CHAP. XLI.
Of Perjury, and Faith, and how Princes have been honored, and punished
accordingly.

FAith is the foundation of Justice, and Justice is the chief means (as
Aristotle says) to preserve a Public Weal. We will therefore note how
faithful and just some Princes have been, and how wicked and false others have
showed themselves; there are so many virtues in the one, and vices in the
other. For some from foes become friends, as Clodius and Cicero two great
enemies a long time, and yet before two faithful friends. Tiberius likewise,
and Affricanus from mortal foes, grew to be such perpetual friends, that
Affricanus gave his only daughter Cornelia in marriage to Tiberius. Even so
some again from friends became foes, yea from tried friendship, to mortal
enmity; as Dion of Siracusa was killed by Calicrates his most assured friend
(as he thought) with whom always before, he found friendship and faith.
Polimnestor likewise though King Priamus reposed such great trust and
confidence in him that he committed his own son Polidorus to his custody, yet
he falsely slew him, and murdered him, though beside friendship, he was his
near kinsman. How well says Socrates, do faithful friends far excel all
Gold, for in danger faith is tried, and in necessity friends are known.

Such is the secret force of truth and love, and such is the hidden subtilty of
falsehood, as may be proved in a history of Sextus Pompeius, son and heir unto
Pompey the great. The faith and justice of Pompey at what time he had appointed
a banquet for Augustus Caesar, and Marcus Antonius upon the seas was well
tried; for being moved by diverse at that time, to revenge his fathers death
Pompeius the great, and especially at that time being prompted to it by his
friend, and master of the ship, whose name was Menedorus, Sextus in no wise
would suffer it, saying: that faith and justice ought not to be turned into
perjury and falsehood; for, said he, as it is perjury to omit faith and promise
made to these Emperors, so this is tyranny, and not justice, to revenge my
fathers death upon innocence. And true it was, that Augustus Caesar was then
but a boy and brought up in school in Apulia, when his uncle Julius Caesar
vanquished Pompey. And Marcus Antonius was rather a friend to Sextus father,
then a foe, and therefore no less faithful was Sextus in preserving, then
just in weighing innocence.

Far unlike was false Hannibal, who under pretense of peace with the Romans,
sent Ambassadors unto Rome to treat thereof, where they were honorably
received: but well requited he the courtesy of Rome to his Ambassadors. For
when that noble Roman Cornelius came from Rome, as an Ambassador unto
Hannibal, his welcome was such, that he never went alive unto Rome again; for
most cruelly and falsely was he slain by Hannibal. In this falsehood and perjury,
was Hannibal much defamed, whose virtues were not so much corrupted by the
vileness of his own nature, as by the falsehood and corruption of the Country,
which always in this was not to be trusted; of which it is proverbially
spoked, Poeni perfidi, the Carthaginians are false, for the people of Carthage
delighted in falsehood, practiced perjury, and used all kind of crafts, as the
people of Sarmatha were most false in words, most deceitful in deeds, and most
cruel one toward the other.

The Scythians being much molested with wars, and driven to leave their wives
at home in the custody of the slaves and servants, having occasion to be absent
four years, their wives married their servants, and brake their former faith
with their husbands, until with force and power their servants were slain, and
so they recovered their countries and wives again. Apollonius the chief
Govern^ur of Samos, whom the Commons of the country from low estate had
exalted to dignity, to whom they committed the Government and state of Samos,
was so false of his faith toward his subjects, that having their goods, lands,
livings, and lives in his own han^, he betrayed them to Philip King of
Macedonia, their most mortal enemy.

That proud perjurer, Cocalus King of Sicily, slew King Minos of Creet, though
under color of friendship, and pretense of communication, he had sent for him.
Cleomines brake promise with the Argives, with whom he took truce for certain
days, and having craftily betrayed them in the night, he slew them being
sleeping, and imprisoned them against his former faith and promise made before.
Even so did the false Thracians with the Boetians, they brake promise, violated
their faith, destroyed their countries, depopulated their cities, and having
professed friendship, and vowed faith, became wicked foes and false traitors,
and all of these received condign punishment.

But of all false perjurers and unnatural foes, Zopyrus amongst the Persians,
and Lasthen^ ^ amongst the Olinthians, to their perpetual Fame, shall be ever
mentioned: the one in the famous City of Babylon deformed himself in such sort,
with such dissimulation of forged faith, that having the rule and government
thereof in his hand, he brought King Darius to enjoy it through his deceit; and
was more faithful to his King then to his Country. Lasthenes being the only
trust of the Citizens, delivered Olinthus their City into the hands of their
long and great enemy, Philip King of Macedonia, What fraud has been found
always in friendship, what falsehood in faith; the murdering of Princes, the
betraying of Kingdoms, the oppressing of innocents from time to time, in all
places can well witness the same.

When Romulus had appointed Spu. Tarpeius to be chief Captain of the Capitol,
the chamber of Rome, where the substance and wealth of Rome did remain;
Tarpeia, Spurius daughter, in the night time, as she went for water out of the
city, meeting Tatius King of the Sabines, though he was then a mortal enemy to
Rome, and in continual wars with Romulus, yet by her falsehood and policy he was
brought to be Lord of the Capitol. Thus Tarpeia was as false to Rome, as King
Tatius was to Tarpeia; for she looking to have promise kept by Tatius, did find
him as Rome found her: she was buried alive by Tatius close to the Capitol,
which was then called Saturnus Mount, and after her death and burial it was
named Tarpeiaes Rock, until Tarquinius Superbus did name it the Capitol, by
finding a man's head in that place.

There was never in Rome such falsehood showed by any man, as was by Sergius
Galba, who caused the Magistrates of three famous cities in Lusitania to appear
before him, promising them great commodities, concerning the states and
Government of their Cities, yielding his faith and truth for the accomplishment
of the same; whose professed faith allured to the number of Nine thousand young
msn, picked and elected for some enterprise for the profit of their country:
But when false Galba had spoiled these three cities of the Flower of all their
Youth against all promise and faith, he slew the most part of them, sold and
imprisoned the rest, whereby he most easily might conquer their Cities.

Men are never certain nor trusty in doing when they are faulty in Faith: For
as the Sun lighteneth the Moon so Faith makes Man in all things perfect. For
Prudence without Faith is Vainglory and Pride; Temperance without Faith and
Truth is Shamefacednesse or sadness; Justice without Faith is turned into
Injury, and Fortitude into Slothfulness. The orders in diverse countries for
the observation of Friendship, and for maintenance of certain and sure love
one toward another, were Oaths of Fidelity. The noble Romans, at what time
they swear, had this order, He or she to take a slint stone in their right
hand, saying these words, If I be guilty, or offend any man, if I betray my
country, or deceive my friend willingly. I wish to be cast away out of Rome by
great Jupiter, as I cast this stone out of my hand. And therewith threw the
stone away.

The ancient Scythians, to obserbe amity and love, had this Law: They poured a
great quantity of wine into a great Boul, and with their knives opened some
vein in their bodies, letting their blood to run out one after another into the
boul, and then mingling the wine and blood together, they dipped the end of
their spears and their arrows in the wine, and taking the boul into their
hands, they drank one to another, professing by that draught, faith and love.
The Arabians when they would become faithful to any, to maintain love thereby
had this custom: One did stand with a sharp stone between two, and with it
made blood to issue from the palms of both their hands, and taking from either
of them a piece of their garment, to receive their blood, he dipped seven
stones in the blood; and calling Urania and Dionisius their Gods to witness
their covenant, they kept the stones in memory of their friendship, and
departed one from another. The like law was among the Barcians who repairing to
a Ditch, and standing thereby, would say, as Herodotus affirms, As long as
that hollow place or ditch were not of it self filled up, so long they desired
amity and love.

In reading of Histories, we find more certainty to have been in the Heathen by
profane Oaths then truth often in us by Evangelist and Gospel Oaths; less
perjury in those Gentiles, swearing by Jupiter or Apollo, then in Christians
swearing by the true and iiving God; more amity and friendship amongst them,
with drinking either of others blood, then in us by professing and
acknowledging Christ's blood, When Marcus Antonius had the government of Rome,
after Caesar was murdered by Brutus and Cassius, and having put to death
Lucullus for his consent therein Volummus hearing of his friend Lucullus death,
came weeping and sobbing before Antonius, requiring one his knees, one grant at
Antonius hand, which was to send his soldiers to kill him upon the grave of
his friend Lucullus, and being dead, to open Lucullus grave, and lay him by his
friend. Which being denied, he went and wrote upon a little piece of paper, and
carried it in his hand, until he came to the place, where Lucullus was buried,
and there holding fast the paper in one hand, he with his dagger in the other
hand, slew himself upon the grave, holding the paper fast in it being de^d,
where this sentence he wrote, Thou that knew the faithful friendship
betwixt Voluminous and Lucullus, join our bodies together being dead, as our
minds were always one being alive. The like history is written of Nisus, who
when his faithful friend Eurialus was slain in the wars betwixt Turnus and
Aeneas, he having understood thereof, went up and down the field tumbling and
tossing the dead carcasses, til he found out Eurialus body, which having long
looked on, and embraced, he drew out his sword, and held it in his hand a
little while saying. As my body shall never depart from thy body so shall I
never fear to follow thy ghost, and laying the pummel of his sword upon the
ground, he fell upon it, having the body of his friend Eu^ialus betwixt his
arms. This love was great betwixt Princes, who did live honorably, and died
willingly. A strange thing for men so to love their friends, as to weigh their
dea^hs more then their own lives.

Orestes faith and friendship toward Pylades was such, that being come unto a
strange Region named Taurica, to assuage his grief, and to mitigate his furious
flames, because he slew his mother Clitemnestra, and being suspected that he
came only to take away the image of Pallas, their Goddess in that country;
the King understanding the matter, made Orestes to be sent for, and to be
brought before him to have judgment of death. For Pylades was not mentioned
nor spoken off, but only Orestes; he it was that should steal their Goddess
away, and carry it into Greece. Orestes therefore being brought, and his fellow
Pylades with him the King demanded which of them was Orestes? Pylades that knew
his friend Orestes should die, suddenly stepped forth, and said, I am he; Orestes
denied it, and said he was Orestes; Pylades again denied it, and said, that it
was even he that was accused unto the King: thus the one denying, and the other
affirming, either of them most willing to die for the other, the King dismayed
at their great ^mity and love, pardoned their faults, and greatly honored
their natural love and faith. So many like histories to this there be, that
then Princes would die for their friends even that great Conqueror Alexander,
would have died presently with his friend Hephestion, had not his counsel
let him; he loved him alive so well, that he was called of all men another
Alexander; he so much esteemed his friend, that when Sisigambis King Darius
mother, had saluted Hephestion instead of Alexander, and being ashamed at her
error, he said, forbear not to honor Hephestion, for he is Alexander also.
What was it that Anaxagoras wanted that Prince Pericles could get for him?
whither went Aeneas at any time without Achates with him? there was nothing
that Pomponiu^ had, but Cicero had part of it, the friendship of Scipio never
wanted toward Cloe^ius. Though Rome could alter state, though fortune could
change honor, yet could neither Rome nor fortune alter faith or change
friends. After the Senators had judged Tiberius Gracchus for diverse seditions
in the City to die, his friend Blosius having knowledge thereof, came and
kneeled before the Senators, besought Lae^us, (whose counsel the Senators in
all things followed) to be his friend, saying unto the rest, after this sort. O
sacred Senate and noble Counselors, if there remains in the City of Rome any
sparkle of Justice, if there be regard unto equity, let me crave that sentence
by law which you injuriously award unto another, and since I have committed the
offense of Gracchus, whose commandment I never resisted* whose will I will
during life obey, let me die for Gracchus, worthily who am most willing so to
do, and let him live who justly ought so to do. Thus with vehement invectives
against himself, he made the Senators astonished with his rare desire of death,
saying: the Capitol had been burned by Blosius if Gracchus had so commanded,
but I know that Gracchus thought nothing in heart, but that which he spoke to
Blosius, and that which he spoke to Blosius, Blosius never doubted but to do:
and therefore I rather deserve death then he. The faith and love betwixt Damon
and Pythias, was so wondered at by King Dionisius, that though he was a cruel
Tyrant, in appointing Damon to die, yet was he so amazed to see the desire of
Pythias, his constant faith, and his love and friendship prosessed in Damons
behalf, striving one with another to die, that he was enforced in spite of
tyranny to pardon Damon for Pythias sake. Thelcus and Perithous became such
faithful friends, that they made several oaths one unto another, never during
life to be parted, neither in affliction, plague, punishment, pain toil, or
travel to be dissevered: insomuch that the Poets fain, that they went unto the
Kingdom, and region of Pluto together. I will not speak of the great love of
that noble Greek Achilles toward King Patroclus: Neither will I recite the
history of that worthy Roman Titus toward Gisippus, nor report the love of
Palemon and Arceir, nor of Alexander and Lodwick, whose end and conclusion in
love were such, as is worthy of everlasting memory.

CHAP. XLII.
Of Envy and Malice, and the tyranny of Princes.

AS Malice drinks for the most part her own poison, so Envy says Aristotle,
hurts more the envious it self, then the thing that it envieth. Like as the
sloathfull in war, or Darnel amongst Wheat, so is the envious in a City: not so
sad for his own miseries and calamities, as he lamenteth the hap and and
felicity of others. Wherefore the Philosopher Socrates calls the enemy serrom
anima, the sow of the soul, for that it cutteth the heart of the envious to see
the prosperity of others. For as it is a grief to good and virtuous men to see
evil men rule: so contraily to the evil most harm it is to see good men live.
Therefore, the first disturber of Commonwealths and last destroyer of good
states: the beginning of all sorrows, the end of all joys: the cause of all
evil, and the only let of all goodness; is envy.

How prospered Greece? Had flourished Rome? How quiet was the whole world?
before envy began to practice with malice, two daughters of tyranny, never
seen, but hidden in the hearts of flatterers? Then, I say, Greece was glorious,
Rome was famous, their names were honored, their prowess feared, their policy
commended, their knowledge extolled, their fame spread over the whole world:
but when envy began to sojourn in Greece, and malice to build her Bower in
Rome; these sisters (like two monsters, or two grim Gorgons) oppressed Castles,
destroyed countries, subdued Kingdoms, depopulated Cities: in fine, triumphed
over all Greece and Italy.

Hannibal chief General of the Carthaginians, Jugurth King of Numidia Pyrrhus
of Epirus, most valiant, puissant and mighty Princes, with long wars, and
mighty slaughter, could not with all their force and power hurt Rome so much as
their hidden hatred between themselves did. Again, Alexander the great, Cyrus
the valiant, Xerxes the famous, most mighty Conquerors, with all their strength
of wars, could not annoy Greece half so much as their inward Envy between the
Cities of Greece. What caused Julius Caesar to war against his son in law
Pompey? Ambition. What made Adrian the Emperor to despise the worthy fame of
Tra^an? Envy. What moved Cato surnamed of Vtica, to kill himself? Envy to
Caesar. Hidden hatred working for private gain, and rash counsel of flattery,
which is heard most often in the envious mouth have destroyed Kingdoms.

Envy first entered into the hearts of Princes arrested the worthiest
Conquerors, waded into the bowels of the wise, and blushed not to attaint the
learned Philosophers in the midst of Athens. Hercules in killing the great
Dragon that watched in the garden of Hesperides, in destroying the ravening
birds Stimphalides, in conquering the raging and furious Centaurs, in
vanquishing terrible monsters, as G^rcon and Cerbe^us, in overcomming the Lion,
the Boar and the Full; in overtaking the gilded Heart; and lastly for his
conquest of the huge and prodigious Hyd^a, in the fens of Lerna, won no less
envy of some, then he justly deserved fame of others.

Theseus to imitate the haughty attempts of Hercules, overcame Thebes, slew
Mino^^mus in the dens of Labyrinthus, subdued Ca^on the Tyrant, with diverse
other large enterprises, as one more willing to envy the fame of Hercules,
then desirous to deserve fame by lenity and quietness. So might I speak of
Julius Caesar that envied Alexander the great, and Alexander likewise that
envied Achilles. And thus always Envy was fostered by Princes. With the wise
and learned envy bare great sway, as betwixt Plato and Xenophon, the best and
gravest philosophers in their time: betwixt Demonsthenes and Ae^^ines, betwixt
Aristotle and Isocrates, one despising the other.

Such slaughter grew of Envy, that one brother killed another, the son the
father, and the father likewise the son; as Romulus slew his brother Remus
through envy, lest he might be King in Rome. Cambyses King of Persia killed his
brother Mergides, as Herodotus does write, through envy. Envy caused Anacha^sis
the Philosopher to be slain by his own brother Cadvidus. King Jugurth murdered
both his brethren Hiempsalis and Adherbales, that he only might reign King in
Numidia. Cain did kill his brother Abel, the scripture does testify, because
his sacrifice was not accepted. Thus envy was known and seen to be betwixt
brethren, betwixt parents and their children.

The like we read that envy committed horrible and terrible murders as well
betwixt the husband and the wife, as in the children toward their Parents, as
in short examples is verified. Clicenmestra slew her own husband Agamemnon, and
she again was slain by her son Orestes, Queen Semi^ams killed likewise her
husband King Ninus, and she was killed even so by her son called Ninus,
Agrippina murdered her husband Tiberius, and she was also murdered by her son
Nero O cruel tyranny that envy should ever cause such unnatural murder, as one
brother to kill another: the father to destroy his son, ye son to slay his
fathsr ye husband to murder his wife, the wife to make away her husband.

We read in Pliny of a certain King in Thebes named Athamas, that gave both his
sons, the one named Learchus the other Euriclea, to be devoured by ravenous
Lions. So many monstrous tyrants have been brought up in the school of envy, so
many deformed Centaures, that all countries have been full of them. When
Antiphiles saw Apelles in great favor with King Ptolomy, he so envied the
matter, that he told the King in spite to Apelles, that Apelles was the very
cause of the long wars between the Tyrians and Egypt, to discredit Apelles for
very envy that he was great with the King, but the matter being known, and his
envy weighed, Apelles was rewarded by the King with a hundred Talents, and
Antiphiles for his envy commanded afterward all the days of his life to be the
slave and bonomen of Apelles. Themistocles was so grieved to see Miltiades so
honored for his great conquest and triumph in Marathon, that being demanded
why he was so sad, he answered, Mitiades triumphs will not suffer Themistocles
to be joyful.

There was no country but envy bare sway in it; there was never any great
virtue, but it was accompanied with envy. Caesar was envied in Rome by Cato;
Turnus was envied in Rutilia by Drances; Ulisses was envied in Greece by Ajax;
Demetrius was envied in Macedonia after King Cassander died: What envy M.
Crassus bare toward Pompey, is sufficiently known: What hidden hatred Pollio
had toward Cicero, may be read in Brusonius the third book, the seventh
chapter, where Pollio says to Messala, that he could not endure the voice of
Cicero. The like we read of Aristotle, who envied Isocrates so much that he was
wont to say; It were a shame to Aristotle to hold his peace, and let Isocrates
speak. For as there is no light (says Pliny) without a shadow, so there is no
virtue or glory without envy.

The wavering state of the vulgar, which always ruled Rome and Athens, was so
mutable and uncertain, that after wise and sage Socrates was condemned to die
being dead, the Athenians repented, his accusers were banished, and Socrates
now being dead, had his pictures erected; which being alive, the rude and
uncertain people esteemed nothing. Even so was Aristides and Themistocles
banished into Persia, Iphicrates into Thrace, Conon into the province of
Corporos, Chabrias into Egypt, and Cares into Sigeum; men of excellent virtues,
of noble service, of renowned fame; yet by the envious people they were
banished their own countries to range abroad the world. Again, Homer was envied
by Zoilus, Pindarus by Amphimanes, Simonides by Timocreon; yea, learned Maro
and Horace were envied and backbiten by Maevius and Suffenus. What do I
speaking of envy? Why wast I time to write of envy? Wherefore seem I so fond to
touch a general subject, being so common with all men, so nourished in all
countries, being known from the beginning of the world, and being first
practiced by the Devil; who envying man's state, the felicity, joy, and pleasure
he was in, lest man should possess the place where sometime the Devil reigned
as an Angel, he deceived man?

This envy took root then in the first Age; for Cain envied so his brother
Abel, that he slew him, for that God accepted the sacrafice of Abel, and
refused his. Joseph was by his own brethren sold into Egypt, for envy that he
was better beloved of his father then they were. Saul did envy King David, that
he gave his daughter Michal in marriage to David, for that she being his
daughter, might betray her husband to the Philistines. Dathan and Abiram had
great envy toward Aaron. Daniel was much envied in the Palace of King
Nebuchadnezzar. What should I be long in this? The Apostles, the Prophets the
Martyrs, yea Christ himself was envyed at by the Jews and Gentiles; insomuch
that tyranny and murder was the sequel of envy, as from time to time has been
tried, from age to age seen, and from man to man practiced nay, even to dead
men it has been showed; as Achilles did to Hector, by haling and drawing his
body about the fields of Troy, in the open sight of King Priam his father. So
M. Antonius did to Cicero, having the head of Cicero set before him, to ease
his Tygerish mind, permitting his wife Fulvin to wear the tongue of Cicero on
her Coyf. This Cambyses showed to the Judge S^samenes, who being dead flead
him, and being flead did cut him in pieces, and being cut in pieces did give
him to be devoured by beasts and birds.

I might well declare the tyranny of Tullia, showed toward her father King
Servius Tullius, being dead, who caused her Chariot and horses to tread on her
fathers body in the open streets. I might speak of Tomyris Queen of Scythia
toward King Cyrus being dead, who did strike off his head, and did bathe it in
blood. I might make mention of the tyranny of Alexander in Thessaly, and of
Busiris in Egypt. I might open the wicked life and state of Dionysius in
Syracusa; of cruel Creon in Thebes; of Periander in Corinth, and of Pisistratus
in Athens: But I should be tedious to amplify that which may be briefly
examined. And this we read and see daily by experience, that the end of Tyrants
is to die in tyranny, and as they deal with others, so are they dealt withal
themselves. As Diomedes and Busiris were wont to feed their horses with men's
flesh, and to quench their thirst with men's blood; so were they themselves
vanquished by Hercules, and made food to be eaten and devoured by their own
horses, which they before fed with other men's flesh. Likewise the great tyrant
Phalaris and that cruel Perillus, were both destroyed with those new invented
torments that they made for others: I mean the brazen Bull which Perillus made
to satisfy the tyranny of Phalaris. Thrasillus and Scyron; the one teaching
the way of tyranny, was first of all in that which he taught unto others,
tormented and slain: the other, thrown headlong into the sea by Theleus, even
so as he was wont to do unto others. What should I speak of the great cruelty
of Aemilius, who as Aristides in Plutarch does testify used to recompense any
man that would and could invent new torments to punish the innocent, and to
pleasure his divellish mind: He (I say) dwelling in Agesta a City of Sicilia,
made a brazen horse to vex and torment the people, wherein through the
commandment of Armmius Paterculus chief Magistrate of the City, he first
suffered the assay of his new invented work. We read again of King Danaus fifty
daughters, called Belides, which being married to the fifty sons of Aegistus,
slew all their husbands the first night, except Linceus who was preserved by
Hypermenestra his wife. The like we read of the thirty sisters of Albina, who
after the same manner made an end of thirty husbands in one night. The sequel
of tyranny was such, that what wanted in the father, was fully supplied in the
son, for amendment is seldom seen: And that was very well considered of a
simple woman named Ihera, who when she perceived that the people of Syracusa
did wish the death of Dionisius the tyrant, she straight kneeled upon her
knees, and besought the Gods that he might live; and being demanded why she
prayed for such a tyrant? she said; I knew three Kings in Siracusa, every one a
tyrant; the second worse then the first, the the third worse then the second,
and now Dionisius being the fourth is worse then the third; and I am doubtful
if a fourth should come, it would be the Devil himself, who is worse then
Dionysius, and therefore I pray the Gods he may live; for of two evils the
least is to be chosen. Mark how in a simple woman, a silly person truth does
often sojourn. The like we read of a certain husbandman, that dug in the
ground, when the murderers that slew King Antigonus passing in have, taking
their flight into Phrygia, demanded of the husbandman why he dug so deep; I
dig up (said he) another King Antigonus to rule in Macedonia: letting them to
understand the true Proverb. That seldom comes the better; that he that would
come after should be far worse then King Antigonus. O happy age! O golden
world, while tyranny was not known!

The great Monarchies of the world were gotten with tyranny, and likewise
through tyranny lost. The first Monarchy after the great Deluge, was that of
the Assyrians; which began under Ninus the third King of the Assyrians, and
continued in slaughter and tyranny till Sardanapalus time, who was the last
King, which was a thousand two hundred nine and thirty years. From the
Assyrians it was won with the sword, and brought with violence and tyranny by
that cruel and bloody Arbactus to the Medes, and remained there till the time
of King Astyages, who was the ninth and last King of the Medes, two hundred and
fifty years: From the Medes it was had away by tyranny to Persia, by King
Cyrus, and there stayed until the time of King Darius, which was two hundred
and thirty years: From the Persians it was with blood and great slaughter taken
away by Alexander the great unto Macedonia, and there maintained till Perseus
time, which was a hundred and seven and fifty years. From the Macedonians it
was posted to Rome, where under Julius Caesar, the proudest Monarch in all the
world, it fomed in blood, flourished in tyranny a long time. Thus tyranny was
fed and fostered from one country to another, till almost the whole world was
destroyed.

The murder and tyranny that long flourished in Greece between the Thebans and
the Lacedaemonians, again, betwixt the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians, betwixt
the Athenians and all Greece, who reads it not in Thucidides. Tamberlan, the
great murderer, King sometime in Scythia, got through tyranny Medea Albania,
Mesopotamia Persia, and Armenia, he passed over Euphrates, subdued Asia the
less, and took Bajazet King of the Turks, called all the Princes of Asia in
his voyage toward Greece, where such tyranny was used that not only Cities and
Countries were destroyed, but also their Temples and their Gods neglected and
spoiled. Great was the tyranny betwixt King Darius of Persia, and Miltiades
Prince of Athens, who slew a hundred thousand of Darius men? How great was the
slaughter of King Cyrus, after he had exiled his Grandfather King Astrages from
Persia, vanquished the Babylonians, and overthrew Croesus King of Lydia, and
after he had subdued the most part of Asia, he ceased not his tyr^nny until he
came to Scithia, where he and two hundred thousand were slain by one woman,
Tomyris Queen Scithia who after she had slain him, she caused his head to be
cut off, and made it to be bathed in a great tun of blood, saying these words:
now Cyrus drink enough of that which thou have always so long thirsted for.
Blood does require blood and tyranny will have cruelty. Antiochus famed in
tyranny brought in subjection Egypt, and India with other countries

Hannibal excelled all men in tyranny, as both Rome and Italy can well
testify. To speak of King Philip and his son Alexander the great, their
tyranny, their conquest, and bloody wars, it were superfluous, as Thessalia
Thebes Larissa, the Olinthians, Phoceans, Lacedaemonians, Athenians, Persians,
Indians, and all Asia are witness thereto: Pyrrhus, Antigonus, Pompey the
great, with infinite more bloody Generals, did more rejoice with tyranny to
offend others, then with justice to defend their own. For the triumphs of cruel
Captains are to joy in tyranny, the wish and desire of the ungodly tyrant is to
destroy all, he is thirsty always of blood, hungry continually of murder and
slaughter. What wished Caligula the Emperor to his own City of Rome? only one
neck, that with one stroke he might strike it off.

The difference between a gentle and a goodly Prince, and a cruel tyrant, is,
and has been always seen. King Codrus of Athens, how far excelled he cruel
Caligula? when by an Oracle it was told to the Athenians, that they should
never have victory during the life of Codrus their King the King understanding
of it, he clothed himself like a common soldier, nay rather as the history
says, like a poor beggar, and went into the midst of his enemies to be slain
to save Athens. How much did noble Curtius, and famous Decius surmounted that
cruel L. Sylla, and that wicked imp C. Marius; they instructed by the like
Oracle, were ready in their arms to mount on horseback to offer themselves
alive, to an open gulf to save Rome: the other with sword and fire were no
less willing to destroy Rome, and to spoil their native soil and country of
Italy. Again Thrasibulus was not so beneficial to Athens, but Catelin was as
hurtful unto Rome.

Diverse Princes and Noble men have been no less studious how to keep and
defend their countries, then they were loath and unwilling to trespass against
their countries. Happy are those places, and most happy are they that enjoy
such Princes. How famous was Thebes while Epaminondas lived? how renowned was
Sparta, while yet Agesilaus ruled? how happy was Rome when Fabius Maximus bare
sway? how flourished Athens when Pericles with his magnanimity, when
Themisiocles with his worthiness, when Demosthenes with his wisdom defended
their state? The virtuous lives of goodly Emperors time has advanced, to
fame, and fame has spread over the whole world, as of Traian, Constantine,
Augustus, Alexander Severus, with others, which are to be honored and had in
perpetual memory. But the cruel tyranny of other wicked Magistrates, neither
time can take away, nor any good nature forget, as that monster of shame, sinck
of sin, that beast Heli^gabalus, that tyrant Nero, that monster Caligula, with
Domitian, Dionisius, and others, which are to be detested, and utterly lothed.
Laertius in his third book does write, that the people of Agineta, had a law
written, that if any of Athens should come unto their great City Aginia, he
should lose his head. When Plato the phil^sopher had happened to come to that
City, it was told Carmendius who then was chief Judge for that year that a man
of Athens was in Aginia, which ought by law to die; the calling Plato before
him in a great assembly demanded what he was, and he said a Philosopher: a
certain man envious unto learning hearing the name of a Philososopher, said:
this is no man but a beast, then said Plato, I ought to be free by your law,
being a beast and not a man, and so pleaded the matter, that by the name of a
beast he was dismissed: applying thus the sense thereof, that with tyrants and
envious people beasts are better esteemed then men.

Such is the furious rage of tyranny, that without mercy and respect of person,
he feeds his fury. King Atreus brother to Thiestes, and son to King Pelops,
slew without pity the three sons of his brother. Thiestes, whose blood he
caused his brother, and their father, to drink unawares, and after he had
hidden their bodies in a cave, he cut off their members, and made their father
to eat thereof. The like history we read in Justine that King Assiages made
Harpagus to eat his own son, dressed ready, and served up at the Kings table,
in two silver dishes before Harpagus the father: of which as one ignorant of
such tyranny the father fed. Mithridates the bloody King of Pontus, slew his
three sons, and three daughters he killed his wife Laodice, and married another
named Hipsicratea.

Tyranny lurketh in the hidden veins, and secret bowels of envy: for even as
Mithridates flew his wife Laodice; so Constantine the great Emperor slew his
wife Fausta, and Nero murdered his wife Poppea. I should weary the Reader to
speak of Cleander, Aristratus, Strates, Sabillus, with innumerable others. The
state of Rome was so often changed by tyranny, that sometimes they reigned
under Monarchy, and then straight under Aristrocacy. And thus the Commons
seeking by change an amendment of Princes, kept always the chief rule and
government of the City of Rome under Democracy, which is the popular
government, abhorring the corruption of Princes, to their immortal fame and
glory.

CHAP. XLIII.
Of Flattery.

FLattery is the sweet bait of Envy the cloak of malice, the only pestilence
of the world, a monster ugly to behold if it could be seen, and dangerous to
trust if it might be known; it has as many heads as Hidra, to invent
wickedness; as many hands as Briareus to commit evil; as many eyes as Argos to
behold and delight in vengeance, as swift of foot as Thalus. entering into every
man's house with words as sweet as honey, but a heart as bitter as gall, of
which the old poem is spoken, Melin ore, verba lactis: felin cord, fraus in
factis.

Antisthenes the learned Athenian was wont to say, that he had rather have
Ravens in his house with him, then flatterers: for Ravens said he, devour but
the carcass being dead, but the flatterer eats up the body and soul alive.
For even as tyranny is hidden in the secret bowels of envy, so is envy cloaked
under the filed phrase of flattery, and very well compared to the Crocodiles of
Nilus, or to the Sirens of the seas, the one weeping and mourning, the other
singing and laughing, the one with lamentation, the other with mirth does study
how to annoy the poor Mariner. The flattering Parasite, as Ovid says, denies
with the negative, and affirms with the affirmative; weepeth with him that is
sad, and laugheth with him that is merry: As sometime Clisophus, who when his
master Philip King of Macedonia, and further to Alexander the great, did halt
because he had the gout, he would halt likewise; when the King would be merry
at his drink, Clisophus would not be sad: In fine, whatsoever Philip took in
hand, the same Clisophus did imitate. Aristippus the Philosopher, could better
please King Dionysius with adulation, the Dion the Syracusan could pleasure him
with truth. Cleo could better accomplish the desire and lust of Alexander with
forged flattery, then Calisthenes his counselor could satisfy him with
Philosophy. Who might move Caesar to do any thing, so much as Curio his
Parasite? Not Pompey his son in Law, nor yet his only daughter Julia, nor all
the Senators of Rome.

Flatterers are dangerous to the most part, hurtful to all, profitable to
none, and yet of Princes most accepted: Under the shape of humanity, they sway
and rule in Court like furious Centaurs, deformed Scyllaes, huge Cyclops, grim
Gorgons, fretting Furies, and monstrous Harpies; yea, with a thousand more
deformities. For who is more made of then he that ought least to be esteemed?
who is trusted more then he that deceives soonest? who is heard more at all
times then he that ought least to come in sight at any time? who has more of
all men then he that deserves least of all men? In fine, who is more beloved
any where then he that ought most to be hated every where? The common people of
the Medes and Persians, for that they kneeled to Alexander, and made him the
son of Jupiter were more esteemed for their flattery therein, then the Nobles
of Macedonia for their truth and plain dealing.

What is it but flattery brings it to pass? That which that famous and
renowned Prince Agamemnon, with all the force and power of Greece, could not
with ten years siege subdue; one subtle Sinon, a simple and a silly Greek,
allured the mind of King Priam unto and deceived with flattery his Nobles, and
entised the Citizens through adulations to their utter destruction, and last
confusion. That ancient and renowned City of Babylon, which King Darius with
all the power of Persia was never able to vanquish, one Zopyrus, a Citizen born
in Babylon, through forged faith and filed flattery, I say, betrayed it unto
King Darius.

What shall I speak of the ancient Lacedaemonians, the most famous and worthiest
people in the whole world for their wars; whom neither Medes Persians,
Macedonians, nor all Greece could vanquish; Phrinicus with his flattery
deceived them. The people of Sambs were deceived by false Apollonius. Menelaus
was beguiled with the flattery of Paris. Dion of Syracusa was slain by his
flattering friend Galicrates. O sucking serpent of malice, whose fruit is
death! If King Antigonus had known the flattery of his feigned friend
Apollophanes, he had not been deceived as he was. If King Astyages had
thoroughly known Harpagus his servant he had not been slain by King Cyrus. If
that noble and famous Roman Crassus had weighed the flattery of Carenus he had
not been so shamefully murdered among the Parthians.

What flattery was between Jason and Medea? what deceit followed? What
adulation was betwixt Theseus and Ariadne? what falsehood ensued? The one
helping Jason to the Golden Fleece, the other delivering Theseus out of the
dreadful Labyrinth from the monster Minotantus, were deceived by flattery. But
pass we forward in the Pilgrimages and affairs of Princes. Who murdered
Caesar, that worthy Emperor, in the Senate house of Rome? Brutus and Cassius,
those flatterers that Caesar loved most. Who poisoned that mighty Conqueror
Alexander, in the midst of his triumphs at Babylon? those that flattered him
most, his own Cup-taster, lola, and his kinsman Antipater. Who betrayed that
famous Roman Cicero to his mere enemy Marcus Antonius? even he whom Cicero
before defended and saved from death, Popilius. Finally, who betrayed Christ,
both God and Man, to the Scribes and Pharisees? his purse-bearer, that
flattering Judas with fair speech, saying, Avi Rabbi, embracing and kissing him
as flatterers use to do.

Where is there greater tyranny showed then where flattery is most used? Where
is there greater deceit practiced, then where courtesy is most tendered? Where
is more falsehood, then where trust is most reposed? The first thing that
deceived man was flattery, which the Devil tho serpent put in ure to deceive
Eve; flattering her, saying, If thou eat of this fruit thou shall know good and
evil, and you shall be as Gods on earth. As the Devil is the only Author of
all lies, so is he the only Father of flattery, attempting always the best and
not the worst; accompanying the highest, and not the lowest, frequenting the
Court more then the Country, and approaching near to Princes, and not to
Beggars.

When Christ was assaulted with the flattery of the Devil, promising him all
the world if he would kneel and flatter him: I would to God that all Princes
would speak to flatterers as Christ spoke to the Devil: Avoid Satan: Away
flatterer. Or else I wish that wise men, who are soonest of all by flattery
allured, would imitate the example of a noble man of Thebes, named Itmenius,
who being sent Ambassador from Thebes to Persia, understanding the manners and
fashions of the proud Persians, and that nothing could be gotten without
flattery, nor heard without kneeling he did let fall his ring on the ground,
whereby he might stoop before the King, not to the King, but to take up his
ring. Or else I would wish all men to answer flatterers, as Diogenes answered
Aristippus; who speaking to Diogenes, that if Diogenes could be content to
flatter Dionysius the King, he needed not to lick dishes, or to live poorly in
Athens; Diogenes made answer. If Aristippus could be content to lick dishes, or
to live poorly in Athens he needed not to flatter Dionysius.

It is read in Caelius, that the maidservants of Cyprus were so given to
flattery, that they kneeled down to bow and bend their shoulders, as a
footstool to their Ladies to mount into their Chariots: surely the men of
Persia and the women of Cyprus engendered such numbers of flattering Parasites,
that glorious masters now never want flattering servants. The scholars of
Gnato frequent always Thrasonical places. Have we not many now a days, that
will speak to their friends as Nicesias was wont to say to Alexander the great
being wounded, and his blood spinning out? O what noble blood is this! This
blood comes from some God and not from man. The wise man says that five things
ought of all men to be mistrusted; a strange dog, an unknown horse, a hollow
bank, a talkative woman, and a flattering servant. Fair words makes fools glad;
yea flattering speeches overcommeth wise men. Demetrius having obtained victory
in the wars at Salamina, was so joyful of his fortune, that he did send
Aristodemus, a very sublil and a cunning flatterer, to certify his father King
Antigonus of his prosperous success, giving in charge unto him to show the
King his father orderly the triumph and victory in the largest manner.
Aristodemus no less joyful of the message, then skillful in flattery, leaving
his Navy, and his company in Cyprus, went on land toward King Antigonus; who
having understood that Aristodemus was come from his son Demetrius, being
desirous of the news, and to hear of the Wars and success of his son, sent
diverse to meet him on the way, to know the truth and effect of his coming: He
saluted all men as one very sad, and so sad, that all men judged that either
Demetrius was slain, or else had lost the field. The King being certified that
Aristodemus was very sad, and that there was no likelihood of good news, came
hastily to meet him; which when Aristodemus saw, he cried out with a loud voice
a far off saying: Most happy art thou King Antigonus, beloved of the Gods,
saluted by Demetrius, and this day feared of all the world. Thy son is
Conqueror over Conquerours and King over Kings a triumphant victor in the wars
at Salamina: thus artificially did Aristodemus use his flattery before King
Antigonus, that the King had as great a delight to hear Aristodemus flattering
phrase, as he had joy and gladness in the prosperity of his son Demetrius.
Thus he did win the heart, and dived into the soul of King Antigonus, that his
reward was as much by his flattery, as his thanks was for his news. Marcus
Antonius was delighted so much in the flattering speech of the Athenians, at
what time he was enforced to forsake Rome by means of Augustus Caesar, that the
Citizens of Athens went to meet him out of the City, having an Oration in
commendation of his wisdom, saying: that he was well worthy to have Minerva in
marriage. He joied so much in this their adulation that they won this Roman by
flattery to do more honor unto Athens, then nature could crave at his hands to
love Rome. Such force has flattery, that when Alexander the great would have
died for sorrow: yea, would have killed himself for that he slew Clitus in his
anger, An^x^^chus with sugared words and fair sentences assuaged his sorrow.
Aristippus when he might not obtain his purpose at Dionisius hand with flattery
and fair words, he would kneel down, and embrace and kiss his feet, and being
accused of his friends, that he being a Philosopher, he was a flatterer, he
answered them in this sort: Aristippus is not in fault to speak unto any man
where his ear is, Dionisius rather is to be blamed to hear at his feet, or to
have his ears at his heels. Diogenes therefore being demanded what beast was
most hurtful to man: of wild beasts a tyrant, of tame beasts a flatterer. What
subject is he that delights not in flattery? what Prince is he that is not
pleased with adulation? What God is he, says the Poet, that loves not his
commendation and praise? Hercules was glad to hear the adulation of Cecropes,
Bacchus was joyful to hear the flattery of Silenus: even Jupiter himself the
King of Gods was delighted in Vulcan. The remedy therefore to avoid this
Gorgon, to expel this monster, to exile this murderer is as Cato the wise man
says, to use truth, for he that uses to hear good talk always, will never
himself speak evil at any time. The nature of flattery was so known, and was
so hated by Augustus the Emperor, that he lothed the kneeling of his household
servants. Tiberius the Emperor likewise would in no wise suffer any of his own
men to call him Lord. Flattery was sometimes so abhorred in Athens, that when
Timagoras was sent as an Ambassador to Darius K. of Persia, for that he
flattered the King in talk, at his return, he was beheaded. Even so Evagoras
because he called Alexander the son of Jupiter, was put to death.

The Lacedaemonians feared flattery so much, that they banished Archilogus only
for his eloquence in a book which he composed. Flattery was so odious in Rome,
that Cato the Censor gave commandment to expel certain fine Orators of
Athens, out of Rome, lest by their fair speech and flattery they might annoy
the state of Rome. What is it but flattery can compass? what may not sugared
Orators move? what could not Demosthenes do in Athens? what might not Cicero
persuade in Rome? King Pyrrhus was wont to say, that he won more Cities, Towns,
and Countries, through the flattering persuasions of Cineas, then he ever
subdued with the strength and force of all the Kingdom of Epire. But to avoid
too much striking on one string, which as Plutarch says is tedious to the
Reader, (for nature is desirous (says Plautus) of novelties:) I will speak a
little of those that fled flattery: it was the only cause that Pythagoras that
noble Phil^sopher forsook his country Samos, the only occasion that the worthy
and learned Solon fled from Athens, the chief cause that made Licurgus to
renounce Lacedemon, and the only cause that made Scipio Nasica forsake Rome:
for where flattery is esteemed, there truth is banished, where flattery is
advanced and honored there truth is oppressed and vanquished: in fine,
flattery finds friendship when truth does purchase hatred as is proved in the
histories of Seneca and Calisthenes two famous Philosophers, the one master
unto Nero Emperor of Rome, the other appointed by Aristotle to attend upon
Alexande^ the great, these Philosophers, because they would not feed the
corrupt natures and insolent minds of these proud Princes with adulation and
flattery, they were put to death: Seneca by Nero for his pain and travel taken
with the Emperor in reading him Philosophy Calisthenes by Alexander, because
he reproved the customs of the Medes and Persians who used such flattery, that
Alexander commanded all men to call him the son of Jupiter. Even so Cicero and
Demosthenes, the one the sovereign Orator and the Phoenix of Rome, the other
the sugared anchor and the patron of Athens, and protector of all Greece; who
having sundry times saved the two famous Cities Rome and Athens, the one from
the pernicious and privy conspiracy of that wicked Catelin and his adherents
the other from the proud attempts and the long wars of Philip King of Macedon,
yet were they both banished and exiled their own countries Cicero for Clodius
sake, which the Romans took so heavily, that twenty thousand did wear mourning
apparel with no less heaviness in Rome, then tears were shed for Demosthenes
in Athens. Flattery was of some then so hated that noble Phocion a learned
Athenian, was went to say to his friend Antipater, that he would take no man to
be his friend, whom he knew to be a flatterer, And most certain it is that he
that at this day cannot flatter, can get no friendship according to that saying
of Terence, obsequium amicos etc. For even as Aristides of Athens for his
manifold benefits to the Athenians was by flattery prevented and for truth
banished: so likewise Thucidides being sent as an Ambassador from Athens to
Amphipolis, a City betwixt Thracia and Macedonia which King Philip kept by
force, was by flattery circumvented. True service is often rewarded with anger
and the rage of Princes, as Thrasibulus a noble Captain and famous, for his
truth was banished out of Athens. Lentulus the defendour of Italy, exiled from
Rome. Dion of Siracusa hunted out of his country by Dionisius: even that
renowned Hannibal, that long protector of Carthage, was compelled after long
service for his country to range about like a pilgrim every where, to seek some
safeguard for his life. Too many examples might be brought from Greek and
Latin histories for the proof hereof. The chiefest bulwark of a Commonwealth
says Demosthenes is assured faith without flattery, and good will tried in the
Commons, and plainness without deceit, boldness and trust in the Nobility.
Flattery is the only snare that wise men are deceived withal, and this the
pharisees knew well, who when they would take our Savior Christ tardy in his
talk, they began to flatter him with fair words, saying: Master we know that
thou art just and true, and that thou came from God. Even so Herod willing to
please the Jews, in killing James the brother of John, and in imprisoning
Peter, he so pleased the people with flattery, that they cried out this is the
voice of God, and not the voice of men: so sweet was flattery amongst the Jews.
The flattering friends of Ammon knowing the wickedness of his mind, and his
perverse dealing toward Mardocheus did not persuade Ammon from his tyranny, but
flattered him with fair words, and made him prepare a high gallows for
Mardocheus where Ammon and his children were hanged. But the young man that
came to flatter king David saying, Saul and his children are dead, was by David
for his flattery commanded to die.

CHAP. XLIIII.
Of the Pilgrimages of Princes, and Misery of Mortality.

THere is neither beast on the earth, nor fowl in the air, nor fish in the sea,
that seeks his own decay, but man only; as by experience we see all things to
have a care of their own lives. The Lion when he feels himself sick he never
cease till he feeds upon an Ape, whereby he may recover his former health.
The Goats of Creet feeding on high upon the mountains, when any of them is shot
through with an arrow, as the people of that Country are most excellent
archers, they seek out an herb called Dictamum, and as soon as they eat any part
of it, the arrow falls down, and the wound waxes whole incontinently, There
are certain kinds of Frogs in Egypt, about the flood of Nilus, that have this
perceiverance, that when by chance they happen to come where a fish called
Varus is, which is great a murderer and spoiler of Frogs, they use to bear in
their mouths overthwart, a long reed, which grows about the banks of Nile;
and as this fish does gape thinking to feed upon the Frog, the reed is so long
that by no means he can swallow the Frog; and so they save their lives. If the
Goats of Creet, if the Frogs of Egypt have this understanding to avoid their
enemies; how much more ought man to be circumspect of his life, who has
millions of enemies neither seen nor known.

We read in the first book of Aelian, that the rude swine, if at any time by
chance they eat of that herb called Hiosciamus, which so contracteth and
draws their veins together that they can hardly stir, they will strive for
remedy to go under the water, where they feed upon young Crabs to recover
health. In the same book you may read of a sea Snail, which from the water does
come to land to breed, and after she has egged, she diggeth the earth, and
hides her eggs, and returns to the sea again, and there continues forty
days; and after forty days, she comes to the self same place where she hid
her eggs, and perceiving that they are ready to come out of the shell, she
opens the shell, and takes her young ones with her into the sea. And thus
have they a care not only of their own states and lives but also of others;
and by some show of sense they help that which is most dangerous and hurtful.

The little Mice have this kind of foreknowledge, that when any house waxes
old and ruinous, they forsake their old dwelling and creeping holes, and flee
and seek refuge in some other place. The little Ants have such foresight, that
when penury and want of relief draws near, they wax painful and laborious,
to gather victuals as may serve them during the time of famine. If these small
creeping worms and simple beasts provide for themselves; what shall we say of
man, the King and ruler over all beasts, who has not only a body to provide
for, but also a soul to save? More happy are these worms and beasts in their
kind, then a number of Princes are; for that they by nature only are taught to
avoid their foes, we neither by nature neither by God the cause of all
goodness can love our friends. Therefore very well it is said of the wise man,
that either not to be born, or else being born straight to die, is the happiest
state that can chance to man; For living in this vale of misery, we see the
Pilgrimage and travel of life to be such, that better far it were to be a poor
quiet man, then a proud ambitious Prince.

And since death is the last line of life, as well appointed for Princes as for
poor men, who in reading of the lives of Emperors, Kings and Princes, and the
Nobles of the world, sees not their unhappy states, which come into the world
naked, and depart from the same naked yet like proud Pilgrims are busy one to
destroy another: not content with countries and Kingdoms, they go from place
to place like Pilgrims, to be more acquainted with misery, and to seek death.
Alexander the great conquerour^ taking his voyage from his Kingdom of
Macedonia unto India, in a desire to destroy all the world, he was in the City
of Babylon prevented by Antipater and Iola with poison, and there he died.
Philopomenes, a great Emperor sometime in Greece, being taken prisoner in the
wars of Messena, was so cruelly handled, that he besought Dinocrates, who then
was Prince of that country, and conqueror over him, one dr^ught of poison to
end his life: Thus he that could not be content to be Emperor and ruler of
Greece, was moved to seek death in a strange Country amongst his foes.
Ladislaus King of Apulia endeavoring to subdue the Florentines, and seeking to
be King over the Florentines lost the Kingdom of Apulia, and by them was at
length poisoned, and so bereft both of Kingdom and life.

With this unhappy kind of death many Princes have been prevented; and no less
threatened are these Princes by their own household friends, then by foreign
foes: No less do their children, their wives, brethren and kinsmen study to
destroy them. Thus Claudius Caesar, an Emperor of Rome, was poisoned by his own
wife Agrippina. Antiochus King of Syria was poisoned by his Queen Laodice, so
that he was in love with Berenices, King Ptolomy's sisterr Constantine the
Emperor, the son of Heraclius, being but one year a ruler in the Empire, was
poisoned by his mother in Law named Martina. The very cause of the Emperor
Conradus death who was Fredericks son was only the Empire and rule of Rome;
for Manfredus his successor hired the Physicians to poison him, that he might
have the only sway. O unhappy state of Princes, whose lives are desired both
of friends and foes.

No less danger it is to be in favor with Princes sometime, then perilous to
be Princes. We read of a Queen named Rosimunda, the daughter of King Cunimund
of Gepida, who after she had poisoned Albonius King of the Longobards, her
first husband did marry a Prince of Ravenna named Helinges, whom likewise she
thought to poison; but being warned in the midst of his draught, he caused
his wife to drink the rest, which drink was the cause of both their deaths. How
many noble Princes in the midst of their pilgrimages have died that death? as
Dioclesian the Emperor of Rome, Lotarius King of France, Charles the eight of
that name, with diverse others, as Hannibal prince of Carthage, Aristobulus King
of Judea, and Lucullus General of Rome.

Princes and noble men do sometime poison themselves, lest they should be
enforced to serve their foes, as Themistocles being banished from his country
of Athens, being in service under Artaxerxes King of Persia, poisoned himself
with the blood of a Bull, in presence of all the Persians, lest he should be
compelled to fight in wars against Greece his country. Even so Aratus prince of
Sicionia, perceiving Philip the younger would banish and exile him out of his
country, was enforced with poison to drink his own death out of his own hand
Even after this sort, after long administration of the Commonwealth, did noble
Socrates, learned Anaxagoras, worthy Seneca, and famous Demosthenes poison
themselves.

Thus their pilgrimages were ended, and their lives finished, their honor and
dignity, their fame and renown did purchase them death. Happy then are those
whom the world knows not, who desire not to be acquainted with the world, but
quiet and contented do finish the course of their pilgrimages. Had not
Jugurthus thirsted for the Kingdom of Numidia, he had not slain his two
brethren Adherbal and Hempsal, which were partakers of the Crown, for the which
vengeance fell upon him, being subdued by Marius, and dying afterward in
prison Had not King Siphax thirsted after the Empire of Rome, he had never been
taken captive and prisoner by Tiberius, where he at length out of his Kingdom
died in prison. Henry the third was of his own son named Henry put again in
prison, where he died. Aristonicus for all his business and great doings, was
vanquished by the Consul Aquilius, and put in prison where likewise he died.

In prison diverse princes have ended their lives in foreign countries. Strange
kinds of deaths, happen upon Princes more then on any other men, as orderly I
shall prove by their pilgrimages and lives. Some by fire, as the Tyrant
Phalaris of Agrigentum, who was burned with all his children, and his wife in
the Brazen Bull which Perillus made for others, and was first of all put into
it himself. By fire was the Emperor Valentine burned by the Goths, by fire was
that famous Greek Alcibiades destroyed in Phrygia, and burned in bed with his
mistress Timandra, after he had ruled Athens and all Greece a long while,
Sardanapalus that great King, and last prince of Assyria, fearing to fall into
the hands of Arbactus, and detesting to die by his enemies made a solemn fire,
when after his lewd life, wantoning in lust, and following his desires, he
burned himself: it was the end of the renowned Hercules, who conquered
Monsters, subdued Serpents Lions, Dragons and wild beasts; at the last he put
on the shirt of Nestus the Centaur which burned him alive. What shall I speak
of Boges, the dear friend sometime of King Xerxes, who when he knew that he
could not escape the hand of Cimon, and the power of At^ens, he made a great
fire, where he caused his wife and concubines, his children and family to be
burned and then his gold silver, and treasure and last of all he burned
himself, Empedocles, Catullus, Luctatius, Asdrubal, and Po^tia died this death.

So desirous were men always to become princes, so ambitious of honor, so
greedy of wealth, that having the name of a King, they thought to avoid and
escape that, which always waits on the heels of Princes, I mean death. Were
not princes hanged by their own subjects, which is the vilest and most
ignominious death that can be? Achaeas King of Lidia, for that he troubled his
subjects with new taxes and subsedies, was hanged by his own subjects at the
river of Pactolus. Bomilchar a Prince of Libia, being suspected by the
Carthaginians, that he had conspired with Agathocles, unto the annoiance of the
subjects, was hanged in the City of Carthage, in the midst of the Market.
Policrates who was supposed to be the happiest Prince that ever reigned in
Samos, and never sustained any loss by fortune, was at last by Orontes the
Persian, King Darius General hanged in sight of Samos. Herodotus does affirm,
that Leonides that famous King of Sparta, who long ruled the Lacedaemonians with
great fame and renown, was by Xerxes King of Persia, after his head was smitten
off, commanded notwithstanding to be hanged. Trogus does write of Hanno a
prince of Carthage, which flourished in the time of King Philip, father to
Alexander the great, who for his prosperous success that he had in all his
attempts, waxed to be such a tyrant, that his own people first bound him with
cords, whipped him with rods, plucked out his eyes, brake his legs, cut off his
hands, and at last to recompense his tyranny, they hanged him up in Carthage.
These were no mean men, that thus were hanged in their own country, and by
their own people. Thus Princes in the midst of their lives have been arrested
by death, and by diverse kinds of death.

Some as you have heard by poison, some by fire, some by hanging have ended
their pilgrimages, some again have been devoured by their own horses, as
Diomedes King of Thracia became food himself to those beasts, which before he
fed with men's bodies. The King of Eubea for his tyranny in Boetia, was given by
Hercules to be eaten by his own horses. Licinius the Emperor, at what time he
had appointed that his daughter H^rina should be given to his horses to be
eaten, he himself giving her as food unto them, was torn in pieces.

It h^ppened that Neocles, the son of that noble Greek Themistocks was by a
horse likewise devoured. And this was not strange unto princes, for they were
always subject unto all kind of deaths. After that the famous prince M^^us
Captain of the Lybians, had broken truce with the Romans he was afterward as
Livi does witness, taken and drawn by four great horses alive at the
cemmandement of Tullus Hostilius being then King of Rome. H^pp^litus son son to
Theseus, being falsely accused by his mother in law Queen Phedra, and flying to
avoid the fury and rage of his father at the request of the Queen, was torn in
pieces by wild horses. But let us pass further, and we shall read, that as
some were devoured by horses, so others were by Serpents stung to death, as
Laocoon that worthy Troyan was by two Serpents destroyed; yea, that famous and
warlike woman Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, after her lover and friend Marcus
Antonius was overcome by Augustus Caesar the Emperor, did choose rather to be
overcome with Serpents, then subdued by Caesar. With this death was Opheltes,
the son of Licurgus, King of Menea vanquished.

Again some have perished by wild Bores, and raging Lions, as Anceus King of
Samos, and Paphages King of Ambracia, the one by a Bore, the other by a Lion.
Some have been devoured by dogs, as Linus, the son of Apollo. Pliny in his
seventh book metions a Queen in Bithinia named Cosinges K. N^comedes wife whom
her own dogs flew, and tare in pieces. Euripides that learned Greek, coming in
the night time from Archelaus King of Macedonia, with whom he had been at
supper was incountered by his enemy Promerus, who set his dogs on him and did
tear him to pieces. Even so were Herachtus and Diogenes both Philosophers, by
dogs likewise killed. I may not forget so great a prince as Basilius the
Emperor of Macedon, who in hunting amongst his Lords and Nobles, yea, amongst
thousands of his Commons, he only meeting a Heart in the chase, was hurt by him
in the leg whereof he died. As for Seleucus King of Syria, son to Antiochus
surnamed the Great, and B^la King of Panonia, they were both thrown by their
horses, and died.

If these mischance happen unto princes in the midst of their state what is
their glory but misery, since nothing expels fate, nor can avoid death. Some
have been so weary of life some so fearful of death that they have thrown
themselves into the water to be drowned, others for all their diligent fear,
and watching for death, have most shamefully notwithstanding been by death
prevented. Frederick the Emperor marching toward Jerusalem, after that he had
taken several Cities and Towns in Armenia, in passing through a little river,
was drowned. Decius that noble King, being enforced to take his flight from the
Goths, with whom he then was in wars, was drowned in the Marish ground Marcus
Marcellus after that he had been a Consul in Rome three times, before the third
wars betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians, was likewise by shipwreck cast
away.

How many noble Princes have been drowned? as Pharaoh King of Egypt in the red
sea, of whom we read in the sacred scriptures. How many have the seas despoyled
of life, and with their own names christened the names of seas and waters in
which they were drowned? As by the death of Aegeus King of Athens, the sea
Aegeum was so called; by the death of Tyrrhenus King of Lydia, the sea was
called The Tyrrhen Sea: And so King Tyberinus altered the river called Aelbula,
by his death, to be the river of Tyber. Again the sea Hellespont was so called
by a woman named Hell, drowned in it. So by I^arus and Myrtilus, the sea of
Icarus, and the sea Myrton were so called.

Diverse Princes have also perished by famine and have been compelled to eat
their own flesh as Erisicthon, and Neocles a Tyrant of Scicioma. It is written
in Curtius, that Sysigambis King Darius mother died of hunger. Ulysles the
Greek lest any offspring of Hector should rise in Phrygia, to revenge the fall
of Troy, and his country, did cast Astianax the son of Hector, over the walls
alive. Lycurgus King of Thrace was by his own subjects thrown headlong into the
sea, for that he first mingled water with wine.

How many famous and noble Princes have been stoned to death, as valiant
Pyrrhus King of the Epyrotes, being in wars with Antigonus, was slain by an old
woman with a a tile-stone at Argos. Pyrander at what time the Athenians warred
against Eumolpus, for that he feared famine, hiding the wheat from his
soldiers, was therefore by them stoned to death. Even so was Cinna the Roman
in the wars betwixt the Gauls and the Romans, for the like offense stoned to
death. Stout Cebrior, King Pria^'s son was slain by a stone, hurled at him by
Patroclus, at the siege of Troy; so died Cygnus the son of Achilles at the same
time. O unstedfast fortune, that stones should end the many lives of famous
princes! O imprudent princes, that know not how nigh ye are always to death.

How many has God punished with sudden death for their offenses: as
Mithridates King of Pontus: and Nicanor the son of Parmenio of Macedonia died
suddenly. Sertorius was slain suddenly at a banquet by Upenna. The Emperor
Heli^gabalus was killed upon his stool at his easement, and thrown into Tyber.
That renowned and famous Conqueror Julius Caesar, was in the midst of the
City of Rome, where he was Emperor, yea, in the Senate House, murdered and
mangled by Brutus and Cassius. Diverse Consuls in Rome died this death, as
Fabius Max^mus, Gurges the Senator; And Manlius Torquatus, even at his supper
died presently.

Some with Thunderbolts did God likewise punish; thus Capaneus was slain at
the wars of Thebes. Tullus Hostilius King of Rome, was with a Thunderbolt for
his insolency and pride slain. Zoroastres King of the Bactrians, the first
inventer of Magic, was likewise by that kind of death encountered. Pride in
princes was the only cause of their falls, insomuch that the poets feign, that
the great and monstrous Giant E^c^ladus, for his proud enterprise against
Jupiter, was thrown by a Thunderbolt into the bottom of Aetna, a fiery and
flaming mountain.

The uncertain state of princes is seen and tried by their death. Who lives so
short a time as a prince? who dies so strange a death as a prince? Who lives
in care? who dies living but a prince? Was not Sergius Galba, and Commodus the
son of Marcus, surnamed Anbilius, two Emperors of Rome, the one by Otho
strangled in the Market place of Rome, the other imprisoned by Martia his own
concubine? Minos King of Creet traveling after Dedalus into Sicily, was by his
great friend King Cocalus, slain by deceit. So was Alebas, chief governor of
Larissa, murdered by his own soldiers.

The desire that men bear unto honor and dignity, is commonly accompanied with
death; as Spurius Cassius and Spurius Melius for their greediness of the
Empire of Rome, were both worthily beheaded. God has showed just vengeance
upon Princes for their iniquity, with plagues and pestilences, which spoiled
the Emperor Constantine, and the Empress Zoae, his wife: And by this were
Marcus Antonius, Alphonsus, and Domitius justly and worthily punished. God has
wonderfully punished the pride of Princes, even with shameful and horrible
deaths, insomuch that Lice and vermin have consumed their bodies alive; As
Maximilian the Emperor, Arnulphus, Honorificus King of the Vandales, and
Herod King of the Jews, were eaten up alive with vermin and Lice. Pliny and
Plutarch say, that proud Sylla, which sore plagued Rome and Italy, had all his
flesh converted into Lice, and so died. Herodotus does likewise report of one
Pheretrina a Queen of the Barceans, who died of this filthy and horrible death.
God has taken them away in the midst of their pleasure, even eating and
drinking, as Septimus and Valentianus, two famous Emperors, who died both of a
surfeit, for want of digestion, Archesilaus died presently with one draught of
wine.

What is the life of Princes, but an uncertain Pilgrimage? Nay, women are
famous for their pilgrimage therein: As the Queen of Sheba came from Ethiopia
to hear and to learn Solomon's wisdom. Cornelia from Rome, being a noble
woman, went to Palestina to hear Saint Hierome teach Christians. The pilgrimage
of our life is nothing else but a continual travel until we come to our last
journey, which is Death: then is the end of all pilgrimage, and just account to
be made for the same,

CHAP. XLV.
Of Death, the End of all Pilgrimage.

THe last line of all things is death, the discharge of all covenants, the end
of all living creatures, the only wish of the good, and the very terror of
the wicked. And for that the life of man is diverse, so is death variable after
sundry manners and fashions, as by experience is seen and known in all
Countries. Nothing is surer then death; yet nothing is more uncertain then
death. For Pindarus that wise King of the Liricans, being demanded of certain
Beotians, what might best happen to man in this world? Even that (said he)
which chanced to Trophonius and Ag^medes, meaning Death: For these men after
they had builded a new Temple to Apollo, demanded of Apollo the best reward
that he could give them: they thinking to enjoy some dignity or worldly
substance, were seven days after rewarded with death.

The like we read in the first Book of Herodotus, where the mother of Biton and
Cleobes, two young men of Argos, kneeling before the Image of Juno, besought
the Goddess to bestow some excellent good thing upon her two sons, for their
pain and travel that they showed toward her, in drawing her Chariot ten miles
in stead of horses: The Goddess willing to grant them the best thing that
could be given to man, the next night, quietly in bed as they slept, they both
died. Wherefore very well did Aristippus answer a certain man who asked how
Socrates died: Even in that order, said he, that I wish my self to die. Giving
to understand, that any death is better then life.

That noble Philosopher Plato, a little before he died, as Sabellicus does
write, did thank nature for three causes; the first, that he was born a man,
and not a beast; the second, that he was born in Greece, and not in Barbary;
the third, that he was born in Socrates time, who taught him to die well.
Hermes that great Philosopher of Egypt, even dying, so embraced death, that he
called upon that that divine spirit which ruled all the heavens, to have mercy
upon him, being right glad that he had passed this toyling life. Such is the
uncertainty of death, that some in the half of their days, and in the midst of
their fame and glory, die. So Alexander the great died in Babylon, Pompey died
in Egypt, and Marcellus, being a young man of great towardness, and by
adoption heir unto the Empire of Rome, died.

It is strange to see the varieties of death and in how diverse and sundry
fashions it has happened unto Great men always. Some being merry in their
banquets, and drinking were slain; so Clitus was slain by Alexander the great,
being his chief friend. Amnon being bidden to a banquet by Absalom, was slain
by him. Yea, all the Ambassadors of Persia were commanded to be slain, even
drinking at the table, by Amyntas King of Macedonia. Some end their lives
wantonning with women, and playing in chambers; as that renowned Alcibiades,
being taken in wantonness with Timandra, was slain by Lisander. Even so Phaon
and Speusippus the Philosopher died likewise. Some bathing and refreshing
themselves, have perished by their own wives: so Agamemnon that famous Greek
was killed by his wife Clitemnestra; and Argirus Emperor of Rome by his wife
Zoe,

Diverse in prison have died as captives; so Aristobulus, Eumenes, Aristonicus,
Marius, Cleomenes, Jugurth, Siphax, famous and renowned Princes. Diverse have
been slain in the draught, as that beast Heliogabalus, whom Rome so hated, that
he fled to a draught, and there was slain, and after was drawn through the
streets and thrown into the river of Tyber. Cneius Carbo a man of great dignity
and power in Rome, was commanded that he should be slain, as he was sitting on
his stool of ease, by Pompey, in the third time of his Consulship in Rome. Thus
shamefully have some died, and thus famously others died. Patroclus knew not
that he should be slain by Hector, Hector never thought he should be killed by
Achilles. Achilles never doubted his death by Paris. Paris never judged that he
should be vanquished by Pirrhus. Neither did Pirrhus know that he should be
overcome by Orestes: so that no man knows his end, where, how, and when he
shall die, and yet all men are certain and sure, that they have an end, that
they must needs die. And yet the fear of death has overcome the stoutest
soldiers. We read that Asdrubal of Carthage, a noble and a famous Captain,
^verthrown by Scipio, for fear of death kneeled before Scipio, embracing his
feet, and was so fearful that his own wife was ashamed of his doings; Yet had
this famous General rather be a laughing stock to the Romans a bond man to
Scipio, running a foot like a lacky after his triumph, then to die manfully in
the behalf of his country, which valiantly for a time he defended. Perpenna
likewise a famous Roman, being taken in Spain, by the soldiers of Pompey in a
place full of Groves, fearing lest at that instant he should be slain by
Pompey's soldiers, he made them believe that he had diverse things to speak to
Pompey, of some designs that the enemies had in hand against him: rather had
Perpenna betray his friends and his fellows, yea, and all his country to his
enemy, then suffer a sudden death. A greater fear of death we read in that book
of Fulgosius, of the Emperor Vitellius, who after he had vanquished and slain
diverse nobles, and showed great wrongs unto the Emperor Otho, and to Sabinus,
brother to Vespasian the Emperor, being in fear of his life by Vespasian, and
being taken by the soldiers, he besought them, rather then die presently,
that he might be kept safe in prison, until he might see and speak with
Vespasian the Emperor; such was his fear, that he did hide himself in a chest
to prolong his wretched life.

So fearful was Caligula of death that he would never go abroad at any
Lightning or Thunder, but had his head covered with all such things as might
resist the violence of Lightning, Misa King of the Moabites, and Joram King of
Iewry, being besieged by the enemies, and in danger of death, they practiced
devises and invensions to save their lives, and sacrificed their children, to
mitigate the rage of the Gods. The love that diverse had unto life, and the fear
they had of death were to be noted worthily considering how much men are vexed
with the fear of death. Antemon was so desirous to live and so fearful to die,
that he hardly would travel out of his house any where; and if he were
compelled to go abroad, he would have two of his servants to bear over his head
a great brazen Target, to defend him from any thing which might happen to do
him hurt. Theagenes in like sort would not go out of his house, without he had
consulted with the Image of Hecate, to know what should happen to him that day,
and to understand whether he might escape death or no. Commodus the Emperor
would never trust any Barber to shave his beard lest his throat should be cut.
Masinissa King of Numidia would rather commit his state and life unto dogs,
then unto men, who was as his guard to keep and defend him from death. I might
here speak of Bion, of Domitianus, of Dionisius, of Pisander, and of a thousand
more, who so feared death that their chief care and study was how they might
avoid the same. The fear of death causes the son to forsake the father, the
mother to renounce the daughter, one brother to deny another, and one friend to
forsake another, Insomuch that Christ himself was forsaken of his disciples for
fear of death. Peter denied him and all the rest fled from him and all for fear
of death Behold therefore how fearful some are and how joyful others are.
Some desperately have died being weary of life. As Sabinus, ^uba, Cleomenes,
some have hanged, some have burned, and some drowned themselves, and thus with
one desperate end or other perished. But since every man must die, it were
reason that every man should prepare to die for to die well is nothing else but
to live again. Wherefore certain philosophers of India called the
Gymnosophislae being by Alexander the great commanded to answer to cercertain
hard questions, which if they could absolve they should live, otherwise they
should die. The first question propounded to know whether there were more
living or dead; to the which the first philosopher said, that the living are
more in number because the dead have no being, no place, nor number. The second
question was whether the land produced more creatures, or the sea; to this
answered the second philosopher and said, the land does engender more for that
the sea is but a portion of the land. The third question was to know, what
beast was most subtle; that beast answered the third philosopher, whose
subtilty man cannot discern. Fourthly it was demanded why they being
philosophers were so induced to persuade the Sabians to rebellion; because said
the philosophers it is better to die manfully, then to live miserably. The
fifth question was, whether the day was made before the night, or the night
before the day; to the which it was answered the day. The sixth was to
understand how Alexander ye Great himself might get ye good will of the people;
in showing said yt sixth philosopher thy self not terrible to the people. The
seve^th question was whether life or death were stronger; to which it was
a^swered, life. The eight was to know how long a man should live; till said the
eight philosopher, a man thinks death better the^ life. The last question
proposed by Alexander was, how might a mortal man be accounted in the number of
the Gods. In doing greater things said all the Philosophers then man is able to
do. For they knew this proud Prince would be a God, and that he would learn of
the sage Philosophers how he might eschew mortality, he was answered roundly
because he should know himself to be a man, and being a man, he should make
himself ready to die, for death is the reward of sin, and death is the
beginning again of life unto the good. As Aulus Posthumous, in an Oration which
he made unto his soldiers, said, it is given to both good and bad to die, but
to die g^dly and gloriously is only given unto good men. So Hector speaking in
Homer, said unto his wife Andromache, that she should not be sorry for his
death, for all men must die.

Some with the Galatians do so contemn death that they fight naked and are
persuaded with the Pythagoreans, that they shall never die, but pass from one
body to another: Some again die joyfully as the brethren of Policrat^, who
being taken captive by Diognitus the King of Milesia, she was so ill entreated
by him, that she did send Letters to Naxus, to her brethren, at what time the
people of Milesia were feasting, drinking and banqueting at a solemn feast:
Her brethren embracing the opportunity came and found the Emperor drinking, and
all his people overcharged with wine, and slew the greatest part of them, and
having taken many of them prisoners, they brought their sister home to Naxus,
where as soon as they came home, they died, for joy of the victory. Even so
Phisarchus sometime in his great triumph crying out, O happy hours and joyful
days, was taken with such an ecstasy of joy, that he brake his veins at that
very instant with the excess of gladness,

He is counted most wise that knows himself. To joy too much in prosperity,
to be advanced and extolled when fortune favors, without all fear of ill haps
to come is folly. To be vanquished and subdued in adversity, without hope of
solace to ensue, is mere madness. Therefore the Wisemen, knowing that death
was the last line of life, did endeavor in their lives how they might die
well: And briefly for the examples of our lives, I will here note a few
sentences of these wise men, which they used as their Posies, and think good to
show their answers to diverse questions propounded to them.

Bias dwelling in the City of Prienna, after the City was destroyed by the
Mutinensians, escaped and went to Athens, whose Poesy was Maximus improborum
numerus: He willed all young men in their youth to travel for knowledge, and
commanded old men to embrace wisdom. This Bias being demanded what was the
difficultest thing in the world; he said, to suffer stoutly the mutability of
fortune. Being demanded what was the most infamous death that might happen to
man, to be condemned (said he) by law. Being asked what was the sweetest thing
to man, he made answer Hope. Being again demanded what beast was most hurtful,
Amongst wild beasts a Tyrant, said Bias, and amongst tame beasts a Flatterer.
And being demanded what thing it was that feared nothing in all the world he
answered, A good Conscience. And again in the second Olympiade, he was demanded
many other questions; as who was most unfortunate in the world; the impatient
man, said Bias. What is most hard to judge? Debates between friends. What is
most hard to measure? he answered, Time. Thus having answered to these, and
diverse other questions, Bias was allowed one of the seven Wise men of Greece.

Chilo, the second of the Sages, being asked what was the best thing in the
world he answered, Every man to consider his own state. And again, being
demanded what beast is most hurtful, he said Of wild beasts a Tyrant, of tame
beasts a Flatterer. Being asked what is most acceptable to man, he said, Time:
And being asked of the Greek Myrsilas, what was the greatest wonder that ever
he saw, he said An old man to be a Tyrant.

The third was Chilo the Lacedemonian who being demanded what was a difficult
thing for a man to do, he answered, Either to keep silence, or to suffer
injuries. Being demanded what was most difficult for a man to know, he said,
For a man to know himself: And therefore he used this Poesy, Nosce teipsum.
This Chilo being of Aesop demanded what Jupiter did in heaven, he said He does
throw down lofty and proud things, and he does exalt humble and meek things.

S. Ion said, that in knowing and considering what we are, and how vile we are,
we shall have less occasion ministered to us to think well of our selves; for
there is nothing good nor beautiful in man. This Solon being asked by King
Cyrus, sitting in his chair of state, having on his most royal habiliments and
Princely robes, covered with Pearls and Precious stones; Whether ever he saw a
more beautiful sight then himself sitting in height of his Majesty? Solon
answered that he saw diverse Birds more glorious to behold then Cyrus: And being
demanded by Cyrus, what Birds were they, Solon said, the little Cock, the
Peacock, and the Pheasant, which are decked with natural garments, and
beautified with natural colors. This Solon was wont to say, I wax daily old,
learning much: He noted nothing so happy in man, as to Live well, that he might
Die well; applying the Cause to the Effect, as first to Live well, and then to
Die well.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by Elizabeth Alsop, dwelling in Grubstreet, near the Upper
Pump 1653.


