SHORT Observations ON A Printed PAPER, Entitled, For encouraging the Coining
Silver Money in England, and after for keeping it here.

London, Printed for A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Paternoster Row. 1695.

THE Author says, Silver yielding the proposed 2 d. or 3 d. more by the Ounce,
than it will do by being Coined into Money, there will be none Coined into
Money; and matter of Fact shows there (...) none.

'Twould be hard to know what he means, when he says, Silver yields 2 d. or ^d.
more by the Ounce, than it will do by being Coined into Money: But that he
tells us in plain words at the bottom of the Leaf, that an Ounce of Silver
uncoin'd, is of 2 d. more value, than after it is Coined it will be which I
take the liberty to say, is so far from being true, that I affirm it is
impossible to be so. For which I shall only give this short reason, viz.
Because the Stamp neither does nor can take away any of the intrinsic value of
the Silver and therefore an Ounce of Coined standard Silver, must necessarily
be of equal value to an Ounce of uncoin'd standard Silver. For example; suppose
a Goldsmith has a round Plate of standard Silver just of the shape, size and
weight of a Coined Crown-piece, which, for brevity's sake, we will suppose to
be an Ounce this Ounce of standard Silver is certainly of equal value to any
other Ounce of unwrought standard Silver in his shop; away he goes with his
round piece of Silver to the Tower, and has there the Stamp set upon it; when
he brings this numerical piece back again to his shop Coined, can any one
imagine that it is now 2 d. less worth than it was when he carried it out
smooth a quarter of a^ hour before, or that it is not still of equa^ value to
any other Ounce of unwrough^ standard Silver in his shop? He that can say it is
2 d. less worth than it was before it had the King's Image and Inscription on
it, may as well say, that 60 grains of Silver brought from the Tower, are worth
but 58 grains of Silver in Lombardstreet.

But the Author very warily limits this ill effect of Coinage only to England;
why it is so in England, and not every where, would deserve a reason.

But let us grant it to be true, as our Author affirms, that Coined Silver in
England is 1/30 worse, or of less value than uncoin'd, the natural Consequence
from this, if it be true, is, that it is very unfit that the Mint should be
employed in England, where it debases the Silver 1/30; for if the Stamp lessens
the value of our Silver this year, it will also do so the next, and so on to
the end of the world, it always working the same way. Nor will the altering the
Denomination, as is proposed, at all help it.

But yet he thinks he has some proof for his Proposition, because it is matter
of Fact that there is no Money Coined at the Mint. This is the great Grievance,
and is one indeed, but for a different ^eason from what seems to inspire that
^aper.

The matter in short is this; England ^ending more consumable Commodities to
Spain, than it receives from thence. The Merchants who manage that Trade, bring
back the overplus in Bullion, which at their return they sell as a Commodity.
The Chapmen that give highest for this, are, as in all Cases of Buying and
Selling, those who can make most pro^ by it, and those are the Returners of ou^
Money by Exchange into those Countries where our Debts any way contracted make
a need of it; for they getting 6, 8, 10, etc. per Cent. according to the want
and demand of Money from England there, and according to the risque of the Sea,
buy up this Bullion (...) soon as it comes in, to send it to the Correspondents
in those Parts, to man good their Credit for the Bills they ha^ drawn on them,
and so can give mo^ for it than the Mint rate, i. e. more the an equal weight
of Milled Money, for (...) equal weight of standard Bullion, the being able to
make more profit of it (...) Returns.

Suppose the balance of our Tr^ with Holland were in all other Com^dities
equal, but that in the last East-I^ Sale we bought of them of East-I^
Commodities to the value of a Milli^ to be paid in a month; within a mo^ a
Million must be returned into Holl^ this presently raises the Exchange, and the
Traders in Exchange sell their Bills at high rates; but the balance of Trade
being (as is supposed in the case) equal in all other Commodities, this Million
can no way be repaid to their Correspondents on whom those Bills were drawn,
but by sending them Money or Bullion to reimburse them.

This is the true reason why the Bullion brought from Spain is not carried ^o
the Mint to be Coined, but bought by Traders in Foreign Exchange, and exported
by them to supply the overplus of our Expenses there, which are not paid ^or by
our Commodities. Nor will the proposed raising of our Money, as it is called,
whether we Coin our Money for the ^uture 1/30, or 1/20, or lighter than now
(...) is, bring one Ounce more to the Mint ^an now, whilst our Affairs in this
respect remain in the same posture. And challenge the Author to show that it
^ill, for saying is but saying; Bullion ^an never come to the Mint to be
Coined, whilst the over-balance of Trade and Foreign Expenses are so great,
that (...) satisfy them, not only the Bullion ^our Trade in some parts now
yearly ^ings in, but also some of your former^ Coined Money is requisite, and
must be sent out; but when a change in the brings in and lodges Bullion here,
(for now it seems it only passes through England) the increase of Silver and
Gold staying in England, will again bring it t^ the Mint to be Coined.

This makes it easily intelligible how i^ comes to pass, that when now at the
Mint they can give but 5 s. 2 d. p^ Ounce for Silver, they can give 5 s. 4
(...) the Ounce (in Lombard Street, which (...) what our Author means when he
say^ Silver now is worth but 5 s. 2 d. the O^ at the Mint, and is worth 5 s. 4
d. el^ where). The reason whereof is plai^ viz. because the Mint giving weigh^
Money for Bullion, can give so mu^ and no more for Silver than it is Coined at,
which is 5 s. 2 d. the Ounce, (...) Public paying all the odds that is (...)
tween the coined and uncoin'd Silver which is the Manufacture of Coinag^ But
the Banker or Returner of Mo^ having use of Silver beyond Sea, wh^ he can make
his profit of it by answ^ing Bills of Exchange, which he (...) dear, must
either send our Money (...) specie, or melt down our Coin to tr^ sport, or else
with it buy Bullion

The sending our Money in specie, (...) melting it down, has some hazard, a^
therefore if he could have Bullion for 5 s. 2 d. per Ounce, or a little dearer,
it is like he would always rather choose to ^xchange Coin for Bullion, with some
little loss, rather than run the risque of melting it down, or Exportation.

But this would scarce make him pay 2 d. in the Crown, which is almost 3 per
Cent. if there were not something more in it, than barely the risque of melting
or Exportation; and that is the lightness of the greatest part of our Current
Coin. For Example: N. has given Bills for 30000 l. sterling in Flanders, and so
has need of 10000 weight of Silver to be transported thither; he has ^0000 l.
sterling by him in ready money, whereof 5000 l. is weighty Milled Money, what
shall hinder him then from throwing that into his Melting-Pot, and so reducing
(...) to Bullion, to be transported? But what shall he do for the other 25000
l. which ^ho he has by him, is yet in clipped and ^ght Money, that is at least
20 per Cent. ^ghter than the standard? If he transports (...) melts down this,
there is so much clear ^ofs to him; it is therefore more advan^age to him to
buy Bullion at 5 s. 4 d. the Ounce with that light Money, than to ^ansport or
melt it down; wherein tho ^e Seller of the Bullion has less weight in Silver
than he parts with, yet he finds his Account as much as if he received it in
weighty Coin, whilst a clipped Crownpiece or Shilling passes as well in
payment for any Commodity here in England as a Milled one. Thus our Mint is
kep^ from Coining.

But this Paper, For encouraging the Coining, etc. would fain have the Mill a^
work, though there be no Grist to be had, unless you will grind over again what
is ground already, and pay To^ for it a second time; a Proposition fit only for
the Miller himself to make; s^ the meanest Housewife in the Count^ would laugh
at it as soon as propos'^ However the Author pleases himself, an^ thinks he has
a good Argument to man it pass, viz. because the Toll to be pai^ for it will
not amount to 330000 l. as^ said in a late Treatise about the rais^ the value
of Money, (p. 170.) for, say^ he, that Writer is mistaken, in sayi^ that 3 s.
and 6 d. is allowed at the Mint f^ the Coinage of every pound Troy, where there
is but 16d there allowed for the sa^ which 16d being above of 3 s. 6 d. (...)
follows by his own Computation, the the new Coining our Money will cost the
Nation above 110000 l. a small Sum i^ this our plenty of Riches, to be laid o^
for the purchasing these following Inconveniences without any the least
advantage.

1. A loss to the King of 1/50 (if you Coin your Money 2 d. per Crown, 1/20 if
you Coin your Money 3 d. per Crown lighter) of all his standing Revenue.

2. A like loss of 1/20 or 1/30 in all Rents that are settled, for these have,
during the term, the nature of Rent-seck: But 5 per Cent. loss in a man's
Income he thinks so little, it will not be perceived.

3. Trouble to Merchants in their Trade. These Inconveniences he is forced to
allow. He might have said disorder to all People in their Trade, though he says
it will be but a little trouble to Merchants, and without any real damage to
Trade. The Author would have done well to have made out this and a great many
other Assertions in that Paper; but saying is much easier, if that may pass for
Proof.

Indeed he has, by a short way, answered the Book abovementioned, in the
conclusion of his Paper, in these words: And he that so grossly mistakes in so
materials Points of what he would assert, it is plain is not free from mistakes.
It does not appear that he who published that Book, ever thought himself free
from mistakes; but he that mistakes in two material Points, may be in the right
in two others, and those will still need an Answer. But one of these material
Points will, I think, by what is already said, appear not to be a mistake; and
for any thing the Author of the Paper has said, or can say, it will always be
true, that an Ounce of Silver Coined or not Coined, is, and eternally will be
of equal value to any other Ounce of Silver. As to the other mistake,
concerning the rate of Coinage, it is like he had his information from some
disinteressed person whom he thought worthy of credit, and whether it be 3 s. 6
d. as he was told, or only 16d per pound Troy, as the Paper says, whether the
Reader will believe the one or the other, or think it worth his more exact
enquiry, this is certain, the Kingdom ought not to be at that or any other
Charge where there is no advantage, as there will be none in this proposed
Coinage, but quite the contrary.

In his Answer to

Object. 1. He says from Edw. III. Silver has from time to time (as it grew in
esteem) been by degrees raised in all Mints. If an Ounce of Silver now not
exchanging or paying for what 1/10 of an Ounce would have purchased in Edw.
III's time, and so being ten time less worth now than it was then, be growing
in esteem, this Author is in the right, else Silver has not since Edw. III's.
Reign, from time to time grown in esteem. Be that as it will, he assigns a
wrong Cause of raising of Silver, as he calls it in our Mint. For if growing
thus in request, i. e. by lessening its value, had been the reason of altering
our Money, this change of Coin, or raising the denomination of Silver in ours
and other Mints, ought to have been greater by much since Henry VII's. time,
than it was between that and Edw. III's. because the great change of the value
of Silver has been made, by the plenty of it poured into this part of the World
from the West Indies, not discovered till Henry VII's. Reign. So that I think I
may say that the value of Silver from Edw. III. to Henry VII. changed not 1/10,
but from Henry VII. till now it changed above 7/10, and yet Money having been
raised in our Mint since Edw. III's. time, the far greater part of the raising
of it was before Henry VII's. time, and a very small part of it since; so that
the cause insinuated by our Author, it is evident, was not the cause of
lessening our Coin so often, whatever was it: and it is possible there wanted
not men of Projects in those days, who for private ends, by wrong Suggestions,
and false Reasonings, covered with mysterious terms, led those into mistakes,
who had not the time and will nicely to examine, tho a Crown piece three times
as big as one of ours now might, for its size alone, deserve to be reformed.

To Object. 2. He says, The raising the Denomination of Money in Spain and
Portugal, was making it go for more when Coined, than its true value.

This, I say, is impossible, and desire the Author to prove it. It did in Spain
and Portugal, just what it will do here and everywhere, it made not the Silver
Coined go for more than its value in all things to be bought, but just so much
as the Denomination was raised, just so much less of Commodity had the Buyer in
exchange for it: As it would be here, if you should Coin Six-pences into
Shillings, if any one went to Market with this new Money, he would find that
whereas he had a Bushel of Wheat last Week for Eight Shillings of the former
Coin, he would have now but half a Bushel for Eight of the new Shillings, when
the same Denomination had but half the quantity of Silver. Indeed those who
were to receive Money upon former Contracts, would be defrauded of half their
due, receiving in their full tale of any Denomination contracted for, but half
the Silver they should have; the Cheat whereof they would find, when they went
to Market with their new Money. For this I have above proved, that one Ounce of
Silver is, and eternally will be equal in value to another Ounce of Silver; and
all that can possibly put a difference between them, is only the different
value of the workmanship bestowed on one more than another, which in Coinage
our Author tells us in this Paper is but 16d. per pound Troy. I demand
therefore of our Author, to show that any sort of Coinage, or, as he calls it,
raising of Money, can raise the value of Coined Silver, or make it go for more
than uncoin'd, bating the charge of Coinage, unless it be to those who being to
receive Money upon former Contracts, will, by receiving the tale agreed for,
receive less than they should of Silver, and so be defrauded of what they
really contracted for.

What effect such a raising of their Money had in one Particular, I will tell
our Author. In Portugal they count their Money by Reys, a very small, or rather
imaginary Coin, just as if we here should count all our Sums by Farthings. It
pleased the Government, possibly, being told that it would raise the value of
their Money to raise in Denomination the several species, and make them go for
a greater (let us suppose double the) number of Reys than formerly. What was
the Consequence? It not only confounded the Property of the Subject, and
disturbed Affairs to no purpose; but Treaties of Commerce having settled the
Rates of the Customs, as so many Reys on the several Commodities, the King
immediately lost in value half his Customs. The same that in proportion will
happen in the settled Revenue of the Crown here upon the proposed change.

For though our Author in these words, Whereas all now desired by this Act is, to
keep Silver when Coined of the same value it was before, would insinuate, that
this raising the Denomination, or lessening our Coin, as is proposed, will do
no such thing; yet it is demonstration, that when our Coin is lessened 3 d. in 5
s. the King will receive 5 per Cent. less in value in his Customs, Excise, and
all his settled Revenue, and so proportionably, as the quantity of Silver in
every species of our Coin shall be made less than now it is Coined in those of
the same Denomination.

But whatever our Author means by making Money go for more when Coined than its
true value, or by keeping Silver when Coined of the same value it was before;
This is evident, that raising their Money thus by Coining it with less Silver
in it than it had before, had not the effect in Portugal and Spain, which our
Author proposes from it here: For it has not brought one Penny more to the Mint
there, nor kept their Money or Silver from Exportation since, though forfeiture
and death be the Penalties joined in aid to this trick of raising to keep it in.

But our Author tells us in Answer to Object. 4. This will scarce ever at all
be perceived. If of 100 Guinea's a man has in his Pocket, 5 should be picked
out so as he should not perceive it, the fraud and the loss would not be one
jot the less; and though he perceived it not when or how it was done, yet he will
find it in his Accounts, and the going so much back in his Estate at the end of
the year.

To the 3d Objection he says, The raising your Coin (it may be) may raise the
price of Bullion here in England. An Ounce of Silver will always be equal in
value to an Ounce of Silver everywhere, bating the workmanship. I say it is
impossible to be otherwise, and require our Author to show it possible in
England, or any where, or else hereafter to spare his may be's. To avoid
Fallacies, I desire to be understood, when I use the word Silver alone, to mean
nothing but Silver, and do lay aside the consideration of baser Metals that may
be mixed with it: For I do not say that an Ounce of standard Silver that has
almost 1/12 of Copper in it, is of equal value with an Ounce of fine Silver
that has no alloy at all, but that any two Ounces of equally alloid Silver,
will always be of equal value; the Silver being the measure of Commerce, it is
the quantity of Silver that is in every piece he receives, and not the
Denomination of it which the Merchant looks after, and values it by.

But this raising of the Denomination our Author would have pass, because
'twill be better for the Possessors of Bullion, as he says Answ. 3. But who are
they who now in England are possessed of so much Bullion? Or what private men
are there in England of that consideration, that for their advantage all our
Money should be new Coined, and of a less weight, with so great a charge to the
Nation, and loss to His Majesty's Revenue?

He farther adds, Answ. 3. It does not thence inevitably follow, it will raise
the price of Bullion beyond Sea.

It will as inevitably follow, as that 19 Ounces of Silver will never be equal
in weight or worth to 20 Ounces of Silver: So much as you lessen your Coin, so
much more must you pay in tale as will make up the quantity of Silver the
Merchant expects for his Commodity, under what Denomination soever he receives
it.

The Clothier thus buying his Spanish Wool, Oil and Labor at 5 per Cent. more
in Denomination, sells his Woollen Manufacture proportionably dearer to the
English Merchant, who exporting it to Spain, where their Money is not changed,
sells it at the usual Market rate, and so brings home the same quantity of
Bullion for it which he was wont, which therefore he must sell to you at the
same raised value your Money is at: And what then is gained by all this? The
Denomination is only changed to the prejudice of the Public, but as to all the
great matters of your Trade, the same quantity of Silver is paid for
Commodities as before, and they sold in their several Foreign Markets for the
sa^ quantity of Silver. But whatever h^ pens in the rate of Foreign Bullion,
(...) raising of the Denomination of (...) Money, will bring none of it to
(...) Mint to be Coined; That depends on (...) Balance of our Trade, and not on
(...) sening our Coin under the same De^ mination: For whether the Pieces (...)
call Crowns be Coined 16, 24, or (...) Grains lighter, it will be all one as
the value of Bullion, or the bring^ more or less of it into England, or to
(...) Mint.

What he says in his Answer to (...) ject. 4. besides what we have already ^ken
notice of, is partly against his (...) and partly mistake.

1. He says, It may be some (as i^ now) Gain to those that will venture (...)
melt down the milled and heavy Money (...) Coined. That men do venture to m^
down the milled and heavy Money, evident, from the small part of m^ Money is
now to be found of that gr^ quantity of it that has been Coined; a^ a farther
evidence is this, that mi^ Money will now yield 4 or 5 m^ per Cent. than the
other, which must to melt down, and use as Bullion, a^ not as Money, in
ordinary payme^ The reason whereof is, the shameful and ^orrible debasing (or
as our Author ^ould have it raising) our unmilled Mo^ey by Clipping.

For the odds betwixt Milled and un^ill'd Money being now, modestly speak^g,
above 20 per Cent: and Bullion, for ^easons elsewhere given, being not to be
^d, Refiners, and such who have need of ^lver, find it the cheapest way to buy
^ill'd Money for Clipped, at 4, 5, or more per Cent. loss.

I ask therefore this Gentleman, What ^all become of all our present milled and
^eavy Money, upon the passing of his ^ct? To which his Paper almost con^sses
what I will venture to answer for ^m, viz. That as soon as such a Law is ^ssed,
the milled and heavy Money will (...) be melted down; for it being 5 per ^nt.
heavier, i. e. more worth than what to be Coined in the Mint, no body ^ll carry
it thither to receive 5 per Cent. ^s for it, but sell it to such as will give
^or 4 per Cent. more for it, and at that ^e melt it down with advantage: For
Lombard Street is too quick-sighted to give (...) Ounces of Silver for 57
Ounces of ^ver, when bare throwing it into the ^elting Pot, will make it change
for its ^ual weight; so that by this Law 5 per Cent. Gain on all our Milled
Money, will be given to be shared between the Possessor and Melter of our
Milled Money, out of the honest Creditor and Landlord's Pocket, who had the
guaranty of the Law, that under such a tale of pieces of such a Denomination as
he let his Land for, he should have to such a value, i. e. such a weight in
Silver. Now I ask whether it be not a direct and unanswerable Reason against
this Bill, that he confesses that it will be a Gain to those who will melt down
the Milled and heavy Money with so much loss to the Public and not, as he
says, with very small loss to those that shall be paid in the new, unless he
calls 5 per Cent. very small loss, for just so much is it to receive but 5^
Grains or Ounces of Silver for 60, which is the proportion in making your Crown
3 d. lighter. This is certain, no body will pay away Milled or weighty Money
for Debts or Commodities, when it wi^^ yield him 4 or 5 per Cent. more; so that
which is now left of weighty Money being scattered up and down the Kingdom into
private hands, which cann^^ tell how to melt it down, will be kep^ up and lost
to our Trade. And as to your Clipped and light Money, will yo^ make a new Act
for Coinage, without taking any care for that? The making a new standard for
your Money, cannot do less than make all Money which is lighter than that
standard unpassable, and thus the Milled and heavy Money not coming into
payment, and the light and Clipped not being lawful Money, according to the new
standard, there must needs be a sudden stop of Trade, and, it is to be feared, a
general confusion of Affairs, though our Author says, it will not any ways
interrupt Trade.

2. The latter part of this Section about raising the value of Land, I take the
liberty to say is a mistake; which though a sufficient Reply to an Assertion
without Proof, yet I shall not so far imitate this Author, as barely to say
things: And therefore I shall add this Reason for what I say, viz. because
nothing can truly raise the value, i. e. the Rent of Land, but the increase of
your Money; but because raising the value of Land is a Phrase which, by its
uncertain sense, may deceive others, we may reckon up these several meanings of
it.

1. The value of Land is raised, when its intrinsic worth is increased, i. e.
when it is fitted to bring forth a greater quantity of any valuable Product.
And thus the value of Land is raised only by good Husbandry.

2. The value of Land is raised, when remaining of the same Fertiliy, it comes
to yield more Rent, and thus its value is raised only by a greater plenty of
Money and Treasure.

3. Or it may be raised in our Author's way, which is, by raising the Rent in
tale of pieces, but not in the quantity of Silver received for it, which, in
truth, is no raising of it at all, no more than it could be accounted the
raising of a man's Rent, if he let his Land this year for 40 Sixpences, which
last year he let for 20 s. Nor would it alter the Case, if he should call those
40 Sixpences 40 s. for having but half the Silver of 40 s. in them, they would
be but of half the value, however their Denomination were changed.

In his Answer to the 5th Objection, there is this dangerous Insinuation, That
Coin in any Country where it is Coined goes not by weight, i. e. has its value
from the stamp and denomination, and not the quantity of Silver in it. Indeed
in Contracts already made, if your species be by Law Coined a fifth part
lighter, under the same denomination the Creditor must take 100 such light
Shillings, or 20 such light Crown-pieces for 5 l. if the Law calls them so, but
he loses in the intrinsic value of his Debt. But in Bargains to be made, and
things to be purchased, Money has and will always have its value from the
quantity of Silver in it, and not from the stamp and denomination, as has been
already proved, and will some time or other be evidenced with a witness in the
Clipped Money. And if it were not so, that the value of Money were not
according to the quantity of Silver in it, i. e. that it goes by weight, I see
no reason why Clipping should be so severely punished.

As to Foreigners he is forced to confess, that it is all one what our Money is,
greater or less, who regard only the quantity of Silver they sell their Goods
for, How then can the lessening our Money bring more plenty of Bullion into
England, or to the Mint?

But he says, The Owners and Importers of Silver, will find a good Market at
the Mint, etc. But always a better in Lombard Street, and not a Grain of it
will come to the Mint, as long as by an under-balance of Trade, or other
Foreign Expenses, we contract Debts beyond Sea, which require the remitting of
greater Sums thither than are imported in Bullion. If for above Forty Years
after Silver was raised in the 43 of Eliz. from 5 s. to 5 s. 2 d. the Ounce,
uncoin'd Silver was not worth above (...) per Ounce; the cause was not that
raisi^ ver in the Mint, but an over-balance (...) which bringing in an increase
of Silver (...) which men having no occasion abroad, (...) to the Mint to be
Coined, rather than (...) dead by them in Bullion; and when ev^ the Case again
in England, it will occas^ again, and not till then. No Money was in (...)
Exported, says he, no nor Bullion neither, s^ should, or how could it, when our
Exp^ chandize paid for all the Commodities (...) home, with an overplus of
Silver and G^ staying here set the Mint on work. Bu^ sing this Bill, will not
hinder the Exp^ one Ounce either of Bullion or Mo^ must go if you contract
Debts beyond (...) how its having been once melted in England is another thing
proposed in this Bill, (...) its Exportation, is hard to conceive, (...)
Coining has not been able to do it, a^ strable, if it be examined, what vast
Su^ Money have been Coined in the two (...) and how little of it is now left.
Beside^ Exportation of Bullion should be broug^ any greater difficulty than of
any other dity, it is to be considered wherher (...) meant of that Trade which
is in skilful (...) not thereupon be so ordered, as to divert^ coming to
England for the future, and (...) be sent from Spain, directly to those pl^
they know English Debts will make it (...) Account, to answer Bills of Exchange
^ther.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
SOme Considerations of the Consequ^ Lowering of Interest, and Raising the
Money. In a Letter to a Member of P^ Sold by Awnsham and John Churchill.


