A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, March the Twelfth,
1689/90.

BEING The Fast Day.

By the Bishop of St. Asaph, Lord Almoner to THEIR MAJESTY'S.

Published by Their Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavell at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1690.

THE BISHOP of St. ASAPH's SERMON Before the KING and QUEEN ON THE FAST DAY.
II PETER III. 9. For the Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, (as some
Men count slackness) but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to Repentance.


THE Word concerning his Promise, refers to that which went before in the
fourth Verse of this Chapter: where it is plain that the Apostle speaks of
Christ's Promise of his coming to Judgment: that is indeed a Promise to his
Elect, but is rather a Threatening to others; and therefore I shall rather call
it a Prediction, which is a Word between both.

By Christ's Promise or Prediction, I suppose he means that in Matthew 24.
where our Savior foretells in one and the same Prophecy, both his coming to
destroy Jerusalem, and his coming to judge the World.

It is the delay of this last coming of Christ, against which the Apostle
foresaw that there would be an Objection, by Scoffers in the latter days. I
shall not consider all the Answer that he gave them, nor any more than what
lies before us in my Text; nor even that, with relation only to the Day of
Judgment, but as it extends to all the Judgments of God; especially those that
end in Destruction, as the Day of Judgment does. Of this, and all other such
Judgments, says the Apostle, For the Lord is not slack concerning his Promise,
(as some men count slackness) but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance.

In my Discourse upon these Words, I shall proceed by these Steps and Degrees.

First, I take it for granted on all Hands, That God is generally very slow in
inflicting his Judgments. It is that which the Scoffers object; it is granted
by the Apostle in his Answer: They agree in the Thing, they differ concerning
the Reason of it.

Therefore, Secondly, for the Reason, as these Scoffers would persuade
themselves, it proceeds from God's slackness in his Government. But this the
Apostle denies, that there can be any such thing in God. What then should be
the Cause of God's delaying his Judgments? This is that which we are chiefly to
consider.

The true Cause (says the Apostle) is, the Long-suffering of God: Of which,
among many Reasons that might be given, he gives this for a Principal; it is
from his Infinite Goodness. It is his willingness by this means to save those
whom a quicker way of Proceeding would destroy.

For the use of all this, I am to show;

First, How much we are wanting to our selves, if we are not ready to comply
with his Goodness, if we are not willing to be saved, as well as God is willing
to save us.

Secondly, I shall show how much it concerns us to take that which is the only
way to be saved, that is, by a speedy and effectual Repentance.

Lastly, For our Encouragement, I shall show what Assurance we have, not only
of Deliverance, but of further Favors upon our Repentance, from that God who
so earnestly desires it, that he seems to expose his own Glory, he suffers
wicked Men to call his Truth and Justice in question, rather than not give
time, and not use the utmost Means to save them from perishing in their Sins.

In the Design here proposed, I am to begin with that which is granted on all
hands; That God is generally very slow in inflicting his Punishments upon
Sinners. I do not say, he is always so; for sometimes, nay oftentimes God does
otherwise, he takes Sinners in the Fact, and does Execution upon the Place.

I need not mind you of the dreadful Examples in Scripture, of Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, of Ananias and Sapphira, and the like. We have oftentimes the
Terror of such Examples before our Eyes. To see one killed in a drunken
Quarrel, or in attempting a Robbery, or in ranging to satisfy his Lust; to see
a Sinner cut off in the first Act, or the first discovered Act of his Sin: when
this happens to any one, though we are silent as to his Eternal Estate, yet we
cannot but say, there is a visible Judgment of God, by which such a one is
taken away, suddenly, as by a whirlwind, in his wrath.

And yet we cannot say, that he is a greater Sinner, than they are who have
their Lives prolonged in their Wickedness: Nay, of the two, perhaps there is
cause to fear their Condition much more than the other. For thus much the
Apostle seems to imply, when he admits there is that that looks like slackness
in Judgment: for there could be no such Pretense, if the most or greatest
Sinners were judged, and especially if they were judged early in this Life. The
Apostle rather seems to admit of the contrary; and it sufficiently appears, by
many Instances, that the greatest Sinners have had a long time given them
before they have been called to account for their Sins against God.

If any would see this proved by Examples, let him think of the worst Men
mentioned in Scripture; he shall see how slow God has been in bringing them to
due Punishment.

Of Heathen Princes, there is none that has a worse Character upon him, than
Pharaoh, a Monster of Pride and Cruelty, and Contempt of God; which brought
down upon him all the Plagues of Egypt, so famous in History. By the last of
those Judgments he perished: but then it was long first; for all those Plagues
came upon him in one Year; and it was in the Sixteenth Year of his Reign, says
Eusebius from Manetho the Egyptian.

Among the Jewish Kings, the worst should be wicked Ahab; for of him the
Scripture says, There was none like him, that had sold himself to work
wickedness; and yet Ahab reigned above Two and twenty Years, before the Dogs
had the licking of his Blood.

In the New Testament, the worst Great Men we read of were, that Herod that
would have killed Christ in his Infancy, and Pilate by whom he was crucified:
But of them, Herod came to his end (which indeed was very horrible, as Josephus
describes it) not till the Four and thirtieth Year of his Reign. And Pilate the
Roman Governor, whom the same Josephus describes as a Man made up of Avarice
and Cruelty, yet continued in his Government, and seemed to enjoy himself in
those Sins, for some Years after the Crucifying of our Savior.

This forbearance of Persons, even the worst that ever lived, is not so
strange, or would be less strange to us, if we considered, that Men have
another Life; and if they should go quite unpunisht here, as many do all their
Lives, God knows where to find them at last: and then he can and will do them
Justice; they shall pay both Principal and Interest together, in their
Sufferings in the future Life.

But for Nations, they have no other Life but this: Their Sins must be punished
here, or not at all. And therefore it may seem a little strange that they
should have any forbearance: and yet so it is, that God is not in haste even
with Them.

For Examples, I might, if I had time, name all the Nations that are recorded
in History. But that does not need, since we have one Nation which God has set
up for an Example to all the rest. The Jewish Nation. In that one, I might show
many Instances of this Doctrine: But these Three are more remarkable than the
rest.

First, When God had sworn in the Wilderness, That he would cut off all the Men
of that Generation, yet he did it not presently: he gave them a time of Forty
Years, and so long many of them lived before they came to perish in the
Wilderness.

Afterward, when they were threatened with the Babylonian Captivity, which was
in the beginning of Jeremiah's Prophecy, in the Thirteenth Year of King Josias;
yet after that, it was Forty Years before they were carried into Captivity.

Lastly, When John Baptist preached Repentance, and warned them to fly from the
wrath to come, and told them, now the Ax is laid to the root of the Tree, now
they were to stand or fall by their dealing with Christ at his coming. If they
should reject him, it was determined that God would destroy their Church, and
scatter their Nation. They did commit that great Sin, and yet it was again
Forty years before the Sentence was put in execution.

These are sufficient Proofs to show that God is not in haste to execute his
Judgment upon Nations. But to go higher yet, we see the same in his Proceedings
against the World of Mankind. We see in the Old World before the Flood, when
all flesh had corrupted its way, when they were fully ripe for destruction; yet
then the destruction came not till after an hundred and twenty years warning,
which (being to all Mankind) was as much as those three warnings of the Jews
put together. So slow is God to execute Judgment upon Sinners, especially such
Judgments as are to end in their utter destruction.

So that now the matter of Fact being clear, we are to find a Reason for it:
And here are two Reasons in my Text; here is the Scoffers Reason, that says it
is slackness in God; here is the Apostles Reason, that says No, it is indeed his
Patience and Long-suffering.

The First is the Scoffers Reason, that which some would persuade themselves to
believe; they say Judgment is delayed, because God is slack in punishing of
Sinners; this the Apostle denies, as a reason most unworthy of God.

For, that is properly Slackness, when Offenders are not punished so much, or
not so soon, as would be necessary for the Ends of Government. What are those?
to keep up Order, and Purity, and Peace, by the Exemplary punishing of
Transgressors. These are the great Ends for which Judgment is designed; and to
make delay of Judgment, so as to defeat these ends, or any of them, this is
truly a slackness in Government.

Now such a slackness as this cannot be thought to be in God. For this
slackness must proceed from some defect or other; either want of Knowledge, or
of Will, or of Power to do Justice. Such defects as these we may suppose to be
in Man. But every one of these is either a fault, or an Imperfection; and that
is enough to remove them from God, there can be no fault nor no Imperfection in
him.

How then shall we solve the difficulty that appears to us in the Text? For
that God does things as if he were slack, it is plain, and the Apostle
confesses it: and yet the Lord is not slack, says the Apostle: how then? he
is Long-suffering: I, that is a Reason worthy of God; we should have guessed at
it if he had not told us, for it is most agreeable to the nature of God.

He is such a great and generous Being, as having all things in his power, can
do his own Work when he pleases: and he knows it, and therefore he will take
his own time to do Judgment.

He will do things never the sooner, nor later, whatever we think of it, for
any provocation whatsoever. Nay, properly speaking, to provoke him is
impossible, he is so infinitely above us. He is not capable of Anger or
Passion; nor can he fear that any Offender should escape the Eye of his
Knowledge, or the Arm of his Justice.

He can find us, and he can reach us, where ever we are. So that he has
nothing to hasten him, nothing to limit or prescribe him. He may take his own
time to do Justice, and he will do it, when it seems best to his Infinite
Wisdom: but that must be, when it is best to set forth the Glory of his
Justice, or of his Mercy. His Justice and his Mercy, both these are chiefly set
forth by his great Forbearance and Long-suffering.

First, The Glory of his Justiee is set forth by this way of Proceeding. The
Justice of God is the same in all Acts of his Government. But it especially
appears in his Judgments, that are visibly executed: And in them it is most
highly exalted by his Longsuffering.

When God has long forborne to punish a Sinner, notwithstanding the greatness
and notoriousness of his Sins; and at last (as it will happen at some time or
other) God takes him in hand, and deals with him as he deserves; the
Long-suffering of God, before he comes to this, is that which most redounds to
his Glory.

It lets all Men see, that there was a just Cause of Punishment: that there was
so continued a Cause, that the Offender would not be treated otherwise: that he
was not only set upon Evil, but that he could not be brought to any Good: that
he was past all enduring; not only wicked, but incorrigible. It will at last
make even the Offender himself, either confess his Fault, or say nothing; for
he cannot excuse it, he cannot but acknowledge the righteous Judgment of God.

This is the Advantage that any Court of Judicature has by not giving Sentence
in a Cause till the Cause is ripe for it. Before that, being judged as it were
while it was green, it would not do so well, the Justice of it would not
appear: many things would have been kept from coming out, by precipitate
judging. But when things are thoroughly examined, and when the matter is all
out, when the Bottom of every thing appears, then the Sentence comes in its
Season; then every one says, Now it is as it should be. Even the Offender
himself agrees to it: he stands convict, not only to the Court, but to himself.
Then the Judge has an universal Confession of his Justice: when none can say,
he was not just in judging so, nay, when it is evident, he had been unjust in
judging otherwise.

This a wise Heathen Writer, Plutarch, observes, is an Effect of the
Long-suffering of God. Dion (says he) that basely killed his Friend, if for
that he had been cut off presently, would not have died so well, as he did a
long while after: when another Friend killed him with the same Dagger, then
every one said, there is a God that avenges such things,

Adonibezek, Jud. 1. 7. having treated so many of the petty Princes about him
with that barbarous Insolence, of cutting off their Thumbs and great Toes; at
last, when his own Thumbs and Toes came to be cut off in like manner, then he
could not but acknowledge Gods Justice: As I have done, (says he) so God has
requited me.

It were easy to abound in such Examples of Persons, that have been by the
patience and long-suffering of God (to use the Apostles word) fitted for
destruction; and then it has justly come upon them, to the great satisfaction
of all Men, and to the greater Glory of God.

But of Persons, whoever reads History will meet with enough of these
Instances; and whoever takes notice, will daily add to them by his own
Observation. Perhaps every one may not observe it in National Judgments, (I
mean final Judgments) for they happen not in every Age: and therefore I shall
name some few of the most remarkable of them, and deliver you the Sense of Men
that were then living, to show you what they thought that suffered under those
Judgments of God.

They confessed upon abundant Conviction, the great Patience and Long-suffering
of God, before he brought things to the extremity: and they confessed the
Wickedness of their Nations, that run on in known Sins, till they even forced
God to these Extremities. These things being considered together, have tended
much to the magnifying of his Glory; and it has been acknowledged by them that
writ whole Books to this purpose.

So namely for the Jews; in their first Captivity, it was seen and confessed by
Jeremy in his Lamentations: in their second Captivity, by Josephus, in his last
Book of the Jewish Wars.

For the Roman Empire, which consisted of many Provinces, when all those were
given up to the barbarous Nations, the just Judgment of God in it was
acknowledged, by Jerome, by Austin, by Salvian, and diverse others, in those
Books which they wrote of God's Judgments on their several Nations.

Here particularly in this Island, when the Britains were overrun with the
Saxons, Gildas gives God the Glory of it, in his Book of the Ruin of Britain.
Likewise when those Saxons were overrun by the Danes, the crying Sins, that
even forced that Vengeance from God, were acknowledged and bewailed by Lupus in
his Book of Saxon Homilies.

And lastly (to name no more) when Constantinople was taken by the Turks, both
Franzes, and others that bewailed the Calamity, ascribed it to the desperate
Folly of their People, who, between a sordid and a seditious Humor, refused to
serve their Prince either with their Purses or in their Persons. He had but a
few hired Men to fight for him and his Kingdom. Yet they were more than he was
able to pay. So that having quite exhausted himself, having coined out his
Altar-Plate, and at last gone from House to House to beg Money, when his
Soldiers mutinied for want of it; he was feign to venture his own Person
against the Enemy. And so when he fell, (as he did) under the Feet of the
Enemy, when over his Body the Turks entered the City, they were amazed at the
incredible Wealth they found in it; they had such a Spoil, that it grew a
Proverb among them, if any grew rich on a sudden, they used to say, he had been
at the Sacking of Constantinople.

It was so sottish a thing, for a People to lose themselves for want of Money,
when their Wealth was at the highest; as if they feared not to perish, but to
be a less Prey to their Enemy: It was such an Infatuation from God, that they
that knew how vile a People they were, could not but applaud the Divine Justice
in it; they could not but acknowledge, it was the just Reward of their Sins.

In all the Cases before us, if these Nations had perished sooner, or
otherwise, God had lost so much of the Glory of his Justice. It had not been so
Illustrated, as it was by his great Patience and Long-suffering.

But Secondly, beside the Glory of his Justice, God shows forth his Mercy in it
likewise. There is some kind of Mercy in it whenever he punishes: in his
Judgment he remembers Mercy (says the Prophet.) It Is a Riddle to us now, but
hereafter we shall see it: God never cuts off a Sinner betimes, but even in
that Judgment there is Mercy, though we see it not in this World. But God shows
forth his Mercy in this World in Long-suffering, in forbearing of Sinners.

He shows his Mercy all the while he forbeareth. When it is so long before he
strikes, he shows how unwilling he is to strike at all. He would not do it if
Men would take any warning. He looks upon us as his own Creatures, Creatures
that cannot live without him, no not one Minute of our Lives. Good God! do we
say he forbears us? He not only lets us live, but he keeps us, he maintains us
all the while in our Being. All the while he waits to be friends with us, he
would not have us dye in his displeasure: Every bit that we eat, every wink
that we sleep, every thing we take to do us good, all are Witnesses on his
side; all do as it were attest to the Sincerity of his Protestations, As I live
(says the Lord) I will not the death of a Sinner, Why will you dye? Yet turn
your selves and live.

Without turning from Sin there is no Living to God: we must dye, that is, we
must perish: Salvation it self cannot save us. The Law says with great
strictness, the soul that sins it shall dye. The Gospel has but one way to
relieve him, that is by Repentance unto life. It is that which Christ came for,
to call Sinners to Repentance: It was that which he Preached, Repent ye and
believe the Gospel: It was that for which he died, that God might forgive us
upon our Repentance.

This being therefore so indispensably necessary, the Apostle thought fit to
express it in my Text, as the Condition on which we are to be saved, and no
otherwise. This is it which I am next to show, as to our Repentance, in what
manner we are helped and assisted by the Long-suffering of God.

It Is first the most likely way to bring Men to Repentance.

Secondly, in Fact, it is that which oftentimes has prevailed.

Thirdly it is the last the only way it can be done: When this is gone, all is
gone; there is no hope for them that have out-sinned the Patience and
Long-suffering of God.

First, it is a Rational way, the most likely to bring us to Repentance;
because it gives us diverse things which are necessary for it; that is, First
time to repent, and Secondly strong Motives to it, and Thirdly warnings to mind
us of it. These are things which we could not have otherwise.

First, The Long-suffering of God gives us Time to repent: And time is needful
to be had for any business, especially for a business of moment or difficulty,
such as this is, to reclaim us from our Sins. It requires much time to do it
well and effectually. And therefore not knowing how much there is to come of
our Life, we were best resolve upon it, and set about it immediately; but yet,
when that is done, we are but entered into a State of Repentance.

Repentance is the change of our Mind and course of Life, in every thing that
is amiss, from Sin to the Obedience of God. It will require time to know our
own ways, to know what God would have us do, and how to do it. It will
therefore require cool Blood and calm Thoughts: Perhaps that is more then heat
of youth will afford. It is a business that is to be done in retirement: And it
is not presently that one can bring himself to it, that one can disentangle
himself from his Companions in Sin. It is a business that requires much
attention and practice, to break himself of those Habits that have got the
Power over him. It requires so much the longer time to break our selves of
them, by how much the longer we have continued in the Custom of our Sins.

If God should not afford us all the time that is necessary, it were but
Justice, upon them that would not afford Time for God. But when he does give us
Time, it is his infinite Mercy: and however we employ it, we owe this to the
Long-suffering of God.

But secondly, Having Time to repent, that we may employ our Time aright, this
Patience of God gives us great Motives to Repentance: especially this, It makes
us see that God is willing to save us; he is yet willing, after so many and so
great Provocations. What can work upon us, if we are not wrought upon by this?

A just God, and most justly provokt, that might have cast us off long since,
as we did him: (And if he had cast us off, who had lost by it? Alas! what can
we add to him?) that he should wait, as it were, for leave to show us Mercy;
while we, either easily forget, or wilfully kick against him: Yet that still he
calls, and waits for us, gives us Time and Opportunity to repent: the very
sense of his Goodness, and the shame of our Ingratitude for it; these Thoughts
chased together will work much upon any ingenuous Soul.

But then farther, the hope that his Long-suffering gives us, that God has
not yet done with us; he has not quite cast us off; and the fear what may
happen, if he should, as well he may, if we hold out longer: Then, how ill it
would go with us, how much the worse for his Long-suffering hitherto. These,
and sundry Thoughts more that his Long-suffering yields us, are the likeliest
Motives to Repentance.

And thirdly, It gives us warning besides, in sundry things that happen in the
mean while: Warnings on the one hand, by the Conversion of others; Warning on
the other hand, by Gods Judgments on the Impenitent; Warning by diverse things
that happen to our selves, and in our Families.

All these are Calls to us from God, who speaks, not only by his Word, but by
his Providence: It is as it were a Voice from Heaven that speaks to us, Why
will you die? Turn you, yet, turn you and live.

But we are especially to observe those National Warnings that happen before
his Wrath breaks out to extremity. Persons may be taken away without any
warning: and if there seem to be any hardship in that, God may (and no doubt
will) consider them for it in the future Life. But for Nations, that have no
future Life, I dare say that none were ever cut off without Warning: they have
had Calls enough to bid them take heed, before they run themselves into
destruction.

Such Warnings were those to the Jews, first, by the Death of good Josiah, and
then Jeconiah's Captivity, before the general Captivity of King Zedekiah and
all his People. Such were those they had again, in the taking of Jerusalem,
first by Pompey, then by Sosius, before it was destroyed by Vespasian.

So the Britains in this Island had been overrun once or twice, and recovered,
before they were driven out of their Country. So the Saxons being invaded by
the Danes, had driven them out once or twice, and had an Interval of Peace,
before they came to be a Conquered People. So in that Instance of
Constantinople, that People were sufficiently warned by two Invasions that the
Turks made upon them, before that which ended in their Captivity.

On these, and all other Instances of this kind, I have only this to observe,
(it is in some of those Writers before mentioned) That when their Nations saw
themselves gone, when they were gone past recovery, when they saw things come
to extremity, when they found themselves as it were in the Talons of their
Enemies: then they could reflect upon what passed before; then they knew that
heretofore they had Warnings; they remembered they had such and such Warnings
from God: then they called themselves Mad men, that would not take warning when
it was given them. O that God would trust them once more! with their Country,
and with their Estate, and their Liberty! Then, how wise, and how good they
would be! But that was never to be tried: it is too late, when things are gone
past all Remedy.

The only way to escape that, is by Timely Repentance. If ever any Warning does
good, it is by bringing us to timely Repentance: and whoever are preserved by
that means, they know to whom to ascribe it, it proceeds from the
Long-suffering of God.

Secondly, As it is the likeliest way to reclaim us, so it is the way that has
often obtein'd. Many, that have had Time, and Motives, and Warnings, (as I
showed you we have by the Long-suffering of God) have been wrought upon by
them, and have repented of their Sins, and so escaped the Judgment to come.
This, being matter of Fact, is to be proved only by Instances: and of them it
were easy to show a great number, I shall choose only two or three out of
Scripture.

The first shall be that of Manasses King of Judah, whose horrible Sins defiled
Jerusalem from one end to the other: and they are said to be his Sins for which
God past that Sentence upon that People. In that sinful Course he had spent
Thirty years of his long Reign, (which was in all Fifty five years.) Had God
cut him off sooner, (as justly he might) then he had undoubredly perished in his
Sins. But it was the Long-suffering of God that spared him. He was only
chastised with a short hard Captivity, he took warning from that, he changed
his Course, he turned a great Penitent: The People did the like by his
Authority and Example, which made some amends for the Hurt he had formerly
given them: he that brought that Sentence upon them by his Sins, obtein'd a
Reprieve for them by his Repentance.

Another, and that indeed an unusual Instance, we have in Nebuchadnezzar King
of Babel. Being a Heathen, from him nothing could be expected, but the Duties
of Natural Religion. But he was so far from living up to that, that he walked by
no Rule but his Lust, for Thirty six years of his Reign. When after he had so
long led the Life of a Beast, God made him like one in all things but his
Shape, for an extraordinary Instance of his Justice; then, being sufficiently
humbled, he was restored to his former way of Living, and to the glory of his
kingdom; then excellent Majesty was added to him; then he was freed from all
Bestiality, he became an excellent Man, a great Prophet, as the Heathen Berosus
tells us: for which wonderful Change, (as himself says) I praised, and
extolled, and honored the great King of Heaven.

But one Example more, that is of St. Paul, who declares it of himself, I. Tim.
I. 13. I was a Reviler of Christ, a Persecutor of the Christian Religion, and
insolently spiteful against it. How long he was so, he does not tell us: but it
seems not to have been a very short time, by that which follows, that he
ascribes his Conversion to the Long-suffering of God. And he did hope his Case
would not be singular. He hoped many would follow his Example. He declared God
had called him for that purpose, v. 16. where having said, Thus and thus I was
formerly; he adds, Nevertheless I obtained Mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ
might show forth all Long-suffering, for a pattern to all them that shall
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

These Examples may suffice. I could name many more, to show how well God's
Long-suffering is designed, by the good it has actually done, in reclaiming
many Sinners, who without it must have perished in their Sins.

I shall add but one thing more, That it is the Last Means that God uses to
bring us to Repentance. When he has first given Time and Opportunity for it;
when he has withal given sufficient Motives, and Means; when he has warned us
whither we are going; when he has done as much for us, as has brought others
to Repentance; then, after that, his Long-suffering is only to give us time to
think deliberately upon it. What one did not consider as it came, he may
possibly reflect upon afterward: either of his own proper Instinct, or by the
Admonition of others, or upon some occasion that may rise; especially in
Sickness, or some other Affliction, (if God be so gracious to send it upon him)
and this is the Utmost that God intends by it. When a Foot, or a Finger, or any
such Part, has a Gangren upon it; if the last Means that can be used, work no
Cure, then the Limb must go off. But first it is to be numm'd, and so to be
prepared for the Operation. That is all the remaining use of God's Patience to
an incorrigible Sinner. It blinds and hardens him more and more, and so
prepares him for everlasting Damnation. That is terrible indeed, and that comes
on every Moment. Damnation slumbers not, (says the Apostle) though they do.
They do not think whither they are going, but they go never the slower for that.

Or if they should, their Judgment would be the more furious when it comes.
Long-slighted Patience turns into Fury: and the longer it has been abused, the
greater the Fury: and especially the Patience of God: It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of an incensed God; for our God, provoked to extremity, is
a consuming Fire.

Having said so much in the Explication of my Text, I dare not be so long in
applying it as I would: and yet something must be said with respect to the
Business of the Day; to humble our selves before God, for our Sins, and for the
Sins of our Nation.

The Fountain of all our National Sins is the low Esteem that we commonly have
of our Religion. This indeed is a thing to be complained of generally among us:
and it is much the worse, for this Aggravation, that it is joined with great
Unthankfulness to God.

God has dealt most bountifully with us, above other Nations, in many
respects; but most of all in that which is the Crown of all his Blessings and
Mercies. We have the best Religion in the World; the Christian Religion (I know
what I say) in the greatest perfection and purity, that ever was in any
National Church. And yet we are so far short of other Christians in the Value
they have for their Religion, we so much undervalue ours, that for this, not
only other Christians, but even Heathens shall rise up in Judgment against us.
It shows we have low Apprehensions of God. We neither love him, nor fear him,
as we ought to do. If we did, how were it possible that so many among us should
have so little or no regard to those Persons or Things that are dedicated to
God, and that are hallowed to his Name? It Is too visible, that this is the
Disease of our Church; the Mother-Disease from which all her other Ailings
proceed.

From hence it proceeds, that some, seeing more Reverence for God, and for the
Things of Religion, in Popery, have been drawn off to that gross Corruption of
the Christian Religion. And in this they have been wonderfully confirmed, by
seeing others take offense at some Things, which were certainly in the
Primitive Church, and which must be in all Churches that will keep up Order and
Decency. Some of these, by a fatal Mistake, calling our Church Government, and
all our Forms and Ceremonies, Popery; and hunting out for a purer Way of
Worship, (as they call it;) have run out first into Schism, and from thence not
a few into damnable Heresies: and branding every thing that they dislike, with
the Name of Popery and Antichristianism, they have not only divided and weakened
our Church, but they have added wonderfully to the Strength and Credit of
Popery.

From these Sects and Divisions have proceeded, in the first place,
Disobedience and Rebellion against the Civil Government. I speak plainly of
that Rebellion that robbed us of the best Christian King that ever was. From
thence we are to date the beginning of these following Evils; from thence the
weakening and destruction of Church Discipline; from thence the neglect of
Catechism and Confirmation; from thence a contempt or low esteem of the
Sacraments of Christ's own Institution; from thence the general neglect of
Family Duties, especially in the Education of Children and young People; from
thence a general Corruption of Manners into Looseness and Licentiousness and
Debauchery. And in them that kept up a Sense of Religion, much of it has run
out into Disputes, which led People to hate one another; and occasioned many
among us, seeing so many things disputed in Religion, to think that all
Religion is disputable; and so by degrees they were drawn into Irreligion and
Atheism.

Whoever will be pleased to look Fifty years back, and give himself the trouble
to think, what many of us have seen, and all others may inform themselves; he
cannot but know, that this which you have heard, has been the true Course and
Progress of our National Sin. He will see, for a great part of that time, such
a Body of a Nation as the Prophet Esaias describes, i. 6. from the sole of the
foot to the head without any soundness in it. To any one that feared God, it
was a sad Prospect from thence, to the four and twentieth Verse of that
Chapter; where God declares against his own People, Ah! I will ease me of my
adversaries, I will avenge me of mine enemies. Yet he did not execute that
Sentence presently, but within an Age or two his wrath came upon them to the
uttermost.

Now who could tell all this while, but God might have pronounced the like
Sentence against us, and that it might have been executed in like manner? God
knows what it may come to in time. But hitherto it has been forborne, I know not
why. No Man can tell why it has been forborne all this while. But God tells us
in my Text, and elsewhere, that it is upon the account of his Long-suffering.
God has been indeed, he has shown himself, long-suffering to usward. And why
is that? The Apostle tells us, because he would have no man perish, but that
all should come to him by Repentance.

Now to show that God would have us come to Repentance; that as he has made us
a Reform d Church, so he would have us a Reformed People, a Pattern to all
other Nations for his Glory; that this is God's Design by his Patience
hitherto, is as plain in the Course of his Providence, as if he had declared it
to us by a Voice from Heaven. What can be plainer than this, that he has
punished us as a People whom he had no mind to destroy? It is plainer yet, by
the Deliverances he has given us: having not only saved us from the brink of
Destruction, but put it withal in our power to be the happiest People under
Heaven. In all the History I have read, I dare challenge any Man to show where
one Nation has ever had two such Deliverances, as have happened to ours, in one
Age.

First, for our Deliverance at the King's Restoration; what a Turn it was to
this Nation? out of a most distracted Condition (in which we were ready to cut
one another Throats) within a few Months to be a most flourishing Kingdom? How
truly was it applied to that Change, what the Psalmist says, Ps. cxxvi. 1. When
the Lord turned the Captivity of Sion, then were we like unto them that dream?
We did not know whether we were awake or asleep. We could scarce believe what
we saw at the King's Restoration.

But for the use of that singular Blessing; as to that, we were truly like them
that dream: for no People that had been awake, would have lost such an
Opportunity as that was, to have made themselves happy to all Generations. But
alas! instead of that, instead of growing wiser and better, we grew worse with
Prosperity. The People grew drunk and dissolute upon it. The Court was that and
worse, they were intoxicated with Popery: In favor to which, it was found
necessary to promote Atheism and Infidelity among the Nobility and Gentry; and
for them that had a Sense of Religion, to divide them, and to exasperate them
one against another.

By these and the like means, we not only lost the Fruit of that former
Deliverance, but we were brought into a Danger as great, nay, greater than the
former. For then, whatever we suffered, or feared, yet still we were not out of
Hope. But there was no hope, if Popery had once prevailed; there had been no
more hope left for us, than for men in the Inquisition.

And how near was that danger of Popery? how impossible was it for us to
escape? Nothing could have saved us from it, but Miracle. It was a Miracle of
Providence that delivered us from it.

I shall not repeat what I have lately said here on that Subject: But this I
shall say, which shows God's Design in it. It is a Providence, that has not
only brought us in Hope, but has put us in actual Possession, and has given
us Security for the continuance, as well of our Liberties as of our Religion.
God has put it again in our power by this Deliverance to be as happy a People
as any is under Heaven.

Now he trys us a second time, whether we will walk worthy of his Mercy and
Goodness. He shows us, the end of his Long-suffering is that we may not
perish. But if we will, there is no Remedy. Now who would think, that God
should put this to us, Twice, as you see he has done, in one Generation? It is
not to be hoped that he will deal thus with us a third time. And now, if you
will take him at his Word, (so I call it, for his Providence is a Call to you
from Heaven; it is as if he had said, Why will you die? Turn ye now and live.)
To day, if ye will hear his voice, Oh harden not your hearts. To day, do what
you can, at this present. You can now take a firm Resolution, to comply with
this Providence of God; to do your part, as he has done his, to make this a
holy and a happy Nation: first holy, and then happy; it can be no otherwise.

To effect that, first begin with your selves: and then engage others, as far
as you can, to break off that Course and Progress of Sin that you have heard.

To begin where I ended. First, To take God's part against all Irreligion and
Atheism; against them that question his Being, or his Word, or his Government.
He is the Enemy of God that does this: he is not his Friend that can endure it
to be done.

Next, to purge the Nation of all Immorality: and especially, of those
scandalous Sins of Cursing, and Swearing, and Profaning the Lord's Day, of
Drunkenness, and Whoredom, and all the like Abominations. These things defile
the Land: they must be purged forth; or else God will not dwell in it, he will
not own us for his People. Now herein, blessed be God that has put it in His
Majesty's heart to begin that Work, which I trust he will perfect in due time.
He has given that Order, which, if it be followed, will make a Reformation
among us, unless we are much wanting to our selves. They are neither good
Christians, nor good Subjects, that will not follow so good and so great an
Example.

Then, it will be also necessary for us, to lay all uncharitable and
unpeaceable Disputes and Animosities among Christians. However they may differ
from one another in Opinion, yet let them join together so far as they are
agreed: in things that are manifestly for the Glory of God, and the Common good
of Mankind; and especially of that Society wherein they live. In such things we
should first learn to Unite, and then we may hope that God in his good time may
compose all our other Divisions.

Particularly for them that are in the Communion of our Church, let them show
that they are not only of our Party, but of our Religion. Otherwise they may
help to save the Church, but for all that they will perish themselves.

If they are serious in Religion, they will show it by their Attendance on
God's Worship and Sacraments. They will endeavor to be as constant and devout,
as they would be if they saw him there, who, we know, is present with us at
those Meetings. They will show it likewise by observing their Duties to Men for
God's sake. First in Loyalty to Their Majesty's, with all that Concernment that
we owe Them, as the Instruments of our Deliverance: then in Obedience to Laws,
which we cannot but value the more, as being sensible of our late Danger of an
Arbitrary Government. They will show it likewise, in being good Christians, as
well as good Subjects: and that in all Points that belong to Men of their Rank
and Condition; in good Government of their Families, in good Education of their
Children, in good Examples to all their Neighbors; in Love to their Brethren,
in Charity to all Men, in universal Purity of Life.

Oh! if we could all attain to this! if any number of us could do it! I will
not say the whole Nation, but if a considerable part of it! What Favors might
we not hope, the whole Nation would have for their sakes? For the sake of Ten
righteous Persons, we know, God would have spared such a People as Sodom. A
Kingdom so much greater than Sodom, as ours is, must require a proportionable
Number. A People so much more knowing as ours is, will require a yet much
greater Proportion. But yet, why may not God find so much a greater Number
among us? I trust he has done it, else he would not have spared us so long;
else we had long ere this, been as Sodom, and made like to Gomorrah. I trust
God will still find such a Number, and that he will spare the rest for their
sakes.

If there be any hope, it must be from them that serve him, as you do in this
Place. I beseech you go on to do it; and for fear God should not still find his
Number, be careful to keep it up, for your own, and for your Childrens sakes.

Hold fast the Profession of your Faith without wavering. Get in what Company
you can into the Number. Exhort all others to join with you, in serving God.
Provoke one another (in the Apostle's sense,) not to hatred and strife, but to
love and good works. Let there be no Emulation but this, who shall be the best
toward God, the most knowing and exemplary Christians: and forsake not the
Public Assemblies, as some do, who I hope in time will be wiser; but exhort
one another, and so much the more, as you see the day approaching: for yet a
little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry; and his
reward is with him, to render to every man according to his works.

FINIS.

