A DEFENSE OF THE REPORT, CONCERNING The Present State of the Differences in
Doctrinals, between some Dissenting Ministers in London; in REPLY to a Book,
ENTITLED, A Faithful Rebuke of that Report.

If I Build again the things which I Destroyed, I make my self a Transgressor.
Gal. 2.18.

The Wisdom that is from above is first Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, and easy
to be Entreated. Jam. 3.17.

(...).

The best way of Revenging an Injury is, not to imitate or resemble him that
did it. Marc. Antonin. Lib. 6. 6.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Hiller, at the Prince's Arms in Leaden-Hall-Street,
over against St. Mary Axe, School.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
WHEN the Report was Published, I being in the Country, on my Return, several
made Enquiry touching my Thoughts of it; to whom my Answer was; That whoever
was the Author, I knew the Matters of Fact, therein contained, to be True; and
Believed the Doctrines, Explained and Asserted in the Healing Paper, and
pleaded for in the Report to be agreeable to Gods Word; and that I should be
willing, if at any time called thereunto, to do my most for their Defense.

Some Weeks after the Report had been Abroad, a Brother, who once, according to
the Talent, wherein he excelled, wrote in Vindication of the Common Faith, sent
forth a Rebuke to the Report; wherein both for Matter and Manner, he has
expressed himself quite otherwise than formerly he had Written, or his Truest
Friends at this time expected; and has really given the Protestant Religion, in
the Article of Christ's Satisfaction, a most sensible Wound.

These Controversies, I doubt not, upon an Apprehension, that none but the
Enemy to Religion will be hereby the Gainer, are very grievous to many sincere
Christians; who, when they shall consider, how much the Truth, by this
Collision, will be cleared; the most Important Doctrines of our Holy Religion,
be more thoroughly understood; more Firmly Believed, as well as more
Irrefragably Defended against the Opposition made unto it; will Admire the
Divine Wisdom, and Adore the Riches of Glorious Grace, in bringing so much Good
out of these Mischievous Divisions, which have been, and are amongst us.

As for my own part, notwithstanding the hard Censures of my Reverend Brother,
I cannot forbear telling thee, That I desire with my whole Soul to bless and
praise the Lord, for the insight he has given me into the Mysteries of Christ's
Gospel, since this Controversy has been stated, and that I do now plainly
see, how the very Truths, we were, through an unjustifyable Supineness, in
danger of loosing, will, hereby be the more clearly Discovered and effectually
Secured.

Discourses from the Pulpit, even when about the most Evangelical Parts of
Christianity, having been of late Years, rather adjusted to move the Affections
than inlighten the Judgment, are but a slender Fence unto Truth; And an
Observance, how they, who are sound in the Faith, through a Zeal for Populacy,
have neglected that Close Study, which is necessary to a through understanding
the Important Doctrines now under debate, has emboldened the Adversary to
Oppugn them, and with the greater Vigor to attempt the exposing the present
Ministry amongst us; and, to speak freely, one Reason why our Brethren are so
much confounded with the Noise of Common Terms and Phrases, at this time
Controverted and so casily Imposed on, is their Disuse of such Studies.

But, it is hoped that these Contests will provoke our Brethren to make more
diligent Enquiries into the Doctrines of Satisfaction and Justification, as it
has already roused up some Great Men to resolve on a Defense of the very
Points, now exagitated amongst us. For, as I have heard thus much of one very
Learned Person; so I did the last Night receive the ensuing Letter from
another; in which, you will observe enough to convince you it is from one of the
first Rate among the Learned, whose Sagacity, and Sharpness is Conspicuous, and
his Resentments Deep.

And, as the Truth, by these Methods will be abundantly cleared, so the surest
Foundation for a solid and lasting Union will be laid: For, whatever my
Censorius Brother suggests to the contrary, it is the resolution of the
Congregational Brethren to do their most for PEACE, which they are sure can
never be lasting, if at the Expense of Truth, but let our Presbyterian Brethren
join with us in the Defense of some Protestant Truths now in danger, they will
find us to go so far as it is possible, with a good Conscience for Peace and
Communion with them.

That these Great Blessings may be obtained, is the fervent Prayer, and shall
be the constant Endeavor of

Novem. 4. 1697. S. L.
The Letter I mention, I will here insert exactly as it came to my hands.



Books Printed for Nath. Hiller, at the Princes Arms in Leaden-hall-street,
over against St. Mary Axe.
THE Divine Institution of Congregational Churches, Ministry and Ordinances,
[As has been Professed by those of that Persuasion] Asserted and Proved from
the Word of GOD. By Isaac Chauncy, M. A.

A Discussion of the Lawfulness of a Pastors Acting as an Officer in other
Churches besides that which he is specially Called to take the Oversight of. By
the late Reverend Mr. Nath. Mather.

To my Reverend, and much Esteemed Friend Mr. Stephen Lobb.
SIR,
I Could heartily have wished, that there had been no Occasion administered for
those Accusations, wherewith the Presbyterian and Congregational Divines have
of late mutually charged one another. And though I do verily believe, that the
Latter are as remote from all Friendliness to Antinomianism, as most of the
Former are from being Tainted with Arminianism, or the having Embraced the
Dogmata of Socinus; yet some Crude Writers of each Party, whose good Opinion of
themselves, does far exceed their Knowledge in those Controversies, have had
the misfortune to speak less accurately, than the avoiding the being thought
Infected with those Heterodoxies, would have exacted of them. But, as for your
Rebuker I will venture to say, that he has not only Departed from the Received
Opinions of most Protestant Divines, but that he has Trespassed against all
the Rules of good Breeding and Modesty in his Pedantick, as well as Insolent
way of Writing. For, though I have not the vanity to pretend the being very
Conversant in the Socinian and Arminian Controversies; yet I dare affirm that
the phrases, which he assumes the liberty to Ridicule, as well as to Oppose,
are those that they of the greatest character for Learning, who have Written
either against the Remonstrants, or them of the Racovian Belief, have both
used, and judged necessary to be adopted into their Debates, not only as a
Fence about the Received Faith, and a Barrier against Irruptions upon common
Christianity, but as such without which the Doctrines of Christ's Satisfaction,
and of our Justification, could neither be Orthodoxly nor Intelligibly
expressed. And were it not, that I intend to Imbarque in this Dispute, in case
it be further supported on his part, I could at present easily expose the
Ignorance of your Rebuker, both in Classical and in Theological Authors, which
whenever I do, you may assure your self it shall not be in the Harlequin and
Scarramuchio style. Nor do I think your Author will much raise his Reputation,
by his setting up for an Ecclesiastical Droll, seeing besides the Indecency of
it, he will by few be thought the more Witty for acting the Buffoon. For a
small measure of Intellectuals, if accompanied with a great degree of
Assurance, will qualify any man to Burlesque all that is Sacred, and thereby
to advance him among such as are truly serious to the Title of Blasphemous and
Atheistical. And you may easily imagine, how not only your Gentlemen of the
Dry-Club (whose Libertinism was too long countenanced as well as connived at by
some amongst you) but your Partisans against all Revealed Religion, will hug
themselves upon the President set them by this Dissenter, in his Treating the
most important Articles of the Christian Faith with a Contempt as well as a
Jocularness, which either a Wise or Sober Man would not allow himself to use,
even in relation to the Dreams and Romances of Mahomet. And to deal with you
without reserve, I will not be positive, in concluding what his Opinion is in
these Controversies, though I fully understand the Language wherein he expresses
it, seeing I have an Exemplar before me of his sincerity, in an Harangue upon
an Address in which his meaning has since appeared ^o be Contradictions to
what he said. But I will add this in Extenuation of the Authors guilt, that he
uses sometimes to be Delirous, and that then both his Genius and Distemper
lead him to be Divertive and Comical* whereas when his Lucida returns, he
leaves the Stage and puts off his Buskins, and reassumes the Gravity of a
Theologue, and exchangeth the Language of the Theater for that of the Pulpit.

Sir Adieu.
A REPLY TO A Faithful Rebuke.
IN my Endeavors to Clear the Report of the Present State of the Differences,
in Doctrinals, between some Dissenting Ministers, in London, from the Charge of
Falsehood; and Vindicate the Congregational Brethren from the Accusation of
being Antinomian; I will pass over the Delicate Language, with which the
Rebuker has Adorned his Discourses, as what is becoming neither the August,
and Sacred Matters treated on, nor a Divine, a Christian, or a Gentleman;
Wondering, that the Checks of his Friends, and the Sense of the like Contempt
and Neglect, with which some years ago, his Adversaries Accosted him, when he
had a Better Cause to Defend, have had no more Influence on him: Especially
considering, that He is now Drawing so very near to that Age, which few Attain
unto. But being of Opinion, that what this Reverend Brother has herein done,
is as much the Effort of another Man's Heats as of his own Disturbed Thoughts,
I would Hope, that on a serious Review, when he shall Reflect, not only on his
way of Writing; but on the Nature, and Severity of those Accusations, which He
has, contrary to Truth, and without the least Ground, loaded his
Congregational Brethren with, he will see cause to Bewail what now He seems to
Triumph in. I say, passing by these things, and whatever else may rather
Provoke than Enlighten; I will Confine my self to what he has Objected against
the Reporter and his Brethren, which may be Reduced to Matters of Fact,
Doctrines of Faith, and Change of Antinomianism.

I. Of Matters of Fact.
Faithful Rebuke.
THE Reporter has miserably Imposed upon you in Matter of Fact, and -- 1. One
Specimen of his Honesty, you shall meet with at the Entrance of his Paper --
And thus in a Pompous Style, He Breaks into the Business after Sundry attempts
made by the Industrious Pa^^ficators, an Instrument was pi^ch'd upon, which
gave satisfaction to the most Learned of both Parties: This Paper was sent by
six, or seven of the Biggest Name among them, who do, or at least have gone
under the Denomination of P^esbyterians, unto some Congregational Brethren, and
gladly Embraced by them, p. 12.

Reply.
This is one part of the Charge of Falsehood against the Report, and yet there
is not One Word mentioned in this Place, but what is True. For, (1.) After
sundry Attempts, an Instrument was Pitched upon, which you have in the close of
the Report. (2.) This was sent unto the Congregational Brethren, by six or
seven of the Biggest name among the Presbyterians, of which number Mr. Alsop
was one, as the Brethren to whom it was sent can, and they by whom it was sent
must Testify. (3.) That it was sent by some of the Biggest Name, is manifest,
for the Hands of Dr. Bates and Mr. How are to the Letter, by which it was
transmitted to the Congregational. (4.) That this Paper was gladly received by
the Congregational; their own Subscription does Evince. (5.) That it gave
satisfaction to the most Learned of both Parties, it is but to read over the
Names of them who subscribed it, and it will be found most True. (6.) That Mr.
Mather's, and Mr. Cole's hands were not set to this Paper, was not, because
they Approved not of the Doctrines therein contained, for they both in the
Hearing of many declared their Approval, though for some other Reasons declined
Subscription.

Where then is the Falsehood? No where but in my Brothers own Imaginations; who
adds,

Faithful Rebuke.
Now Sir do you not Judge, that this Instrument -- had Redintegrated the
violated Union -- That all Distances were removed -- That they were all now got
together again at Little St. Hillens? I assure you Sir, not a word of this was
true. p. 13.

Reply.
No Sir, we had no reason to Judge thus, but the quite contrary, for there was
not a word of this in the Report, where it is expressly affirmed, (1.) That when
matters were brought to this Head [as above] nothing but a Reunion, and a
general Amnesty was in Prospect. It was you see but in Prospect, not come to an
Accomplishment; And, it is added, (2.) That this Reunion had ensued, had it no^
been for two or three Opposers, so that, unless the Opposition made unto the
Healing Instrument; and the laying it by, does signify, that this Instrument
had Redintegrated the violated Union, and brought all of 'em together again to
Little St. Hellens, there is not there cannot be the least Pretense for the
charge of Falsehood. And whether these Expressions signify what is most
contrary to their genuine meaning, I submit it to my Brother's more sober
Thoughts, and in the mean time will take it for granted, That there is nothing
False in this part of the Report, and pass on to his second Instance.

Faithful Rebuke.
2. A second Instance of the Reporters regard to Truth, where you will easily
observe how by a Wretched Sen^chdoche, he has given you a part for the whole of
a Just Narrative. p. 14.

Reply.
1. The Reporter never Pretended to give a Narrative of the whole: He knew that
the doing so would rather widen than close the wound; and therefore, it being
his Design, whilst he gave an account of what was done toward the making up
the Breach, and where the last Stop was, to Soften and Prepare the Minds of the
Brethren for Peace, He Industriously waved, as any one might perceive, the
giving a Full Narrative of the whole: and in the Title Page, He Declared, That
his Report was of the Present State, and therefore, not of what had passed some
years ago. How then can any, consistently with Truth, say, that by a Wretched
Senechdoche, He has given you a part for the whole of a Just Narrative?

2. A Desire to Accommodate matters so far as possible, upon the Bottom of
Truth, lies so much upon his Heart, that he does (...) fixedly Resolve against
what is likely to Exasperate. And therefore though this Brother has given such a
Partial and Untrue History of the whole, Relating to the Division, as cannot be
Detected without Publishing what we ought (I think) mournfully to cover. He
Obliges me at least for the Present, to conceal such Particulars, as much as
sincere Affection to the Truths of Christ's Gospel will allow; which I am the
rather inclined to do, because I find, that when the Report did so calmly give
but a few Intimations about what had been done for Peace, what Advances had
been made toward it by diverse of the most Eminent of each Party, where the
stop was, and what would Heal, they have put my Brother in to such a Confusion
of Thought, as moves some to Fear, that a thorough search into this History,
will discover such Mistakes, and give him such a Disturbance, as to make him
wholly Unfit for that good work, for which God has given him an Excellent
Talent, and to which, with a sincere Respect to him and his further Usefulness,
I do Heartily Wish he would henceforward Confine himself.

Having thus Cleared the Report from the Charge of Falsehood, as to matter of
Fact, I will make what convenient have I can, to consider what he has Offered
about Doctrinals. And to set what Relates hereunto, in the clearest Light, I
must beg my Readers Patience to Observe, what is necessary to be suggested on
this Occasion. For, it must be Inculcated. 1. That we have no Controversy with
any Assembly of United Ministers, as such; not only because we know of no such
meeting that has been of late months at Little St. Hellens; but because, when
there were such Meetings, they did not set their hands unto the Offensive Book,
and never Expressed any other way their Approbation of it.

That the meeting of Ministers at Little St Hellens, is not composed of United
Brethren, is manifest, in that the Congregational, who are an essential Part of
the Union, have not (if we may believe my Brother) met with them. For he
assures us, That they gradually withdrew from their Assemblies, and
Common-Meetings; and not only so, but set up another Opposite-Meeting in a
Neighboring Place, at the very Hour, and on the same day that the United
Brethren Assembled at Dr. Annesleys; Some few of them would now and then drop
in, when they had occasion to serve themselves of the Union, and commonly there
was one or two to spy out their Liberty. Fa. Reb. p. 21.

Now what manner of Union can there be between two Parties, when there is but
one Party to make it up? But,

2. The generality of those Brethren, who were Pastors of Churches, and did set
their Names unto the Testimonial before the Offensive Book, did thereby rather
intend to express their Just Abhorrence of Antinomian Dotages, than an Approval
of the Book: for diverse of them never Read the Book; nor can they bear, that
the setting their hands unto the Attestation praefixed unto it, should be
Interpreted, as if it had been unto the Book, but only unto the state of the
Truths and Errors therein mentioned, and not unto the Preface, Explications, or
Proofs.

3. That the true Reason, which influenced several of them, who meet at Little
St. Hellens to Reject the first Paper was an Apprehension, that the Testimony,
it gave against Antinomianism, was not so full as they could wish and thought
needful (though it was as full as it is now, in the third Paper.) Not that they
disliked the Renunciation of Arminian, or Socinian Errors.

However, it must be acknowledged to be somewhat singular, if not unparallel in
them, who Reject the first Paper, that, notwithstanding the Complaints of our
Offened Brethren, the Nature of the Errors, Charged on the Offensive-Book; and
the many mischievous and fatal Consequences, that have attended the Setting
their Hand unto the Testimonial before it, they have not hitherto, that I can
hear, Condescended so far, as to Examine, whether their Names have not given
Countenance to such Notions, as are contrary to the Holy Scriptures, and the
Faith Professed by Protestants at Home and Abroad.

But, seeing what is thus surprising flows from an Excess of Charity in them,
to the Author of the Offensive Book, it is now hoped, that the bold stroke,
which the Faithful Rebuke has given to the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction,
will awaken the Presbyterian Brethren to declare their Orthodoxy by their
Testifying against what does, in it, deviate from the Truth.

4. That the Controversy is, in good earnest, between the Congregational, and
the Body of the Presbyterian Brethren on the one Part; and a few, who are with
Mr. Williams, on the other. The Reasons which move me to Judge thus are* 1. The
generality of the Presbyterian Brethren in this City, do still firmly adhere
unto the Assemblies Confession, Larger and Shorter Catechism; from which, in
the Controverted Points, some apprehend Mr. W's* though he has subscribed them,
does dissent and cannot choose, whilst they have so many powerful Arguments for
that Apprehension. Besides, if there had not been a real Difference between him
and them, how could Mr. J. W. and his Friends boast of a Brother's coming over
unto them in the Point of Justification? 2. No one has written much in the
praise of Mr. Ws his Notions, but Mr. Toland; whose Opinions are well known
both in England and Ireland: and this Brother, whom I am sorry to see Listed in
defense of the same Cause. What the Reverend Mr. Lorimer has written, as it is
after another manner than what my Rebuker has done; so the most in him in
these Matters is his mistaken Charity to Mr. Ws. For he is a Man, that neither
thinks the Phrases of Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners, and of a
Commutation of Persons between Christ, and us, to be either New or of a
Dangerous sound. Nor does he deny, that our Lord Jesus did, as our surety, come
under the Bond and Curse of the Moral Law.

5. As for the Doctrine of Justification, Mr. Ws, if he will be true to his own
avowed Principles, must come over to Mr. Humphrey, in the denial of the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, in any other sense, than in its Effects.

It Is true, Mr: Ws does grant, that Christ by his Righteousness, did not only
purchase a Conditional Grant, of those Effects, which he had merited by his
Righteousness; But, besides these Effects made ours, the very Righteousness of
Christ is imputed to true Believers. Gospel Truth Stated, p. 39. However, if we
compare this passage with what is more lately and fully explained in his Man
made Righteous, p. 77, etc. you will soon unravel the whole Mystery, and see,
that whilst he is laboring to hide himself, for a while, in a Cloud of Words,
be means nothing at all by this Grant. For he is most explicit in affirming,
That the Righteousness of Christ, as it was the Performance of the Conditions
of our Salvation, is mediately imputed to the Believer. Christ's very
Performance of the Conditions is (says he) Imputed mediately in this manner.
If one give me my Liberty, which he voluntarily purchased for me at a dear
rate, he mediately gives me what he paid for my Ransom, though immediately I
receive my Liberty and a Right thereto.

Now what is this more than an imputation of Christ's Righteousness in the
Effects? Because the Effects of Christ's death, such as a Right to Pardon, etc.
is given to the True Believer, therefore it may be said, that Christ's
Righteousness, the procuring Cause, is imputed unto him. As the money, which
one gives for another Liberty, may be said to be given to that other to whom
Liberty is given, which is only in the effects of that Money; so Christ's
Righteousness is imputed, in that the effects of it are given unto us: that is
to say, Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us mediately; It is imputed to us
mediante effectu, or in its effects. If he can make any thing more of it, let
him.

Besides, so long as he, against the Common Sentiment of Protestants, denies a
Commutation, or Change of Persons between Christ and us; or, that Christ
sustained the Person of sinners; or, as our Surety came under the Bond and
Obligations of the violated Law of works, to answer those Obligations for us:
it is impossible there should be, on his Principles, any other imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, but what is in its effects, which Mr. Humphrey, clearly
understanding, does honestly Assert, and that he must do the same, or
relinquish his Principles may be more distinctly proved at any time, that he
will, though let him be but sincere and confess it, I shall be most willing, with
my Reverend Brethren, to consider how far we are to extend our Communion, or
Charity toward such, wherein he will find me Charitable enough.

6. The Breach being on this account begun, it is now widened by a Rejecting
the Assertion of a Necessity of a Commutation of Persons between Christ and us,
for the due explaining and defending the Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction, and
our Justification; together with a Laying by the Use of the Phrases of Christ's
sustaining the Person of Sinners, of a Change of Persons between Christ and us;
of Christ's being our Surety, to answer for us the Obligations of the Violated
Law of Works; and the like. And made more dangerous, since these Phrases have
been so very much Ridiculed by this Brother.

But there being so much wonder made at an insisting on the Use of these
Phrases, I will, for the sake of those Brethren, who, either by disuse have
forgotten; or, by reason of a too early and constant Application unto practical
Preaching, never thoroughly understood this necessary Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction; I will, I say, show how useful these Phrases are to explain this
glorious and blessed Truth.

There are, in the Holy Scriptures, several Texts which discover and prove the
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction.

About the Genuine Sense of these Texts, the chief Controversy between the
Reformed on the one hand, and the Arminian, and Socinian, on the other, does
Lie.

The Controverted Texts are such as speak of Christ's dying for our sins, and
for us; of his being our Surety, and a Sacrifice for us; and the like, that
relate to these Matters.

The different Senses, which the Orthdox, and their Adversaries have of these
Texts, I will distinctly Propose.

1. When it is said in Scripture, that Christ was wounded and bruised for our
Transgressions; suffered and dyed for our Sins. Socinus and his Followers
affirm, that the Expression [for our sins] signifies only a Final Cause, as if
no more was meant than that Christ dyed for our good.

The Orthodox expressly Asserts, that [For our sins] in these Texts* imports an
impulsive meritorious Cause; and Grotius proves against Socinus, that these
words, Christ suffered for our sins, cannot be understood of a Final, but of
Meritorious Cause. And, if our sins be the Meritorious Cause of Christ's
Sufferings, it necessarily follows, that Christ's sufferings were a Proper
Punishment for them, and must be satisfactory to Gods Justice, which Grotius,
and the Right Reverend Bishop of Worcester, have unanswerably Proved.

2. When, in Scripture it is affirmed, that Christ suffered, and dyed For us,
the Socinians, who Labor to reduce all to his suffering for our good only, are
positive, that the signification of the Proposition [For] ^s, that Christ dyed
nostro bono, for our good. He suffered for our sins, that is, say they, he
suffered for our good; He dyed for us, that is, say they, he dyed only for our
good.

On the contrary, the Orthodox aver, that the Preposition (...), For, when it is
said, Christ dyed for us, signifies a Commutation, or Change of persons between
Christ and us; which is aptly expressed by that other Phrase, [in our Place and
Stead] that is, Christ suffered not only for our good; but, that God might be
glorified in our Redemption, Christ suffered in our Place and Stead; Christ in
his sufferings, did sustinere vicem, seu Persunam nostram. He was put into our
Place, State and Condition, that having the Guilt of our sins laid upon him, he
might, according to the Rule of Justice, suffer a Proper Punishment for our
sins, and so make Satisfaction to Gods Justice for us.

When it is said, Christ came into our Place, State and Condition, the meaning
is, he came under the Bonds and Obligations of the violated Law of Works, lay
under the Guilt and Punishment of sin on our behalfs, that we, by laying hold
on Christ by Faith, might be delivered.

The Phrases then of a Change of Persons between Christ, and us, of Christ's
taking on him the Person of Sinners, suffering in their Person, Rooms and
Stead, are most apt to convey unto our Understandings the true, the Orthodox,
and Genuine Sense of these Texts, Christ dyed for our sins, and for us, in
opposition to the Socinian Interpretation, that is to bring all to Christ's
suffering for our good only; which they do, that they may the better subvert
the Doctrine of a Real, Proper and full Satisfaction to Gods Justice.

3. The Term Surety, when spoken of Christ in Scripture, relates to us as we
are Sinners, endebted to the Law, and Justice of God, and imports a Change of
Person between Christ, and us; Christ's sustaining our Person, coming into the
Bond, we had forfeited, and in our Place and Stead, answering for us the
Obligations of the Violated Law of Works.

4. Christ's being made a Sacrifice for us, does signify the same, for that
Christ might be a Proper Sacrifice for us; 'twas necessary that he should be
substituted into our Place and Stead, as the Bishop of Worcester, as well as
Grotius, have fully proved.

It Is true, Episcopius and his Followers, pretend a Zeal for Christ's being a
Proper Expiatory Sacrifice, but then they declare that Christ, when sacrificed
for us, did not suffer a Proper Punishment for our sins: But the Orthodox have
cleared it, beyond all doubt, that Christ, as our Sacrifice was substituted
into our Place and Stead; that this Substitution cannot be without a
Commutation of Persons between him and us; that hereupon Christ's sufferings,
when he was sacrificed for us, became a Proper Punishment for our sins.

The Use then of these Phrases [of a Commutation of Persons between Christ, and
us; of Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners; of his suffering in our Place,
Stead and Person; of his coming under the Bonds and Obligations of the Violated
Law of Works; of his answering for us these Obligations,] are used by the
Orthodox, as most apt to explain the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, and
distinguish it from the Socinian Heresy.

They are the Phrases pitched upon by the Godly Learned, to deliver unto us the
sound meaning of those Scriptures, which speaks of Christ's suffering for our
sins; dying for us; being our Surety, and made a Sacrifice for us.

But, if you will Reduce all to Christ's sufferings in our Place, and Stead;
and by these Expressions, avowedly Declare, that it is Impossible for that
Phrase, to signify any more than for our good, and to turn nostro Loco, into
nostro bono, you give up the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, and Sacrifize
the Truth to the Lusts of its greatest Enemies, for Christ's suffering only for
our Good, respects only Man; and the signification of Christ's making
Satisfaction does primarily respect God the Justice, and Righteousness of his
Nature, which is not included in his suffering only nostro bono; for which
reason if Christ suffered only for our Good, He did not by his sufferings make
satisfaction unto God's Justice.

These things, (which will be distinctly handled in my vindicating the Report
from Falsehood in Doctrinals) do sufficiently show how necessary the Use of
these Phrases is, how Dangerous to recede from them, and how liable to
suspicion such Brethren are, who do not only Oppose, but with Scorn and
Contempt Reject them.

It now remains, that I proceed to Examine what it is, that my Reverend Brother
charge the Report with, in matters Doctrinal.

II. Of Doctrinala.
IN the Report we may observe an Intimation given of sundry Points, which were
in the First Paper, but left out of the Third, and the leaving 'em out of the
Third insisted on as what increased the Offense of our Grieved Brethren.

I. An Expunging that Paragraph which in the First Paper, did Assert the
Necessity of a Change of Persons, between Christ and Us, in order to a due
Explaining, and Defending the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, and our
Justification.

II. A Rejecting the Phrase of Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners.

III. The Denying a Change of Persons between Christ and Us.

IV. An Imposing a Socinian sense on the Phrase of Christ's suffering in our
Place and Stead.

V. A Turning Christ's Undertaking to Answer for us the Obligations of the
Violated Law of Works, into Christ's Answering for our Violation of the Law of
Works.

VI. Why so many Orthodox Terms and Phrases, which were in the First Paper are
left out of the Third?

And seeing it is boldly said, That our Controversy with them is not about
what is owned, or so much as Countenanced in any Public Confessions, I will
under this Head of Doctrinals make Answer to the Enquiry.

VII. In what Confessions are the Terms, or Phrases so much Contended for to be
found?

Before I discourse on any of these points, 'twill be requisite, that I set
before you the Reason, which my Brother gives for their rejecting those
Passages, Terms and Phrases, that were in the First Paper. You shall have it in
his own words.

Faithful Rebuke.
The Brethren did Unanimously agree to Grant as much as the sound Sense could
Bear; and modestly to wave, and pass by the other, which was liable to be
Interpreted to a sense and sound of Malignity to the whole of the Gospel. p.
30.

Reply.
This passage of my Reverend Brother does make it manifest, That the
Paragraphs, Terms, and Phrases, which were in the first Paper, and were waved
and passed by in the Composure of the Third, are looked upon by my Brother, and
as he will have us believe, by all the Ministers, who meet at Little St.
Helens, and had a Head, a Hand, and a Heart in Composing the Third, could not
bear a sound sense, but were liable to be Interpreted to a sense, and sound of
Malignity to the whole of the Gospel. That is to say, The Phrase of Christ's
putting on the Person of Sinners; of his Answering for us the Obligations of
the Violated Law of Works, the Term, Surety, and the Assertion of the Necessity
of a Commutation, or Change of Persons between Christ and Us, in order to
Explain, and Defend Christ's Satisfaction, cannot in their Opinion bear a sound
sense, but are liable to be Interpreted to a sense, and sound of Malignity to
the whole of the Gospel.

This is the sense of my Reverend Brother, concerning which I will only say,
that though I think my self bound in Civility to believe what he says of
himself, yet I dare not be so severe as to conclude, that all my Presbyterian
Brethren who meet at Little St. Hellens are in these Points of his Mind.
However I desire my Reader to have Recourse unto this Passage, when He
considers what I offer under the Particulars Proposed to be Examined. To the
First,

I. An Expunging that Paragraph, which in the first Paper did Assert the
Necessity of a Change of Persons between Christ and Us, in order to a Due
Explaining and Defending the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, and our
Justification.
That a Change of Persons between Christ and Us is necessary to a due
Explication and Defense of Christ's S(...)tion and our Justification, is so
very manifest, that were nor but surprise us, to Hear from a Brother who
pre(...) to Believe both, that it is not so.

What more Evident, than that if the Lord Christ has not made Satisfaction to
God's Justice for us, there is nothing Left for the Relief of a Convinced
Sinner, or for Healing a Wounded Spirit: for there is no Room, no Place for our
being Justified in the Court of Heaven. If no Satisfaction, there can be no
Justifying Righteousness found for us, to appear before the Bar of God in. It Is
Christ's Righteousness alone, that can pass the Examen in the Great Day of the
Lord; and without that no Soul Living can be Justified.

But, if Christ Endured not the Punishment due to us for sin, by Answering for
us the Obligations of the Violated Law of Works, there can be no Proper
Satisfaction made to the Justice of God for Us, for Satisfaction taken strictly
and in a proper sense is solutio Debiti, a Suffering the Punishment due for our
Sin. That the Punishment of our Sins could not be born by the Lord Jesus
Christ, unless there were a Commutation of Persons between Christ and Us,
whereby the Lord Jesus came under the Bonds and Engagements of the Violated Law
of Works, that we might be Delivered, is as Evident.

These things are so plain, that whoever thoroughly Understands this Doctrine,
whether the Orthodox, Socinian, or Arminian, they make no doubt of it, and
therefore such as oppose the Doctrine of a Proper Satisfaction, deny a Change
of Persons between Christ and Us, and thereby turn Christ's Sufferings from
being Properly a Punishment to be only vicarious, that is, vice poenae,
Grievous, and Painful Afflictions instead of a proper Punishment.

Whether what I here Assert be not the Truth Revealed to u^ in the Holy
Scriptures, I appeal to all sound Divines, whether in the Church of England,
Scotland, or the Reformed abroad.

However, if we may Believe my Brother, the Assertion of the Necessity of a
Commutation of Persons between Christ, and Us, in order to a due Explaining and
Defending Christ's Satisfaction and our Justification cannot bear a Sound
sense, but is liable to be Interpreted to a sense of Malignity to the whole of
the Gospel.

If this be not matter of Just Grief to the Godly Learned amongst us, what can
be so? Here is an Exposing to the uttermost Contempt a Truth of very great
Importance.

II. The Phrase of Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners is Rejected.
That they Reject this Phrase, of Christ's Sustaining the Person of Sinners, is
so manifest, that my Brother does not only prove the Charge to be true, but
Expresses himself against the Use of this Phrase, with Vehemence and Heat.
Take his own words.

Faithful Rebuke.
For Christ to take upon him the Person of sinners, as the phrase is New and
Uncouth, so it is to me Unintelligible, till they who have invented it shall
Interpret it, p. 10. -- This New phrase, Christ took upon him the Person of
sinners, is a phrase to Puzzle and Confound men's Understandings, p. 11. -- Now
succeeds the Coining Age, and they have stamped, and Counterfeited some New
Phrases, Terms, and Expressions, such as Christ's taking on him the Person of
Sinners. p. 32.

Reply.
1. This is no new Phrase, but Used and Contended for by the Orthodox against
the Arminians many years ago. If you consult the Learned Peter du Monlin, his
Anatomy of Arminianism, you will find, that near fourscore years ago, he charged
the Arminians with denying, that Christ sustained the Person of the Elect when
on the Cross. cap. 27. 6. And, in the following chapter, 30. he thus expresses
himself, When these Sectaries deny, that Christ did, when on the Cross, sustain
the Person of the Elect, they do plainly contradict what is Affirmed by Christ
in Joh. 10.11. The good Shepherd lays down his Life for his Sheep, and those
other places in Joh. 15.13. Ephesians. 5.25.

Joannes Arnoldus Corvinus in his Censure on the Anatomy, freely declares in
the Name of the Arminians they do deny, that Christ sustained the Person of the
Elect, when on the Cross. cap. 27.. 6.

2. The Learned Du Moulin was not singular in his Opinion, for what he asserted
on this Occasion was the Faith of the Reformed, which I will evince, beginning
with the mention of some Learned Divines amongst our selves in this Island. And
it is worthy Remark, that the Reverend Dr. Bates, who is known to be no
Antinomian, does affirm in his Harmony, p 240. That, as in Civil cases, where
one becomes Surety for another, He is Obliged to pay the Debt, for in the
Estimate of the Law, they are but One Person, Heb. 7.22. So the Lord Jesus
entering into this Relation, sustained the Person of sinners, and became
Iudicially One with them; and according to the Order of Justice was liable to
their Punishment.

What the Doctor has here observed, gives Light touching the Genuine Import of
the Phrase of Christ's taking on him the Person of sinners, as it is included
in Christ's Sure^iship. For, when it is said, Christ is our Surety, if it be
meant of his Paying our Debts to the Law, and Justice of God, as it is by the
Orthodox, the Term Surety must necessarily imply Christ's sustaining ^^r
Person, it being the part of a Surety to ^ake on him the Person of a Debtor, to
Represent him, and stand so in his Place and stead as to come into the same
Bond, and under the same Obligations the Debtor stood.

Thus much is the Import of the Term, Surety, and signification of Christ's
sustaining the Person of sinners, that is, The Lord Christ came into the Bond,
we Forfeited, lies under the Obligations of the Violated Law of Works, and in
our Person, Representing Us, He Paid the Debt we Contracted, by suffering the
Punishment we Deserved.

Though Christ had not any Demerit of his own upon him, yet as the learned Bishop
Reynolds has it, He had the Guilt of Sin so far upon him, as it Notes the
Obligation and Subjection unto Punishment, as he was our Surety, and so in
sensu forensi, in the sight of Gods Court of Justice, One with us, who had
deserved the Punishment imputed to him, on Psalm. 110. p. 439.

Christ, as our Surety, suffered in our Person, Representing us, and as the
great Placeus, in the Salmurian Theses de Justificat. sect. 29. Observes, what
Christ as our Surety, in our Person or Name suffered may be very truly imputed
unto us. Who can, says he, deny the Imputation of that Satisfaction unto us,
which was made by our Surety, in our Name?

To the same purpose the learned Mr. Rutherford, who was not only an Enemy to
Antinomian Heresies, but One, who did Unanswerably Confute them, this worthy
Person, so justly celebrated, not only throughout Scotland, but by the learned
in this Kingdom, and abroad for his Excelling Learning, Piety, and sound
Judgment, makes it his Province to prove against the Arminians, and Socinians,
that Christ in suffering sustained the Person of the Elect, and that the
Orthodox signification of the phrase in our Place and Stead is, in our Name or
Person; of which more hereafter in due season, but in this place I will only
Remark, how he presses, that Christ's Suretiship can import no less than his
sustaining the Person of them for whom he suffered. His words are, He, who
being under the Law, paid that (...) Debt of Satisfaction, which the Elect in
their ^^^sons should have paid, He sustained the Person of the Elect, in his
suffering. But Christ being made ^^der the Law, paid that Law-Debt of
Satisfaction which the Elect in their Persons should have paid, Ergo. The
Proposition is out of doubt. (...) He, who says expressly, that what is here
affirmed by my Rebuking Brother to be Unintelligible, fit to Puzzle and
Confound men's Understandings, is so easy to be Understood, that there is no
place left for doubt, for, as He adds in the next page. None who Dies as a
Surety, or pays as a Surety, but He bears the Person of such as He Pays for.
These things are Asserted by him, in his Treatise of the Covenant of Grace.
Part 2. p. 252, etc.

I will add one Testimony more, and that is what I find in the Catechism of Mr.
Nowell, received with the greatest Honor, above these Hundred years, in the
Church of England, where you have these words; Christ for us suffered, and went
through Horrible Fears, and most bitter Griefs of mind, to satisfy God's Just
Judgment in all things, and to Appease his Wrath. For to Sinners, whose Person
Christ did here Bear, not only the Sorrows and Pains of present Death are due,
but also Death to Come and Everlasting.

But these Authorities being only in the English Tongue, can only prove, that
the Phrase of Christ's bearing the Person of sinners is not so New, as my
Brother affirms, I will go on to enquire, whether this odd Phrase (to use my
Brothers own words) durst show its Face in Latin? For my Brother says it durst
not.

Faithful Rebuke.
Seeing the great Struggle has been, not about the satisfaction of Christ, as
the Report Misrepresents it, but about some odd Phrases, and Expressions, in
which it is clothed, especially these of Christ's suffering in the Person of
sinners -- whether if this be a sound, and safe way of Expressing that great
Doctrine, it will not endure to show its Naked Face in some other of the
learned Languages? And if you please make an Experiment, how well it will look
in Latin? -- Now what is sustinere Personam alterius? -- Whatever Excuse they
can have for the English phrase, I know not, it is pretty hard to Damn all the
World for an Anglicism, p. 53.

Reply.
1. What my good Brother means by these Reflections on the phrases of Christ's
sustaining and suffering in the Person of sinners, less than that, in his
Opinion, they were never used by any Author, who wrote in Latin, and that this
learned Language wants apt words to express them by, I cannot comprehend. But,

2. This being the manifest sense of my reverend Brother, I shall be
necessitated to Try his Skill, or Integrity, or both; For, nothing more Obvious
than that they, who have wrote in Latin, on this Subject, have Used these
phrases, and that Cicero himself has found out apt words to render the Bearing
the Person of another into good Latin.

3. The Authorities I design to press shall be of such Great Men, as are most
distant in their Judgment, from Antinomian Notions, and passing by the
Lutherans, viz. Calovius, Dorsheus, Scherzerus, Quenstedius, and many other
such, who are in this Article very sound, I will Confine my self to the
Reformed. Essenius, in his Defense of Grotius de Satisfactione, lib. 1. sect*
4. cap. 5. part 1. p. 128. has it thus, That Christus Personam nostram
sustinens, etc. Christ sustaining our Person, there was a Commutation of his
Death for ours, that we might attain unto Life.

Hoornbeck, who understood this Controversy as well as any one, lays it down
as a General Rule, by which we are to guide our selves, in the management of
it, That Christus eorum Personam sustinuit, Christ sustained the Person of
them, for whom he made Satisfaction by his death, was in their Place, and
State, and took on him to bear their Guilt on himself. Miscel. Sac. lib. 3. p.
396.

Nor can there be any thing more Remarkable upon this Occasion than what Rivet
Replies to Bellarmine's Answer to the Common Argument of Protestants, for our
being Justified by the Righteousness of Christ; in which place, after he had
urged a great deal in detecting Bellarmine's Sophistications, he adds, That
Christ is to be considered, first as in himself, and then with respect to us,
whose Person he sustains; that Christ considered in himself is Just, Holy,
without Spot, and separate from Sinners, but in respect to us, he is said to be
made sin: He is our Surety, and so a Debtor. Rivet. Cathol. Orthod. Tom. 2.
Tract. 8. Querst. 2. number. 35.

Cloppenburch is as positive; for, in his Enarrat. in 53. Isa. says he, When
it is affirmed, that our sins are imputed unto Christ, we must understand it,
that he is truly made sin, though not in himself, yet in our Person he may be
reckoned and esteemed as the Debtor: for, by reason of his Suretiship, he is
Judicially esteemed One Person with us. page 79.

Witsius, to whom Dr. Chauncey and Mr. Williams have appealed in this
Controversy, declares it as his Judgment, That Christ was so substituted for
the Elect, and so sustained their Person, that there is a Permutation or Change
of Persons. Animad. Iren. Cap. 2. 8. and elsewhere, Christ did not Undertake,
or make Satisfaction for any, but them, whose Person he sustained. De Oecon.
Faed. lib. 2. cap. 9. 1.

To these I will only add Voetius, who having Asserted, That Christ, as our
Surety, sustained the Person of all them that shall be saved by him, and so
fulfilled all that Righteousness of the Law, which they could not do, tells us,
'That the Remonstrants, who are justly suspected for Leaning too much toward
the Socinians, do hold no other Satisfaction, and Merit, than such an appeasing
God, the offended Party, as that, by which he is so far satisfied as to be
willing to Receive Offenders into favor; and by which Christ has acquired for
the Father, a Right of Entering into a New Covenant with Men, from whence (adds
he) it follows, That Christ was not truly our Surety, that he suffered not in
our Place and Stead; that he did not in a proper Sense Purchase and Procure any
thing for us; nor did he, when on the Cross, sustain the Person of the Elect.
Select. Disput. Theol. p. 2. de Merito Christi; page 133, 134. Calvin also uses
it on Gal. 3.13.

These few Instances are enough to convince an Unbyassed Mind, that the Phrase
of Christ's sustaining our Person, has been commonly used, both by the Reformed
at Home and Abroad; that it has been insisted on as necessary to secure the
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction from Arminian and Socinian Encroachments, and
that it has dared to show its Face in Latin. But my Brother's further Enquiry
is, Does it appear in good Latin? To which I answer.

5. This Phrase, sustinere Personam alterius, is Cicero all over, for (says he
de Orat.) Tres Personas unus sustineo, meam, Adversarij and Judicis.

This Matter is so very plain, that how excusable soever my Brothers Instructor
may be in making such Mistakes, my Brother himself, who is so good a Latinist,
discovering so much Unacquaintedness, not only with Divinity, but with that
Learned Language, in which, if in any thing, excepting Wit, he must be esteemed
to excel, cannot be entirely excused. For what more evident, than that, if
Cicero may be Regarded as a Competent Judge in this Case, sustinere Personam
alterius, is such good Latin, that it need not be afraid to Look my Brother in
the face. However,

6. This Brother will have it, that the Phrase of Christ's Sustaining our
Person, is Unintelligible, fit to Puzzle and Confound Men's Understanding,
incapable of a sound Sense, and liable to be interpreted to a Sense and Sound
of Malignity to the whole of the Gospel, as if all that have used it, such as
Dr. Bates, Rutherford, Calvin, and the Generation of the Orthodox had designed
to confound the World by the Use of barbarous and pernicious Phrases, and had
been guilty of the unrighteous Charge, with which the English Unitarians have
burdened them, when they Reproach them for amusing Mankind with the Jargon of
Unintelligible Terms and Phrases. And as if such an Accusation had been too
mean, my Brother runs higher. For

7. He exposes the Phrase of Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners, to the
greatest Contempt and Scorn, as if it Represented the blessed Redeemer in the
most glorious undertaking of falen Man's Recovery, to be Histrionical. His Words
are,

Faithful Rebuke.
We are told of Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners: -- What can this
Expression signify, but that Christ wore the Mask, the Vizer, the Disguise of
Sinners? That he was Personatus Histrio? Like a S^^ge Player, that puts on the
Person of a King, wh^^ indeed he is but some Sorry Fellow. -- page 53.

Reply.
1. That the Phrase of Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners, should be so
vilely misrepresented by any one of them, who meet at Little St. Hellens, is
equal Matter of Astonishment and Humiliation. And to be Just unto Truth, I must
turn unto the Reverend Brethren, who ordinarily Assemble at that Place for
their Judgment in this case, whether the Phrase of Christ's sustaining the
Person of sinners, can signify nothing but his wearing the Mask, the Vizer,
the Disguise of Sinners, as if he had been a sorry Stage Player? This is the
Case that deserves, yea, that calls for your determination; for my Brothers
words are, What can these Expressions signify, but that Christ wore the Mask,
etc. Sirs, the Eyes of a whole Nation are upon you, and the Eyes of the
Reformed Churches Abroad, will be upon you, to see whether you will give
Countenance to such an Abuse of Truth, and its Renowned Defenders. But to
Return to my Brother.

2. Why, cannot this Phrase signify nothing else? If he had but gained a
little smattering in the Civil Law, he would have seen that it could have born
another meaning. There he might have Learned, That there is a Moral Person
distinct both from a Physical, and Ficta Persona; That a Moral Person is one
placed in the State and Office of them, whose Person he sustains; That One
single Man being put into the different States and Conditions of many, puts on
their Person; That a peculiar Species of Political Persons may be called
Representative, because they represent the Persons they bear; for instance,
Ambassadors, Viceroys, Syntdicks, and the like. And in the more inferior
Station, the Tutor sustains the Person of the Pupil, the Guardian of the Minor,
and yet none of these are Stage Players; for to a Representative Person,
somewhat more belongs than mere Representation, they are such as do somewhat
for the Advantage of them, whose Person they sustain; That these True Moral
Persons are distinct from them, who are but Fictae as Stage Players are: That
the Fictae Personae, or Stage Players, are but the Vmbrae, or Shadows of the
True. That the Essence of these Fictae Personae, consists only in
Representation of the Habit, the Gesture, and the like of another. And as
Pufendorf further declares, Veras Personas morales, quas producit Impositio,
haudquidquam ita est Libera, quin ejusmodi Qualitates debeat praesupponere,
quae aptae sint, ut solidus aliquis effectus in vita humana inde Eveniat. Et
illas, qui circa Constituendas Personas negle xerint per vecordem Petulantiam
mortalibus insultare est Censendus. Pufend. de Jure Not. and Gent. Lib. 1. Cap.
1. Edit. 3. page 15.

That this good Brother therefore, whilst so Unacquainted with what is so much
known to every body, who understands this Controversy about Christ's
Satisfaction, and his Suretyship, should so far forget himself as to write
after the rate he has done, may very well be a Caution to others to take heed,
how they go beyond their last, or, how they suffer themselves to be hurryed on
a Controversy before their Heats are over, and they have got time to
deliberate, and digest what they write about. Had my Reverend Brother been more
cool, had he got more time to consider, and weigh well what he did, he could
never have been thus imposed upon to wound his own Reputation as he has done,
in the use he has made of Milton: Milton, though he says, Salmasium risum pene
Legentibus Multiplici Barbarismo concitasse, could not charge Salmasius, with
more Instances of Barbarism, than my Brother is fallen into mistakes in the use
he makes of Milton. For,

1. Salmasius Writes not of a Moral Representative Person, but of the Natural
Person of the King; there was, says he, a Paricide Committed on the Person of
the King, that is, on his Natural, his own proper Person.

2. When Milton Banters Salmasius with a Pseudo-Philip, he mentions not a word
of a Moral Person neither; but speaks only of a mere Ficta Persona, as if
Salmasius, by Persona, had meant a Tyrant, under the Vizer, or Mask of a King.

3. The Reason, why Milton was so severe upon Salmasius, was not so much
because Salmasius used the Word Persona, as because he mislook the Ablative for
the Accusative Case, and wrote in Persona, when it should have been in Personam
Regis.

But, though Salmasius gave a full Answer to every thing, that Milton, on this
occasion, Played upon him for, Instancing in several Roman Writers, who have
taken the word Persona in a proper Sense, and have used the Ablative Case, as
he has done; yet, it not being to my present Purpose, I shall only desire to
know of my Brother. What Alliance Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners has,
either with the Natural Person of a King; or of any other Man; or with a mere
Ficta Persona? For both these are very distinct from a Moral, or Legal Person;
and, it is in this Moral or Legal Sense, that the word [Person] is taken, when
it is affirmed, that Christ sustained the Person of Sinners, and it signifies
the same with Christ's being their Public Representative. He was Publica
Persona moralis Representativa.

We will therefore, before we dismiss this Phrase, consult the Reverend Mr.
Alsop, for I know my Brother has a great conceit of him; who, in his
Antisozzo, p. 689. says, That Christ is the Representative of all his
Spiritual Seed; and in p. 693. All the Spiritual Seed and Posterity of Christ,
are by Virtue of a New Law-constitution, made Righteous by the Righteousness of
their Spiritual Head, and Representative: To whom I Will add what the Reverend
Dr. Bates says of it, which is, that Christ was to be our Representative, and
therefore such a Conjunction between him, and us, must be, that God might
esteem all his People to suffer in him; which is no more than what is affirmed
in the Close of the first Homily of Justification, when it is said, That Christ
is now the Righteousness of all them that truly do believe in him. He for them
paid their Ransom by his death; He, for them, fulfilled the Law in his Life: So
that now in him, and by him, every True Christian may be called a Fulfiller of
the Law:

But if Christ Represented Sinners in his Death, he must be found in their
Quality, suffering as a Sinner; that is, as Mr. Alsop has it, in his
Anti-Sozzo, p. 184. That Christ's Soul was made an Offering for sin, Isa. 53.10.
Nay, he was made Sin for us, though he know no sin, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 21. And Appearing in this Quality; Death,
the Officer of Gods Violated Law, might Justly Arrest him, and the Father be
pleased to bruise him. For as elsewhere, the same Author, he was a Sinner, that
is, by Imputation, page 574. Christ could no otherwise be a Sinner, but by
imputation, nor we otherwise Righteous than by Imputation.

Thus, the Lord Christ Suffering and Obeying in the Person of Sinners, as their
Public Representative, it is to all intents and purposes as effectual, as if
they had done it themselves Personae morales Representativae, quae Personam
ali^^um Reserant -- hujus vice negotia expediunt, eodom cum effectu, acsi ab
illo ipso essent Confectae. Pusend. ubi. sup. II.

What has been urged on this Head, makes it Apparent, that the Phrase of
Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners, in his Death and Obedience, is very
Intelligible and Aptly used by the Orthodox; such as Dr. Bates, Rutherford,
Scherzerus, Quenstedius, Nowel, Essenius, Voetius, Rivetus, and many others;
ay, the very same thing is used by the Reverend Mr. Alsop, (...) insisting so
very much on Christ's being a Re^^^^^ntative, who is one that sustain the Person
of them (...) Represents: However, it is rejected and exposed to scorn and
contempt, by this Brother, who thereby does, in this instance, prove the
Reports to be True; For, it being affirmed in the Report, that this Phrase of
Christ's sustaining our Person, is Rejected by them; you see it to be so, and
the Reason assigned is, because it could not bear a sound sense, but is liable
to be Interpreted to a sense of Malignity to the whole of the Gospel.

III. A Commutation or Change of Persons between Christ and us, is Denied.
The Paper sent by some Presbyterian Brethren unto the Congregational,
intimating, that the Author of Gospel Truth Stated, had denied a Commutation or
Change of Persons between Christ and us; the Reverend Brethren, who meet at
Little St. Hellens, delivered their Opposite Sense thus, It is manifest, that
when Mr. Williams uses the Phrase [of no Change of Persons between Christ and
us] it could not be intended, as a denial of a Change of Persons between Christ
and us, in the general Sense.

But what thinks my Reverend Brother of this? It appears clear enough to me,
that he is of Opinion, That Mr. Ws. does deny a Change of Persons between
Christ and us, in every Sense. And yet on the other hand, he seems to argue, as
if Mr. Ws. held a Change of Persons between Christ and us, in some Sense, which
is Evident from what he says of a Change and no Change; [tho' he had little
Reason to speak of no Change, seeing he is the man that is given so much to
Change] and his falling so severely upon the Reporter, for suggesting, that Mr.
Ws. Denied a Change of Persons between Christ and us, in every Sense? For he
very triumphantly tells us,

Faithful Rebuke.
Mr. Ws. did not deny a Change of Person, simpliciter, sed secundum quid; not
universally, but restrictively; for the most universal Terms are not always
universally to be understood. page 38.

Reply.
1. This Paragraph of my Reverend Brother, in Connection with what precedes,
and follows it, does, I confess, look as if he held, that Mr. Ws. did not deny
a Change of Persons between Christ and us, in the general sense: And for once
we will suppose it, and see how agreeable this Notion is with his way of
arguing on this occasion, which is thus,

2. Mr. Ws. did not deny a Change of Person simpliciter, sed secundum quid, not
universally but restrictively. Well then; on this supposal, what follows?
Because Mr. Ws. did nor deny a Change of Person, simpliciter, and universally,
therefore must he be for a Change of Persons between Christ and us, secundum
quid, and restrictively? Yes; It must be so. How then shall we Conciliate this
Notion with what is in page 9. in which place he thus expresses himself; Where
lies the necessity, that because there was a Change of Christ's Person for
sinners, there must be a Change of Person between Christ and sinners? This
Passage makes it evident, that in the Judgment of my Brother, these two Phrases
[A Change of Christ's Person for sinners;] and [a Change of Person between
Christ and sinners] are so very different, and in their Meaning so Remote from
each other, that from the Asserting the one, the other cannot be necessarily
inferred. How then can, say I, these two Passages be Conciliated? Mr. Ws. must
hold a Change of Persons between Christ and us, secundum quid, because he does
not simply and universally deny a Change of Christ's Person; and yet there lies
no necessity, that because there is a Change of Christ's Person for us, there
must be a Change of Persons between Christ and Us? How shall we set these
things together? Or, find in our Brothers Arguings a Defense of the Brethren at
Little St. Hellens? It must be thus or not at all, that I can see. Mr. Ws. does
not deny a change of Christ's Person Simply and Universally, therefore in some
respect he must be for a change of Person between Christ and Us. That is to
say, though a Man may hold a change of Christ's Person, without holding a change
of Persons between Christ and Us, in any sense; yet Mr. Ws. must be for a
change of Persons between Christ and Us, in some sense, because he does not
deny a change of Christ's Person simply, and in every sense. He must own that
the Apostle Peter was a good man, in some respect, because he does not say,
that St. Paul was Evil in every respect. The Connection between a change of
Christ's Person, and a change of Persons between Christ and Us, is, in the
Judgment of my Brother, no other than what is between the Piety of the one
Apostle, and the Infirmities of the other. But,

3. My Brother is in good earnest, only for a change of Christ's Person,
without a change of Persons between Christ and Us, as I will soon prove, so
that all this noise about a change of Christ's Person secundum quid, and
Restrictively, is nothing to the purpose. The question is not, whether there be
a change of Christ's Person for Sinners? No Socinian will deny thus much. But,
whether there be a change of Persons between Christ and Sinners? The Brethren
at St. Hellens say, There is a change of Persons between Christ and Us; at
least in the general sense, and they thought, that Mr. Ws. held so too. But, if
we may Judge of Mr. Ws. by his Defender, its notorious, that Mr. Ws. does not
hold a change of Persons between Christ and Us, in any sense. That this phrase
is of a late contrivance, and must have a Blasphemous sense, as I will show
from my Brothers own words.

Faithful Rebuke.
The Controversy lies in some School Terms, or Jargons of Art, of a very late
Contrivance, such as a change of Persons between Christ and Us. p. 30.

Reply.
1. This contemptuous Treatment, with which my Brother entertains this phrase,
(which as it has been long ago used by the Church of God; so is it most apt to
express that great Truth, delivered in the Holy Scriptures, where it is said,
Christ died for us) can indicate nothing less than that He Believes not a
change of Persons between Christ and Us.

2. He says, that it is a phrase of a very late contrivance, and a School
Term, whereas the learned Dr. Owen has proved it to have been used by the
Fathers, such as St. Austin, St. Chrysostom, Gregory Nyssen, and Justin
Martyr, long before the Schoolmen had their rise. Owen of Justif. p. 41, etc.
and Witsius proves it too.

My Brother goes on to assure us, that this phrase, of a change of Persons
between Christ and Us, must have a Blasphemous sense.

Faithful Rebuke.
Let us Examine the phrase: A change of persons between Christ and Us; If I
understood Grammar, the sense must be, that Christ was changed for us; and we
for Christ, the change must be mutual, and Interchangeable. But though Christ
Redeemed us; we never Redeemed Christ: Christ stood in our place, as our
Redeemer, we never stood in his place, nor were his Redeemers: He Died for us,
for our sins; we nenever Died for him, for his sins. p. 9.

Reply.
1. That my reverend Brother has delivered himself, in a point of this
Importance so hastily, does greatly lessen him in the Esteem of some of his
truest Friends. For he is positive, that the phrase of a change of Persons
between Christ and Us, must signify, that we Died for Christ's sins, to Redeem
him; Now, seeing this must be the sense of the phrase, I desire to know,
whether we did, in any sense, General, or Special, Die for Christ's Sins? If
this must be the sense of the phrase; except my Brother believes, that in some
sense, we did Die to Redeem Christ, he cannot hold a change of Persons between
Christ and Us, in any sense, and whatever my reverend Brethren in Little St.
Hellens did charitably hope, it is now manifest from this Rebuker, that Mr.
Williams by the phrase [of no change of Persons between Christ and Us] did
intend the denial of a change of Persons between Christ and Us in the General
sense. Yea farther,

2. That seeing my reverend Brethren at St. Hellens are for a change of Persons
between Christ and Us, they must, in the Opinion of the Rebuker, hold, that We
Died for Christ's Sins, and Redeemed him, which is Blasphemy. I wish my Brother
would think a little on what he Asserts, when he so boldly avers, that the
sense of a change of Persons between Christ and Us, must be, that we were
Changed for him, so as to Die for his Sins: Never did a Socinus, a Crellius, or
any rash English Unitarian charge this phrase, and the generality of the
Reformed, with more than Blasphemy. But,

3. Where is the man, that ever gave such a sense of this phrase? The learned
Witsius is persuaded, That never any one, who understood Divinity, no, not a
Man in his Wits, did ever Dream of such a Permutation of Persons, as that,
which places the Savior amongst the saved. Iren. Animad. cap. 2.. 8. And sure
I am, that Crellius, though he fastened a wrong sense upon the word Surrogation,
'twas not such a Blasphemous one. For, when he says, There is not a proper
Surrogation in Christ's Dying for us, It is (says he) because a proper
Surrogation must be such a Commutation of Persons, that the substituted person
is, in all respects, to be in the same place, and state, wherein the other was,
and if it refers to Sufferings, then it is when one suffers the very same,
which the other was to suffer, he being immediately delivered by the others
suffering. But in answer unto Crellius it is cleared, That to endure the same
Punishment in all respects, is not necessary to a proper Surrogation. That, if
David, (as the Bishop of Worcester has it) had obtained his wish, that he had
Died for his Son Absalom, it had not been necessary in order to his Sons
Escape, that he had hanged by the Hair of his Head, as his Son; but his Death,
though in other circumstances, had been sufficient. And therefore, when the
Lawyers say, subrogatum sapit naturam ejus, in cujus Locum subrogatur:
Coverruvias tells us, it is to be understood secundum primordia^em naturam, non
secundum accidentalem; from whence it appears, that all circumstances are not
necessary to be the same in Surrogation, but that the Nature of the Punishment
remain. Discourse. of Christ's suff. (...). p. 324. But where is the man, who at
any time ^^^cied that a Commutation of Persons between Christ a^^ Us, must
signify, that as Christ suffered for us, (...) we suffered for Christ. There
is a Commutation between a Surety and the Debtor, which is when the Surety,
sustaining the Person of the Debtor, pays his Debts for him; but must this
phrase of a change of Persons between the Surety and the Debtor, signify, that
the Debtor pays the Debts of his Surety? Is it not sufficient, that it
signifies, that on the Sureties coming into the same Bonds with the Debtor,
and Paying the Debt he owed, the Debtor be thereby delivered? The same may be
truly said of our Lord Jesus Christ, for he being our Surety, took on him our
Person, so that there was a change of Persons between him and us, He paid the
Debt we owed, that we might be delivered. Not that we Paid any Debts for
Christ, for he owed none. But the Term Surety is also rejected, as what cannot
bear a sound sense; which may further assure us, That a Change of Person
between Christ and Us, is denied in the general sense. Once more,

4. As the phrase of a change of Persons between Christ and Us is entirely
denied, in like manner a New Phrase of a Change of Christ's Person is invented,
and put into its place, Though what to make of it my Brother is at a loss; and
when He goes about to explain it, he is miserably confounded.

Faithful Rebuke.
This phrase, the Change of the Person of Christ, may have, and truly has an
Honest, and sound sense, in which it may be of some good Use to Explain the
Doctrines of Satisfaction, and Justification; and it is that which the R. R.
the Bishop of Worcester, with Grotius against Crellius do put upon it, Reas. of
Christ's Suffer. Edit. 1. p. 144. viz. The Substitution of One Person in the
room of another, etc. p. 44.

Reply.
1. There is, says he, an Honest sense of this phrase, [the change of Christ's
Person] has, and it is that, which the R. R. the Bishop of Worcester, with
Grotius against Crellius put upon it. He should have said what Grotius, with
the Bishop of Worcester against Crellius put upon it; for, though Crellius* wrote
against Grotius, and the Bishop against Crellius, yet Grotius never wrote
against Crellius.

2. What sense did these great Men put upon this phrase, of a change of Christ's
person? I cannot conceive how they should put any sense upon it, for, 'twas not
known, when they wrote on Christ's Satisfaction; nor ever invented till the
Gentleman, who engaged my Brother to enter upon this sorrowful Undertaking,
started it. And to speak the Truth, it is a phrase only adjusted to express no
more than what the Socinians do constantly grant; for they say it again and
again, that Christ, though he suffered not the Punishment due to us for sin, yet
he endured Grievous and Dolorous Pains, which is aptly enough expressed, when
it is said there was a change of Christ's Person for us, for he was, say these
Heretics, Changed from Ease to Pain for our Good. However,

3. My Brother will have it, that the Bishop has put a sound sense upon this
phrase, viz. It is the Substitution of one Person into the room of another.
Does the Bishop give this Interpretation of the phrase of a change of Christ's
Person? Or, does he not rather think, that there can be no Substitution of one
Person into the room of another, without a change of Person between that One,
and the other? Thus much undoubtedly he holds. But to Insinuate, that this
great Man and Grotius are for a change of Christ's Person, without a change of
Persons between Christ and Us, and make that change of Christ's Person to
signify a Substitution of Christ in our room, is to represent 'em to be such
Self-contradictors, as indeed, my Brother and his Principal are. A change of
Christ's Person, without a change of Persons between Christ and Us, must be a
Change without a Substitution, for a Substitution there cannot be without a
change of Persons between one, and another. To affirm that Christ was
Substituted into our Place and Room, and at the same time to deny a Commutation
of Persons between Christ and Us, is to Say, and Unsay.

That I may therefore clear the Truth in this Instance, and Vindicate these
learned Men from the charge of denying a change of Persons between Christ and
Us, and of affirming a Substitution of Christ into our room, I will give you
their own words on this Subject, and add to them what the great Turretine says
of the phrase of a change of Persons between Christ and Us.

1. That Grotius is for a Change of Persons between Christ and us, I mean such
a Change of Persons between the one and the other, as is more than only a
Change of a Person. For, 1. Grotius his word is Commutation, which imports,
that what is changed has an essential respect to the Change of another,
whether it be meant of Things or Persons, the Commutation must signify more
than the Change either of one thing, or of one Person, it must be between Thing
and Thing; or between Person and Person; Or, as Crellius says, between a Thing
and a Person: Though there may be a Change of one thing only, or of one Person;
yet, a Commutation of one thing; or of one Person only is an Implication. 2.
The Change, Grotius speaks of, is such a Change, as is per successionem, where
one goes out of the place and another comes into it, which cannot possibly be,
if the Change be only of one. As often (says Grotius) as the Praeposition
(...), [For] is applied to Persons, it signifies the coming of one into the
room and place of another by Succession. Thus Archelaus is said to Reign (...)
[For Herod] That is, He Succeeded Herod in the Throne. -- Socinus, when
pressed, dares not deny, that (...) [For many] does signify a Commutation. --
We were Debitores mortis, from this debt we were discharged by Christ's giving
somewhat, to give somewhat, that by it, we may be discharged, is to Pay or
Satisfy. This Phrase therefore, (...) [To give for many] does always signify
a True Commutation; not a Metaphorical One, as Socinus without any President
affirms. -- (...), For, does necessarily denote a Commutation. Grot. de Satis.
Cap. 9.

Here Is not a word of the Change of one Person only; it being a Commutation,
which is a Change between one Person and another, that Grotius speaks of, where
he, who owed nothing, is come into the place of the Debtor, and paying the
debt, the Debtor is discharged, and thereby brought into a state of Liberty and
Freedom. Here is, I say, a Commutation, or Change of Persons, which in some
respect is mutual, but not in all respects so; It is, as the Learned Dr. Owen
has it, a Commutation, or Change of Persons between Christ and us, as to sin
and Righteousness, whence Christ is made our sin, and they, who believe, are
made the Righteousness of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.21.

2. The Right Reverend the Bishop of Worcester, who, in his Defense of Grotius,
against Crellius, has very Clearly stated the Controversy between the
Orthodox and the Socinians, and given the true sense of Grotius: is very
particular and distinct in his Asserting and Explaining the Doctrine of a
Commutation of Persons between Christ and us, in these words, In the matter of
Redemption, or where (...) is used, Crellius will by no means yield, that there
was a Commutation of Persons between Christ and us; but all the Commutation he
will allow here, is only a Commutation between a Thing or a Price and a Person;
which he therefore asserts, that so there may be no necessity of Christ's
undergoing the Punishment of sin, in order to Redemption, because the Price
that is paid, is not supposed to undergo the Condition of the Person Delivered
by it; which will evidently appear to have no force at all, in case we can
prove, that a Proper Redemption may be obtained by the Punishment of one in the
room of another; for that Punishment then comes to be the (...), or Price of
Redemption, and he that pays this, must be supposed to undergo Punishment for
it: so that the Commutation being between the one and the other, Redeemed by
it, here is a Proper Commutation of Persons implied in the Payment of the
price. Disc. of Christ's suffer. Ed. 2. page 325.

In these words the Learned Bishop is very full in asserting a Proper
Commutation of Persons between Christ and us; That whereas Crellius denied a
Commutation of Persons that there might be no necessity of Christ's undergoing
the Punishment of sin, in order to Redemption, the Bishop does with clearness
detect his subtilty; and Learnedly Confute him, making it to appear, that those
places of Scripture, where (...), and (...) are joined together, do prove a
Commutation, not of a price for a Person, but of one Person for another; or
which is the same, a substitution of one Person in the room of another; for,
these Phrases, [a Commutation of one Person for another] and [a substitution of
one Person into the room of another] as the Bishop and all others, acquainted
with this Controversy, apprehend, do signify so much the same thing, that
whoever yields the one, cannot in reason deny the other.

The Bishop, discoursing of Expiatory Sacrifices, clears it, that the Jews
themselves understood (...), Capar, to import such an Expiation as is made by
the substitution of one in the Place of another, telling us, that Buxturf has
collected many Instances, wherein Capara is taken by the Rabinical Writers for
such an Expiation, whereby one was to undergo a Punishment in the place of
another; And (says the Bishop) I insist on these things, only to let us
understand, that the Jews never understood Capar in the sense our Adversaries
contend for, when applied to an Expiatory Sacrifice, but as implying a
Commutation and a Substitution of one in the place of another, so as by the
punishment of that, the other in whose room he suffers, may obtain deliverance.
Of Christ's Suffer. p. 359, 360. Here you see a Commutation and a Substitution
do go together, and as the Bishop adds, Which is the sense we plead for.

The thing is so very clear, that my Brother could never have misrepresented
these Great Men thus, nor indeed have himself fallen into this mistake, if he
had not used the word, without framing in his Mind an Idea of its Import. If he
had taken the Phrase of a Substitution of one Person into the Room of another,
in the Common Sense of the Words, he could not but observe, a Commutation, or
Change of Persons between the one and the other, and that if the Change had
been but of one, of the Substituted Person only, there could be no room for him
to be placed in, that is, there could be no Substitution.

In a word, from what I have insisted on it is manifest, that the Learned Bishop
is most express in asserting a Proper Commutation, or Change of Persons between
Christ and us: So that my Reverend Brother, when he suggests the contrary, does
really mis-represent and abuse the Bishop. But

3. The Learned Turretine, who is acknowledged by all to have written of
Christ's Satisfaction with as much clearness, and strength as most Men, is very
large in his Defense of a Commutation, or Change of Persons between Christ and
us, against Socinus and Crellius, For (says he) seeing our Salvation may be
considered under a fourfold Respect; (1.) With respect to God, Judging. (2.) As
to Christ, Redeeming, and so there is a Permutation, because Christ is made
sin, and a Curse for us, that we might be the blessed of God in him. De Satis.
par. 1. Disp. 3. 29. And in the following Disputation, 5. When it is said Mat.
20.28. Christ gave himself a Ransom for many, the praeposition (...)
Communissime, and maxim proprie substitutionem, and Commutationem designat;
this praeposition [For] does most frequently and properly denote a Substitution
and Commutation: And this Great Man adds, Crellius against Grotius, insinuates,
that we are deceived in thinking, that there is a Commutation between Christ
and us, in the controverted Places, as if, when we were to give our souls,
Christ in our Place gave his Soul, the Commutation is only between a Thing and
a Person; between a Price, that is, the Soul and Life of Christ, and us, as
Captives and Slaves, but who did ever say, that Christ's blood m^^ subrogated
for us, and came into our Place* To th^^ of Crellius, Turretine thus answers,
That whilst he endeavors to deceive others, he himself is most shamefully
deluded, for these are not our words sed verba Scripturae, but it is the
Scripture, quae Commutationem illam inter Christum and nos statuit, dum
express dicit Christum seipsum dedisse pro multis, which direct to this
Commutation, or Change between Christ and us; when it is said so expressly, that
Christ gave himself for many, Mat. 20.28, etc.

This Phrase of a Change of Persons between Christ and us, is, in the Judgment
of the Learned Turretine, a Scripture Phrase, intended by Christ himself when
it is said, He gave himself [For] many. I might give a large Catalogue of other
Authorities, but, that this is the Doctrine, commonly received by Protestants,
is so manifest, that whoever has any tolerable Acquaintance with their
Writings, cannot but be convinced of the Truth of what I do herein affirm, much
more should he, who has received a Commission from all the Systematical Divines
of Germany, the Voluminous Tigurines and Bulky Low Dutch, and with those few
that are left in England, be sufficienty instructed in the Knowledge of such a
Plain and Common Truth.

These things then have been cleared that my Rebuker does untruly represent the
Phrase of a Change of Persons between Christ and us, to be a Jargon of Art; of
a very late Contrivance; that cannot bear a sound sense, but must signify
Blasphemy; That he, or his guide, has invented a New Phrase of a Change of
Christ's Person; that he has Unrighteously Charged Grotius and the Bishop of
Worcester, for using it, that the sense he feigns them to put upon it is
inconsistent with his denying a Change of Persons between Christ and us; And,
do he what he can, he must split either on a Contradiction; or on Blasphemy, or
both.

Thus you see whither my Brothers Heats, or somewhat else has hurryed him.

But it is urged, that though a Change of Persons between Christ and us, is
denied; yet so long as it is owned, that the Lord Christ suffered in our Place
and Stead, the Truth is secured.

Faithful Rebuke.
I would a thousand times sooner choose to adhere to this Phrase, Christ
suffered, and dyed in our Stead and Place [Loco nostro, vice nostra] than to
that other; In the sufferings of Christ, there was a Change of Persons between
Christ and us; for the former has had its signification strongly fixed, and
settled by long Usage, and Praescription: Whereas this latter is but of
Yesterday, and scarce two Persons, no, not the Inventors agreed amongst
themselves, what sense to stamp upon it. Again, the plainest Christians have a
tolerable understanding of the former, whereas the other does but Amuse and
Confound them. p. 37.

Reply.
1. If Mr. Ws. had taken this Phrase [in our place and stead] in it is Ancient
and Genuine Sense, it would have argued, that he was sound in the Faith, and
that his rejecting the Phrase of a Change of Persons between Christ and us,
would have been only an evincement of his want of Learning, and that he
understood not the Controversy he wrote of.

2. That, if this had been the Case, the Reverend Brethren, at Little St.
Hellens, would have been in the Right, when they said, Mr. Ws. cannot be
understood to deny a Change of Persons between Christ and us, in the general
sense because he uses the Phrase of Christ's suffering in our place and stead,
which does signify a Change of Persons between Christ and us. But

3. He who wrote the Report, had, it is like, some Reasons, moving him to
suspect Mr. Ws. that as he did (whether in ignorance or knowingly, I say not)
concur with Socinus and Crellius, in denying a Proper Commutation, or Change of
Persons between Christ and us; so he did with some high Arminians, and the
English Unitarians, impose a wrong sense on the Phrase of Christ's suffering in
our Place and Stead, who intend by it no more than that Christ suffered for our
good, in which sense it does not, I confess, imply a Change of Persons between
Christ and us; nor can the Use of it be sufficient to prove, that he who does
expressly deny a Change of Persons between Christ and us, does hold a Change of
Persons between Christ and us, which was the thing the Reporter pressed. And
now the Rebuker has made manifest.

4. That the Phrase of Christ's suffering in our place and stead, is not taken
by them in the sense of the Reformed, for as it is set up in contradistinction
to a Change of Persons between Christ and us, so it is made to signify no more
than for our good, for which reason the next Charge is,

IV. That an Heterodox Sense is Imposed on the Phrase of Christ's suffering in
our Place and Stead.
There are, says Turretine, several Texts of Scripture, in which it is
asserted, That Christ dyed for us, Romans 8.32. Romans 5.6, 8. 1 Pet. 3.18. Heb.
11.9. Mat. 20.28. These and many other such Texts, do either bear but a Frigid,
and Jejune sense; or must necessarily import such a surrogation, as signifies,
that Christ did undergo the most cursed Death, not only bono, and Commodo
nostro, for our good and profit, But moreover, vice ac Loco nostro, in our
place and stead. De Satis. par. 1. Disput. 4. These. 2.

Dr. Edwards, in the Second Part of his Preservative against Socinianism,
having asserted, That our blessed Savior by dying and shedding his blood,
underwent that punishment, and submitted to that Condemnation, which our sins
had otherwise rendered us, inevitably obnoxious to; and this being in it self a
Sufficient Compensation made to the Justice of God, for the Affronts and
Injuries offered to his Authority by the violation of his Laws; and likewise
being accepted of by him as such: It must from hence necessarily and naturally
be effectual to procure for us Pardon, and Impunity. The Dr. having asserted
thus much, he adds, Now this being a matter of great Consequence, upon which
the whole stress of the Controversy between us, and our Adversaries Leans and
Rests, I shall a little further enlarge upon it, and endeavor to make out
these two Things, 1. That Christ dyed for our sakes, and that not only as it
signifies for our Benefit and Advantage, but in our room and stead, p. 94.

What the Dr. has in this place declared, is nothing else than what the
Orthodox universally do, in their Oppugning the Socinian Heresy, in this great
Point; For they all hold, that as the Phrase, in our room and stead, signifies
somewhat more than for our good, so it points us to that upon which the whole
stress of the Controversy between us and them does Lean.

But what is this somewhat more? I answer,

Turretine, speaking of Christ's Suffering vice nostra, in our place and stead,
explains it thus, Christ, as our Surety suffered what we had deserved, that by
making a full satisfaction to Divine Justice, we might be delivered from
eternal Death, and being delivered, might moreover, be made partakers of
eternal Life.

To suffer, you see, vice nostra, in our stead, is in the Judgment of this
great Man, to suffer as our Surety, and who knows not, that a Surety is
substituted into the room of the Debtor; that between the one and the other
there is a Commutation, or Change of Persons, besides, sustinere vicem nostram
is the same with sustinere personam nostram; to suffer in our stead the same
with suffering in our Person. Further,

This phrase [vice nostra, in our Stead] is used to interpret that other
phrase, [For us] what is done for us, is done in our stead.

When it is said in Scripture, that Christ suffered [for us,] the meaning is
that Christ suffered [in our stead,] and that [For us] does denote a
Commutation, or change of Persons between Christ and Us, I have already shown
out of Grotius, the Bishop of Worcester, and Turretine about the Import of the
Praeposition (...), [For.]

But in Scripture it is also said, that Christ Died for our sins; and for
sinners, and the Controversy between Us, and the Socinians, is, whether [for
our sins] must be considered as Importing a Final, or the Impulsive and
Meritorious Cause, of Christ's sufferings? Now Dr. Edwards gives the sense of
the Orthodox, when He affirms that all those phrases of Dying for sins, and
sinners, plainly denote to us, that sin in those places, is not to be
considered as the Final, but as the Impulsive Meritorious Cause; But the
Socinians will have it, that [for us] and [for our sins] denote only a Final
Cause, and signify no more than for our good.

However my reverend Brother, for reasons best known unto himself, is express,
that the phrase of Christ's suffering in our Stead, does signify no more than
for our Good, Ay, that it is Impossible it should signify any more.

Faithful Rebuke.
He that by Christ's suffering in our stead, intends He suffered for our good
speaks the Truth. p. 37.

But the Caviller proceeds; in our place and stead (with some) signify no more
than for our good why it is Impossible they should. p. 35.

Reply.
What English Unitarian can more positively declare, that it is Impossible for
the phrase [in our Place, and Stead] to signify any more, than for our good
than my Brother has done? And if it can signify no more than for our good,
wherein can he, who is of this Opinion, distinguish himself from a Socinian,
when he denies a change of Persons to be between Christ and Us, by saying, that
Christ Died in our Place and Stead? For, whilst he says Christ suffered in our
Stead, according to this declaration, he must mean no more than that Christ
suffered for our good, which may be without His making satisfaction to God's
Justice for us. Alas Sirs! If you will allow us no sense of the phrase of a
change of Persons between Christ and Us, but that we Died for Christ's sins,
this is Blasphemy, when yet, if there be not a change of Persons between Christ
and Us, there cannot be a Substitution of Christ's Person into our room, and
consequently Christ did not, and could not suffer in our place and stead, which
is, He did not, he could not make satisfaction, a Real, Proper, and Full
Satisfaction unto God's Justice for us.

Here is the very natural and irrefragable Consequence which flows from my
Brother's denying, a change of Persons between Christ and Us. For (I say) if
Christ suffered not in our stead, He could not make Satisfaction for us, as all
will grant. If there was not a Substitution of Christ into our place, He
suffered not in our place, and if there was not a change of Persons between
Christ and Us, there could not be a Substitution of Christ into our place.

But you will say, that this is a remote, Consequence, which ought not to be
charged on my Brother; well then, we will let it for once pass so; and see
whether He is for Christ's suffering in our stead, here our Enquiry is not
about the word, without a meaning; nor with a wrong Sense. But, whether as it
signifies somewhat more than for our good; it may be said, that Christ suffered
in our stead? To which my Brother does directly answer, That when it is said
Christ suffered in our stead, it is Impossible it should signify any more than
for our Good: So clear it is, that how honestly soever my Brother may mean, his
Words do in this place Express a Denial of Christ's Satisfaction; as openly as
the English Unitarians have ventured to do; And yet he does say, that the
Socinians, when they use this phrase, do it Knavishly.

Faithful Rebuke.
I had rather have the Socinians speak honestly, though with a Knavish meaning,
than mean, and speak, both like Knaves -- If the Socinians will put an Unsound
sense upon sound words, will you quit the sound phrase, because they put a
wretched Sense on it? p. 35.

Reply.
1. I am willing to think my Brothers Wit has proved a Snare to him in this
place. For, if he be in good earnest in any sense, though but comparatively, for
honest words with a Knavish meaning, 'twill induce some to suspect, that whilst
he seems so zealous for the honest phrase of Christ's suffering in our stead,
he has pitched upon the Socinian, which he calls the Knavish, meaning
deliberately, and of choice; And that of Inclination and Design he does too
often so speak, and so write.

2. Whatever my Brother intends, it is manifest, that whilst he calls the
Socinian sense Unsound, Wretched and Knavish, He gives the very sense of this
phrase, which the Socinians, who use it, do give; and by it means (if we may
judge his meaning by his words) no more than what Socinus, Crellius, and that
Fraternity, do consistently with their Denial of Christ's Satisfaction,
constantly grant. But must we quit a sound phrase, when ever an Unsound sense
is put upon it?

3. There is no need of quitting the phrase. An Orthodox Explanation will be
sufficient to Obviate what mischiefs are likely to arise from their wretched
Interpretations; which is the true reason, why I am so much concerned in this
affair, and press so much for the Use of these Orthodox Terms and Phrases in
their sound sense. For,

4 It has been the Practice of some to reject the Use of such phrases, as have
been pitched upon by the Godly Learned, and are most apt to express the Truth
in the Controverted Points; and when for their Interest to continue their Use,
then insiduously to foist in a wretched sense on them; chiefly for this reason,
that they may make the Sufferings of Christ to be but an Act of Dominion; and
not properly Poenal; they, as well as all others knowing that if Christ's
Sufferings be not properly a Punishment, they cannot be satisfactory to God's
Justice for our sins; and if Christ did not so suffer in our Place and Stead,
as [in our Place and Stead] signify somewhat more than for our good, His
sufferings were not properly Poenal. And, agreeably hereunto, my Brother as he
Rejects the phrases of Christ's sustaining the Person of sinners; of a change
of Persons between Christ and Us, and puts an Unsound sense on Christ's
suffering in our Place and Stead; so that word, which was in the first Paper,
to make it evident, that we esteemed Christ's Sufferings to be a proper
Punishment is rejected, as what cannot in my Brothers Opinion bear a sound
sense, which brings me to the fifth charge.

V. Christ's Undertaking to Answer for sinners, the Obligations of the Violated
Law of Works, is turned into Christ's Answering for our Violation of the Law of
Works. To this my Brother Replies.

Faithful Rebuke.
What is the Nice difference then between Christ's Answering for our Violation
of the Law; and Answering for us the Violation? Or, what the Critical
difference between Christ's answering for them the Violation; and Answering for
their Violation of the Law of Works: He that Answers for me the Violation of
the Law, Answers for my Violation of the Law. p. 47.

Reply.
1. That Christ suffered for our sins, that is, for our Violation of the Law,
the Socinians always acknowledge, but then they are so honest as to tell us,
that the Praeposition [For] in this Instance denotes only a Final cause, and
that the meaning of the phrase of Christ's suffering for our Violations of the
Law is the same with that other of Christ's suffering for our good; for which
reason the yielding no more than that Christ suffered for our Violation of the
Law of Works, cannot be a Bar against Socinian Encroachments, nor a sufficient
security to the Truth of Christ's Satisfaction.

2. My Brother does in this place make a sad noise about Answering for our
Violation of the Law of Works, making close Enquiry, where the Nice difference
between for our, and for us; and the Critical difference between for them, and
for their closing his Enquiry with a but this it is to be Hypercriticks in
Theology, when it is often ridiculous in Phylology, whereas a Grain of Common
Sense would have helped him to understand, that here is not one word in all his
Nice and Critical Disquisitions to the purpose, and that it was not about the
difference between for ours, and for us, for them and for theirs, but that the
strest of what she Reporter suggested on this occasion leans on the word
[Obligation.] In the first Paper it was, that the Lord Christ did Answer for us
the Obligations of the Violated Law of Works, and it must be observed, that by
this phrase an Effectual (...) was laid in against the most Rotten part of the
Socinian Heresy against, Christ's Satisfaction. And the Enquiry, if so the
purpose, should have been, what the Nice Difference between answering for us
the Obligations of the Violated Law of Works; and Answering for our Violation
of the Law of Works? To which I answer;

3. There is a very great Difference, as great as is between a Gospel Truth,
and a Socinian Error, in an Important Article of the Christian Faith.

To clear the Truth in this Point, I will refer you to the learned Bishop of
Worcester, who truly delivers the sense of the Socinians thus. They assert,
That God took occasion by the sins of Men to exercise an Act of Dominion upon
Christ in his sufferings, and that the sufferings of Christ were intended for
the taking away the sins of men; but they utterly deny, that the sufferings of
Christ were to be considered, as a Punishment for sin, or that Christ did
suffer in our place and stead, nay they contend with great vehemence, that it
is wholly inconsistent with the Justice of God to make one man's sins, the
Meritorious Cause of another Punishment; especially One wholly Innocent, and
so that the Guilty shall be Freed on the account of his sufferings. Thus I have
endeavored to give the true state of the Controversy, with all Clearness and
Brevity. And the substance of it will be reduced to these two Heads.

Thus this learned Bishop. The first Head of the two, being mostly to my
purpose, I Will only mention it and somewhat said of it. It is this, Whether the
sufferings of Christ in general are to be considered as a Punishment of Sin, or
as a mere act of Dominion? for that it must be one or the other of these two,
cannot be denied by our Adversaries; for the Inflicting those Sufferings upon
Christ, must either proceed from an Anteceding Meritorious Cause, or not. If
they do, they are then Punishments; if not, they are mere Exercises of Power
and Dominion; whatever Ends they are Intended for and whatever Recompense be
made for them. Of Christ Suff. p. 267.

Here then lies the Heart of the Controversy between us and them, whether our
sins be an Impulsive Meritorious Cause of Christ's sufferings; and Christ's
sufferings a proper Punishment for our sins? If our sins be the Meritorious
Cause of Christ's sufferings, it necessarily follows, that Christ bore the
Punishment of our sins in a proper sense.

An Impulsive Cause, in a remote sense, as though our sins were a mere Occasion
of Christ's Dying Crellius granted. But as the Bishop observes, We Understand
not an Impulsive Cause in so remote a sense, -- but we contend for a nearer and
more proper sense, viz. that the Death of Christ was primarily intended for the
Expiation of our sins, with a respect to God. and not to Us, and therefore our
sins as an Impulsive Cause are to be considered as they are so displeasing to
God, that it was necessary for the Vindication of God's Honor, and the
deterring the World from sin, that no less a sacrifice of Atonement should be
offered than the Blood of the Son of God. (...) ibid. p. 269.

And as they own a sort of no Anteceding Impulsive Cause, which is but the mere
Occasion of Christ's suffering so they will call Christ's sufferings a Punishment,
but then they take Punishment only in an improper sense, Paenam improprie
dictam fatamur. So Crellius, For, says He, What Christ suffered has so near a
Cognation and Alliance with true Punishment, that the word Punishment; and
those other phrases used in describing proper Punishments, may for the greater
Elegancy be taken into our Discourses about Christ's Passion. The Agreement
there is between Christ's sufferings and a proper Punishment is very
considerable. First in their matter, for both are afflictive, then in the
Impulsive Procatartic cause: which is sin in the sense the Bishop observed, and
at last in the Effect, and End, which is to remove guilt, and bring men off
from their sins, though in the manner there is some difference. But then the
great Difference is as to the Formal Reason of Punishment, which not being
found in Christ's sufferings they cannot be properly a Punishment. Crel.
Respons. ad Grot. de satisf. ad cap. 1.

Thus, what Approaches soever they seem to make toward the Truth, they utterly
deny that sin is in a proper sense the Meritorious Cause of Christ's
sufferings; Or, that Christ's sufferings are a proper Punishment.

There are amongst the Arminians also, some who agree too much with the
Socinians in denying Christ's sufferings to be properly a Punishment, they
holding them to be rather Dolorous than Poenal, who are justly called
Socinianizing-Arminians; such as Episcopius, Carcellaeus, and Limborch, who do
their utmost to corrupt the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction. They own that
Christ was Punished Loco nostro, in our Place and Stead, and yet deny his
Sufferings to be properly Poenal, allowing 'em to be but Improperly, or
Analogically a Punishment. That the sufferings of Christ, as to the Reason of
the thing, were a Natural Evil, endured for Sin, as sin was the Occasion, or
remote Cause, and may be aptly enough called Punishment. But they would rather
call them a Vicarious Punishment, as they are Vice Poenae, in the Room, and
Stead of a proper Punishment.

Gerardus Vossius, in a Letter to Grotius, is very express, that in this point
Episcopius differed from him. For, Though He owned that Christ's Sufferings had a
respect unto God and not only, unto men; yet the Grand Question is, says He,
what respect? As for the Opinion commonly Embraced, viz. that Christ bore that
Punishment, which was due to us, he could by no means admit, because then He
thought Christ must have been plunged into despair, and suffer the very
Torments of Hell; and that Pardon of sin would be made hereby Impossible --
That his Notion of satisfaction was that as, in the Old Testament, sins were
Pardoned on the Offering of a Sacrifice without any suffering of a Punishment;
even so, in the New Testament on the Intervention of Christ's Sacrifice, which
abundantly excels them under the Old, are all our sins forgiven us: That
herein, lay the Error of Socinius, that He Denied Christ's Sacrifice to be
properly Propitiatory. Epist. Praest. Viror. Ep. 278. Thus far Episcopius, who,
in his public Writing used more Caution, yet to his Particular Friend He thus
freely opens himself, and Limborch thought it meet to acquaint the World with
it, Curcellaeus, who succeeded him in the Professors Chair, declares freely,
That Christ did not Satisfy, as is commonly apprehended, by suffering all
those Punishments, which we had deserved by our Sins. First, because suffering
Punishment belongs not to the Reason of a Sacrifice, and has nothing Common
with it. Sacrifices are not Debitorum Solutiones, the Payment of Debts, as
appears from the Legal Institutions. Curcel. Relig. Christ's Instit. lib. 5. c.
19. 14, 15.

Lemborch holds the same Opinion, It may be in a certain sense said, that
Christ was Punished for us, as there was laid upon him a Vicarious Punishment,
that is Affliction, quae Poenae vicem sustenuit, in the place and stead of
punishment. Limb. Theol. Christ. Lib. 3. c. 22. 2.

4. Having thus stated the Controversy between the Orthodox and the Socinians,
together with Episcepius and his Followers, I will consider the Enquiry; What
is the Nice Difference between Christ's Answering the Obligations of the
Violated Law of Works; and his Answering for our Violation of the Law of Works?
And desire my Brother to consider, that a Man may subscribe to this Assertion,
That Christ answered for our Violation of the Law of Works, consistently with
his denying Christ's Sufferings to be properly paenal: But ^eeing, the violated
Law of Works obliged unto a proper punishment, Christ could not Answer for us
the Obligations of this Violated Law any otherwise than by suffering a Proper
Punishment for our sins; So that, though an insisting on Christ's Answering for
our Violation of the Law of Works, secures not this Great Truth of Christ's
suffering a proper Punishment for our sins; yet his Answering the Obligations
of the Violated Law, does it most effectually. But,

5. My Brother assuring us, that no Terms or Passages were waved and passed by
but such as could not bear a sound Sense, and this word [Obligations] which
establishes Christ's suffering a proper punishment being waved, is it not a
plain Indication, that my Brother has at least a concern for them, who with
the Socinians and Episcopians deny the Sufferings of Christ to be a proper
Punishment, or Satisfactory to Gods Justice for our sins, or has in ignorance
spoken all this?

6. It Is now time therefore, to gather up what my Brother has said to the
shaking the Foundations of Christ's Satisfaction; which is so very much, that an
English Unitarian, in the way now esteemed most (...) to succeed, could do no
more toward it.

If any one of them has made it his Province to expose the Assertion of a
Necessity of a Commutation, or Change of Persons between Christ and us, has
rejected the Phrases, of Christ's sustaining the Person of Sinners; of a Change
of Persons between Christ and us; of laying the guilt of our Iniquities upon
Christ; of his Answering the Obligations of the violated Law of Works; of his
bearing our sins in his own body, as our Surety, and feeling the weight of Gods
wrath in the punishment of our sins transferred upon him, and expose them all
as what cannot bear a sound Sense, but are liable to be Interpreted to a Sense,
and sound of Malignity to the whole of the Gospel; and Ridiculing some of them
as Jargons of Art, of a very late Contrivance; fit to amaze, puzzle and
confound men's Understandings, affirming, that their sense and meaning must be
Blasphemy, and that the Phrase of Christ's suffering in our stead, cannot
signify more than for our good: Should, I say, an English Socinian start up
and write after this rate, would you not be apt to say he has done his part to
break down the Barriers of our holy Religion in the Article of Christ's
Satisfaction, he has made many bold strokes, and done his most to subvert this
Glorious Doctrine. Why, these things are done by my Reverend Brother; who, I
hope, was not aware of what he was adoing, when he wrote his Rebuke, but I Will
not aggravate, I will only endeavor to Inculcate.

1. That the Rejecting so many sound Terms and Phrases, established by a long
Prescription in the Church of God, as most apt to explain the Truth and and
distinguish it from Error, may be justly esteemed as a good Reason for such an
one, as observed thus much in a calm way and manner to do his most for the
securing the endangered Truths.

2. That the Rejecting them for the Reasons mentioned in the Rebuke may Justly
Allarm the Orthodox amongst us, and Justify their insisting on a fuller
security for Truth than the third Paper Affords. But I shall have a fair
Occasion to press this Consideration some what further, in my Answer to the
following Enquiry.

VI. Why so many Orthodox Terms, and Phrases, which were in the First Paper,
are left out of the third?
Although I have already suggested what my Brother has said of the Reason; yet,
it being a Matter of great Importance, I will, in this place, be more full, in
setting before you what he says of the Mature Deliberation, and Just Reasons,
upon which they have Rejected those Phrases; and then show who are herein
imitated, and what are the most likely Consequences of such a Practice.

As to what my Brother says of the Brethrens Rejecting these Phrases, with
deliberation and for just Reasons, take his own Words.

Faithful Rebuke.
5. Those Brethren, who had their Heads, their Hands, and Hearts too, in
Drawing, Dressing, and signing the former Paper, when they had heard the
Reason, and Arguments of the whole Body; where all Matters were managed, not in
a hasty and praecipitate way, but with the greatest calmness, by slow paces,
with great liberty and freedom of debate, and being now dis-incumbred from the
Counterpoize of Oppositions, or Insinuations; might, and did see Just Reasons
to alter the Phrases, and new-model some Expressions.

6. And hereof you may be fuller Assured, inasmuch, as those individual Nine
Brethren, who for, and in hopes of Peace, had signed the former Paper, had
their Hands, and Heads, and Hearts too, in the Forming, Wording, and Assenting
to this third: Nor did they herein alter their Judgments, or vary in the least
from their Zealous Desires of Peace and Union; only they now saw this last
Paper was in all things the same with the former, saving in some few Passages,
and Expressions, which carried a Face of some dangerous Tendencies; which,
however they might escape the Notice of Private Brethren, could not escape the
Observation of the many Discerning Heads, who with utmost Application, set
themselves to prevent any Inconvenience, that might arise to the Truths of the
Gospel. -- The Brethren did unanimously agree to grant as much as the Sound
Sense could bear; and modestly to wave and pass by the other, which was liable
to be Interpreted to a Sense and Sound of Malignity to the whole of the Gospel:
page 29, 30.

Reply.
I. My Brother here gives a Character of such as did Sign the first Paper; and
of them, who Formed, Worded and Assented unto the Third: The former are Private
Brethren, who, it is like, were so hasty in what they did, that some Passages of
a dangerous Aspect escaped their Notice: The other are the whole Body, many
Discerning Heads, whose observation, the dangerous Passages could not Pass; who
gave such Reasons and Arguments to their Private Brethren, as convinced them,
that there were Just Reasons to Alter the Phrases and new Model some
Expressions. Now, that you may the more rightly Judge of this Matter, I will
give you the Names of these Private Brethren; who were so Hasty and
Inconsiderate, though when with the Body, so thoughtful as to receive much light
from the strong Reasons of the many Discerning Heads: They were, Dr. Bates, Mr.
How, Mr. Stretton, Mr. Alsop, Mr. Shower, Mr. Burgess, Mr. Slauter, Mr. Quick,
Mr. Evans, Mr. Veal, Mr. Hill of Roterdam, Mr. Glascock, and three or four
more. The Names of the many Discerning Heads, I need not give, and therefore I
will leave the Reader to Pause a while on the Representation my Brother has
given of this Matter, and go on to consider what he further says of them.

II. The Private Brethren, such as Dr. Bates, Mr. How, etc. received so much
light from the many Discerning Heads, that as they might, so they did see Just
Reasons to alter the Phrases, and New Model some Expressions, ay, to wave, and
pass by some Phrases, as what could not bear a sound sense, but were liable to
be Interpreted to a sense and sound of Malignity to the Gospel.

In this place 'twill be Expedient that we compare the Two Papers, and see what
are the Waved, and Altered Passages.

The First Paper.
1. Bearing with One another Infirmities, and Different Sentiments about
Logical, or Philosophical Terms, or merely Humane Forms of Speech, in matters
of Lesser weight.

The Third Paper.
1. Bearing with One another Infirmities, and Different Sentiments in matters
of Lesser weight, not contending about Logical, or Philosophical Terms, or mere
Humane Forms of Speech.

The Alteration in this place, how Insignificant soever, it may seem to some,
is in a point, that Affects the very Vitals of our Holy Religion; For, by this
Change, the words [in matters of lesser weight,] being transferred [from
Logical Terms] unto [different sentiments] a matter of another kind, with an
addition of [ not Contending about Logical, or Philosophical Terms, etc.]
without the Restriction [in matters of lesser weight] a Liberty to contend
about these Terms in matters of greater weight, is denied, and the Assenters
unto the Third Paper are brought under an Obligation to sit still, as silent
Spectators, whilst the Episcopians, and Socinians are Exposing to the greatest
Reproach the Logical, and Philosophical Terms and Humane Forms of Speech,
pitched upon by the Church of God to Explain the Foundation Points both of
Revealed and Natural Religion.

To clear thus much, I desire to Inculcate these following Particulars. 1. That
it is an Unexpressible Grievance unto all sorts of Heretics to observe in the
Church of God a strict Adherence to those Logical, or Philosophical Terms that
have been chosen, and settled, as what do most aptly and clearly explain those
glorious Truths, discovered unto us by the Light of Nature, and Scripture
Revelation; and clearly distinguish these most Important Truths from Error.

2. That it has been the way of Heriticks to quarrel with these Terms, because
not found in the Letter of Scripture. Though the Controversy is about the sense
of Scripture, ay, about the sense of every Text is there a Controversy with
one Heretic or other; yet, will they have us to confine our selves to
Scripture phrases, in Explaining Scripture phrases.

Though it is undoubtedly True, that there is no better way to Understand the
genuine sense of Scripture, than by comparing Scripture with Scripture, yet
it is no less True, that it is not so easy to convey the True sense unto others
without the help of Humane Forms of Speech.

Amongst many others it is well observed by the learned Mr. Norton of
New England, that the most Pestilent Doctrines have often times been
communicated in the Language of Scripture; which was the reason, why St.
Hierome speaking against the Heresies of Ebion, Photinus, Marcion, and
Basilides, did say, Think not the Gospel to be in the words of the Scripture,
but in the sense. And Mr. Norton adds, who is Ignorant, that the Arians speak
Heresy by that Text, The Father is greater than I, Joh. 14.28.

But Biddles Scripture Catechism is an illustrious Evincement of this Truth,
for there he has in Scripture words, delivered very gross Errors, for
instance, that God has a similitude, or shape whose Essence is confined to the
Heavens, and the like; as also, that God is not Omniscient, for he knows not
what will be hereafter; Whereas, in Truth, God is Omniscient, and
Incomprehensible too. And though these Terms are not in the Letter of
Scripture; yet the things contained in these Terms and Phrases, are Expressly in
the Scriptures. And as the learned Bishop of Worcester affirms. It is the Wiser
and Safer Course to keep in the same Way, which the Christian Church has used,
ever since she has agreed to express her sense in such Terms, which were
thought most proper for the purpose. -- And since no other can be found more
significant and proper for that End, it looks like yielding too Great Advantage
to our Adversaries, to give up the Boundaries of our Faith. Pref. to the
Vindie, of the Prin. p. 2, 3. But I do also Observe,

3. That the first Attempts made by them, who forsake the Faith, are on these
Terms and Phrases. Thus the Socinians, (as I have shown in my Growth of Error)
did about the year 1562. labor to engage the Ministers in some parts of Poland
to Abstain from the use of Philosophical Terms, or Humane Forms of Speech, and
as Stonius Observes, it was this year concluded in a Synod at Pin^zow, that the
Ministers should not use any Philosophical Modes of Speech, such as the
Trinity, Essence etc. but that every one should confine himself to the Terms
used in the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and in the Apostles Creed.
p. 175.

Episcopius, and his Followers took the same Method, when they Attempted to
subvert the commonly received Doctrine about Christ's Satisfaction. In a Letter
to Schotlerus, he confesses, 'twas charged upon him, that he used other
phrases, than those received by the Church, and such as seemed to Favor the
Socinian Cause, and the Truth of the charge against him he does not deny.
Curcellaeus does the same, and has a Dissertation against Maresius, wherein he
defends the laying by of sundry phrases, used by the Church of God, because not
found in the Letter of Scripture, but both Episcopius and Curcellaeus, did not
content themselves in the laying aside the Use of these phrases, but went on to
oppose the Truths Explained by 'em, and at last lodged themselves in the
Socinian Tents, and are Justly, by Sandius, placed in the Anti-Trinitarian
Bibliothec.

4. As it has been the Practice of Heretics to make their first Attempts on
Orthodox phrases, that they may the more effectually Introduce their Error; in
like manner, it has been the care of them, who are sound in the Faith, to keep
up those Banks or Barriers, and to Defend these phrases, as the Boundaries of
the Truth. When Gregorius Pauli, and many others of the Socinian Faction
struggled for the Disuse of all phrases, not expressly delivered in Scripture,
and Sarnicius with Diverse others so earnestly contended for their Use, as they
did most clearly express the Truth, and distinguish it from Error, that
Gregory's party found it most Prudent to admit of their Use. And the Orthodox
in all Ages, would by no means part with these phrases.

5. In Imitation of our Forefathers, and according to the constant Practice of
the Church, before and since the Reformation, the Reverend Brethren, who sent
the first Paper unto the Congregational, Observing the Charge to be, that the
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction was corrupted, did in the said Paper, single
out, and pitched upon those Terms, Expressions and Phrases, which have been
Used by Protestants, to Explain this Doctrine. Such as a Change of Persons
between Christ and Us; Christ's taking on him our Person; and coming into our
(...) and Stead, to answer for us the Obligation of the V^^^^red Law of Works;
the laying the (...) our iniquities on Christ; and that Christ (...) as our
Surety, did feel, and (...)sure of God, and the Weight of his Wrath (...) as
men found in the Faith, they (...) matter of Offense to their (...) Brethren But

6. How (...) these phrases are, how apt to explain the Truth, and how
Necessary soever to distinguish it from Error, it cannot be admitted by
others, for the (...), and secret Influences of that very man, who (...)quished
the commonly Received Doctrine of Protestants, in this Instance, are so
powerful, that these phrases must be rejected; and what cannot but astonish our
Brethren in the Country, the Orthodox in the Church of England, Scotland and
the Reformed abroad, they are rejected, as phrases, that cannot be safely
retained; that cannot bear a sound sense; but are liable to be Interpreted to a
sense of Malignity to the whole of the Gospel, which is such a bold stroke, so
deep a wound given the Doctrine commonly passing in regard to Christ's
Satisfaction, as has not been given it by any but by such as Episcopius,
Socinus, and their Admirers; and it is carried on with so High a Hand, that
whoever dares Appear to Detect their Attempt, though with the greatest softness
of Expression, must be cried down as a Firebrand and a Disturber of our Peace,
and the very Man, who once Pleaded for the Faith, is turned with much severity
against his Orthodox Brethren, and as if this had been the time to follow the
Blow, and strike at all, it is Inserted as a Term of Peace, in the Paper, sent
from Little St. Hellens, that there must be,

7. No Contending about Logical, or Philosophical Terms; or merely humane Forms
of Speech; though about Matters of the greatest Importance, as appears by their
removing from this Place the limitation which in the first Paper, was [in
matters of Lesser Weight.]

That I may, in this place, discharge my Conscience with the greatest
Impartiality, I do declare, 1. That I Charge not the Brethren at Little St.
Hellens, as a Body, for I am Persuaded the greatest Part of them are not aware
of the Design, or Tendency of this Alteration; and that the Chief Contriver
does gaudere sinu, to Observe, how he imposes on them; and how he has Tooled my
Rebuker, who, I would hope, has his Heart as yet untainted with the Errors,
delivered in his Rebuke. However*

2. It is most evident to me, that as they will Answer it in the great Day of
the Lord, they are under the strongest Bonds of doing their utermost to put a
Check to those Invasions made on the Truth by the Methods, used by the
Contriver of the third Paper. I speak of them, who are convinced of the truth
of the Commonly received Doctrine of Protestants, for by Countenancing this
Paper, they in Fact Renounce what they Believe to be True; and by approving of
this Alteration, which will by no means allow of our contending about Logical
or Philosophical Phrases, though in Matters of greatest Weight, they open a gap
for the letting in all manner of error; For

8. They, by Assenting to this Paper, have put in a Bar against their
contending for any Logical Phrases, and when the Socinians shall expose to
Contempt and Ridicule some Phrases, which express, what is Essential to the
Principles of Natural as well as of Revealed Religion, they must break their
Promise, or be silent; suffering the very Deist to carry all before him.

To clear thus much 'twill be sufficient to mention what Biddle says on this
Topic; I Will give you his own Words, Examine therefore the Expressions of God's
being Infinite, and Incomprehensible; of his being a simple Act; of his
subsisting in three Persons; of a Divine Circumincession; of an eternal
Generation; of an eternal Procession of an Incarnation; of an Hypostatical
Union, -- of Original Sin; of Christ's making satisfaction to God for our Sins,
both past, present and to come; of Christ's fulfilling the Law for us; of
Christ's being punished of God for us; of Christ's merits, his meritorious
Obedience, both Active and Passive, -- of Christ's enduring the wrath of God for
us, -- of Apprehending and Applying Christ's Righteousness to our selves by
Faith; of Christ's being a Surety; of Christ's paying our Debts; of our Sins
imputed unto Christ; of Christ's dying to appease the wrath of God -- of infused
Grace, -- of irresistible workings of the Spirit in bringing men to believe --
of spiritual Desertions, etc. -- And thou shall find that as these Forms of
Speech are not owned by the Scripture, so neither the things contained in them.
So far Biddle in his Preface to his Catechism.

That the things contained in these Forms of Speech are most plainly and
expressly revealed in Scripture, and that God is Infinite and Incomprehensible,
made known by the Light of Nature, is certain; But that the Phrases themselves
are not Literally in the Scriptures must be acknowledged, and if we must not
contend about the abovementioned Phrases, will not the Followers of Biddle and
the English Unitarians Triumph over us? And should this Paper pass as the Sense
of the Dissenters, would they not provoke unto it, to the great grief of many
sound and godly Divines in the Church of England, as well as of our Country
Brethren?

But, I will say it again, for I believe it to be true, that there are not five
of the Brethren who meet at Little St. Hellens, who are aware of this and that,
on a review, they will never bring themselves under the Obligation of not
contending for the abovementioned Phrases, though but humane Forms of Speech,
suited to explain the necessary Articles of Religion, so far is my Brother from
the Truth, when he says, that the third Paper was with that deliberation, slow
paces, etc. Composed.

The First Paper.
2. Although Regeneration, Repentance toward God, Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and holy Conversation, are by Gods express word manifestly necessary to
the Salvation of a Sinner, yet that none of these, etc.

The Third.
2. That although the express word of God do Assert the necessity of Regeneration
to our entering into the Kingdom of God, and Requires Repentance, that our sins
may be blotted out, and Faith in Christ, that we may be justified, and holiness
of heart and life, without which we cannot see God; Yet that none of these, etc.

It will be expedient, that I do in this place observe,

1. That according to what my Brother declares again and again, it must be
supposed that this Passage in the first Paper cannot be safely retained, that it
cannot bear a Sound Sense, but is liable to be interpreted to a Sense and Sound
of Malignity to the whole of the Gospel, and therefore upon mature deliberation
waved, and another Passage put into its place; whereas, in my Opinion, no one,
that is not of the worser sort of Antinomians, even a Libertine, who denis
Regeneration, Repentance toward God, Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and Holy
Conversation, to be necessary to the Salvation of Sinners, dares say, that this
Passage cannot bear a Sound Sense, etc. and therefore must be Altered.

That my Brother has outrun himself, and all his old avowed Principles, in
this way of Writing, is enough to awaken us all to take heed, how we do in the
least Point, turn aside from the Truth, nothing being more manifest than that
uno absurdo dato mill sequuntur.

But though my Brothers Writings are in this Particular so extravagantly
Erroneous, I would willingly hope, 1. Better things of him, and in Charity will
place this Mistake amongst his Incogitancies, concluding that when he said,
what alterations were made, were upon Just Reasons, and what was waved could
not Bear a Sound Sense, he did not think on the passing by this Passage, it
being very common for Men in a heat to forget themselves.

2. My Brother does perhaps look on this Passage, in the first Paper, not to
contain in it, so full a Testimony against Antinomianism, as he could wish, and
thinks needful, which I should have more firmly believed, in case he had not
delivered himself so positively as above: However, I think it not amiss to show
what fell under Consideration, when this Point was to be stated.

1. It was thought most conducive to the great end, to avoid as much as
possible, a running into the Discussion, and Determination of Differences of
lesser moment, which were agitated amongst the godly Orthodox themselves, and
therefore to keep to those Matters which did more nearly concern the Essential
Articles of Faith.

2. There being a Controversy amongst the Reformed themselves about the order,
between Faith and Repentance, as which has the Antecedence and Priority; and
whether Repentance was a necessary praerequisite to pardon, the Composers of
the First Paper waved the determination thereof; which was no more than was
done in the Composing the Seven Propositions which were renounced to the end we
might express our abhorrence of Antinomian Errors; a brief account of which
will be needful, not only to detect my Brothers mistakes touching matter of
Fact in this one point, but to Inlighten others in this Affair.

It must then be carefully minded, 1. That the Renunciation of Antinomianism,
of which my Brother speaks, page 23. was drawn up by some Brethren of both
Persuasions; of which number the very Person, my Brother takes to be the
Reporter, was One, who faithfully transcribed the seven Propositions agreed
unto, and by Direction carried 'em unto the B^^thren at Little St. Hellens,
where he Read them, and expressed his great satisfaction of the Renunciation,
as several of them, who do now ordinarily meet there can Testify.

2. That whereas Mr. Williams insisted on the Assertion of the necessity of
Repentance in order to Pardon, about which the Orthodox have different
Sentiments, 'twas at last agreed to assert the necessity of Repentance, and
leave this Controversy undetermined, which was done by declaring against what
was Opposite in this matter unto the Assembly, as you have it in the fourth
Proposition, where we renounce the Doctrine of them who hold [That any may
expect Pardon without Repentance.] To return,

3. The only difference that I can see between the First and Third Paper, in
this particular, must be in these words, [ That God requires Repentance that
our sins may be blotted out] which look as if the determining this Controversy
had been designed: The reason why I can see no other difference is, because I
know that the Congregational do hold, That the Express Word of God does Assert
the necessity of Regeneration to our entering into the Kingdom of God; and Faith
in Christ that we may be Justified, and Holiness of Heart and Life, without
which we cannot see God, for these things are all included in what is in the
first Paper. And in case my Brethren, who glory in their confining themselves
unto Scripture Expressions, will take in the whole verse, they refer unto, when
they say [That God requires Repentance that our sins may be blotted out,] which
is [When the times of Refreshing shall come from the Presence of the Lord] I
know not a Man among the Congregational, that will scruple to Express his
Assent unto this Clear and Full Testimony against Antinomians in the
Fundamental Article of Justification: And, if any of them do agree with
Polanus, and many more sound Protestants in this Undecided Controversy, it
cannot advantage the Antinomians, especially seeing they hold, That none may
expect Pardon without Repentance.

First Paper.
3. Yet that none of these, or any work done by men, or wrought by the Spirit
of God in them, is under the Notion of Subordination, or under any Denomination
whatsoever any Part of that Righteousness, etc.

The Third.
3. Yet that none of these, or any work done by men, or wrought by the Spirit
of God in them, is, under any Denomination whatsoever any Part of that
Righteousness, etc.

1. In this place the words [Vnder the Notion of Subordination] is waved, and
as my Brother will have us believe, upon the weightiest Reasons, as what cannot
bear a sound sense. And yet,

2. The following words which are left in [under any Denomination whatsoever]
should methinks be comprehensive enough to take in under 'em [the Notion of
Subordination] for a Subordinate Righteousness falls within the circle [of any
Denomination whatsoever.] But,

3. My Brother cannot endure to swallow a Contradiction, which this must be, in
case the phrase [under the Notion of Subordination] cannot bear a sound
meaning, as it cannot in the Opinion of my Brother, because it is waved; and yet
is comprised under [any Denomination whatsoever] which must bear a sound sense
because not passed by, for which reason we must endeavor to save it from a
Contradiction, which cannot be but by restraining this Universal Term [Vnder
any Denomination whatsoever] thus, [under any Denomination whatsoever that can
bear a sound sense,] but [the Notion of Subordination] not being able to bear a
sound sense it is not to be taken within the verge of under any Denomination
whatsoever.] Well then,

4. If this phrase [under the Notion of Subordination] cannot bear a sound
sense, it must be because they hold a Subordinate Righteousness in our
Justification, where it must be noted, that here is the mention only of one
Justification, which carries in it the Pardon of sin, the accepting of
sinners, and an Entituling them to Eternal Life; and that this Justification is
not only by Christ's Righteousness, but also by a Subordinate one, of our own,
they both concurring to our Justification, the one Principally, the other
Subordinately. This is the only way, that I can think on to fetch my Brother
off from a Contradiction, and yet do I what I can I must at last lodge him
under a Contradiction. For,

5. This Third Paper does expressly declare, that we are Pardoned, Accepted, and
Entitled to Eternal Life only by the Righteousness of Christ imputed unto us,
and received by Faith alone. But to be Pardoned, Accepted, and Entitled unto
Eternal Life only by Christ's Righteousness, and yet to be Pardoned, Accepted or
Entitled to Eternal Life by a Subordinate Righteousness of our own is an
Implication. Being thus necessitated to leave my Brother in these dark shades,
I will return to the private Brethren, such as Dr. Bates, Mr. (...), Mr. Alsop,
and the rest of this denomination, to see what Influence that light, which they
received from the many discerning Heads has had on them, which my Brother
assures me was very great. For, he says,

III. Those Individual nine Brethren, who for, and in hopes of Peace had signed
the former Paper, had their Hands, their Heads, and their Hearts too, in the
forming, wording, and assenting to this Third -- For they now saw in the former
some few ^assages and Expressions, which carried a F^^e of some dangerous
Tendencies; which, however they might escape the Notice of Private Brethren
could not pass the observation of many discerning Heads.

In Examining this Passage, it must be remarked.

1. That these Private Brethren, every one of the Individual Nine, saw the Face
of some dangerous Tendencies, in the First Paper, which they had formerly
Subscribed, and therefore must be now supposed to Repent of that; but whether
this be true or not, I appeal to their own Consciences, for, till this Brother
published his Rebuke, I could not hear one word to this purpose, some of 'em
assuring me, that the Alterations between the two Papers were but very Minute,
such Tan^^lla as were not worth a contending about, and not of such things as
were of dangerous Tendencies.

2. Several of the Nine have very lately declared their Approbation of the
First paper, and one of 'em in particular told me, that my Brother was guilty
of a Notorious Falsehood in saying, that the Individual Nine had their Hands,
their Heads, and Hearts in the forming, wording and assenting to the Third
Paper, for he had neither Hand, nor Head, nor Heart in it.

3. If the Individual Nine had a Hand, a Head and a Heart in composing the
third, and in Waving the Phrases, rejected, because they could not bear a sound
sense, then must Dr. Bates, who is one of the Nine Private Brethren. be for a
waving the Phrases, of Christ's sustaining the Person of sinners; and suffering
the wrath of God as our Surety, as what could not bear a sound sense, and if it
be so, I do humbly conclude that it is his Duty to answer that part of his
Harmony, where these Phrases are used, and the Doctrine they express is
Asserted and Defended.

But sure I am, that I have heard him say, that the Harmony was the fruit of
Fervent Prayer of his closest studies, and most Impartial Examination, not only
of the Orthodox, but of their Adversaries, and that, though it was his resolution
to follow light, and if he could meet with good reasons to convince him, he was
in an Error, he would fall under it, yet hitherto he has met with no reasons
to move him to change his mind, and to this purpose he has spoke since the
composure of the Third Paper.

To close my Answer to this Enquiry, it is manifest to me that my Brother and
his Teacher are for rejecting the above mentioned Orthodox Terms and Phrases,
because they have forsaken the Protestant Doctrine, as ordinarily conceived by
them. Though I have put my Charity on the outmost stretch in favor of my
Rebuking Brother, yet must I say, That, if he does not see the Tendencies of a
rejecting the aforesaid Phrases, upon the Reasons he has assigned, to be
destructive of the Protestant Faith in the Article of Christ's Satisfaction, He
is not the sit Man in the World to enter on a Controversy of this kind;
and yet I must at the same time acknowledge, that the more unmeet any one is to
enter on this Controversy, the more likely he is to be imposed on by his more
seeing guide, who does, in the instance before us, as the nature of the thing
speaks, leave the Reformed; and nothing short of this can be the import of my
Brothers arguings in his Rebuke.

This Assertion I do confess leads me to the consideration of the seventh
Enquiry, which is,

VII. In what Confessions are the Terms or Phrases, so much contended for to be
found?
My Brother is very confident, that the Phrase of a Change of Persons between
Christ and Us, and his taking on him the Person of Sinners is not in any one
Confession of Faith. For, says he,

Faithful Rebuke.
Observe further, That the Phrase of a Change of Persons between Christ and Us,
and his taking upon him the Person of Sinners, are Terms wholly Unknown to
those Confessions and Articles, which were made the Test of soundness in the
Faith, by the United Ministers, nay, if you have the leisure, search the whole
Body of Confessions of the Reformed Churches from Helvetia to Transylvania,
thence to America, and you shall not find these Terms, Phrases, or Expressions
in any one of them. p. 17.

Reply.
1. This strong Assurance of my Brother brings to my remembrance a passage I
have met with in Mr. Baxters Catholic Theology of a Jocular Contemptuous
Defendant; who, whilst He pretended to have a Commission from all the
Systematical Divines of Germany, was so Charitably Uncharitable as to say, That
never a man in his Wits affirmed, That the Righteousness of Christ was the
Formal Cause of our Justification. (Append. to the Praemun. par. 2.) whereas,
on the other hand, Davenant, who was far from being a Madman, or from
representing the Protestants to be so, does assure us, That it is the common
sense of all our Divines, that the Righteousness of Christ, imputed to us, is
the Formal Cause of our Justification, and as to what pertains to the thing it
self, not one Protestant Divine has either spoke, or written otherwise.
Praelect. de Justit. hab. c. 22.

This Over-bold, Rash, and Untrue Assertion of the Jocular Defendant, ran in my
Mind as soon as I entered on the Examination of what the Rebuker here says, not
only because He has as little reason for what he says, but upon another
account. For,

2. Do we in good earnest press for what has not the countenance so much as of
One Confession of Faith? This would really be hard, and Provocation sufficient
to stir up his Ange^ against the offended Brethren. To whom, in Answer I do
declare, that if I had not found these phrases in some Public Confessions;
nay, if I had not met with them in the Holy Scriptures, I would have been
silent and never have put Pen to Paper, on this occasion. Mistake me not, my
meaning is, that the things signified by these Terms and Phrases, are expressly
in our Confessions, and in the Holy Scriptures too; and perhaps it may appear
that the phrase most exposed by him, will be found to be literally in one or
other Confession.

3. That I may set what I now declare in the clearest light, I must observe
unto you,

1. That the phrases, of a Commutation, or Change of Persons between Christ and
us; of Christ's sustaining our Person; of his being Substituted into our room;
and his Suffering in our Place and Stead, are so nearly Allied to each other,
that they are as Hypocrates his Twins; they Live and Dye together. Grant one
and all necessarily come in with it; oppose but any one of 'em in the genuine
meaning, and you oppose all of them.

The Phrase of Christ's Dying in our Place and Stead, as it imports somewhat
more than for our good, implies a Substitution of Christ into our Place, which
cannot be without a change of Persons between Christ and Us; or without Christ's
sustaining our Person. If then any one of these phrases be found in any one
Confession, there is an owning all the rest.

2. Those Scriptures, which speak of Christ's Dying for us; of his being a
Sacrifice; and of his being our Surety to satisfy the Law for us, do all
import Christ's Suffering in our stead, his being Substituted in our Place, a
change of Persons between him and us, and his sustaining our Person in
suffering.

What I here assert is so clear, that there is no doubt of it amongst the
Orthodox, who thoroughly understand this Controversy. Yea further,

3. These controverted phrases do express what is essential unto a Real, Proper
and Plenary satisfaction to Gods Justice for our sins, and upon this account,
in what confession soever such a satisfaction is asserted, there these phrases
are owned.

If then I can direct to the Confession, where either a Proper Satisfaction is
asserted; or, where it is declared, that Christ as our Surety suffered for us;
or, that Christ suffered in our Place and Stead; or stood in our Person, when
He Died, I hope it may satisfy any unprejudiced person, that the phrases
Contended for are in our Confessions; and if I show that all these last
mentioned are in some public Confessions or Catechisms, why may it not be
enough to remove my Brother from his Fastnesses; and oblige him to conclude,
that they who plead for their use are not so singular as he has Insinuated?

These things Praemised, our first Enquiry must be,

1. In what Confession is a proper Satisfaction owned? Go to the Assemblies,
cap. 8. sect. 8. and there you may read, That the Lord Jesus by his Perfect
Obedience and Sacrifice of himself, has fully satisfied the Justice of his
Father. And cap. 11. sect. 3. Christ by his Death and Obedience did make a
Proper, Real, and Full Satisfaction to his Fathers Justice on their behalf. The
same is repeated in the larger Catechism in answer to the Question, What is
Justification? and to that which follows it.

If my Brother cannot see in the assertion of [a Proper, Real and Full
Satisfaction made for us by Christ to the Justice of God.] the Phrase [of a
Change of Persons between Christ and Us,] it is not because it is not there. For
in a Proper Satisfaction, whatever is essential thereunto, as a Commutation, or
Change of Persons between Christ and Us is, is contained; and whoever
understands the true nature of a proper Satisfaction, cannot but see it.
However for the sake of the less studied, I will by a very plain instance
Illustrate thus much; affirming, that all sound Believers are Discharged from
that Obligation to Punishment they lay under for their past sins, that the
Obligation unto Punishment, is in their case, dissolved, that this is the
Doctrine embraced by the Reformed. Now, if my Brother demands of me, in what
Confession of Faith is this phrase [of Dissolving the Obligation to Punishment]
to be found; In answer, I Will refer him to the Assemblies Confession. cap. 11.
sect. 1. Those whom God Effectually calls, he also Freely Justifies -- by
Pardoning their Sins. If he says, he cannot in this place see the phrase [of
Dissolving the Obligation to Punishment.] I Will tell him, it is there, though he
cannot see it, for in the Pardon of sin it is, it being Essential unto Pardon,
that the Obligation unto Punishment be dissolved, to talk of the Pardon of a
sinner whilst he continues to lie under the Obligation unto Punishment, is to
Trifle, and to say, that the dissolving the Obligation to Punishment cannot be
read, where the Pardon of sin is expressed, is to talk after such a manner as
Modesty wont give me leave to call by its most proper name.

The same is true of Christ's Satisfaction, and a Commutation of Persons between
Christ and Us; for, a Commutation of Persons between Christ and Us, is as
essential unto a proper Satisfaction, as the dissolving the Obligation to
Punishment is unto Pardon of sin.

2. The phrase [of Christ's suffering in our place and stead,] as it imports
somewhat more than for our good, implies a Commutation of Persons between
Christ and Us; and signifies the same with Christ's suffering in our Person, as
our Surety.

That it is thus understood by the Orthodox, I have already cleared, and to
what has been said, I will add the Judgment of the Palatinate Divines, which
they delivered into the Synod of Dort, which was, That one Error, amongst the
many embraced by the Remonstrants, was [the same which my Brother has in his
Rebuke, viz.] That to Die for sinners must not be understood, as if Christ died
Loco, aut vice ipsorum, in their Place and Stead, sed bono tantum, but only for
their good.

This Error these Divines, (in what they have said on the second of the five
Articles) did confute, asserting, in opposition unto them, that Christ our
Surety according to the Scriptures died Loco Peccatorum, in the place of
sinners, which in their Orthodox Antithesis they thus explain, partim Loco,
partim bono ipsorum. And it was Decreed by this Synod, That whereas we were
unable of our selves to satisfy Gods Justice, and deliver our selves from his
Wrath, God of his Immense Mercy, gave his only begotten Son to be a Surety for
us; who, that he might make Satisfaction for us, was made Sin, and a Curse on
the Cross for us, or vice nostra, or in our stead.

This Decree was about the year 1623. received by the Reformed in France in the
Synod of Charenton, and subscribed by the Pastors and Elders of the said Synod,
with a Protestation in the Presence of God, that through his grace, they would
never depart from it; decreeing that it should be inviolably observed by all
the Churches, and Universities in that Kingdom.

And, in the Assemblies Confession, Cap. 11. Sect. 3. it is express, That
Christ's Obedience and Satisfaction was accepted in their stead; and why
accepted in their stead? but because Christ obeyed and satisfied in their
stead? which, as I have shown, is as much as to say, Christ obeyed and
satisfied in our Person. But of this more immediately under the next Head.

3. The Term [Surety] when applied to Christ, as suffering for our sins,
denotes to us a Change of Persons between him and us, and his sustaining our
Person, in his sufferings.

Thus much is so evident, that they who have any tolerable Acquaintance with
this Controversy, and oppose the Phrases of a Change of Persons between Christ
and us, and of Christ's sustaining our Person, do also deny that Christ suffered
as our Surety. Mr. Ws. himself therefore Rejects Christ's being under the Law of
Works, as our Surety, upon the old Socinian Bottom, as said to be inconsistent
with the Free Pardon of Sin. Man made Right. p. 92, 96. And my Brothers many
discerning Heads do not only Reject Christ's taking on him the Person of
Sinners, as a Phrase that cannot bear a Sound Sense, but they also Reject this
other Phrase [of Christ's being considered in Relation to us, as our Surety,
bearing our sins in his own Body] and least thus much should have been inferred
from that other Phrase of [Christs feeling and bearing the Weight of Gods
Wrath] it is also Rejected as what is liable to a Sense and Sound of Malignity
to the whole of the Gospel.

Now, if I must believe, as my Brother suggests, that these alterations and the
Rejecting of these Phrases is upon the assigned Reasons is the deliberate Act
of the whole Body, composed of many discerning Heads, that still profess a Zeal
for all the Doctrines contained in the Assemblies Confession; Larger and
shorter Catechism. I must declare, God knows, with a sincere desire, it may be
with brokenness of Heart, and the deepest Humiliation, that our Case, in this
regard, is more deplorable than I am willing to suggest, though I cannot but
reflect on the Calamitous Condition, into which our Brethren in France have
fallen, since they omitted to witness so fully as they should have done against
Armyraldian Encroachments made on the Common Faith of Protestants, especially
seeing they are now out done, by some amongst our selves.

If Christ was not as our Surety, made under the Law; If he did not endure the
most grievous Torments, immediately in his Soul, and most painful Sufferings in
his Body, as feeling and bearing the Weight of Gods Wrath due to us for our
sins, how shall we be able to stand before the Bar of God in the great day?
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousands of
Rivers of Oil? Shall I give my Firstborn for my Transgression, the Fruit of my
Body for the Sin of my Soul? These things cannot satisfy Gods Justice, nor
appease his Wrath, nor make an Atonement for our Sin. It must be Christ's
Suffering in our stead, his bearing our sins in his Body, as our Surety, and
feeling, and bearing the Weight of Gods Wrath for our Sins, that alone can save
us.

But these Phrases, though they were in the First Paper, are waved, and left out
of the Third, because, as my Brother says, they cannot bear a sound Sense, etc.
whilst a Zeal is pretended for the Assemblies Confession and Catechism, in
which the rejected Doctrines are literally asserted. In the Confession, Cap. 8.
Sect. 3, it is express, That the Father called the Lord Christ to the Office of
a Mediator, and Surety: And in Sect. 4. this Office the Lord Christ did most
willingly undertake, which that he might discharge, he was made under the Law,
and did perfectly fulfill it, endured most grievous Torments in his Soul, and
most painful Sufferings in his Body.

These things the Lord Christ endured as our Surety; which is more fully
delivered in Answer to that Question, How is Justification an Act of Gods Free
Grace? In which you will see Mr. Ws. his Objection against Christ's being under
the Bonds of the Law, as our Surety, taken from a supposed inconsistency
between it and the forgiveness of our Sins fully removed, in that it is there
declared, Although Christ, by his Obedience and Death, did make a Proper, Real
and Full Satisfaction to Gods Justice; yet in as much as God accepts the
Satisfaction from a Surety, which he might have demanded of them, did provide
this Surety, his own only Son, imputing his Righteousness to them, and
requiring nothing of them for their Justification but Faith, which also is his
gift, their Justification is to them, of Free Grace.

But if Christ, as our Surety, does so, will it not follow, that he paid our
Debts? Yes, it will; And so, says the Assembly, Confess. Cap. 11. 3. Christ, by
his Obedience and Death, did fully discharge the Debt of all those that are
thus Justified, and did make a proper, real, and full Satisfaction. Did he not
then feel and bear the Weight of Gods Wrath? Ay, he did so: And thus much is
affirmed by the Assembly in the same Words, it is rejected by the many
discerning Heads; For, in Answer to this Question* How did Christ humble
himself in his Death? It is in the Larger Catechism, thus, Christ humbled
himself in that, having been betrayed by Judas -- and having also conflicted
with the Terrors of Death, and the powers of Darkness, felt and bore the weight
of Gods Wrath; he laid down his Life an Offering for sin.

Whether a Rejecting the Phrases of Christ's bearing our Sins in his Body, as
our Surety, and his feeling and bearing the weight of Gods Wrath, be not a
Contravening a Doctrinal Article, established by the Assembly, at Westminster?
and whether this Brother who does so, ought not to be Censured by the Body of
the United Ministers, if we may be ever so blessed, as to see such a Meeting
once more. I submit to more discerning Heads; and sure I am, that, however this
Matter may issue, it is plain enough to me, that the Controverted Phrases are
owned by the Synod of Dort^, established in the Reformed Churches in France, as
well as by the Assembly of Learned, Judicious, Godly and Orthodox Divines at
Westminster.

Well, but though I had leisure to look into all the Confessions at home; or
search the whole Body of Confessions of the Reformed Churches from Helvetia to
Transylvania, thence to America, can I find, in any one of them, the least
Countenance given to these Terms, Phrases, or Expressions? Or is it possible to
Observe in any one of them, so much as a smile on that Phrase of Christ's
suffering in our Person? I answer,

1. What, though I cannot? Is it not enough that I have shown, that the
Controverted Phrases are included in the Acknowledgment of Christ's making a
proper Satisfaction to Gods Justice for us? And that they are all virtually
owned, which in sundry Confessions and Synods, which have openly Received the
Phrase of Christ's suffering in our Stead, as it signifies more than for our
good, and is of the same Import with Christ's suffering in our Person, but the
owning that Christ as our Surety, felt and bore the weight of Gods Wrath,
should, methinks, be sufficient. However,

2. That my Brother may see, that without going so far as Helvetia,
Transylvania or America, we may find enough nearer home to convince him, that
he has very little, or no Reason for his assuming way of Writing, I will only
take a turn into Scotland, where we shall find this very Phrase of Christ's
dying in our Person, inserted in their Confession of Faith, It became the
Messiah, and Redeemer to be True God, and True Man, because he was to suffer
the Punishments due for our sins, and to appear, [quasi in Persona nostra,
coram Judicio Patris pro nostra transgressione, and in obedientia pati, morte,
mortis authorem superare] in our Person, before the Judgment Seat of the Father
to suffer for our Transgressions, and by death to destroy him that had power
over Death. Vid. Carp. Confess. Ed. an. 1612. page 142.

Here you see that the Church of Scotland above a hundred years ago, used this
very Phrase, which, my Brother assured us, could not be found in any one
Confession: and which, he says, does make a Blasphemous Representation of Gods
Love in the Redemption of falen Man, but I hope, when he shall be so far
recovered as to be able to entertain some free Thoughts, on this Subject, he
will do his part, to repair the Breaches he has, by his Rebuke, made on one of
the Chief Articles of our Holy Religion, and do what in him lies, to clear the
Orthodox from those unjust Reproaches he has covered them with, by making them
to hold and defend Blasphemous Opinions in their use and defense of the
Controverted Phrases; And that it may be thus, it shall be my Prayer, and I
desire it may be also the Prayer of all them who love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity.

There is one thing more needful to be spoken unto, before I close my Reply: It
is the Third and Last general Head, I have proposed to be considered.

III. The Charge of Antinomianism.
1. MY Brother, that he may put the fairer Gloss, upon the New Notions, he has
undertaken the Defense of, applies himself to the same Artifices, by which the
Socinian^, of old, used to Propagate their Heresies, which was to expose the
Ref^r^^ed, as Men of Antinomian Principles, Men of a very bad Character, and
ill Designs.

2. That he has, without any provocation given him, thus Aspersed his
Congregational Brethren, in the Bulk, without a Salvo to the Reputation of any
one of them, I will particularly evince.

1. The Charge of Antinomianism; He lays in thus, The True Reason of their
(the Congregational Brethrens) severe displeasure conceived against the Third
Paper is, that it has so clearly and fully born its Testimony against the
Antinomians in the Fundamental Article of Justification. Reb. p. 56. A little
before this, 'I wish (says he) you could inform me, Whether they, [ viz. the
Congregational] have received any New Revelations, or made any New Discoveries
of these great Secrets, and Indi^pensible Necessity of these New Notions? [that
is, if the Terms, Phrases, and Doctrines, long ago openly embraced by the
Reformed] 'Whether they [the Congregational still] are become (...), the
Adepts, in the Rosacrucian Mysteries, or have found out the Philosophers Stone
to turn all Antinomianism into pure Gold. page 50.

I will here, only tell you, that these Rosacrucians are a People, who hold,
that by the help of a Spirit which Penetrates the Universe, they are adorned
with such Angelical Wisdom, as excels the Knowledge, conveyed to us by the Holy
Scriptures, by which they may understand whatever is done, or can be known in
the World -- They are a sort of Chimists, who, in their Laboratories desired
Instruction, either from the Stars, or after the manner of Enthusiasts, expect
secret Inspirations and Revelations; as also Converses and Conferences with
Spirits, and great Assistances from them; whereupon many have been strangely
deluded by the Devil, who transforms himself into an Angel of Light. These are
the Rosacrucians, my Brother speaks of, and as one in doubt, wishes to be
informed, whether the Congregational, are not Adepts, great Proficients in
their Hellish Mysteries.

2. The Character he further gives of them is, That they are Pettyfoggers,
whose work it is to sow the Seeds of Strife, page 31. whose desultory Humors
(or giddy Brains) can no more be fixed than Proteus can be bound. page 33. who
are no longer of an Opinion than till the next Crotchet comes into their Heads
to invent another. page 33. Great Intreaguers, p. 29. Unreasonable Men,
Malicious Slanderers, Guilty of a more heinous Sin, in that they Usurp the
Privilege of God to Judge the Heart. p. 34. whose Grief, to observe how much
the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction is in danger, may remember you of what you
Read in some Naturalists, That the Crocodile weeps over his Pre^, and then
devours it; whose Tears are all Mockery. p. 54. who lie Mr. Ws. to the Stake to
be Baited, (by their Party, that is, (by the English Molossi, or Mastiff-Dogs,
and every Whaffing Welp, that could bark, though not bite, Unreasonably Cruel,
putting such Terms upon Mr. Williams, as are not so Merciful, as those put upon
the Men of Jabesh Gilead by Nahash, 1 Samuel 11.2. who would only thrust out
their Right Eyes, but these [ viz The Congregational] would cut off his Right
Hand too. p. 58. whose Terms favor too much of Empire over Souls, and Dominion
over the Consciences and Faith of Men. p. 59 Who, when they promise not to make
further Public Contests, yet will then be for Private Whisperings, Evil
Surmises, Insinuated Slanders, and Clandestine Reproaches, whilst Mr. W. is
alive, and it is to be feared will feed upon his Carcass, and Survive his Dust
and Ashes. That these Bigots will never forgive them, who have joined with the
Brethren of a more Benign Temper in the Third Paper. p. 60.

This is the way he takes to Treat a whole Party of Brethren in this City, who
are known to be Men of Integrity, soundness in the Faith, and successful
Laborers in the Vineyard of our Lord; But I will make no other Return than to
assure him, it is my prayer, he may see, and consider what he has done, and that
the Lord will soften his heart, and forgive him. As for what he says of the
Reporter, I will not repeat one word of it, only I will accquaint you with what
little Reason my Brother had to Insinuate, as if the Reporter had been a
favourer of Dr. Crisp's Errors, and what Obligations he lies under to clear
himself fom the suspicion of Antinomianism; for such indeed is the Nature of
Error, that how distant soever some Heresies are, in their appearances from
each other, they frequently center in one and the same Point.

To evince what I have here suggested, 'twill be sufficient to propose what my
Brother says of the Reporters Zeal for Dr. Crisps, and make my Reply.

Faithful Rebuke.
The Proposal of a full Testimony against Antinomianism, is the unpardonable
Sin against Dr. Crisp, which shall never be forgiven by the Reporter. p. 57.

Reply.
1. That my Answer may be the more clearly understood, it must be noted, that I
speak of the Person, who is by my Brother taken for the Reporter, whether he be
Right, or not, in his Conjecture; and by the Rebuker, I mean the Man that is
Famed to be so. This premised, I affirm,

2. That there is not the least pretense for his insinuating, that the Reporter
is a favourer of Dr. Crisps Notions; but there are diverse reasons for my
insisting on it, that my Rebuker is not free from the suspicion, if not liable
to a charge of giving Countenance to them, and so stands bound to clear himself.

1. It Is well known unto me, That when the Reporter did, about seventeen years
ago, write against Antinomianism, with a particular Reference unto some
assertions of Dr. Crisp, my Brother gave him sufficient encouragement to expect
his Mid-wising it into the World by a Praefatory Epistle, which upon some noise
made on the mention of the Doctors Name, he declined to do. When my Brother
shall call to mind what he wrote in a Letter to PH, He cannot, I presume, but
remember that what I here intimate, though so long ago, is very true.

2. When a New Impression of the Doctors Works, with an addition of some
Sermons came into the World about seven or eight years since, the Reporter was
desired to set his Name to the Attestation before it; but He, apprehending it
would be taken for granted, at least by the Common People, that His Name would
stand there as an approval of all the Notions, in that Book, and ensnare many
to a closure with the very Errors my Brother now seems to declaim against,
Refused to set his Name unto it: And yet he himself, notwithstanding the
Antinomian Heresies, Horrid Opinions, and Abominable Doctrines that He charge
his Congregational Brethren with in his One and twenty Positions, page 25, 26.
did set his Hand unto the Attestation before Dr. Crisps Book. And there it
still remains without a public recalling it. And I think he cannot easily
forget, when, and where he was charged with it, and called upon to give
satisfaction, but was so Inflexible, that no other could be obtained, than that
the Charge was Rude and Ignorant, and so braved it out.

3. The Reporter is one never like to make any Apologies for the Doctors
Notions, as differing from the common Belief of Protestants; But, this Brothers
Hand is set to a Plea for them.

In a Preface, before Mr. Flavels blow at the Root, Subscribed by the Rebuker,
we have the following defense of those very points, wherein Dr. Crisp forsook
the Orthodox. For, it is there declared.

1. That the Difference between Dr. Crisp, and other good Men, seems to lie,
not so much in the Things, which the one, or the other of them Believe, as
about their Order and Reference to one another

This is one passage, that my Brother has Subscribed: which clears it, That, if
He did it with consideration and sincerity, He could not look on Dr. Crisp to
hold either Antinomian Heresies, or any other horrid Opinions, but that as to
the things themselves, the Doctor is of the same Faith with my Rebuker, which
thing once granted, makes it evident, that there could be no such powerful
reasons to influence Mr. Ws. to write against the Doctor as my Brother
suggests, p. 16. for, when Differences are only about the Order, and Reference
of one thing to another, where, as to the Things themselves, there is an
Agreement, then it becomes the Duty of those Brethren, who, in these lesser
matters, differ from each other, to exercise mutual forbearance; and, it must
be, in Mr. Ws. and those zealous Brethren, who did set him on this Work, a
Violation of the Rule of Christian Love and Forbearance, to make this Strife;
whence it must unavoidably follow, that 'twas Mr. Ws. who made the First breach
on the Union, and that my Rebuker, so long as his Name abides to this Preface,
can never clear him.

2. You will say, There may be Agreement as to the things themselves, and yet
about their Order, and reference to one another, very material difference. I
grant it may be so. Though for my own part, I do look on the difference between
the Orthodox and Dr. Crisp to be much greater than this sort of Palliating
Preface will allow it to be, and that whilst my Brothers Name continues
(without a Retractation) to be before the Doctors Book, and under this Preface,
'twill be a Snare to multitudes; especially, seeing He adds his further sense
in these words.

3. But we reckon, that notwithstanding what is more Controversible, in Dr.
Crisps Writings, there are much more Material Things, wherein they cannot but
Agree, and would have come much nearer each other, even in these things, if
they did take some Words or Terms in the same sense.

What can be said more fully, in Favor of Dr. Crisps Notions? Did ever the
Reporter talk thus? I Will go further, if there be any thing dangerous in the
Doctors Writings, as I believe there is, what can be said more to ensnare poor
People to receive that as Sound and True? Did Dr. Chauncey ever say more? Show
me where he has at any time said so much. It Is true, he brings in the
Antinomian, saying as much as he can in his own defense; but he also, if I
mistake not, tells you, that you are not to look for his Judgment there, but
where he brings in Calvin moderating between Neonomian and Antinomian. Once
more,

4. Whereas my Brother does, in his Rebuke, p. 25, 26. insinuate, as if the
Cataing^^ of Artino^ian Heresies, horrid Opinions, and abominable Doctrines,
had been offered to the Congregational, that they might give satisfaction to
the United Brethren, but would not, (though to this day, did I never hear, 'twas
tendered to the Congregational for their Purgation) there is reckoned amongst
these Abominations, this, as the eleventh. A believer is to work from life, and
not for life.

And what thinks my Brother of this? There is (says he) an Expression in Vol
1. p. 46. That Salvation is not the end of any good work we do; which is like
that of another, We are to Act from Life, not for Life. Neither of which are
(says he) to be rigidly taken as it is likely, they were never meant, in the
strict Sense.

This is the Plea my Brother makes for Crispian Notions, in which, if he was
not sincere, He ought to be as public in taking the shame of it, as the
setting his Name has been; If he was sincere, and has received convincing
Light from his Master Mr. Ws. let him own it to the World, and recall his Hand
from the Attestation before the Doctors Writings, and from this Preface. But if
he did sincerely set his hand, and is still of the same mind, let him consider
what it is that has put him upon this ^elf-contradicting Province, which
brings him the more under the Reprehension and Just Notice of his being a
Favourer of that Antinomianism, which is in Dr. Crisps Books.

Thus I have, so far as the Paper allotted me would give leave, Examined the
Faithful Rebuke of my Brother, which I call [Faithful] not because I can see so
much as one grain of Faithfulness in it, but because it is the Name He has given
it. And what I have done has been with Impartiality; For, I thank God, that I
having Felt the Displeasure of some of my Congregational and Presbyterian
Brethren, because a Conviction of Truth has necessitated me in some instances,
relating to the True Way to Peace, to differ from them both, I am the less
concerned though I please neither, so long as I am enabled to discharge a good
Conscience toward God and All Men. And as I have been Impartial, so it has
been my care to write according to the Unforeseen advice, which the Learned and
Grave Mr. Humfrey has given me in his Friendly Interposer (for which I thank
him) in that I have been, not only Vnmoved in my self; but have made it my
endeavor, that nothing might fall from my Pen, expressive of undue
resentments. It is Truth I pursue, and glad shall I be to see more of that,
whether conveyed to my Understanding in the angry way, in which my Rebuking
Brother delivers his sense; or in a more clear, distinct and calm
Representation.

Hitherto I must acknowledge, that the commonly Received Doctrine of
Protestants, is in my Conscience most agreeable to the Word of God in
Scripture; But if at any time, whether in reading what Mr. Humfrey has
delivered in the several Tracts he has Published on this Occasion, in which
there is another Spirit, and other Matter, and more Mature Thoughts than in my
Rebuker, or otherwise from any Letters he speaks of hereafter; or in reading
any Books written on this Subject by any others, I shall be convinced, I am in
a mistake, I will not be afraid to own it, being persuaded, that the Truths of
God need neither Men's Lies, nor their Hypocritical Methods to support them. And
I must confess it, I am the better pleased with Mr. Humfrey, in that I do see
by this Interposition, that the halting, the offensive halting of Mr. Ws. which
I have formerly observed, and in these Papers my self reprehended, is, in the
Point of Justification, made so Judiciously, and Fully manifest, in this Piece,
upon his own Repugnant Principles, that if he will be a Follower of Truth, as
much as a Leader of the People, he must go quite over to Mr. H. (as I have
already noted) or come back to the Received Doctrine, which he makes now to
serve him only for a Gloss, but Recedes from it. Whether he be sincere, or no,
he must now show it.

FINIS.

