AN ANSWER TO THE Bishop of OXFORD's Reasons FOR ABROGATING THE TEST, Imposed
on All Members of Parliament Anno 1678. October. 30.

In these Words, I A. B. do solemnly and sincerely, in the Presence of God,
profess, testify, and declare, That I do believe that in the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper there is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and
Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, at, or after the Consecration thereof
by any Person whatsoever; And that the Invocation, or Adoration of the Uirgin
Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used
in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous.

By a Person of Quality.

London, Printed in the Year 1688.

To the Kingdom in General.
HIS Majesty, having with a Grace exemplary not only to all his Subjects of
this Naiion, but to all Christian Princes and States, (however they may be
themselves of the Roman Persuasion) designed it, as the avowed Glory and
Stability of his Reign, to settle such a Liberty, that there may be free
discourses, and debates concerning the Truths of Christian Religion, and the
Dissents of Christians in them, as from the Pulpit, so proportionably from the
Press; as therefore the Ministers and Fautors of that Church (which would be
known by the Name of Catholic) have always (and will be while they are) always
active with their Pens to the utmost in their Sphaer. And as we see they have
Public Freedom, so is it not to be doubted of the Princely so Universal Grace,
but that he intends a Freedom on the other side to answer; that there may be no
Inequality in holding the Beam, but that it may alike incline to all in this
matter, specially now that he is making Credence of those his Royal Favors to
all His Protestant Subjects, who cannot but be deeply concerned at such a Time
as this; because of the great Advantages, the Interests of the Counter-Scale
hope for from a Sovereign of their own Sentiments. But in no case is this
Liberty more desirable, than when an Amphibious-Ambidextrous Bishop, who
assumes, like that Angel of the Revelation, to set one Foot on the Sea, and the
other on the Earth: One Foot on the Protestant Church, (which he calls one as
if his self were of it) and the other on the Roman: In favor of which he so
openly appears (to speak the most honorably of him) to conciliate toward it,
at lest a Cassandrian Temperament: which, as it will never be yielded by the
Protestant, so would it not be accepted, if it were offered, by the Papist. For
he has published (with what intentions is best known to God, and his own
Conscience) a palliation of the most irreconciliable Points of the Popish
Religion, Transubstantiation, the Sacrifice of the Mass, the Invocation and
Adoration of the Virgin Mary swollen to such a Monstrosity in that Religion,
together with other Saints, and all with Images too; Points wherein the Wisdom
of the Nation thought fit to fix the TEST, as the security of Protestancy; and
that of Images of so great Infamy in Sacred Writ, and all these with a
Multitude of Rampant Words; now rather than a Multitude of such Words should
not be answered, or a man of lips be justified, even the very Stones would
speak: Such Lies and Sophistry will not suffer Men to hold their peace, and
while he seems rather to mock than argue, should not every one endeavor to
make him ashamed? For, certainly, his ways of Discourse are like those of the
Whorish Woman in the Proverbs, so moveable, one cannot know them, he comes out
in this Time, that he esteems a Twilight, and with a prostituted Subtilty he
treats of Sacred things: he is loud and stubborn; his feet abide not in the
House of his own Church, as he his self styles it; but now he is in the Streets
of the Strange Religion, and lays wait in every Corner with a New sort of
Ecclesiastical Polity, or in a New Edition, and his great Temptation is, I
have, says ^e^ Peace Offerings with me, that carry at the same Time
Reconciliableness to Rome, and likewise a Blessing himself in a designed
Indulgence to his own Genius, and caressing himself in the thoughts of his
comfortable Magdalen Importances, and though at a high Water of Papacy he would
be burnt for a Heretic, if he did not speak more out, which without doubt he
is prepared to do on congruous Occasions, yet so much, at this seeming Return
of the Water, is enough to beatifie and then Canonize him in that present
Calendar, where, I doubt not, he stands marked with a Red Letter, and it may be
a just Reason to all sincere Protestants to spue him out of their Mouths: The
observation of his double dealing and appearing more like the Atheist than the
Learned and Ingenuous, though mispersuaded, Papist, sowetimes transports my
Style beyond its own Intention and Resolution, when I first essaid to consider
only the rational part of Discourse in those matters; and I am much the
bolder, because I hear from all, his Book has much disserv'd His Majesty's
Gracious Purpose, and created in all minds a Nausaea; specially observing his
odd Aspersions on so eminent a Person, as Dr. St. who in the thoughts of all
the World is incomparably (and beyond all possibility of being named together,)
ten thousand times more, the Apostolic Bishop.

If I have offered too largely to a just Indignation here, I having the
Treatise it self mostly applied my self to the rational part, and minded
chiefly to possess the Reader with the true sense of things: I have therefore
waved the persuit of his History of Transubstantiation in the several Stages of
it, leaving it to more learned Persons, who, I doubt not, may observe in their
usual walks and dail-y paths, through the whole course of Ecclesiastic Times
Many of his Erratick motions: but however the main point of truth, or falsehood
on that Head, or Article rests in this little room whether it is possible to
believe such sublime spirituality (as our Lord always breathed) so little of kin
to sense, to matter, to flesh, should in his holy dying Institution, forsake
him so, that he should, intend to engage his Blessed Body, that was so suddenly
to become a Spiritual Glorious Body, and to Asscend far above all Heavens, to
so inglorious, insipid, inefficacious a desscent, as only to dispossess a
small Roll os Bread, or Wafer of its whole Substance, and as by a trick to
leave its Accidents still entire to fool and baffle all the sense and reason in
the World: and yet to so little effect as to suffer the Bodies and the Souls
too, of the greatest number of the Eaters to be without any Evidences of good,
as notorious and certain, as the miracle is supposed to be stupendous; whoever
can believe this, need not go to visit the dark and too often impure Cells where
so strange a Docrine was conceived and fostered, he has a Bulimy of Faith
without more ado of search and inquiry to devour all the absurdities that the
name of a Church can offer him.

And so to the points os Idolatry, abating from things Pious and Learned, (to
which let the utmost allowances of deference and honor be yielded, and paid)
the Notions he would imprint of it on the minds of his Readers, are an
audacious affront (as he speaks in a more innocent case) to God the Creator of
Heaven and Earth in his Word, who therein abhorrs all Distributions and
Parcellings out of any the least Particles of the Glory of the One God, or
Mediator to any of the most Seraphick of his Creatures, Angels, or Saints, or
the Mother of God, as he speaks without Precedent from Scripture, and hardly
allowable in a Discourse of Idolatry although tolerated in the case of the
Nestorian Heresy: Even so all Address of any Beings besides that God and the
Mediator, his Word does de TEST specially invisible Beings, to whom we can make
not the least Application, but under the peril of Idolatry as Communicating
them, in any semblances of Worship, with those Incommunicable Attributes and
Properties of Omniscience and Omnipresence: He has indeed allowed and
commanded mutuous respects in the lower humane World for the settlement of the
order of Religious, and Civil Offices; but all the figments of Men's own Brains
concerning Worship of Himself, or of the Mediator through the Mediation of any
of his Creatures, and most notoriously, by Graven Images, or any kind of
Similitudes comprehending other Figments, he declares to be Abomination. It is
a grand Audaciousness therefore to offer such an insolent piece of falsehood to
Christian minds as that the Cherub were by his appointment to be Worshipped, or
to have Worship directed to them, because their Resemblances were placed as
waiting at that Throne that was Empty of any Presence to sit upon it; but an
Invisible Glory and Grace had promised favor to those who, according to his
Word, praid toward that place, which He having filled with a visible sign of
his Presence of Glory He after placed his Name there: with as much sense
therefore it might have been said that every Stone in the Building of the
Temple, or whatever was in the Temple, or specially in the Holy of Holies, was
to be Worshipped as to say the Cherubim were to be Worshipped, of God in,
through, or by them.

A Parallel Essrontery it is to load the Sun and Host of Heaven, the Scripture
with all the Idolatries brands, and so contrary to the very letter of it, that
the Visional Representation of the Jewish Idolatries to Ezekiel, Chapter 7.
distinguishes that of the Sun from all the Rest, I stand therefore in perfect
Amaze and Astonish what the Christian, much more the Protestant, Bishop should
mean, and yet make so open and public an appeal for his Integrity, God and the
World in the close. As to what concerns the Test and the Peerage, I humbly
submit the Reason of it to the higher Judges in these things; begging pardon of
any errors in so great matters, as likewise taking example in that, I beg of
all Men allowance for mistakes of humane infirmity in so Critical a point and
in so Critical a time.

DRAWDEREVE ROFMADA.

AN ANSWER TO THE Bishop of Oxford's Reasons For Abrogating the TEST Imposed on
all Members of PARLIAMENT. Ann. 1678. October. 30.
IN undertaking to give an Answer to these Reasons, I shall choose, as my
particular Province, to insist only upon the most substantial Principles of
Reason, and that may most concern, (as we usually speak) the Merits of the
Cause, with all due regard to the Character of Dignity, the Laws of this
Nation, and the Constitution of the Government thereof (both Civil and
Ecclesiastic) have imprinted upon the Author; as also remembering the
Admonition the Apostle Jude gives from the Example of the Archangel, who
disputing with the Devil about the Body of Moses, most probably in the Cause of
Idolatry, did not adventure to bring against him a Railing Accusation, but
said, the Lord rebuke Thee.

Nor will I assume to make the least Reflection upon the Insufficiencies of the
Discourse, as to its particular Frame and Menage, or upon the Air, Mien, or
Spirit of it, relating to either the Roman, or the Protestant Religion, or to
the Names of greatest Honor, Authority and Reverence, who have acted, or
written in Defense of the Reformation: But leaving all this part to those, who
have both Talents, and Authority to support them in their just Censures of such
a manner of Treaty of what deserves our highest Value and Veneration, I will
content my self with Debating upon the principal Matters, taking them in the
utmost Extent of the Offensive, or Defensive Arguments upon them.

The Heads therefore according to which this Discourse is to be modeled, Reas.
1.
must be those Reasons, the Bishop gives for the Abrogating of the Test: The
firstof which is; That it does not only diminish, but utterly destroy the
natural Rights of Peerage, and turns the Birthright of the English Nobility
into a Precarious Title.

Now in the first place in answer to this, I must observe; that in the very
thought of utterly destroying this Right, the Episcopal Author does somewhat
relent, and recoyl from the Height of his Expression, and abates it into a
Turning that Birthright into a Precarious Title: Taking therefore advantage
from that so natural, and even necessary Recess, or Condescension, if not to be
thought, as it very much seems a Check upon impetuousness of style from a
Consciousness of its Excess; I shall take the boldness more freely to assert,
That the natural Rights of Peerage are not at all destroyed, but owned, upheld,
and more solemnly acknowledged by the Test-Act. Secondly, that the Birthright
of the English Nobility is no way turned into a Precarious Title by it.

And because this is indeed the only Argument for the removing the Test-Act,
that is of true Strength, and Merit in the whole Contexture; it deserves the
more Attent Consideration.

For whatever shall attempt to shake such a main Pillar, and Fundamental
Principle of our English Government, ought to be both suspected, and feared;
and if it indeed prove to do so, to be surpised and foreclos'd from its
Effect: But the Invalidity of this Charge will thus appear.

1. It is most evident the Right of Peerage in the General stands firm,
notwithstanding the Test: Seeing this Principle of Government is not only
still, but with strongest Confirmations even from this very Test-Act on all
sides preserved most firm and undoubted, That there is a most just Right that
every Peer has to all the privileges of English Peerage: Accordingly the very
Act is founded upon that Acknowledgment, and Supposition, viz. That every Peer
has such Right to all the Honors of Peerage, and to that Right most
unquestionable in it self, for else the very Ground of the Law were taken away.
2. All and every Peer submitting to that Law takes that Right, and enjoys it
without any Diminution, and holds it not only for himself, but for that whole
Estate: the whole being acknowledged in every Member: And particularly sitting,
and voting in the Higher House of Parliament, (which is therefore with Honor
to that Estate called the House of Lords) is acknowledged to be the just Right
of Peerage without any Infraction upon the Right it self. 3. Even those Noble
Lords, who do refuse, or do not actually submit to the taking the Test, have
yet their Right of Birth, Blood, or other Title preserved undisputed, and
inviolate, as it is such a Right and on such a Claim; and therefore whenever
they please to accept it on that Condition, there is no demur upon their Right.
But until they so accept, their Right is in a kind of Abeyance, and Custody of
Law for them; and never dies, or is extinguished. 4. The Suspension in the mean
time amounts no higher to the Defalcation of the Privilege, (nor indeed so
high) than the Minority of such Noble Persons, which cause's a Suspension of
that Privilege of voting in Parliament, till they are of Age, which is not at
their pleasure, but requires the natural Course of Time to advance them to it;
whereas in this case, they may in Construction of Law every day remove the
Obstruction and enjoy their Right, seeing the Claim is always allowed, and
owned, and the Law takes no notice of the Reasons of their refusal. 5. This is
made most evident; in that all other natural Rights of their Peerage, are
notwithstanding the Suspension of this particular Branch continued to them. 6.
It is most undeniable; their Right of Blood, or other Claim to the Privilege
of Parliament is unmoved; because not their taking the Test, but that
precedent, and still continuing just Right, gives them a perfect enjoyment of
that particular Privilege whenever they take the Test. Which is, I hope, a
full Vindication of the natural Rights of Peerage from being utterly destroyed;
seeing it is only one Branch, that is in Question, and that is only
suspended, or rather deposited in trust with the House of Peers, and no way
destroyed, or extinguished.

2. I come therefore to make good in the second place, that the Birthright os
the English Nobility is not turned into a Precarious Title, nor that which in
former Ages was forfeited only by Treason is now at the mercy of every
Faction, or every Passion in Parliament.

For that can never be Precarious, nor at such mercy, which subsists, and rests
upon the common Base of the whole World for its security, and that is the Law
of self-preservation.

For when a Parliament consists of Two Houses, and the Upper House of Two
Estates, each Estate a Convention (as is to be always presumed) of the wisest,
and most honorable Persons of a whole Nation, the Lower House has always upon
all their Proposals, or Offers at any Bill, the curb and restraint; that this
is to pass the Upper House, or House of Lords, and therefore cannot rationally
so much, as essay them with any Law, that would destroy the Rights of their
Peerage.

But suppose the House of Commons should make so unreasonable an attempt, it
can never be imagined, so intelligent a Body always provident, and watchful,
so naturally sensible of Honor, and of their own Interest, should either be
imposed upon, or drawn by whatsoever motives to consent to the Destruction of
their very Constitution, there being no stronger Passion, or more binding
Cement, than that of self-preservation.

And yet the preparation of the Two Houses for the bringing forth a Law, does
but form the Materials, that they may be presented to the Royal Assent to to
give them the form and life; who as the common Father of the Country will
judge* of all Bills, whether they are the Products of Passion, or Faction, and
so they either live, or are still-born.

When all Laws are therefore thus winnow'd, and sifted through these several
Explorations of Persons supposed to have all manner of Talents for judging, and
the quickest Resentments of their own Interest, and Concernment whether as the
Lower, or Higher Body of a Nation, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastic, and then
shall all meet in the common Head, who sees, and feels for the whole, it is
very adventurous to impute such Enactions to the Faction, or Passion of a
Parliament. Seeing this must needs be the firmest Foundation humane Affairs can
be entrusted to in this World, viz. the Law of self preservation balanced by
King, Lords, and Commons, e're any thing becomes a Law. And although, it is
true, the influence of the Supreme Prince, the Genius, and Temper of an Age, or
particular Inclination of Times, the Configuration of various Co-incidents may
preponderate to the worse, in some Laws, yet there must be submission to
suffering, even when Conscience, or Reason countersways that which we call
Active Obedience to such Laws; or all Government must be unhinged, and fall.

And seeing it is acknowledged there may be a Forfeiture by Treason of the
Rights of Peerage, and that it has been in the Power of Parliaments to declare
the nature and kinds of Treason, there is, nor can be greater danger to the
Peerage in trusting themselves with the Suspension of one Branch of their Right
than, in trusting themselves with the whole of those Rights: and it is very
rare, that humane Nature (specially such sapient and honorable part of it)
conspire with a Faction, or Passion against themselves, or receive a precedent
srom a partial Infringment of their Rights to destruction of the whole; seeing,
if so great an Estate has overseen in a lesser concern, it is to be concluded,
it will be the more jealous after, and where the whole is in danger; and so
there is no more consequence from the Precedent of the Test-Law (which is
either unawares, or by the sorce of Truth, or of mere Grace, it being unlike
the rest of this Discourse, granted by the Reverend Author to have been
useful in its season) than from a necessary and prudent opening a vein to
conclude the Person that consents to the one, will therefore consent to the
letting out the whole Mass of Blood.

And lastly after all that has been said; the Instances this Author gives of
the first Transubstantiation-Test, and the Protestation, or Test of Loyalty in
which the privilege of Peerage was so carefully provided for against injury by
either of those Tests, do rather strengthen than weaken what has been insisted
on; for it confirms, how quick of apprehension the House of Peers have always
been in that point, and therefore they would not suffer their own Peerage to
fall under any Eclipse, sooner than they found absolute necessity, and such a
good arising, as would compensate any so much, as Parenthesis of the full Beams
of that Glory on any of their Members, and so that it should be no more than a
Parenthesis; till such Members moved themselves to such a position, that no
part of their Orb of Honor should be unenlighten'd.

But in the other Test they seeing no Reason sor the shortest Suspension on
Accounts of Loyalty, sufficiently otherwise secured, lest there should arise a
Custom of trapaning Peers out of their Rights, some Noble Personages resolved
to Stem that Tide; even as in the wise Administration of what pertains to
health, extraordinary methods may be resolved against; but when indeed
formidable Symptoms appear, such resolutions may be rescinded; and so without
any Dishonor but great Honor, the Peers who entered Protestations against such
superfluous Tests, as were projected to ensnare and obtein upon them standing
Orders of the House against any such Tests, and yet might upon pressing
vehement urgencies, see it necessary for the safety of the whole Body of the
Peerage to have such a Test as might bring some of their Members under a
Suspension, till they gave Hostages of their not sufsering such persuasions to
have the ascendent of them, as might be destructive to a Protestant Nobility in
all appearance much the Major part; whereas in the case of the designed
Protestation, the lesser part were probably understood to have designed by
Degrees to have disinherison'd through such Artificesthe greater Number, of
which some Lords more sagacious, being aware, entered their Protestation to
awaken others equally concerned, though not so foreseeing, and whose foresight
gained upon the rest.

And seeing no such Protestation was entered in the case of the last
Transubstantiation-Test, it assures the evidence of the reasonableness of it,
overweigh'd the very attempt: And so I take leave of the First Reason, which I
have more diligently attended in all its moments of appearance, because it is
urged not only by this Author, but by the generality of the zealous for
removing the Test-Act. And it issues into this most equitable Maxim of
Government; That the major part of each particular Body Politic in a Nation
must judge, even as particular Persons do, what is best for the whole. And the
House of Peers being Judge for it self, and most tender of it self; and the
King, the Father and Fountain of Honor, having advised with them, and given
life to a Law for the Suspension of the Rights of those Peers who neglect to
take the Test; this Law can by no means shake the general Rights of Peerage, or
so much as destroy, but only suspends the Right of particular Peers, till they
yield obedience to that Law, which acknowledging their Right expects it from
them, and hastens them to a compliance with it self.

And this will proportionably flow down upon all parts, and Persons concerned
in the Test-Act. If the major part of each distinct Body of Men in a Nation
shall not by their Representatives freely chosen, or by the whole Body it self
summoned to Parliament upon the Right of their Peerage, conclude the whole, by
their most duly weighed, and considered Acts, presented to the Supreme Power,
and impressed by him, there can be no possible Rest, Quiet, or Determination of
humane Affairs in any rational way, or method: And all this being of that
nature, and so cautiously suspending, or preseerving, as in Abeyance, and not
extinguishing any Right, it can never be said to destroy, nor so much as to
submit to a Precarious Title, Faction, or Passion of Parliament, (Words most
injurious to the very Nature of Parliaments.)
Any Right, much less the Right of Peerage, as being a Right of Blood and of
Inheritance.

I come therefore to the Bishops Second Reason.

Secondly it ought to be repealed, because of its dishonorable Birth, and
Original; Reas. 2.
it being the first Born of Oats his Plot, and brought forth on purpose to
give Credit and Reputation to the Perjury.

How far the Wisdom of the Nation in Parliament shall concern it self for the
Honor of both the Nation, and its Parliaments to give Reputation to the Cross
Wounds it may seem to have received in that unhappy Assair, I will not be so
bold as to pry; it being an Ark of State that has its Secrets, and sacred
Retirements, nor at all wade in so invidious a matter; but wholly wave the
Paragraph, in which it is handled; only I will consider how far a
dishonorable occasion may give Birth to a Law, and the Law it self still
remain in honor; and then remark upon the Little Interest the (as the Bishop
calls it) Otesian Plot may have in the Test-Act.

As to the Test, all Laws have this dishonor in their Original (if we might
allow things of that Class, or Rank to be Originals;) to have such respect to
the degeneracy of humane Nature, that the Apostle has said; The Law is not
made for a Righteous Man but for the Lawless; and it is a known Maxim; Ex
malis moribus bonae nascuntur Leges.

Out of such manners as could never be said
To have been good, good Laws have yet been made:
Sic vere vertit --
For grant the Birth be base; don't Comets rise
From Fogs and Vapors, before they shine in Skies?
And acts amazing by a Pesant's Son,
As by a Prince's, ha ve they not been done?
If so, SA. OXON is (SAI not the TEST is) gone.
-- Sic just judicat EHMAMP ARTNOCAS. Alias DRAWDE REVEROFMADA. Laws therefore
are to be weighed by the serviceableness, and use they are of to the main Ends
of Virtue, Righteous ness and Peace, and not by the foulness of their
occasional Originals. And therefore they have indeed a much higher Original, if
wise, virtuous and good Laws; and claim their descent from the exemplar-Wisedom
a nd Goodness, and that Eternal Law of Reason, Truth and Equity, which can
never be stained, or embas'd by the particular occasions, upon which they are
Enacted, which give Being to them no otherwise, than as those Divine Emanations
exert and direct themselves against those contrary Evils and Vices which they
Forbid and Punish: so that the Birth, or Original of this Law is not to be
inquired into (suppose it Oats's Plot) so low as Oats's Plot, but as the Peace
and Safety of a Community is provided for by it; which is as the Arteria Magna,
in that universal Law of Righteousness, as it concerns Humane Affairs, and as
it is calculated for the Support and Security of the National Religion, against
the Usurpation of a Foreign Jurisdiction, a nobler part, than that any thing
else can come in Competition with it. It is then a very petty thing to weigh
the goodness of a Law by the next occasion of it; and a manifest Blunder upon a
Non Cause for the True Cause, to confound an Occasion and an Original together.

Let us then consider in the next place, what Interest the (so styled) Otesian
Plot has in this Law: For if in effect it should prove the Firstborn of that
Plot, the Beginning, and Excellence of its strength, and that it has not a
more Excellent Soul, and Spirit, descending from Above; it might be in danger
to be Condemned to the same Fate. But whoever considers the Test it self, will
not find the least Cognation, or Relation it has to that Plot, nor that any
Lineaments, or Strokes of it enter into its Composition: so that however it
might receive occasion from it, yet the Essentials of it are such Sentiments,
as the Nation has had for above the last hundred of years, and that it has
upon greatest Judgment, Reason and Experience confirmed it self in: and
according to several Emergencies added to its securities by Law upon Law,
against the Regurgitations of that usurpation upon it; not barely because of
such Emergencies, but because of that Grand Reason, the very Essence of Popery
has given it: whether therefore the particular Emergent has had Dimensions
Long and Broad enough for the particular Laws and Constitutions which have been
made, was not so much considered: But the whole Nature of the Evil Feared, and
provided against, being large enough to support such Acts, it has given Reason
to all such provisions; and that was the danger of the Roman Religion
Resettling and Reinstating it self in a Protestant Nation, as the English
Nation is and has been for so great a space.

Thus this Last Act for the Test, setting before it only that so Full and
Comprehensive Consideration of the Increase and Danger of Popery in this
Nation, to which the former good Laws had proved Ineffectual, does therefore so
Enact as that Act expresses.

In all which there is not the least Reference to the so much Infam'd Plot, nor
any Line looking toward it: Till therefore there be a change in the very
Essential Nature of Popery, and a perfect Nullity of all the Fears arising from
it made evident, there must be This, or That particular Accidental Cause
quickening the Legislative Power of the Nation to branch out it self into more
and more, and further and further particular Laws, that may more effectually
reach the intended Point, and be new in the Particulars; observing where former
Provisions were deficient and inefficacious: which new Laws are not to be
charged upon the lesser Accidental Causes, but on the Irreconcileableness of
Popery, and its Growth to the peace and welfare of a Protestant Nation. And so
I have finished what I think necessary upon the Bishop's Second Reason, to show
how Inconcluding it is for the Abrogating of the Test.

I proceed now to the Third Reason.
The Test ought to be repealed, because of the incompetent Authority, Reas. 3.
by which it was enacted, for it is a Law of an Ecclesiastic Nature, made
without the Authority of the Church, contrary to the Practice of the Christian
World in all Ages, etc.

1. This Reason rests upon these two Principal Pillars, that the Power of
making Decrees concerning Divine Verities, is a Legislative Power, given as the
highest Act of Government by Christ's Commission, to the Officers of his own
Kingdom, upon which the whole Fabric of the Christian Church has hitherto
stood, and is to stand to the End of the World, and without which, it must run
into confusion; and that to entrench upon this Prerogative of the Holy
Catholic Church, is to depose Christ from his Throne, by disowning,
neglecting, and affronting his Commission to his Catholic Church; so that this
Power cannot be usurped without Sacrilege, and Blasphemy, and such a daring
Invasion of Christ's Kingdom, as that nothing more imports Christian Kings and
Governors, than to be wary and cautious, how they lay hands upon it.

2. That the Bishops sitting in the House of Lords, and (to their shame)
consenting to this Law, is not sufficient to make this Law an Act of Church
Authority; because it ought to have been first decreed by their own proper
Authority, without any Lay Concurrence and then to have come into Parliament,
and as they judged sit, to have been abetted with Temporal Penalties, a
Practice never violated, but by Aposlates, and Rebel Parliaments. And lastly
because Particular Bishops sit not in Parliament by Power derived from our
Blessed Savior, but by the mere Grace and Favor of the King, so that the
exercising any Ecclesiastical Authority in that place is scandalously to
betray, as much as in them lies, the very being of a Christian Church, and
profanely to pawn the Bishop to the Lord; and lastly because the Ecclesiastical
Power is by the Law of England settled in Convocation, and therefore to enact
any thing of an Ecclesiastical Nature without their consent is to betray the
Rights of the Church of England, as by Law established in particular, as well
as of the Church Catholic in general.

But as a Check and Limitation to all this, the Episcopal Author interposes;
the Civil Power may restrain the Exercise of this Ecclesiastical Prerogative,
as they shall judge meet for the Ends of Peace, and the Interest of the Common
Wealth, and punish it too at their own discretion, if it shall at any time
entrench upon the Power of the State, and it may prevent, or correct Abuses.

I have thus collected the strength of this whole Reason without omitting any
thing, I could think material; I have also subjoined the Limitation, that it
may be of the use the Author designed it, and may also be considered in its
place to our purpose.

There are three Expressions, I desire in modesty and reverence to this R. R.
Author to draw a Veil over. 1. That Parenthetic (to their shame) viz. the
Bishop's shame, who consented to the Test-Law, because it seems so much to
confine on speaking Evil of Dignities; and for the same Reason, 2 ly. upon
that, ( Except by Apostates, and Rebel-Parliaments,) as also because I would
not know the direct meaning of those words, but go backward to cast a covering
over them. 3. On those words, I draw the Curtain; ( profanely pawn the Bishop
to the Lord) lest they seem rather, fit to be retired among the Bishops Ludicra.

But to the main purport, and stress of the Argument I shall undertake to
rejoyn these Assertions.

1. That there is no such Legislative Power given by Commission from Christ to
his Church, or made the Foundation of it.

2. That all such Pretensions of Church Power drawn from the Practice of the
Christian Church, are very invalid.

3. That the Law of the Test is not a Law of an Ecclesiastic Nature.

4. And if it were, the Church of England has done enough in Convocation, and
other Church-Acts to support it.

5. That the Presence of the Bishops in Parliament not protesting against it,
are sufficient proof of the two last Assertions.

6. That according to the Bishop's own Limitation of Church Power; it must
remain a good, and necessary Law, and for which the Parliament had Competent
Authority.

I begin with the first. 1. That there is no such Legislative Power, Assert. 1.
given by Commission from Christ to his Church, or made the Foundation of it,
which may be demonstrated in this manner.

This Legislative Power of the Church is most contrary to that Holy Book, from
whence we derive our Christian Sacred Religion, and to the soundest Reason
guided by that; for by that there is, nor can be any Legislative Power in
matters of Divine Verity but what is immediately from Heaven, either by voice
from thence, or by the Ministry of Angels, or by immediate Inspiration given
to Holy Men, Prophets and Apostles, and consigned by them into the Holy
Writings we call Scriptures. All which after- Revelations are to be tried, and
Tested by their compare with, and Agreement to former Revelations, as is most
manifest in all parts of Scripture; and by the constant, and continual Appeal
of the Old Testament to the New: So that this prerogativ'd, Legislative Church,
that is pleaded into so high and rampant a Power, that All-seeming wavings of
its Authority must be an Invasion of Christ's Kingdom, a Deposing of Him, an
affronting his Commission, smells strong of the Pride, and Ambition of that
City, which, first, as a City, and then as a Church has always aspired, to
have a Kingdom over the Kings of the Earth; as also of the Luciferian Ascent of
the Beast; that carries it, with and upon which, I doubt not, the Sacrilege,
and Blasphemy will be found: Who exalts himself above all that is called God,
or worshipped, who sits in the Temple of God, showing Himself that he is God.

But to us, there is but one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. One
Father, who is in Heaven; One Master, who is Christ, and all we are Brethren;
One Legislative-Lord; and the chiefest in his Church are Servants, Ministering
his Word in the Scriptures, the only law of Divine verities. And therefore in
this Prerogative-sense, dare not receive the title of Masters, or Fathers; nor
can those who receive the Law of Christ, made evident from the Scriptures to be
his Law, by their Ministry, upon such Ministration yield them therefore the
Names of Masters, or Fathers in a Legislative sense. For they know, they ought
to Preach Christ the Lord; and themselves only Servants for Christ's sake,
that they have no Dominion over the Faith of Christians, (who are however
called the Laity, yet are Christ's Clerus,) but only are Ensamples of the Flock
who attends the motion of the Chief Shepherd, the Lamb, Christ Jesus,
whithersoever he goes, and will not follow Strangers.

Princes, and States by Light offered them by the Ministerial labors, and
services of the Bishops, and Elders of the Church, who labor in the word, and
Doctrine are to direct their Power according to that Light they receive by such
Ministrations, but together, and not without their own search, into Scriptures,
and constant meditation therein.

And the People are to obey in Agreement with that Law, and word of Christ;
which they are to know for themselves in that Light diffused by the preaching
of the word to them in season and out of season, which, I say, they are to know
for themselves, and not others for them, by the deep research of their own
minds into Scripture, to see whether those things are so, or not. For wisdom
has written to them, even to them, as may be seen by all the Epistles of the
Apostles; that they might know the certainty of the words of truth, and have
their trust in the Lord, and not an Implicit Faith in Men, and might be able by
Apologies for the hope that is in them, to answer the words of Truth to those,
who send to them either in a way of advice, or challenge.

Whatever is contrary to this undoubted evidence of the Word of God, and sound
Reason, seeing every one must give an account of himself to God, as well as
those, who are set over them, who by faithful Offers of Truth discharge
themselves, whatever, I say, is so proposed, as by a Catholic Church, and its
prerogative, I affirm savours of that intoxicating Cup of Abominations in the
hand of that Sorceress, that calls her self the Mistress of Churches, and would
Sit the Lady of the Christian World, and of the power that bears it, who under
pretense of the Kingdom of Christ undermines it, and has, in the unsearchable
Judgment of God delayed, thus long its appearance to all the World; and is the
Baalam lofty Prophet of that Romish Pergamus.

2. The pretended practice of the Church of God in all Ages, can give no
presidency in this Case, beyond what is thus asserted; For in the times of the
Old Testament, Religious Princes, did by the general advice, and Doctrine of
the Prophets, and of those Priests who kept their Faith to the Law of God,
themselves govern, and reform according to that of which each King was to have
a Copy Written by himself, which was to be with him, and he was to read it all
the days of his Life. That he might Learn to fear the Lord his God, Deuteronomy. 17.
and to keep his Laws. And whereas in that precedent Law, enquiry of the Priest
in the place God should choose, was commended; it plainly insinuates, the
divine Responses, God gave at that time by the Vrim, and Thummim, immediately
from himself were intended, but yet all was to be founded in the Written Law,
there all was to be shown, and from thence to be learnt, or not to be received,
no not under a power of seeming Miiracles, Deuteronomy. 12.

In the first times of Christianity, for three hundred years, there were no
Christian Magistrates, who would wait for the Churches Oracle's. But for the
Determination of the Church without a Lay-Concurrence, it is most apparently
opposite to that grand instance of the first Council, wherein the people (if
any) distinguishingly styled the Church; and who made most manifestly one of
the Estates, (if I may so express it) in the whole Conciliary management; The
Apostles, the Elders, the Brethren; and the whole Consultation, and
Determination moved upon the Poles of express Scripture, as will be most
visible to any enquirer into those Conciliary Acts; For he that runs may read,
Acts 15.

In the days of that first and most Religious Emperor Constantine, although
he, as all pious Princes, and Christians would, received light from the
Ministers of sacred truth, yet so that he used his own Judgment together with
it; deploring the weaknesses he observed among these who seemed to be pillars
of light, but yet it must be acknowledged, that that Apostasy, the Mystery of
iniquity, that began to work in the Apostles days was well grown up, and
advanced, and a Legislative Church was Towering up its Power in the Christian
World at that very time.

But it is undoubted, There is nothing so Ancient, as Divine Truth in the Law,
and in the Testimony, consenting with that Law of Reason Engraven in man's
Heart, and to these we must go; Fot whatsoever speaks not according to these,
there is no Morning to it, nor from it; but a Night, even to a Midnight, ensues
upon it, what Antiquity soever it pretends to.

3. That I may yet give a more direct Answer to this Reason, the Test-Act is
not a Law of an Ecclesiastic Nature; For it is only an Exploration, and Touch
upon Persons, whether they are Romanists, or not: it is no Canonical
Determination of the Point of Transubstantiation, it binds no Decree with a
Spiritual, or Ecclesiastic Anathema, or Excommunication; which are of the
Essence of Ecclesiastic Laws, as they have been always Solemnized, and
Ratified in the Christian-Antichristianizing World upon light occasions.

But this Test presumes Two Things, supposed before to be sufficiently certain.
1. That no Romanist will deny his Transubstantiation, nor consent, that his
Invocation of the Virgin Mary, and of other Saints, and that the Sacrifice of
the Mass is Superstitious, and Idolatrous. The Test does not determine, nor
pretend Canonically to Define of these Things: it only proposes this, as a
certain Discovery of the Votaries of a Foreign Church; nor does it mind to
decide the Truth of those Matters: It is enough to it, to know, who do, or who
do not assent to their presumed Truth, and thereby to discover Men, not to
Decree points of Faith.

2. Nor is it Ecclesiastic, but purely Civil, and pertaining to the State
only, whom it will judge safe to commit the Affairs of this Nation unto, and
into what Hands to entrust its Interests; and having by more than a hundred
years experience, deemed it not safe for a Protestant Nation to be overgrown by
a Papal Power, it has thus Resolved, and Enacted; not at that Time enquiring
after the Truth of the Things, concerned in the Test: but satisfied with the
Assurance, that a Roman Catholic (as he is called) will not assent to them, as
they are there laid. Which are here only taken notice of, as matters of State;
and their Doctrinal Truth it supposes elsewhere to have been sufficiently
Ascertained, as shall be afterward considered.

4. For indeed the Church of England has both in Convocation, in continual
printed manifestations of its sense, in daily preachings, and ministrations of
the Truth of the word of God, abundantly, and beyond all Controversy opened,
explained, and asserted concerning these things out of and according to
Scripture, so that not in a Humane Light, or Determination, but in the very
Beams of Scripture, and Divine Truth, which are plainly to be seen streaming
from the fountain of light the word of God, there is warranty enough without
any Invasion upon Christ's Kingdom, or the Rights of the Officers of it,
(supposing them what we can suppose rhem) for a Parliament safely to proceed as
it did; supported by as many Assurances, as it could desire; that if the Lips
of the Ministry of the Church of England preserved knowledge, and that the Law
was to be enquired at its mouth; the Resolution of that Church, in all those
cases, was sufficiently known, and no injury could be done to it.

5. Of this the presence of the Bishops in Parliament, not Remonstrating, nor
Protesting against this Law, his consenting (however the Author judges it to
their shame) are security enough: That they understood the Test-Law to be no
Invasion of the Rights of the Church, but according to the whole Doctrine and
Government of it, as by Law established.

For seeing, as has been before argued, every Body, nor Estate of Men in
Parliament knew so quick and feelingly for themselves, and specially such a
Body as the Episcopacy of a Nation; it can never be supposed they would, as by
a common Conspiracy, agree to betray their own Rights and Privileges, having
at hand always that freedom of entering their Protestations of Dissent. So that
although it is acknowledged, they sit in Parliament by the Grace of the King,
and by the Constitution of English Parliaments, and not by Power derived from
Christ, nor as a Convocation according to the Laws of England in that case; yet
it is always to be forethought that they sit with their Understandings, with
their Consciences, with their Senses, with their Sentiments of
Self-preservation about them: and that therefore they would not be Felones de
se, by consenting to the Destruction of their noblest Rights; and on account of
which, they are judged worthy to sit as an Estate, and to vote in Parliament,
viz. as Bishops of the Church of Jesus Christ.

6. But lastly, it can never be understood, but that according to the Bishops
own limitation, (if that be the Standard) of Church Power and Praerogative, or
his setting up another Power and Praerogative to mute it, the Parliament have
well done in this Test-Law.

For seeing the Civil Power may restrain the Exer^ise of Ecclesiastical
Praerogative, as they shall judge meet for the ends of Peace, and the Interest
of the Commonwealth, and may punish it too, at their own discretion, if it
shall at any time entrench upon the Prerogative of the State, and that it may
praevent or correct Abuses; who can determine, whether the States have not done
according to what they might and ought to do, in preventing and correcting
Abuses: For if they may prevent and correct Abuses, they must be able to judge
of them; they must determine when they ly, they must judge also of the best
means to prevent them. And what more liable to such judgment of Abuses, and to
undergo the best and most effectual methods of Praevention, than the things to
be declared against in the Test; as shall be manifestly proved in the following
Reason. And seeing that upon these very accounts it is notorious, that even in
this Nation Church Power and Prerogative has swollen beyond all bounds, and
entrenched with a vengeance upon the Power of the State, why then may not the
State continue the correction and punishment of it by After- Acts (seeing the
Bishop allows these punishments at their own discretion) and restrain and lock
down men? Certainly all the Avenues to such an Exercise and Notions again of
that Power, that they have found in all Ages so destructive to the Peace and
Interest of the Commonwealth.

And here I cannot but reflect upon the strange Irreconcileableness of the
Bishop's Church-Prerogative, and of the Civil Power, as he has stated it. For
that such a Seeing Judging Prerogative and Legislative Power, that can alter,
make Decrees concerning Divine Verities, should not know how to keep within its
own bounds, nor so to learn its Power, but that it must be restrained for the
Ends of Peace, and the Interest of the Commonwealth, and be punished too at
discretion for its aptness to praesume, and to entrench upon the Power of the
State; nay, and beyond all this, to be so extravagant, that its Abuses may have
need to be praevented and corrected.

Who can imagine, Jesus Christ should be so nearly concerned in such a
Prerogative and Legislative Power, as to be disowned, neglected, affronted, if
that he be Christ risen, and that the usurpation of it should lie so near
Sacrilege and Blasphemy, as that his Kingdom should be invaded, and Himself
deposed? and on such an account, that it should be such a Seeing and Holy
Catholic Church; and yet that this Civil Power that is supposed to know so
little in Divine Verities, may bind its hands, punish, praevent, correct its
Abuses. What must Christ, so closely importuned in it, suffer in the mean time?
What kind of Kingdom and Power is here allowed in the mean time? What Governor
would accept such a Power as this of Christ's? or how can the King of Kings,
Lord of Lords, Prince of the Kings of the Earth, be such an Underling?

Certainly this is is a precarious Power, with a witness: Surely in this state
of things, there must be a most profane pawning the Bishop indeed to the Lord,
or how can ever one Firmament bear two such Suns, or the Consciences of Man
ever be at rest between them both? or serve two such Masters? They must adhaere
to one, and despise the other; But since the Bishop must be Reverenced as a man
of Sense and Reason, certainly it cannot be the Roman Holy Catholic Church, that
may be thus treated by the Civil Power; nor is it any Protestant Civil Prince,
or State that has these Powers, but only a Caesar, or State of the Roman
Character, Image, and Superscription has this Power, and only on Protestant
Churches under their dominion.

And so I pass with the Fatigue of this confounding, perplexing Reason, and com
to the last but longest Reason, which I shall yet but in brief consider.

The fourth Reason for which the Test-Act ought to be repealed, is, because of
the uncertainty and falsehood of the matters contained in the Declaration it
self, as, First, That there is no Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of our
Savior's Body and Blood. And Secondly, That the Invocation of Saints, and of
the Mother of God, is Idolatry.


This reason so plainly divided by the Bishop into its two parts, that of
Transubstantiation, and that of Invocation of Saints, and of the Mother of God,
must be distinctly considered.

But before I proceed upon either of them, I must needs object, That this Test
is not fairly quoted, for in so great a concern every word ought to have its
due place, and no pretense of keeping the substance, will justify the
variation of an Iota from the very Letter, except my apprehension exceedingly
deceive me: the Sense is much more injured, than the Letter is varied: Indeed
the Author has been so fair, as to prefix the Text of the Act, that his unfair
Repetition may be convinced by it; but the unwary, or unthinking Reader, may
easily slide into Error by it, one being in the Title Page, where it may miss
being considered, the other in the body of the Book. Observe then the difference
betwixt the Text of the Test and the Bishop's Quotation; the Test runs thus: I
believe there is no, etc. The Bishop quotes as a proposition, There is no* etc.
It may be a much more uncertain proposition, and more liable to falsehood, to
asfirm, there is no Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of our Savior's Body
and Blood, than so say, I do believe, There is none; and so proportionably, I
believe, is to be supplied to the second member of the Declaration, viz. And I
believe, that the Invocation or Adoration of, etc.

Now although, I make no doubt, that every Christian ought to be fully assured
of the propositions themselves, to be declared in the Test; yet, plain and
downright Doctrinal Propositions are not the proper subjects of solemn sincere
Profession, Testification, and Declaration in the presence of God.

But such solemn sincere Professions, Testifications, and Declarations,
properly fall upon the belief of a man's mind; which he knows, and has
judgment of, as a rational man, because they are within him; for the Apostle
tells us, The spirit of a man knows the things that are within him. So that a
man's belief, that is within him, may be well declared and testified, even as
all matters of sense and of trust? and because they are within him* known only
to himself; There are therefore many just occasions to declare and testify it
to others: Of which the denial of lawful Authority, as a Qualification for
Places of Trust and Power, are justly to be accounted among the principal.

And this very observation, (as it is plain, and grounded on undeniable
evidence by a compute of the words of the Test, set down by the Bishop himself,
in the Title Page, and Fourth Reason, page 9.) does indeed make vain,
frivolous, and of no possible avail, or so much as significancie. All that
follows, as to the Test, which is the thing in quaestion, and under debate, and
brings it into this narrow compass, Whether persons so devoted to the Faith of
the Church of Rome, may for the ends of Peace, and the Interest of a Protestant
Commonwealth, be secluded from Power, and trust by the consent of the major
part of their own particular Bodies, and of each other Body, or Estate of the
Nation, and the Supreme Prince assenting, in so considerable and solemn an Act,
as an Act of Parliament must needs be; which has been already discoursed.

For which soever side of the Propositions should be true, yet still, what a man
within himself believes, he truly knows, and truly may declare and testify:
And the business of the Test is not to determine, as has been said, which part
of either of the Proposions is true; but what belief each person admitted to
Trust, and Power is of; that so the Nation, as Protestant, may consult its own
safety against the growth of Popery into a National strength and interest, and
further confirms all that has been said, That it is no Ecclesiastic Act, but a
pure perfect Magistratic Act, as the Administering an Oath in all other cases
concerning the Trust of matters of Faith is.

So that the affirming, that those two Propositions are by this Law to be
solemnly and sincerely in the Praesence of God, Protested, Testified and
Declared, is a downright unfaithfulness (not to say, out of reverence to the
Author, Falsehood) in the very sight of the Sun, in the sight, if I may so
speak, of the Frontispiece of the Book; which Title Page gives of necessity the
Lie to this Ninth page; and is enough to discredit, and to call into just
suspicion, the badness of the whole Cause, that is so insincerely handled by a
person of such a Character of Dignity, and Sacredness of Office, as a Christian
Bishop, who ought to do so much otherwise.

But this is not all the unfaithfulness of the Episcopal Author, in recounting
the Test, he is arguing against; for whereas the Declaration in the Act runs
thus: I believe, that in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, there is not any
Transubstantiation of the Elements of the Bread and Wine into the Body and
Blood of Christ, etc. The Bishop represents his Proposition thus: That there is
no Transubstantiation in the Sacraments of our Savior's Body and Blood. Now it
is easy for every person, that does but in the lest apply his mind to it, to
perceive, that the Test leaves it free to every person to frame any Mystical,
Spiritual, Analogical, Figurative sense in his own thoughts concerning
Transubstantiation; and which may sufficiently satisfy and exhaust the sense
of more than most words of the Greek Fathers import, for it is observabl, they
have no word strictly Greek, for Transubstantion. And only foreprize's that so
monstrous contradiction to all our Faculties, is the Transubstantiation of the
Elements into the Body and Blood of Christ.

And whereas the Test runs thus: And that the Invocation and Adoration of the
Virgin Marie, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are
now used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrouus. The Bishop
thus: That the Invocation of the Mother of God, and of Saints, is Idolatrous.
Leaving out Adoration, and as in the Church of Rome, and for Superstitious and
Idolatrous, putting in the word, is Idolatrous. But although greater exactness
in this Proposition, had been more becoming; yet, I must confess in my own
sense, the Amount is the same.

These things being thus adjusted, how empty of sound Sense and Reason must
that Tragical Harangue, that follows, be in; of the Monstrousness, and
Inhumaneness of the Barbarity, that could never have entered into the Thoughts
of any Man, but the Infamous Author, to oblige the whole Nobility of a Nation,
to swear to the Truth of such abstruse and uncertain Propositions, which they
neither Do, nor Can, nor Ought to understand; and this upon the Penalty of
forfeiting the Privileges of their Birthright.

Of the same Nature is, That which comes after, for what immediately follows, I
will be, as uncertain in, as the Argument it self is, as also in the two Famous
Burgesses of Oxon.

But those Words, ( viz. what is meant by Transubstantiation is altogether
unknown to the Nobility, and Gentry of the Nation, being only the Wars between
Schoolmen, who have quarrelled about nothing more, than the Notion of
Transubstantiation: And that therefore, it is more incapable to impose upon the
Nobility, and Gentry of the Nation, to Abjure a thing that is morally impossibl
for them to understand; and therefore it must be a profane Affront to Almighty
God in whose Presence they Swear, and shows men will Swear to any thing before
the Searcher of Hearts, rather than lose any Worldly interest) are to be cast
into the main Heap.

Together with all this, an Appeal is subjoined to the Honorable Members of
both Houses, whether they have any distinct Idea, or Notion in their minds,
about what they Renounce; and that if every man gave his own account of
Transubstantiation, it would be a Babel*

This is what is declaimed with relation to the first Proposition, on which
Fallacy the Historical Account of Transubstantiation, designed certainly on
purpose to amuse, for it does not add one Cubit to the Stature of the Argument,
above, and beyond what is here summed up.

Taking therefore the words of the Test, as they stand in the Test it self; I
will sum up the Answer in these two Heads.

I. That all the Abstruseness, Darkness, and difficulty in the Notion of
Transubstantiation, and this Bishop's amusing History of it, does not in the
lest prejudice the reasonableness of the Test, but make it more reasonable. II.
That the very Point of Transubstantiation is the most reasonabl of all others,
to settle the Test upon, and the more reasonable, because of the difficulty of
that Notion.
1. Let the first be considered with Relation to the most Unknowing, and
Uninquiring Men of all, who can be supposed to be concerned in the taking the
Test. And after the word made common English to them, which very ordinary use
does to most Men in the Nation, much more to any likely to be concerned,
whether they can sound the Word, or hammer the Notion or not, is not material;
For still, what is more easy then to declare their Belief according to their
Senses; and that the Bread and Wine that they see before the Words of
Consecration, and in which they are agreedly not mistaken, are the same Bread,
and Wine after Consecration. Who would be afraid to Declare, and Profess, they
Believe it so? and that it is unchanged, Vntransubstantiated into the Flesh,
and Blood of a Human Body. Let a Man be Unprejudiced, Unprepossess'd, and what
the least Shade of Doubt could fall upon him in this Matter? Call in Thousands
together, to observe the Progress from the beginning to the end of the
Celebration; And would they not consent upon Oath, that they fully believed
there was no such Transubstantiation? Let but their minds be free, undisturbed,
unperplex'd, and the whole world of Touch, of Taste, of Sight, of Smell, of
Hearing (so far as hearing can have interest in the trial) would be at perfect
agreement concerning it, their minds and understandings judging by the senses
alike in all.

Let such persons hear there are many Disputes, and much variety of Opinions
concerning it; and how little would it affect them, except with wonder at the
folly and madness of any difference?

And let them know, some of the wisest and most learned men in the World, are
of their Opinion, or rather of their Knowledge, by their senses, although there
are others of a contrary Opinion, men of Name too for Knowledge and Learning;
and it is easy to know whose minds they would be of, viz. of theirs whose
Learning and Senses go together.

Thus let the thing be brought within the Verge of Scripture-judgment, and upon
that so very controverted; This is my body, and discussed before the most plain
and inartificial apprehensions; and let the general manner of Scripture
expressing it self often in familiar Figures be laid before them: They would
easily conclude on the side of their Senses, and that Scripture intended no
violence on their Faith, against their Senses, on the side of so incredible a
change of the Elements into a Humane Body.

Nothing but the charms or enchantments rather of a false Religion, and the
Sorcery of it, which are the things to be discovered by the Test, the slavery
of an implicit Faith, (except under the terror of a severe Persecution, for a
contrary Persuasion) can endanger any man's falling into such an unaccountable,
wilful, professed blindness.

The Test therefore requires not only the easiest, most unperplexed Assent,
Belief, and Declaration, but that which all Mankind with violence runs into (if
not bewitched with Superstition) upon the lest motive of apprehension about the
matter.

2. If sense goes thus far with the plainest and most unthinking men, how much
more does Reason and rational Faith assure the thinking and intelligent? who
not only by Sense determine the Bread is Bread, and the Wine Wine; but know,
it can be no other, and the whole circle of Absurds, that crowd in upon the
change into the Body and Blood of Christ, that have been so often arang'd
against such a Figment, encompass them, that with highest reason and assurance,
they can declare their Belief, as the Law of the Test requires them to do.

Whatever then may be the various shapes this Proteus, or Camelion of
Transubstantiation has put on throughout the long History of the
Metamorphos'd Notion, whatever dress of Representation, the Eloquence of the
Fathers, the Canon of the Ecclesiastics, or the Difficiles Nugae or the vain
curiosities and subtilties of the Schoolmen have Attyr'd it in; the sincere
honest mind, and the intelligent Christian, leaving all the cramping
Difficulties of Transubstantiation to its Slaves, can declare freely with the
Test, There is not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine, in
the Lord's Supper, into the Body and Blood of Christ. Whatever spiritual
Communion there may be between Christ in his Death, and the true Believer, is
most humbly in the mean time owned and prayed for: which is the first thing
that was to be shown.

The second Head is, That the very point of Transubstantiation, is of all
others the most reasonable to settle the Test upon, and the more reasonable in
all regards, because of the so exceeding difficulty of the Notion.

1. What can a civil Power have greater indignation against, or be more willing
to settle upon, as an exclusive Test of all from places of Honor, Trust, and
Power; than the being Vassals to such an Imposture as destroys all the Truth
and Certainty that is in the World? Who can be believed upon Oath, (which the
Apostle says is the end of all strife) if there be no more credit to sense,
then that Bread may be a Humane Body, and Wine Blood, though it has all the
evidences to sense possible, it is what it judges it to be, and that is Bread?
And what more heed can be given to Reason, if its main Foundations can be thus
overturned, so that all the principles of Government, and humane Converse, are
overthrown? What may not such Bigots be screwed into, who leave themselves
naked of the defenses of Sense and Reason, at the Command of a tyrannic Church,
and Pope, and become mere Tools in such Hands? Who can concredit to them the
Interest of their Country, who couch down like Asses under such a Burden, and
especially for a Notion so dark and slippery, that no one knows where to have
it? And what would become of humane Commerce, if such Things multiplied?

2. Upon Transubstantiation, the Test-Act does most deservedly fall; because,
when the foundations of general Reason, and common Sense are laid, Religion,
and the Reason, and Honor of that, as it is National, comes next to be
considered? that it may bear up it self, and invite both the People of the
Nation, and even the Nations round about, to a just veneration of it: But
Transubstantiation being made the great, and most tremendous Mystery of the
Roman Religion, yet carries in the very judgment of sense, the Countenance,
mean, and appearance of the most notorious Cheat, and Juggle, that the Name of
Religion ever offered to the World; for there being a most contemptible, poor,
and low outside only, without the least of Power, or Puissance, or any the
thinnest resemblance of a Miracle; demands a Belief of the Highest, and most
constant Miracle, daily to be performed by the most Profligate oftentimes, and
most Ignorant of Mankind, and depending upon their Intention too, which may
defeat the Miracle. All this dishonours the very Name of Christian Religion,
and is so heavy, and intolerable a Gabel, Excise, and Tax upon the Religious
Sense of Mankind, as must needs eat out the whole Life, Power, and Reverence of
it. And therefore it is worthy the Notice, Prevention and Correction of so
grand an Assembly, as the King, the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons
of the Nation met in Parliament; and the Seclusion of all Persons from so sage
and awful a Convention, who are under so great a Slavery, as not to renounce
it: For as Moses testifies, The wife Laws of a Nation in Religion give it an
Estimation of a Wise, Great, and Honorable Nation. If therefore a Parliament
secures the Rights and Properties of the Nation, from any Impositions upon
their Estates, but with their own Consent: How justly may it do the same
against any Illegal Impositions upon their Faith?

And whereas this Transubstantitaion is attempted to be brought into Parallel,
and placed in the Rank of other great Mysteries of the Christian Religion, as
of the Blessed Father, Son, and Spirit, One God, of the Hypostatical Union, and
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, besides the Intrinsic difference of the one, and
of the other: There is this vast distance, That those Supreme Revelations are
Heavenly, Divine, retired in Meditation, Holy Rational Discourse, and Spiritual
Adorations. But this of Transubstantiation, while it does nothing, offers
nothing to Sense* to Reason, or so much as to Faith from Divine Revelation, but
by Gross Letter, a Figurative, Spiritual Proposition into condensating,
pressing, and incrassating, it pretends to a real Operation, or conversion of
Bread into the Body without any such thing. But yet, as if such a thing were
seen to be indeed done; Mercenary Priests play all the Tricks of Gesture,
Posture, Elevation, Geniculation, with the whole Train of Attendant Frauds, too
many to be mentioned, upon the Score of a dull coarse Cheat even in Handicraft,
and Legerdemain in Mechanics. All which Imposture is indeed, not only
Morally, but Naturally impossible ever to be understood.

3. It ought above all other Points in Popery, to be the Subject of a Test-Act,
because it has above all other Points of Popish Falsehood, been made the Test
of Vassalage and Slavery, and as it were that very Mark of the Beast joined
with the Idolatry of Adoration, and Image Worship; and of the Receiving his
Name, and Worshipping his Image, which all must receiv, or be killed; and none
must buy or sell, that the Psuedo Spiritual Excommunication may be pursued with
secular Anathema's upon all who will not bear this Cognizance of the Bestian
Usurpation. In short, This has been the central Point, from which, and into
which have Flowed all the Cruelties, Persecutions, Massacres, deluges of Blood
that have been poured out: Blood of Men, Women, and Children, Sacrificed at
this Altar, that have made it indeed an Altar of Blood, an Altar where real
Flesh and Blood have been Offered, and to say, The Bread and Wine have been so
Transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of Martyrs, were much nearer Truth.
Here have been the so-much unheard of Barbarities and Inhumanities, that would
make a History of Transubstantiation Truth, indeed, could it be had, worth the
having, to justify the Test, and such a one, that certainly could never upon
the Account of so blessed a Religion, and of a Sacrifice of such infinite
Grace, as that of Jesus Christ's Offering himself once for all for Mankind, have
entered into the Heart of any Man; were it not that such a very detestable
Bestial Power, that bears at this very time, and has long born a City, or
False Church, in which will be found the Blood of Prophets, and Apostles, and
that is Drunk with the Blood of Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus, is made
known unto us in the Revelation.

Now all this is matter of known History, and of evident Fact; How justly
therefore is Power, and Trust, endeavored to be surprised by a Protestant
Parliament, from such hands that dare not disown Principles so doub le dyed in
Blood, on the account of which such Butcheries, and Burnings of Men alive, have
been committed; that the so mis-stil'd Barbaritie and Inhumanitie of the
Test-Act compared herewith, is not only Mercy andHonor to the Persons
concerned, but a Monument of greatest Equity and Philanthropie or Love to
Humane Nature, to endeavor to extinguish out of the Nation the very Principles
of so much Bloud-Guiltiness, and Bloud-Thirst, of the greater heinousness,
because if the Bishop be to be credited in the Case, it was for not believing a
Transubstantiation, which it was Morally impossible for those Martyrs to know,
and such abstrusities which they neither did, nor could, nor indeed ought to
understand.

4. To press and force a litteral Sense upon the Holy Scriptures Free Familiar
Condescension to our Weakness, in expressing things of a high Spiritual Nature
in such Language, as we in Humane Bodies most easily take things into our minds
by, as in the Sacrament, the real Spiritual Union, and Communication of the
Value, Virtue, and Efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ Himself, and in the
Union of, and Communion, and Communication of his Spirit to us, is expressed by
eating his Body, and drinking his Blood: Now I say, to force, a litteral Sense
upon this, is such a piece of Rudeness, Barbaritie, and Ingratitude, that if
the same measure were meeted to all other parts of Scripture, would even in the
Judgment of those very Men, who are either Atheists or Bigots in this matter,
not only turn it into Horrible, and Abominable Burlesque, but even Martyr and
Murder those two Witnesses, as some have expounded them Rev. 11.
. To vindicate therefore, those Sacred Volumes, the Pandects of our most Holy
Religion, from having to do with so midnight, and Sphingian a Riddle, in so
plain, and merciful an Institution, so humble, and even Domestic (in a
spiritual Sense) as the Lord's Supper is; a Riddle, set on work to so much
Cruelty and Bloodshed, is worthy the Spirit of a truly Christian, and nobly
English Senate, and to set the danger of its return into use, at the utmost
impossibility, Humane Providence could attain, without the expectation of
Miracle.

For what is meant by Transubstantiation, the Bishop himself says, is
altogether unknown and uncertain, especially to the persons chiesly concerned,
viz. the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation; and which they neither do, can, nor
ought to know: What obligation can they then have to believe it, except with
such a blind Faith as all Religion and Reason abhors? However, if they have no
Faith concerning so fugitive a thing, that like a shadow, cannot be caught, or
like the Phantom of a Body that has no flesh and bones to be seen and felt, as
all Bodies have, and as Christ, as it were prophetically, exposed his Body to
the Experiment of, when it was really there, that no such Imposture concerning
it should be palm'd upon the World: I say, if the Nobility and Gentry have no
Faith of such a thing, why may they not profess and declare, they do not
believe it?

For the Bishop seems either not to be awake, or to dissemble a slumber, that
his Discourse of men's swearing to any thing, his Burlesque on the famous
Burgesses of Oxon, and his Appeal to the Honorable Members concerning their
Idea's of Transubstantiation, and the Babel thence arising, [the whole Notion
is indeed a Babalism, or pertaining to Babylon the Great] had been very good,
if the Test had required them to declare their belief of such a
Transubstantiation. But now his Arguments hunt counter, and impeach the Roman
Tyranny of horrid Murders upon persons, for not believing what they neither
do, can, nor ought to know, what they can so hardly pronounce the sound of,
much less hammer the sturdy sullen Notion it self: For who can know what there
is no knowledge of? But what more innocent than to declare, when lawfully
required, though before the Searcher of Hearts, a man does not believe what he
cannot nor ought to know, nor so much as anvil a Notion of? If it were never so
true, real, knowable, and worthy to be believed, any one might, without guilt,
(when justly demanded to do so) declare he did not believe it, while he knew it
not so as to find reason to believe it; it were double Hypocrisy to do
otherwise: and all the Bishop's arguing and storying, can never make it
otherwise. Indeed the whole recoyles upon himself, and dashes out the brains of
all he has writ upon it; which, sure, he crasly oversaw, or thought all his
Readers were such Fools as to be cozened with the gloss.

For if the infidelity were ever so culpable, it were a Duty, when adjur'd by
a Law to declare it; but how can the infidelity be blamed, when after the
Bishop's hunting down the Notion through the whole History of the
Controversy, He has preyed only upon a Ghost, missed of all comprehension,
and he pronounces the sum, and result of all to be what is meant by that
Transubstantiation is a thing altogether uncertain and unknown; and there is no
one thing in which Christendom more both agrees and differs; all Parties agree
in the Thing, and differ in the manner. Now it so happens, the Test was so
sagaciously composed, though it might lawfully have done much more, that it
modestly leaves the Thing free, and requires only to declare a Belief of such
Manner of Transubstantiation, as of the Elements of Bread and Wine, into the
Body and Blood of Christ; and requires the Declarers own Belief alone, and
nothing of censure upon any others Belief in this branch of the Test; which
surely any man may lawfully make, that makes it truly: and seeing the whole
Issue of the Notion is Skepticism, the Bishop himself being Judge, (and what can
the man do that comes after the ishop?) may not every man then say, (...), I do
not comprehend it, therefore I do not believe it.

Indeed if there were Revelation for it, like what there is concerning the
Father, Word, and Spirit, one God; concerning the Incarnation and Hypostatic
Union of the Eternal Word with Humane Nature, leaning not on figurative
expression, but plain assertion, wrought into all the discourse, and whole
Argument of Scripture, all Disputes were silenced.

But when there is no pretext of Revelation, but such a manner of speaking, as
if it were pressed alike into a literal sense, through the whole Book of God,
it must overthrow all Theology. To refuse then a Figure there where it is so
absolutely necessary, that else Christ must eat his own flesh, while it
remained entire before the Apostles, and drink his own blood, while it was
circulating in his Veins, and no amaze nor so much as question upon it, is such
a setting the Scripture to be broken upon the Wheel, such a Barbarity, as
exceeds a thousandfold all the Barbarities and Inhumanities spoken of
throughout the Bishop's whole Book: Especially when our Lord declares in a like
manner of speaking, and doubts upon it; His words were spirit and life, and the
flesh profited nothing. Why then should men bring the Scripture to the Engine,
to torture it into the confession of what (as God speaks) never came into his
heart?

And so I may fairly dismiss the Bishop's longsom History of
Transubstantiation, seeing the mouth of his Canon turns upon himself for what
he can; and what should a man be shie of in declaring his Non-belief of what is
against all the sense and reason of mankind, what has no ground in Revelation,
and what all the Wits and Subtilties the Canonists and Schoolmen, yea the very
Councils of the Roman Vassalage can, when set upon the utmost stretch, make
nothing of, but a mere Babel, if we may believe the Bishop, in what he
determines upon the whole search in favor of it. Not like Solomon's conclusion
of the matter into the whole of man, but like the conclusion of Babel, all was
Jargon, Nonsense, Confusion, and Rubbish; and worse than that, the conclusion
will be like that of Babylon the Great, a perpetual Desolation and Burning.

They therefore who have like Slaves bored their Ears to this spiritual
Egyptian slavery, and under the Plague of its Darkness to be even felt, how
just is it to disengage them from taking the Rights of their Prince and Country
into their trust, whether their contented Slavery rise from some weak part, or
a worse depravedness, which inclines their always bowed down Backs, and their
Eyes laden with slumber under such a monstrous Bigottism.

I come therefore to consider of the second Proposition, which, however it runs
in the Bishop's Text, is thus expressed in the Test: And that the Invocation or
Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are superstitious and
idolatrous.

In which, although I confess in my own Judgment, the very Extremity, as of
Sense, that the words can reach, are supported by the demerit of the things
Declared against: Yet, because it is a Test, publicly offered, the refusal of
which suspends so great an Interest, as all share in Government, as the Bishop
expresses it. It will not be unfit to observe all the Lenitives, that are by
the Prudence of the Composers, (whoever they were, it makes no matter)
contrived into it.

1. Therefore, I do believe is prefixed to the whole Test, by common Equity of
Construction to be supplied. I do believe the first Proposition, That in the
Sacrament, etc. And in the second, I do believe, that the Invocation, etc. Now
it is Evident, a Man may Swear to his own Belief, if he knows he does really so
Believe, although he be mistaken in the grounds of his Belief, because it is
only matter of Fact within himself.

2. There is a Limitation, As these things are used, and now used in the Church
of Rome, whether by express Command, or by Approbation, or Connivence; so that
the very grossness and stupidity of the most Dull and Ignorant, who stick in
the very thick Matter, and are able to extricate themselves, as the finer Wits
pretend to do, are to be taken into that Usage, and that most Meritoriously,
seeing if the Church of Rome leads such unwary, and unapprehensive Persons in
Obedience to it, to the very brink of the Precipice into so deep, and impure a
Mud, and that so unnecessarily; it is to be changed with the Vsages, as in it
self.

And then those words of the Test, As it is now used; signifies the first
beginnings of these things were not so fresh, as now they are arrived to be.

3. In that, the word Superstitious is first set, as the lesser, and most
undoubted, and then not the downright full-out word Idolatry, but Idolatrous.
It takes off the full Blow of the Censures, for Idolatry imports a great
danger, suspicion, and nearness to Idolatry, but not absolute Idolatry it self.
And this the Bishop ought in all candid dealing to have taken Notice of, and to
have allowed the Caution, with which the Test is worded; for the Stabbing, and
Cutthroat word Idolatry is not used, and so the Piquancy of that his remark
false.

But letting slip all things that do not enter into the substance of the
matter, it is first to be observed, that absolutely and in earnest, all that
dreadful Representation of the punishment of Idolatry in this World, is
disowned by all sober Christians: and those rigid Laws, or any such Zelotic
Spirit of Elias, as among the Jews on the account of Idolatry, are reversed
under the milder temper, and more moderate climate of Christian Religion, and
the compassionate Spirit of it, as repeated by our Savior expressly in those
words to the Disciples, that were for demanding Fire from Heaven upon the
Samaritans, Luke 9.54. To which our Lord rejoyned, Ye know not what spirit ye
are of: the Son of man came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them* We
disown all such torrid Enthusiasm wherever it is found, upon this Authority,
and such Ravagings upon the Lives of men merely for their (notwithstanding so
great) delusions in so plain a point of Divine Worship, are not so much as
thought of in the Test: Cruelties and inhumanities of that kind, are left as
the proper Inheritance of the Idolatrous, who indeed cut Throats, and cause
innocent Persons to pass through the Fire alive, in the rage of their
Moloch-Sacrafice: And I am fully persuaded the principal end of the Test-Act
was to secure the Lives and Fortunes of a Protestant Nation from the fury and
blood-thirstiness of that name of Religion, by which it is as much known (as
the Scarlet and Purple it is arraied in) and that in the History of some Ages
past, and so cannot but be still suspected.

The prevention indeed of such, the public practice of those Superstitions and
Idolatrousnesses, is worthy the care of a Protestant Magistracy to prevent, and
to take care the Contagion may not spread, much less that a Protestant Kingdom
should come under the Girdle of its Ministerial Government, (although with all
Loyalty, it owns their Sovereign, according to the Christian Law, and of the
Nation) and then for to set such Bounds to it, as may most indemnifie it self.

But for the securities of Divine Justice upon Idolatry, whenever they com to
be manifested; they will be just, and bring their conviction along with them;
which may be speedier than men are aware, the Measure of Iniquity growing now
full, as of more then one God, is Idolatry, so of more than one Mediator is a
Parallel Idolatry. And as letting fall any glances of Respect upon any
Creature, Person, or Thing, Angel, or Diamon, Sun, Moon, or Stars, or the
inferior Creatures, as partial Gods conveying the Benifits of the Supreme God
to us, is foul Idolatry: so any partial or inferior Mediators, are alike
Idolatry, under the Gospel. And as the making to our selves any likeness either
in Heaven above, or the Earth beneath, etc. as a Medium to Worship God by: so
the making to our selves any likeness of the Mediator; (For though we had known
him after the flesh, yet (says the Apostle) we know him so no more.) are alike
Idolatrous. How certainly then are the Invocations of the Virgin, of Saints
Idolatrous, as giving them a share of the incommunicable Mercy, Omnisciency,
Omnipresence, seeing they are not visible to us, we cannot speak with them at
certain times or places, we know them not, we know not they know us; there are
no kinds of Communion between us; a Vail of thick Darkness is spread betwixt
us, which nothing but Infinity can pierce. The Infinity of the Father, the
Infinity of the Mediator, God-man: Men indeed whom we see, whom we converse
with, to whom we can make our selves and our condition known, we are allowed by
God to Address, to give and receive mutual Religious Respects, and of Civility
and Kindness, according to the Stations of Honor and Subordination we stand in
one to another.

But how both Senseless, and Idolatrous, would it be with hope of good to pray
to any Person upon Earth, at great, or even at the smallest distance one from
another, where no Communication passes by Word, Messages, and Letters, as in
our private Closets, and Thoughts; this were to make them, as God Omniscient,
Omnipresent. And to pray to Saints or Angels, as Mediators, is Idolatry
committed against the Mediator, as if he had not that whole Sum of Mediatorial
Mercy, Grace, Privileges in himself. How certainly then are their Invocations
continually used at Rome, not only Superstitious, but Idolatrous: And indeed
all Superstition is Idolatry, against the Second Commandment; Devising an
Image, a Likeness to go to God by them.

How certainly are those abundance of Images, Pictures, Statues,
Representations, used at Rome: Their Incensing, Bowing, Kneeling, uncovering
the Head, to Images and Pictures, used at Rome, Idolatrous? For even Job's
Mouth kissing his Hand, was an Indication sufficient of an enticed Heart. Their
Elevation, Adoration, Geniflexian, given to the Bread, as the Body of Christ,
are of the same guilt, seeing Christ was never Worshipped Bodily on Earth, when
his Apostles were daily with him, but in the Emanations of his Divinity, how
much more (now we are to know him no more after the flesh) therefore are we not
to Worship him Bodily, not in an Imaginary Transubstantiation of the Elements)
into Flesh: Does not he abhor such a Worship?

For whatever we do in pretense of Worship to God and Christ, that is not
either the pure Issues of that Law of the Mind, or of the Natural Conscience it
self, or is revealed to us in his Word: The Worship (call it how you will,
Dulia, or an inferior Worship) not so warranted, passes before God for no
other, but Superstition and Idolatry. Even the Worship of the Man Christ Jesus
only, as united to the Eternal Word, is justified by Divine Revelation: so
tender and severe a thing is the Worship of the Holy Jealous God, who as he is
separated from all Creatures in his Purity and Perfection, so in his Worship,
and tne manner of his Worship appointed only by himself. And so Holy, Holy,
Holy, and infinitely separate from all Creatures is IEHOVATH the Mediator, with
whom none can be named; even as none can know but by the Revelation of the
Father. All Worship therefore given to Creature-Mediators, all Worship given to
him not according to his Word, is but Superstitious and Idolatrous in his
Account.

How near therefore is it to the Blasphemy, of which the Author confesses,
Idolatry is a principal instance; when he speaks of the Cherubins being
worshipped; who indeed, had by God's immediate Command, a Place of Attendance,
by the Mercy-Seat: this Type of Christ, over which God filling the Tabernacle,
and so the Temple after with his Glory, that none could enter, and so only gave
a remaining Symbol of his Presence there; but likewise of God to be seen; but
the People are warned over and over, to take notice they saw no Likeness or
Similitude of God; nor is there the least shadow of any direction of Worship to
those Cherubins; but to that God, who was pleased to promise his Presence
there, where his Glory had appeared, in Christ the propitiation; so that by
pure spiritual Acts, they might pray toward that place, called by his Name,
without any profaning God by sense: From which he is always in an infinite
retirement, for sense is the Foundation of Idolatry. And agreeably what was in
the Holy of Holies, not being seen, was a warning to retire all into a
spirituality, and a sense of the incomprehensibleness of God, the enjoyment of
him being in pure spirituality.

And as false it is, that the Scripture speaks only of the Idolatry of
Worshipping the Heavenly Body.

For from the heights above, to what is most below, the changing of the Glory
of the incorruptible God, with any corruptile Image, or the Worship directed by
the Mediation of any Image, is Abomination to him, as in numberless places of
Scripture (besides the Second Commandment) particularly Duet. 4.16. Romans 1.23.
For that I can hardly believe my eyes in reading the Bishop's Definition of
Idolatry, and so it is as to the Redeemer, or one Mediator, who is not to be
worshipped, by any Image of his Humanity, nor by so despicable a Thing as
Bread, which he made only the Element of a spiritual Communication of himself,
as a most familiar Emblem, without the least design of Worship to it, most
abhorred by him.

Most false it is, therefore, that there is no Idolatry if Men do not worship
Images of false Gods, or make corporeal Images of his divine Nature: For
Angels, tho his Servants, and Saints departed, become false Gods, and Names of
Blasphemy, when worshipped with any sort of Worship, as the Apocaliptick Angel
testifies, chap. 21. v. 22. and the Host so worshipped, is the Symbol of a
false God, as turned into a Likeness, and Image, before the jealous God, and
Mediator, who will have all pure Spirituality in the Worship of them.

And yet in the mean time, I must acknowledge that the Bishop has rightly
observed concerning that Idolatry, which he is willing to allow to be Idolatry,
viz. the Worship of the heavenly Bodies (and I am sure it will follow of all
other Idolatry, that it is to be proportionably admeasur'd to) It is an
iniquity to be punished by a Judge, viz. By the Civil Magistrate. And this
determination concerning Idolatry, is recorded in that admirable Book of
Natural Religion, the Book of Job. Now the Laws of Natural Religion are
irreversible, and unchangeable; so that were it not that in the great
degeneracie of humane Nature, the generality of the Nations of the World were
early drenched, and even plunged in this great evil, Natures Laws had always so
prevailed: Whereas, alas, too too soon that Government grew to weak too
establish it self; and were that Government, the Government of the Law, written
in Man's Heart restored, it must proceed with all Efficacy to the extirpating
this Evil; and where it was so much restored, as among the Jews, and enforced
with further Positive and Ceremonial Sharpness of Laws, the Rigors on Offenders
were so great, as the Bishop has Recounted: But yet the mercy of the Gospel,
and of Christian Religion, is such, that although in Governments able and equal
for it, there ought to be no abatement of Severity against the Sin it self, yet
there is by Christ, a Relaxation, as to Persons Lives, where the most guilty
Circumstances of Presumption, Obstinacy, Danger of bad Example, do not inflame
the Account of the Evil: All means of Conversion and Reformation being first
used; which is a great justification of the lawfulness, and necessity of the
Test, in a Protestant Government. Nevertheless, the generality of the Sin, has
been at no time too big for Divine Vengeance; but that it has appeared from
Heaven upon Idolatrous Powers, and Nations, when he saw good; And the time is
approaching, when a better State of the renewed World growing on, will, by
degrees, but with signal Vials powered out upon the whole Race of Idolaters and
their Idolatries, make way for the perfection of that Renovation, and such a
thing as Idolatry will not in one single example be endured. For Satan, that
old Serpent, that has deceived the Nations into it so long, will be sealed up
into his own Abyss at the same time. But this has been by way of Digression.

It is time to return now to the just Remarks, that are to be made upon the
Bishop's Discourse upon Idolatry; so contrived, as to lead the Unthinking, yea,
the not closely observant Reader, thorough a Variety of Matter, far off from
suspecting the Roman Worship of Idolatries, where yet Scripture-Prophesie has
settled it upon its own Base, in that Land that is Spiritually called Shinar,
or Mystical Babylon: His Discourse, indeed, is blended sometimes with better,
that it may convey more Artificially the intollerably bad, sometimes with
things doubtful and uncertain, that the notoriously False may hope to skulk
among them.

I cannot, according to the brevity I have resolved, retail to the Reader, so
ambagious, or tedious an Account of Idolatry. There are two things among his
own Notions, that if he had taken his Measures by, they would have steerd him
much better, viz. First, The observation of the Great Care God took by all his
Dealings with his People, Descendants from Abraham, to secure them by the
Mosaic Mediatorship in the acknowledgment of the One God, Creator of Heaven
and Earth, the Universal and most Natural Standard against Idolatry, together
with those particular assurances of himself to them; by his Covenant with
Abraham, by bringing them out of the Land of Egypt, speaking to them out of the
Cloud, and Fire on Mount Sinai, by his filling the Tabernacle with his Glory,
which is especially to be remarked, both in Moses's Tabernacle, and Solomon's
Temple, as being the true Reason of the Worship toward the Holy of Holies. And
Secondly, the observation of the Sabbath, as a peculiar Commemoration of the
Creation, as also of the further Manifestation of the same true God, Creator of
Heaven and Earth, who was so particularly the God of Abraham's Posterity.

Had these two Observations, together with the Types, which the Episcopal
Author, with Dr. Spencer, and other Learned men, not without Reason, make
Fences between Israel and the Idolatrous Nations, and their Idolatries; or, as
the Apostle calls it, Partition Wall; these would have led to the One Mediator
Jesus Christ, Who is that very Propitiation and Mercy-Seat, of which, that in
the Holy of Holies was but the Type, and for which Type sake the Shecinah, or
Glory once came, and sat in its filling the Temple; as between the Cherubims,
or Attendant Angels, Simbolycally Represented in an Adoring Posture, stooping
down, and prying upon the Mercy-Seat, as that Type of Christ, as the Apostle
Peter alludes, 1 Pet. 1.12. Worshipping; but the Spirits, whom they resemble,
would have abhorred to be Worshipped; As he most injuriously to Truth, would
bear his Readers in hand, if they would be deceived by him.

Now, as Redemption parallell's Creation; so the One Mediator, the One God; as
our Lord himself teaches. This is Life Eternal, to know Thee the only true
God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, and so the Apostle tells us: There
are Gods many, and Lords many in the World, Counterfeits of the One God, and
One Mediator. As the Heathenish Gods, and Baalim, or Daimons, who were esteemed
a middle Region of Gods, or Mediators* But to us, says he, There is but One
God, the Father of Whom are all things, and we in, or for, or unto him; and One
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. So to Timothy, There
is One God, and One Mediator, between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, which
one God is now known to us, as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which Title drinks up, as the Antitype does the Type of the former Titles, of
the God of Abraham, etc. of the God that brought from Egypt, that sits between
the Cherubins: that Title, indeed, of Creator, Lord of Heaven and Earth, is not
in the least ececlips'd, but shines together upon, and with, and in the
Redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ.

And as a Testimony and standing Plea of all this* the Sabbath of Creation, is
removed from the Seventh, into an Union with the First Day, the Sabbath of
Redemption, or Lord's Day.

Thus there is, as the Apostle John speaks, the true God, and eternal Life, in
the very mention of which, as foreseeing the great Antichristian Idolatry
coming upon the Christian World in other Mediators, (the same thing with other
Gods) he makes the Conclusion and Farewell of his Epistle, little Children, keep
your selves from Idols: and seal's it with a passionate, Amen.

Now this One God, and this one Mediator, we are to worship, and only to know,
and only to serve, all introducing other Mediators, either of Man, or of other
Creatures, as in honor to God, to worship Him, or Jesus Christ by them, joined
with some Ceremonies of a Service, as Kneeling, Bowing, Incensing, Invoking,
etc. is Idolatrous.

And now to draw the whole matter of Idolatry to a conclusion; I confess, it
seems necessary, that whoever takes the Test, being, as the Bishop truly
observes, of the Alloy of an Oath, it is necessary he should take it in
Judgment, as well as in Righteousness, and in Truth.

That any one may so do it, he must carry about him a Gauge, or certain Notion
of Idolatry, and some general knowledge of the Usages of Rome, as to the
Invocation of the Virgin, of Saints, the adoration of them in their Images,
with the Sacrifice of the Mass; which by a little enquiry will be easily known,
if it can be at all unknown to any Persons, who can be supposed to have
possible obligation to take the Test: For the Roman Church does not hide its
Sin; but carries the Title on its Forehead, the Title its Idolatrous
Fornications; and its Papal Prince carries his Names of Blasphemy, Idolatry, on
her Heads; and it is to be earnestly prayed, these things may not be more
vulgerly known among us, against which the Test is one great security.

To give then in the second place, a very short, and portable Gauge of
Idolatry, I should choose to do it best, by all I have said; as encas'd, or
ench^s'd, in the very words, Superstition and Idolatry, truly explained. The
first of which imports any religious Act* either to Persons dead, as if they
were now alive, and conversant with us, though above, as the Virgin Mary, or
Saints departed or else and (as may most agree) Super Statutum, above the Rule
and Law of all religious Actions, viz. the very Law and Light of Nature,
teaching us natural Religion, which consists only in the Religion of the Mind,
and expressed only in the most necessary Rational Latria, or Service of our
Bodies; or else which best explains all Religion to us: The Word of God;
seeing, there we find nothing of such Invocation, or Adoration, so much as in
any dark Line of either of these Laws; but much written, as with a Sunbeam
against them, who even knows, and believes the Word of God, may boldly call the
usages of Rome superstitious.

And as to Idolatry, it is the Service to an Apparition of a God, to our dark
and foolish Imagination, for the One God, that made Heaven, and Earth; or the
Apparition of a Mediator, besides Jesus Christ, the One Mediator, who redeemed
us by his Death: Both which are against the first Commandment, for Idolatry is
a worship of any thing whatever that is believed to be God, and Christ, from
the highest Heavens to the lowestCentre, by any Image, or sensible
Representation, (as against the second Commandment.)

Now he may be sure of this Idolatry, whoever considers the Romish Church,
(falsely so called) the spiritual Babylon, the City made of graven Images; so
certainly that headed Babylon, that in the days of John's receiving the
Revelation, reigned over the Kings of the Earth, and was then (five of its
Governments so notorious in History, being fallen, or gone off from their
Principality) under its sixth King, the Heathen Emperor; and for a little space
under the Christian Emperor its seventh King, but no Head, and has been under
its eighth King, that was of those seven Kings, who were ever Heads, ever since
the expiration of Augustulus's Line, the late Emperor, An. Dom. 475.

For till Rome be utterly destroyed, and sink like a Millstone into the Sea*
That eighth King, the Beast, or Pope* shall not be utterly destroyed; but Rome,
and its eighth King* shall fall within few years, from its Ten-king'd
Principalities*

All which may be thus demonstrated, the Bounds of the Prophesies stand eminent
and unmovable, even to demonstration, viz. the Heathen Empire therein being at
one end, and the final ruin of Rome at the other; in the middle just as the
short lived Christian Empire expiring, run forty two prophetic Months, or Times
of the Moon, amounting to 1222 prophetic years, which accounted from 475, must
end 1697.

Now this Rome, and its so called Church, is Mysteries of Idolatries* and the
Pope its Balam, or High Priest, or Prophet carrying it, and so described in the
Revelation, and the thing there Prophesied, so fulfilled in all Eyes, and Ears,
in the Blasphemies of God, and of all that dwell in Heaven, by these
Idolatries; that then can be no hazard, if there was liberty to demonstrate the
thing, as it may be demonstrated: It would put Transubstantiation, the Worship
of the Virgin, of Saints, and the Adoration of the Mass, and its Sacrifice out
of all Dispute, although the things may be otherwise set, enough beyond
Controversy, yet not so suddenly or surely, as by this Prophecy is well
explained.

In the mean time, to say all in a word, I cannot but make great doubt, whether
the Bishop with so great pretense, and yet such thin Sophisms in the room of
Reason, and with those Unepiscopal, Unchristian, Ungentile, as well as highly
Senseless Reflections upon a Person of so great Learning, Gravity and Piety in
the eyes of the whole Nation, (as Dr. St.) did indeed design any more, than to
Ridicule what he would seem to Favor, things so False, so Fallacious, so
Inconclusive, could never else have been so laid together, and to carry, as it
were a fresh Remembrance. At the last he concludes his Book under a transparent
Tiffany, with a downright Falsehood, viz. As if the not taking the Test, did
wrap up the Refusers in a Conviction of Recusancy; to which purpose he foist's
in a part of the Test-Act, leaving out what would have convicted him of
senseless Fraudulency: For he well knows, not the Refusal of the Test, but the
Refusal, and yet invading Offices contrary to the Test, brings any one under
that Conviction: Whether therefore he was in earnest, or in a Sathanic
Fanaticism, when he writ all this, I much doubt; but if he were, indeed, in
earnest, he deserves the Character of the weakest of Men, in a disguise of a
Man of Parts and Learning; if not, of the most infidelious and dishonest
Sophister in the Lawn of a Protestant Bishop.

But without any railing Accusation against him, or any such, I pray as I
begun, the Lord rebuke them.

DRA. LOCNIL.

FINIS.

