A SECOND LETTER CONCERNING TOLERATION.

LICENSED, June 24. 1690.

LONDON: Printed for Awnsham and John Churchill, at the Black Swan in
Ave-Mary-Lane, near Paternoster Row. M DC XC.

TO THE AUTHOR OF THE Argument of the Letter concerning Toleraration, briefly
considered and answered.
SIR,
YOU will pardon me if I take the same Liberty with you, that you have done
with the Author of the Letter concerning Toleration; to consider your
Arguments, and endeavor to show you the Mistakes of them. For since you have
so plainly yielded up the Question to him, and do own that the Severities he
would dissuade Christians from, are utterly unapt, Page 12, 13, 14.
and improper to bring Men to embrace that Truth which must save them; I am not
without some hopes to prevail with you, to do that your self, which you say is
the only justifiable Aim of Men differing about Religion, even in the use of
the severest Methods: viz. Carefully and impartially to weigh the whole matter,
and thereby to remove that Prejudice which makes you yet favor some Remains of
Persecution: Promising my self that so ingenious a Person will either be
convinced by the Truth which appears so very clear and evident to me; or else
confess, that, were either you or I in Authority, we should very unreasonably
and very unjustly use any Force upon the other which differed from him, upon
any pretense of want of Examination. And if Force be not to be used in your
case or mine, because unreasonable, or unjust; you will, I hope, think fit that
it should be forborne in all others, where it will be equally unjust and
unreasonable; as I doubt not but to make it appear it will unavoidably be,
where ever you will go about to punish Men for want of Consideration. For the
true way to try such Speculations as these, is to see how they will prove when
they are reduced into Practice.

The first thing you seem startled at, in the Author's Letter, is the largeness
of the Toleration he proposes: And you think it strange that he would not have
so much as a Pagan, Mahumetan, Page 1.
or Jew, excluded from the Civil Rights of the Commonwealth, because of his
Religion. We pray every day for their Conversion, and I think it our Duty so to
do: But it will, I fear, hardly be believed that we pray in earnest, if we
exclude them from the other ordinary and probable means of Conversion; either
by driving them from, or persecuting them when they are amongst us. Force, you
allow, is improper to convert Men to any Religion. Toleration is but the
removing that Force. So that why those should not be tolerated as well as
others, if you wish their Conversion, I do not see. But you say, it seems hard
Page 2.
to conceive how the Author of that Letter should think to do any Service to
Religion in general, or to the Christian Religion, by recommending and
persuading such a Toleration. For how much soever it may tend to the
Advancement of Trade and Commerce, (which some seem to place above all other
Considerations) I see no reason, from any Experiment that has been made, to
expect that true Religion would be a gainer by it; that it would be either the
better preserved, the more widely propagated, or rendered any whit the more
fruitful in the Lives of its Professors by it. Before I come to your Doubt it
self, Whether true Religion would be a gainer by such a Toleration; give me
leave to take notice, that if, by other Considerations, you mean any thing but
Religion, your Parenthesis is wholly besides the matter; and that if you do not
know that the Author of the Letter places the Advancement of Trade above
Religion, your Insinuation is very uncharitable. But I go on.

You see no reason, you say, from any Experiment that has been made, to expect
that true Religion would be a gainer by it. True Religion and Christian
Religion are, I suppose, to you and me, the same thing. But of this you have an
Experiment in its first appearance in the World, and several hundreds of Years
after. It was then better preserved, more widely propagated (in proportion) and
rendered more fruitful in the Lives of its Professors, than ever since; tho
then Jews and Pagans were tolerated, and more than tolerated, by the
Governments of those places where it grew up. I hope you do not imagine the
Christian Religion has lost a^ of its first Beauty, Force, or Reasonableness,
by having been ^most 2000 Years in the World; that you should fear it should be
less able now to shift for it self, without the help of Force. I doubt not but
you look upon it still to be the Po^er and Wisdom of God for our Salvation; and
therefore cannot suspect it less capable to prevail now, by its own Truth and
Light, than it did in the first Ages of the Church, when poor contemptible Men,
without Authority, or the countenance of Authority, had alone the care of it.
This, as I take it, has been made use of by Christians generally, and by some
of our Church in particular, as an Argument for the Truth of the Christian
Religion; that it grew and spread, and prevailed, without any Aid from Force,
or the Assistance of the Powers in being. And if it be a mark of the true
Religion, that it will prevail by its own Light and Strength; (but that false
Religions will not, but have need of Force and foreign Helps to support them)
nothing certainly can be more for the advantage of true Religion, than to take
away Compulsion every where. And therefore it is no more hard to conceive how
the Author of the Letter should think to do Service to Religion in general, or
to the Christian Religion, than it is hard to conceive that he should think
there is a true Religion, and that the Christian Religion is it; which its
Professors have always owned not to need Force, and have urged that as a good
Argument to prove the truth of it. The Inventions of Men in Religion need the
Force and Helps of Men to support them. A Religion that is of God wants not the
Assistance of Human Authority to make it prevail. I guess, when this dropped
from you, you had narrow'd your Thoughts to your own Age and Country: But if
you will enlarge them a little beyond the Consines of England, I do not doubt
but you will easily imagine that if in Italy, Spain, Portugal, etc. the
Inquisition; and in France their Dragooning; and in other parts those
Severities that are used to keep or force Men to the National Religion, were
taken away; and instead thereof the Toleration proposed by the Author were set
up, the true Religion, would be a gainer by it.

The Author of the Letter says, Truth will do well enough, if Page 49.
she were once left to shift for her self. She seldom has received, and he
fears never will receive much Assistance from the Power of great Men, to whom
she is but rarely known, and more rarely welcome. Errors indeed prevail, by the
Assistance of Foreign and borrowed Succors. Truth makes way into our
Understanding by her own Light, and is but the weaker for any borrowed Force
that Violence can add to her. These words of his (how hard soever they may seem
to you) may help you to conceive how he should think to do Service to True
Religion, by recommending and persuading such a Toleration as he proposed. And
now, pray tell me your self, whether you do not think True Religion would be a
gainer by it, if such a Toleration established there, would permit the Doctrine
of the Church of England to be freely preached, and its Worship set up, in any
Popish, Mahumetan, or Pagan Country? If you do not, you have a very ill Opinion
of the Religion of the Church of England, and must own that it can only be
propagated and supported by Force. If you think it would gain in those
Countries, by such a Toleration, you are then of the Author's Mind, and do not
find it so hard to conceive how the recommending such a Toleration might do
Service to that which you think True Religion. But if you allow such a
Toleration useful to Truth in other Countries, you must find something very
peculiar in the Air, that must make it less useful to Truth in England. And
'twill savor of much partiality, and be too absurd, I fear, for you to own,
that Toleration will be advantageous to True Religion all the World over,
except only in this Island; Though, I much suspect, this, as absurd as it is,
lies at the bottom; And you build all you say upon this lurking Supposition,
that the National Religion now in England, backed by the Public Authority of
the Law, is the only True Religion, and therefore no other is to be tolerated.
Which being a Supposition equally unavoidable, and equally just, in other
Countries, (unless we can imagine that every where but in England Men believe
what at the same time they think to be a Lie) will in other Places exclude
Toleration, and thereby hinder Truth from the means of propagating it self.

What the Fruits of Toleration are, which in the next words you complain do
remain still among us, and which you say give no Encouragement to hope for any
Advantages from it; what Fruits, I say, these are, or whether they are owing to
the want or wideness of Toleration among us, we shall then be able to judge,
when you tell us what they are. In the mean time, I will boldly say, that if
the Magistrates will severely and impartially set themselves against Vice, in
whomsoever it is found; and leave Men to their own Consciences, in their
Articles of Faith, and Ways of Worship; True Religion will be spread wider, and
be more fruitful in the Lives of its Professors, than ever hitherto it has
been, by the imposition of Creeds and Ceremonies.

You tell us, that no Man can fail of sinding the Way of Salvation, Page 7.
who seeks it as he ought. I wonder you had not taken notice, in the places you
quote for this, how we are directed there to the right way of seeking. The
words ( John vii. 17.) are; If any Man will do his Will, he shall know of the
Doctrine whether it be of God. And, Psalm XXV. 9, 12, 14. which are also quoted
by you, tell us, The Meek will he guide in Judgment, and the Meek will he teach
his Way. What Man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the Way
that he shall choose. The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he
will show them his Covenant. So that these places, if they prove what you cite
them for, that no Man can fail of finding the Way of Salvation, who seeks it as
he ought; they do also prove that a good Life is the only way to seek as we
ought; and that therefore the Ma istrates, if they would put Men upon seeking
the way of Salvation as they ought, should, by their Laws and Penalties, force
them to a good Life; A good Conversation being the readiest and surest way to a
right Understanding. Punishments and Severities thus applied, we are sure, are
both practicable, just, and useful. How Punishments will prove in the way you
contend for, we shall see when we come to consider it.

Having given us these broad Marks of your Good Will to Toleration, you tell
us, It Is not your Design to argue against it, but Page 3.
only to enquire what our Author offers for the proof of his Assertion. And
then you give us this Scheme of his Argument.

1. There is but one Way of Salvation, or but one True Religion.

2. No Man can be saved by this Religion, who does not believe it to be the
True Religion.

3. This Belief is to be wrought in Men by Reason and Argument, not by outward
Force and Compulsion.

4. Therefore all such Force is utterly of no use for the promoting True
Religion, and the Salvation of Souls.

5. And therefore no Body can have any Right to use any Force or Compulsion,
for the bringing Men to the True Religion.

And you tell us, the whole strength of what that Letter urged for the Purpose
of it, lies in this Argument; Which I think you have no more reason to say,
than if you should tell us, that only one Beam of a House had any strength in
it, when there are several others that would support the Building, were that
gone.

The purpose of the Letter is plainly to desend Toleration, exempt from all
Force; especially Civil Force, or the Force of the Magistrate. Now if it be a
true Consequence, that Men must be tolerated, if Magistrates have no Commission
or Authority to punish them for Matters of Religion; then the only strength of
that Letter lies not in the unfitness of Force to convince Men's Understanding.
Vid. Let. p. 7.

Again; If it be true that Magistrates being as liable to Error as the rest of
Mankind, their using of Force in Matters of Religion, would not at all advance
the Salvation of Mankind, (allowing that even Force could work upon them, and
Magistrates had Authority to use it in Religion) then the Argument you mention
is not the only one, in that Letter, of strength to prove the Necessity of
Toleration. V. Let. P. 8. For the Argument of the unsitness of Force to
convince Men's Minds being quite taken away, either of the other would be a
strong proof for Toleration. But let us consider the Argument as you have put
it.

The two first Propositions, you say, you agree to. As to the Third, Page 4.
you grant that Force is very improper to be used to induce the Mind to assent
to any Truth. But yet you deny that Force is utterly useless for the promoting
True Religion, and the Salvation of Men's Souls; which you call the Author's 4th
Proposition: But indeed that is not the Author's 4th Proposition, or any
Proposition of his, to be sound in the Pages you quote, or any where else in
the whole Letter, either in those terms, or in the sense you take it. In the
8th Page, which you quote, the Author is showing that the Magistrate has no
Power, that is not Right, to make use of Force in Matters of Religion, for the
Salvation of Men's Souls. And the reason he gives for it there, is, because
force has no efficacy, to convince Men's Minds; and that without a full
persuasion of the Mind, the Profession of the true Religion it self is not
acceptable to God. Upon this ground, says he, I affirm that the Magistrate's
Power extends not to the establishing any Articles of Faith, or Forms of
Worship, by the force of his Laws. For Laws are of no force at all without
Penalties; and Penalties in this case are absolutely impertinent, because they
are not proper to convince the Mind. And so again, Page 27. which is the other
place you quote, the Author says; What soever may be doubted in Religion, yet
this at least is certain; that no Religion which I believe not to be true, can
be either true, or profitable unto me. In vain therefore do Princes compel
their Subjects to come into their Church Communion, under the pretense of
saving their Souls. And more to this purpose. But in neither of those Passages,
nor any where else, that I remember, does the Author say that it is impossible
that Force should any way, at any time, upon any Person, by any Accident, be
useful toward the promoting of true Religion, and the Salvation of Souls; for
that is it which you mean by utterly of no use. He does not deny that there is
any thing which God in his Goodness does not, or may not, sometimes, graciously
make use of, toward the Salvation of Men's Souls (as our Savior did of Clay
and Spittle to cure Blindness) and that so, Force also may be sometimes useful.
But that which he denies, and you grant, is that Force has any proper Efficacy
to enlighten the Understanding, or produce Belief. And from thence he infers,
that therefore the Magistrate cannot lawfully compel Men in matters of
Religion. This is what the Author says, and what I imagine will always hold
true, whatever you or any one can say or think to the contrary.

That which you say is, Force indirectly and at a distance may do Page 5.
some Service. What you mean by doing Service at a distance, toward the
bringing Men to Salvation, or to embrace the Truth, I confess I do not
understand; unless perhaps it be what others, in propriety of Speech, call by
Accident. But be it what it will, it is such a Service as cannot be ascribed to
the direct and proper Efficacy of Force. And so, say you, Force, indirectly,
and at a distance, may do some Service. I grant it: Make your best of it. What
do you conclude from thence, to your purpose? That therefore the Magistrate may
make use of it? That I deny. That such an indirect, and at a distance
Usefulness, will authorize the Civil Power in the use of it, that will never be
proved. Loss of Estate and Dignities may make a proud Man humble: Sufferings
and Imprisonment may make a wild and debauched Man sober: And fo these things
may indirectly, and at a distance, be serviceable toward the Salvation of Men's
Souls. I doubt not but God has made some, or all of these, the occasions of
good to many Men. But will you therefore infer, that the Magistrate may take
away a Man's Honor, or Estate, or Liberty, for the Salvation of his Soul; or
torment him in this, that he may be happy in the other World? What is otherwise
unlawful in it self (as it certainly is to punish a Man without a fault) can
never be made lawful by some Good that, indirectly and at a distance, or if you
please, indirectly and by accident, may follow from it. Running a Man through
may save his Life, as it has done by chance, opening a lurking Imposthume. But
will you say therefore that this is lawful, justifiable Surgery? The
Galleys, it is like, might reduce many a vain, loose Protestant, to Repentance,
Sobriety of Thought, and a true sense of Religion: And the Torments they
suffered in the late Persecution, might make several consider the Pains of
Hell, and put a due estimate of Vanity and Contempt on all things of this
World. But will you say, because those Punishments might, indirectly and at a
distance, serve to the Salvation of Men's Souls, that therefore the King of
France had Right and Authority to make use of them? If your indirect and at a
distance Serviceableness may authorize the Magistrate to use Force in Religion,
all the Cruelties used by the Heathens against Christians, by Papists against
Protestants, and all the persecuting of Christians one amongst another, are all
justifiable.

But what if I should tell you now of other Effects, contrary Effects, that
Punishments in matters of Religion may produce; and so may serve to keep Men
from the Truth and from Salvation? What then will become of your indirect, and
at Page 5.
a distance Usefulness? For in all Pleas for any thing because of its
usefulness, it is not enough to say as you do (and is the utmost that can be
said for it) that it may be serviceable: But it must be considered not only
what it may, but what it is likely to produce: And the greater Good or Harm
like to come from it, ought to determine of the use of it. To show you what
Effects one may expect from Force, of what usefulness it is to bring Men to
embrace the Truth, be pleased to read what you your self have writ. I cannot
but remark, say you, that these Page 13.
Methods ( viz. depriving Men of their Estates, Corporal Punishments, starving
and tormenting them in Prisons, and in the end even taking away their Lives, to
make them Christians) are so very improper in respect to the Design of them,
that they usually produce the quite contrary Effect. For whereas all the use
which Force can have for the advancing true Religion, and the Salvation of
Souls, is (as has already been showed) by disposing Men to submit to
Instruction, and to give a fair hearing to the Reasons which are offered for
the enlightening their Minds and discovering the Truth to them; These Cruelties
have the Misfortune to be commonly looked upon as so just a Prejudice against
any Religion that uses them, as makes it needless to look any further into it;
and to tempt Men to reject it, as both false and detestable, without ever
vouchsafing to consider the rational Grounds and Motives of it. This Effect
they seldom fail to work upon the Sufferers of them. And as to the Spectators,
if they be not beforehand well instructed in those Grounds and Motives, they
will be much tempted likewise, not only to entertain the same Opinion of such a
Religion, but withal to judge much more favorably of that of the Sufferers;
who, they will be apt to think, would not expose themselves to such
Extremities, which they might avoid by compliance, if they were not thoroughly
satisfied of the Justice of their Cause. Here then you allow that taking away
Men's Estates or Liberty, and Corporal Punishments, are apt to drive away both
Sufferers and Spectators, from the Religion that makes use of them, rather than
to it. And so these you renounce. Now if you give up Punishments of a Man, in
his Person, Liberty, and Estate, I think we need not stand with you, for any
other Punishments may be made use of. But, by what follows, it seems you
shelter your self under the name of Severities. For moderate Punishments, as
you call them in another place, you think may be serviceable; indirectly, and
at a distance serviceable, to bring Men to the Truth. And I say, any sort of
Punishments disproportioned to the Offense, or where there is no fault at all,
will always be Severity, unjustifiable Severity, and will be thought so by the
Sufferers and Bystanders; and so will usually produce the Effects you have
mentioned, contrary to the Design they are used for. Not to profess the
National Faith, whilst one believes it not to be true; not to enter into
Church Communion with the Magistrate, as long as one judges the Doctrine there
professed to be erroneous, or the Worship not such as God has either
prescribed, or will accept; this you allow, and all the World with you must
allow, not to be a fault. But yet you would have Men punished for not being of
the National Religion; that is, as you your self confess, for no fault at all.
Whether this be not Severity, nay so open and avowed Injustice, that Page 14.
it will give Men a just Prejudice against the Religion that uses it, and
produce all those ill Effects you there mention, I leave you to consider. So
that the name of Severities in opposition to the moderate Punishments' you
speak for, can do you no Service at all. For where there is no Fault, there can
be no moderate Punishment: All Punishment is immoderate, where there is no
Fault to be punished. But of your moderate Punishment we shall have occasion to
speak more in another place. It suffices here to have shown, that, whatever
Punishments you use, they are as likely to drive Men from the Religion that
uses them, as to bring them to the Truth; and much more likely; as we shall see
before we have done: And so, by your own Confession, they are not to be used.

One thing in this Passage of the Author, it seems, appears absurd to you; that
he should say, That to take away Men's Lives, to make them Christians, was but
an ill way of expressing a Design of their Salvation. I grant there is great
Absurdity some where in the case. But it is in the Practice of those who,
persecuting Men under a pretense of bringing them to Salvation, suffer the
Temper of their Good Will to betray it self, in taking away their Lives. And
whatever Absurdities there be in this way of proceeding, there is none in the
Author's way of expressing it; as you would more plainly have seen, if you had
looked into the Latin Original, where the words are Vita denique ipsa privant,
ut fideles, ut salvi siant (Page 5.) which tho more literally, might be thus
rendered, To bring them to the Faith and to Salvation; yet the Translator is
not to be blamed, if he chose to express the Sense of the Author, in words that
very lively represented the extreme Absurdity they are guilty of, who under
pretense of Zeal for the Salvation of Souls, proceed to the taking away their
Lives. An Example whereof we have in a neighboring Country, where the Prince
declares he will have all his Dissenting Subjects saved, and pursuant thereunto
has taken away the Lives of many of them. For thither at last Persecution must
come: As I fear, notwithstanding your talk of moderate Punishments, you your
self intimate in these words; Not that I think the Sword is to be used in this
Page 23.
business, (as I have sufficiently declared already) but because all coactive
Power resolves at last into the Sword; since all (I do not say, that will not
be reformed in this matter by lesser Penalties, but) that refuse to submit to
lesser Penalties, must at last fall under the stroke of it. In which words, if
you mean any thing to the busines^ in hand, you seem to have a reserve for
greater Punishments, when lesser are not sufficient to bring Men to be
convinced. But let that pass.

You say, If Force be us^d, not instead of Reason and Arguments, Page 5.
that is, not to convince by its own proper Efficacy, which it cannot do, etc.
I think those who make Laws, and use Force, to bring Men to Church-Conformity
in Religion, seek only the Compliance, but concern themselves not for the
Conviction of those they punish; and so never use Force to convince. For, pray
tell me; When any Dissenter conforms, and enters into the Church Communion, is
he ever examined to see whether he does it upon Reason, and Conviction, and
such Grounds as would become a Christian concerned for Religion? If Persecution
(as is pretended) were for the Salvation of Men's Souls, this would be done; and
Men not driven to take the Sacrament to keep their Places, or to obtain
Licenses to sell Ale, (for so low have these holy Things been prostituted) who
perhaps knew nothing of its Institution; and considered no other use of it but
the securing some poor secular Advantage, which without taking of it they
should have lost. So that this Exception of yours, of the use of Force, instead
of Arguments, to convince Men, I think is needless; those who use it, not being
(that ever I heard) concerned that Men should be convinced.

But you go on in telling us your way of using Force, only to Page 5.
bring Men to consider those Reasons and Arguments, which are proper and
sufficient to convince them; but which, without being forced, they would not
consider. And, say you, Who can deny but that, indirectly, and at a distance,
it does some Service, toward bringing Men to embrace that Truth, which either
through Negligence they would never acquaint themselves with, or through
Prejudice they would reject and condemn unheard? Whether this way of Punishment
is like to increase, or remove Prejudice, we have already seen. And what that
Truth is, which you can positively say, any Man, without being forced by
Punishment, would through carelessness never acquaint himself with, I desire you
to name. Some are called at the third, some at the ninth, and some at the
eleventh hour. And whenever they are called, they embrace all the Truth
necessary to Salvation. But these slips may be forgiven, amongst so many gross
and palpable Mistakes, as appear to me all through your Discourse. For Example:
You tell us that Force used to bring Men to consider, does indirectly, and at a
distance, some Service. Here now you walk in the dark, and endeavor to cover
your self with Obscurity, by omitting two necessary parts. As, first, who must
use this Force: which, tho you tell us not here, yet by other parts of your
Treatise it is plain you mean the Magistrate. And, secondly, you omit to say
upon whom it must be used; who it is must be punished: And those, if you say
any thing to your purpose, must be Dissenters from the National Religion, those
who come not into Church Communion with the Magistrate. And then your
Proposition in fair plain terms will stand thus. If the Magistrate punish
Dissenters, only to bring them to consider those Reasons and Arguments which
are proper to convince them; who can deny but that indirectly, and at distance,
it may do Service, etc. toward bringing Men to embrace that Truth which
otherwise they would never be acquainted with? etc. In which Proposition, 1.
There is something impracticable. 2. Something unjust. And, 3. Whatever
Efficacy there is in Force (your way applied) to bring Men to consider and be
convinced, it makes against you.

1. It is impracticable to punish Dissenters, as Dissenters, only to make them
consider. For if you punish them as Dissenters (as certainly you do, if you
punish them alone, and them all without exception) you punish them for not
being of the National Religion. And to punish a Man for not being of the
National Religion, is not to punish him only to make him consider; unless not
to be of the National Religion, and not to consider, be the same thing. But you
will say the design is only to make Dissenters consider; and therefore they may
be punished only to make them consider. To this I reply; It is impossible you
should punish one with a design only to make him consider, whom you punish for
something else besides want of Consideration; or if you punish him whether he
consider or no; as you do, if you lay Penalties on Dissenters in general. If
you should make a Law to punish all Stammerers; could any one believe you, if
you said it was designed only to make them leave Swearing? Would not every one
see it was impossible that punishment should be only against Swweating, when
all Stammerers were under the penalty? Such a proposal as this, is in it self,
at first sight, monstrously absurd. But you must thank your self for it. For to
lay penalties upon Stammerers, only to make them not swear, is not more absurd
and impossible than it is to lay Penalties upon Dissenters only to make them
consider.

2. To punish Men out of the Communion of the National Church, to make them
consider, is unjust. Tlsey are punished because out of the National Church: And
they are out of the National Church, because they are not yet convinced. Their
standing out therefore in this State, whilst they are not convinced, not
satisfied in their Minds, is no Fault; and therefore cannot justly be punished.
But your method is, Punish them, to make them consider such Reasons and
Arguments as are proper to convince them. Which is just such Justice, as it
would be for the Magistrate to punish you for not being a Cartesian, only to
bring you to consider such Reasons and Arguments as are proper and sufficient
to convince you: When it is possible, 1. That you being satisfied of the truth
of your own Opinion in Philosophy, did not judge it worth while to consider that
of Des Carts. 2. It is possible you are not able to consider, and examine, all
the Proofs and Grounds upon which he endeavors to establish his Philosophy. 3.
Possibly you have examined, and can sind no Reasons and Arguments proper and
sufficient to convince you.

3. What ever indirect Efficacy there be in Force, applied by the Magistrate
your way, it makes against you. Force used by the Magistrate to bring Men to
consider those Reasons and Arguments, which are proper and sufficient to
convince them, but which without being forced they would not consider; may, say
you, be serviceable indirectly, and at a distance, to make Men embrace the
Truth which must save them. And thus, say I, it may be serviceable to bring Men
to receive and embrace Falsehood, which will destroy them. So that Force and
Punishment, by your own confession, not being able directly, by its proper
Efficacy, to do Men any good, in reference to their future Estate; though it be
sure directly to do them harm, in reference to their present condition here;
and indirectly, and in your way of applying it, being proper to do at least as
much harm as good; I desire to know what the Usefulness is which so much
recommends it, even to a degree that you pretend it needful and necessary. Had
you some new untried Chemical Preparation, that was as proper to kill as to
save an infirm Man, (of whose Life I hope you would not be more tender than of
a weak Brother's Soul) would you give it your Child, or try it upon your
Friend, or recommend it to the World for its rare Usefulness? I deal very
favorably with you, when I say as proper to kill as to save. For Force, in
your indirect way, of the Magistrates applying it to make Men consider those
Ar^uments that otherwise they would not; to make them lend an Ear to those who
tell them they have mistaken their Way, and offer to show them the right; I say
in this Way, Force is much more proper, and likely, to make Men receive and
embrace Error than the Truth.

1. Because Men out of the right Way are as apt, I think I may say apter, to
use Force, than others. For Truth, I mean the Truth of the Gospel, which is
that of the True Religion, is mild, and gentle, and meek, and apter to use
Prayers and Entreaties, than Force, to gain a hearing.

2. Because the Magistrates of the World, or the Civil Sovereigns (as you think
it more proper to call them) being Page 16.
few of them in the right Way; (not one of ten, take which side you will)
perhaps you will grant not one of an hundred, being of the True Religion; it is
likely your indirect way of using of Force would do an hundred, or at least ten
times as much harm as good: Especially if you consider, that as the Magistrate
will certainly use it to force Men to hearken to the proper Ministers of his
Religion, let it be what it will; so you having set no Time, nor bounds, to
this consideration of Arguments and Reasons, short of being convinced; you,
under another pretense, put into the Magistrate's Hands as much Power to sorce
Men to his Religion, as any the openest Persecutors can pretend to. For what
difference, I beseech you, between punishing you to bring you to Mass; and
punishing you to bring you to consider those Reasons and Arguments which are
proper and sufficient to convince you that you ought to go to Mass? For till
you are brought to consider Reasons and Arguments proper and sufficient to
convince you; that is, till you are convinced; you are punished on. If you
reply, you meant Reasons and Arguments proper and sufficient to convince them
of the Truth. I answer, if you meant so, why did you not say so? But if you
had, it would in this case do you little service. For the Mass, in France, is
as much supposed the Truth, as the Liturgy here. And your way of applying Force
will as much promote Popery in France, as Protestantism in England. And so you
see how serviceable it is to make Men receive and embrace the Truth that must
save them.

However you tell us, in the same Page, that if Force so applied, Page 5.
as is above mentioned, may in such sort as has been said, i. e. Indirectly,
and at a distance, be serviceable to bring Men to receive and embrace Truth,
you think it sufficient to show the usefulness of it in Religion. Where I shall
observe, 1st. That this Usefulness amounts to no more but this, That it is not
impossible but that it may be useful. And such a Usefulness one cannot deny to
Auricular Confession, doing of Penance, going of a Pilgrimage to some Saint,
and what not. Yet our Church does not think sit to use them: though it cannot
be denied but they may have some of your indirect, and at a distance
usefulness; that is, perhaps may do some service, indirectly, and by accident.

2. Force your way applied, as it may be useful, so also it may be useless.
For, 1st, Where the Law punishes Di^enters, without telling them it is to make
them consider, they may through ignorance and oversight neglect to do it, and
so your Force proves useless. 2. Some Dissenters may have considered already,
and then Force employed upon them must needs be useless; unless you can think
it useful to punish a Man to make him do that which he has done already. 3. God
has not directed it: and therefore we have no reason to expect he should make
it successful.

3. It may be hurtful: nay it is likely to prove more hurtful than useful. 1st.
Because to punish Men for that, which it is visible cannot be known whether they
have performed or no, is so palpable an Injustice, that it is likelier to give
them an aversion to the Persons and Religion that uses it, than to bring them
to it. 2ly. Because the greatest part of Mankind being not able to discern
betwixt Truth and Falsehood, that depend upon long and many Proofs, and remote
Consequences; nor have ability enough to discover the salse Grounds, and resist
the captious and fallacious Arguments of Learned Men versed in Controversies;
are so much more exposed, by the Force which is used to make them hearken to
the Information and Instruction of Men appointed to it by the Magistrate, or
those of his Religion, to be led into Falsehood and Error, than they are likely
this way to be brought to embrace the Truth that must save them; by how much
the National Religions of the World are, beyond comparison, more of them False
or Erroneous, than such as have God for their Author, and Truth for their
Standard. And that seeking and examining, without the special Grace of God,
will not secure even knowing and learned Men from Error. We have a famous
instance in the two Reynold's (both Scholars, and Brothers, but one a
Protestant, the other a Papist) who upon the exchange of Papers between them,
were both turned; but so that neither of them, with all the Arguments he could
use, could bring his Brother back to the Religion which he himself had found
Reason to embrace. Here was Ability to examine and judge, beyond the ordinary
rate of most Men. Yet one of these Brothers was so caught by the sophistry and
skill of the other, that he was brought into Error, from which he could never
again be extricated. This we must unavoidably conclude; unless we can think,
that wherein they differed, they were both in the right; or that Truth can be
an Argument to support a Falsehood; both which are impossible. And now, I pray,
which of these two Brothers would you have punished, to make him bethink
himself, and bring him back to the Truth? For it is certain some ill-grounded
Cause of assent alienated one of them from it. If you will examine your
Principles, you will find that, according to your Rule, The Papist must be
punished in England, and the Protestant in Italy. So that, in effect, (by your
Rule) Passion, Humor, Prejudice, Lust, Impressions of Education, Admiration of
Persons, Worldly Respect, and the like incompetent Motives, must always be
supposed on that side on which the Magistrate is not.

I have taken the Pains here, in a short recapitulation, to give you the view
of the Usefulness of Force, your way applied, which you make such a noise with,
and lay so much stress on. Whereby I doubt not but it is visible, that its
Usefulness and Uselessness laid in the Balance against each other, the
pretended Usefulness is so far from outweighing, that it can neither encourage
nor excuse the using of Punishments; which are not lawful to be used in our
case without strong probability of Success. But when to its Uselesness Mischief
is added, and it is evident that more, much more, harm may be expected from it
than good, your own Argument returns upon you. For if it be reasonable to use
it, because it may be serviceable to promote true Religion, and the Salvation
of Souls; it is much more reasonable to let it alone, if it may be more
serviceable to the promoting Falsehood, and the Perdition of Souls. And
therefore you will do well hereafter not to build so much on the Usefulness of
Force, applied your way, your indirect and at a distance Usefulness, which
amounts but to the shadow and possibility of Usefulness, but with an
over-balancing weight of Mischief and Harm annexed to it. For upon a just
estimate, this indirect, and at a distance, Usefulness can directly go for
nothing; or rather less than nothing.

But suppose Force, applied your way, were as useful for the promoting true
Religion, as I suppose I have showed it to be the contrary; it does not from
thence follow that it is lawful, and may be used. It may be very useful in a
Parish that has no Teacher, or as bad as none, that a Layman who wanted not
Abilities for it (for such we may suppose to be) should sometimes preach to
them the Doctrine of the Gospel, and stir them up to the Duties of a good Life.
And yet this, (which cannot be denied may be at least indirectly, and at a
distance, serviceable toward the promoting true Religion and the Salvation of
Souls) you will not (I imagine) allow, for this Usefulness, to be lawful: And
that, because he has not Commission and Authority to do it. The same might be
said of the Administration of the Sacraments, and any other Function of the
Priestly Office. This is just our Case. Granting Force, as you say, indirectly,
and at a distance, useful to the Salvation of Men's Souls; yet it does not
therefore follow that it is lawful for the Magistrate to use it: Because, as
the Author says, the Magistrate has no Commission or Authority to do so. For
however you have put it thus, (as you have framed the Author's Argument) Force
is utterly of no use for the promoting of true Religion, and the Salvation of
Souls; and therefore no body can have any right to use any Force or Compulsion
for the bringing Men to the true Religion; yet the Author does not, in those
Pages you quote, make the latter of these Propositions an Inference barely from
the former; but makes use of it as a Truth proved by several Arguments he had
before brought to that purpose. For tho it be a good Argument; it is not
useful, therefore not fit to be used: yet this will not be good Logic; it is
useful, therefore any one has a right to use it. For if the Usefulness makes it
lawful, it makes it lawful in any hands that can so apply it; and so private
Men may use it.

Who can deny, say you, but that Force indirectly, and at a distance, may do
some Service toward the bringing Men to embrace that Truth, which otherwise
they would never acquaint themselves with. If this be good arguing in you, for
the usefulness of Force toward the saving of Men's Souls; give me leave to
argue after the same fashion. 1. I will suppose, which you will not deny me,
that as there are many who take up their Religion upon wrong Grounds, to the
indangering of their Souls; so there are many that abandon themselves to the
heat of their Lusts, to the indangering of their Souls. 2dly, I will suppose,
that as Force applied your way is apt to make the Inconsiderate consider, so
Force applied another way is as apt to make the Lascivious chaste. The Argument
then, in your form, will stand thus: Who can deny but that Force, indirectly,
and at a distance, may, by Castration, do some Service toward bringing Men to
embrace that Chastity, which otherwise they would never acquaint themselves
with. Thus, you see, Castration may, indirectly, and at a distance, be
serviceable toward the Salvation of Men's Souls. But will you say, from such an
usefulness as this, because it may indirectly, and at a distance, conduce to
the saving of any of his Subjects Souls, that therefore the Magistrate has a
right to do it, and may by Force make his Subjects Eunuchs for the Kingdom of
Heaven? It is not for the Magistrate, or any body else, upon an Imagination of
its Usefulness, to make use of any other means for the Salvation of Men's Souls
than what the Author and Finisher of our Faith has directed. You may be
mistaken in what you think useful. Dives thought, and so perhaps should you and
I too, if not better informed by the Scriptures, that it would b^ useful to
rouse and awaken Men if one should come to them from the Dead. But he was
mistaken. And we are told that if Men will not hearken to Moses and the
Prophets, the means appointed, neither will the Strangeness nor Terror of one
coming from the Dead persuade them. If what we are apt to think useful were
thence to be concluded so, we should (I fear) be obliged to believe the
Miracles pretended to by the Church of Rome. For Miracles, we know, were once
useful for the promoting true Religion, and the Salvation of Souls; which is
more than you can say for your Political Punishments: But yet we must conclude
that God thinks them not useful now; unless we will say (that which without
Impiety cannot be said) that the Wise and Benign Disposer and Governor of all
things does not now use all useful means for promoting his own Honor in the
World, and the Good of Souls. I think this Consequence will hold, as well as
what you draw in near the same words.

Let us not therefore be more wise than our Maker, in that stupendous and
supernatural Work of our Salvation. The Scripture, that reveals it to us,
contains all that we can know, or do, in order to it: and where that is silent,
it is in us Presumption to direct. When you can show any Commission in
Scripture, for the use of Force, to compel Men to hear, any more than to
embrace the Doctrine of others that differ from them, we shall have reason to
submit to it, and the Magistrate have some ground to set up this new way of
Persecution. But till then, 'twill be sit for us to obey that Precept of the
Gospel, which bids us take heed what we hear. So that hearing is not always
Mark 4.24.
so useful as you suppose. If it had, we should never have had so direct a
Caution against it. It Is not any imaginary Usefulness, you can suppose, which
can make that a punishable Crime, which the Magistrate was never authorized to
meddle with. Go and teach all Nations, was a Commission of our Savior's: But
there was not added to it, Punish those that will not hear and consider what
you say. No, but if they will not receive you, shake off the Dust of your Feet;
leave them, and apply your selves to some others. And St. Paul knew no other
means to make Men hear, but the preaching of the Gospel; as will appear to any
one who will read Romans the 10th, 14, etc. Faith comes by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of God.

You go on, and in favor of your beloved Force, you tell Page 6.
us that it is not only useful but needful. And here, after having at large, in
the four following Pages, set out the Negligence or Aversion, or other
hindrances that keep Men from examining, with that application and freedom of
Judgment they should, the Grounds upon which they take up and persist in their
Religion, you come to conclude Force necessary. Your words are: If Men are
generally averse to a due Consideration of things, where Page 10.
they are most concerned to use it; if they usually take up their Religion
without examining it as they ought, and then grow so opinionative and so stiff
in their Prejudice, that neither the gentlest Admonitions, nor the most earnest
Entreaties, shall ever prevail with them afterward to do it; what means is
there left (besides the Grace of God) to reduce those of them that are got into
a wrong Way, but to lay Thorns and Briars in it? That since they are deaf to
all Persuasions, the uneasiness they meet with may at least put them to a
stand, and incline them to lend an Ear to those who tell them they have
mistaken their way, and offer to show them the right way. What means is there
left, say you, but Force. What to do? To reduce Men, who are out of it, into
the right way. So you tell us here. And to that, I say, there is other means
besides Force; that which was appointed and made use of from the beginning, the
Preaching of the Gospel.

But, say you, to make them hear, to make them consider, to make them examine,
there is no other means but Punishment; and therefore it is necessary.

I answer. 1st, What if God, for Reasons best known to himself, would not have
Men compelled to hear; but thought the good Tidings of Salvation, and the
Proposals of Life and Death, Means and Inducements enough to make them hear,
and consider, now as well as heretofore? Then your Means, your Punishments, are
not necessary. What if God would have Men left to their freedom in this Point,
if they will hear, or if they will forbear, will you constrain them? Thus we
are sure he did with his own People: And this when they were in Captivity:
Ezekiel. 11.5, 7.
And it is very like were ill treated for being of a different Religion from the
National, and so were punished as Dissenters. Yet then God expected not that
those Punishments should force them to hearken, more than at other times: As
appears by Ezekiel. 3.11. And this also is the Method of the Gospel. We are
Ambassadors for Christ; as if God did beseech by us, we pray in Christ's stead,
says St. Paul, 2 Cor. v. 20. If God had thought it necessary to have Men
punished to make them give Ear, he could have called Magistrates to be
Spreaders and Ministers of the Gospel, as well as poor Fishermen, or Paul a
Persecutor, who yet wanted not Power to punish where Punishment was necessary,
as is evident in Ananias and Sapphira, and the incestuous Corinthian.

2ly. What if God, foreseeing this Force would be in the hands of Men as
passionate, as humoursome, as liable to Prejudice and Error as the rest of
their Brethren, did not think it a proper Means to bring Men into the Right Way?

3ly. What if there be other Means? Then yours ceases to be necessary, upon the
account that there is no means left. For you your self allow, That the Grace of
God is another means. And I suppose you will not deny it to be both a proper
and sufficient Means; and, which is more, the only Means; such Means as can
work by it self, and without which all the Force in the World can do nothing.
God alone can open the Ear that it may hear, and open the Heart that it may
understand: and this he does in his own good Time, and to whom he is graciously
pleased; but not according to the Will and Fancy of Man, when he thinks sit,
by Punishments, to compel his Brethren. If God has pronounced against any
Person or People, what he did against the Jews, ( Isa. 6.10.) Make the Heart of
this People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; lest they see
with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts,
and convert, and be healed: Will all the Force you can use, be a Means to make
them hear and understand, and be converted?

But, Sir, to return your Argument; You see no other Means left (taking the
World as we now find it) to make Men thoroughly and impartially examine a
Religion, which they embraced upon such Inducements as ought to have no sway at
all in the Matter, and with little or no examination of the proper Grounds of
it. And thence you conclude the use of Force, by the Magistrate, upon
Dissenters, necessary. And, I say, I see no other Means left (taking the World
as we now find it, wherein the Magistrates never lay Penalties, for Matters of
Religion, upon those of his own Church, nor is it to be expected they ever
should;) to make Men of the National Church, any where, thoroughly and
impartially examine a Religion, which they embraced upon such Inducements, as
ought to have no sway at all in the Matter, and therefore with little or no
examination of the proper Grounds of it. And therefore, I conclude the use of
Force by Dissent^rs upon Conformists necessary. I appeal to the World, whether
this be not as just and natural a Conclusion as yours. Though, if you will have
my Opinion, I think the more genuine Consequence is, that Force, to make Men
examine Matters of Religion, is not necessary at all. But you may take which of
these Consequences you please. Both of them, I am sure, you cannot avoid. It is
not for you and me, out of an imagination that they may be useful, or are
necessary, to prescribe means in the great and mysterious Work of Salvation,
other than what God himself has directed. God has appointed Force as useful and
necessary, and therefore it is to be used; is a way of Arguing, becoming the
Ignorance and Humility of poor Creatures. But I think Force useful or
necessary, and therefore it is to be used; has, methinks, a little too much
presumption in it. You ask, What Means else is there left? None, say I, to be
used by Man, but what God himself has directed in the Scriptures, wherein are
contained all the Means and Methods of Salvation. Faith is the Gift of God. And
we are not to use any other Means to procure this Gift to any one, but what God
himself has prescribed. If he has there appointed that any should be forced to
hear those who tell them they have mistaken their way, and offer to show them
the right; and that they should be punished by the Magistrate if they did not;
'twill be past doubt, it is to be made use of. But till that can be done,
'twill be in vain to say what other Means is there left. If all the Means God
has appointed, to make Men hear and consider, be Exhortation in Season and out
of Season, etc. together with Prayer for them, and the Example of Meekness and
a good Life; this is all ought to be done, Whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear.

By these means the Gospel at first made it self to be heard through a great
part of the World; and in a crooked and perverse Generation, led away by Lusts,
Humors, and Prejudice, (as well as this you complain of) prevailed with Men to
hear and embrace the Truth, and take care of their own Souls; without the
assistance of any such Force of the Magistrate, which you now think needful.
But whatever Neglect or Aversion there is in some Men, impartially and
thoroughly to be instructed; there will upon a due Examination (I fear) be found
no less a Neglect and Aversion in others, impartially and thoroughly to instruct
them. It Is not the talking even general Truths in plain and clear Language;
much less a Man's own Fancies in Scholastic or uncommon ways of speaking, an
hour or two, once a week, in public; that is enough to instruct even willing
Hearers in the way of Salvation, and the Grounds of their Religion. They are
not Politic Discourses which are the means of right Information in the
Foundations of Religion. For with such, (sometimes venting Antimonarchical
Principles, sometimes again preaching up nothing but absolute Monarchy and
Passive Obedience, as the one or other have been in vogue and the way to
Preferment) have our Churches rung in their turns, so loudly, that Reasons and
Arguments proper and sufficient to convince Men of the Truth in the
controverted Points of Religion, and to direct them in the right way to
Salvation, were scarce any were to be heard. But how many, do you think, by
Friendly and Christian Debates with them at their Houses, and by the gentle
Methods of the Gospel made use of in private Conversation, might have been
brought into the Church; who, by railing from the Pulpit, ill and unfriendly
Treatment out of it, and other Neglects or Miscarriages of those who claimed to
be their Teachers, have been driven from hearing them? Paint the Defects and
Miscarriages frequent on this side, as well as you have done those on the
other, and then do you, with all the World, consider whether those who you so
handsomely declaim against, for being misled by Education, Passion, Humor,
Prejudice, Obstinacy, etc. do deserve all the Punishment. Perhaps it will be
answered; If there be so much toil in it, that particular Persons must be
applied to, who then will be a Minister? And what if a Layman should reply: If
there be so much toil in it, that Doubts must be cleared, Prejudices removed,
Foundations examined, etc. Who then will be a Protestant? The Excuse will be as
good hereafter for the one as for the other.

This new Method of yours, which you say no body can deny but that indirectly,
and at a distance, it does some Service toward bringing Men to embrace the
Truth; was never yet thought on by the most refined Persecutors. Tho indeed it
is not altogether unlike the Plea made use of to excuse the late barbarous
Usage of the Protestants in France, (designed to extirpate the Reformed
Religion there) from being a Persecution for Religion. The French King requires
all his Subjects to come to Mass. Those who do not, are punished with a
witness. For what? Not for their Religion, say the Pleaders for that
Discipline, but for disobeying the King's Laws. So by your Rule, the Dissenters
(for thither you would, and thither you must come, if you mean any thing) must
be punished. For what? Not for their Religion, say you, not for following the
Light of their own Reason, not for obeying the Dictates of their own
Consciences. That you think not fit. For what then are they to be punished? To
make them, say you, examine the Religion they have embraced, and the Religion
they have rejected. So that they are punished, not for having offended against
a Law: For there is no Law of the Land that requires them to examine. And which
now is the fairer Plea, pray judge. You ought, indeed, to have the Credit of
this new Invention. All other Lawmakers have constantly taken this Method;
that where any thing was to be amended, the Fault was first declared, and then
Penalties denounced against all those, who after a time set, should be found
guilty of it. This the common Sense of Mankind, and the very Reason of Laws
(which are intended not for Punishment, but Correction) has made so plain; that
the subtilest and most resined Lawmakers have not gone out of this course, nor
have the most ignorant and barbarous Nations mist it. But you have outdone
Solon and Lycurgus, Moses and our Savior, and are resolved to be a Lawmakers
of a way by your self. It Is an old and obsolete way, and will not serve your
turn, to begin with Warnings and Threats of Penalties to be inflicted on those
who do not reform, but continue to do that which you think they fail in. To
allow of Impunity to the Innocent, or the opportunity of Amendment to those who
would avoid the Penalties, are Formalities not worth your notice. You are for a
shorter and surer way. Take a whole Tribe and punish them at all Adventures;
whether guilty or no, of the Miscarriage which you would have amended; or
without so much as telling them what it is you would have them do, but leaving
them to find it out if they can. All these Absurdities are contained in your
way of proceeding; and are impossible to be avoided by any one who will punish
Dissenters, and only Dissenters, to make them consider and weigh the Grounds of
their Religion, and impartially examine whether it be true or no, and upon what
Grounds they took it up, that so they may find and embrace the Truth that must
save them. But that this new sort of Discipline may have all fair play; let us
enquire,

First, Who it is you would have be punished. In the place above cited, they
are those who are got into a wrong way, and Page 10.
are deaf to all Persuasions. If these are the Men to be punished, let a Law be
made against them: you have my Consent; and that is the proper course to have
Offenders punished. For you do not, I hope, intend to punish any fault by a
Law, which you do not name in the Law; nor make a Law against any fault you
would not have punished. And now, if you are sincere, and in earnest, and are
(as a fair Man should be) sor what your words plainly signify, and nothing
else; what will such a Law serve for? Men in the wrong Way are to be punished:
but who are in the wrong Way is the Question. You have no more reason to
determine it against one, who differs from you; than he has to conclude against
you, who differ from him. No, not tho you have the Magistrate and the National
Church on your side. For, if to differ from them be to be in the wrong Way;
you, who are in the right Way in England, will be in the wrong Way in France.
Every one here must be judge for himself: And your Law will reach no body, till
you have convinced him he is in the wrong Way. And then there will be no need
of Punishment to make him consider; unless you will assirm again, what you have
denied, and, have Men punished for embracing the Religion they believe to be
true, when it differs from yours or the Public.

Besides being in the wrong Way, those who you would have punished must be such
as are deaf to all Persuasions. But any such, I suppose, you will hardly sind,
who hearken to no body, not to those of their own Way. If you mean by deaf to
all Persuasions, all Persuasions of a contrary Party, or of a different Church;
such, I suppose, you may abundantly find in your own Church, as well as
elsewhere; and I presume to them you are so charitable, that you would not
have them punished for not lending an Ear to Seducers. For Constancy in the
Truth, and Perseverance in the Faith, is (I hope) rather to be encouraged, than
by any Penalties checked in the Orthodox. And your Church, doubtless as well as
all others, is Orthodox to it self, in all its Tenets. If you mean by all
Persuasion, all your Persuasion, or all Persuasion of those of your Communion;
you do but beg the Question, and suppose you have a right to punish those who
differ from, and will not comply with you.

Your next words are, When Men fly from the means of a Page 11.
right Information, and will not so much as consider how reasonable it is,
thoroughly and impartially to examine a Religion, which they embraced upon such
Inducements as ought to have no sway at all in the matter, and therefore with
little or no Examination of the proper Grounds of it; What Human Method can be
used, to bring them to act like Men, in an Affair of such Consequence, and to
make a wiser and more rational Choice, but that of laying such Penalties upon
them, as may balance the weight of those Prejudices which inclined them to
prefer a false Way before the true, and recover them to so much Sobriety and
Reflection, as seriously to put the Question to themselves; Whether it be
really worth the while to undergo such Inconveniences, for adhering to a
Religion, which, for any thing they know, may be false, or for rejecting
another (if that be the case) which, for any thing they know, may be true, till
they have brought it to the Bar of Reason, and given it a fair trial there.
Here you again bring in such as prefer a false Way before a true: To which
having answered already, I shall here say no more, but that, since our Church
will not allow those to be in a false Way who are out of the Church of Rome,
because the Church of Rome (which pretends Infallibity) declares hers to be the
only true Way; certainly no one of our Church (nor any other, which claims not
Infallibility) can require any one to take the Testimony of any Church, as a
sufficient Proof of the Truth of her own Doctrine. So that true and false (as
it commonly happens, when we suppose them for our selves, or our Party) in
essect, signify just nothing, or nothing to the purpose; unless we can think
that true or false in England, which will not be so at Rome, or Geneva: and
Vice versa. As for the rest of the Description, of those on whom you are here
laying Penalties; I beseech you consider whether it will not belong to any of
your Church, let it be what it will. Consider, I say, if there be none in your
Church who have embraced her Religion, upon such Inducements as ought to have
no sway at all in the matter, and therefore with little or no Examination of
the proper Grounds of it; who have not been inclined by Prejudices; who do not
adhere to a Religion, which for any thing they know may be false, and who have
rejected another which for any thing they know may be true. If you have any
such in your Communion (and 'twill be an admirable, tho I fear but a little,
Flock that has none such in it) consider well what you have done. You have
prepared Rods for them, for which I imagine they will con you no Thanks. For to
make any tolerable Sense of what you here propose, it must be understood that
you would have Men of all Religions punished, to make them consider whether it
be really worth the while to undergo such Inconveniences for adhering to a
Religion which for any thing they know may be false. If you hope to avoid that,
by what you have said of true and false; and pretend that the supposed
preference of the true Way in your Church, ought to preserve its Members from
your Punishment; you manifestly triste. For every Church's Testimony, that it
has chosen the true Way, must be taken for it self; and then none will be
liable; and your new Invention of Punishment is come to nothing: Or else the
differing Churches Testimonies must be taken one for another; and then they
will be all out of the true Way, and your Church need Penalties as well as the
rest. So that, upon your Principles, they must all or none be punished. Choose
which you please: One of them, I think, you cannot escape.

What you say in the next words; Where Instruction is Page 11.
stiffly refused, and all Admonitions and Persuasions prove vain and
ineffectual; differs nothing but in the way of expressing, from Deaf to all
Persuasions: And so that is answered already.

In another place, you give us another description of those you think ought to
be punished, in these words; Those who Page 20.
refuse to embrace the Doctrine, and submit to the Spiritual Government of the
proper Ministers of Religion, who by special designation, are appointed to
Exhort, Admonish, Reprove, etc. Here then, those to be punished, are such who
refuse to embrace the Doctrine, and submit to the Government of the proper
Ministers of Religion. Whereby we are as much still at uncertainty, as we were
before, who those are who (by your Scheme, and Laws suitable to it) are to be
punished. Since every Church has, as it thinks, its proper Ministers of
Religion. And if you mean those that refuse to embrace the Doctrine, and submit
to the Government of the Ministers of another Church; then all Men will be
guilty, and must be punished; even those of your Church, as well as others. If
you mean those who refuse, etc. the Ministers of their own Church; very few
will incur your Penalties. But if, by these Proper Ministers of Religion, the
Ministers of some particular Church are intended; why do you not name it? Why
are you so reserved, in a Matter wherein, if you speak not out, all the rest
that you say will be to no purpose? Are Men to be punished for refusing to
embrace the Doctrine, and submit to the Government, of the proper Ministers of
the Church of Geneva? For this time, (since you have declared nothing to the
contrary) let me suppose you of that Church: And then, I am sure, that is it
that you would name. For of whatever Church you are, if you think the
Ministers of any one Church ought to be hearkened to, and obeyed, it must be
those of your own. There are Persons to be punished, you say. This you contend
for, all through your Book; and lay so much stress on it, that you make the
Preservation and Propagation of Religion, and the Salvation of Souls, to depend
on it: And yet you describe them by so general and equivocal Marks; that,
unless it be upon Suppositions which no Body will grant you, I dare say,
neither you, nor any Body else, will be able to find one guilty. Pray find me,
if you can, a Man whom you can, judicially prove (for he that is to be punished
by Law, must be fairly tried) is in a wrong way, in respect of his Faith; I
mean, who is deaf to all Persuasions, who flies from all Means of a right
Information, who refuses to embrace the Doctrine, and submit to the Government
of the Spiritual Pastors. And when you have done that, I think, I may allow you
what Power you please to punish him; without any prejudice to the Toleration
the Author of the Letter proposes.

But why, I pray, all this bogling, all this loose talking, as if you knew not
what you meant, or durst not speak it out? Would you be for punishing some
Body, you know not whom? I do not think so ill of you. Let me then speak out
for you. The Evidence of the Argument has convinced you that Men ought not to
be persecuted for their Religion; That the Severities in use amongst Christians
cannot be defended; That the Magistrate has not Authority to compel any one to
his Religion. This you are forced to yield. But you would fain retain some
Power in the Magistrate's Hands to punish Dissenters, upon a new Pretense; viz.
not for having embraced the Doctrine and Worship they believe to be True and
Right, but for not having well considered their own and the Magistrate's
Religion. To show you that I do not speak wholly without-Book; give me leave to
mind you of one Passage of yours. The words are, Penalties to put them upon a
sorious and impartial examination Page 26.
of the Controversy between the Magistrates and them. Though these words be not
intended to tell us who you would have punished, yet it may be plainly inferred
from them. And they more clearly point out whom you aim at, than all the
foregoing places, where you seem to (and should) describe them. For they are
such as between whom and the Magistrate there is a Controversy: That is, in
short, who differ from the Magistrate in Religion. And now indeed you have
given us a Note by which these you would have punished may be known. We have,
with much ado, found at last whom it is we may presume you would have punished.
Which in other Cases is usually not very difficult: because there the Faults to
be mended easily design the Persons to be corrected. But yours is a new Method,
and unlike all that ever went before it.

In the next place; Let us see for what you would have them punished. You tell
us, and it will easily be granted you, that not to examine and weigh
impartially, and without Prejudice or Passion, (all which, for shortness-sake,
we will express by this one word Consider) the Religion one embraces or
refuses, is a Fault very common, and very prejudicial to true Religion, and the
Salvation of Men's Souls. But Penalties and Punishments are very necessary, say
you, to remedy this Evil.

Let us see now how you apply this Remedy. Therefore, say you, let all
Dissenters be punished. Why? Have no Dissenters considered of Religion? Or have
all Conformists considered? That you your self will not say. Your Project
therefore is just as reasonable, as if a Lethargy growing Epidemical in
England; you should propose to have a Law made to blister and scarify and shave
the Heads of all who wear Gowns: Though it be certain that neither all who wear
Gowns are Lethargick, nor all who are Lethargick wear Gowns.

-- Dii te Damasippe Deaeque
Verum ob consilium donent tonsore.
For there could not be certainly a more Learned Advice, than that one Man
should be pulled by the Ears, because another is asleep. This, when you have
considered of it again, (for I find, according to your Principle, all Men have
now and then need to be jog'd) you will, I guess, be convinced is not like a
fair Physician, to apply a Remedy to a Disease; but, like an engaged Enemy, to
vent one's Spleen upon a Party. Common Sense, as well as Common Justice,
requires, that the Remedies of Laws and Penalties should be directed against
the Evil that is to be removed, wherever it be found. And if the Punishment,
you think so necessary, be (as you pretend) to cure the Mischief you complain
of, you must let it pursue and fall on the Guilty, and those only, in what
company soever they are; And not, as you here propose, and is the highest
Injustice, punish the Innocent considering Dissente^, with the Guilty; and, on
the other side, let the inconsiderate guilty Conformist escape, with the
Innocent. For one may rationally presume that the National Church has some, nay
more, in proportion, of those who little consider or concern themselves about
Religion, than any Congregation of Dissenters. For Conscience, or the Care of
their Souls, being once laid aside; Interest, of course, leads Men into that
Society, where the Protection and Countenance of the Government, and hopes of
Preferment, bid fairest to all their remaining Desires. So that if careless,
negligent, inconsiderate Men in Matters of Religion, who without being forced
would not consider, are to be roused into a care of their Souls, and a search
after Truth, by Punishments; The National Religion, in all Countries, will
certainly have a right to the greatest share of those Punishments; at least,
not to be wholly exempt from them.

This is that which the Author of the Letter, as I remember complains of; and
that justly, viz. That the pretended Care of Men's Souls always expresses it
self, in those who would have Force any way made use of to that end, in very
unequ^l Methods; some Persons being to be treated with Severity, whilst others
guilty of the same Faults are not to be so much as touched. Though you are got
pretty w^ll out of the deep Mud, and renounce Punishments directly for
Religion; yet you stick still in this part of the Mire; whilst you would have
Dissenters punished to make them consider, but would not have any thing done to
Conformists, tho never so negligent in this point of considering. The Author's
Letter pleased me, because it is equal to all Mankind, is direct, and will, I
think, hold every where; which I take to be a good Mark of Truth. For, I shall
always suspect that neither to comport with the Truth of Religion, or the
Design of the Gospel, which is suited to only some one Country, or Party. What
is True and Good in England, will be True and Good at Rome too, in China, or
Geneva. But whether your great and only Method for the propagating of Truth, by
bringing the Inconsiderate by Page 12.
Punishments to consider, would (according to your way of applying your
Punishments only to Dissenters from the National Religion) be of use in those
Countries, or any where but where you suppose the Magistrate to be in the
Right, judge you. Pray, Sir, consider a little, whether Prejudice has not some
share in your way of Arguing. For this is your Position; Men are generally
negligent in examining the Grounds of their Religion. This I grant. But could
there be a more wild and incoherent Consequence drawn from it, than this;
Therefore Dissenters must be punished?

But that being laid aside, let us now see to what end they must be punished.
Sometimes it is, To bring them to consider Page 5.
those Reasons and Arguments which are proper and sufficient to convince them.
Of what? That it is not easy to set Grantham Steeple upon Paul's Church?
Whatever it be you would have them convinced of, you are not willing to tell
us. And so it may be any thing. Sometimes it is, To incline them to Page 10.
lend an Ear to those who tell them they have mistaken their Way, and offer to
show them the Right. Which is, to lend an Ear to all who differ from them in
Religion; as well crafty Seducers, Page 27
as others. Whether this be for the procuring the Salvation Page 23.
of their Souls, the End for which you say this Force is to be used, judge you.
But this I am sure; Whoever will lend an Ear to all who will tell them they are
out of the Way, will not have much time for any other Business.

Sometimes it is, To recover Men to so much Sobriety and Reflection, Page 11.
as seriously to put the Question to themselves, Whether it be really worth
their while to undergo such Inconveniences, for adhering to a Religion which,
for any thing they know, may be false, or for rejecting another (if that be the
case) which, for ought they know, may be true, till they have brought it to the
Bar of Reason, and given it a fair Trial there. Which, in short, amounts to
thus much, viz. To make them examine whether their Religion be True, and so
worth the holding, under those Penalties that are annexed to it. Dissenters are
indebted to you, for your great care of their Souls. But what, I beseech you,
shall become of those of the National Church, every where (which make sar the
greater part of Mankind) who have no such Punishments to make them consider;
who have not this only Remedy provided sor them; but are lest in that
deplorable Condition, you mention, of being suffered quietly, Page 27.
and without Molestation, to take no care at all of their Souls, or in doing of
it to follow their own Prejudices, Humors, or some crafty Seducers: Need not
those of the National Church, as well as others, bring their Religion to the
Bar of Reason, and give it a fair trial there? And if they need to do so, (as
they must, if all National Religions cannot be supposed true) they will always
need that which, you say, is the only Page 12.
means to make them do so. So that if you are sure, as you tell us, that there
is need of your Method; I am sure, there is as much need of it in National
Churches, as any other. And so, for ought I can see, you must either punish
them, or let others alone; Unless you think it reasonable that the sar greater
part of Mankind should constantly be without that Sovereign and only Remedy,
which they stand in need of equally with other People.

Sometimes the end for which Men must be punished is, to dispose Page 13.
them to submit to Instruction, and to give a fair hearing to the Reasons are
offered for the inli^htning their Minds, and discovering the Truth to them. If
their own words may be taken for it, there are as sew Dissenters as
Consormists, in any Country, who will not profess they have done, and do this.
And if their own word; may not be taken; who, I pray must be judge? You and your
Magistrates? If so, then it is plain you punish them not to dispose them to
submit to Instruction, but to your Instruction; not to dispose them to give a
fair hearing to Reasons offered for the inlightning their Minds, but to give an
obedient hearing to your Reasons. If you mean this; it had been sairer and
shorter to have spoken out plainly, than thus in fair words, of indesinite
Signification, to say that which amounts to nothing. For what Sense is it, to
punish a Man to dispose him to submit to Instruction, and give a fair hearing
to Reasons offered for the inlightning his Mind, and discovering Truth to him,
who ^s two or three times a week several (...) on purp^se to do i^, and that
with the hazard of his Liberty or Purse; (...) you mean your Instructions, your
Reasons, your Truth: Which brings us but back to what you have disclaimed,
plain Persecution for differing in Religion.

Sometimes this is to be done, To prevail with Men to weigh Page 14.
Matters of Religion carefully, and impartially. Discountenance and Punishment
put into one Scale, with Impunity and hopes of Preferment put into the other,
is as sure a way to make a Man weigh impartially, as it would be for a Prince
to bribe and threaten a Judge to make him judge uprightly.

Sometimes it is, To make Men bethink themselves, and put it Page 20.
out of the power of any foolish Humor, or unreasonable Prejudice, to alienate
them from Truth and their own Happiness. Add but this, to put it out of the
power of any Humor or Prejudice of their own, or other Men's; and I grant the
end is good, if you can find the means to procure it. But why it should not be
put out of the Power of other Men's Humor or Prejudice, as well as their own,
wants (and will always want) a Reason to prove. Would it not, I beseech you, to
an indifferent Bystander, appear Humor or Prejudice, or some thing as bad; to
see Men, who profess a Religion revealed from Heaven, and which they own
contains all in it necessary to Salvation, exclude Men from their Communion,
and persecute them with the Penalties of the Civil Law, for not joining in the
use of Ceremonies which are no where to be found in that revealed Religion?
Would it not appear Humor or Prejudice, or some such thing, to a sober
impartial Heathen; to see Christians exclude and persecute one of the same
Faith, for things which they themselves confess to be indifferent, and not
worth the contending for? Prejudice, Humor, Passion, Lusts, Impressions Page
6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
of Education, Reverence and Admiration of Persons, Worldly Respects, Love of
their own Choice, and the like, (to which you justly impute many Men's taking up
and persisting in their Religion) are indeed good words; and so, on the other
side, are these following; Truth, the right Way, inlightning, Reason, sound
Judgment; but they signify nothing at all to your purpose, till you can
evidently and unquestionably show the World that the latter (viz. Truth and the
right way, etc.) are always, and in all Countries, to be found only in the
National Church; and the former (viz. Passion and Prejudice, etc.) only amongst
the Dissenters. But to go on:

Sometimes it is, To bring Men to take such care as they ought Page 22.
of their Salvation. What care is such as Men ought to take, whilst they are
out of your Church, will be hard for you to tell me. But you endeavor to
explain your self, in the following words; that they may not blindly leave it
to the choice neither of any other Person, nor yet of their own Lusts and
Passions, to prescribe to them what Faith or Worship they shall embrace. You do
well to make use of Punishment to shut Passion out of the choice: because you
know fear of suffering is no Passion. But let that pass. You would have Men
punished, to bring them to take such care of their Salvation, that they may not
blindly leave it to the choice of any other Person to prescribe to them. Are
you sincere? Are you in earnest? Tell me then truly: Did the Magistrate or
National Church, any where, or yours in particular, ever punish any Man, to
bring him to have this care which, you say, he ought to take of his Salvation?
Did you ever punish any Man, that he might not blindly leave it to the choice
of his Parish Priest, or Bishop, or the Convocation, what Faith or Worship he
should embrace? 'Twill be suspected care of a Party, or any thing else rather
than care of the Salvation of Men's Souls; if, having found out so useful so
necessary a Remedy, the only Page 12.
Method there is room left for, you will apply it but partially, and make trial
of it only on those who you have truly least kindness for. This will,
unavoidably, give one Reason to imagine, you do not think so well of your
Remedy as you pretend, who are so sparing of it to your Friends; but are very
free of it to Strangers, who in other things are used very much like Enemies.
But your Remedy is like the Helleboraster, that grew in the Woman's Garden, for
the cure of Worms in her Neighbors Children: For truly it wrought too roughly,
to give it to any of her own. Methinks your Charity, in your present
Persecution, is much what as prudent, as justisiable, as that good Woman's. I
hope I have done you no Injury, that I here suppose you of the Church of
England. If I have, I beg your Pardon. It is no offense of Malice, I I assure
you: For I suppose no worse of you, than I confess of my self.

Sometimes this Punishment that you contend for is, to bring Page 22.
Men to act according to Reason, and sound Judgment.

Tertius e Coelo cecidit Cato.

This is Reformation indeed. If you can help us to it, you will deserve Statues
to be erected to you, as to the Restorer of decayed Religion. But if all Men
have not Reason and sound Judgment, will Punishment put it into them? Besides,
concerning this matter Mankind is so divided, that he acts according to Reason
and sound Judgment at Auspurg, who who would be judged to do the quite contrary
at Edinburgh. Will Punishment make Men know what is Reason and sound Judgment?
If it will not, it is impossible it should make them act according to it. Reason
and sound Judgment are the Elixir it self, the universal Remedy: And you may as
reasonably punish Men to bring them to have the Philosopher's Stone, as to
bring them to act according to Reason and sound Judgment.

Sometimes it is, To put Men upon a serious and impartial Page 26.
Examination of the Controversy between the Magistrate and them, which is the
way for them to come to the Knowledge of the Truth. But what if the Truth be on
neither side (as I am apt to imagine you will think it is not, where neither
the Magistrate nor the Dissenter is either of them of your Church) how will the
examining the Controversy between the Magistrate and him be the way to come to
the Knowledge of the Truth? Suppose the Controversy between a Lutheran and a
Papist; or, if you please, between a Presbyterian Magistrate and a Quaker
Subject. Will the examining the Controversy between the Magistrate and the
Dissenting Subject, in this case bring him to the Knowledge of the Truth? If you
say yes, then you grant one of these to have the Truth on his side. For the
examining the Controversy between a Presbyterian and a Quaker, leaves the
Controversy either of them has with the Church of England, or any other Church,
untouched. And so one, at least, of those being already come to the Knowledge of
the Truth, ought not to be put under your Discipline of Punishment; which is
only to bring him to the Truth. If you say no, and that the examining the
Controversy between the Magistrate and the Dissenter, in this case, will not
bring him to the Knowledge of the Truth; you consess your Rule to be salse, and
your Method to no purpose.

To conclude, your System is, in short, this. You would have all Men (laying
aside Prejudice, Humor, Passion, etc.) examine the Grounds of their Religion,
and search for the Truth. This, I consess, is heartily to be wished. The means
that you propose to make Men do this, is that Dissenters should be punished, to
make them do so. It is as if you had said: Men generally are guilty of a Fault;
therefore let one Sect, who have the ill luck to be of an Opinion different
from the Magistrate, be punished. This at first sight shocks any who has the
least spark of Sense, Reason or Justice. But having spoken of this already, and
concluding that upon second thoughts, you your self will be ashamed of it; let
us consider it put so as to be consistent with common Sense, and with all the
advantage it can bear; and then let us see what you can make os it. Men are
negligent in examining the Religions they embrace, refuse, or persist in;
therefore it is sit they should be punished to make them do it. This is a Con^e
indeed which may, without desiance to common S^nse, be drawn from it. This is
the use, the only use, which you think Punishment can indirectly, and at a
distance, have, in matters of Religion. You would have Men by Punishments
d^iven to examine. What? Religion. To what end? To bring them to the Knowledge
of the Truth. But I answer.

First, Every one has not the Ability to do this.

Secondly, Every one has not the opportunity to do it.

Would you have every poor Protestant, for Example, in the Palatinate, examine
thoroughly whether the Pope b^ insallibl^, or Head of the Church; whether there
be a Purgatory; whether Saints are to be prayed to, or the Dead prayed sor;
whether the S^ripture be the only Rule of Faith; whether there be no Salvantion
out of the Church; and whether there be no Church without Bishops; and an
hundred other Questions in Controversy between the Papists and those
Protestants; and when he had mastered these, go on to sortify himself against
the Opinions and Objections of other Churches he dissers from? This, which is
no small Task, must be done; before a Man can have brought his Religion to the
Bar of Reason, and given it fair trial there. And if you will punish Men till
this be done; the Countryman must leave off plowing and sowing, and betake
himself to the Study of Greek and Latin; and the Artisan must sell his Tools,
to buy Fathers and Schoolmen, and leave his Family to starve. If something
less than this will satisfy you, pray tell me what is enough. Have they
considered and examined enough, if they are satisfied themselves where the
Truth lies? If this be the limits of their Examination, you will sind sew to
punish; unless you will punish them to make them do what they have done
already. For, however he came by his Religion, there is scarce any one to be
found who does not own himself satisfied that he is in the right. Or else, must
they be punished to make them consider and examine till they embrace that which
you choose for Truth? If this be so, what do you but in effect choose for them,
when yet you would have Men punished, To bring them to such a Page 22.
care of their Souls that no other Person might choose for them? If it be Truth
in general you would have them by Punishments driven to seek; that is to offer
matter of Dispute, and not a Rule of Discipline. For to punish any one to make
him seek till he sind Truth, without a Judge of Truth, is to punish for you know
not what; and is all one as if you should whip a Scholar to make him find out
the square Root of a Number you do not know. I wonder not therefore that you
could not resolve with your self what degree of Severity you would have used,
nor how long continued; when you dare not speak out directly whom you would
have punished, and are far from being clear to what end they should be under
Penalties.

Consonant to this uncertainty, of whom, or what, to be punished; you tell us,
That there is no question of the Success of Page 12.
this Method. Force will certainly do, if duly proportioned to the design of it.

What, I pray, is the design of it? I challeng you, or any Man living, out of
what you have said in your Book, to tell me directly what it is. In all other
Punishments that ever I heard of yet, till now that you have taught the World a
new Method, the Design of them has been to cure the Crime they are denounced
against; and so I think it ought to be here. What I beseech you is the Crime
here? Dissenting? That you say not, any where, is a Fault. Besides you tell us,
That the Magistrate has not an Authority to compel any one Page 21.
to his Religion: And that you do not require that Men should Page 25.
have no Rule but the Religion of the Country. And the Power Page 26.
you ascribe to the Magistrate is given him to bring Men, not to his own, but
to the true Religion. If Dissenting be not the Fault; is it that a Man does not
examine his own Religion, and the Grounds of it? Is that the Crime your
Punishments are designed to cure? Neither that dare you say; lest you displease
more than you satisfy with your new Discipline. And then again, (as I said
before) you must tell us how far you would have them examine, before you punish
them for not doing it. And I imagine, if that were all we required of you, it
would be long enough before you would trouble us with a Law, that should
prescribe to every one how far he was to examine Matters of Religion; wherein
if he failed and came short, he was to be punished; if he performed and went in
his Examination to the Bounds set by the Law, he was acquitted and free. Sir,
when you consider it again, you will perhaps think this a case reserved to the
Great Day, when the Secrets of all Hearts shall be laid open. For I imagine it
is beyond the Power or Judgment of Man, in that variety of Circumstances, in
respect of Parts, Tempers, Opportunities, Helps, etc. Men are in, in this
World, to determine what is every one's Duty in this great Business of Search,
Enquiry, Examination, or to know when any one has done it. That which makes me
believe you will be of this Mind, is, that where you undertake for the success
of this Method, if rightly used, it is with a Limitation, upon Page 12.
such as are not altogether incurable. So that when your Remedy is prepared
according to Art, (which Art is yet unknown) and rightly applied, and given in
a due Dose, (all which are Secrets) it will then infallibly cure. Whom? All
that are not incurable by it. And so will a Pippin Posset, eating Fish in Lent,
or a Presbyterian Lecture, certainly cure all that are not incurable by them.
For I am sure you do not mean it will cure all, but those who are absolutely
incurable; Because you your self allow one Means left of Cure, when yours will
not do, viz. The Grace of God. Your words are, What Means is there Page 10.
left (except the Grace of God) to reduce them, but to lay Thorns and Briars in
their Way. And here also, in the place we were considering, you tell us, The
Incurable are to be left to God. Page 12.
Whereby, if you mean they are to be left to those Means he has ordained for
Men's Conversion and Salvation, yours must never be made use of: For he indeed
has prescribed Preaching and Hearing of his Word; but as for those who will not
hear, I do not find any where that he has commanded they should be compelled or
beaten to it.

There is a third Thing that you are as t^nder and reserved in, as either
naming the Criminal; to be punished, or positively telling us the End for which
they should be punished: And that is with what sort of Penalties, what degree
of Punishment they should be forced. You are indeed so pracious to them, that
you renounce the Severities and Penal^s hith^rto made use of. You ^ell us, they
should be but (...) Penalti^s. But if we ask you what are moderate Page 24.
Penalties, you confess you cannot tell us. So that by Moderate, here, you yet
mean nothing. You tell us, the outward Force to Page 15.
be applied, should be duly tempered. But what that due Temp^r is, you do not,
or cannot say; and so in effect, it signisies just nothing. Yet if in this you
are not plain and direct, all the rest of your Design will signify ^ing. For it
being to have some Men, and to some End, punished; Yet if it cannot be found
what Punishment is to be used, i^ (...) (notwithstanding all you have said)
utterly useless. You tell us modestly, That to Page 12.
determine precisely the just measure of the Punishment, will require some
consideration. If the Faults were preci^ly determined, and could be proved, it
would require no more consideration to determine the Measure of the Punishment,
in this, than it would in any other cas^, where those were known. But where the
Fault is undesined, and the Guilt not to be proved, (as I suppose it will be
sound in this present Business of examining) it will without doubt require
Consideration to proportion the Force to the Design. Just so much Consideration
as it will require to sit a Co^t to the Moon, or proportion a Shoe to the Feet
of those who inhabit her. For to proportion a Punishment to (...) Fault that
you do not name, (and so we in Charity ought to think you do not yet know) and
a Fault that when you have named it, will be imposible to be proved who are or
are not guilty of it; will I suppose require as much Consideration as to sit a
Shoe to Feet whose Size and Shape are not known.

However, you offer some measures whereby to regulate your Punishments; which
when they are looked into, will be sound to be just as good as none; they being
impossible to be any rule in the case. The sirst is, So much Force, or such
Penalties as are or-dinarily P. 14.
sufficient to prevail with men of common discretion, and not desperately
perverse and obstinate, to weigh matters of Religion carefully and impartially,
and without which ordinarily they will not do this. Where it is to be observed:

First, That who are these men of Common Discretion, is as hard to know, as to
know what is a fit degree of Punishment in the case; and so you do but regulate
one Uncertainty by another. Some men will be apt to think, that he who will not
weigh matters of Religion, which are of infinite concernment to him, without
Punishment, cannot in reason be thought a man of Comm^n Discretion. Many Women
of Common Discretion enough to manage the ordinary Affairs of their Families,
are not able to read a Page in an ordinary Author, or to understand and give an
account what it means, when read to them. Many men of Common Discretion in
their Callings, are not able to judge when an Argument is conclusive or no; much
less to trace it through a long train of Consequences. What Penalties shall be
sufficient to prevail with such (who upon examination I ^ear will not be found
to make the least part of Mankind) to examine and weigh matters of Religion
carefully and impartially? The Law allows all to have Common Discretion, for
whom it has not provided Guardians or Bedlam. So that, in effect, your men of
Common Discretion, are all men, not judged Idiots or Madmen: And Penalties
sufficient to prevail with men of Common Discretion, are Penalties sufficient
to prevail with all men, but Idiots and Madmen. Which what a measure it is to
regulate Penalties by, let all men of Common Discretion judge.

Secondly, You may be pleased to consider, That all men of the same degree of
Discretion, are not apt to be moved by the same degree of Penalties. Some are
of a more yielding, some of a more stiff Temper; and what is sufficient to
prevail on one, is not half enough to move the other; tho both men of Common
Discretion. So that Common Discretion will be here of no use to determine the
measure of Punishment: Especially, when in the same Clause you except men
desperately perverse and obstinate; who are as hard to be known, as what you
seek: viz. the just proportitions of Punishments necessary to prevail with men
to consider, examine, and weigh matters of Religion; wherein, if a man tells
you he has considered, he has weighed, he has examined, and so goes on in his
former course, it is impossible for you ever to know whether he has done his
duty, or whether he be desperately perverse and obstinate. So that this
exception signifies just nothing.

There are many things in your use of Force and Penalties, different from any I
ever met with elsewhere. One of them, this Clause of yours, concerning the
measure of Punishments, now under consideration, offers me: Wherein you
proportion your Punishments only to the yielding and corrigible, not to the
perverse and obstinate; contrary to the Common Discretion which has hitherto
made Laws in other cases, which levels the Punishments against refractory
Offenders, and never spares them because they are obstinate. This however I
will not blame, as an oversight in you. Your new method, which aims at such
impracticable and inconsistent things as Laws cannot bear, nor Penalties be
useful to, forced you to it. The Uselessness, absurdity, and unreasonableness
of great Severities, you had acknowledged in the foregoing Paragraphs.
Dissenters you would P. 13, 14.
have brought to consider by moderate Penalties. They lie under them; but
whether they have considered or no (for that you cannot tell), they still
continue Dissenters. What is to be done now? Why, the incurable are to be left
to God, as you tell us, P. 12. Your Punishments were not meant to prevail on
the desperately perverse and obstinate, as you tell us here. And so whatever be
the success, your Punishments are however justified.

You have given us in another place, something like another boundary to your
moderate Penalties: But when examined, it proves just like the rest, trifling
only, in good words, so put together as to have no direct meaning; an art very
much in use amongst some sort of Learned Men. The words are these; Such
Penalties as may P. 26.
not tempt persons who have any concern for their Eternal Salvation, (and those
who have none, ought not to be considered) to renounce a Religion which they
believe to be true, or profess one which they do not believe to be so. If by
any concern, you mean a true concern for their Eternal Salvation, by this rule
you may make your Punishments as great as you please; and all the severities
you have difclaim'd may be brought in play again: For none of those will be
able to make a man, who is truly concerned for his eternal Salvation, renounce
a Religion he believes to be true, or prosess one he does not believe to be so.
If by those who have any concern, you mean such who have some faint wishes for
Happiness hereafter, and would be glad to have things go well with them in the
other world, but will venture nothing in this world for it; These the
moderatest Punishments you can imagine, will make change their Religion. If by
any concern, you mean whatever may be between these two; the degrees are so
infinite, that to proportion your Punishments by that, is to have no measure of
them at all.

One thing I cannot but take notice of in this passage, before I leave it: And
that is that you say here, Those who have no concern for their Salvation
deserve not to be considered. In other parts of your Letter you pretend to have
compassion on the careless, and provide remedies for them: But here, of a
sudden, your Charity fails you; and you give them up to Eternal Perdition,
without the least regard, the least pity; and say they deserve not to be
considered. Our Savior's Rule was, The sick, and not the whole, need a
Physician. Your Rule here is, Those that are careless are not to be considered,
but are to be lest to themselves. This would seem strange, if one did not
observe what drew you to it. You perceived that if the Magistrate was to use no
Punishments but such as would make no body change their Religion, he was to use
none at all: For the careless would be brought to the National Church, with any
sl^ght Punishments; and when they are once there, you are, it seems, satisfied,
and look no further after them. So that by your own measures, if the Careless,
and those who have no concern for their Eternal Salvation, are to be regarded
and taken care of; if the Salvation of their Souls is to be promoted there is
to be no Punishments used at all: And therefore you leave them out as not to be
considered.

There remains yet one thing to be enquired into, concerning the measure of the
Punishments, and that is the length of their duration. Moderate Punishments
that are continued, that men find no end of, know no way out of, sit heavy, and
become immoderately uneasy. Dissenters you would have punished, to make them
consider. Your Penalties have had the effect on them you intended; they have
made them consider; and they have done their utmost in considering. What now
must be done with them? They must be punished on; for they are still
Dissenters. If it were just, if you had reason at first to punish a Dissenter,
to make him consider, when you did not know but that he had considered already;
it is as just, and you have as much reason to punish him on, even when he has
performed what your Punishments was designed for, when he has considered, but
yet remains a Dissenter. For I may justly suppose, and you must grant, that a
man may remain a Dissenter, after all the consideration your moderate Penalties
can bring him to; when we see greater Punishments, even those Severities you
disown, as too great, are not able to make men consider so far as to be
convinced, and brought over to the National Church. If your Punishments may not
be inflicted on men, to make them consider, who have or may have considered
already for ought you know; then Dissenters are never to be once punished, no
more than any other sort of men I^ Dissenters are to (...) punished, to make
them consider, whether they have considered or no; then their Punishments, tho
they do consider, must never cease, as long as they are Dissenters; which
whether it be to pun^sh them only to bring them to consider, let all men judge.
This I am sure; Punishments, in your method, must either never begin upon
Dissenters, or never cease. And so pre^end, Moderation as you please, the
Punishments which your method requires, must be either very immoderate, or none
at all.

And now, you having yielded to our Author, and that upon very good reasons
which you your self urge, and which I shall set down in your own words, That to
prosecute men with Fi^e and Sword, or to P. 13, 14
d^prive them of their Estates, to maim them with ^ral Punishments, to starve
and t^rture them in noisome Prisons, and in the end even to take away their
lives, to make them Christians, is but an ^ll way of expressing men's desire of
the Salvation of th^se wh^m they treat in this manner. And that it will be very
difficult to pers^ade men of sense, that he who with dry eyes and satisfaction
of mind can deliver his Brother to the Executioner, to be burnt alive, does
sincerely and heartily concern himself to save that Brother from the Flames of
Hell in the world to come. And that these Methods are so very impr^per, in
respect to the Design of them, that they usually pr^duce the quite contrary
effect. For whereas all the use which Force can have for the advancing true
Religion, and the Salvation of Souls, is (as has already been ^wed) by
disposing men to submit to Instruction, and to give a fair hearing to the
Reasons which are off^red, for the enlightening their minds, and discovering the
Truth to them; these Cruelties have the misfortune to be commonly looked upon
as so just a prejudice against any Religion that uses them, as makes it
needless to look any further into it; and to tempt men to reject it, as both
false and detestable, without ever v^ucbsafing to consider the rational Grounds
and Motives of it. This effect they seldom sail to work upon the Sufferers of
them; and as to the Spectators, if they be not beforehand well instructed in
those Grounds and Motives, they will be much tempted likewise, not only to
entertain the same opinion of such a Religion, but withal to judge much more
favorably of that of the Sufferers; who they will be apt to think, would not
exp^se themselves to such extremities, which they might avoid by compliance, if
they were not thoroughly satisfied of the Justice of their Cause. And upon these
Reasons you conclude, That these Severities are utterly unapt and improper for
the bringing men to embrace that Truth which must save them. Again, you having
acknowledged, That the Authority of the Magistrate is P. 21.
not an Authority to compel any one to his Religion. And again, That the rigor
of Laws, and force of Penalties are not capable to convince P. 24.
and change men's minds. And yet further, That you do not require that men
should have no rule, but the Religion of the Court; or that P. 25.
they should be put under a necessity to quit the light of their own Reason,
and oppose the dictates of their own consciences, and blindly resign up
themselves to the will of their Governors; but that the Power you ascribe to
the Magistrate, is given him to bring m^n not to his own, but to the true
Religion Now you having, I say, granted this; whereby you directly condemn and
abolish all Laws that have been made here, or any where else (that ever I heard
of) to compel men to Conformity, I think the Author, and whosoever else are
most for Liberty of Conscience, might be content with the Toleration you allow,
by condemning the Laws about Religion, now in force; and rest satisfied, until
you had made your new Method consistent and practicable, by telling the World
plainly and directly; 1. Who are to be Punished. 2. For what. 3. With what
Punishments. 4. How long. 5. What Advantage to true Religion it would be, if
Magistrates every where did so punish. 6. And lastly, Whence the Magistrate had
Commission to do so.


When you have done this plainly and intelligibly, without keeping in the
uncertainty of general expressions, and without supposing all along your Church
in the right, and your Religion the true; (which can no more be allowed to you
in this case, whatever your Church or Religion be, than it can be to a Papist
or a Lutheran, a Presbyterian, or an Anabaptist; nay no more to you, than it
can be allowid to a Jew or a Mohammedan); when, I say, you have by settling these
Points, framed the parts of your new Engine, set it together, and showed that
it will work, without doing more harm than good in the world; I think then men
may be content to submit to it. But imagining this, and an Engine to show the
perpetual Motion, will be found out together; I think Toleration in a very good
state, notwithstanding your answer; wherein you having said so much for it, and
for ought I see, nothing against it; unless an impracticable Chimera be, in
your opinion, something mightily to be apprehended.

We have now seen and examined the main of your Treatise; and therefore I think
I might here end, without going any farrher. But, that you may not think your
self or any of your Arguments neglected, I will go over the remainder, and give
you my thoughts on every thing I shall meet with in it, that seems to need any
answer.

In one place you argue against the Author thus: If then the Author's Fourth
Proposition, as you call it, viz. That Force is of no use for promoting true
Religion and the Salvation of Souls, be not true (as perhaps by this time it
appears it is not) then the last Proposition, which is built upon it, must fall
with it: Which last Proposition is this, viz. That no body can have any right
to use any outward Force or Compulsion, to bring men to the true Religion, and
so to Salvation. If this Proposition were built, as you alledg, upon that which
you call his fourth, then indeed if the fourth fell, this built upon it would
fall with it. But that not being the Author's Proposition, (as I have showed)
nor this built wholly on it, but on other Reasons, (as I have already proved,
and any one may see in several parts of his Letter, particularly P. 7, 8, and
9.) what you alledg falls of it self.

The business of the next Paragraph is to prove, That if Force be useful, then
somebody must certainly have a right to use it. The first Argument you go about
to prove it by, is this, That Usefulness is as good an Argument to prove there
is somewhere a right to use it, as Uselessness is to prove no body has such a
right. If you consider the things of whose Usefulness or Uselessness we are
speaking, you will perhaps be of another mind. It is Punishment, or Force used
in punishing. Now all Punishment is some evil, some inconvenience, some
suffering; by taking away or abridging some good thing, which he who is
punished has otherwise a right to. Now to justify the bringing any such evil
upon any man, two things are requisite. First, That he who does it has
Commission and Power so to do. Secondly, That it be directly useful for the
procuring some greater good. Whatever Punishment one man uses to another,
without these two conditions, whatever he may pretend, proves an injury and
injustice, and so of right ought to have been let alone. And therefore, though
Usefulness (which is one of the conditions that makes Punishments just) when it
is away, may hinder Punishments from being lawful in any bodies hands; yet
Usefulness, when present (being but one of those conditions) cannot give the
other, which is a Commission to punish; without which also Punishment is
unlawful. From whence it follows, That tho useless Punishment be unlawful from
any hand; yet useful Punishment from every hand is not lawful. A man may have
the Stone, and it may be useful (more than indirectly and at a distance useful)
to him to be cut; but yet this usefulness will not justify the most skilful
Surgeon in the world, by Force to make him endure the pain and hazard of
Cutting; because he has no commission, no right, without the Patients own
consent to do so. Nor is it a good Argument, Cutting will be useful to him;
therefore there is a right somewhere to cut him, whether he will or no. Much
less will there be an Argument for any right, if there be only a possibility
that it may prove useful indirectly and by accident.

Your other Argument is this; If Force or Punishment be of necessary use, then
it must be acknowledged, that there is a right somewhere to use it; unless we
will say (what without impiety cannot be said), That the wise and benign
Disposer and Governor of all things has not furnished mankind with competent
means for the promoting his own honor in the world, and the good of souls. If
your way of arguing be true; it is demonstration, that Force is not of necessary
use. For I argue thus, in your form. We must acknowledge Force not to be of
necessary use; unless we will say (what without impiety cannot be said) that
the wise Disposer and Governor of all things did not, for above 300 years
after Christ, furnish his Church with competent means for promoting his own
honor in the world, and the good of souls. It Is for you to consider whether
these Arguments be conclusive or no. This I am sure; the one is as conclusive
as the other. But if your supposed Usefulness places a right somewhere to use
it, pray tell me in whose hands it places it in Turkey, Persia, or China, or any
Country where Christians of d^fferent Churches live under a Heathen or
Mohammedan Sovereign? And if you cannot tell me in whose hands it places it
there, (as I believe you will find it pretty hard to do) there are then (it
seems) some places where (upon your supposition of the necessary usefulness of
Force) the wise and benign Governor and Disposer of all things, has not
furnished m^n with competent means for promoting his own honor, and the good
of Souls; unless you will grant, that the wise and benign Disposer and
Governor of all things, bath for the pr^moting of his honor, and the good of
souls, placed a power in Mah metan or Heathen Princes, to punish Christians, to
bring them to consider Reasons and Arguments proper to convince them. But this
is the advantage of so sine an invention, as that of Force d^ing some Service
indirectly and at a distance; which Usefulness, if we may believe you, places a
right in Mohammedan or Pagan Princes hands, to use force upon Christians; for
fear lest mankind, in those Countries, should be unfurnished with means for the
promoting God's honor and the good of souls. For thus you argue; If there be
so great use of P. 15.
Force, then there is a right somewhere to use it. And if there be such a right
somewhere, where should it be but in the Civil Sovereign? P. 16.
Who can deny now, but that you have taken care, great care, for the promoting
of Truth and the Christian Religion? But yet it is as hard for me, I consess,
and I believe for others, to conceive how you should think to do any service to
Truth and the Christian Religion, by putting a right into Mahometans or
Heathens hands to punish Christians; as it was for you to conceive how the
Author should think to do any service to Truth, and the Christian Religion, by
exempting the Professors of it from Punishment every where; Since there are
more ^agan, Mohammedan, and erroneous Princes in the world, than Orthodox;
Truth, and the Christian Religion (taking the world as we find it) is sure to
be more punished and suppressed, than Error and Falsehood.

The Author having endeavored to show that no body at all, of any rank or
condition, had a power to punish, torment, or use any man ill, for matters of
Religion; you tell us you do not yet understand why Clergymen are not as
capable of such Power as other P. 17.
Men. I do not remember that the Author any where, by excepting Eccles^sticks
more than others, g^ve you any occasion to show your concern in this point. Had
he ^seen that this would have touched you so nearly, and that you set your h^t
so much upon the lergys Power of punishing; it is like h^ (...) have told you,
he thought Eccles^sticks as capable of it as any Men; and that if forwardness
and diligence in the exercise of such Power may recommend any to it, Clergymen
in the Opinion of the World stand sairest for it. However, you do well to put
in your claim for them, tho the Author excludes them no more than their
Neighbors. Nay, they must be allowed the pretense of the fairest Title. For I
never read of any se^es that were to bring Men to Christ, but those of the Law
of M^; which is therefore called a Ped^gue. ( Gal. 3 14.) And the next Verse
tells us, That aft^r that Faith is c^e, (...) are no longer under a
Schoolmaster. But yet if we are still to be driven to Christ by a Rod, I shall
not envy them the pleasure of wi^ng it: only (...) desire them, when they have
got the Scourge into their Hands, to remember our Savior, and sollow his
Example, who never used it but once; and that they would, like him, employ it
only to drive vile and seand^ons Trasikers for the things of this World out of
their Church, r^ther than to drive whoever they can into it. Whether that
latter be not a proper method to make their Church what our Savior there
pronounced of the ^emple, they who use it were best look. For in matters of
Religion, none are so easy to be so driven, as those who have nothing of
Religion at all; and next to them, the Vicious, the Ignorant, the Worldling,
and the Hypocrite; Who care for no more of Religion but the Name, nor no more
of any Church, but its Prosperity and Power; and who, not unlike those
described by our Savior, Luke 20.47.) for a show come to, or cry up the
Prayers of the Church, That they may dev^ur Widows, and other helpless People's
houses. I say not this of the serious Professors of any Church, who are in
earnest in matters of Religion. Such I value, who conscientiously, and out of a
sincere Persuasion, embrace any Religion, tho different from mine, and in a
way, I think, mistaken. But no body can have reason to think otherwise than
what I have said, of those who are wrought upon to be of any Church, by secular
hopes and fears. Those truly, place Trade above all other Considerations, and
Merchandise with Religion it self, who regulate their choice by worldly Profit
and Loss.

You endeavor to prove, against the Author, that Civil Society is not
instituted only for Civil Ends, i. e. The procuring, preserving, and advancing
Men's Civil Interests. Your words are: I must say, that our Author does but beg
the Question, when he affirms P. 18.
that the Commonwealth is constituted only for the procuring, preserving, and
advancing of the Civil Interests of the Members of it. That Commonwealths are
instituted for these Ends, no Man will deny. But if there be any other ends
besides these, attainable by the Civil Society and Government, there is no
reason to affirm, That these are the only ends, for which they are designed.
Doubtless Commonwealths are instituted for the attaining of all the Benefits
which Political Government can yield. And therefore, if the Spiritual and
Eternal Interests of Men may any way be procured or advanced by Political
Government, the procuring and advancing those Interests must in all reason be
reckoned among the Ends of Civil Societies, and so, consequently, fall within
the compass of the Magistrates Jurisdiction. I have set down your words at
large, to let the Reader see, That you of all Men had the least reason to tell
the Author he does but beg the Question; unless you mean to justify your self
by the pretense of his Example. You argue thus. If there be any other Ends
attainable by Civil Society, then Civil Interests are not the only Ends for
which Commonwealths are instituted. And how do you prove there be other ends?
Why thus. Doubtless Commonwealths are instituted for the attaining all the
Benefits which Political Government can yield. Which is as clear a
Demonstration, as Doubtless can make it to be. The Question is, Whether Civil
Society be instituted only for Civil Ends? You say, No; and your proof is,
Because, Doubtless, it is instituted for other Ends. If I now say, Doubtless
this is a good argument; is not every one bound without more ado to admit it
for such? If not, Doubtless you are in danger to be thought to beg the Question.

But notwithstanding you say here, That the Author begs the Question; In the
following Page you tell us, That the Author offer three Considerations which
seem to him abundantly to demonstrate, that the Civil Power neither can, nor
ought in any manner to be extended to the Salvation of Souls. He does not then
beg the Question. For the Question being, Whether Civil Interest be the only
End of Civil Society, he gives this reason for the Negative; That Civil Power
has nothing to do with the Salvation of Souls; and offers three Considerations
for the proof of it. For it will always be a good consequence, that, if the
Civil Power has nothing to do with the Salvation of Souls, then Civil Interest
is the only End of Civil Society. And the reason of it is plain; Because a Man
having no other Interest, but either in this World, or the World to come; if
the End of Civil Society reach not to a Man's Interest in the other World, (all
which is comprehended in the Salvation of his Soul) it is plain, that the sole
End of Civil Society is Civil Interest, under which the Author comprehends the
good things of this World.

And now let us examine the Truth of your main Position, viz. That Civil
Society is instituted for the attaining all the Benefits that it may any way
yield. Which, if true, then this Position must be true, viz. That all Societies
whatsoever are instituted for the attaining all the Benefits that they may any
way yield; there being nothing peculiar to Civil Society in the Case, why that
Society should be instituted for the attaining all the Benefits it can any way
yield, and other Societies not. By which Argument it will follow, That all
Societies are instituted for one and the same End: i. e. for the attaining all
the Benefits that they can any way yield. By which account there will be no
difference between Church and State; A Commonwealth and an Army; or between a
Family and the East India Company; all which have hitherto been thought
distinct sorts of Societies, instituted for different Ends. If your Hypothesis
hold good, one of the Ends of the Family must be to Preach the Gospel, and
Administer the Sacraments; and one business of an Army to teach Languages, and
prop^gate Religion; because these are Benefits some way or other attainable by
those Societies: Unless you take want of Commission and Authority to be a
sufficient Impediment: And that will be so too in other cases.

It Is a benefit to have true Knowledge and Philosophy embraced and assented to,
in any Civil Society or Government. But will you say, therefore, that it is a
benefit to the Society, or one of the Ends of Government, that all who are not
Peripateticks should be punished, to make Men find out the Truth, and prosess
it. This indeed might be thought a fit way to make some Men embrace the
Peripatetick Philosophy, but not a proper way to find the Truth. For, perhaps
the Peripatetick Philosophy may not be true; perhaps a great many have not
time, nor Parts to Study it; perhaps a great many who have studied it, cannot
be convinced of the truth of it: And therefore it cannot be a benefit to the
Commonwealth, nor one of the Ends of it, that these Members of the Society
should be disturbed, and diseased to no purpose, when they are guilty of no
fault. For just the same reason, it cannot be a benefit to ^ivil Society, that
Men should be pun shed in Denmark, for not being Lu^rans; in Geneva, for not
being Calvinists; and in Vi^nna, for not being Papists; as a means to make them
find out the true Religion. For so, upon your grounds, Men most be treated in
those places, as well as in England, for not being of the Church of England.
And then, I beseech you, consider the great benefit will accrue to Men in
Society by this method; And I suppose it will be a hard thing for you to prove,
That ever Civil Governments were instituted to pun^sh Men for not being of
this, or that Sect in Religion; however by accident, indirectly, and at a
distance, it may be an occasion to one perhaps of a thousand, or an hundred, to
study that Controversy, which is all you expect from it. If it be a Benefit,
pray tell me what Benefit it is. A Civil Benefit it cannot be. For Men's Civil
Interests are disturbed, injured, and impaired by it. And what Spiritual
Benefit that can be to any multitude of Men, to be pun^shed for Dissenting from
a false or erroneous Prosession, I would have you sind out: unless it be a
Spiritual Benefit to be in danger to be driven into a wrong way. For if in all
differing Sects, one is in the wrong, it is a hundred to one but that from which
one Dissents, and is punished for Dissenting from, is the wrong.

I grant it is past doubt, That the Nature of Man is so covetous of Good, that
no one would have excluded from any Action he does, or from any Institution he
is concerned in, any manner of Good or Benefit, that it might any way yield.
And if this be your meaning, it will not be denied you. But then you speak very
improperly, or rather very mistakenly, if you call such benefits as may any way
(i. e. indirectly, and at a distance or by accident) be attained by Civil or
any other Society, the Ends for which it is instituted. Nothing can in reason
be reckoned amongst the Ends of any S^ty, but what may in reason be supposed to
be designed by those who enter into it. ^ow no body can in reason suppose, that
any one ent^ed into Civil Society for the procuring, securing, or advancing the
salvation of his Soul^ when he, for that end, needed not the Force of Civil
Society. The procuring, therefore, s^ing, and advancing the Spiritual and
E^ernal Interest of men, cannot in reason be reckoned amongst the Ends of Civil
Societies; Tho perhaps it might so fall out, that in some particular instance,
some man's spiritual Interest might be advanced by your or any other way of
applying Civil Force. A Nobleman, whose Chapel is decayed or ^allen, may make
^se of his Dining Room for Praying and Preaching. Yet whatever (...) were
attainable by this use of the room, no body can in reason reckon this among the
Ends for which it was built; no more than the accidental breeding of some Bird
in any part of it (tho it were a Benefit it yielded) could in reason be
reckoned among the Ends of building the House.

But, say you, Doubtless Commonwealths are instituted for the attaining of all
the B^nefits which pelitical Government can yield; and therefore if the
Spiritual and Et^rnal Interests of men may any way be procured or advanced by
P^litical Government, the procuring and advancing those Interests, must in all
reason be reck^n'd amongst the E^ds of Civil S^ciety, and so con^quently fall
within the compass of the Magistrates Jurisdiction. Upon the same Grounds, I
thus reason. Doubtless Churches are instituted ^or the attaining of all the
Benefits which Ecclesiastical Government can yield: And therefore, if the
Temporal and Secular Interests ^f men man any way be procured or advanced by
Ecclesiastic^l Pol^y, the (...) and advancing those Interests, must in all
reason be reckoned among the Ends of Religious Societies, and so consequently
fall within the compass of Church-mens Jurisdiction. The Church of Rome has
openly made its advantage of Secular Interests to be precured or advanced,
indirectly and at a distance, and in ord^e ad spiritualia; all which ways (if I
mistake not English) are comprehended under your any way. But I do not remember
that any of the Reformed Churches have hitherto directly professed it. But
there is a time for all things. And if the Commonwealth once invades the
spiritual Ends of the Church, by meddling with the Salvation of Souls, (which
she has always been so tender of) who can deny, that the Church should have
liberty to make her self some amends by Reprisals?

But, Sir, however you and I may argue from wrong suppositions, yet unless the
Apostle, ( Ephesians. 4;) where he reckons up the Church Officers which Christ had
instituted in his Churh, had told us they were for some other Ends than for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ; the advancing of their secular Interests will scarce be allowed
to be their business, or within the compass of their Jurisdiction. Nor till it
can be shown that Civil Society is instituted for Spiritual Ends, or that the
Magistrate has commission to interpose his Authority, or use Force in matters
of Religion; your supposition of Spiritual Benefits indirectly and at a
distance attainable by Political Government, will never prove the advancing of
those Interests by Force, to be the Magistrates business, and to fall within
the compass of his Jurisdiction. And till then, the Force of the Arguments
which the Author has brought against it, (in the 7th and following Pages of his
Letter) will hold good.

Commonwealths, or Civil Societies and Governments, if you will believe the
judicious Mr. Hooker, are as St. Peter calls them (1 Pet. 2.13.) (...), the
contrivance and institution of man; and he shows there for what end; viz. for
the Punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well. I do not
find any where, that it is for the punishment of those who are not in Church
Communion with the Magistrate, to make them study Controversies in Religion, or
hearken to those who will tell them they have mistaken their way, and offer to
show them the right one. You must show them such a Commission, if you say it is
from God. And in all Societies instituted by man, the Ends of them can be no
other than what the Institutors appointed; which I am sure could not be their
spiritual and eternal Interest. For they could not stipulate about these one
with another, nor submit this Interest to the power of the Society, or any
Sovereign they they should set over it. There are Nations in the West Indies
which have no other End of their Society, but their mutual defense against
their common ^ies. In these, their Captain, or Prince, is Sovereign Commander
in time of War; but in time of Peace, neither ne nor ^y body else has any
Authority over any of the Society. You cannot deny but other, even temporal
ends, are attainable by these Commonwealths, if they had been otherwise
instituted and appointed to those ends. But all your saying, Doubtless
Commonwealths are instituted for the attaining of all the benefits which they
can yield, will not give Authority to any one, or more, in such a Society, by
Political Government or Force, to procure directly or indirectly other Benefits
than that for which it was instituted: And therefore, there it falls not within
the compass of those Princes Jurisdiction to punish any one of the Society for
injuring another; because he has no commission so to do; whatever reason you
may think there is, that that should be reckoned amongst the Ends of their
Society.

But to conclude: Your Argument has that desect in it which turns it upon your
self. And that is, that the procuring and advancing the Spiritual and Eternal
Interest of Souls, your way, is not a Benefit to the Society: And so, upon your
own Supposition, the procuring and advancing the spiritual Interest of Souls,
any way, cannot be one of the Ends of Civil Society; unless the procuring and
advancing the spiritual Interest of souls, in a way proper to do more harm than
good toward the salvation of Souls, be to be accounted such a Benefit as to be
one of the ends of Civil Societies. For that yours is such a way, I have proved
already. So that were it hard to prove that Political Government, whose only
Instrument is Force, could no way by Force (however applied) more advance than
hinder the Spiritual and Eternal Interest of men; yet having proved it against
your particular new way of applying Force, I have sufficiently vindicated the
Author's Doctrine from any thing you have said against it. Which is enough for
my present purpose.

Your next Page tells us, That this reasoning of the Author, P. 19.
viz. That the Power of the Magistrate cannot be ex^ended to the Salvation of
Souls, because the care of Souls is not committed to the Magistrate; is proving
the thing by it self. As if you should say, when I tell you that you could not
extend your Power to meddle with the money of a young Gentleman you traveled
with, as Tutor, because the care of his Money was not committed to you, were
proving the thing by it self. For it is not necessary that you should have the
Power of his money; it may be entrusted to a Steward who travels with him; or
it may be left to himself. If you have it, it is but a delegated Power. And in
all delegated Powers, I thought this a fair proof; you have it not, or cannot
use it, (which is what the Author means here by extended to) because it is not
committed to you. In the summing up of this Argument, (P. 18.) the Author says,
No body therefore, in fine, neither Commonwealths, etc. has any Title to
invade the Civil Rights and worldly goods of another, upon pretense of
Religion. Which is an exposition of what he means in the beginning of the
Argument, by the Magistrates Power cannot be extended to the Salvation of
Souls. So that if we take these last cited words equivalent to those in the
former place, his Pr^of will stand thus. The Magistrate has no title to invade
the Civil Rights or Worldly Goods of any one, upon pretense of Religion;
because the care of Souls is not committed to him. This is the same in the
Author's sense with the former. And whether either this, or that, be a proving
the same thing by it self, we must leave to others to judge.

You quote the ^uthor's Argument, which he brings to prove that the care of
Souls is not committed to the Magistrate, in these words. It is not committed
to him by God, because it appears not that P. 21.
God has ever given any such authority to one man over another, as to compel
any one to his Religion. This when first I read it, I confess I thought a good
Argument. But you say this is quite besides the business; and the reason you
give, is; For the authority of the Magistrate is not an authority to compel any
one to his Religion, but only an authority to procure all his Subjects the
means of discovering the way of Salvation, and to procure withal, as much as in
him lies. that none remain ignorant of it, etc. I fear Sir, you forget your
self. The Author was not writing against your new Hypothesis, before it was
known in the World. He may be excused if he had not the gift of Prophecy, to
argue against a Notion which was not yet started. He had in view only the Laws
hitherto made, and the Punishments (in matters of Religion) in use in the
world. The Penalties, as I take it, are lain on men for being of different ways
of Religion. Which, what is it other, but to compel them to relinquish their
own, and to conform themselves to that from which they differ? If this be not
to compel them to the Magistrates Religion, pray tell^ us what is? This must be
necessarily so understood; unless it can be supposed that the Law intends not
to have that done, which with Penalies it commands to be done; or that
Punishments are not compulsion, not that compulsion the Author complains of.
The Law says, Do this and live; embrace this Doctrine, conform to this way of
Worship, and be at ease, and free; or else be fined, imprisoned, banished,
burnt. If you can show among the Laws that have been made in England,
concerning Religion, (and I think I may say any-where else) any one that
punishes men for not having impartially examined the Religion they have
embraced, or refused, I think I may yield you the Cause. Lawmakers have been
generally wiser than to make Laws that could not be executed: and therefore
their Laws were against Nonconformists, which could be known; and not for
impartial examination, which could not. 'Twas not then besides the Author's
business, to bring an argument against the Persecutions here in fashion. He did
not know that any one, who was so free as to acknowledge that the Magistrate has
not an authority to compel any one to his Religion, and thereby at once (as you
have done) give up all the Laws now in force against Dissenters, had yet Rods
in store for them, and by a new Trick would bring them under the lash of the
Law, when the old Pretenses were too much exploded to serve any longer. Have
you never heard of such a thing as the Religion established by Law? Which is,
it seems, the Lawful Religion of a Country, and to be complied with as such.
There being such things, such notions, yet in the World; it was not quite
besides the Author's business to allege, that God never gave such authority to
one man over another as to compel any one to his Religion. I will grant, if you
please, Religion established by Law is a pretty odd way of speaking, in the
mouth of a Christian; (and yet it is much in fashion) as if the Magistrate's
Authority could add any force or sanction to any Religion, whether true or
false. I am glad to find you have so far considered the Magistrate's Authority,
that you agree with the Author, that he has none to compel men to his
Religion. Much less can he, by any establishment of Law, add any thing to the
Truth or Validity of his own, or any Religion whatsoever.

It remains now to examine, whether the Author's Argument will not hold good,
even against Punishments in your way. For if the Magistrate's Authority be, as
you here say, only to procure P. 21.
all his Subjects, (mark what you say, ALL HIS SUBJECTS) the means of
discovering the way of Salvation, and to procure withal, as much as in him
lies, that NONE remain ignorant of it, or refuse to embrace it, either for want
of using those means, or by reason of any such prejudices as may render them
ineffectual. If this be the Magistrate's business, in reference to ALL HIS
SUBJECTS; I desire you, or any man else, to tell me how this can be done, by
the application of Force only to a part of them; Unless you will still vainly
suppose ignorance, ^gligence, or prejudice, only amongst that part which any
where d^ffers from the Magistrate. If those of the Magistrates Church may be
ignorant of the way of salvation; If it be possible there may be amongst them
those who refuse to embrace it, either for want of using those means, or by
reason of any such prejudices as may render them ineffectual; What, in this
case, becomes of the Magistrate's Authority to procure all his Subjects the
means of discovering the way of sal^ation? Must these of his Subjects be
neglected, and lest without the means he has Authority to procure them? Or must
he ase Force upon them too? And then, pray, show me how this can be done. Shall
the Magistrate punish those of his own Religion, to procur^ them the means of
discovering the way of salvation, and to procure as much as in him lies, that
they remain nor ignorant of it; or refuse not to embrace it? These are such
contradictions in practice, this is such condemnation of a man's own Religion,
as no one can expect from the Magistrate; and I dare say you desire not of him.
And yet this is that he must do, If his Authority ^e to precure all his
subjects the means of discovering the way to salvation. And if it be so
needful, as you say it is, that he should use it. I am sure Force can^do that
till it be applied wider, and Punishment be laid upon more than you would have
it. For if the Magistrate be by Force to pricu^e; ^s much as in him lies, that
none rem^gnorant of the way of salvation; must he not punish all those who are
ignorant of the way of salvation? And pray tell me how is this any way
practicable, but by supposing none in the National Church ignorant, and all out
of it ignorant of the way of S^lvation. Which, what is it, but to punish men
barely for not being of the Magistrate's Religion; The very thing you deny he
has authority to do? So that the Magistraie having, by your own confession, n^
authority thus to use Force; and it being otherways impract cable for the
procuring all his Subjects the means of discovering the way of salvation; there
is an end of Force. And so Force being laid aside, either as unlawful, or
unpracticable, the Author's Argument holds good against Force, even in your way
of applying it.

But if you say, as you do in the foregoing page, That the Magistrate has
authority to lay such Penalties upon those who refuse to P. 20.
embrace the Doctrine of the proper Ministers of Religion, and ^o submit to
their Spiritual Government, as to make them betb^nk themselv^s so as not to be
ali^nated from the Truth.( ^or, as for fo^lish ^umour, and uncharitable
pr^judice, etc. which are but words o^ course that opposite Parties give one
another, as marks of duke and presumption; I omit them, as signifying nothing
to the Question; being such as will with the same Reason be retor^ed by the
other Side,) Against that also the Author's Argument holds, That the Magistrate
has no such Authority. 1st, Because God never gave the Magistrate an authority
to be Judge of truth for another man in matters of Religion: and so he cannot be
judge whether any man be altenated from the truth or no. 2^ly), Because the
Magistrate had never authority given him to lay any Penaltie^ on those who
refuse to embrace the Doctrine of the proper Ministers of his Religion, (or of
any other) or to submit to their Spiritual Government, more than o^ any other
men.

To the Author's Argument, that the Magistrate cannot receive such authority
from the People; because no man has power to leave it to the choice of any
other man to choose a Religion for him; you give this pleasant Answer. As the
Power of the Magi-strate, P. 22.
in reference to Religion^ is ordained for the bringing men to take such care
as they ought of their Salvation, that they may not blindly leave it to the
choice, neither of any other person, nor yet of their own lusts and passi^ns,
to prescribe to them what faith or worship they shall embrace: So if we suppose
this power to be vested in the Magistrate by the consent of the People; this
will not (...) their abandoning the care of their Salvation, but rather the
contray^ For if men, in choosing their Religion, are so generally subject, as
has been showed, when left wholly to th^es, to be so much ^way d by prejudice
and passion, as either not at all, or not sufficiently to regard the reason^
and motives which ought alone to determine their choice; then it is every man's
true interest, not to be left who^ly to himself in this matter; but that care
should be taken, tha^in an Affair of so vast concernment to him, be (...) be
brought even against his own incl^ation, if it cannot be done otherwise, (which
is ordinarily the case) to act according to reason an^ sound judgment^ And then
what better course can m^n take to provide for this, than by vesting the Power
I have described, in him who bears the Sword? Wherein I beseech you consider;
1st, Whether it be not pleasant, that you say the Power of the Magistrate is
orda^'d to bring men to take such care; and thence infer, Then it is every
one's interest to vest such Power in the Magistrate? For if it be the Power of
the Magistrate, it is his. And what need the People vest it in him; unless
there be need, and it be the best course they can take, to vest a Power in the
Magistrate, which he has already? 2dly, Another pleasant thing, you here say,
is; That the Power of the Magistrates is to bring men to such a care of their
Salvation, that they may not blindly leave it to the choice of any person, or
their own lusts, or passions, to prescribe to them what faith or worship they
shall embrace; And yet that it is their best course to vest a Power in the
Magistrate, liable to the same lusts and passions as themselves, to choose for
them. For if they vest a Power in the Magistrate to punish them, when they
dissent from his Religion; to bring them to act, even against their own
inclination, according to reason and sound judgment; which is, (as you explain
your self in another place) to bring them to consider Reasons and Arguments
proper and sufficient to convince them: How far is this from leaving it to the
choice of another man to prescribe to them what Faith or Worship they shall
embrace? Especially if we consider, that you think it a strange thing, That the
Author would have the care of every man's Soul left to himself alone. So that
this care being vested in the Magistrate, with a Power to punish men to make
them consider Reasons and Arguments proper and sufficient to convince them of
the Truth of his Religion; the choice is evidently in the Magistrate; As much
as it can be in the power of one man to choose for another what Religion he
shall be of, which consists only in a Power of compelling him by Punishments to
embrace it.

I do neither you nor the Magistrate Injury, when I say that the Power you give
the Magistrate of punishing men, to make them consider reasons and arguments
proper and sufficient to convince them, is to convince them of the truth of his
Religion, and to bring them to it. For Men will never, in his opinion, Act
according to Reason and sound Judgment, (which is the thing you here say Men
should be brought to by the Magistrate, even against their own Inclination)
till they embrace his Religion. And if you have the brow of an Honest Man, you
will not say the Magistrate will ever punish you, to bring you to consider any
other Reasons and Arguments, but such as are proper to convince you of the
truth of his Religion, and to bring you to that. Thus you shift forwards and
backwards. You say The Magistrate has no Power to punish Men, to compel them to
his Religion; but only to compel them to consider Reasons and Arguments proper
to convince them of the truth of his Religion; which is all one as to say, no
Body has Power to choose your way for you to Jerusalem; But yet the Lord of the
Manor has Power to punish you, to bring you to consider Reasons and Arguments
proper and sufficient to convince you; (of what?) That the way he goes in, is
the right, and so to make you join in Company, and go along with him. So that,
in effect, what is all your going about, but to come at last to the same place
again; and put a Power into the Magistrate's hands, (under another pretense) to
compel Men to his Religion; which use os Force, the Author has sufficiently
overthrown, and you your self have quitted. But I am tired to follow you so
often round the same Circle.

You speak of it here as the most deplorable Condition imaginable, P. 22.
that Men should be left to themselves, and not be forced to consider and
examine the Grounds of their Religion, and search impartially and diligently
after the truth. This you make the great miscarriage of Mankind. And for this
you seem solicitous, all through your Treatise, to find out a Remedy; and there
is scarce a Leaf wherein you do not offer yours. But what if, after all, now
you should be found to prevaricate? Men have contrived to themselves, P. 7.
say you, a great variety of Religions: It Is granted. They seek not the Truth
in this matter with that Application of Mind, and that freedom of Judgment
which is requisite: It Is confessed. All the false Religions now on foot in the
World, have taken their rise from the slight and partial Consideration, which
Men have contented themselves with, in searching after the true; and Men take
them up, and persist in them for want of due Examination: Be it so. There is
need of a Remedy for this; and I have found one whose Success cannot be
questioned: Very well. What is it? Let us hear it. Why, Dissenters must be
punished. Can any Body, that hears you say so, believe you in earnest; and that
want of Examination is the thing you would have amended, when want of
Examination is not the thing you would have punished? If want of Examination be
the fault, want of Examination must be punished: if you are, as you pretend,
fully satisfied, that Punishment is the proper and only means to remedy it. But
if, in all your Treatise, you can show me one place, where you say That the
Ignorant, the Careless, the Inconsiderate, the Negligent in examining thoroughly
the truth of their own and others Religion, etc. are to be punished; I w^ll
allow your remedy for a good one. But you have not said any thing like this;
and which is more, I tell you before hand, you dare not say it. And whilst you
do not, the World has reason to judge, that however want of Examination be a
general Fault, which you with great Vehemence have exaggerated; yet you use it
only for a pretense to punish Dissenters; and either distrust your remedy, that
it will not cure this Evil, or else care not to have it generally cured. This
evidently appears from your whole management of the Argument. And he that reads
your T^eatise with attention, will be more confirmed in this Opinion, when he
shall find, that you (who are so earnest to have Men punished, to bring them to
consider and examine, that so they may discover the way to Salvation) have not
said one word of considering, searching, and hearkening to the Scripture; which
had been as good a rule for a Christian to have sent them to, as to Reasons and
Arguments pr^per to convince them, of you know not what; As to the In^ction and
Government of the proper Ministers of Religion, which who they are, Men are yet
^ar from being agreed; Or as to the ^formation of those, who tell them they
have mistak^n their way, and offer to show them the right; and to the like
uncertain and dangerous Guides; which were not those that our Savior and the
Apostles sent Men to, but to the Scriptures. S^arch the Scriptures, for in them
you think you have ^nal Life, says our Savior to the unbelieving persecuting
Jews. ( (...) 5.39) And it is the Scriptures which St. Paul's says, are able to
make wise unto Salvation. ((...) Tim. 3.15.)

Talk no more therefore, if you have any care of your Reputation, how much it
is every Man's Interest not to be left to himself, without Molestation, without
Punishment in matters of Relig^on. Talk not of bringing Men to embrace the
Truth that must save them, by putting them upon Examination. Talk no more of
Force and Punishment, as the only way left to bring Men to examine. It Is
evident you mean nothing less. For, tho want of Examination be the only fault
you complain of, and Punishment be in your Opinion the only way to bring Men to
it; and this the whole design of your Book; yet you have not once proposed in
it, that those, who do not impartially examine, should be forced to it. And,
that you may not think I talk at random, when I say you dare not; I will, if
you please, give you some Reasons for my saying so.

First, Because, if you propose that all should be punished, who are ignorant,
who have not used such Consideration as is apt and proper to manifest the
Truth; but ^ave been determined in the choice of their Religion by Impressions
of Education, Admiration of Persons, w^rldly Respects, Prejudices, and the like
incompetent Motives; and have taken up their Religion, without examining it as
they ought; you will propose to have several of your own Church (be it what it
will) p^nished which would be a Proposition too apt to o^end too many of it,
for you to venture on. For whatever need there be of Re^ormation, every one
will not thank you for proposing such an one as must begin at (or at least
reach to) the House of God.

Secondly, Because, if you should propose that all those who are Ignorant,
Careless, and Negligent in examining should be punished, you would have little
to say in this Question of Toleration. For if the Laws of the State were made
as they ought to be, eq^al to all the Subjects, without distinction of ^en of
d^erent Professions in Religion; and the Faults to be amended by Punishments,
were impartially punished, in all who are guilty of them; this would
immediately produce a perfect Toleration, or show the uselesness of Force in
Matters of Religion. If therefore you think it so necess^ry, as you say, for
the promoting of true Religion, and the Salvation of Souls, that Me^ should be
punished to make them examine; do but fi^d a way to apply F^rce to all that
have not thoroughly and impartially examined, and you have my Consent. For tho
Force be not the proper means of promoting Religion; yet there is no better way
to snew the uselesless of it, than the applying it equally to miscarrages, in
whomsoever sound; and not to distinct Parties or Persuasions of Men, for the
Reformation of them alone, when others are equally Faulty.

Thirdly, Because, without being for as large a Toleration as the Author
proposes, you cannot be truly and sincerely for a free and impartial
Examination. For whoever examines, must have the Liberty to judge, and follow
his Judgment; or else you put him upon Examination to no purpose. And whether
that will not as well lead Men from, as to your Church, is so much a venture,
that by your way of Writing, it is evident enough you are loath to hazard it;
and if you are of the National Church, it is plain your Brethren will not bear
with you in the allowance of such a Liberty. You must therefore either change
your Method; and if the want of Examination be that great and dangerous Fault
you would have corrected, you must equally punish all that are equally guilty
of any neglect in this Matter, and then take your only means, your beloved
Force, and make the best of it; or else you must put off your Mask, and confess
that you design not your Punishments to bring Men to Examination, but to
Conformity. For the Fallacy you have used, is too gross to pass upon this Age.

What follows to Page 26. I think I have considered sufficiently already. But
there you have found out something worth notice. In this Page, out of abundant
Kindness, when the Dissenters have their Heads (without any cause) broken, you
provide them a Plaster. For, say you, if upon such Examination of the Matter,
( i. e. brought to it by the Magistrates Punishment) they chance to find, that
the Truth does not lie on the Magistrate's side; P. 26.
they have gained thus much however, even by the Magistrate's misapplying his
Power, that they know better than they did before, where the truth does lie.
Which is as true, as if you should say; Upon Examination I find such a one is
out of the way to York; therefore I know better than I did before, that I am in
the right. For neither of you may be in the right. This were true indeed, if
there were but two ways in all; a Right and a Wrong. But where there be an
hundred ways, and but one right; your knowing upon Examination, that that which
I take is wrong, makes you not know any thing better than before, that yours is
the right. But if that be the best reason you have for it, it is Ninety eight to
one still against you, that you are in the wrong. Besides, he that has been
punished, may have examined before, and then you are sure he gains nothing.
However, you think you do well to encourage the Magistate in punishing, and
comfort the Man who has suffered unjustly, by showing what he shall gain by it.
Whereas, on the contrary, in a Discourse of this Nature, where the bounds of
Right and Wrong are enquired into, and should be established, the Magistrate
was to be showed the bounds of his Authority, and warned of the injury he did
when he misapplies his Power, and punished any man who deserved it not; and not
be soothed into injustice, by consideration of gain that might thence accrue to
the sufferer. Shall we do evil that good may come of it? There are a sort of
People who are very wary of touching upon the Magistrate's duty, and tender of
showing the bounds of his Power, and the injustice and ill consequences of his
misapplying it; at least, so long as it is misapplied in favor of them, and
their Party. I know not whether you are of their number. But this I am sure;
you have the misfortune here to fall into their mistake. The Magistrate, you
confess, may in this case misapply his Power; and instead of representing to
him the injustice of it, and the account he must give to his Sovereign one day
of this great Trust put into his hands for the equal protection of all his
Subjects: you pretend advantages which the Sufferer may receive from it: And so
instead of disheartning from, you give encouragement to, the mischief. Which,
upon your Principle, joined to the natural thirst in man after Arbitrary Power,
may be carried to all manner of exorbitancy, with some pretense of Right.

For thus stands your System. If Force, i e. Punishment, may be P. 15.
any way useful for the promoting the Salvation of Souls, there is a right
somewhere to use it. And this Right (say you) is in the Magistrate. P. 16.
Who then, upon your grounds, may quickly find reason, where it suits his
inclination, or serves his turn, to punish men directly to bring them to his
Religion. For if he may use Force, because it may be, indirectly and at a
distance, any way, useful toward the Salvation of Souls, toward the procuring
any degree of glory; Why may he not, by the same Rule, use it where it may be
useful, at least indirectly, and at a distance, toward the procuring a greater
degree of glory? For St. Paul assures us, that the Afflictions of this life
work for us a far more exceeding weight of glory. So that why should they not
be punished, if in the wrong, to bring them into the right way; If in the
right, to make them by their Sufferings gainers of a far more exceeding weight
of glory? But whatever you say of Punishment being lawful, because indirectly,
and at a distance it may be useful; I suppose, upon cooler thoughts, you will
be apt to suspect that, however Sufferings may promote the Salvation of those
who make a good use of them, and so set men surer in the right way, or higher
in a state of glory; yet those who make men unduly suffer, will have the
heavier Account, and greater weight of guilt upon them, to sink them deeper in
the Pit of perdition; and that therefore they should be warned to take take
care of so using their Power. Because whoever be gainers by it, they themselves
will (without repentance and amendment) be sure to be losers. But by granting
that the Magistrate misapplies his Power, when he punishes those who have the
Right on their side, whether it be to bring them to his own Religion, or
whether it be to bring them to consider reasons and arguments proper to
convince them, you grant all that the Author contends for. All that he
endeavors, is to show the bounds of Civil Power; and that in punishing others
for Religion, the Magistrate misapplies the Force he has in his hands, and so
goes beyond Right, beyond the limits of his Power. For I do not think the
Author of the Letter so vain (I am sure for my part I am not) as to hope by
Arguments, though never so clear, to reform presently all the Abuses in this
matter; Especially whilst men of Art, and Religion, endeavor so industriously
to palliate and disguise, what truth, yet, sometimes, unawares forces from them.

Do not think, I make a wrong use of your saying, the Magistrate misapplies his
Power, when I say you therein grant all that the Author contends for. For if
the Magistrate misapplies, or makes a wrong use of his Power, when he punishes
in matters of Religion any one who is in the Right, though it be but to make
him consider, (as you grant he does) he also misapplies, or makes wrong use of
his Power, when he punishes any one, whomsoever in Matters of Religion, to make
him consider. For every one is here Judge for himself, what is Right; And in
matters of Faith, and Religious Worship, another cannot judge for him. So that
to punish any one in Matters of Religion, tho it be but to make him consider,
is by your own Confession beyond the Magistrate's Power. And that punishing in
matters of Religion is beyond the Magistrate's Power, is what the Author
contends for.

You tell us in the following words; All the hurt that comes to P. 26.
them by it, is only the suffering some tolerable Inconveniences, for their
foll^ing the Light of their own Reason, and the Dictates of their own
Consciences; which certainly is no such mischief to Mankind, as to make it more
elegible, that there should be no such Power vested in the Magistrate, but the
care of every Man's Soul should be left to himself alone, (as this Author
demands it should be:) that is, that every Man should be suffered, quietly, and
without the least Molestation, either to take no care at all of his Soul, if he
be so pleased; or in doing it, to follow his own groundless Prejudices, or
unaccountable Humor, or any crafty Seducer, whom he may think fit to take for
his Guide. Why should not the care of every Man's Soul be left to himself,
rather than the Magistrate? Is the Magistrate like to be more concerned for it?
Is the Magistrate like to take more care of it? Is the Magistrate commonly more
careful of his own, than other Men are of theirs? Will you say the Magistrate
is less exposed in matters of Religion, to Prejudices, Humors, and Crafty
Seducers, than other Men? If you cannot lay your Hand upon your Heart, and say
all this; What then will be got by the change? And why may not the care of
every Man's Soul be left to himself? Especially, if a Man be in so much danger
to miss the truth, who is suffered quietly, and without the least Molestation,
either to take no care of his Soul, if he be so pleased, or to follow his own
Prejudices, etc. For if want of Molestation be the dangerous state, wherein Men
are likeliest to miss the right way; it must be confessed, that of all Men, the
Magistrate is most in danger to be in the wrong, and so the unfittest (if you
take the care of Men's Souls from themselves) of all Men, to be entrusted with
it. For he never meets with that great and only Antidote of yours against
Error, which you here call Molestation. He never has the benefit of your
Sovereign Remedy, Punishment, to make him consider; which you think so
necessary, that you look on it as a most dangerous State for Men to be without
it; and therefore tell us, it is every Man's true Interest, not to be left
wholly to himself in matters of Religion.

Thus, Sir, I have gone through your whole Treatise, and as I think, have
omitted nothing in it material. If I have, I doubt not but I shall hear of it.
And now I refer it to your self, as well as to the Judgment of the World,
Whether the Author of the Letter, in saying no Body has a Right; or you, in
saying, the Magistrate has a Right to use force in Matters of Religion; has
most Reason. In the mean time, I leave this request with you. That if ever you
write again, about the means of bringing Souls to Salvation, (which certainly
is the best design any one can employ his Pen in) you would take care not to
prejudice so good a Cause, by ordering it so, as to make it look as if you writ
for a Party.

I am, SIR, Your most Humble Servant, PHILANTHROPUS.
May 27. 1690.
FINIS.

