THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE Church and Court OF ROME, CONSIDERED:

IN SOME REFLECTIONS ON A DIALOGUE

ENTITLED,

A Conference between two Protestants and a Papist.

By the Author of the Late Seasonable Discourse.

LONDON:

Printed by Andrew Clark for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard,
at the West End, 1674.

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE CHURCH and COURT OF ROME, CONSIDERED.
HAving fouud my self concerned to Vindicate the Seasonable Discourse, (which
showed the Necessity of Maintaining the Established Religion in Opposition to
Popery) from the Passionate Cavils of the Full Answerer: I think it necessary
further to advert to what is offered by a more temperate and knowing Writer, in
Bar to my Assertions, whether in direct contradiction to them, or incidentally
in order to the framing an Apology for those moderate men of the Roman
Communion, who disown the Exorbitances of the Pope, though they remain addicted
to that Church.

Writers of this kind, who not only join with, but seemingly out-go us, in a
just abhorrence of some of the odious parts of Popery, thereby gain an
advantage to recommend both themselves and the other less scandalous, though
equally pernicious, Doctrines of the Roman Church; and also to bring in that
Whole Religion at the Postern-Door, which would never be admitted at the Gate.

And if this be the natural Effect of the Pretenses made to Moderation, however
specious they appear, I presume 'twill be esteemed by sober men no ill Office
to detect the fraud and danger of them, and demonstrate the Unpracticableness
and utter Impossibility of that Dream of Reconcilement with those our
Adversaries; who cannot dismiss an Error, but they must part with
Infallibility to boot; nor incline to the Demands of Truth or Charity, without
the forfeiture of Interest and Reputation: In a word, cannot acquit themselves
of Treason, without renouncing an Article of their Faith.

Now our Author having thought fit to propose what he had to say in this
Affair, in the form of a Dialogue, which though in it self a popular and
persuasive method, is yet by reason of its frequent Transitions and Ornamental
Appendages, not very very proper for the carrying on an Argumentative Debate: I
shall therefore consider the Heads of Discourse which I find insisted on by
him* those I mean which seem material, distinctly and apart, and fairly give my
thoughts upon them.

Where my first Enquiry shall be,

I. Whether peaceful Pretenses are Baits to catch the unwary Proselyte, who
when he is once hung, there is no getting loose again; but Concessions are
retracted, the painted shows washed off, and he has nothing left but a
fruitless repentance* All which the Author peremptorily denies, page 8. II.
Whether if the State would think fit to allow the English Papists, such, of
whose Fidelity and Affection to their Country the Governors were well assured,
to whom those Papists might have recourse for their spiritual Concerns, they
would remove our jealousies of their being overmuch affected to Strangers,
etc. Which is asserted, page 6. III. Whether the Popes power in deposing Kings
be a Doctrine of the Roman Church? Which is denied, p. 9, 10, 11, 12. IV.
Whether Princes of the Roman Communion have sufficient Powers to defend
themselves from the Tyrannies and Encroachments of the Pope. Which is said, p.
16, 17, 18. V. Whether Religion were the Cause of the Massacres in France and
Ireland? Which is denied, page 29.
These severals being honestly discust, will I presume go very far toward the
undeceiving of all those, who without the mixture of Prepossession and
Interest, which no evidence can convince, are led aside by fair Appearances;
and are so credulous to think every thing possible, which some bold Undertaker
has the Confidence to say is easy; and every thing practicable which someman
of speculation demonstrates to be possible.

ENQUIRY I. Whether Peaceful Pretenses are Baits to catch the unwary Proselyte,
who when he is once hung, there is no getting loose again, but Concessions are
retracted, the painted shows washed off, and he has nothing left but a
fruitless Repentance.
In which Enquiry concerning the insidious practicing of the Romanists to draw
men into Popery, It will be reasonable to observe the method used in this
affair: Where I might very justly insist upon the downright Cheats, Juglings,
and Impostures practiced by the Factors for Popery, notoriously evidenced not
only by creditable Testimony and flagrant Fact; but also by public Acts of
Court, and Judicial Records: Of which the Reader may have large accounts from
Archbishop Declarat* of egregious* Popish Impostures, etc, Foot out of the
Snare. Examination of Sowbrets, etc. Boy of Bilson, etc. Chambers. Sheldon.
Hars net, Mr. Gee, Mr. Baddiley, Pots, and others. To which might be added the
impudent Defenses of pious Frauds, directing of Intention, and Apologies for
that artificial way of lying called Equivocation; as also the Fallacies and
empty Paralogisms constantly used and solemnly recommended in the Affair of
gaining Proselytes to the Roman Church.

As a Specimen whereof, to avoid trouble to the Read^^ (...) my self, I will
mention those which are proposed by Thomas a Jesus, in his large work concerning
the Conversion of all Nations, borrowed as he tells us from Coster, Possevine,
and other eminent Writers in that Cause. Where Tho a Jesu, de convers. omn.
gent. p. 561, etc.
he advises not to dispute with Heretics, but rather express an intimate
kindness for their Souls; and first demand of them, What they think of all
their Ancestors? Whether they imagine they were damned for being Papists? An
Argument, which, had it any force, must persuade Jews, Mahumetans, and
Heathens, never to be Christians, and as it happens here in England, must
oblige us never to be Papists, lest we should condemn our Fathers,
Grandfathers, and Great Grandfathers, all those Ancestors for whom we have the
most sensible Concern, who all were Protestants. The next Direction is, To ask
the Dissenter from the Church of Rome, Ibid.
Why he is of this Sect rather than that, why a Lutheran rather than a
Calvinist, etc. And if he says, Because he sees more reason to be of this Sect
than of another, to conclude he is a Heretic, because he chooses one Religion
before another. One would wonder that they who are persuading men to prefer
Popery before Protestantism, should at the same instant declare it a Mark of
Heresy to choose a Profession in Religion: That they should pretend to give
Reasons why men should be Papists, and yet hold it a pernicious thing to be of
that Religion which they have Reason to be of. The third Demand is as
convincing as the former, To ask the Protestant where his Church was before
Luther? Ibid.
As if Religion were therefore new, because freed from Innovations: Not to
question the Age of the Popes Universal Monarchy, Transubstantiation,
Image Worship, the Sacrilege of taking the Cup from the Laity, and one
Commandment from the Decalogue; Encroachments which we all know when they came
into the Church: 'twill be more than enough to ask where was the Roman New
Creed, before the Council of Trent; which was invented many a fair year after
that very Reformation which is accused of Novelty.

These are the goodly Machines which are recommended to batter down the
Protestant Cause, and which we see every day proposed with such confidence as
if they had really some force or value in them; and where these Stratagems
succeed, lest the fraud and folly of them should be detected, great pains is
taken to persuade the unhappy Proselyte immediately to discard all Heretical
Books, especially the Bible; and the conversation of Heretics, especially
Divines. But because in this Noonday Light of Christian Knowledge, the
Generality of Protestants* is not apt to be persuaded to quit their Faith on
these slight terms, the next dexterity will be (which is the Head we are now
immediately concerned in) to make them believe that they are much mistaken if
they measure Popery from Prejudice and common Fame, or the Expressions of the
Schoolmen, or peevish Writers of Controversy: The Church speaks in the Canons
of her Councils; and if they be soberly considered, 'twill appear there is not
so vast a distance between both parties, as is vulgarly imagined: This is at
large inculcated, as by our Countrymen, Sancta Clara, Hugh Cressy, Tilden, and
others; so with great vouge and ostentation by the Bishop of Condom, in his
celebrated Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church concerning
matters in Controversy; which he has transformed and molded to render it more
soft and plausible several times Response au livre de Monsieur l' Ev^que de
Condom, en l' avertisement.
over: So that we are so far from learning of him the Doctrine of his Church,
that we cannot discern what is his own; every Edition altering the Scheme and
way of Proposal. I may not omit to add upon this Head the mention of my Author,
who spends whole pages of his little Dialogue in showing the P. 7, 8, etc.
Moderation of the Church of England in difference to other Reformations; and
the easiness by good handling to procure a Reconcilement. But all these
Pacifick Men are so artificial as to conceal what ill Treatment the Authors of
such Discourses have ever had, where they were in earnest, and there was no
collusion in the case: For instance, Erasmus* Cassander, Modrevius, The
Interimists, F. Barnes, etc. And what is more material, the Bull of Pius Bull
Pii IV.
the IV. who made the Trent Creed, and confirmed the Dictates of that Assembly
which forbids that any Person of whatsoever Order or Dignity in the Church, his
Holiness only excepted, do explicate the Decrees of the Council in any manner,
or upon any pretense; withal he nulls and makes* void all such Explications. So
that be we Protestants never so much disposed to a composure, there is no
Concession to be looked for on the Papists part, who are not only accountable
for the Heterodoxy of their Interpretations, but for the very offer at
interpreting. And therefore however the Heretic may be born in hand before his
Reconcilement to the Church of Rome, of great Indulgence to Dissenters in
Speculative Points: so soon as he is made a Proselyte, the case is altered; and
he must believe as the Church believes, or 'twere as good to believe nothing at
all. I had thought here to have instanced in Mr. Hugh Cressy's Improvements in
the Catholic Faith after his first Conversion; Whereby all his kind
Remembrances of the Church of England, and offer of giving Security to the
State, mentioned in the First Edition of his Exomologesis, are forgotten in the
Second, with several other Remarkable Varieties, and Additional Periods and
Sections in the place of those that were expunged; with which, when the
aforesaid Mr. Cressy was charged, as gross and scandalous falsifications, he
had no better excuse to make, than by protesting solemnly, Animad. p. 76, 77,
etc.
That he knew nothing of the Alterations, they being put in by his Superiors,
to whose diseretions he had entirely left his Book, and it seems his own
Honesty and Honor. But I find my self prevented in this particular by the late
honorable Animadverter on that inconstant man; and therefore unto him I remit
the Reader.

George Cassander, who labored in the Affair of Reconcilement as much, and
understood it as well as any man, lays it down as a fundamental Maxim, That
the Consult. p. 56.
Church can never have the desired peace, unless they lead the way to it, who
have given the cause to the distraction: that is, unless those who are in place
of Ecclesiastical Government, will remit of their immoderate Rigor, and yield
somewhat to the peace of the Church, and hearkening to the Admonitions of pious
men, will set themselves to correct manifest Abuses according to the Rule of
Divine Scripture, and of the Primitive Church from which they have swerved.

Now can any one be so fond to think that his Holiness will tamely strip
himself of the Regalia Petri, and be reduced to the Neighbour-like Terms of the
old Regulae Patrum? Will he part with his Universal Monarchy, and be satisfied
with a primacy of Order, his Suburbicarian Region, and a little Diocese in a
part of Italy? Will he leave off to have his feet upon the necks of Kings, and
his hands in theirs and their subjects pockets, and be in earnest servus
servorum? I need not ask whether the Cardinals will come off from their
Pontifical Sloth and Luxury, and quitting their Pensions and Commendams;
remember they were poor Parish Priests and Deacons? But will the meanest Father
or Cure persuade himself to disown his power of making God, and disposing of
him at his pleasure in the language of Pere Cotton, loose the omnipotence of
having his God in his hand, and Prince at his feet* and in pure self-denial
quit the power of the Keys in the grinful pretenses of being able by the
virtue of the Sacrament of Penance, and some grains of Attrition added to it,
to remit all sins how horrid soever; and sneak into a Ministerial Stewardship
of a Clave non errante. Or farther, shall the bartering for Masses, whose whole
merit is said to be applied by the intention of the Priests, and the Lay-mans
payment for them; though neither understand a word of the whole Office, and the
later do not so much as hear it read, and can have no concern therein, unless
perchance his share in the idolatrous Worship of the elevated Wafer: upon which
work alone so many thousand lazy Friars are constantly maintained, be laid
aside for the reasonable service instituted by our Savior, and the entire
perception of the holy Eucharist, according to that his Institution of it.

I know men are apt to believe that which they vehemently wish, and very wise
and sober men were induced to think heretofore a closure with the Church of
Rome no impossible matter; but the case is quite altered since the time of the
Council of Trent, which has established every thing that ought to be removed;
and showed the world how vain their hopes were from Synods, and universal
Councils; how formidable the very approaches to Reformation were to those
Fathers abundantly appears from that History of Padre Paolo; and this is
acknowledged abundantly by my P. 13.
Author.

And now let us suppose an easie-going, good-natured man, by very fair words or
perchance visions or exorcisms choused of his Religion: and at last awakened
from the pleasant dream of being in the bosom of the Roman Church; discovering
the guilt and folly of his vile Apostasy from that Holy Mother, in whose Faith
he was Baptized; and also the fraud of those that had seduced him from her.
Shall he start back and render himself abhorred unto that Party to which he was
so lately reconciled; and suffer the reproaches of the other he so unworthily
deserted? Will it not be easier for him to sit down with the contempt of Levity
in one Instance, than to repeat the shameful Act; desert what he had chose, and
choose again what he deserted? Since he must be contemned and hated, will it not
seem better to have some to own him, than none at all? What effect a perverse
bashfulness has in other cases, we all know* it being proverbial, That it is a
greater shame to bring home the Bridle than steal the Horse: and the Renegado
Turk we find by common experience is so far from resuming the Profession of
Christianity, that he is sure to be its mortal and inveterate Enemy: so that
there needs little more security of having one continue in the Profession of
Popery, than by any means to beguile him to admit it; a second Revolt being
abundantly precluded by the first. But let us go on forward and examine, how
honestly we are treated when we are made believe that there is a fair retreat
afforded, for that the P. 8.
Papists have no prisons in which to keep men against their wills, as our
Author tells us. It Is very well they have no Lollards Tower in England, but we
cannot but remember what has been heretofore. I am sure in those Countries
where the Inquisition is on foot, men may easily get into a Goal, upon the
least surmise of an intention to quit the Roman Catholic Religion. Nay, where
that Tyranny takes no place, it is plain enough that Votaries are not at large
to go when, or whither they have a fancy. What think we of the Monasteries
and Nunneries in Popish Countries, whither young children are spirited away
from their Friends, or barbarously exposed by them. Were the doors of those
Houses left open, would it not soon appear by their providing for their Liberty
on such an opportunity, that there was something of restraint that held them
in? But by our Authors leave, is there nothing can confine a man besides a
Prison? He that being taken by the Enemy in War, goes at large on his Parole to
get himself exchanged; is, I humbly conceive, no less a Prisoner, than when
under Guard, and in the Marshals custody. And if the word of a Soldier, the
bare engagement upon honor have this force, what shall we say to a solemn
Oath, backed with direful execrations in case of failance? Now that Proselytes
to Popery are in this strict manner tied not to desert it, I demonstrate from
the Roman Pontifical, and the order of reconciling a Heretic to the Church;
The words are these,

I. N. being convinced of the snare of Division wherein I Pontif. p. 94, 95
was held; after long deliberation, with ready and unconstrained will, the
Divine Grace being my Guide, am returned to the unity of the Apostolic See.
But lest I may be thought not to have returned with a pure mind, or with
dissimulation: I engage under the penalty of falling from my Estate, and the
obligation of an Anathema; and Promise to you N. Bishop, and by you to St.
Peter Prince of the Apostles, and our most holy Father in Christ and Lord, our
Lord N. the Pope and his Successors; that I by no persuasions of any persons,
or by any other means will return to the Schism, from which I am freed by the
Grace of our Redeemer: but will always remain in the Unity of the Catholic
Church, and the Communion of the Pope of Rome. Wherefore I Swear by the
Omnipotent God, and the holy Gospels, that I will steadfastly continue in the
Unity and Communion aforesaid. And if (which God forbid) I should divide my
self from this Unity upon any occasion or argument, incurring the guilt of
Perjury, let me appear bound over to eternal Punishment, and have my Portion in
the World to come with the Author of Schism. So help me God, etc.

What effect such Imprecations naturally have, it is obvious to apprehend. I my
self know several persons, that having been perverted to Popery, were
afterward convinced of the Errors of it, and returned into the bosom of the
Church of England: but then being hazen'd with the remembrance of those Curses
they had laid on their heads, if at any time they should leave the Roman
Communion, went, after some years continuance in our Church, back again to that
of Rome. Which I the rather mention, because our Author is so very peremptory,
that no such thing is done, and wages his reputation in the case.

ENQUIRY II. Whether if the State would think fit to allow the English Papists,
such, of whose Fidelity and Affection to their Country the Governors were well
assured, to whom those Papists might have recourse for their spiritual
Concerns, they would remove our jealousies of their being overmuch affected to
Strangers, etc.
It may here in the first place be well worth the enquiry, whether it be
possible for Papists to give the State where they live such an assurance as is
talked of? For beside that, their Clergy, and all those in Religious Orders,
have separate Interests from the State, and by their Caelibate have given no
Pledges to it: Certainly all they whose faith it is that Princes may be
Excommunicated, and then deprived of their Dominions by the Pope, can by no
imaginable way give security to the State for their Obedience to their Prince,
and Fidelity to his Government: And it is not only altogether undeniable, that
this is the Faith of most Romish Confessors, and Priests, and Orders; but also
that it is the Faith of the Church of Rome it self, I shall sufficiently prove
in the following Section.

But secondly, They who hold that no Faith is to be kept with Heretics, who
teach equivocation, as laudible and innocent, who believe they can be dispensed
with for any outward compliance with Dissenters in Religion by the Pope, do
evidently by such Doctrines set themselves without the terms of humane Society,
and are not to be trusted upon those Obligations, which other men of narrower
Principles are bound by. How probable the former Doctrines are esteemed in the
Church of Rome, we may learn from their celebrated Writers. As to the later, I
mean his Holiness giving Commission to his Factors to dissemble their
Profession, I have showed at large in the seasonable Discourse, and justified
my Allegation against the Exceptions of the full Answerer in my Reply to him.
Though indeed the Compliance of, in a manner, all the Papists of England, and
coming to our Church Service for the first 11 years of Q. Elizabeth, would to
true Englishmen, be a competent account of this matter, especially since it is
notoriously known* that not long after in Scotland there were intercepted the
very Dispensations from Rome, whereby generally the Roman Catholics were
permitted to promise, Arch. Spotswood. History p. 803.
swear, subscribe, and do what else should be required of them, so as in mind
they continued firm, and did use their diligence to advance in secret the Roman
Faith. Which being showed to the King, were the cause of some Severities, as
the judicious Spotswood observes, which were then in that Kingdom used against
the Papists.

I might add to this the Oath of Subjection and Obedience to the Pope, to keep
and defend his Regalities, and not discover his Secrets, which every Popish
Bishop takes at his Consecration, Pontificale Romans
set down at large by my Author himself, and which he pretends he would not
take for the best Bishopwrick in Christendom. Now this Oath being part of the
Office for a Bishops Consecration in the Roman Pontifical, must be presumed
(however my Author would dissemble it) to be taken by every Prelate of that
Church: And if so, I demand what security one so obliged can give to any State?
If he bind himself by an Oath of Allegiance, that will come too late, and the
former Engagement must take place against the latter. Besides, he who shall be
so profligate to take a second Oath contrary to a first, gives no security
thereby, it justly having no more esteem with other men, than it had with the
unhappy Swearer himself. As also, I demand whether any person so obliged can
reasonably be thought in the Examination previous to the conferring of Orders,
to have passed over this fundamental Point on which the Roman Hierarchy
depends, or to be willing to confer Orders on those who are Heteredox therein?
Withal, whether the Bull of Pius IV. subscribed, and the Oath of Canonical
Obedience taken perpetually by every Priest of the Roman Church, do not involve
them in the strict Obligations before recited, and the Consequences appendant
to them?

It Is true, our Author talks very freely of the disorders of the Papacy, and
pretends that those of his way are excommunicate. For all this, it may not be
safe to trust them without better assurance. We remember from sad Experience,
that no persons did so boldly rail at the Tyrant Cromwell, as those that were
his Pensioners, who merited by saying those very things which others were to
lose their Lives or their Estates barely for hearing. Nay, we have not forgot,
that some of these perfidious Wretches lay under the common calamity of honest
men, Sequestrings, Restraints, and Decimations, that they might continue
unsuspected Villains. And we are not sure but his Holiness may be as dextrous
in his Managery as that Tyrant was; making a show of great Displeasure against
those Agents of his which are hired to pretend a disagreement with the Court of
Rome, and sufferings by it, thereby to gain securely Proselytes to the Church,
and a Reward unto themselves.

Nor will this be esteemed an uncharitable Surmise, when we consider what
usually is done by this sort of men, upon Watson's Quod libets, Dialogue
between a Secular Priest and Lay-Gentleman.
like pretensions. I shall, to avoid giving trouble to the Reader, bring but
one single instance, yet it shall be so close and commensurate a Parallel in
all respects, as not to admit of any colorable Exception to it. It Is that of
F. Watson the Secular Priest, who having wrote at large in the defense of
Sovereign Princes, against the Dictates of the Jesuits, wherein A true
Relation of the faction begun at Wisbich.
he openly confesses, That all the sufferings brought upon the Papists here in
England, was the due Reward of their own Demerit: And withal detected the
Frauds and Villainies of the Jesuits, Quod.
not only in reference to the State, but their Cheats of P. 37, 69, 88, 89,
265, 266, etc. 275, etc. 303, etc.
private persons by means of Auricular Confession, and other gainful Methods of
Hypocrisy, setting down the Names of the persons wrought upon, and theirs who
practiced upon their easiness, with the particular sums thus gained, the place,
and time, and manner of the Action; proofs one would think of the greatest
sincerity imaginable; especially since he for this was with all possible
violence pursued and railed at by his Adversaries in the Church of Rome, and
seemingly persecuted by his Holiness, and Arch-Priests commissioned by him: Yet
after all, we find this man at last was discovered to be engaged in Treason
against his Sovereign, and plotting all those Villainies he had before so
solemnly declaimed and wrote against: the account whereof we have in all our
Histories.

Hitherto we have seen how the overture of admitting and tolerating such
Priests as will profess the plausible Opinion of the power of Princes above the
Popes, is Unreasonable* upon the General Head of Security to be given by them.
Let us now consider how far it is Practicable under a Protestant Prince, who
cannot make Popish Bishops nor Priests; and such as are already made by the
Pope or his Authority, if they profess these Tenets, (if we could be sure they
did hold them) will, as is confessed, not only be disabled to officiate, but
also be sent for away, and others of another sort sent in their place; and I
believe they think they are obliged to so much Obedience to the Pope, as to
remove upon his Call, at least while they have no Churches proper to them.

The truth is, all correspondence between the Crown and the Papists is matter
of so much Jealousy, that I cannot see any possible advantage that can
recompense it. The little intercourse which was in King James his time,
(notwithstanding his Writings Discourse of the Powder Treason. Apology for the
Oath of Allegiance. Premonition to all free Princes and States. Answers to
Cardinal Perron and Bellarmin, etc.
against the Pope and his Usurpations, his frequent Speeches in Parliament, and
that strange Solemnity of Attestation, the apprecating Destruction to those of
his Family in succeeding Generations, who should attempt a departure to Popery,
and dereliction of the Religion professed in the Church of England: Which
remarkable passage is recorded by Judge Crook in his Sir George Crook's
Reports, part. 2. Term Trin. A. 2. Iac. R. in Banco Regis.
Reports: I say notwithstanding all this done here in England to assure his
Subjects, besides all that had past in Scotland;) the Umbrage then given by the
Relaxations afforded at that Treaty with the Spaniard, was never recovered in
the minds of the people, but those Jealousies continued had the greatest share
in those dismal Effects we have seen in our days; And I heartily wish we never
see more; It is matter of my Fear, as well as of my Hopes and Wishes. This one
consideration is enough to me to overthrow all those plausible projects which
some have had of dividing the Papists, etc. We shall reap much prejudice, but
never advantage by these attempts. Under shelter so obtained, Converts will be
made, who must afterward believe as the Church believes, which the shifting of
a Confessor turns quite about, and there will always be* found difference
enough in opinion amongst their Doctors, to make Rebellion a probable Opinion,
and Massacres too, when the season is fit for it.

Great Ostentation is made of the Loyalty of Romanists, from the frequent
repetition of the Statutes against Provisors in the time of our Ancestors, and
applied as a competent Security against those Usurpations of the Pope, which
were said by the seasonable Discourse to tend so much to the impoverishing of
this Nation. But in the mean time the Author does not consider that the
frequency of those Statutes shows as much their insufficiency, as the making
them argues the good will of the Legislators: nor is it probable that any
Remedy can be sufficient, when the Supremacy of the Pope is acknowledged, and
where the whole belief of the Professors is concluded in that one rule of
believing as the Church believes. For the Pope being supposed to be the Head of
the Church, what Interpreters of the Churches Faith can they meet with equal to
the Head of it? Not to speak of those who believe in the infallibility lodged
in the Pope; General Councils are not every day assembled, nor is it probable
the Pope will permit them, if likely to contradict or lessen his Authority. In
their absence, what is there which can be put in balance with the Reverence
given to St. Peter's Chair, amongst the Professors of that Religion? Shall the
opinion of one or two Priests stand in competition with the Pope? Can any man
believe this plausible Doctrine of the power of Kings, and contempt of the
Pope's in comparison of theirs, can have any other aim or effect than to
procure a connivance or admittance of that Religion, which (whatever the
opinion of some few Professors may be, and what their sincerity is, may be
another question) when it recovers its strength, must turn like the
Countrey-man's snake, to sting those who with so much charity and kindness
shall cherish and favor it.

To make this whole matter obvious to a common understanding; let us suppose
some loyal person stumbling at the irregular claims of the Pope, and confusion
and miseries brought into the world by that exorbitance; and upon the
conviction of that one Point, which for its plainness he best understands, and
for its influence and effect upon his secular Interests, he most studiously
minds, holding fast the loyal Principles of the Church of England, since no
other batteries can shake him, comes Father N. and tells him he is in a great
mistake to think that the great exaltation of the Pope's Authority is so
necessary a Doctrine, that for his own part he does not believe it: Well, that
stumbling block being removed, there is a Convert made to the Romish Church,
perhaps eminent enough to lead many others by his Example; at least it is
highly probable he wants not influence upon his Wife and Children, if not
others of his Relations and Acquaintance, to pervert them also, probably
without conditioning so severely for their loyalty. But what will become even
of that capitulation, when after (perhaps some years of confirmation in all the
Romish Opinions, and particularly that of submission to the Churches Authority)
death or the censure of the Pope may have removed, or a preferment have
converted F. N. or such loyal Casuist: For why may he not change his Opinion as
Father Cressy did his in that very particular, who in the first Edition of his
Exomologesis made a Protestation of his Duty and Obedience, which is corrected
in the second? And in any of these cases our Proselyte shall find himself
entangled with the new Doctrines of his Confessor, who in a season when
Factions of State or other Circumstances prepare men for such dangerous
Doctrines (as they are too subtle to avow them, or at least press them
unseasonably) shall urge the submission to the Churches opinion; and then the
quotations of so many Doctors (which are now by our Author rejected and
slighted in comparison of one or two plausible opinions) shall sound loud in
concurrance with the Head of the Church, who besides the credit of his own
determination, has the prescription of so many Ages, the actual deposition of
Princes in all parts of Europe from time to time, and the decrees of Universal
Councils, to justify his claim. In vain shall the Penitent allege to his
Confessor, that Father N. was of that opinion: The Reply will be easy, that
Father N. was a good, yea and a learned man in things where he agrees with the
Church, but still he was a man, and subject to error, and therefore not to be
credited when he disagreed with the Church, of which the Pope, College of
Cardinals, General Councils, and so many Doctors who have wrote before and
after Father N. are better and more credible Expositors than he. It will be
hard for any body to disentangle himself from this Argument, if he have once
surrendered his Faith implicitly to that of the Roman Church, or as we have
showed, under the usual Obligations been engaged in its Communion. And if a
person of so remarkable loyalty, as we in this Instance suppose our Proselyte
to be, cannot be able to withstand and secure himself, what shall we suppose of
those his Relations and Acquaintance, whom his Authority and Example turned to
the Church of Rome, perhaps with less Circumspection.

I have many Reasons to believe F. N. to be a very honest man; as I know him to
be ingenuous and learned: and therefore stand amazed to see him offer to the
World a Proposal so unreasonable as this is. If he be in earnest as I must
suppose him to be, his Address to one of our Church, whom he would bring over
to his Part, will run in this or such like Form.

Those only belong to the Fold of Christ, who are under the conduct of the
Universal Pastor, his Holiness the Pope, and they alone are sound in the Faith,
and consequently capable of Salvation, who believe the Doctrine received by the
Catholic that is, the Roman Church; It is therefore necessary for you, as you
tender the eternal welfare of your Soul, religiously to obey this Pastor, and
believe all the Proposals of this Church. But notwithstanding, though this
Pastor and (as I shall presently demonstrate) this Church have solemnly
declared that Princes may be Excommunicated, and then deprived of their
Dominions by his Holiness, you must by no means believe that damnable Doctrine;
and though you are sure to be excommunicated for your stubbornness therein (as
F. N. at this day is for this only crime) you must endure First Controversial
Letter
it, rather than comply with those false and rebellious Tenets, that subvert
the Laws, destroy the Peace, and endanger the Sacred Persons of Sovereign
Princes. In short, upon pain of damnation you must be in Communion with the
Roman Church, and yet under the same penalty you must be content to be
excommunicated, you must believe as the Church believes, and yet you must not
believe so.

Before I leave this Point, I must beg leave to add one Observation, which may
be useful to the determining, how far it will consist with Prudence to hearken
to the Proposition made for the encouraging, by the relaxation of Penalties
those who are in the Communion of the Roman Church: It is plainly this, They
are a sort of men who are always the worse for Favor and Indulgence. I
mentioned but now the case of F. Watson, who after his many public
declarations of himself against the traitorous Jesuits, confuted all his
Writings by his Actions.

But the particular which I now refer to, is the time of this his Enterprise,
which was the entrance of K. James into this Kingdom, when all the severities
of the Laws against the Romanists were laid asleep, and they received not only
to a peaceful enjoyment of their Consciences and Estates, but were admitted to
the Court, to Trust* to Honors and Preferments; nor was this treachery and
falseness his singular Demerit: At the same time, and under the same
circumstances was the Agency of the Romish Factors with the King of Spain, for
the procuring a second Invasion of their Native Country, which might expiate
that of 88. as also that King James his Discourse of the Powder Treason.
hollish Machination of the Gun-Powder-Treason. These, though so barbarous in
the intendment as to be capable of no aggravation; had, besides the
forementioned Ingratitude, of being attempted in a season of Indulgence; this
particular brand upon them, that they were designed by those Proceedings
against the Gunpowder Traitors.
very men who had been guilty of Treasons in the time of Q. Elizabeth, and had
been graciously forgiven by K. James, and personally had sued out their pardons
from him under seal. So that we may conclude it as reasonable an attempt to
still a Tempest by whispering gently to it, put out a Fire by pouring Oil upon
it, or reclaim a Viper by receiving him into the Bosom, as to hope by any Acts
of Kindness and Indulgence to assure the Duty of a Roman Votary, of whatever
Principle or Subdivision he pretend to be.

ENQUIRY III. Whether the Popes power in deposing Kings be a Doctrine of the
Roman Church?
Having debated this point already in the Seasonable Discourse, and defended
what I there asserted in my Reply to the Full Answerer, there is really no need
I should trouble my self or Reader in the proof of a thing perfectly evident.
But since the Gentleman with whom I had first to do, and our present Author
after him, think they have abundantly cleared themselves, by quoting a few
Romanists who have denied the Exorbitant Tyrannies of the Pope, and separating
the Interests of the Court and Church of Rome, with this Difference, that
whereas the Full Answerer quite slips over the mention of Councils, this my
Author after a short Reflection lightly passes the Allegations which I made
from the Canons of the said Councils, which I pretend to have been received as
Universal, not only by the high-flown Papalins, but these moderate pretenders;
(and consequently what is by those Councils decreed, must beyond all subterfuge
be concluded to be the Doctrine of the Church.) And whereas the said Author
only adds some few colorable pretenses to elude the Arguments drawn from the
aforesaid Councils, I shall (which I take to be the alone remaining possible
way of inforcement) set down the express words of those Councils in plain
English; And then I hope there will need no infallible Interpreter to inform us
of the meaning and importance of them. And having done this, I shall reply to
those thin Sophisms which are brought to elude my Argument.

In the Seasonable Discourse I first cited the 27 Canon of the 3 Council.
Lateran. Tom. conc. 27.
Third Lateran Council, Cap. Sicut ait: Where the Fathers having condemned the
Cathari, etc. and subjected the Fautors of them to the same punishment with
them, it is added, They shall forfeit all the Fealty, Homage, and Obedience
which was due to them. Now we know who they are to whom Fealty and Homage, in
its remarkable and most proper importance, is due. But to avoid all Cavil, this
is determined to extend to Sovereign Princes by the express words of the
Council of Constance, as we shall see anon. And therefore in the next place I
proceed to the Fourth, and as it is styled by the Romanists, the most General
Council of Lateran: Where the Fathers having 4 Council. Lateran. Tom. council. 28.
condemned all Heretics that exalt themselves against the Catholic Faith by
them explained; an Article whereof is, That in the Sacrament of the Altar the
Body and Blood of Christ are really contained, the Bread being
transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, and the Wine into his Blood; that
is, to wave all the monstrous Absurdities of Transubstantiation, that they who
receive only the Bread, receive only the Body; and they who receive the Cup,
only receive the Blood of our Savior, (for concomitancy cannot suit with
things entirely separate.) And having required the Aid of the Secular Powers
against the said Heretics, the Council proceeds in this form: If the Temporal
Lord, required or admonished by the Church, shall neglect to purge his
Territory from Heretical pravity, let him be Excommunicated by the Metropolitan
and his Suffragans, and if he persist in neglecting to give satisfaction for
the space of a year, let him be signified to the Pope, that he from thenceforth
may pronounce his Subjects discharged from their Obedience, and expose his
Territory to be seized by Catholics, who having exterminated the Heretics,
without Contradiction shall possess it and preserve it in the Purity of Faith:
So as no injury be done to the Right of the Superior Lord, where there is
such; provided he do not any way oppose himself: and the same Law is to take
place on them who have no superior Lord. Where we may observe how pitiful the
Excuse is, which is commonly brought, that Sovereign Princes are not here
meant, but only Feudatary; when, as if it were on purpose to exclude this
plea, those who are most Absolute and Supreme, are particularly levelled with
the other. In the mean time, we of this Nation may take notice, That besides
our own Runagates, whom I cited in the Seasonable Discourse, who make our
Kingdom to be held in fee from the Pope, in a manner all Foreign Writers go
away with it as a thing confessed and evident, and bring, as the common instance
of the Popes power to depose Kings, that his Holiness may dispose of the Crown
of England, even where they exempt the King of France from such subjection. But
this upon the by. The same Council goes on, and says, That the Excommunicate
Fautors of Heresies shall have no Votes in Councils or Elections, shall not be
allowed to make a Will, to give Testimony, or bear any Office, or inherit an
Estate. If any happen to be a Judge, his Sentence shall be null and void: If an
Advocate, he shall not be admitted to plead; if a Clark or Notary, the
Instruments drawn by him shall be of no moment: And so in all other like Cases.
Whence we may gather what assurance we are likely to have of the possession of
our Estates, if Popery prevail: All Acts of Law, all Bequests of Wills, and
Judiciary Proceedings since the Reformation, (and I suppose most English men
hold under some of them) are absolutely void and null by the Decree of this
Council, and we must come to new Purchases to be secured in the possession of
whatsoever we possess, or challenge for our own. And how fair Chapmen we shall
meet with in that Case, it will not be difficult to determine.

My next Allegation is of the Council of Lions, where the Tom. Conc* 18
Pope after mature deliberation had with his Cardinals and the Council, having
deposed and deprived the Emperor, and absolved all those from their Oaths of
Allegiance, who had sworn it to him, and commanded that no person should own
him from thenceforth as Emperor, or any way obey or intend to obey him, and
excommunicated all such as should give him Counsel, or any way favor him; and
ordered that the Electors should proceed to a new Choice, the aforesaid
particulars being read in the Council, the Pope and Prelates sitting in
Council, with Candles burning in their hands, thundered out their
Excommunication against the deposed Emperor Frederick, etc. The words of the
Council are plain enough, but when illustrated by such a Comment as the Actual
Deposing of an Emperor, I cannot think it needful to subjoyn any farther
Enforcement; but proceed to the remaining Allegation from the Determination of
the Council of Constance; which in the seventeenth Session decrees, defines,
and ordains, that whosoever, whether he be King, Cardinal, Patriarch,
Archbishop, Bishop, Duke, Prince, Earl, Marquess, or of any other Condition or
Dignity, either Ecclesiastical or Secular, shall hinder, disturb, or molest
Sigismund King of the Romans and Hungary, and the King of Arragon, from
meeting, etc. shall incur the Sentence of Excommunication, etc. and shall be
deprived of all Honor, Dignity, and Office, etc. Where, by the way, we may
take notice, that this Council, who lay so severe Penalties on the Violators of
their Safe Conduct, were not ashamed perfidiously to violate it themselves on
John Huss, who in confidence thereof put himself into their hands.

Besides this, we allege from this Council Pope Martin's Letter, approved by
the last Session of the same Council, where his Holiness admonishes and
requires all Professors of the Christian and Catholic Faith, the Emperor,
Kings, Dukes, Princes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, etc. that they drive out of
their Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, etc. all Heretics, according to the tenor
of the Lateran Council, which begins, Sicut ait, etc. And then decrees, That
all Heretics, Partakers or Defenders of them, though they shine in the Dignity
of Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Kings, Queens, Dukes, or any other
Ecclesiastical or Mundane Title, etc. shall be pronounced Excommunicate in the
presence of the People, every Sunday and Holy Day, etc. and requires that they
proceed to deprivation of Dignities, etc.

Now our Author to all this given in proof by me from these ecumenical
Councils, as the Romanists style them, opposes the Authority of one John
Bishop, who in a Book written in the time of Q. Elizab. proved that the
Constitution of the Lateran Council, upon which the whole authority of
absolving Subjects from their Allegiance and deposing Princes is founded, is no
other then a Decree of Pope Innocent the III. and was never P. 11.
admitted in England: yea, that the said Council was no Council at all, nor was
any thing at all there decreed by the Fathers.

So then we are come to a Resolution of Faith, if one single man shall write a
Book against a received Doctrine in the Church, that founds it self on the
Decree of a Universal Council, and shall deny that Council to be valid, or
received in a particular Church, that Doctrine however received or founded, as
is above mentioned, ceases to be the Doctrine of the Church: Which, if it be
true, I believe 'twill be almost impossible for any man to be a Heretic; some
one or other having wrote a Book in the defense of his Tenet, how Heterodox
soever it were, and disparaged the Authority of that Council that condemned it.
But this Author, who relies so much on the credit of John Bishop, should have
adverted to those very cogent Arguments which Cardinal Perron produces Harangue
au tiers Estat p. 61^. etc
in his long Speech to the third Estate, and Dr. Vane has since brought in
favor of that Council, and his Confutation of all Suggestions alleged on the
contrary part. Dr Vane Vindicat, of the Council of Lateran.
Also he should have taken notice of the Subsidiary proof lately added by F.
Labbe, and Cossart, Editors of the Councils now at Paris, who there from a Copy
supposed to be written in that very Age, give the Canons of that Council in
Tom. 11. part. 1.
Greek deficient, chiefly in those parts, where the Controversy between the
Eastern and Western Church was determined to the disadvantage of the Greeks.
And lastly, he should have considered that the Council of Trent, whose
Authority he Council Trid. Sess. 4. can. 8.
will not dispute has alleged the Canons of this fourth Lateran Council, and
therefore it will not be very reasonable to oppose I. Bishop to all those
Fathers.

But to pass this: How comes it about that our Author tells us, this Council
was never admitted in England? Did he Mat. Paris in ann. 1222.
consider what power the Pope then claimed in this Island, when he had
rendered, and openly styled the King his Binnii Council.
Vassal? As also how much work the English had, to do in Tom. 7. part. 2.
that Assembly, particularly in the case of Stephen Langton, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, and that the Canons of that Council were allowed and confirmed in
the National Synod held at Oxford, A. 1222. Had he told us that this
convention, notwithstanding all its pompous pretenses of so many Patriarchs,
Emperous, Kings and Princes, Bishops and Doctors that attended at it, was
nothing but a Scene dressed up in Masquerade; he would perchance have said
something to the purpose: For instance, That the man who played the Greek
Emperor, was Hen. brother to Baldwyn Earl of Flanders, that had lately before
seized Constinople and some few more of the Greeks Towns, with the Arms of the
Croisade; and had no other Title to his Conquests, besides the Pope's gift:
That the Latin Emperor, who yet was but Elect, was the Popes Pupil; so made by
the will of his Mother Constance, and chosen Emperor by the Popes influence,
who had unmade two Emperors before, of whom one, i. e. Otho. 4. was then
living, and the next Pope save one, Innocent the IV. deposed this very
Emperor: Farther, that John de Brenne and Almerick held the Kingdoms of
Jerusalem and Cyprus of the Popes gift: That our King John was become his
Feudatary, and as his Holiness was pleased to style him his Vassal; that James
King of Arragon held by the same Copy, who besides was a Minor and Pupil to the
Pope, who was so favorable as to give him a Crown, whose Father had deserved
so ill as to forfeit to his Holiness both Kingdom and Life. Then farther, that
Philip King of France had his Kingdom twice put under Interdict by this very
Pope, and was threatened worse: That Andrew of Hungary was also by this very
Pope threatened with Deprivation, and having thereby learnt Obedience, became
his Creature and Favorite; and was made by him General of the Croisade against
the Mahumetans, as Simon de Monifort was of that against the Heretics of
France; and the Princes of Flanders, of that against the Greek Schismatics.
This, one would think, were a fair account of all the Crowned Heads that sent
their Ambassadors and Bishops to this Council. But the Ecclesiastical part of
the Comedy was of the same piece; for of the four Eastern Patriarchs, as they
call them, three were Italians, and one a French man; all made by this Pope,
and no more owned by the people of those Churches, to which they pretended then
his Holinesses titular Bishops use to be.

Our business here is not to consider, whether this or other Councils were free
or obnoxious, since they be received by the succeeding Roman Church, and by our
Author himself.

I would leave this Point, but that our Author is pleased to assert a very
strange Paradox, that though I cited the third Lateran Council, that of Lions,
and that of Constance besides this fourth of Lateran; yet on this fourth the
whole Authority of absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, and deposing
Princes is founded. Not to dispute the Superstructures of the two after
Councils; certainly the third of Lateran, could not well build on the fourth,
which was not then in being: I am sure the Council of Constance was so far from
owning the having learnt this Lesson from the fourth Lateran Council, that they
expressly quote the third for the most Orthodox Doctrine of Treason and
Rebellion; where by the way I cannot omit to mention the wonderful dexterity
and Harangue au tiers Estat.
confidence of Cardinal Perron, in his Oration to the third Estate, who in this
matter produces the Decrees of this Council as a sufficient security for
Princes; as also of the Penman of the Controversial Letters, who seems no
stranger to our Author, and desires us to look upon the Church of Rome First
Controv. Letter.
in a Council, to be convinced that she does not favor this deposing Power:
And also singles out this very Council, to show the Orthodox Doctrine of the
most loyal Roman Catholic Church, whose Decree I even now cited on the
contrary part: When as the Writer of the Controversial Letters, plainly
confesses, that the Story is no more then this: There had prevailed an Opinion
in this age, and it was seconded by Practice, that the people might at their
pleasure correct their offending Lords, and kill Tyrants, notwithstanding any
Oath made to them, without expecting the Sentence or Command of any Judge
whatsoever. And this with much ado was condemned The life of Gerson prefixed to
his works. And Tom. 1. p. 375. and 3. p. 69.
in this Council, though it cost John Gerson a great deal of pains, and more
then that, the imminent hazard of his Life, to compass thus much; That it
should not be lawful for any ordinary Cutthroat to destroy Sovereign Princes;
but remain the singular Prerogative of his Holiness the Pope.

I shall not exaggerate Consequences, nor pursue this Topic, which my Author
complains never fails when any one has a mind to declaim against Papists, but
hope, that notwithstanding his Profession, that he is yet to learn the name and
situation of that Country which believes it; it is manifest as P. 9.
Noon-day-light, that whosoever believes the Article of the Roman Catholic
Church, must also, as large a morsel as it is, be content to digest, at least
swallow this.

ENQUIRY IV. Whether Princes of the Roman Communion, have sufficient Powers to
defend themselves from the Tyrannies and Encroachments of the Pope?
We have seen the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, concerning the Popes Power
over Princes, which if it be truly stated, (and I think nothing in the world is
evident if my Argumentation be not) will easily determine the issue of this
Enquiry. For not to insist on the many defects both intellectual and moral,
which are pretended to incapacitate for Government, or otherwise forfeit it,
discoursed at large by the Canonists, and more largely commented on by
practice, in the deposition and removal of such Princes by Popes; If we suppose
them in all Points qualified for Rule, and zealous Assertors of the Roman
Faith, yet notwithstanding upon any disobedience to the Churches Dictates, or
contumacy of any kind to her Commands, which may subject them to the censure of
the Church, and the displeasure of his Holiness, and thereby expose to
Excommunication, (of the due infliction whereof they only are Judges,) all
Right and Authority upon the Principles before laid down, immediately becomes
forfeit: and the very questioning hereof in Thesi, the thing being determined
by Ecumenical Councils, and so made de Fide, will be Heresy.

And now whereas no Prince can maintain himself without the Obedience of his
Subjects, and ready Execution of his Ministers, I demand whether upon any
difference started (and unless the Prince will tamely give up all, there must
be many) a Minister of State will dare to uphold and defend the Rights of his
Master, in opposition to the Pope? If he do, he is sure to bring all the hatred
of the Pope and Clergy upon him, and it is observed, that Ministers of State
have seldom weathered the opposition of the Gown-men of either sort.

But what if we should say, that Princes themselves dare seldom adventure to
maintain their own Rights against the Pope? Not to insist upon the personal
apprehensions they may justly have of a Dagger from a Clement or a Ravilliac:
It is not unknown to any, that Princes, even when in Peace, live with the
jealousies and precautions of War, and are as industrious for accession of
Allies and advantages to themselves, as to prevent those of a contrary party;
still expecting and providing for a storm in the deepest calm of tranquillity
and Peace. If (as sometime heretofore they did) all Europe submitted to the
Pope, what advantage or disadvantage to any Prince would the good will of the
Pope be? What influence would he not have (by the Clergy) amongst the people of
any Prince, if not absolutely to raise Rebellion, at least to slacken and abate
the zeal and fervor of the people? What diversions to this or that holy War,
or Interpositions for Peace could he not make, as it should suit best with the
party he shall most favor? And how hardly could such plausible desires be
denied to the holy Father? These and the like considerations render the Kings
of France and Spain so jealous of the making Popes or Cardinals: though it is
certain the Popes dare not be so openly partial and unequal to Princes (nor
would that partiality be so fatal to their Interests) now as heretofore,
because the Reformation has spread into many Countries which value not the
Inclination of the Pope; but rather incline to the party he most opposes; which
as it seems a counter-ballance, so is it a great awe to the Pope, lest their
partiality should force Princes to cherish and favor the Protestant party, and
perhaps even to throw off his yoke: but if ever the Church of Romo could
eradicate the Reformed Religion (which doubtless is and ever must be their
great drift and aim.) Princes of the Romish Religion would find the want of
that check and awe upon the Pope.

Will you see how tender and fearful Princes have been heretofore of claiming
their Rights in this kind* See Ed. 3. a brave and a magnanimous Prince, in the
vigor of his Age, in the 25 year of his Reign, when he comes to claim and
vindicate his Rights in Ecclesiastical matters, he is so fearful of offending
the Pope, that he seeks all possible excuses even whilst he is claiming his
own. First, he lays the fault on his 25 Ed 3. cap. ult.
Predecessors, and quotes the Statute made in his Grandfathers time: In the
next place, the grievous complaint of the Commons must bear its share; then the
injury to private Patrons is called in for a pretense, as if that gave rise to
the complaint (when all this while the King had power enough from the Rights
inherent in the Crown, and from former Statutes, if he durst put it in
practice) then (which is a wonderful Instance of his fear to offend the Pope)
for a farther excuse, he sets up a claim for his people, to the prejudice of
his Negative voice (the greatest and choicest flower of the Crown) for in the
Statute of Provisors of that year, he makes the Commons to allege (nor is
there any mark of his dislike, but rather assent to it, so desirous he was of
an excuse toward the Pope) that the Right of the Crown of England, and the Law
of the said Realm is such, that upon mischiefs and damage which happened to his
Realm, he ought and is bound of the accord of his said people in his Parliament
thereof, to make Remedy and Law in voiding the mischiefs and damage which
thereof comes, etc. Then the King goes on himself to allege his own Oath to
see the Laws executed, etc. as the Reader may satisfy himself more fully from
the Statute at large, as it appears in all our Books.

I suppose this may sufficiently show how fearfully that Great and Generous
Prince (not subject to vain fears) went about to remedy that Inconvenience:
What Fruit he reaped from the hazard he adventured: And how effectual that
Great Medicine (our Author so highly commends to us) was, may be conjectured by
the need there was of another Statute of Provisors, the very next Parliament,
viz. the 27 year of his Reign. It would be too tedious to the Reader and my
self, to quote all the Statutes of that kind; Instead of others which it were
easy to produce, I shall only add that of the 16 of Rich. 2. cap. 5. Where
the Commons of the Realm having complained of the intolerable Tyrannies and
Oppressions of the Sea of Rome, go on to pray the King, and him require by way
of Justice, that he would examine all the Lords in the Parliament, as well
Spiritual as Temporal, severally, and all the States of the Parliament, how
they think of the Cases aforesaid, which be so openly against the Kings Crown,
and in derogation of his Regality; and how they will stand in the same Cases
with our Lord the King, etc. Whether this Examination was in order to the
Attainder of the Persons, or Suspension of the Votes of the Dissenters, or some
other purpose, I will not take upon me to enquire; Certainly considering the
Greatness of the Peerage of England at that time, such a way of procedure shows
the greatness of the mischief which was desired to be redrest. But the
continued Complaint and fresh Endeavors for Remedy, do likewise as evidently
demonstrate that none of our Kings ever found an effectual Cure, till the time
of Henry the VIII. who yet, although he retained the Roman Profession of faith,
denying temporal Subjection to the Pope, became liable to that Deprivation and
Censure, and all that Spiritual Thunder which so severely fell upon him; and
has since exercised his Successors.

But these our Princes who came after him, having generally been of the
Reformed Religion, which they of Rome have declared to be Heresy, the
practices among us however exorbitant, will not fall under our present
consideration. I shall therefore pass over to our Neighbors of France; and
examine how well the Privileges of the Gallican Church have stood the most
Christian Kings in stead, which will readily be seen if we look into their
Histories: nor will we seek farther than the last Age. Henry the Third we know
had difficulty enough with the Catholic holy League, opposed not only by the
high-flown Jesuited Romanists, but the Bulwarks of Regal Authority, the Loyal
Doctors of the Sorbon, who being Seventy in number, unanimously decree, nemine
contradicente, That the Subjects of France were freed from their Oaths of
Allegiance Davil. l. 10. Conclus. Facult. Paris.
and Obedience made to Henry the Third: And also that the said Subjects may
legally and with a safe Conscience arm and unite themselves, collect and raise
money, etc. Which Decree of the good Doctors was ratified by his Holiness in
his Bull of Excommunication, which suddenly followed; and was pursued D*
Aubigne, Tom. 3.
to such Extremities by the Leaguers, that they were not only content to
subject that Kingdom to the Yoke of Spain, but in despite of the Sallick Law,
endeavor that the Infanta Clara Eugenia Elizabetha should succeed unto the
Crown; and though the King turned Covenanter himself, and Established the Oath
of Union in the Assembly of the Three Estates, and personally swore to it,
making it a Fundamental Law of the French Nation, that only a Catholic should
be capable to succeed unto the Crown, yet notwithstanding this, the said Henry
the Third could not escape the Anger of his Holiness, and what is consequent
thereto, the being deprived of his Kingdom and his Life, massacred by I.
Clement, the Iacobin-Monk. To him we know succeeded Henry the V. who after
great struggling, and the same opposition from the Unanimous Determination of
the Loyal Sorbon-Doctors, in their general Congregation, who May 7. 1590.
Declared Henry of Bourbon incapable of the Crown, though he should obtain
Absolution from the Church, and that the French were obliged to keep him from
the Crown; that all who favor him are in perpetual mortal sin; and all that
are slain in the Cause against him shall obtain an everlasting Reward, and be
crowned with the Trophies of Martyrdom. This Henry, I say, having by the
blessing of God, and a good Sword, added possession to his Claim, and in spite
of opposition made himself Master of France; yet this new Sallick Law stood
still in his light, and a Crown was not to be had but at the price of a Mass:
For though it be a received Maxim, That the Crown removes all taint of Blood,
it cannot of Opinion. One now would have expected in this instance, that the
Church Doors should have flown open to receive this Royal Convert: but the case
is far otherwise. Five years diligent agitation in the Court of Rome, and
attendance on three several Popes, can scarcely compass this great Work of
bringing a straid Royal Sheep into the Fold of Christ. The difficulties made
herein will abundantly appear, as from the Histories of that Age, so more
particularly from Cardinal D' Ossat and Perron's Memorials. And truly it is
remarkable when the matter was adjusted, to what submissions the King in his
Representatives was fain to descend: How his Commissioners in his Name and
Behalf, beg Remission prostrate on their Faces; and being drub'd and
bastinado'd, as the insulting Italians word it, or as the Boter. relat. Thuan.
Hist. lib. 137.
French confess, being switch'd by his Holiness, hardly* obtained an Absolution
for their Master, who was farther obliged to renounce his former Inauguration
and Absolution given him in France, and to swear the Extirpation of the
Protestants. But when all this was done, the Pacification was not fully made;
but this Mighty Prince fell by the Poniard of a Ravilliac, and the implacable
Papacy, as is notorious to the World.

The Successor to these, Lewis the XIII. having before him, the Catastrophe of
his two immediate Predecessors, one would have thought might reasonably be
allowed some farther Provision for his Safety and Assurance of the Allegiance
of his People: and to this end the Third Estate drew up an Oath of Fealty to be
taken by all his Subjects: but it is not imaginable with what fury this was
oppos*d by the Pope and Clergy; what violent and long Harangues were made in
the House of Peers and Commons against it; what Gratulations were sent to the
Clergy of France by his holiness for their generous opposition of that Oath,
complementing it as a Defense Harangue au tiers Estat.
of his, and therein the Churches Rights. The Speech of Cardinal Perron is a
sufficient account of this matter, which was at large answered by the Royal Pen
of King James, and therefore needs no new unraveling.

But beyond all this, there is a particular which is not commonly taken notice
of, and deserves not to be forgotten: It Is this: After the Cardinal in his long
Harangue in the Name of the Clergy of France, had baffled and exposed the power
of Kings, and endeavored to subject both it and their Persons also to the
Discipline and Coercion of the Church, and concluded that at best, the point of
Princes being exempt from Deposition was barely Problematical, and consequently
could not be matter of an Oath: The King fearing to provoke so strong and eager
a party; called the aforesaid Bill for the Security of his Person, to his own
hearing, and made an express Inhibition to the several Estates, that they
should not proceed farther in it, or sign or publish what they had drawn up.
But this would not serve the turn, the Ecclesiastics would not sit down with a
drawn Battle; but insolently depute in their Names the Bishop of Angers, with
other Prelates and Capitulars, among whom were Cardinal Perron and Sourdis;
where Recueil tres exact and curieux de tout ce que l'est fait and pass de
singulier and memorable, en l'Assemblee Generale des Estates tenus, a Paris en
l'anne 1614. Bar Florim. ^ Rapine.
Cardinal Perron being the Spokes-man, told the King to his Face, That this
matter lately contested was a point of Doctrine; and though in his Speech to
the Third Estate he had declared it to be Problematical; now to cut it short,
he asserted that the power of the Pope was full, nay most full and direct in
Spirituals, and indirect in Temporals: That whosoever maintained the contrary
were Schismatics and Heretics, even those of the Parliament who had sucked
the Milk of Tours. That if the King would not immediately cassate the Arrest of
the Parliament, and would not raze out of the Registers the Conclusions of the
Kings Officers, he had in Commission and Charge to say, That they would depart
from the Assembly of Estates; and that being there as in a National Council,
they would Excommunicate all those who were of a contrary Opinion to Page 356.
the Proposition which affirmed that the Pope could Depose the King. And if the
King would not suffer them to proceed unto Ecclesiastical Censures, they would
do it notwithstanding, though they were to suffer Martyrdom. We have here (if I
mistake not) plain enough the Judgment of the Church of France. Would we see
what was the Opinion of the Pope upon it? Upon the 16 of Febr. there was
brought, and opened, and read in the Chamber of the Clergy, a Brief of the Pope
Paul the V. bearing date the last of March 1615. sub annulo Piscatoris, wherein
his Holiness returns his Solemn Thanks to the Clergy of France, for what they
had done against the Article of the Third Page 410.
Estate, wherein his power was concerned, desiring them to persevere in the
same mind.

Which Brief, by the way, was read in their Chamber without any leave had or
asked from the King or Council. And truly if the most Christian King be treated
thus by his Subjects in duty to their Sovereign the Pope, notwithstanding the
primogeniture, and other pretenses of that Crown; what shall we of England
expect, who stand in worse circumstances? We must not wonder or take it amiss
that Pope Urban the VIII in the year 1626. by his* Bull bearing date May 30.
forbad all Roman Catholics to take the Oath of Allegiance: And since First
Controversial Letter.
the happy Restoration of his present Majesty, when several of his Subjects of
the Papal Profession, offered by Oath (wherein the Supremacy is wholly waved)
to assure their Duty and Obedience, that the Pope and his Agents looked upon
this Overture as Apostasy from him, that is, from the Christian Faith. and
persecuted all those who are concerned in the Proposal, of which see the
Controversial Letters, and the late History of the Irish Affairs. Nor lastly,
will it be at all strange, that at this day many eminent Persons of the Romish
Religion, who by the great Indulgence of the State are permitted,
notwithstanding their Differences in Judgment and Interest from the rest of the
Kingdom, are upon assurance given of their Loyalty by the easy Test of
promising it under the Seal of an Oath, permitted to have the personal and free
use of their Votes in the Judging of Causes in their last Appeal, and what is
the highest Trust imaginable, the making of Laws, and sit as Peers in the Great
Council of the Nation, do now refuse to give the aforesaid Assurance by taking
the Oath of Allegiance, though that be the general Condition previous to
Session, laid not only upon them, but all the rest of their Fellow Subjects.

It is not for me, or any private person to determine of the Rights of our
Superiors; but by Duty and Allegiance we are obliged to defend them. This I
think may be laid down as a Maxim, That no Power is of any moment, when set in
Opposition to its Superior; and that all Pleas follow the last Appeal: So that
if the Spiritual Sovereign be placed above the Temporal, it is vain to talk of
any Rights the Temporal can plead in prejudice unto the other; and to speak the
whole matter in one short word, Princes can have no sufficient powers against
Encroachments from the Papacy, who, if the Popes and Churches pretentions stand
good, whenever they think fit to interpose, have no power at all. And thus much
be said upon this Head of Enquiry.

ENQUIRY V. Whether Religion was the Cause of the Massacre in France, and
Rebellion in Ireland?
I no way doubt that Men's Exorbitant Passions and Desires are the Cause of all
the Disturbance in the World. According to that of the Apostle, Whence are Wars
and Fightings among James 3.
you? Are they not from your Lusts that war in your Members? But our Author
knows well, that besides the leading principal original Cause, there is an
immediate evident one, which is joined to the Effect; which alone in a
Discourse of this nature we enquire after. Now if it be manifest that his
Holiness the Pope, the Supreme Monarch of the Church, laid his Command upon,
and with great instance dealt with the French King to destroy the Hugonots, had
his Promise and Engagement that he would destroy them; and after he had done
it, it be certain that the News of the performance was received with Joy and
Exultation by the whole Roman Court, and Pope himself, I hope it will be
sufficiently manifest to whom the Action is to be imputed. I do not say that
his Holiness either designed the manner of the Massacre, or was privy to all
the circumstances of it beforehand: But if I bargain with a Ruffian that he
shall kill such a person, whom I take to be mine Enemy, though I do not
contract whether he will do it with a Pistol, or a Sword, or with Poison; yet
if the murder at my instance be committed, no sober Judge or Jury would doubt
to find me guilty in the case.

Now that the Pope was thus far accessory to that bloody Vita del glori^sissimo
Papa Pio quinto, p. 195.
Carnage, appears from Ierom Catena, Secretary to Cardinal Alexandrino, in his
Life of Pius V. dedicated to Pope Sixtus V. who mentions his Holiness his
engaging in this matter, as an instance of his pious solicitude for the
Advantage of the Church; in particular he tells us, That when his Master
Cardinal Alexandrino, the Popes Nephew and Legate in France, with great instance
moved the breaking of the intended Marriage with the King of Navar, and that
the Legate to divert it persuaded a Match of Margaret Daughter of France, with
Sebastian King of Portugal; In answer to which, the King taking the Legate by
the hand, bid him assure his Holiness Pius, that he concluded this Marriage for
no other purpose than to take vengeance of the Enemies of God, and to chastise
his Rebels, as the end should manifest: and that he did all this to obey the
Instructions and the Counsels of Pius, who perpetually incited him not to
endure such injuries committed against God and the Crown: and that he took this
Course because he knew no better way to compass his end, than thus to make
those of the Religion secure, having tried all other means: Then pulling a
Diamond of great value off his Finger, he said to the Legate, Take this as a
Pledge and Security of my Promise, and the Faith which I will always bear to the
Apostolic See, and to execute all that I have said against these impious
Wretches. He adds farther, That the Legate excused himself from receiving the
Ring, pretending that he had kept himself from taking any thing from the hands
of any Prince to whom he had been sent: and besides, that he took the Word of
so Great a King to be the surest Pledge and Security: But that the Ring, after
the Death of Pope Pius, was sent to Rome by the King unto Cardinal Alexandrino
in a Casket, on which were engraved these words, Non minus haec solida est
pietas: Nec pietas possit mea sanguine solvi.

So that if we will believe either the Pope who directed, or King of France who
executed this Tragedy, 'twas Piety and Religion, which was the Motive to it.

As to the espousal and owning of this bloody Fact, after its execution, I may
not hope to express the Joy it brought unto his Holiness, since the Historian
tells us that it surpasses the Mo^ray, Ann. 1572.
comprehension of Speech, and as he terms it, it was indicible. Thuan. Hist. l.
53.
It created a Jubilee in its liberal importance; and whereas the Tongue was
unable to speak out the full Resentment, Gesture and Action were called in to
use their Rhetoric; and not only all the pompous Solemnities of a Procession
and Triumph, of which the Head of the Noble Coligni, sent as a Token from
France to his Holiness, was a mean and inconsiderable circumstance: but
Almighty God was put into the Pageantry, and a solemn Thanksgiving at the
Church of St. Stow. Speed. Chron. in Hen. 2.
Lewis, was an instance of the grateful piety of the Pope and Cardinals on this
occasion.

Let me make this matter plainer, if it may be, by an Instance taken from our
own Histories, which ad hominem will I assure my self be conclusive beyond
control. It is the case of Thomas a Becket, wherein K. Henry the second being
no farther concerned, then that after intolerable affronts and perpetual
vexations given him by that insolent Prelate, he being in passion, and asking
if he should never be rid of so inveterate an enemy, though (as Baronius
relates it) the irregular deed that followed Baron. in An. 1169.
was neither acted by his will or consent, nor done by any contrivance of his;
yet because the Murder of that Prelate was consequent to his impatient words,
the poor King was by the judgment of the Church declared guilty of the whole
Fact, and by the sentence of the Popes Legates, besides the sacrificing several
Rights of the Crown, and payment of large sums of money; made to walk barefoot
several miles to the Cathedral at Canterbury, where attending a whole day and
night without sleep or food, he received from the Monks his Subjects, on his
naked back, above fourscore lashes. And if a King was thus far criminal for
occasioning, though beside his intendment, the death of one of his rebellious
Subjects; what shall we say of that Universal Pastor, who directly advised and
commanded the slaughter and destruction of so many thousands of all Degrees,
Ages and Sexes, whereof a great part were certainly more innocent than that
unhappy man, whose blood was esteemed so sacred, could be thought to be?

Having given this account of the Massacre in France, let me see next whether
my Author be in the right in his account of the Rebellion in Ireland; where not
to rip up that old sore, and show how the Romish Factors fomented and blowed up
those unhappy flames, and the Pope having absolved by his Bulls his Majesty's
Subjects from their Allegiance, took upon himself to be their Prince and
General in the person of his Nuncio, exercising all Regal Powers, and that not
only upon the poor Protestants; but even the Papists also, who were guilty of
that mortal sin, the designing to desert Rebellion, and returning to his
Majesty's Obedience: This I pass over, being the matter of a just History, and
shall produce only two Testimonies in evidence to my present Conclusion, and
both of them of so early a date, as not to admit that common excuse, which the
Irish are always ready to offer; that they did not rebel against the King, but
fought against his Enemies and Regicides.

The first of these shall be the Brief of Pope Urban to Oneal, bearing date
October. 8. that is our Sept. 28. 1642. which was before the first battle between
the King and his Rebels in England at Edgehill. The Brief runs thus,

To his beloved Son Eugenius Oneal. You are accustomed to omit no occasion to
testify your singular zeal and endeavor which you derive from your Ancestors
of defending the Church; and of this you have given a recent testimony by
designing to go into Ireland to take care of the concerns of the Catholics:
Wherefore your Letters came very welcome to me, whereby you signify your
intended Voyage, and taking your Auspice from the Divine Assistance, have not
less humbly than religiously desired of Us our Apostolical Benediction. We
highly commend your constancy against the Heretics, and sincere Faith;
expecting from you in this opportunity, the proofs of your Valor, which have
formerly given you renown, and will be exemplary to others. We hope the most
high will be at hand to assert your Cause, and will make known his saving
health among all Nations. In the mean time, that you may proceed with greater
assurance, praying incessantly to the divine Clemency, that he would frustrate
the endeavors of your Enemies, we give to you, and those others who promote
the affairs of the Catholics in the aforesaid Kingdom, our Benedicton; and to
all and each of them, if they being penitent, are confessed and duly refresht
with the holy Communion, if it may be had, plenary Remission and pardon of
their sins, and also at the point of Death plenary Indulgence. Dated at Rome
under the Seal of the Fisher, the 8 day of October. A. 1642. and of our Papacy 20.

My next Proof shall be from a zealous Votary of the Church of Rome* Father
O-mahon, in his Apology for the Right to the Kingdom of Ireland, in behalf of
the Catholics against the Disputatio Apologetica de sure regni Hiberniae pro
Catholicis Hibernis adversus haereticos Anglos, Autore C. M. Hiberno Artium and
S. Th. magistro, etc. number. 2*
English Heretics; and his Exhortation, where after other laudable Documents,
he thus bespeaks them.

My Contrymen of Ireland, Go on and prosper, fulfill the work which you have
begun for your Defense and Liberty; destroy the Heretics your Enemies, and all
their Abettors; you have already killed an hundred and fifty thousand of them
in these four last years* I mean from 1641. to this present 1645. wherein
(...), the which your Enemies in their Writings roar out and (...); and you
acknowledge, and I believe, that more of the Heretics have been killed, and
would to God that all had been so. It remains that you destroy those that yet
survive, or at least drive them out of Ireland, that they may no more infect
our Catholic Country with their Heresies and Errors.

I shall trouble the Reader no farther on this Head, but desire him to take his
choice whether he will believe my Author, who says the Rebellion of Ireland
was not for Religion; or his Holiness (whom in this case we may allow to be
infallible) who says it was: Or if we will avoid so odious a comparison,
whether we will think our Author speaks truth, or Father Mahun, who was not a
stranger to the action he talks of, and would be thought to know what belongs
to War and Religion, as well as any of his neighbors; though, by the way, he
also confutes that representation which our Author makes of the small numbers
of Protestants murdered by the Rebels; for our Author seems to suggest, That
indeed P. 19.
this thing which we talk of as a Massacre, and a War, was only a Scuffle at a
Wake, where a few broken shins or beads determined the quarrel; and after the
application of a plaster of Diapalma, all was presently made well again. But
there is nothing so manifest, that some Romanists have not the confidence to
deny: And truly, they who teach their Votaries in the immediate concerns of
their immortal Souls, to renounce all their senses and reason to boot, need not
despair of obtruding any thing upon the credulous world.

It may here be expected, that from the before-going premises, I should now
draw out Conclusions, and those severely pressing on that whole sort of men,
who under diverse hotious and pretenses call themselves Roman Catholics; that I
should exhort our Patriots to oppose sanguinary Laws against inhumane bloody
practices, and pecuniary, or other strict restraints against licentious
Principles. To put it out of their power to hurt the public, whose very
Religion makes it impossible for them to give any competent security that they
will not destroy it: And in a word, to avert those mischiefs by precaution,
which if allowed to gather strength, will be so fatally destructive, as not to
be repaired (...) after punishments. But this is not my aim, who press the
discoveries which I have made, no farther than to arm those who are so
fortunate to have been educated in a Faith of peaceful Duty and Obedience, not
to be tempted by false pretenses to desert it; and to persuade all those who
have been so unhappy to be entangled in that endless maze of Error the Roman
Church, to quit both it and those pernicious guilts, which I have showed to be
its necessary and individual adherents.

I contend not against Names and Notions, but Vice and Mischief; nor am I angry
with men, but with that which destroys Human Society. I would not make any
Faction look worse than it is. But I can never hold that for Religion which
teaches men to Violate their Faith; to Worship Wood and Stone; to Make, and
then Devour their God; to Blow up Senates; to Massacre Nations, and Kill Kings.

FINIS.

